Chapter 43: Those who saw Imam al-Qaim (a.s.)
=============================================

1 - Narrated to us Ali bin Hasan bin Faraj Muezzin (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin al-Hasan Karkhi: Abu Harun - a person who belongs our
school of thought - said:

“I saw His Eminence, the Master of the Age while his face shone like a
full moon and I saw a line of hair on his navel. When I removed the
cover I saw that he was circumcised. I asked Abu Muhammad (a.s.) about
it and he said: This is way he was born and this the way we all (Imams)
are born. But we moved the knife over him just in keeping up with the
practice.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar: Narrated to me Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Malik Fazari: Narrated to me Muawiyah bin Hukaim and Muhammad bin Ayyub
Ibne Nuh and Muhammad bin Uthman Amari (r.a.), they said:

“Abu Muhammad Hasan Askari (a.s.) acquainted us, forty persons, with his
newborn son, His Eminence, Mahdi, while we were present at his house. He
said: ‘This son of mine is my Imam and Caliph for you after me. Obey him
and after me do not become disunited in your religion, that you be
destroyed. But you should know that, after this day, you will not see
him.’ They said: We left his place and after only a few day he [Imam
Askari (a.s.)] passed away.”

3 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah
bin Ja’far Himyari that he said: I said to Muhammad bin Uthman Amari
(r.a.):

“I was with Ahmad bin Ishaq in the presence of al-Amri (r.a.). I said to
al-Amri: I ask you about a subject, as Allah, the Mighty and the High
has said in the story of Ibrahim (a.s.): So you not believe? He said:
Yes, but in order to satisfy my heart. Have you seen my Master? He said:
Yes, and he has a neck like this, pointing with both of his hands to his
own neck.”

4 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad Daqqaq and Muhammad bin Muhammad Isaam
Kulaini and Ali bin Abdullah Warraq -May Allah be pleased with them –
they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini: Narrated to me
Ali bin Muhammad: Narrated to me Muhammad and Hasan sons of Ali bin
Ibrahim in the year 279: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Abdur
Rahman Abdi from Abde Qais – from Zau bin Ali Ijli from a man of Fars
whom I heard saying:

“I reached Surra Man Raa and came to the house of Abu Muhammad (a.s.).
Before I could seek the permission to enter the Imam called me from
inside. I entered and greeted him. He asked me: How are you? Then he
told me to sit and inquired about the well-being of my family. Then he
said: How do you happen to come here? I said: I have come to serve you.
He said: Then stay here only. I began to live in his house with the
servants.

One day I returned from the market after buying the necessary things.
When I entered the house, the Imam called me out to stop where I was.
And that neither should I go out nor come in. Then a maid came out
carrying something wrapped in a cloth. Then the Imam called me and also
called the maid. When she came back he told her: Reveal that which you
have in your arms.

When she removed the cloth, I saw a beautiful child in her arms. I saw
his belly on which there was a line of hair from the chest to the navel.
The hairs were green and not black. The Imam said: This is your Master
(after me). Then he told the maid to take him away. After that I did not
see the child till the Imam (a.s.) passed away. Zau bin Ali says: I
asked this Persian: What was the age of the Qaim at that time? He
replied: Two years. Abdi says: I asked Zau bin Ali: What would be his
age today? He replied: Fourteen years. Abu Ali and Abi Abdullah say: At
this time his age must be twenty-one years.”

5 -Narrated to us Abu Talib Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi
Samarqandi (r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his
father Muhammad bin Masud Ayyashi: Narrated to us Adam bin Muhammad
Balkhi: Narrated to me Ali bin Hasan bin Harun Daqqaq: Narrated to us
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Qasim bin Ibrahim bin Ashtar:
Narrated to us Yaqoob bin Manqoosh that he said:

“I went to Abi Muhammad Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) to find him sitting on his
usual place in his house. There was a room to his right with a curtain
at its entrance. I asked the Imam: O my chief, who is the master of this
affair? He replied: Lift that curtain. When I lifted the curtain I saw a
boy aged ten or eight years, having a broad forehead, fair complexion,
pearl-like upper lip. Soft and clear palms, broad shoulders, long knees,
a mole on the right cheek, hair reaching to the forehead, come out and
went on to sit in the Imam’s lap.

The Imam said: This is your master. Then he got up and the Imam said to
the child: Son, go back till the appointed Hour. The child went into the
room while I was watching him continuously. Then the Imam said to me:
Yaqoob, go and see who is in the room? I entered that room but did not
see anyone there.”

6 - Narrated to us Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Hatim
Naufali (r.a.): Narrated to us Abul Husain Abdullah bin Muhammad bin
Ja’far Qasbani Baghdadi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ja’far Farsi, known
by the title of Ibne Jurmuz: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ismail bin
Bilal bin Maimoon: Narrated to us Azhari Masroor bin Aas: Narrated to us
Muslim bin Fadl that he said:

“I went to Abu Saeed Ghanim bin Saeed Hindi in Kufa and asked him about
his well being and asked him about what has passed on him. He said: I
lived in a city of India, that was called Kashmir and I was among the
forty advisors of the king.”

And narrated to us my father (r.a.) that: Narrated to us Saad bin
Abdullah from Allaan Kulaini that he said: A group narrated to me from
Muhammad bin Muhammad Ashari from Ghanim who said:

“Thus I was in Kashmir with the Indian king and I was one of the forty
persons who sat around him in his court. We were scholars of Taurat,
Injeel and Zaboor. Once there was a discussion among us with regard to
Prophet Muhammad and we said that we have found him mentioned in our
books. Thus it was decided that I should go and find him and ask him
about the correct religion. So I set out with some money.

On the way I was robbed and I somehow managed to reach Kabul. From Kabul
I moved to Balkh which was ruled by Ibne Abu Shoor. I went to him and
told him about myself. He summoned the scholars to have a discussion
with me on Islam. So I asked them about Prophet Muhammad. They said that
he was their Prophet and that he has passed away. So I asked them who
his successor was. They said: Abu Bakr. I told them to mention his
lineage.

They took his lineage upto the Quraish. I said: Then the person whose
successor is Abu Bakr, was not a prophet because we have found in our
books that his successor would be his cousin, the husband of his
daughter and the father of his sons. All of them went to the king and
said: This person has come out of polytheism and gone into disbelief.
Therefore he must be executed. I said: I am following one religion and
my aim is only to spread my knowledge.

So the king sent for Husain bin Askib and said: O Husain have a
discussion with this man. Husain said: He has been surrounded by the
scholars and jurists, how can I have a discussion with him? Take him
aside and have a discussion with him as I have told you, and be lenient
with him. Thus Husain bin Askib took me aside and I asked him about
Prophet Muhammad. He said: As the scholars have informed you, he was our
Prophet.

But his successor is his cousin, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.), the husband
of his daughter, Fatima and the father of his sons, Hasan and Husain
(a.s.). I said: I testify that there is no god, except Allah and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. He took me to the king and I
declared my acceptance of Islam. Then I came with Husain bin Askib to
his house. He explained the teachings of Islam. I said: We have read in
our books that there is a successor for every caliph. So who is the
successor of Ali? He replied: Hasan, then Husain and then he mentioned
each of the names till he reached the name of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)
and then he said: Now you yourself search for the successor of Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s.). So I set out to search for him.”

Muhammad bin Muhammad said: And he came upto Baghdad with us. He told us
that he had a friend who was helping him in this matter, but during the
same time I became fed up with some of his habits and I separated from
him.

He said: One day I was walking on the bridge in Baghdad in a
contemplative mood when a man approached and said to me: Come to your
master. He walked with me till he brought me to a house which had a
garden. Suddenly I saw my master sitting there. When he saw me he spoke
to me in Hindi and he greeted me. He addressed me by my name and asked
about each of the forty persons separately.

Then he said: You are planning to go for Hajj this year with the people
of Qom. Don’t go for Hajj this year. Go to Khurasan and perform the Hajj
next year. Throwing a small pouch to me he said: You may use it for your
expenses and don’t stay in anyone’s house in Baghdad. And don’t tell
anyone what you have seen. We set out from Uqbah and our Hajj was not
complete and Ghanim went to Khurasan and he performed the Hajj the
following year. Then he came to us kindly and did not enter Qom and
neither did he go for Hajj. He went to Khurasan instead and died there.
May Allah have mercy on him.

Muhammad bin Shazan from Kabuli that: I saw him with Abu Saeed, who
remembered that I was in search of the true religion that I had found in
Injeel and for which I had left Kabul. Muhammad bin Shazan said: I have
received news that he has reached till here. I continued to search for
him till I found him and asked him about his story. He said that he was
still in search. He settled down in Medina. Whomever he mentioned this
ridiculed him. Till he met a Shaykh of Bani Hashim named Yahya bin
Muhammad Areezi. He said: The person you are looking for is in Sariya.
He said: I came to Sariya I went to a threshold that was sprayed with
water. I felled myself at the place. A black servant emerged from the
house and told me to go away from there. I said I would not go anywhere.
At last he told me to come inside.

When I entered I saw my master seated at the center of the house. He
addressed me by name which no one knew except my people in Kabul. Then
he informed me about a few things. I said: My master, my livelihood is
lost, please give me something. He said: It is lost because of your
falsehood. Then he gave me rations and even though I had lost everything
previously the rations Imam gave me lasted for me. Then I returned. But
when I went there the next year I could not find anyone in the house.”

7 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Kufi from Ishaq bin
Muhammad Sairafi from Yahya bin Muthanna Attar from Abdullah bin Bukair
from Ubaid bin Zurarah that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“Their Imam will disappear from the people. Then he will witness those
who come for the Hajj pilgrimage, he will see them but they will not see
him.”

8 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Muhammad bin Uthman al-Amari (r.a.)
that he said:

“The master of this affair shall perform the Hajj rituals every year.
Thus he shall see the people and recognize them and they shall (also)
see him but will not recognize him.”

9 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari that:

I asked Muhammad bin Uthman Amari: “Have you the seen the master of this
affair?” He replied: “Yes, and the last time I saw him, he was besides
the Holy House of Allah and praying: O my Lord, fulfill the promise that
You made to me.”

10 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari that:

I heard Muhammad bin Uthman Amari (r.a.) say: “I saw His Eminence (a.s.)
holding the curtain of the Kaaba below the spout and praying: O my Lord,
take revenge from my enemies.”

11 - Narrated to us Abu Talib Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar bin
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Umar bin Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to
us Abu Nadhr Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to us Adam bin Muhammad
Balkhi: Narrated to us Ali bin Hasan Daqqaq: Narrated to me Ibrahim bin
Muhammad Alawi: Narrated to me Naseem, the maidservant of Abi Muhammad
(a.s.):

“A night after the birth of the Master of the Time (a.s.) I came to him.
I sneezed and he said to me: ‘May Allah have mercy on you.’” Naseem
says: “I became very pleased at this.” His Eminence said: “Shall I not
give you glad tidings about your sneeze?” I asked: “What is it?” He
said: “You are secure from death for three days.”

12 -And through the same chain of narrators from Ibrahim bin Muhammad
Alawi: Narrated to me Tareef Abu Nasr:

“I came to the Master of the time (a.s.) and he told me to bring red
sandalwood which I did. Then he asked: Do you know me? I said: Yes. He
said: Who am I? I said: My master, and the son of my master. He said: I
did not ask you this. Tareef said: I said: May I be sacrificed on you,
tell me. He said: I am the seal of the successors. And through me will
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime ward off calamities from my family and my
Shias.”

13 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Maroof that he said: Abu Abdullah Balkhi wrote
to me: narrated to me Abdullah Suri that:

“When I went to the orchard of Banu Aamir I saw boys playing in the pond
and a youth was sitting on the prayer carpet with his sleeve on his
mouth. I asked: Who is that? The boys replied: M.H.M.D. Ibne Hasan. He
resembled his father.”

14 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari that:

“I was with Ahmad bin Ishaq in the presence of al-Amri (r.a.). I said to
al-Amri: I ask you about a subject, as Allah, the Mighty and the High
has said in the story of Ibrahim (a.s.): So you not believe? He said:
Yes, but in order to satisfy my heart. Have you seen my Master? He said:
Yes, and he has a neck like this, pointing with both of his hands to his
own neck. I asked: And the name? He replied: I warn you not to seek
that, because the people believe that his progeny has been cut off.”

15 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Amari (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father: Narrated
to us Ja’far bin Maroof from Abi Abdullah Balkhi from Muhammad bin Salih
bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Qamber, the elder, slave of ar-Reza (a.s.) that
he said:

“The Master of the Age came to Ja’far Kazzab from an unknown place when
the latter was claiming inheritance after the passing away of Abu
Muhammad (a.s.). The Imam said to him: O Ja’far, why are you claiming
that which is our right? Ja’far was absolutely confounded. After that
the Imam disappeared from his sight. Ja’far searched for him among the
people but could not find him. When his grandmother, the mother of
al-Hasan passed away after having willed that she must be interred in
the house, Ja’far argued: This is my house and no one will be buried
here. So the Imam (a.s.) came to Ja’far and said: O Ja’far, is it your
house? After that he disappeared from his sight and he never saw him
again.”

16 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Muhammad Khuzai (r.a.): Narrated to us
Abu Ali Asadi from his father from Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi that
he mentioned the names of those who were familiar with the miracles of
the Master of the Age (a.s.) and who have met the Imam. They were as
follows:

“Among the representatives were: Al-Amari and his son, Hajiz, Bilali and
Attar from Baghdad. From Kufa, Al-Asimi. From Ahwaz, Muslim bin Ibrahim
bin Mahziyar. From Qom, Ahmad bin Ishaq. From Hamadan, Muhammad bin
Salih. From Rayy, Bassami, that is he himself – From Azerbaijan, Qasim
bin Alaa. From Nishapur, Muhammad bin Shazan.

Among the non-representatives were: from Baghdad, Abul Qasim bin Abi
Hulais, Abu Abdullah Kindi, Abi Abdullah Juniadi, Harun Qazzaz, Neeli,
Abul Qasim bin Dubais, Abi Abdullah bin Furookh, Masroor Tabbakh, slave
of Abil Hasan (a.s.), Ahmad and Muhammad, sons of al-Hasan, Ishaq
al-Katib from Bani Naibakht, Sahib-e-Nawa and Sahib-e-Surratil
Makhtooma.

From Hamadan was Muhammad bin Kashmard, Ja’far bin Hamadan and Muhammad
bin Harun bin Imran. From Dainawar was Hasan bin Harun, Ahmad bin
Ukhiyya and Abul Hasan. From Isfahan, Ibne Bazshala. From Saimara,
Zaidan. From Qom, Hasan bin Nasr, Muhammad bin Muhammad, Ali bin
Muhammad bin Ishaq and his father and Hasan bin Yaqoob. From the people
of Rayy were: Qasim bin Musa and his son, Abu Muhammad bin Harun,
Sahib-e-Hisaar, Ali bin Muhammad, Muhammad bin Muhammad Kulaini and Abu
Ja’far Rafa.

From Qazwin, Murdas and Ali bin Ahmad. From Faqtar, two persons. From
the city of Roza, Ibne Khal. From Faris, al-Mahrooj. From Merv, owner of
a thousand dinars, owner of money and the white letter, and Abu Thabit.
From Nishapur, Muhammad bin Shuaib bin Salih. From Yemen, Fadl bin
Yazid, al-Hasan and his son, Ja’fari, Ibne Ajami and Shamshati. From
Misr, father of two newborns, owner of wealth in Mecca and Abu Rajaa.
From Nasibeen, Abu Muhammad bin al-Wajna and from Ahwaz, al-Khusaini.”

17 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad Kufi, alias Abil Qasim Khadiji: Narrated to
us Sulaiman bin Ibrahim Riqqi that he said: Narrated to us Abu Muhammad
Hasan bin Wajna Naseebi that:

“I was in my fifty-fourth Hajj and in supplicating in prostration under
the drain-pipe of the Kaaba after Isha prayer. I was lamenting and
beseeching when all of a sudden somebody shook me and said: “O Hasan bin
Wajna, get up.” He said: I got up and saw a slave girl of pale
complexion and thin stature. I thought she was more than forty years of
age. She began to walk before me. And without asking any questions I
began to follow her till she reached the house of Her Eminence, Khadija.
There was a room in that house with an open door in the center of the
wall. The slave girl went above.

I heard a voice calling out: O Hasan, come up. So I went up and stood at
the door of the room when His Eminence, the Master of the Time (a.s.)
said: “O Hasan, you thought that you were hidden from me? By Allah, I
had been with you every time you came for Hajj.” Then he described my
circumstances. I fell down unconscious on the face. Then I felt a hand
touching me; I got up. He said to me: “Stay in Medina at the house of
Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) and do not worry about food, water and
clothes.”

Then he gave me a paper on which were written Dua Faraj and recitations
of benedictions on His Eminence. And he said: “Recite this supplication
and send benedictions upon me in this manner. And do not show this paper
to anyone except deserving ones among our Shias. As Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime will give you Taufeeq.” I said: “O my master, Would I never
see you after this?” He replied: “O Hasan, whenever Allah wills, (you
will see me).”

Hasan says: After concluding my hajj I went to Medina and stayed at the
house of Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.). I always went to the Masjid and
except for three things I did not return to the house. For making
ablution, rest and sleep, and at mealtime. When I entered my room at the
time of breaking the fast I found a bowl one-fourth filled with water
and upon it was kept a loaf of bread and food that I felt like having
that day. I consumed it till satiation.

Winter clothes arrived in winter and summer clothes in summer. During
the day I used to enter the water for bathing and sprinkle the water in
the house also. I used to take the empty cup and fill it with food and
whatever exceeded my needs I gave it away to the poor so that those with
me may not come to know of my circumstances.”

18 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani (r.a.):
Narrated to us Abul Qasim Ali bin Ahmad Khadiji Kufi: Narrated to us
Azdi that:

“I was performing the Tawaf of the Kaaba. I had completed six rounds and
was starting on the seventh when I saw a young man on the right side of
the Kaaba and fragrance was coming from him. His awe had affected the
people and they had surrounded him so that they may speak to him. I have
not heard anyone speak in a more pleasant way nor seen anyone with a
better demeanor. I also went there so that I may also get a chance to
speak to him, but the crowd pushed me back. I asked the people who he
was.

People said he is son of Allah’s Messenger, who comes here for one day
every year to meet his special followers and speak to them. I called
out: My chief, I also want to speak to you so that you may guide me.
When he heard this he threw some pebbles towards me which I picked up.
People asked: What did he throw towards you? I said: Pebbles. And I
opened my fist but saw that they were pieces of gold. I began to follow
him till I joined him.

He said: Now my proof is complete on you, the truth has become manifest
and your blindness is gone. Do you know who I am? I said: No. He said: I
am the Mahdi. I am the Qaim of the Age. Its I, who would fill the earth
with justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and
tyranny. The earth is never without Divine Proof. This is a trust with
you. Convey it to your brothers who are steadfast on the true faith.”

19 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ibrahim bin Mahziyar that:

“I reached the city of the Prophet (Medina) with the purpose to
investigate the traditional reports of Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ali, the
second (a.s.) but I could not get any lead. I was finally compelled to
move to Mecca. Once while circling the Kaaba I saw a wheat complexioned,
handsome and cultured young man. I moved towards him to consult him
about my present problem. I caught him up and greeted him.

He responded to my greeting in the most cheerful way and asked me where
I was from. I said that I was a resident of Iraq. Then he asked me from
which city I hailed. I said that I was from Ahwaz. He was pleased with
this and he exclaimed a nice welcome and said: May Allah bless for my
meeting with you. Do you know a person in Ahwaz called Ja’far Hamadan
Husaini? I replied in the positive. I said I knew him well but he was
deceased. He said: May Allah’s mercy be on him. He spent all his time in
worship and lived a pious life.

Due to those good deeds Allah, the Mighty and Sublime gave him the best
rewards. After he asked: Do you know Ibrahim bin Mahziyar? I said I was
him. He embraced me at once and said: Welcome, O Abu Ishaq, where is the
sign through which there was connection between you and Abu Muhammad
(a.s.)? I said: Perhaps you mean the finger ring by which Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime graced me through Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ali (a.s.).

I don’t desire any other thing. So I took out the ring and the youth
took it up very eagerly and lovingly touched it to his eyes and kissed
it. Then he read all that was written on the edge of this ring. The holy
names of Allah, Muhammad and Ali were engraved upon it. After that he
said: May my life be sacrificed on them. I presented my question to him
and he gave satisfactory replies. I also discussed the various aspects
of relating traditional reports.

Finally he said: O Abu Ishaq, tell me about the great aim that you
intend to achieve after completing your Hajj. I said I would not conceal
anything from him. He said that was only proper. Right now you can ask
me whatever you want and I will, Insha Allah, explain to you everything
in detail. I asked him what he knew about the children of Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.). He replied: By Allah, he has two sons, Muhammad and Musa
and I have seen both of them. I have been sent by them only. They have
called you. If you want to meet them and gain from them you can come
with me to Taif, but don’t let your companions know anything about it.

Ibrahim says: I immediately set out with this young man towards Taif.
After crossing the vast expanses of the desert we reached a spot where
the desert ended. I saw there a magnificent tent made of hair pitched on
raised ground due to which the surrounding area looked fresh and
inhabited.

When we halted there, my companion youth went inside the tent and
announced my arrival. The elder of the two gentleman emerged from the
tent. He was M-H-M-D, Ibnul Hasan (a.s.). He had a clear and youthful
countenance. The color of his purified body was absolutely clear,
eyebrows joined, soft cheeks, high nose. There was a mole on his right
cheek which shone like a star and seemed to be a particle of musk on a
mirror. The hair reached to the ear lobe and I saw such signs as I had
never seen before and I had never before been familiar with such
elegance and modesty.

I rushed to him, fell at his feet and began to kiss them. He said: O Abu
Ishaq, congratulations to you. I was eager to meet you since a long
time. Even though you lived far away, your face was always there in my
imagination. As if no moment was without the best conversation and
meeting. I thank my Lord who is the owner of praise that He saved me
from meetings and discord. And that he bestowed me the opportunity to
remain successful in the coming circumstances.

After this discourse he inquired about the other believers of Ahwaz. I
said: Master, as soon as Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) passed away I set out
in search of you, leaving my home and people and I have been roaming
about till date, therefore I cannot tell you anything about those
people. But today Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has fulfilled my aim.

After that he took me in private, made me sit down comfortably and then
said: The fact is that my respected father – may Allah bless him – took
oath from me that I would not reside in one place but in hidden and far
off lands. So that I may protect myself from the deceit and plots of
deviated and rejected people that are present in wayward communities.
Thus I was sent to the highlands and I considered the barren areas
necessary for myself. I was shown the causes through which problems are
solved and calamities dispelled.

His Eminence (a.s.) also made me familiar about the treasures of wisdom
and the fine points of sciences that I was unaware of or had superficial
knowledge of. My father gave me from the treasures of unseen secrets and
wisdom, such that if I taught even a part of it to you, O Abu Ishaq, you
will not be in need to ask anyone in the world.

My father said: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime had at no time left any
part of the world in no circumstances without His Proof, who may help
them in religious and worldly affairs, and who is their leader in the
world and the hereafter. That is why I can tell you that I am certain
that my son, after me you are from those who are sent by Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime till today, one after the other, to distinguish truth
and falsehood. These Imams distinguish truth from falsehood and destroy
the basis of recognition of falsehood.

They douse the fire of disbelief and apostasy. In order to be safe from
the calamities of the time it is necessary for you to live in far off
hidden places because in every age every representative of God also has
an enemy who is always ready for confrontation with the divine
appointees. It is so because the latter considers it his religious duty
to fight the enemies of Allah. So the exceeding number of your enemies
should not frighten you.

You must also be assured that the hearts of the sincere believers are as
eager to meet you as the birds are eager to reach their nests. And the
people with the perfect faith and absolute sincerity are those who
apparently live ordinary lives and in difficult circumstances in the
world. But in the view of Allah these people have an exalted status and
much value even though in the view of the people they are helpless and
needy. They have contentment and they keep away from sins. It is they
who nurture the religion of God and are prepared to fight the enemies of
faith. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has secured them through patience
and forbearance. They shall remain in the world with the same qualities
till the Almighty Allah conveys them to their eternal abode in Paradise.

They have been endowed with patience so that in times of distress they
may display the jewels of their patience and bear all the calamities of
the world without any reaction, and crossing each stage reach to the
stages of the hereafter. So gain from knowledge. O son, dispel the
darkness of calamites and humility with the light of patience so that
the Almighty Allah may remove that calamity from you and be assured that
all the calamities and problems that befall you, all of them increase
your honor because you are famous in the world as a righteous one.

That is why your excellences are spoken of in all the areas. O son, as I
can see that you have been defended verbally that is why you have been
able to gain an upper hand over your enemies. As if I can see the yellow
and white flag in the vicinity of the Kaaba. Your followers are very
loyal and sincere to you. They gather around you like pearls and they
glance at your house in hope of refuge like people stretch their hands
towards the Hajar al-Aswad. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has created
their hearts with pure love and blessed essence and has kept it purified
of every contamination and impurity of hypocrisy.

They readily accept the ways of religion and its dos and don’ts and they
are away from mischief and corruption. Due their acceptance of divine
laws their countenances are always shining. Due to excellence their
bodies are strong and active. They the ones who bring faith on the
religion of truth and it is these who will rush to pay allegiance to
you. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has strengthened their bodies and
increased their lifespans. They would pay allegiance to you under a tree
with thick branches near the Tiberius Sea and as result of their
allegiance the people of innovation and deviation will be scattered.

The rise of reality will begin at this time and the darkness of
ignorance and misguidance will come to an end, through which the
Almighty Allah will remove all the corruption from the earth and after
being erased completely the ways of faith and religion will be
established afresh. All this would happen through you. People will be
involved in spiritual maladies at this time but your followers and
helpers will not be affected with these maladies. Your acceptance will
be so widespread that even an infant in the cradle will be desirous of
coming to you to pay the allegiance. But those who are away from the
straight path and like beasts, they will not be inclined to you.

The rest of the world will through serving you obtain salvation and
eternal joy. Due to you the branches of honor will become green once
more and the edifice of respectability will remain firm in its location.
Due to you the lost pages of religious law and divine commandments will
be restored. The clouds of success and help will rain for you.

At that time you will strangle your enemies and help your followers. At
that time on the whole of earth there will not remain any oppressor that
deviates from truth and neither will there be any denier that considers
the true commands debased. No enemy of yours will remain and neither
will be anyone that points out defects. No opponent will be left to
oppose you. Thus Allah, the Mighty and Sublime helps one who relies on
Him because Allah does what He resolves to do.

Then he said: O Abu Ishaq, keep this location and this meeting secret
except from those who are reliable from among your brothers in faith.
And when the signs of reappearance and advent become apparent to you do
not lag behind your brothers in reaching me, and make haste to obtain
the effulgence of certainty and religion so that you may obtain
guidance, if Allah wills. Ibrahim bin Mahziyar says: I stayed with His
Eminence for sometime to gain points of wisdom and clarification of many
problems and obtained the revival of faith in my heart.

After that I became nostalgic for my people and with regret of
separation from the Imam asked him to allow me to leave. The Imam
accorded me permission and also gave me a supplication which carries
untold spiritual benefits and which will be a source of blessing for my
children and relatives.

I had with me an amount of 50000 dirhams which I presented to the Imam
who smiled and said that I should use it for my expenditure in the
return journey. He said that I must not think that the Imam has not
accepted it. He said: May Allah increase your wealth and make it last
for you ever. May He give you the rewards of the righteous and grant you
the traits of the obedient ones. All the excellence belongs only to Him.
And I pray that Allah makes you reach home safely without any problem. I
entrust you to Allah. You will never be deprived of His mercy and
blessings, if Allah wills.

O Abu Ishaq, we have adopted contentment due to His great favors and
benefits of thankfulness. And we have protected our selves through the
company of divine saints, purity of intention and unadulterated advice.
And we have guarded that which is absolutely clean and whose mention is
very lofty.

Abu Ishaq said: I thank Allah, the Mighty and Sublime that He showed me
the right path. I returned after meeting the Imam with a certainty that
the Almighty Allah will not allow His earth to decay and nor would He
keep it devoid of His clear proof.

I publicized this report in order to increase the insight of the people
of faith and to increase the recognition of the purified progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (S). It was a kind of returning the trust that I
held. So I decided to submit to that which had become clear to me so
that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime grants me the strength of
determination, helps my intention and increases the belief in
infallibility. And Allah guides whomsoever He likes to the straight
path.”

20 - And we have heard that a Shaykh of Hadith named Ahmad bin Faris
Adeeb said:

“I heard the following incident from my brothers in Hamadan and no one
has ever falsified this story:

There is a tribe in Hamadan which is called Banu Rashid. All of its
members are Shia Imamiyah, when I asked them the reason for their
Shiaism an elder of their community whom I found righteous and honest,
told me: It is narrated from our forefather, Rashid Hamadani that he
said:

When I was returning from Hajj and covering the distances through the
desert I was experiencing delight in halting and moving on. I covered a
long distance on foot till I was tired and needed some rest. So I
decided to sleep for some time to regain strength.

I said to myself: When the last part of the caravan passes by me I will
get up and join them. I was finally awakened by the intense sun and I
could not see anyone there. I was terrified because I didn’t know the
way. So I relied on Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and decided to move in
the direction I was facing. After sometime I reached greenery that had
recently received rainfall. The earth was fragrant. In the middle of
that I saw a palace that was glittering like the sword. I said to
myself: If only could know about this palace which I have never seen
before and neither have I heard anything about it. When I came to the
gate I saw fair complexioned servants.

I greeted them and they replied to me in a cheerful manner. They said:
Sit down, Allah has wished you well. A servant went into the palace and
then returned to say: Come inside. I entered the palace and saw that its
foundations were the best type of foundations and its construction was
also the best. The servant stood at the curtain of an entrance. Then he
lifted the curtain and told me to go in. I entered the room and saw a
young man sitting there in such a way that a long sword was hanging
above his head and he seemed to be a full moon shining in the dark. I
saluted him and he responded in a kind manner.

Then he asked: Who am I? I said: By Allah, I don’t know. He said: I am
that Qaim of Aale Muhammad who would appear in the last period of time
and through this sword fill the earth with justice and equity as it
would be fraught with injustice and tyranny.

I fell down on my face. He said: Don’t. Get up. You are a resident of
Hamadan and your name is Rashid. I said: My lord and master, you are
right. He said: Would you like to return to your family? I said: Yes, my
lord and master, and I would tell them of that with which I have been
blessed. He gave me a pouch and gestured to the servant who walked a few
steps with me. I decried mounds, trees and minarets of the mosque.

The servant asked me: Do you recognize this town? I said: It seems to be
like my town, Asadabad. The servant said: O Rashid, this is Asadabad,
you may proceed now. When I turned back I could see him no more.

I entered Asadabad. There were forty or fifty dinars in the pouch. I
went to Hamadan. I gathered my family members and conveyed the good news
to them. Till the time these dinars lasted, we remained in peace and
security.”

21 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Hatim Naufali
alias Kermani: Narrated to us Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Isa Washsha Baghdadi:
Ahmad bin Tahir Qummi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Najr bin Sahl
Shaibani: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Masroor from Saad bin Abdullah Qummi:

“I was very fond of collecting books on intricate and difficult subjects
so that I may learn the reality. I used to consider it my duty to speak
up about the reality and had the habit of learning by heart complicated
matters. I always desired to obtain success over the deviations and
difficulties of the books.

I had firm belief in the religion of the Imamiyah and often took part in
debates against the opponents. I used to expose their defects and
explained the weaknesses of their Imams. I exposed scandals of their
religious guides till one day I was subjected to a fight with severe
Nasibis. Enmity with them continued for a long time and there were
terrible fights between us. I used to ridicule them through questions
and proved that they were obstinate on a false stand.

Once I faced a debate with a deeply bigoted Nasibi. During the debate he
said: ‘Death be on you and all your co-religionists. You Rafidis lay
curse on the Emigrants and Helpers and deny their love for the Holy
Prophet while the Siddiq was the most exalted persons among the
companions and he had precedence in accepting Islam. Don’t you know that
the Messenger of Allah took him along to the cave on the night of
migration due to the risk to his life, just as he was concerned for his
own safety.

Because he knew that he would be his caliph and successor. Therefore he
wanted to protect his life like he was concerned about his own security.
So that the religion may not be destroyed after him. In those very
circumstances he made Ali sleep on his bed as he knew that even if he
were killed there would be no problem for Islam in the future because
there were people among the companions who could have taken his place,
therefore he did not accord much importance to his (Ali) getting
killed.’”

Saad says: “I replied to it but the replies were not so effective. So he
said: ‘You Rafidis say that the first and the second caliphs were
hypocrites and you support it by what happened on the Lailatul Uqbah.’
Then he said: ‘Come let us see if they accepted Islam willingly and
happily or it was under duress and pressure?’

Here I did not give any reply, because if I said it was under duress it
would not be correct as Islam at that time was not dominant and if I
said they accepted willingly it would negate their hypocrisy. I returned
from this debate with a heavy heart, took a paper and wrote down forty
odd questions that were difficult for me and said to myself that I must
hand it over to the representative of Maula Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ali
Askari (a.s.) (that is Ahmad bin Ishaq who resided in Qom).

But when I went to him I learnt that he had left on a journey. I
departed in his pursuit and when I reached him I told him all that had
happened. Ahmad bin Ishaq said to me: Come let us go together to Surre
man Raa (Samarrah) and ask our master, Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) about this.
So I accompanied him to Surre man Raa till we reached the house of our
master and asked for permission to enter, which was given and we went
inside.

Ahmad bin Ishaq had a leather bag that he had concealed inside his
Tiberian cloak. The bag contained one hundred and sixty purses
containing gold and silver coins. Each purse was sealed with the seal of
the sender. When our eyes fell on the elegant face of His Eminence, Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) we saw that his face was like a full
moon and a child was sitting in his lap. He was very beautiful, like a
Jupiter star having nice locks of hair. In front of the Imam was placed
a golden pomegranate decorated with jewels and precious stones; it was
presented by an affluent gentleman from Basra.

The Imam was holding a pen and writing something on paper. Whenever the
child caught his hand he tossed the pomegranate and the little one
chased it and brought it back. In the meanwhile he wrote whatever he
wanted. So Ahmad bin Ishaq opened the cloak and the leather bag before
Imam Hadi (a.s.) [a title of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)]. His Eminence
threw a glance at the child and said: Remove the seals from the gifts of
your Shias and friends. It was asked: O my master, is it lawful that a
pure hand should extend towards impure gifts and filthy monies?”

His Eminence asked Ahmad bin Ishaq to take out the contents of the bag
so the lawful and the unlawful can be separated. He did as he was told.
The child said: “This is from so-and-so of so-and-so locality of Qom,
containing 62 dinars from sale proceeds of a house, and inheritance from
his father 45 dinars and from the money of six dresses 40 dinars and the
rent of three shops amounting to three dinars.” Our master said: “You
are right, my son. Now tell us what is unlawful in it?”

The child said: “There is a dinar in this purse which was minted in Rayy
in so-and-so year. Half of its inscription is worn out; its three
corners are cropped, such that its weight is reduced by 1.5 Daniq. This
same amount is unlawful in it because the sender of this purse in
so-and-so year, so-and-so month gave to a weaver who was his neighbor a
mound and a quarter of old cotton for spinning. That cotton was stolen
from the weaver who informed him about it but he didn’t accept his
version and in its place took a mound and a half of softer cotton. Then
he ordered a garment be made for him from this material.

Thus that money and the cropped amount is from that money.” Ahmad bin
Ishaq untied the purse and removed from it the said dinar and the
cropped pieces from it. Then he took out another purse. The child said:
“This is from so-and-so of so-and-so locality of Qom, containing 50
dinars. It does not befit us to touch it at all.” Ahmad bin Ishaq asked:
“Why?” He replied: “It is the sale proceed of wheat that the sender had
paid to his farmers but while giving he measured some with a correct
measure and some with a tampered measure.”

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) said: “You are right my son.” Then he said: “O
Ibne Ishaq, take that purse and return it to the sender and tell him to
give the money to its actual owner, that is those farmers, as we are not
in need of this money.” At that moment he said: “Give me the garment
sent by the old lady.” Ahmad bin Ishaq said: “I have forgotten it.” He
went out to look for it. At that moment my master, His Eminence, Abu
Muhammad Hadi (a.s.) looked at me and asked: “What a surprise that you
came here?”

I said: “Ahmad bin Ishaq encouraged me to come and meet you.” He asked:
“What happened to those questions that you wanted to ask?” I said: “They
are yet unanswered, my master.” He said: “Ask whatever you want from my
dearest son.” And he gestured to the child. I asked: “O our master and
master’s son, it is narrated to us that the Holy Prophet (S) had given
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) the right to divorce his wives.

Therefore on the day of Jamal he sent message to Ayesha that she had
wreaked havoc with Islam and Muslims (and taken wrong advantage of her
position). That she has in an ignorant way condemned her children to
perdition. ‘Thus if you do not refrain from your act I will divorce
you.’ Tell me, my master, that what is the meaning of divorce here? That
the Messenger of Allah (S) left it at the discretion of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.)?”

He replied: “The Almighty Allah, hallowed be His name, gave an exalted
status to the wives of the Prophet and gave them the honor of being the
mothers of the faithful. Thus the Messenger of Allah (S) told Amirul
Momineen (a.s.): O Abal Hasan, this status is valid for them till they
remain in the obedience of the Almighty Allah. So whoever of them
disobeys Allah and after me, comes out in armed confrontation against
you, remove her from my wifehood and take away her status of motherhood
of faithful.”

Then I asked: “What is open obscenity? That if the wife commits, the
husband is entitled to expel her from his house even during her menses?”

He replied: “It is Musahiqa and not fornication. Because if she commits
fornication they will apply the penalty on her and if one wants to marry
her there is no problem in it. And the penalty that is given is no
obstacle for it. But if she commits Musahiqa, it is obligatory that she
must be stoned and being stoned is a disgrace, as for whomsoever Allah
has ordered stoning, He has disgraced that person. Therefore no one is
permitted to marry her.”

Then I asked: “O son of the Prophet, Tell me about the statement of the
Almighty Allah to His Prophet Musa (a.s.) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ إِنَّكَ بِالْوَادِ الْمُقَدَّسِ طُوًى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore put off your shoes; surely you are in the sacred valley,
Tuwa.”***[^1]

Scholars of the two sects are of the view that the shoes of Musa (a.s.)
were made of skin of dead animal?”

He replied: “Whoever says this has made a false allegation against His
Eminence, Musa and considers him ignorant in his prophethood because it
implies one of the two possibilities and each of them is a mistake;
either prayer was allowed in it or not. If it was allowed it would also
be allowed to hide them in that place as it is pure. If his prayer was
not allowed, then His Eminence, Musa (a.s.) failed to discriminate
between lawful and unlawful, that wearing what one can pray and with
what not, and this is infidelity.”

I said: “So, my master, tell me the exegesis of this verse.” He replied:
“His Eminence, was in the sacred valley when he said: ‘O my Lord, I have
made my love sincere to You and washed my heart of everything other than
You. But Musa was very much attached to his family. So the Almighty
Allah told him: ***“Therefore put off your shoes…”***

If your love for Me is sincere and your heart is devoid of inclination
for anyone except Me, remove the love of your family from your heart.”
“Please tell me what is the interpretation of the verse Kaaf Ha Ya Ain
Saad?” He replied: “These letters are from the unseen informations that
the Almighty Allah conveyed to His servant, Zakariya. Then He related
the story to Muhammad (S). It was that when Zakariya implored his Lord
to teach him the names of Panjetan (the holy five) the Almighty Allah
sent Jibraeel to him and he taught him their names.

Thus whenever Zakariya mentioned (remembered) the names of Muhammad,
Ali, Fatima or Hasan (a.s.) his sorrow and grief used to go away, but
whenever he thought of Husain (a.s.) a terrible grief used to beset him
and he was very much astonished why it was so. Thus one day he prayed to
the Almighty: O my God, how is it so that when I remember the four names
I obtain peace, but when I think of Husain, tears flow from my eyes and
I begin to wail?

Allah, the Mighty and the High informed him about the tragedy of Imam
Husain (a.s.) and told him that in Kaaf Ha Ya Ain Saad: Kaaf is for
Kerbala, Ha stands for Halakat (getting killed) of ‘Itrat’ (progeny) the
Holy Prophet (S), Ya implies Yazid who would oppress Husain (a.s.), Ain
denotes ‘Atash’ (thirst) of Husain (a.s.) and Saad indicates ‘Sabr’
(patience).

Thus when Zakariya heard this he did not leave the Masjid for three days
and did not allow anyone to meet him and continued to weep and wail. He
lamented on Husain (a.s.) and prayed to Allah: My God, will they make
the best of Your creature sit in mourning for his son? O Lord, would
this tremendous tragedy befall him? My God, would they make Ali and
Fatima put on the dress of mourning? Would they make the shock of this
calamity reach their abode? Then he said: Bestow me a son so that I can
be pleased in my old age and that his love affects my heart. After that
make me sit in his mourning as You would make Muhammad, Your beloved
sit. So the Almighty Allah gave him Yahya and later his martyrdom made
him aggrieved. And the period of Yahya’s pregnancy was six months like
in the case of Husain (a.s.).”

Then I asked: “O my master, why is it so that people cannot select the
Imam for themselves?” He replied: “Righteous or a corrupt Imam?” I said:
“Righteous.” He said: “Is there a possibility that they may choose a
transgressor while they are not aware what goes on in his mind, whether
he is righteous or corrupt?” “Yes,” I said. He said: “That is the reason
that I shall explain to you with logical argument.” I said: “Please do.”

He said: “Let us consider the prophets that the Almighty Allah has
appointed, on whom He revealed heavenly scriptures and supported them
with revelation and infallibility. They were the leaders of nations,
like Musa and Isa. Inspite of having knowledge and sharp insight were
they not prone to select hypocrites considering them believers?” “No,”
said I. The Imam said: “Then how did it happen that His Eminence, Musa
Kalimullah, inspite of having that same knowledge and receiving
revelations he chose seventy persons from the senior ones of the
community and those who were in the forefront of his army; about whose
sincerity he was sure and about whom he had no doubt, in fact he had
selected hypocrites. Allah, the Mighty and the High says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْتَارَ مُوسَى قَوْمَهُ سَبْعِينَ رَجُلاً لِّمِيقَاتِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Musa chose out of his people seventy men for Our
appointment…”***[^2]

As we have seen that when someone who is appointed by the Almighty Allah
(like Musa and Isa) when he could select the corrupt instead of the
righteous we realize that selection is not lawful except for one who is
aware of hidden secrets and the concealed thoughts. And we understand
that the selection of the Emigrants and Helpers was worthless, after the
prophets intending to select good people ended up choosing corrupt men.

Then he said: O Saad, your opponents claim that the Holy Prophet (S)
took with him the selected one of this Ummah to the cave as he was
afraid for his safety in the same way as he was worried about his
personal security because he knew that he would be the caliph of the
Ummah after him. While the necessity of hiding in the cave only arose
because he took him along. As for Ali (a.s.) he made him sleep on his
bed as he knew that the vacuum created by the death of Abu Bakr will not
be as that due to the death of Ali because there were others who could
fill that vacuum.

You can reply by asking him that are you not having the belief that the
Holy Prophet (S) said: After me the caliphate shall be for thirty years.
And they apply it to the tenures of the four persons, Abu Bakr, Umar,
Uthman and Ali (a.s.). The opponent will have to agree. Tell him if this
is correct, why did he take only one caliph, Abu Bakr, to the cave,
leaving the other three. This shows that the Prophet considered them
unimportant since it was necessary that he acts with them all like he
did with Abu Bakr. Since he did not do it, he considered their rights
unimportant and he discriminated between them in his kindness to them
while it was necessary for him to have the same concern for all of them.

As for your opponent’s question that: Did those two accept Islam
willingly or unwillingly? Why don’t you say: It was due to greed.
Because they used to sit in the company of Jews and they were knowing
about the proclamation and victory of Muhammad (S) on the Arabs. The
Jews had told them all about the prophecies in the Old Testament and
ancient scriptures. They had said that his domination over the Arabs
would resemble that of Nebuchadnezzar in Bani Israel except that he
would be claiming to be a prophet while in fact he would not be one.

Thus when the proclamation of the Messenger of Allah (S) was made they
helped him on the testimony of ‘There is no god except Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah’ with the greedy intention that when
circumstances are good and his affairs are in order, they would also be
able to get his deputyship and authority. But when they despaired of
getting rulership from His Eminence they joined other people having same
view on the night of Uqbah to frighten the camel of Prophet (S) so that
it may throw him down, killing him.

They covered their faces like others but the Almighty Allah kept His
Prophet safe from their plot and they could not harm him in any way.
Those two were just like Talha and Zubair who came and pledged
allegiance to Ali (a.s.) coveting governorship of a province. But when
they despaired, they broke the pledge and rose up in rebellion against
His Eminence till they met the fate of those who break the pledge of
allegiance.”

When the conversation reached this point, our master, Imam Hasan bin Ali
(a.s.) arose to pray. Qaim (a.s.) also arose with him and I returned
from their company and came out looking for Ahmad bin Ishaq. I saw him
coming to me weeping. I asked: “Why were you delayed? And why are you
crying?” He replied: “I don’t have the garment that my master has asked
for.” I said: “Don’t be upset, go and tell the Imam about it.”

So he went inside and returned smiling and reciting Durood on Muhammad
and Aale Muhammad. I asked: “What happened?” He replied: “I saw the
garment concealed under the feet of my master.” So we praised Allah the
Almighty. After that day we visited the house of our master a few times
more but did not see that child with His Eminence again. When it was
time to say farewell I, Ahmad bin Ishaq and some of our co¬religionists
came to His Eminence.

Ahmad bin Ishaq stood up and said: “O son of Allah’s Messenger,
departure is soon and our grief is intense. I pray to Allah to convey
our Durood on your grandfather Muhammad Mustafa, your father, Murtuza,
your mother, Sayydatunnisa and the two chiefs of the youths of Paradise,
your uncle and your father and the Purified Imams after them from your
forefathers. And also we convey our Durood and Salawaat on you and your
son. And we pray that may your station be exalted and may your enemies
be disgraced. And may not Allah make this our last audience with you.”
When Ahmad bin Ishaq reached this point His Eminence was moved to such
an extent that tears flowed from his eyes. Then he said:

“O Ahmad bin Ishaq, in your supplication, do not ask for invalid thing
as in this journey you will meet the Lord.” When Ahmad bin Ishaq heard
this he fell down unconscious. On regaining consciousness he said: “I
implore you by the sanctity of your grandfather, grant me a piece of
cloth that I can take as my shroud.”

Our master, put his hand under his seat and removed thirteen dirhams and
said: “Take this and don’t spend anything else on yourself and you will
not be deprived of what you desire. Indeed Allah does not waste the
reward of the doers of good.”

Saad continues: “On the return journey when three farsangs remained from
Halwan, Ahmad bin Ishaq developed fever and became seriously ill and was
on the verge of death. When we arrived at Halwan and lodged at one of
the caravanserai, Ahmad bin Ishaq summoned one of his townsmen who lived
in that place, and after that he said to us: ‘Tonight, you all leave me
alone.’ Each of us retired to our bedrooms, and near dawn a thought came
to my mind. When I opened my eyes I saw Kafoor, servant of my master,
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) who said to me: ‘May Allah increase your reward in
this calamity and may He compensate you for this tragedy.

We have finished the funeral bath and shrouding of your friend. You may
please get up for his burial, because his status in the view of your
master is more exalted than that of you all.’ After that he went out of
my sight and we participated in the funeral of Ahmad bin Ishaq, weeping
and wailing. We fulfilled his rights and completed his last rituals, may
Allah have mercy on him.”

[No 22 is missing in Arabic-Persian edition also.]

23 - Narrated to us Abul Hasan Ali bin Musa bin Ahmad bin Ibrahim bin
Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin
Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.): I found in the book of my father
(r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ahmad Tawal from his father from
Hasan bin Ali Tabari from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ali bin
Ibrahim bin Mahziyar that he heard his father say: I heard my
grandfather Ali bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar say:

“One night I dreamt that someone is telling me: O Ali bin Ibrahim, go
for Hajj and there you shall meet the Master of the Age (a.s.). I was
very happy at this dream and after performing the Morning Prayer went
out to inquire about the people who were going for Hajj. I came to know
that a caravan was just about to set out for Hajj. I hurriedly prepared
for the journey and set out with the first group of people.

After traveling for some time we reached Kufa. I alighted from my beast
and entrusting my luggage to a reliable person and set out in search for
the children of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.). I asked each and everyone but
no one had any knowledge about it. At last we departed for Medina but
when we reached there I was so tired that I did even feel capable of
dismounting. But I got down at last and keeping my belongings with a
reliable person set out in search of information about the progeny of
Abu Muhammad.

I continued my search without success till a group set out for Mecca and
I accompanied them. On reaching Mecca, again I put aside my belongings
and set out in search of the progeny of Abu Muhammad but again met
failure. One night I was sitting in despair when I thought to myself
that I should go and perform the Tawaf of Kaaba and pray to the Almighty
Allah regarding my desire. He would surely give me the recognition of my
hope. When I set out, I was facing the direction of the Kaaba. At that
moment I saw an elegant young man. He was wearing a pleasing fragrance
and covered with a sheet and trying for another sheet. He put one sheet
over his shoulder and shook it. He looked at me and said: Where are you
from? I said that I was from Ahwaz.

He asked: Do you know Ibne Khaseeb? I said: May Allah have mercy on him.
He has passed away. He said: May Allah’s mercy be on him. He fasted
during the days and prayed during the nights. He recited the Quran and
had love and regard for us. After that he asked: Do you know Ibrahim bin
Mahziyar? I said I was him. He said: Welcome, O Abul Hasan, do you know
the two sons of the Imam?

I said: Yes. He asked: Who are they? I replied: They are Muhammad and
Musa. He said: Where is the sign that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) had given
you? I said: It is with me. He said: Show it to me. I took out the ring
on which the names of Muhammad and Ali were engraved. On seeing the ring
he began to weep and said: Abu Muhammad, may Allah have mercy on you.
You are a just Imam, the son of an Imam and the father of Imam. May
Allah admit you to the Paradise of Firdaus with your holy forefathers.

Then he said: O Abul Hasan go back to your quarters and be ready to
depart with me after three of the six parts of the night have passed. I
returned to my quarters and remained in deep thought for a long time.
When it was time to go I prepared my mount and reached the designated
place at the appointed time. I found the young man waiting for me there.
He said: Welcome, O Abul Hasan, congratulations, you have gained the
permission to meet the Imam.

Both of us mounted and crossing the Arafat and Mina neared the foothills
of Taif. The youth told me to alight there. We got down and recited the
Midnight Prayer. Then the youth told me to pray the Morning Prayer also
but in brief. So I prayed the Morning Prayer in brief. The young man
applied dust to his face, mounted his beast and also told me to mount. I
mounted and both of us set out again.

When we reached the desert he asked me if I could see anything. I said:
Yes, my chief, I can see a green area. He asked: Can you see something
on it? I said: I can see a tent of hair pitched on a sand dune. And that
light is coming out from this tent. He asked me: Can you see anything
else? I said: I can see such and such thing. He said: O Ibne Mahziyar
may Allah purify your soul, and cool your eyes, we have reached our
destination. Dismount!

When I dismounted he said: Ibne Mahziyar, leave the reins of your beast.
I said: How can I leave it just like that? There is no one here to take
care of it. He said: This is a sanctuary and no one apart from the
saints of Allah can enter this place. So I left the beast alone and we
moved to the tent. When we reached there, he said: Wait here. Let me get
permission for you. He went inside and came back almost immediately and
said: Congratulations, you have got the permission.

I entered and saw the Imam of the Age (a.s.) seated on a leather rug. I
saluted him and he replied. I saw that his face was luminous as the moon
and there was no sort of wrinkle in it. Neither was his face too long
nor too broad or flat. He was of a tall stature. He had a very holy
appearance. The color of his skin was fair. He had a broad forehead and
his eyebrows were joined with each other. His cheeks were soft and eyes
large. His nose was raised. On his right cheek was a mole. When I saw
him for the first time I was completely amazed at his personality. The
Imam said to me: O Mahziyar, how are your brothers in Iraq? I said:
Master they are following wrong views about you and the progeny of the
satan is dominating them. Imam (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَاتَلَهُم ُاللّه ُأَنَّ ىيُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***May Allah destroy them; how they are turned away!***[^3]

I can see that a community will come which will slay them in their city.
The divine command shall apprehend them at any time of the day. I said:
O son of Allah’s Messenger, when will this happen? He replied: It would
be when between you and the route of the Kaaba a people will come who
are such that Allah and His messenger are immune from them. Redness will
be visible in the skies for three days continuously.

A pillar will be seen in this, like a pillar of silver from which light
would emanate. Then Saruwi will rise from Armenia and Azerbaijan who try
to reach the black mountains at the rear of Rayy. These mountains are
facing the red mountains and just next to the Taliqan district. After
that there will be a fierce battle between him and Maruzi, in which
children will grow old and the old will become weak. There will be
terrible bloodshed between them. At that time you must await the
reappearance of the Master of the Age who will first head for Zaura.

From there he would move to Mahan and from there to Wasit in Iraq. He
will stay for around a year. From there he will march forward and reach
Kufa, from there to Najaf and from there to Haira and Gharra. At this
place there will be a fierce battle between the two groups. As result of
which both the armies will be destroyed. Those who survive this battle
will be cut into pieces by the Almighty Allah. Then he recited the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَاهَا أَمْرُنَا لَيْلاً أَوْ نَهَارًا فَجَعَلْنَاهَا حَصِيدًا كَأَن
لَّمْ تَغْنَ بِالأَمْسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Our command comes to it, by night or by day, so We render it as
reaped seed- produce, as though it had not been in existence
yesterday.***[^4]

I said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, what does ‘Amr’ أَمْ ر denote? He
replied:

We are the Amr of Allah and His army. Then I asked: Sir, has that time
arrived? He recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The hour drew nigh and the moon did rend asunder.***[^5]

24 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani: Narrated to us
Abul Qasim Ja’far bin Ahmad Alawi Riqqi Uruzi: Narrated to me Abul Hasan
Ali bin Ahmad Aqiqi: Narrated to me Abu Nuaim Ansari Zaidi that:

“We were in Mecca sitting near the spout with a small group of Umrah
pilgrims among whom were Mahmoodi, Allaan Kulaini, Abu Haitham, Abu
Ja’far Ahwaal Hamadani, Muhammad bin Qasim Alawi comprising 30 persons.
Except for Muhammad bin Qasim Alawi Aqiqi none of them was sincere. It
was the 6th of Zilhajj of the year 293 A.H. a young man approached us
wearing Ihraam dress and carrying his slippers in his hands. He came
among us and due to his awe and majesty we stood up and greeted him with
Salaam. He glanced to the left and right and sat down among us. He
asked: ‘Do you know what His Eminence, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) used to
say in his supplication?’ We asked: ‘What did he recite?’ He said: ‘He
used to say:

O Allah, indeed I ask You by Your name due to which the sky and the
earth stand, and by which it is possible to distinguish between right
and wrong. Due to which different and separated people come together and
by which there develops differences and dispersion in cohesive groups;
and through which are calculated the number of sand particles in the
desert, the weight of the mountains and the measure of water in the
oceans. Bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad and widen and ease
all my affairs for me.’

Then the handsome youth stood up and we also followed by way of respect.
He began to perform the circumambulation (Tawaf). As a result of his awe
we forgot to ask him who he was. The next day at the same time he
completed the Tawaf and came to us and sat down among us in the same
way. Then he glanced to the right and left and asked: ‘Do you what
supplication Amirul Momineen used to recite after the obligatory
prayers?’ We asked: ‘What did he recite?’ He said: ‘He used to recite as
follows:

O Allah, it is towards You that voices are raised. Supplications are
addressed to You alone. Before You only are cheeks placed in submission.
Humility and lowliness is shown to You. Your command is honored in all
the matters. O the best of those who are beseeched and One Who is better
than all those who bestow. O the true one, O the forgiving one. O one
who never breaks His promise. O one who also commands to ask from Him
and also promises the fulfillment of supplications.

O one who has said: ‘Call upon Me, I will answer you.’ O one who said:
‘And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very near;
I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me, so they should
answer My call and believe in Me that they may walk in the right way.’ O
one who said: Say: ‘O my servants! Who have acted extravagantly against
their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah
forgives the faults altogether; surely He is the Forgiving the
Merciful.’

Then he looked to the right and the left and asked: ‘Do you know what
Amirul Momineen used to recite in the prostration of thankfulness
(Sajdah Shukr)? ‘Please tell us what he used to say,’ we replied. He
said: ‘He used to say:

The weeping of those who weep does not increase anything except Your
generosity and kindness. O one who has the treasures of the heavens and
the earth. O one whose mercy is widespread. My sins cannot restrain Your
favors from reaching me for which I pray to You. Regarding my affairs,
do what befits You.

You are powerful over every type of punishment and You have complete
right upon all of them. I have no argument to support my case in Your
court and neither have I an opportunity to present excuse. I present my
sins to You and I confess of having committed them so that You may
forgive them and You are the best of those who know.

I dissociate myself of all the sins that I have committed and all the
mistakes I made and all the evils deeds I have performed. O my Lord,
forgive me and have mercy on me and overlook all that You know for You
are the most powerful and kind.’

After that the young man arose and began to circle the Kaaba. We all
also rose up to pay respect. The next day he again came to us at the
same time and like the previous day we welcomed and greeted him. He sat
down in our company and glanced at the right and left. Then he said:
‘Ali bin al-Husain, Chief of those who prostrate (Sayyid us-Saajideen)
used to recite this at this place in prostration (so saying he pointed
to the Black Stone):

‘Your slave is at Your threshold, Your destitute is at Your door, You
are asked for those things over which none except You have power.’

Then he looked to the right and the left and glanced at Muhammad bin
al-Qasim Alawi from among us and said: ‘O Muhammad bin al-Qasim, you
are, Insha Allah on the right path.’

Then he arose and entered the circling of the Kaaba. There was none
among us that had not learnt by heart the supplications he had recited,
but we forgot to ask him about himself every day.

Mahmoodi asked us: ‘Do you know this man?’ ‘No,’ we replied. He said:
‘By Allah, he is the Master of your time.’ We asked: ‘How do you know, O
Abu Ali?’ He said: ‘I prayed to my Lord for seven years to let me have
the glimpse of the Master of the Age.’

Then he said: ‘Seven years ago that same gentleman was reciting the
supplication of Isha in Arafat. I asked him: ‘Who are you?’ He replied:
‘I am a human being.’ I asked: ‘From which race of human beings?’ He
said: ‘From the Arabs.’

Then I asked: ‘From which Arab clan?’ He said: ‘From the most noble and
high clan.’ I asked: ‘Which is that?’ He replied: ‘Banu Hashim.’ I
asked: ‘From which branch of Banu Hashim?’ He said: ‘That which is the
highest in giving counsel and worthy of praise in its loftiness.’ I
asked: ‘From which of these persons?’ He said: ‘From those who split the
heads, fed the poor and prayed in the dead of the night when the people
slept.’

I said to myself that he was an Alawite and I was inclined to the
Alawites. Then he disappeared. I don’t know whether he went to the sky
or into the earth. I asked those who were around him whether they knew
that Alawite gentleman. ‘Yes,’ they replied, ‘He comes with us every
year on foot to perform the Hajj.’ I told them that I didn’t see their
footprints. Then I went towards Muzdalifah in a condition of grief and
sorrow. That same night I saw the Holy Prophet (S) in dream. He said: ‘O
Mahmoodi, you have seen what you desired.’ I said: ‘My master, who was
he?’ He replied: ‘The one you saw during Isha was the Master of the
Time.’

Thus when we heard this from him we became angry at him, why he did not
inform us about it. He said that during the conversation he had
forgotten about it.”

And this traditions is narrated to us by Ammar bin Husain bin Ishaq
Usrushani (r.a.) at the Butik hill in Farghana. He said: Narrated to me
Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Khizr that he said: Narrated to me Abul Hasan
Muhammad bin Abdullah Iskafi that he said: Narrated to me Sulaym from
Abu Nauim Ansari that he said:

I was near the Mustijar in Mecca with a small group of people including
Mahmoodi, Allaan Kulaini and then he narrated the same report.

And narrated to us Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad
bin Hatim that: Narrated to us Abul Husain Ubaidullah bin Muhammad bin
Ja’far Qasbani Baghdadi that: Narrated to me Abu Muhammad Ali bin
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Husain Mazarai that: Narrated to us Abu Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali Munqazi Hasani in Mecca that:

We were sitting at the Mustijar with a small group of people including
Mahmoodi, Abu Haitham Dinari, Abu Ja’far Ahwal, Allaan Kulaini and Hasan
bin Wajna. We were all together thirty persons. Then he narrated the
same narration.

25 - Narrated to us Abul Hasan Ali bin Hasan bin [Ali bin] Muhammad bin
Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that: I heard Abul Husain
Hasan bin Wajna say:

“Narrated to us my father from his grandfather that he was in the house
of Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), when some people attacked. Among them was
Ja’far Kazzab bin Ali also. They began to plunder the house. Just then I
saw the Imam of the time (a.s.) coming out of a door. At that time he
was six years old. After that no one saw him.

I have seen in some books of history and Muhammad bin Hasan Ubbad has
also narrated that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) passed away on Friday at the
time of the Morning Prayer. The preceding night he wrote a number of
letters to Medina. The day was 8th Rabi I, 260 A.H. At the time of his
demise were present, his maid, Saqeel, his servant, Aqeed and the one
whom Allah knows. Aqeed says: Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) asked for water
and I brought it to him. The water was heated in the Samovar.

Then we brought it. The Imam said: Prepare for the ritual prayer. We
spread out a sheet in his room. The Imam took the water from Saqeel and
washed his face, then washed both his hands from the elbows to the
finger tips. Then he wiped his head and feet. After that he performed
the ritual prayer on his bed. Then he asked for drinking water. As he
was drinking the water his hand was shaking so badly that Saqeel took
the bowl from him. At that moment he passed away. He was buried in Surra
Man Raa in his house besides the grave of his mother. At that time was
twenty-nine years of age.”

And Ibne Ubbad narrated the following tradition to me: “The mother of
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) who was named Hadith, arrived from Medina and
got the news of Imam’s demise when she had reached Surra Man Raa. She
was also told about the demands of Imam Askari’s brother Ja’far
regarding inheritance and the fact that he had gone to the ruler and
revealed to him all those things that were supposed to be kept
confidential. Mutamid arrested Saqeel, the Imam’s slave wife and
detained her in his palace. Saqeel claimed that she was pregnant.
Mutamid appointed his women, female slaves and the wife of Qadi Shurai
to keep an eye on Saqeel.

But this was soon followed by events like the death of Ubaidullah bin
Yahya Khaqan, revolt in Surra Man Raa and the rule of Sahib Zanj in
Basra, due to which their attention was diverted away from Saqeel.”

Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad bin Habbab said: Narrated to me Abul Adyan
that: Aqeed the servant, Abu Muhammad Ibne Khairawayh and Hajiz Washsha
all narrate from Aqeed the servant, and Abu Sahl bin Naubakht said:
Aqeed the servant said:

“The close friend of Allah, al-Hujja Ibn al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad
bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali bin
Abi Talib, bliss of Allah be for them all, was born on the Friday eve in
the month of Ramadhan of the year two hundred and fifty four after
Hijra. His patronym is Abul Qasim and it is also said that it is Abu
Ja’far. His title is al-Mahdi and he is the proof of Allah on His earth.

People have split many ways on the subject of his birth: Of them are
those who have let it be known, of them are those who have concealed it,
of them are those who have been forbidden from mentioning him, and of
them are those who have made his name public. And Allah knows the best.”

Abul Adyan says: “I was a servant of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), and
carried his letters to different cities and environs. I had the honor to
attend to his service in his last illness. He gave the letters to me and
said, ‘Go to Madayn. Your journey will last for fifteen days. On the
fifteenth day, you will return to Samarrah. Here, wails and cries from
my house will greet you.

You will see me in the room where corpses are given the ritual bath.” I
asked, ‘Master! In such a case, who will be the Imam after you?’ Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) responded, ‘One who will ask you about the
replies to my letters will be my successor.’ I requested, ‘Please
provide me more details.’ Imam (a.s.) replied, ‘He will lead my funeral
prayers.’

I pleaded again, ‘Please furnish more information.’ He retorted, ‘He
will inform you about what is there in the bag.’ The awe-inspiring
personality of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) prevented me from further
inquiry about the bag.

I took the letters to Madayn and procured the ripostes. On the 15th day,
just as Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) had predicted, I entered Samarrah.
Loud voices of wailing and crying echoed from the house of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.). I saw Ja’far, the brother of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.), standing on the door and receiving condolences and consolation
from the local Shias. I said to myself, ‘If this man is the Imam, then
it will be clear that the position of Imamate has undergone a change.

For, I have seen him drink wine, gamble and play musical instruments.’ I
went near him and offered my condolences. He did not ask me anything.
Afterwards Aqeed emerged from the house and said, ‘Master! Your brother
has been shrouded. Come and lead his funeral prayers.’ Ja’far went ahead
to lead the prayers. Around him were some Shias including as-Samman and
Hasan bin Ali alias Salma, whom Mutamid killed.

When I entered the Imam’s house I saw that his corpse had been shrouded
and Ja’far bin Ali went forward to pray the funeral prayer. As he was
about to announce the Takbeer, a young boy with a wheatish complexion,
curly hair, broad teeth, shining like a brilliant moon, came out of the
house. He caught hold of Ja’far’s robe and pushed him aside, saying,
‘Uncle! Move aside. I am more worthy of leading the funeral prayers of
my father.’ Ja’far withdrew in a corner and his face went colorless.

The child went ahead to recite the prayers on his father’s dead body and
buried him next to his father’s (10th Imam’s) grave. Thereafter, he
turned towards me and said, ‘O Basri! Give me the replies of the letters
that are with you.’ I handed the letters to him and said to myself, ‘Two
prophecies are already fulfilled. Now only the third one about the
contents of the bag, remains.’ I went to Ja’far bin Ali and saw him
sighing.

Hajiz Washsha said to him: O master, who is that lad? So that I can
establish the proof on him. He said: By Allah I had never seen him and I
don’t know who he is. We were sitting when some residents of Qom arrived
and asked about the condition of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). When they
were informed about his demise, they inquired about the Imam after him.
People guided them towards Ja’far Ibn Ali.

They saluted him and offered their condolences. They wanted to know from
him about the money that they had brought along with themselves, to whom
did it belong and how much? Ja’far stood up from his place, and while
gathering his clothes, he said, ‘They expect me to know the unseen.’
Afterwards, a servant emerged from the house of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.) and announced, ‘The letters of so and so are in your possession.
You also have a bag containing a thousand dinars.

Of which, only ten dinars are pure. They gave the letters and money to
this servant saying, ‘The one who has sent you must be an Imam.’ Ja’far
bin Ali came to Mutamid and narrated everything. Mutamid sent his
soldiers to the Imam’s house who arrested and brought Saqeel.

Mutamid told her to surrender the child but she denied having given
birth to any child and she claimed that she was pregnant so that Mutamid
would give the pursuit of the child. So he gave her in custody of Ibne
Abi Shawarib the Qadi, till Ubaidullah bin Yahya bin Khaqan died all of
a sudden. The owner of Zanj revolted in Basra. All these circumstances
made him unconcerned with Saqeel and she was released. And praise be to
Allah the Lord of the worlds.”

26 - Narrated to us Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Husain bin Abdullah bin
Muhammad bin Mehran Aabi Aruzi (r.a.) in Merv: Narrated to us [Abu]
Husain [Ibne] Zaid bin Abdullah Baghdadi: Narrated to us Abul Hasan Ali
bin Sinan Musili: Narrated to me my father that:

“After Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) had been martyred, a delegation from Qom
departed for Samarrah carrying some monies as trusts and religious
payments of Shias to visit His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari and to
deliver him the monies. But when they reached Samarrah they learnt that
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) has passed away. Some servants of Ja’far told
them that after him the Imam was Ja’far.

At that same time Ja’far has gone out with his singers and musicians to
entertain himself on the banks of Tigris River. That is why the
delegation of Qom did not believe that Ja’far could be the Imam because
they knew that an Imam and a Divine Proof is aloof from sinful acts and
disobedience. Thus they decided to see him and learn the truth about
him.

So they arrived when Ja’far returned home and met him saying: We are a
group of Shias from Qom and we bring some monies for our master, Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s.). Ja’far did not let them complete the sentence and
asked in haste:

Where are the monies? “With us”, they replied but they requested Ja’far
to tell them about the amount of money they had brought and who had
given it to them. Because previously whenever they came to Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) he used to inform them all these things. Ja’far was
dumbfounded and did not know what to do. Ja’far protested that they were
lying and the knowledge of the unseen was only for Allah and his brother
was not having such knowledge. The delegation of Qom was further
perplexed and they looked at each other.

But Ja’far told them in an angry and harsh tone to hand him the money.
The group said that they were representatives of the people of Qom and
that they would hand him the monies only if he could furnish some signs
like Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) used to do.

Therefore if he were their Imam he should prove that he is the Imam
otherwise they would return the monies to their respective owners. On
hearing this reply Ja’far hurried to the Abbaside Caliph and informed
him about the matter concerning the group from Qom. Ja’far sought his
help in taking hold of the monies from the Qummi group. The Caliph also
pressured the Qummis and said to them, “Give this money to Ja’far.”

The Qom delegation said that they were representatives and agents of
people of Qom. “They have requested us not to give these monies to
anyone without getting a proof of Imamate. And this same procedure was
prevalent during the time of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.).”

“What was that sign that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) presented?” The group
said, “Without us saying anything, His Eminence used to inform us the
details of whatever we had brought. And when we used to be reassured
that the Imam is perfectly knowing those things we used to hand them
over to him.

Now if this man is the owner of Guardianship (Wilayat) like his brother
he should inform us about these things and explain their quantity and
condition so that we can hand it over to him. Otherwise we would take it
back to the owners.”

Ja’far was infuriated and he turned to the Caliph and said, “O Master of
believers! These people attribute falsehood to my brother because this
is knowledge of the unseen and my brother had no such knowledge.”

The Caliph paid no attention to the statement of Ja’far but said, “They
are agents and they are not the owners so they could not be held
responsible for their decision.”

The delegation implored the Caliph to help them leave the city in safety
and security. The Caliph ordered they be taken out of the city under
police protection and none should obstruct their passage.

The Qom delegation left the boundaries of the city and all of a sudden
they decried a handsome young man who mentioned each of their names and
said, “Accept your Master!” The group said, “Are you the master of
Guardianship?” The youth replied, “Refuge of Allah (No)! Rather I am the
slave and the obedient one of your Master, so come with me to be in the
presence of our Master.”

The Qom group happily followed the young man. When they reached the
house of Imam (a.s.) they saw that the Imam was sitting on a platform
wearing a green dress. His face shone like a full moon. They saluted the
Holy Imam (a.s.) and after they had made themselves comfortable the Imam
informed them about the amount of monies with them and the details of
other items as well.

The Qom group fell into prostration of thanks for Almighty Allah for
having given them the recognition of their Imam and the Divine Proof.
After that they posed some religious queries to His Eminence and His
Eminence provided the replies. Then they handed over the monies and
goods to the Imam. His Eminence instructed them that in future they must
not bring anything to Samarrah but that it should be handed over to the
Imam’s representative in Baghdad.

The Imam’s written communications must also be taken from this
representative. In that same gathering Imam (a.s.) gave a shroud and
camphor to Abu Abbas Muhammad Ibne Ja’far Qummi Himyari and said, “May
Allah magnify your rewards...”

After having received these favors the group bid farewell to His
Eminence and departed for Iran and Qom and during the journey when they
reached between Uqbah and the area of Hamadan, the above-mentioned
gentleman, Abu Abbas died. After that we used to send our religious
payments to Baghdad to the representative of the Imam and from there the
Imam’s epistles were issued.”

The author says: This report proves that the caliph of that time was
aware of the existence of the Imam of the Age (a.s.) and that is why he
did not oppose the delegation that had brought the monies and he did not
pay attention to Ja’far’s claims so that this matter is not publicized,
lest the common people become attentive towards the Imam.

After the passing away of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) when Ja’far brought
20000 dinars for the caliph and in exchange of that asked him to allow
him to keep the position of his deceased brother [Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.)],
the caliph said: Your brother’s position was not granted by us.

It was a divine appointment. You can see that I exhausted all my
capabilities to bring down the status of your brother but all my efforts
had been in vain. On the contrary his respect and piety went on
increasing. If in the view of the followers of your brother you also had
those qualities you would not have needed any help from us. And if in
their view you don’t have the qualities your brother had, even if I
appoint you on the post of Imamate, it would be of no use to you.

[^1]: Surah Taha 22:12

[^2]: Surah Araaf 7:155

[^3]: Surah Taubah 9:30

[^4]: Surah Yunus 10:24

[^5]: Surah Qamar 54:1


