Chapter 44: Reasons for Occultation (Ghaibat)
=============================================

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar [from Muhammad bin Husain] from Muhammad bin
Isa bin Ubaid from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Saeed bin Ghazwan from
Abi Baseer from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The birth of the Master of this affair has been concealed from the
people so that when he emerges, he would not be having anyone’s
allegiance upon him.”

2 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Ubaid and Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from
Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Jameel Ibne Salih from Abi Abdullah (a.s.)
that he said:

“The Qaim will arise without having anyone’s allegiance on his neck.”

3 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Yaqoob bin Yazid and Hasan bin Zareef, all of them from Muhammad
bin Abi Umair from Hisham bin Saalim from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said:

“The Qaim (a.s.) will arise and there will not be anyone’s allegiance on
his neck.”

4 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to us
Ahmad bin Muhammad Hamadani: Narrated to us Ali bin Hasan bin Ali bin
Faddal from his father from Abil Hasan Ali bin Musa ar-Reza (a.s.) that
he said:

“As if I can see the Shias after the passing away of my third
descendant, that they are roving about like cattle in search of pasture
but unable to find it. I asked: Why would it be so, O son of Allah’s
Messenger? He replied: Because that Imam will be hidden from them. I
asked: Why? He replied: So that when he rises up with the sword he would
not be having anyone’s allegiance on his neck.”

5 - Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad al-Attar (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abu Amr Kashshi from Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to us Jibraeel bin
Ahmad: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Isa from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from
Saeed bin Ghazwan from Abi Baseer from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The master of this affair will be one whose birth shall be concealed
from the people so that when he rises up he would not be having anyone’s
allegiance on his neck. And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will improve
his circumstances overnight.”

6 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud and Haider bin
Muhammad Samarqandi, all of them said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Masud: Narrated to us Jibraeel bin Ahmad from Musa bin Ja’far Baghdadi:
Narrated to me Hasan bin Muhammad Sairafi from Hanan bin Sadeer from his
father from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“There is an occultation for our Qaim, which shall be prolonged.” I
asked: “Why, O son of Allah’s Messenger?” He replied: “Because the
Almighty Allah wants that the practices of His prophets in their
occultation should also occur on him. And O Sudair, his occultation must
come to an end. The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَتَرْكَبُنَّ طَبَقًا عَن طَبَقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That you shall most certainly enter one state after another.”***[^1]

It means: The Sunnats of those who have gone before you.”

7 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud:
Narrated to me Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Khalid: Narrated to me Ahmad
bin Hilal from Uthman bin Isa Rawasi from Khalid bin Najih Jawwaz from
Zurarah that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“O Zurarah, occultation is inevitable for the Qaim. I said: Why? He
said: He will fear for his life - and he pointed to his stomach with his
hand.”

8 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud:
Narrated to me Muhammad bin Ibrahim Warraq: Narrated to us Hamdan bin
Ahmad Qalanisi from Ayyub bin Nuh from Safwan bin Yahya from Ibne Bukair
from Zurarah that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“There is occultation for the Qaim before his advent. I said: Why? He
said: He will fear - and he pointed to his stomach with his hand.”

9 - Narrated to me Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah from Hamdan bin Sulaiman
from Muhammad bin Husain from Ibne Mahboob from Ali bin Riyab from
Zurarah that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“The Qaim (a.s.) will have an occultation before he rises up. I said:
Why? He said: He will fear - and he pointed to his stomach with his
hand.” – Zurarah says: That is [he will fear] being killed.

10 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to me my
uncle Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi from
Ayyub bin Nuh from Safwan bin Yahya from Ibne Bukair from Zurarah from
Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim (a.s.) will have an occultation before he rises up. I said:
Why? He said: He will be afraid that he would be killed.”

11 -Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to me Ali bin Muhammad Ibne Qutaibah Nishapuri: Narrated to us
Hamdan bin Sulaiman Nishapuri: Narrated to me Ahmad bin Abdullah bin
Ja’far Madayni from Abdullah bin Fadl Hashimi that he said: I heard
As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) say:

“Certainly, there is a long occultation for the master of this affair
which cannot be avoided, as during the period of occultation every
falsehood seeking person shall fall into doubt.

I asked: Why, may I be sacrificed on you? He replied: For the reason we
have not been permitted to reveal.

I said: Then what is the wisdom behind his occultation? He replied: The
same wisdom that was behind the occultation of divine proofs before him.
Indeed the wisdom behind the occultation of His Eminence will not be
known except after his reappearance just as the wisdom behind the
actions of Khizr (a.s.) of making a hole in the boat, killing the boy
and repairing the wall were not clear to Prophet Musa till the time of
the parting of their ways.

O son of Fadl, this matter (of occultation) is a matter of Allah the
Almighty and is one of the divine secrets from the unseen of God. And
since we know that the Almighty Allah is All-Wise, we testify that all
His actions and words are based on wisdom even though their causes may
not be clear for us.”

[^1]: Surah Inshiqaq 84:19


