Chapter 46: Longevity
=====================

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar from Ahmad bin Muhammad
bin Isa from Ali bin Hakam from Hisham bin Saalim from As-Sadiq Ja’far
bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said:

“Prophet Nuh (a.s.) lived for 2500 years out of which 850 years was
before proclaiming his prophethood and he propagated faith to his nation
for 950 years. After deluge he disembarked from the Ark and lived for
another 700 years during which his children lived on the earth. Then one
the day the angel of death visited him when he was standing in the sun.
The angel greeted him: Peace be on you.

He responded to the greeting, then asked: What is the purpose of your
visit, O angel of death? The angel said: I have come to capture your
soul. Nuh (a.s.) said: Will you allow me to come to the shade? The angel
said: All right. Nuh (a.s.) came into the shade and said: O angel of
death, I feel the duration of my life was as much as the time it took me
to come from the sun into the shade. Now you may do as you are
commanded. The narrator says: Then the angel captures the soul of Nuh
(a.s.).”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from Husain bin Hasan bin Aban from Muhammad
bin Uramata that: Narrated to me Saeed bin Junah from Ayyub Ibne Rashid
from a man from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The lifespan of each person of the nation of Nuh (a.s.) was of three
hundred years.”

3 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Idrees Muhammad
bin Yahya al-Attar, all of them said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ahmad
bin Yahya that: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yusuf Tamimi from Ja’far bin
Muhammad from his father from his grandfather (a.s.) from the Messenger
of Allah (S) that he said:

“Father of humanity, Adam, lived for 930 years. Prophet Nuh (a.s.) had a
lifespan of 2450 years. Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) 175 years. Prophet Ismail
(a.s.) 120 years. Prophet Ishaq (a.s.) 180 years. Prophet Yaqoob (a.s.)
120 years. Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) 120 years. Prophet Musa (a.s.) 126
years. Prophet Harun (a.s.) 133 years. Prophet Dawood (a.s.) 100 years
out which he was the king for 40 years and Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) lived
for 712 years.”

4 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Bashshar Qazwini (r.a.):
Narrated to us Abul Faraj Muzaffar bin Ahmad: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Ja’far Kufi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ismail Barmaki: Narrated to
us Hasan bin Muhammad Salih Bazzaz that he said: I heard Hasan bin Ali
Askari (a.s.) say:

“After me, my son will be the Qaim through whose long lifespan and
occultation the practice of the prophets will be repeated. His
occultation will so much prolonged that the hearts of the people will;
harden no one will remain steadfast on religion except those on whose
hearts Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has inscribed faith and those who
would be helped by Ruhul Qudus.”

5 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ahmad Shaibani (r.a.) that he said:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi from Musa bin Imran Nakhai
from his uncle Husain bin Yazid Naufali from Hamza bin Humran from his
father Humran bin Ayyan from Saeed bin Jubair that he said: I heard the
Chief of the Worshippers Ali bin Husain (a.s.) say:

“In the Qaim is resemblance to Prophet Nuh (a.s.) and that is a long
lifespan.”

6 - Narrated to us my father that: Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin
Hashim from his father from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Hisham bin
Saalim from As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said relating
the story of Prophet Dawood (a.s.):

“One day Prophet Dawood (a.s.) came out of the house reciting the
Zaboor. And when he recited the Zaboor, there was no mountain, no stone
and no bird that did not join him in his recitation. Finally he reached
a hill on top of which lived a worshipper named Hizqil. When this man
heard the mountains, stones and birds reciting the Zaboor he understood
that Prophet Dawood (a.s.) was approaching.

Prophet Dawood (a.s.) said: O Hizqil, allow me also to join you on the
hill. He replied: No. On being refused the permission Prophet Dawood
(a.s.) began to weep. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime revealed to Hizqil
to allow Prophet Dawood (a.s.) and to seek His forgiveness. So he held
the hand of Prophet Dawood and brought him to the top. Prophet Dawood
(a.s.) said: O Hizqil, do you ever feel like committing a sin? He
replied: No. He asked: Do you ever feel desirous of worldly pleasures
and vices?

He said: Sometimes I feel the urge. He asked: Then what do you do? He
said: I go into this cave and by looking at that which is in the cave I
obtain lesson from it. So Prophet Dawood (a.s.) entered the cave and saw
a throne made of iron on which was a skeleton, and an iron plate was
attached to it. Dawood (a.s.) saw the following written on it:

‘I am Urwah bin Salam. I ruled for 1000 years, constructed 1000 cities,
married 1000 times and the gist of my whole life is that today I have
turned to dust. I am the diet of worms and insects. Thus one who sees me
should not desire the world.’”


