Chapter 31: Statements of Ali bin al-Husain (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
======================================================================================

1 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us my father from Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Yahya bin Imran
Ashari from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin Hasan
from Abi Saeed Usfoor from Amr bin Thabit from Abi Hamza that he said: I
heard Ali bin Husain (a.s.) say:

“Allah, the Mighty and the High created Muhammad and Ali and eleven
Imams from His great effulgence. In the spiritual form, under the light
of His effulgence they worshipped Him before the creation of the
creatures, glorified Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and sanctified Him
and they are the Imams of guidance from Aale Muhammad (a.s.).”

2 - Narrated to us Ali bin Abdullah Warraq: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Harun Sufi from Abdullah bin Musa from Abdul Azeem bin Abdullah Hasani
(r.a.): Narrated to me Safwan Ibne Yahya from Ibrahim bin Abi Ziyad from
Abi Hamza Thumali from Abi Khalid Kabuli that he said:

“I came to my master, Ali bin Husain Zainul Abideen (a.s.) and said: O
son of Allah’s Messenger, tell about those personalities whose obedience
and love Allah has made incumbent on His servants and that after the
Messenger of Allah (S) they should follow them. The Imam said: O Kankar,
The ones whom Allah has made as Ulil Amr (vested with authority) are
Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and after him, Imam Hasan
(a.s.), then Imam Husain (a.s.), sons of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) till
this position came to me. After that the Imam fell silent.

I said: My chief, it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that the
earth shall never be devoid of Proof of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
upon His creatures. So who is the Imam and Divine Proof after you? He
replied: My son, Muhammad and in Taurat his name is Baqir (splitter) and
he will expound knowledge. He will be the Divine Proof after me. And
after him his son, Ja’far who will be famous among the folks of the
heavens as Sadiq. I said: My chief, why is he named Sadiq (truthful)
while all of you are truthful?

He replied: My father narrated to me from his father that the Messenger
of Allah (S) said: When my great grandson, Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali
bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) is born, name him Sadiq. One of
his fifth descendants will be named Ja’far, who will falsely claim
Imamate and attribute falsehood to the Almighty Allah. He would be
Ja’far Kazzab in the view of Allah. He will claim something he is not
worthy of.

He will oppose his father and be jealous of his brother. Taking undue
advantage of the occultation of Divine Proof he will try to expose the
secret of Allah. After that Imam Ali Ibne Husain (a.s.) cried much and
then said: “As if I can see Ja’far Kazzab helping the tyrant of the time
to search for the Wali of Allah. He will try to spy on him and not
knowing about the birth of Imam Qaim, he will become the executor of his
father’s estate and will desire that were he to gain upper hand on the
Qaim he will eliminate him; and will be greedy for his inheritance, till
he usurps it wrongfully.”

Abu Khalid says: I said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, is it a prediction?
He replied: No, rather by Allah, it is written in the book in our
possession that mentions the calamities that shall befall us after the
Messenger of Allah (S). Abu Khalid says: I asked: O son of Allah’s
Messenger, what will happen after that? He replied: After that there
will be a long occultation of the Wali of Allah and the twelfth
successor of the Messenger of Allah (S).

O Abu Khalid, during this period of occultation, those who believe in
his Imamate and who await for his reappearance, they shall be better
than the people of all times because Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would
bestow them intelligence, understanding and recognition and for them
occultation would be same as presence. Their status shall be like that
of the holy warriors who fought under the command of the Messenger of
Allah (S). It is they who are sincere and our true Shias. They shall
call the people to the religion of Allah openly and secretly. And he
said: Awaiting for the reappearance is the best worship act.”

And this tradition is also narrated to us by Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa; and
Muhammad bin Ahmad Shaibani; and Ali bin Abdullah Warraq from Muhammad
bin Abi Abdullah al-Kufi from Sahl bin Ziyad Adami from Abdul Azeem bin
Abdullah al-Hasani (r.a.) from Safwan from Ibrahim bin Abi Ziyad from
Abi Hamza Thumali from Abi Khalid Kabuli from Ali bin al-Husain (a.s.).

The author says: The mention by Zainul Abideen (a.s.) of the name of
Ja’far Kazzab proves the reports about this matter. And the same thing
is narrated from Abil Hasan Ali bin Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) that he
was not pleased at the birth of Ja’far and in fact he informed that
Ja’far would mislead a large number of people. All this also proves the
above.

Because nothing proves Imamate better than informing about the past and
the future events. Like the proof of the messengership of Prophet Isa
(a.s.) was that he informed the people what they ate and what they
stored at home. In the same way was the case of the Holy Prophet (S).
When Abu Sufyan said to himself: Has anyone done it the way I have done?
I came and at once removed his hands from me.

Then I gathered a large number of people of Kanana and Habasha, then I
fought with him. Perhaps I could have stopped him again. So the Holy
Prophet (S) called out from his tent: O Abu Sufyan, now Allah will
recompense you. This was like the proof of Prophet Isa bin Maryam
(a.s.). And all such prediction made by the Imams (a.s.) prove that they
are the true appointees of Allah and that it is incumbent to follow
them.

And narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that:
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Hasan bin Furat: Informed us Salih bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin
Muhammad bin Ziyad from his mother Fatima binte Muhammad bin Haitham
known as Ibne Siyabah that she said:

“I was in the house of Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) when
Ja’far was born. I saw the family members rejoice at the birth. But when
I came to Abul Hasan (a.s.) I did not see him happy at this. So I asked
him: O my Sayyid, why do I see you unhappy at the birth of this child?
He replied: It will become clear to you because soon he will mislead a
large number of people.”

3 - Narrated to us Shareef Abul Hasan Ali bin Musa bin Ahmad bin Ibrahim
bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin
Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said: Narrated to us Abu
Ali Muhammad bin Hammam: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad Naufali:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hilal from Uthman bin Isa Kilabi from Khalid
bin Najih from Hamza bin Humran from his father [Humran bin Ayyan] from
Saeed bin Jubair that he said: I heard the Chief of the worshippers, Ali
bin Husain (a.s.) say:

“In His Eminence, Qaim (a.s.) are present similarities to seven
prophets. The practice of our father, Adam, the practice of Ibrahim, the
practice of Musa, the practice of Isa, the practice of Ayyub and the
practice of Muhammad (S). As for the practice of Adam and Nuh (a.s.) it
is a long life. As for the similarity with Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) it is
a concealed birth and being away from the people. And from Musa it is
the fear and occultation. And from Isa is that he will have discord
regarding him. With Ayyub (a.s.) he shares the occurrence of triumph
after difficulties. And from Muhammad (S) he will share the aspect of
advent and armed uprising.”

4 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Bashshar Qazwini: Narrated to us
Abul Faraj Muzaffar bin Ahmad: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ja’far Kufi
Asadi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his uncle Husain bin
Yazid from Hamza bin Humran from his father from Saeed bin Jubair that
he said: I heard the Chief of the worshippers, Ali bin Husain (a.s.)
say:

“In the Qaim is present a resemblance to Nuh (a.s.), and that is a long
life.”

- Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad Daqqaq and Muhammad bin Ahmad
Shaibani -May Allah be pleased with them -they said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi from Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his uncle
Husain bin Yazid from Hamza bin Humran from his father Humran bin Ayyan
from Saeed bin Jubair that he said: I heard the Chief of the
worshippers, Ali bin Husain (a.s.) say:

“In the Qaim is present a resemblance to Nuh (a.s.), and that is a long
life.”

5 - And from the same chain of narrators he said: Ali bin Husain, the
Chief of the worshippers (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim from us will be such that his birth will remain concealed from
the people so much that they will say (regarding Imam Hasan Askari)
that: He had no issue who will rise up without having the allegiance of
anyone on his neck.”

6 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Bastam bin Murrah
from Amr bin Thabit that he said: Ali bin Husain, the Chief of the
worshippers (a.s.) said:

“To one who remains firm on our guardianship (Wilayat) during the
occultation of our Qaim, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will give the
reward of a thousand martyrs of Badr and Uhad.”

7 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Isaam Kulaini (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini: Narrated to us Qasim bin
Alaa: Narrated to us Ismail bin Ali Qazwini: Narrated to me Ali bin
Ismail from Asim bin Humaid Hannat from Muhammad bin Qais from Thabit
Thumali from Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said:

“The verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُوْلُواألَْرْحَامِبَعْضُهُمْأَوْلَىبِبَعْضٍفِيكِتَابِاللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and the possessors of relationship have the better claim in the
ordinance of Allah…***[^1]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَهَاكَلِمَة ًبَاقِيَة ًفِ يعَقِبِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he made it a word to continue in his posterity.***[^2]

Were revealed about us. And the Imamate will remain in the progeny of
Husain bin Ali (a.s.) till Judgment Day. There are two occultations for
our Qaim, one of which shall be longer than the other. As for the first
one, it would be for six days[^3], or six months or six years. And as
for the second one it would be so long that most of those who have faith
in this matter will turn back from their belief. Then they would not
remain firm on this matter except those who have very strong faith and
correct recognition, and in their hearts there is no discomfort from our
decisions and those that submit to us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).”

8 - And from the same chain of narrators he said: Ali bin Husain (a.s.)
said:

“The religion of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is not obtained through
defective intellect, invalid opinion and corrupted analogy. It is
achieved through submission. Thus there is security for one who
submitted to us. There is guidance for one who followed us. And one who
resorted to analogy and personal opinion, he is destroyed and one who
felt unconvinced by our statements and decisions, he has denied the one
who revealed the seven oft repeated verses and the great Quran.”

[^1]: Surah Ahzab 33:6

[^2]: Surah Zukhruf 43:28

[^3]: Allamah Majlisi (r.a.) says: Six days, perhaps imply different
conditions of His Eminence in the period of his occultation, just as for
six days no one was informed about the birth of His Eminence except very
special people from his close aides. After six months his other
companions were informed and then after six years, after the passing
away of his respected father (a.s.), many people came to know about the
matter of His Eminence. After that his special representatives appeared…


