Chapter 54: Shaddad and his Paradise, those who had very long life-spans
========================================================================

Shaddad bin Aad bin Iram and his paradise. Like which nothing was ever
made on this earth.

1 - Informed us Muhammad bin Harun Zanjani through what he wrote to us
that: Narrated to us Maaz Abu Muthanna Anbari: Narrated to us Abdullah
bin Muhammad bin Asma: Narrated to us Juwairiya from Sufyan from Mansur
from Abi Wael that he said:

“A man called Abdullah bin Qalabah set out in search of his lost camel.
He was searching it in the desert and wilderness of Aden. He saw a city
in those wildernesses, which was surrounded by a city-wall on all four
sides and had many palaces and countless flags. He thought that the city
would be inhabited and went there to enquire about his camel but he did
not see anyone entering or leaving the city.

He reached near the city, got down from his camel and tied it on one
side, unsheathed his sword and entered the city through its gate. He saw
two more large gates such that no one would have seen gates as large as
and as high as those. The wood of those doors was fragrant and was
studded with saffron and red rubies, whose light had illuminated all the
houses.

He was surprised on seeing this. Then he opened one of the doors and
entered. There was a city inside it, which was matchless and unique. He
saw such palaces standing, whose pillars were made of emerald and ruby.
There were windows in every palace and every window had another window
above it. All of them were made from gold, silver, pearls, ruby and
emerald.

The doors of those palaces were like the gates of city, whose wood was
fragrant and were decorated with rubies. The flooring of those palaces
was made from the balls of pearls, musk and saffron. When he saw those
buildings, he did not find anyone there and became frightened. There
were flower-beds on all four sides of those palaces.

Trees were planted in them and fruits were hanging from the trees.
Streams were flowing beneath them. He thought that it is the same
paradise, which Allah has promised for His virtuous servants. He thanked
God for making him enter Paradise in the world itself.

Then he picked up small bottles containing pearls, musk and saffron as
much as he could. However, he could not remove even a single emerald or
ruby because they were strongly fitted on walls and door and balls
containing pearls, musk and saffron were spread in palaces and rooms
like sand. He collected as much as he could and then came out, mounted
his camel and reached Yemen from the way he had come.

There he showed those balls of pearls, saffron and musk and narrated
whatever he had seen. He sold the pearls, which had turned saffron and
changed because of ravages of time. This news spread and when it reached
Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan, he sent a messenger to the governor of Sanaa
and summoned that person. Thus, the person went to Muawiyah. He enquired
about that city in private and asked what he had seen in it. He narrated
the entire incident to him and showed him the pearls, musk and saffron
he had picked up from there and said, “By God, even Sulaiman bin Dawood
did not have such a city.”

Muawiyah called Kaabul Ahbar and said, “O Abu Ishaq! Have you received
the information about a city in this world, which is made of gold and
silver? Its pillars are made of rubies and emerald and its palaces and
windows are made of pearls. Its flower-beds have trees and streams flow
beneath them?”

Kaab said, “Yes, such a city was built by Shaddad bin Aad. It is Iram
Dhatul Imad, which was praised by Almighty Allah and He says in the book
revealed on His Messenger (S) that nothing was created like that.”

Muawiyah said, “Tell me about it.” Kaab said, “There was a person called
Aad-e-Ula and he was not from Aad, the community of Prophet Hud (a.s.).
He had two sons – Shadeed and Shaddad. When Aad died, both of his sons
became kings and came to power so much that everyone in the east and
west started obeying them. Shadeed died first and Shaddad became the
king undisputedly.

He loved books very much. When he used to hear about Paradise that there
would be buildings made of rubies, emerald and pearls, he wished that he
too would make such a paradise like that in this world against God. He
appointed one hundred persons for his work and appointed one thousand
people to help each one of them and ordered: “Look for the best and wide
ground and make a city of gold, silver, rubies, emerald and pearls for
me in it and make the pillars from emerald.

Make its pillars from emerald. Construct palaces in it and make windows
in them and construct more windows above the existing ones. Plant trees
of different fruits below those palaces and make streams flow beneath
the trees as I have read in books about the features of Paradise. I want
to construct a city like that in this world.

Those people said, “From where will we get so many jewels and gold and
silver to make a city with them as wished by you? Shaddad said, “Maybe
you people don’t know that all the countries of world are under my
control.” The people said, “Yes, we know that.” He said, “Go and appoint
a group on every mine of gold, silver and jewels so that they collect as
much as you want. Also, get the gold and silver from people as much as
they have.”

Thus, letters were written to the sovereigns of the east and west and
they collected jewels for ten years. Then the city was constructed in
three hundred years. Shaddad lived for nine hundred years. People
informed him that they had completed the construction of Paradise. He
ordered, “Construct a boundary on all four sides of it and build a
thousand palaces around that boundary and fix a thousand flags near each
palace because each palace would be occupied by one of my viziers.
Hence, go back and complete this work.”

Hearing this, those people came back and constructed as they were
ordered and informed him. Now, when he ordered people to make
preparations to go to Iram Dhatul Imad, people collected belongings for
the journey for ten years.

Then, the king departed with an intention of visiting Iram. When he
reached near that paradise and the journey of only a day and night was
left, Lord of worlds sent a voice on him and his companions and all of
them died after hearing it. Neither he could enter Iram nor could any of
his companions do so. It is a characteristic of that Iram that a city
could not be created like that one.

Also, I have noted this fact in books that a person would go to that
Iram. He would see it and narrate it to the people but the people would
not believe him. However, faithful people would enter it during the last
age.”

The author says: If it is permissible for a paradise made on earth to
remain hidden from the eyes of people and no one can find it out and
even though its location is unknown, people believe in it on the basis
of traditions then why don’t they accept the occultation of Qaim
(a.t.f.s.) on the basis of traditions? Also if it is acceptable that
Shaddad bin Aad lived for nine hundred years then why is the long life
of Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.) objected to?

The narration about Shaddad bin Aad is reported by Abu Wael and reports
about the Qaim (a.t.f.s.) are narrated from Prophets (a.s.) and Imams
(a.s.). Thus, it is mere rejection of truth.

I have seen in Kitab Muammareen, in which it is narrated from Hisham bin
Saeed Rihal: I saw a stone in Alexandria, on which it was inscribed “I
am Shaddad bin Aad” who constructed Iram Dhatul Imad such that no city
was constructed like it.

I trained many armies and leveled many battlefields with the power of my
arms and constructed Palaces of Iram when there was no old age and death
and stones were as soft as flowers. Also, I threw a lot of wealth whose
quantity reached twelve storeys in sea and no one would be able to
remove it but the Ummah of (Prophet) Muhammad (S) will bring it out.

Aus bin Rabiah bin Kaab bin Umayyah al-Astami lived for two hundred
years and composed the following verses:

I lived so much that my family members became wary Of my living with
them and my long life And it is justice that apart from two hundred
years The fourteen years, which were spent Making one wary of life and
every morning Is followed by night My bones had left the flesh like
Rahib (his bones) And my heart accepted it.

Abu Zubaida whose name was Badr bin Hurmula was a Christian and he lived
for one hundred and fifty years.

Nasr bin Duhman bin (Basar bin Bakr bin) Sulaiman bin Ashja’ bin Reeth
bin Ghatfan lived for one hundred and ninety years and all his teeth
fell and all his hair turned white and he became unsound of mind. When
his community needed his advice in one of the matters, they prayed to
Allah to restore his mind and youth. Allah accepted their supplication
and granted him mind and youth and all of his hairs turned black.

Thus, Musallama bin Kharshab Anmari told Anmar bin Bagheez (about this)
and it is said that Ayaz Mardas Salami said:

Nasr bin Duhman’s life was like a hundred year old camel, which he lived
His posture was straightened and his body accepted it And the whiteness
of his hair was changed to black for ninety more years And his youth
began once again after he had lost it His also regained his sense Even
though he had lost it but he died in spite of all these things.

Suwaid bin Hadhdhaq Abadi lived for two hundred years.

Ja’sham bin Auf bin Hudhaimah lived for a long period and composed the
following verses:

Till when would Ja’tham have lived among alive? Who neither had anyone
to support him and nor was he rich Alas, there is not medicine for
death.

Thalaba bin Kaab bin Zaid bin Abdul Ash-hal Ausi lived for two hundred
years and composed the following verses:

I spent life with many groups But all of them went away. They became so
silent That when I call them, they don’t respond Thus, my life was
lengthened too much for me after them Hence, I used to sit in a corner
of my house whole day And spent those days wishing for death.

Rida-ah bin Kaab bin Dhahl bin Qais Nakh-I’ lived for three hundred
years and composed the following verses:

And it did not remain, alas, what an infamy I am neither the father of
sons nor of daughters Nor am I a barren woman for whom there is no sleep
But the dead are counted daily Is there anyone who would buy my life and
I would sell it to him?

Adi bin Hatim Tai lived for one hundred and twenty years.

Ammabaat bin Qais bin Harith bin Shaiban Kindi lived for a hundred and
sixty years.

Umair bin Hajir bin Umair bin Abdul Azza bin Qumair lived for one
hundred and seventy years and composed the following verses:

I got involved and the time destroyed me and I received Hundred more
years of life and ten more years after that And I have become like a
chick that I am neither included among dead, Which would have ended my
problems nor am I included among alive to give order I spent a long
period of my life with the people of my tribe Now I am like a dead for
them who is heading to his grave.

A’rraam bin Mundhar bin Zubaid bin Qais bin Haritha bin Laam lived for a
long period during the time of ignorance and saw the time of Umar bin
Abdul Aziz and met him. When his cloak used to fall, his ribs were
visible one above the other. Hence, he asked, “What did you get?” He
recited the following lines in reply:

And I swear by Allah that I don’t know whether I Have seen the people of
the time of Dhulqarnain and thought that I am older than them When you
will remove my shirt so that You would see the chest, which neither has
flesh nor blood.

Saif bin Wahab bin Judhaimah Taai lived for two hundred years and
composed the following verses:

Know that very soon I am going away And don’t think I am a liar
Whichever cloak I wore was thus, destroyed And the controlling power saw
me And warded off the enemy and benefited his friend so that someone may
live with him.

Irtaah bin Dush-habah Muzni lived for one hundred and twenty years. His
agnomen was Abu Waleed. Abdul Malik bin Marwan told him, “O Irtah! Is
something left from your verses? He replied, “O Amirul Momineen! I do
not drink wine nor do I sing nor get angry while the poets who come to
me do not have these characteristics. Then I said:

I showed man that nights eat him up Like earth eats up the fragments of
iron And when death arrived The life of Adam’s son did not remain even
for a moment And know it that it would come back again in order to
Complete the offering of Abu Waleed.

Abdul Malik was taken aback. He said, “O Irtah!” Then Irtah said, “O
Amirul Momineen! My agnomen is Abu Waleed.”

Also Ubaid bin Abras lived for three hundred years and composed the
following verses:

I was destroyed and the time destroyed me And my example is like Banu
Naa’th and like the polestar.

Then Numan bin Mundhir arrested him and killed him on the day he was
angry.

Also Shuraih bin Hani lived for one hundred and twenty years till he was
killed during the time of Hajjaj bin Yusuf. He composed the following
verses about his weakness and old age:

I became aged and continued to bear the sufferings of old age And I
spent a long period among polytheists Then I saw the time of prophet who
was a warner And after that I saw Siddique and Farooq also And I also
saw the day of Mehran and Shushtar And the gatherings of Siffeen and
Nahrawan

Alas, I am sad about this long life.

Also, a person from Bani Z’abbah who was called Majaah’ bin Sabaa’
Z’abbi lived for a long time and composed the following verses:

I went around the earth many times

I became weak and wished that I should have died

And I was destroyed and if day

And night are destroyed then they come back

And a month comes after a month

And a year comes after every year.

Luqman[^1] Aadi, the elder lived for five hundred years. Umar lived for
seven Unsurs; and every Unsur consists of eighty years. He was included
in the delegation of the community of Aad, which had gone to Haram to
pray for rain. He used to keep a female young one of a vulture on the
mountain, which was his actual home till the vulture remained alive.
After that he used to catch another one and bring it up till nothing
remained of it and his life was very long. Thus, it is said about him
that he lived till now without having anything.

Also, many famous poems are quoted from him. He was granted strength and
sharp hearing sense and sight, which was necessary for him and he has
narrated a number of traditions.

Zuhair bin Junaab bin Hubal bin Abdullah bin Kunana bin Bakr bin Auf bin
Uzrah bin Zaidullah bin Rufaidah bin Thaur bin Kalb Kalbi lived for
three hundred years.

Maziqiyyah whose name was Umar bin Aamir was like water from the sky. He
used to spread life wherever he went. He was called Maziqiyyah because
he lived for eight hundred years. He was a common man for four hundred
years and ruled for four hundred years. He used to wear two suits
everyday and then tear them so that no one reuses it.

Hubal bin Abdullah bin Kananah lived for six hundred years.

Abu Tahaman lived for one hundred and fifty years.

Mutasawwaghar bin Rabia’h bin Ka’ab bin Zaid Munah bin Tameem lived for
three hundred years. He saw the time of Islam but did not accept Islam.
The verses quoted from him are famous.

Duwaid bin Zaid bin Nahd lived for four hundred and fifty years. He
said:

The time surrounded me

And the time is such that if someone makes something then it destroys it

Whoever is corrected today, it defaces him tomorrow.

When the time of his death arrived, he called all his children and
willed them: “Do bad to people and do not accept their apology and do
not accept their revenge.”

Rabi bin Zaba bin Wahab bin Bagheez bin Malik bin Saad bin Adi bin
Fuzara lived for two hundred and forty years. He saw the time of Islam
but did not accept Islam.

Maadi Karb Hameeri from the progeny of Dhi Yazn lived for two hundred
and fifty years.

Also Sharyah bin Abdullah Jofi lived for three hundred years. Thus, he
came to Umar bin Khattab in Medina and said, “I have seen in this
desert, in which you are that the people of my community read your
testimony i.e. Laa ilaaha illallaah. He was accompanied by his son at
that time who stumbled as he walked. He had become very old.

He was told, “O Sharyah! Your son has become old and you are still
alive.” He replied, “I swear by God, I had married his mother when I was
seventy years old. However, this wife of mine was very chaste and loyal.
Whenever I was happy, she used to treat me so that my eyes used to
become cool and if I was upset she used to coax and make me happy.

However, this son of mine has married a woman who is very immodest and
evil-doer. Whenever he is happy, she troubles him so much that he
becomes unhappy and if he is sad she abuses so much that he approaches
his death.

Narrated to us Abu Saeed Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Abdul Wahhab bin Nasr
Sajzi from Abul Hasan bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Hamza bin Zaid
She’rani who was from the progeny of Ammar bin Yasir that Abul Qasim
Muhammad bin Qasim Misri narrated that:

“The treasures of Egypt opened for Abu al-Jaish Hamaduyah bin Ahmad bin
Tuloon so much that they had not opened for anyone else. When he
intended to raze the pyramids of Egypt, his trustworthy advisers advised
him not to do so but he did not listen and appointed one hundred
laborers for this work who continued to dig the area around it for one
year but could not find a way and when they intended to return without
any hope, they saw a hole.

Hence, they estimated that it was the same door and opened it through
its mechanism. (Muhammad bin Muzaffar says that they saw a foundation
behind that, which was very strong. They removed and cleansed it.) It
contained an inscription in Greek. All the wise and people from all the
religions of Egypt were called to read that inscription but no one was
successful in reading it.

There was a person called Abu Abdullah Madini who was one of the great
scholars of the world. He told Abu al-Jaish Hamaduyah bin Ahmad, “I know
an Ethiopian Bishop whose age is three hundred and sixty years now and
he knows this writing. He had tried to teach this writing to me also but
I loved Arabic more and hence, I could not learn it.

That person is alive even today.” Eventually, Abu al-Jaish Hamaduyah
wrote a letter to the Shah of Ethiopia to send that Bishop to him. The
Shah of Ethiopia wrote a letter in reply: the Bishop has grown very old
and has become used to the environment of this place. If he leaves this
environment and goes to another place then there is a risk that the
environment will not be suitable for him there and he would die. Also,
he can no longer bear long journeys.

His presence is a cause of honor, joy and tranquility for us. Therefore,
if you want him to read something or explain or to answer your questions
then write and send them here.” Hence, that marble slab was kept in a
tray and sent to the city of Aswan. Then it was sent to Ethiopia from
Aswan, which was near it. When that piece reached Ethiopia, the Bishop
read it and translated it into Ethiopian language. It was then
translated into Arabic from Ethiopian. It was written as follows in it:

“I am Rayyan bin Dumagh.” Abdullah Madini asked the Bishop who that
person was. He replied, “He was the father of king Aziz of Egypt during
the time of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) whose name was Waleed bin Rayyan bin
Dumagh. The Aziz of Egypt lived for seven hundred years. His father
Rayyan lived for one thousand and a hundred years and Dumagh lived for
three hundred years. In short, it was inscribed as follows:

“I am Rayyan bin Dumagh who had set out to know where river Nile
originated from because I was not aware of its origin. I was accompanied
by four thousand people and I continued to travel for eighty months and
I reached darkness and the ocean. I saw that river Nile cut that
encircling ocean and crossed it. There was no way for me to cross the
river and only one person was left with me out of four thousand. I
feared that my rule would come to an end and hence, I returned to Egypt.
Then I constructed many pyramids and cellars. I also constructed two
such pyramids, in which I kept all my treasures safely and I have
composed the following verses about it:

My knowledge consists of that which exists And my I don’t have knowledge
of unseen and Allah knows better And provided firmness in creation of a
thing, which required it I strengthened and Allah is the Most Powerful
and Wisest Thus, I tried to find out the origin of River Nile, I became
wary and man is wary I spent eighty months in journey Even though I was
surrounded by the people Bani Hajar and a very huge army Till the point
we had left behind all men and Jinn And I came face to face with a dark
river Thus, I accepted that there is no stage after this For any person
who dares before or after me.

Then I returned to my country and stayed there Sometimes in calamities
and sometimes with bounties I am the owner of all pyramids of Egypt And
of all the earthen utensils and I am one who initiated I have left in it
signs of my craftsmanship and wisdom And handed over to the time which
would neither get torn or destroyed And it has many treasures and
strange things And this act is a cause of bitterness and disappointment
for the time.

My locks will be opened and my strange things will come out In the hands
of a friend of Lord, which would shine like a star during the last age
His actions will be seen around the House of Allah And he will reach the
peak and then it would be a time of peace and harmony Eight and nine and
two and four And other ninety or nine will be killed or taken captives.

Then there would be clashes for ninety-nine years And all signs of mine
would come into their hands and will be destroyed All my treasures will
come out However I see that blood would be shed because of this I have
written my words on rocks They would remain and would then be destroyed
and will then become extinct.

After looking at this inscription, Abu Jaish Hamaduya bin Ahmad said,
“This is a thing, which would be used by Qaim of progeny of Muhammad
(S). Then that marble slab was kept back in its place.

A year later, Abu Jaish was killed in the state of intoxication on his
bed by his slaves. It was known after this incident when pyramids were
constructed and by whom and it is one of the most authentic narrations
about Nile and pyramids.

Zabira bin (Saeed bin) Saad bin Sahm Qarshi lived for a hundred and
eighty years. He lived during the time of Islam also. His death was
accidental.

Lubaid bin Rabia Ja’fari lived for a hundred and forty years and lived
during the time of Islam and accepted it. When he was of seventy years,
he composed the following verses:

As if I have spent seventy years And took the cloak off my shoulders
This soul is crying and complaining to me That I lifted you for seven
years more than seventy years If you complete three more years then you
would get a wish And eighty years will be completed after those three
years

When he was ninety, he composed the following verses:

As if I have completed ninety years now Thus, I have taken off the
bridle of life along with it The daughters of the time attack me from
unknown place However, I am injured with something other than arrows
When he completed one hundred and ten years, he wrote: A person who
lived for a hundred years and completed ten more years after that Then
what is missing in his age?

When he completed one hundred and twenty years, he wrote:

I spent a long life before I fell ill But there is no place for this
adamant soul

When he was a hundred and forty, he composed the following verses:

Now I am fed up with life and its length And with the question of
people, “Lubaid, how are you?” Men were overcome but you did not lose
That lengthy period, which will be forever and elongated

If a day comes for me and a night after that

Then both of them come once again after they have passed.

When he was in his final moments, he willed to his son, “Your father
will not only die but will be destroyed. Thus, when your father’s soul
is captured, close his eyes, make him face Qibla and wrap him in his
clothes and tell everyone strictly that they should not cry or shout.
Then prepare nice food in the large vessel, in which I used to feast and
send it to those people in mosque who have mourned for me. Make the
people eat it after the Imam completes prayer with salutation. When they
have finished eating, tell them that their brother Lubaid has died and
request them to attend my funeral and that Almighty Allah has captured
my soul.” Then he recited following verses:

“When you bury your father, put some wood and wet sand on him And use
such strong planks that uninvited guests do not manage to make nests
inside And it is certain that the face would become like fine sand
although it is unbelievable.”

There is another tradition that Lubaid had taken oath that when northern
wind blows, he would slaughter some camels and fill them in a large
vessel and invite everyone for feast.

When Walid bin Uqbah bin Abi Muit became the governor of Kufa, he
delivered a sermon and said after praising and glorifying Allah, “O
people! You know about Lubaid bin Rabia Ja’fari and his courtesy and
helpfulness and you also know that he had taken oath that whenever
northern wind blows, he would slaughter a few camels. Hence it is your
duty that to help him for his courtesy.” Saying this, he got down from
the pulpit and sent five camels and wrote the following verses to
Lubaid:

I see that when Abi Aqeel Lubaid’s northern wind blows

The butchers sharpen their knives

He is a Ja’fari who is very tall and has broad chest He is generous like
his lineage and like a sharp sword And these virtues are present in
Ja’fari sons also As if there is dearth of wealth for him.

It is said that Walid had send twenty camels. When Lubaid read those
verses, he said, “May Allah give ten rewards to Amir for this. Probably,
he does not know that I have stopped composing verses.” Then, Lubaid
called his five year old daughter and said, “Reply these verses of
Amir.” The girl thought for a while and then recited the following
verses:

Now, whenever Abu Aqeel’s northern wind blows We would remember Walid A
tall one with broad chest And one who is related to Abdush Shams He
helped Lubaid like long ropes, like a caravan of camels On which the
people of Bani Haam are mounted O Abu Wahab (Walid)! May God reward you
for it We have slaughtered the camels gifted by you and Please be
generous another time also because a generous is one who Is generous
again and again and our oath is fulfilled again and again.

Lubaid (after hearing these verses) said, “O daughter! You have quoted
very nice verses but you should not have asked for anything in them.”
She replied, “A king never gets angry when asked for something.” Lubaid
said, “Then you are a very good poet.”

Dhul Asba Adwani whose name was Harthan bin al-Harith bin Muharrith bin
Rabia bin Hubairah bin Thalaba bin Zarb bin Uthman lived for three
hundred years.

Ja’far bin Qabt lived for three hundred years and lived during the time
of Islam.

Aamir bin Zarb Adwani lived for three hundred years

Muhassin bin Utbaan bin Zaalim bin Amr bin Qatiah bin Harith bin Salama
bin Mazin Zubaidi lived for two hundred and fifty years and composed the
following verses:

Beware, O Muslim (community)! I am not from you

I am such a man whose strength is hungry

When I was challenged by two persons, I told them to come

They said, “Every person who is challenged, displays his strengths

Beware, O (Bani) Muslim! My life has made me wary

And trade and traveling for it has made me weak

I have become a burden for my house because of illness and weakness

And every stranger and relative has become wary of me

This time and days are like a table with food laid on it

Which has a part for every hungry person.

Auf bin Kunana bin Auf bin Uzrah bin Zaid bin Thaur bin Kalb lived for
three hundred years. When his final moments arrived, he gathered his
children and willed:

“Fear Allah, do not mourn or grieve (for loss of wealth). Keep away from
distrust. Do not disturb wild animals otherwise all of them will come
out of their shelters and you will be disgraced. Do not hurt people and
live with peace and harmony. Do not ask excessive questions so that
people do not consider you a burden. Do not speak except truth so that
people praise you. Treat people with love so that their hearts become
spacious for you. Do not deprive people of benefiting from you.

Otherwise, their hearts will become full of complaints for you and
include yourselves among those who give gifts to their children
secretly. Do not spend much time with people lest you would be
considered lowly. Be patient during the time of difficulty and make the
time wear its clothes. Certainly speaking nice with difficulty is better
than speaking bad with ease.

Bow in front of the person who bows in front of you, for people come
closer because of love. If someone expresses hatred and dislike do not
move away from promise and commitment. If someone seeks excuse from you,
accept his excuse. Keep your promises and do not break them. Lift your
status by keeping away from falsehood because human misfortune is in
falsehood and speaking against the will. Do not express your
helplessness to people. Otherwise, you will lose respect in their eyes.
Fear poverty because it is a disgrace.

Treat your equals honorably and wish that you are uplifted. The beauty
of women should not separate you from healthy lineage and involve you in
worry because marriage with virtuous women is a cause of respect and
honor. Bow down while meeting your community. Do not betray them and do
not show indifference in a matter, in which they are united because
opposition is against obedience of a leader. First do good to your
people and then to others and do not fear the wishes of your near and
dear ones because it is a cause of extinguishment of fire of hard work
and non-fulfillment of duties.

And leave the one who sleeps and become their helpers during the time of
their difficulties and pains so that you will conquer and fear from
asking that, whose benefits did not reach them. Treat your neighbors
with respect who comes to you with freshness. Give preference to the
right of weak over your right. Tolerate fools so that your sorrow and
grief is reduced. Keep away from groupism because it is a disgrace.

Do not trouble yourself more than your capacity except during the time
of difficulty so that your are not condemned for inspite of your
helplessness; and you should have such a strength, which is better than
supporting them through apologies in the state of helplessness (i.e. you
should assist them before it is time to seek forgiveness) and make
effort and do not be sluggish because effort keeps away from poverty and
helplessness.

You all should shout one slogan because it is a cause of respect and
keep your edges sharpened. Do not pay attention to disrespectful people
nor bring them near you and do not meet wicked people because you will
be hurt by them. Do not be jealous among yourselves else you will be
destroyed. Miserliness is a disease. Keep away from it.

Elevate your status through generosity, kindness and by respecting the
purity of excellent people. Spend and gain love. Take care of knowledge
and respect of knowledgeable and excellent persons. Benefit from the
experience of the experienced persons. They would not stop you even from
a smallest deed, which contains reward and do not consider people lowly.

Otherwise the same would be returned to you because a person is judged
by the purity of his heart and purity of his tongue and when you are
involved in fear of something then it is necessary for you to be
steadfast instead of hurrying up.

Also, see to it that you make your place near rulers through love
because whoever tried to disrespect them was disrespected himself and
whoever elevated them was elevated. Show courtesy because eyes are
pointing you out. Show humility with dignity to people so that your Lord
likes you.” Then he said:

“And every intelligent and shrewd will not advise you

Nor every advisor is intelligent

However, if both things are collected in one person Then it is necessary
for you to obey him.”

Saifi bin Riyah bin Aktham who was from the progeny of Asad bin Amr bin
Tameem, lived for two hundred and seventy years. He used to say, “Your
brother is under your control in all circumstances except during the
time of war because when a man picks up a weapon, he cannot be
controlled by anyone. Sword is the best advisor.

Avoiding pride keeps praises alive. The greatest punishment is that
given to a traitor. The mischief of help is injustice. The worst
character is one, which is troublesome and bad manners are cause of
increasing displeasure.” Then he hit his staff on ground and recited the
following verses:

It is necessary for a destroyed person that he realizes his faults
before his death comes

And human beings got knowledge so that they understand everything.

Imad bin Shaddad Yarbui’ lived for a hundred and fifty years.

Aktham bin Saifi from the progeny of Asad bin Amr bin Tameem lived for
three hundred and sixty years. Some say that he lived for one hundred
and ninety years. He saw the time of Islam. There is difference of
opinion whether he accepted Islam or not. Most people say that he did
not accept Islam. He said about this:

Certainly, a man should spend ninety years of life

If it is extended by hundred more years then an ignorant (person) does
not become wary of life

If six and four are subtracted from two hundred then one hundred and
ninety would remain

It is when nights are also counted.

Muhammad bin Salama says, “When Aktham wanted to accept Islam, his son
made him die out of thirst. Also, I have heard that this verse was
revealed for him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُهَاجِرْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ يَجِدْ فِي الْأَرْضِ مُرَاغَمًا
كَثِيرًا وَسَعَةً ۚ وَمَنْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى
اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ
عَلَى اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***And whoever flies in Allah’s way, he will find in the earth many a
place of refuge and abundant resources, and whoever goes forth from his
house flying to Allah and His Apostle,*** ***and then death overtakes
him, his reward is indeed with Allah.”***

There was no one wiser than him among the people of Arabia. When he got
the news of annunciation of apostleship of the Messenger of Allah (S),
he sent his son Halees to Prophet (S) and said, “O son! I want to give
you some advices. You should follow after you depart till your return to
me.

Try your luck in the month of Rajab. Then try to make it lawful so that
it becomes lawful because of you because unlawful is illegal for oneself
but also for one’s acquaintances. During this journey, you should stay
with the person who is most respectful, in whichever tribe you happen to
pass by.

Maintain your relations with noble persons. Keep away from disgraced
ones because if they would not have been disgraced then they would have
been respected in their community and when you approach that person then
first of all, I am aware of him and his family as he belongs to one of
the most honored households of Quraish. You should keep two things in
mind. Even if he desires kingdom, you should honor him and stand in
front of him.

Do not sit unless he asks you to do so. In this way, you would not be
hurt by him and you will be benefited by him and if he is really a
prophet then Allah would not like misbehaving with him. You would find
that all his matters are right and you would find humility in him. He
would be an obedient one of his Lord. Bow down when you meet him and do
not say anything except what I have ordered you. Remember whatever I
have told you and follow it.

Then he handed over a letter addressed to the Holy Prophet (S) to his
son, which contained the following text: In the name of Allah, this
letter is from a servant to another servant. I got the news of you
apostleship but I don’t know the truth. If you have seen something then
show me and if you have received knowledge then give it to me also and
include me in your treasury. Wassalaam.

Holy Prophet (S) replied this letter as follows: From Muhammad, the
Messenger of Allah (S) to Aktham bin Saifi. I thank Allah that he
ordered me to say ‘There is no God except Allah’ and order others to do
so. All creatures are created by Allah and every order belongs to Allah.
Only He gives life and only He gives death.

Only He will assemble people and we have to return only to Him. I have
been sent to teach you people the manners of messengers and you would
certainly be asked about the great news and that great news would be
known soon.”

When Aktham bin Saifi read the letter of Holy Prophet (S), he asked his
son, “How was he according to you?” He said, “I saw that he orders good
things and stops from doing bad deeds.”

Thus, he told his son, “O son! Gather Banu Tameem but do not bring any
fool because every person has an opinion and a fool’s opinion is weak
however physically strong he might be. Whoever does not have
intelligence, does not have goodness (When Banu Tameem gathered, he
delivered a sermon following:)

“O Banu Tameem! Now, I have become aged and I have entered the disgrace
of old age. If I say a right thing, you must accept it. Otherwise,
inform me about a right thing so that I become steadfast on it. My son
had gone to meet a person. He informed that that person orders to do
good things and stops from evil. He narrates benefits of good character
and restrains one from having bad character. He orders worship of One
Allah. He prevents from worshiping idols and fire. He says that he is
the messenger of Allah and that messengers had come before him also who
had books and ordered worship of One Allah.

Hence it is the duty of you all that you help Muhammad (S) in his
mission. If the orders given by him are rightful, you will benefit and
if it is not rightful, it is your duty to hide him and do not become
angry with him.”

“Earlier Asqaf Najran had also narrated his characteristics. Before
that, Sufyan bin Majashi’ had also talked about him and hence, he named
his son Muhammad. Those among you who possess opinion know it well that
the matter, towards which he is inviting is a good thing. Hence, you
should be the first to accept him and do not delay this matter. If you
obey him, it would be a cause of your honor and you would be manifested.

Make haste in obeying him before you are compelled to do so because I
see that he would not leave any high or low position and would not live
without uprooting fixed thing and would reach everywhere. Even if it is
supposed that whatever he is inviting towards is not a religion then too
it is merciful character. Accept whatever I say and follow it. I am
asking for a thing from you, which can never be snatched from you.

Your population is a majority in Arabia and your cities are largest. I
think that even if a disgraced one will follow him, he would become
respectful and even if a respectful person opposes him, he would be
disgraced. You people are respectful. Hence, your respect will be
doubled. Then there would be no one to compete with you.

Remember that those who go ahead do not leave anything for those who are
left behind. Leadership is for those who come first and those who are
left behind have to obey. Thus, hasten in your work because
determination is strength and precaution is helplessness.

Malik bin Nuwairah said, “O people! This old man has become unsound of
mind.” Aktham said, “Curse be upon the person who is aggrieved and
extremely sorrowful. You people kept quiet over my words. The worst
thing for an advice is that people turn their faces away from it.”

“Woe unto you, O Malik! You would be destroyed. When truth becomes
manifest, it manifests its followers also and backward people also come
in the level of those who have progressed. Thus, you should make it
obligatory for yourself to be among those who stand up for establishing
truth.

Now, when you have considered me elder to you, bring my camel so that I
mount on it.” Saying this, he mounted on his camel and his son and
nephew walked behind him. Then he said: “I am sad about the work, which
I could not accomplish and which did not take me ahead.”

Banu Tai wrote a letter to Aktham. They were his maternal uncles. Some
narrators say that Bani Marrah wrote a letter to him. They were also his
maternal uncles. They sought advice from him. Aktham wrote to them in
reply:

“So to say: I advise you to fear Allah and maintain relations because
its roots are strong and branches are spread out. Keep away from sins
and breaking relations because its roots are weak and branches do not
spread. Do not marry foolish women because it is abominable to have
sexual intercourse with them and the children born are useless.

Consider the worth of camels. They are like a strong fort for Arabia. Do
not load them more than their capacity. They are fixed as dower and
accepted in expiation for killing. Their milk is a gift for elders and
food to children. They can also be used for operating grinding mill. A
person who considers his worth will never be destroyed. Poverty of
intelligence is the real poverty. A virtuous man would never allow his
wealth to be destroyed.

Sometimes, a single man happens to be better than a hundred men and
sometimes a single group happens to be better than two groups together.
A person, who complains about time, bears pain. A person, who is
thankful for his fortune lives a good life. Lust and greed are barriers
in the way of (a person with) opinion and habit should be in accordance
with good manners. A needy, who has love in his heart is better than a
rich who has hatred in his heart. World is a temporary abode, which will
be destroyed.

Whatever is bound to come, will come in spite of your weakness even if
you fail to seek it and whatever is bound to go, will go in spite of all
the force and attempts made by you. The defect of poverty and hunger
wastes honor. Jealousy is such a disease, for which there is no
medicine; rejoicing at another’s distress comes after that. If a person
treats others with goodness, he too would be treated with goodness.

Foolishness is accompanied by shame. Forbearance is the pillar of mind.
The collection of all (good) deeds is patience; and forgiveness is the
best act. Keeping promises maintains friendship and the love for a
person who shows inclination increases.”

Aktham bin Saifi gathered his children at the time of his death and told
them: “O my sons! I lived for a long period and want to make some wills
to you before I die.

I will you that you should fear Allah and to maintain relations.
Continue to do good deeds so that your number increases. Neither its
roots nor its branches deplete. Keep away from disobedience of Allah and
breaking relations because neither roots nor branches of a person who
breaks relations are strong.

Control your tongue because it is your enemy. Even a friend would not
like to hear a true thing and look at the necks of camels and load them
according to their capacity because they are given in dowers and also
accepted as blood-money. You must not marry foolish girls because it
would be nothing but trouble for you and children from them would be
nothing but trouble.

To have proper food during a journey guarantees comfort and strength and
a person who does not become hopeless after losing a thing will get
peace and if a person remained satisfied with whatever he has, his eyes
will be cooled. Leave that (wrong) deed before you are embarrassed and
according to me, it is better to do a good deed than committing a sin.

No man dies without knowing his value and status. Helplessness during
distress is a barrier for dignity. Pity on that scholar who is fearless
about his foolishness; and fear takes insight away. Whenever some issue
is brought to him, he becomes confused and when the work is taken back,
he is recognized by clever as well as foolish.

Extravagancy during happy times is stupidity. Attaining heights give
respect. Do not be sad if you get a little because you will get more. Do
not answer a thing, which is not asked to you. Do not laugh at a thing,
which is not worthy of laughing. Express your aloofness from this world
and do not have hatred. Jealousy resides among relatives and when
everyone gathers in one place, their weapons start cackling.

You get near because of love but do not depend on proximity. Also, it is
obligatory that you reform through wealth because the reformation of
wealth and property cannot take place without your reformation. Pay
attention to your diet. Do not rely on your brother’s wealth to fulfill
your needs.

It is like that one who tries to enclose water in the fist. If a person
wants to become rich, he should spend on his family members. Respect
your leaders. The game of a respectful woman is to play with spindle
(i.e. she remains busy in her work). When there is no way out, patience
is the last policy.”

Qirdah bin Thalaba bin Nafasha Sulooli lived for one hundred and thirty
years during the time of ignorance. Then he saw the period of Islam and
accepted it.

Masaad bin Junaab bin Maraarah was from the progeny of Amr bin Yarboo’
bin Hanzala bin Zaid bin Munaah and he lived for a hundred and forty
years.

Qus bin Saada Ayaadi lived for six hundred years and he was one who
composed the following verses:

Does a raining cloud take peace away from a person who is in a bad
condition?

Or it showers favor on him?

Whatever has passed away and lost from the hands then

There is no use of lamenting and saying, “Only if, it would have been
such”.

Similarly, Lubaid says:

And Qus said “Only if” and “If I would have been such” He left Luqman
the wise behind by saying that.

Harith bin Kaab Madhh’aji lived for one hundred and sixty years.

The author says: All traditions narrated by us are also related by our
opponents from Muhammad bin Saaeb Kalbi, Muhammad bin Ishaq Bashaar,
Awaana bin al-Hakam, Isa bin Zaid bin Aab and Haitham bin Adi Tai. And
the Holy Prophet (S) said, “Whatever has happened in the previous Ummahs
will happen in this Ummah also, in the same order.”

Thus, if it is appropriate that long life was prevalent among previous
Ummahs and the incidents of occultation of proofs of Allah (a.s.) took
place in previous centuries, why should the occultation of Imam Qaim
(a.t.f.s.) and his long life be rejected in spite of the fact that there
are traditions from the Messenger of Allah (S) and holy imams (a.s.)
about his, which are narrated in this book?

Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad Daqaaq from Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi
from Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his uncle, Husain bin Yazid Naufili from
Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq from his holy father from his
holy ancestors that Holy Prophet (S) said:

“Whatever has happened in previous Ummahs will happen exactly in the
same way in this Ummah also, in the same order.”

Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan Qittan from Hasan bin Ali Askari from
Muhammad bin Zakariya from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Imarah from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq from his father from his holy ancestors that Holy Prophet
(S) said;

“I swear by Him, Who made me rightful Prophet and harbinger of good news
that all those things are going to occur in my Ummah in the same order,
which had occurred during previous Ummahs. So much so that if a snake
entered a hole in Banu Israel, it would happen in my Ummah also.”

Narrated to us Shareef Abul Hasan Ali bin Musa bin Ahmad bin Ibrahim bin
Muhammad bin Abdullah from Abu Ali Hasan bin Rakaam from Ahmad bin
Muhammad Naufili from Ahmad bin Hilal from Uthman bin Isa Kilaabi from
Khalid bin Najeeh from Hamza bin Hamraan from his father from Saeed bin
Jabeer that he heard Syed al-Aabideen Ali bin Husain bin Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) saying:

“Our Qaim (a.t.f.s.) has Sunnah of prophets. The Sunnah of Prophet Nuh,
Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa, Prophet Isa, Prophet Ayyub and Prophet
Muhammad (S) is included in it.” The Sunnah of Prophet Nuh is a long
life, secret birth and remaining hidden from people is the Sunnah of
Prophet Ibrahim.

The Sunnah of Prophet Musa is fear and occultation. The Sunnah of
Prophet Isa is that people have difference of opinion about him. The
Sunnah of Prophet Ayyub is happiness after bearing calamities and Sunnah
of Prophet Muhammad is that he will come out carrying a sword.

Thus, if it is correct that the incidents of long life were prevalent
during previous ages, it is appropriate that this Sunnah is true for
Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.) also, who is the twelfth Imam. It is not possible
that nothing will be left in the occultation of Imam (a.t.f.s.) and as
Holy Prophet (S) said, “Even if one day is left before this world
perishes then Allah will prolong that day enough so that Imam Qaim
(a.t.f.s.) will reappear and fill the world with justice as much as it
would have been filled with injustice and oppression and we would get
Islam only when we bow in front of the commandments of Holy Prophet (S)
and holy imams (a.s.). There is no power and might except by Allah, the
High and the Mighty.”

During the previous ages, the people who were religious, worshippers and
abstinent used to hide such a person and their matters and this custom
is followed from the beginning of the world till our time. Then how is
it possible to deny the occultation of Imam Qaim (a.t.f.s.)? Only those
people will reject this, whose hearts are filled with infidelity and
misguidance and hatred of Prophet (S) and Imams (a.s.).

Incident of Bilohar and Yuzasif
-------------------------------

Narrated to me Ahmad bin Hasan Qattaan from Hasan bin Ali Askari from
Muhammad bin Zakariya that:

A king who had a huge army and ruled a vast region in the kingdom of
India whom the subjects feared in an uncommon manner, was very lustful.
He loved every indecent act and loved to be flattered a lot. He liked
those who considered his opinion right and behaved well with them.

However, he hated and ruined those who neglected his orders and had
faith on someone else. He had reached his prime youth and his advices
were firm, his speech was eloquent and was famous for his statesmanship
and maintaining law and order. Thus, because these facts became famous,
common people became obedient to him. Strong and weak everyone bowed in
front of him. The intoxication of strength, fame and pride was collected
in him.

He was granted extra strength because he conquered his enemies, showered
anger on the people of his kingdom and obedience of people. Thus, he
used to disdain people because of his inebriation. The praises and
flatters had made him even more unconscious. Then his view and heart
became full of pride so much because people praised him a lot and
appreciated his moves in front of him. He desired this world only and
world was giving him everything and there was no desire, which remained
unfulfilled.

He used to fulfill his lust through women as well as men and was
deprived of a male offspring. Religion prevailed before his kingdom and
majority people followed the former. Shaitan decorated the enmity of
religion and religious people in his eyes and he harmed religious
people, broke their strength and terrorized them and he had brought the
idol-worshippers near him before and made idols of silver and gold for
them. He favored and honored them and prostrated in front of their
idols.

Thus, when the subjects saw this, they too got attracted towards
idol-worship and the religious people were dishonored.

One day, he enquired about a person, who had good reputation and high
status in the country so that he could take his help in some activities
and treat him with love and honor him.

People said: “Sir, he has left off this world and whatever is there in
it and he has attached himself to the dervishes. The king did not like
this and ordered that he should be brought to him. When this person was
brought to the king and the king saw him dressed like a dervish and
expressing humility like them, he scolded him saying: You were from
among our servants and among the nobles of our country.

Then why did you disgrace yourself and destroy your property and family
members? Why did you follow those who suffer loss? So much so that you
became a butt of ridicule and exemplar for the people. You were our ally
in the most important matters and you helped me in whatever I wanted you
to help.

That person replied: O king, if I don’t have any right upon you, your
intellect definitely has a right upon you. So do not be angry at what I
say, and decide the matter after understanding it properly because anger
is the enemy of reason, and it puts a veil between man and his
understanding. The king said: What are you trying to say? The dervish
replied: O king, I ask you, have you punished me due to my personal
sins? Or my sin is affecting you?

The king replied: Your sins are very serious in my view and if anyone
from my subjects causes the destruction of his self I shall come between
him and his self. Because his destroying his self is same as destroying
another person. I am his guardian and I am having authority on him as
well as you. Thus I am having more authority on you and I am going to
punish you since you have destroyed yourself in this manner.

The dervish said: O king, Do not condemn me without proof and do not
establish proof except that you have a judge with you. You are having
many judges from the men and it is their rulings that you enforce. I
approve of some of them and I am fearful of some.

The king said: Who are those judges? The person said: The judge I
approve is your reasoning faculty and that which I dread is your selfish
desire. The king said: What are you trying to say? Since when has this
thought appeared in your mind? Who has deviated you? I came to know that
I was told something in my childhood which took root in my heart like a
seed that germinates in the earth. It continued to grow and became a
tree as you can see.

I have heard from a wise man that one who is a fool considers a useless
thing as very important and he considers useless that which is really
useful. And he does not leave the matter which is having no reality and
does not achieve the aim that is having reality and he does not see that
which is real. Thus he is not satisfied at leaving that which has no
reality and the reality is the life after and that which is not real is
the world.

Since I heard this I left off this temporal world which is having no
reality and I became attached to that which is real, that is the
permanent abode. Now, in my view, life is death and wealth is poverty.

The happiness of the world is sorrow, health is sickness, the strength
in the world is weakness and helplessness, the worldly honor is
degradation and how the worldly life should not be death because the one
who lives, lives for death and he is certain of death and also of the
end of life. And why should not its prosperity not be considered penury,
as nothing is achieved except that due to this he becomes needful of
something else which makes him inclined to that which is necessary for
him.

Like man is sometimes needful of an animal that when he rears it, he
considers necessary its feed and care. In the same way, for everything
he becomes needful of something else, that may be useful and necessary
for him. Thus when can the need be fulfilled of one who is needful of
this procedure?

And how his happiness should not turn into sorrow that whoever receives
some joy is in fact such that sorrow and pain lies in ambush for him?
And he himself sees his sorrow being doubled. If he is gladdened through
his child, the child’s sickness and death brings him utmost grief which
surpasses his joy.

If he becomes happy due to his wealth, is he not fearful of its
destruction and loss? That the joy of wealth is the greatest joy. If it
is so, people have a right that they must not become attached to that
about which they know previously. And how cannot his health change into
sickness as his health depends upon various factors and the nearest
element of life is blood. And the most obvious fact is that the man who
is created through blood, can very soon get involved in a sudden death,
slaying, plague, cheek injury and pleurisy and perish.

And how cannot his strength not change into weakness while in him are
present those powers that can harm and even destroy him. And how cannot
the position of these factors change into degradation while honor is not
made permanent for man and his family has to suffer disgrace. Except
that the days of honor are very few and the days of disgrace are long.

Thus the best option for the people is that they should condemn this
world for which they have extended their hands. After the fulfillment of
the need he should hope and expect every hour and every moment and every
day he should calculate his wealth that he is in need of and in
obtaining which he dazzles the eyes of his relatives and they fight each
other over the wealth that he has amassed.

They demolish the foundations of his building and death attacks his
family members and uproots them completely. And everyone that is having
brotherly relations to him is subjected to torture. Thus, O king, I
condemn all that the world is giving and the dress with which it is
dressing; inherited property that would ultimately make one naked.
Sometimes it brings honor to a person but later it brings grief.

And one who is involved in its love, he is going to leave it ultimately.
After receiving wealth in inheritance a person becomes hard-hearted. One
who obeys this wealth is defrauded and one who relied on it, is
betrayed. Inherited wealth is like that beast of burden that throws down
its rider, it is like a companion who misappropriates.

It is a way that makes you astray. It is a place of descent that
destroys and it is a greatness that does not honor anyone but it
degrades all. It is a beloved that does not love anyone and it is a
necessary thing but it does not remain with anyone forever. Sometimes
this inherited wealth is loyal and at other times it is disloyal.
Sometimes it denies and sometimes it verifies. Sometimes it supports and
sometimes it goes against.

One who wants to progress with this inherited wealth, it created
crookedness in him. It plays with one who has taken possession of it. At
the same moment it gives a morsel to one who has decided to eat it. When
it makes a person its servant it serves him well. It makes fun of one
who laughs upon it. It condemns one who criticizes it. It weeps for one
who cries on it.

It extends the hand of charity to one who asks for help and gives
respect while he is disgraced. It honors the one who is dishonored. In
the same way if one is lowly, it makes him great and makes the lowly one
lofty. Sometimes the inherited wealth is obedient even if it is
disobeyed. In the same way one feels happy in this inherited wealth
while one is caused grief. Similarly the satiated ones by it are those
that are hungry. And some people are dead due to this inherited wealth
while in fact they are alive.

Thus woe be to the abode that has such qualities that it places the
crown of glory on a person in the morning and in the evening assigns him
to the pit of destruction. It makes one wear ornaments of gold in the
evening and next day puts him in the chains of slavery. Sometimes this
world makes one sit on the throne in the morning and throws him to some
prison at night. Sometimes it spreads the sheets of silk at night and in
the morning forces him to sleep on dust. In the morning it may gather
those who have fun and games and at night it gathers those who weep and
wail. On some nights it endears to him the proximity of his family
members and on some mornings it makes him like aloofness from them.

On some mornings it makes his smell pleasing to him and on some nights
it makes the same smell detestable. So, one who is not going to be saved
from its evils is the one who relies on his glory. This man’s heart
benefits from the worldly things and his eyes relishes its strange
things. His hand is full of the worldly bounties but later it also
becomes empty.

The spring of wealth remains calm. Whatever is gone is gone and whoever
is destroyed is destroyed. Whatever became apparent became apparent.
After each one it keeps one in force and it is satisfied with all by way
of recompense. It brings peace to all centuries one after the other. It
feeds the leaders depending upon their communities.

It makes the lowly ones reach to the position of the superior ones. It
makes the helpless ones take the place of those who are cautious. It
brings the communities from dryness into freshness. It makes the walkers
ride, rings the hungry into prosperity, changes adversity into opulence,
humiliation into respect.

So much so that if he is immersed in it, it brings changes in
circumstances and then again removes freshness and prosperity from them
and takes away the strength from them. And once again they return to the
worst destruction, the worst needfulness and the worst drought.

O king, you say that by renouncing the world I have subjected myself and
my family to destruction is not true. Rather I have become more
attentive towards them and I have maintained a special relationship with
them. But I was seeing them with an enchanted eye through which I could
not distinguish my relatives from the strangers and the enemies from
friends.

Thus when the enchantment ended the enchanted eye changed into the
normal eye and the friends were distinguished from the enemies and the
relatives stood out from among the strangers. Thus at that moment I
began to count my relatives, friends, brethren and the kindred. All of
them were like hunting dogs ready to devour me except that they were
different in strength and daring.

Some of them were like lions due to their hot temper. Some were like
hyenas that tear up its prey and are notorious for snatching and
fighting. Some were like flattering dogs that wag their tails and some
were deceptive and cheating like foxes. Though their methods differed
their aim was one and the same.

O king, even though you are having a lofty position due to the greatness
of your kingdom and because of your armies, supporters and servants I
have pondered about you a great deal. And I concluded that no one from
this world is on your side.

You are alone. And I have also learnt that the common people are hostile
to you and the people you rule are very greedy and inimical. They are
great hypocrites. These people are more dangerous to you than the
hunting dogs. All the strangers bear enmity towards you. When I look at
your servants and aides I find that they are a group that acts for
vested interests.

And despite this they are involved in greed and selfishness, so that
they may work less for you and take more recompense. And when I look at
your close confidants and your relatives I find them busy in working for
you and increasing your wealth, whereas you always subject them to
hardships and not all of them are like that.

They are happy in working hard for you. Thus if you stop from them this
they would not be pleased. So, O king, can you not see that you are
alone? You neither have a relative nor any wealth.

Whereas I have family members, wealth, friends and siblings who are
neither eating me up nor being fed through me. They love me and there is
no discord between us. They testify for me and I testify for them and we
do not falsify each other.

They are having concern for me and I have concern for them and there is
no animosity between us. They help me and I help them and we are in
contact of each other. They like the goodness that I like. They do not
fear that I shall influence them.

There is neither corruption nor greed between us. We perform for each
other such rewarding acts that are not temporal. And this practise is
always established between us. If I become deviated they are my guides.
If I become blind they are my eyesight. If I come to them they become my
refuge. If I am attacked they become a shield for me.

When I fall into a hardship they become my helpers. And we have kept
ourselves safe from houses, shops and eating places and neither have we
any desire for them. We have renounced all the wealth and pelf due to
which we have no desire for worldly riches. We do not rebel against each
other and do not harbor enmity towards each other. Neither we resort to
corruption nor have any jealousy. We do not cut off relations.

Thus, O king, these are my family members. They are my brethren and the
near kindred and my friend. It is them I love and to them I turn. I have
deserted whom I had recognized with my enchanted eye and from whom I
wished to be safe.

Thus, O king, this world is like I told you. It has no reality. This is
its genealogy and this is its revolution that I had heard of. After
knowing this I have renounced it. I have seen the matter which is true
reality. Thus, O king, if you like, I will talk to you about the
hereafter which I know is the only reality. So you be prepared to hear
about it.

Listen with all your attention; not like you listen to other things.
Thus the king did not do any injustice upon him except that he told him:
You have lied and nothing that you have said is correct. You have
remained successful in evil and hatred. Thus you get out of here and do
not stay in any part of my kingdom as you are of those who create
mischief.

During that time a son was born to the king while he had lost hope of
having a male issue. This newborn child was so beautiful and attractive
that no one had ever seen such a handsome boy. The king was so much
enjoyed that he almost died of happiness. In his view this was a gift
from the idols that he worshipped.

Thus the people donated all the wealth they had to the temples that
housed the idols. People were ordered to continue the celebrations for a
year. The king named his son as Yuzasif and he summoned all the scholars
and astrologists of the country to prepare the child’s horoscope. After
much contemplation the astrologers informed that the boy shall have the
highest position among all his contemporaries in India.

But one of them said: Not only the highest position in the world; what I
see is that this child will also have an exalted status in the hereafter
and that he would be a leader of religion and the religious people. He
shall have an honorable position in the hereafter because the greatness
I see in him does not resemble any worldly greatness; rather it is akin
to the greatness of the hereafter.

These words killed all the joy that the king had experienced with regard
to the newborn child. It was so because the person who had given this
prophecy was the most reliable astrologer and the most learned and
truthful in the king’s view.

So the king arranged a house for the child and appointed the most
trusted nurses and servants there commanding them that death, hereafter,
sorrow, disease and annihilation should not be mentioned in the presence
of the child.

So much so that they become accustomed to that and their hearts forget
the reality. They were told that when the child grows up nothing should
be mentioned in his presence that may create fear in him and lead him to
religion. And that they must take care of him and protect him and become
so much absorbed in it that they should forget each other.

Due to the fear that his son will adopt the right way, the king was
extremely angry at the dervishes.

He had a minister who neither misappropriated his wealth, nor lied or
concealed anything from him. He neither tried to influence his decisions
and there was no one who shared his actions and the king didn’t want to
lose him.

In addition to this the minister was kind hearted and well known for his
charitable deeds. The common people loved him and he was pleased with
them. However the king’s aides and relatives were jealous of him. They
used to oppress him and tried to lower his status.

One day this king went out for the hunt accompanied with this minister.
In the hilly path he found a person with injured legs. He was clinging
to the trunk of a tree and it was impossible for him to go away from
there. When the vizier inquired he said that the wild beasts have
rendered him in that condition.

The vizier was moved by his circumstances and the man pleaded for help
and implored the vizier to take him to his house saying perhaps he would
benefit him in the future. The vizier said: Even if you don’t give me
anything in return, it is still my duty to help you; but tell me how you
intend to recompense me?

Can you do some work or repair something? The man said that he was
capable of changing adverse circumstances. “How can you do this?” asked
the minister. He replied: as soon as discord appears I bring about unity
as a result of which there is no mischief. The minister did not pay much
attention to his statement but brought him along and got him treated to
health.

At last it so happened that the king’s aides together decided to accuse
the honest minister of something and bring him down in the king’s
estimation.

So they told the king that this minister was aspiring for the throne and
in order to seize power after him he was always behaving nicely with the
people. If you want to confirm this you call him and say that you want
his advice about giving up the kingdom to become a dervish. His elation
at this decision of yours will tell you what the truth is.

Since they all knew that the minister had a soft corner for religion and
he was inclined to the hereafter, he would definitely be elated by the
king’s plan and they would succeed in exposing him to the ruler. The
king said that he would ask him about it when he met him next time. Thus
when the king met the minister he said: You know well how much I am
inclined to worldly things and wealth and I have told you before that in
the past I did not possess anything.

And I have realized that one day I will have to revert to the same
condition. So I have decided to do something for the hereafter which is
better than what I have done to get material wealth. I begin with the
realization that the truth is with the religious and first of all I
shall leave the kingdom to whose who are deserving of it.

So what is your opinion about it? On hearing this, the minister cried
intensely and the king understood what the minister’s view was. The
vizier said: Your majesty, even if something is difficult to obtain, it
is worth trying to obtain it if it is going to be permanent. And if
something is temporal, it is not worth trying to obtain it even though
obtaining it may be easy. Your decision is good and I pray to God that
He gives you the best of the world and the hereafter.

The king was extremely annoyed at the minister’s opinion and he realized
that what he had been told about the latter was true. The minister also
felt that the king was displeased with him and he returned home in
dismay to discuss with the family members what was the solution to this
problem. He lay awake at night thinking of a way out of these
circumstances when he remembered of the man he had saved, who had told
him that he was capable of changing adverse circumstances.

He summoned him at once and told him: You told me that you can change
adverse circumstances to the good. He replied: Yes I had told you that.
What is your problem? The vizier said: I will tell you about it. I was a
companion of the king before he gained this kingdom and since he became
a king I don’t remember any instance when he has been displeased with
me. But today he called me and said that he was renouncing the world to
become a hermit. When I expressed my approval he was dismayed.

The man said: I have understood the problem. Actually the king thinks
that you want to oust him and take over his kingdom. I have a plan which
would surely save you from undesirable consequences. In the morning you
change into the dress of a hermit, shave your head and rub your head at
the king’s threshold.

When he sees you he will ask what you are upto. You say: Since I gave
you advice I thought that first I must act upon it. The king will then
know that you are not after his kingdom. So the vizier did the same and
finally the king realized that the former had no evil intentions.

The very next day, the king issued commands that all religious people
should be thrown out of his territory. All those who were inclined to
religion went into hiding. One day the king was on an excursion when he
saw two dervishes.

He summoned them and said: Why have you not left my kingdom? They said:
We were leaving but your agents brought us here. “Why are you on foot?”
They said, “We are aged, we neither have a vehicle nor any means of
travel. Thus we cannot travel any faster.” The king said, “When a person
is frightened of death he does not need a vehicle to move faster.”

They said, “We are not scared of death; rather we don’t find pleasure in
anything.” The king said, “Why are you not scared of death? Because when
my agents brought you here why are you trying to flee?” They said, “We
are fleeing from death not because we are scared of it. You must not
think that we are frightened of death.

We flee in order to help you against our desire.” The king was angry
with their reply and he ordered that they be cast into the fire. He also
issued the edict that any devout person found anywhere be also consigned
to the flames. The idol worshippers immediately searched out all
religious people in every nook and corner of their country and burnt
them alive. From that time the custom of burning the dead started in
India.

Most devout and religious people were exterminated from the country.
Only a few dared to conceal themselves so that one day they may show the
right path to one who came out in search of it.

Yuzasif, the prince reached the age of understanding. He was a very
intelligent youth. His wisdom compelled him to ask himself why he was
kept with a few person in solitude. He thought of asking his father
about it but later realized that it was he only, who has arranged all
this so why would he tell him what the matter was?

Among those who were appointed to train the prince in the royal customs
and administrative affairs there was a man who due to his wisdom had
endeared himself most to the young prince. One day the prince told him:
I like you very much. You are like a father to me. After the king I will
inherit the kingdom. At that time your position will either be too high
or too lowly.

The man said, “Why are you threatening me?” Yuzasif replied, “Because
until now you have concealed from me the fact that I will learn in the
future. At that time I will take a dreadful revenge from you.” The man
was terrified and he told Yuzasif all the secrets, the prediction of the
astrologers, the reason why he was kept in seclusion etc.

The prince thanked him and told him to keep it confidential. One day
when the king came to see his son, the son said: “Father, I am indeed
yet a child. So I thought about myself and also observed my
controversial circumstances. Thus I will mention what I remember and
inspite of knowing what I don’t mention; it is something that I also
know well.

I also know that I am not like that neither you are in that condition.
Neither you shall remain like this forever; and the time will change
your condition very soon. Thus if you wanted to conceal the matter of
death from me, it has not been so.

And if you restricted my movements and kept a barrier between me and the
people so that I don’t become capable to know that which is not in my
favor, you have keep me out of your circle. I am anxious and restless
because of the barrier between me and the people. So much so, I am not
aggrieved of anything.

And I have no intention till I am not satisfied with the condition I am
in, from which neither I get any benefit not am I interested in it. Thus
you release me and tell me about that which you dislike and are fearful
of so that I may keep away from it and that your satisfaction and
pleasure may dominate me. So far I am unable to fathom why I have been
kept in this seclusion?

Why I am not allowed to go out? Is it the punishment for some mistake of
mine? If it is to ensure that I remain ignorant of death and eternity,
how long will this go on? One day this world will itself inform. Now
allow me to go out otherwise I will die thinking on it.

When the king heard this he realized that the prince has come to know
what was concealed from him. And that these restrictions will only
increase inquisitiveness. So he said: My son, I didn’t keep you here
except that you remain safe from hardships and discomfort.

Thus you see only that which is favorable and hear only that which
pleases you. So when your desire is against this, I will indeed dominate
the things with myself over that which you are pleased with and that
which you desire.

Then he ordered his men to mount him with all majesty and remove all
detestable views from his path.

After this excursion he undertook a number of outings.

One day he was on an unfamiliar route when he saw two beggars. One of
them was terribly diseased having yellow complexion and the other was
blind. He was shocked at their sight and inquired about them. The people
told him that it was due to a terrible disease and that the blind man
was like that since a long time.

The prince asked if others were inflicted with this disease. When they
replied in the positive the young prince asked if it was not possible to
save oneself from these diseases? When they said that it was not
possible the prince became aggrieved and was shocked and terrified of
that which existed in his father’s kingdom. And he remained in this
manner for many days.

One day during an excursion he saw an old man. Grey hair, waist bent,
unable to walk properly; his complexion had darkened and skin was
wrinkled. The prince was amazed at his condition and he asked the people
regarding it. They told him that he is an old man. He asked: How much
time does it take for man to reach this stage?

They said: Around a hundred years. He asked: Then what happens after
that? “After that he dies,” they told him. The prince asked, “Does
anything remain after the man and his age?” “No, nothing,” said the
people, “And this happens within a short time.” The prince said: There
are thirty days in a month and there are twelve months to a year.

Now if the age of man is a hundred years which day of the month passes
by fastest? And which month of the year passes soonest? Which year of
life goes away in the shortest time? After that the prince returned
repeating these sentences. Then he began to remain awake in the nights,
his conscience awoke and he gained insight and wisdom. No error or
forgetfulness remained in him and he developed seriousness of purpose.
His heart turned away from the world and worldly desires. In any case,
he accorded respect to his father and behaved with him kindly.

In spite of that he was always waiting to hear anyone speak against the
path he himself followed so that he may guide him.

The prince summoned the man who had revealed the truth to him and asked:
Do you know anyone who is different from us? “Yes,” he said, “There is a
group of people called dervishes. They have renounced the world and are
in search of the hereafter. Their speech and knowledge is such that I
know nothing of it, except that people are inimical to them and they
burn them alive; and the king has thrown them out of his kingdom.

Thus these days no one in our towns is aware of them as the surviving
ones have gone into hiding waiting for deliverance. And the system of
these divine saints has come since the ancient age and they live in
tyrant rules concealed from each other.” All this made the prince very
sad and he became like a man who was in search of something that was
important to him. His contemplation, elegance, excellence and wisdom
became famous in every nook and corner of the land.

This information also reached to a dervish, Munsh Bilohar of Sirandeep,
who in addition to being a dervish was also a physician. So he boarded a
ship and landed at Saulabath and planned to meet the prince and join his
order. He took off his dervish clothes and put on the attire of traders.
After that he obtained detailed information about the courtiers,
associates and people of that place.

Therefore he also learnt about the excellent manners of the prince
through his aides and also that the prince had great regard for him. So
Bilohar began to frequent the house of this aide till one day he found
him alone and said: I am a trader from Sirandeep. I am here since some
days. I am having a priceless thing with me which is highly beneficial.

Since I found you reliable I am telling about it. The thing I have is
more precious than red sulphur. It can give sight to the blind and
hearing to the deaf. It cures weakness and turns weakness into strength.
It protects you from the jinns and helps against enemies and I don’t
find anyone more worthy of this medicine than this young man.

Thus if you feel appropriate you may mention it to the prince. If he is
inclined you may then take me to him because the excellence of this
elixir should not remain unknown to him. The aide replied: You have
mentioned something that we have never heard before. And I don’t think
there is any problem in informing the prince about something he is
unaware of. But first you let me see this medicine; if I find any
reality in what you say I will mention it to the prince.

Bilohar said: I am a physician, I know that you have a weak eyesight and
I fear that that if you glance at the medicine you may lose your
remaining sight. However the prince has good eyesight and he is also
young in age so there is no risk if he looks at it. If he sees it, it
would prove beneficial for him. On hearing this, the man went to the
prince and mentioned what Bilohar had said. The prince realized that it
would be good to meet this person.

So he said: Bring him tonight itself but keep it a secret as such a man
is not caused disrespect. The prince’s aide informed Bilohar of the
appointment. He took a basket containing books. The aide asked: What is
there in the basket? Bilohar said: Medicine. Now if you like you may
take me to the prince. So they set out to meet the prince. When they
arrived the prince greeted Bilohar, prayed for him and welcomed him in
the best manner. After that the aide went away.

The Hakim sat down with the prince and asked him first of all: O prince
I feel that you have accorded more respect to me than your servants and
the nobles of your country. The prince said: It is due to that great
hope that I repose in you. Bilohar said: You have done like the king of
a country who was well known for his good deeds and people had good
hopes in him. One day he was on an excursion with his army when he saw
two poor men in tattered clothes. They seemed helpless and deprived.

The king alighted, greeted them and shook hands. His ministers felt very
bad on seeing this. So they came to his brother who had influence upon
him and said: The king has disgraced himself and the people of the
country. He got down to meet two lowly men. So you must scold him so
that he doesn’t repeat it again. And also ask him why he acted in this
manner. The brother did that and in reply the king said something which
did not reveal whether the king was angry or he had accepted the
critique. The brother returned home after that.

After some days the king ordered the announcer of deaths to go the door
of his brother and announce his death. And this was the method the king
followed when he intended to eliminate anyone. When they heard the news
there was wailing in the brother’s house and he himself rushed out
dressed in clothes of death to the royal residence wailing and tearing
at his hair.

When the king came to know this, he summoned him. On entering the court
the brother threw himself down and began to cry of perdition and plead
for mercy. The king said: Come here, you are crying because the caller
had conveyed the message of the creature and not the creator. And I am
your brother.

You know that you have not done anything for which I may kill you, but
condemn me of what I do in the land. While I can see the caller of my
Lord and I am more aware of my sins than you. So go back as I have
understood that the ministers have fooled you and they will also realize
their folly soon.

After that the king ordered them to make four wooden caskets. Tar was
applied to two of the caskets and filled them with gold, rubies and
emeralds. The other two caskets were gilded with gold sheets but filled
with excreta, blood and carrion. Then he summoned the viziers who had
blamed him for according respect to the two poor men, and asked them:
Which of these caskets are more valuable? They said: As far as we can
see and on the basis of what we know the two caskets covered with gold
are more valuable, while the caskets covered with tar are worthless.

The king said: So this is your knowledge about things and the reality of
your opinions. Then he ordered his men to open the tarred caskets and
soon the court was filled with the brilliance of the jewels. The king
said: The simile of these caskets is like that of those two who were
apparently poor but endowed with knowledge, wisdom and all the good
qualities which are more precious than these jewels. Then he ordered
them to open the golden caskets.

The people recoiled in horror. The terrible scene made them nauseous and
they were tortured by the dirty stench. The king said: The simile of
these caskets is like those who are outwardly dressed in good clothes
but they have ignorance in the inside, they have blindness, lies,
oppression and all kinds of evils which are more horrid than carrion and
more detestable.

The people said: We have understood what you intend to say and we have
gained lesson from this.

Then Bilohar said: O prince, your meeting me and according honor to me
is also similar to that. Prince Yuzasif stood up and said: Narrate to me
some more edifying incidents. The Hakim said: Every farmer sows the
seeds. Some grains fall at the edge of the field, some fall on stones
and dry up ultimately. Some fall in thorny bushes and are unable to take
root.

Some fall on clean earth and grow up properly. O prince, except for
these all the seeds are wasted. In the same way good counsels are
effective only on clean consciences. The prince said: Hakim, your
discourse has given me a tranquility that I cannot describe. Please give
me an example through which the love of the world can be said to be a
fraud.

Bilohar said: It is said that an excited elephant pursued a man who fled
in horror. The elephant followed him. On the way there was a well and a
tree grew at its edge. The man caught hold of its branch and dangled
from it. Then he saw four serpents at the roots of this tree. Below he
saw a python with its mouth open. He also saw white and black rats
gnawing at the branch. He saw honey applied on the branches of the tree.
This man began to lick the honey completely oblivious of the approaching
dangers.

O prince, the world is like a well full of calamities and evils and the
branch signifies the life of man. The rats stand for day and night that
hasten death. The four serpents stand for the four humors that are
killing poison. That is: blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile and
its owner does not know when they may become excited.

The open-mouthed python below is death which is waiting for him. Honey
stands for deception that the one who is proud, is fooled by worldly
pleasures, fame, bounties, wealth and good food and aromatics. The
prince said: It is a strange simile but nevertheless very much true.
Please tell me more about the world, the man of the world, one who is
proud of it and gains from it.

Bilohar said: It is said that a man had three friends. He loved one of
them very much and through him he used to dominate the most terrible and
frightening things. That is why he had become proud. Day and night he
used to fulfill his needs. He loved the second friend also, but somewhat
lesser. He obeyed this friend and behaved with him kindly and never
became careless about him.

However the third friend was a tyrant and a degraded man. He did not
like this friend. He was also poor.

Finally a time came upon this man when he needed all the three. The
royal police came to take him to the king. So he went to the first
friend and said: You are aware of my loyalty towards you and that I had
surrendered myself to you. Now today I am in need of you. What can you
do for me? He replied: I am not your friend. I have other friends with
whom I am busy after you. Today they are better than you. But I can give
you clothes that you may need.

Then he went to the second friend who was very kind and loving and said:
You are aware of my love and kindness towards you and how much I
endeavored to make you happy. Now today I am in need of you. What can
you do for me?

He replied: My conscience tells me that I should forget you and what you
did. So you must rely only on your own self. You should know that the
relationship between us stands broken because our ways are diverse. I
can walk with you few steps but it will not be of any use to you. Then I
will head for that which is more important than you.

He turned in despair and went to the third friend whom he previously
considered lowly, never listed to his advice and never paid any
attention to him in his bad times. He said to him: I am ashamed before
you but need has brought me here.

What can you do for me? He replied: I have equality and brotherhood for
you and the responsibility to protect you even though there was some
carelessness on your part. Good news for you, may your eyes become cool
with happiness. I will offer you a company that shall neither harm you
nor entrust you to someone else.

Thus I will not make you ashamed for that little good that you have done
to me. Bilohar said: The first friend was wealth. The second was
children and the third was good deed.

The prince said: Indeed this is manifest truth. Tell me something more
about the world, pride in it, and one who becomes proud upon it and one
who is satisfied with it. Bilohar said: The people of a city used to
appoint any poor man that happened to arrive there as their ruler for a
year. This stupid man used to rule them thinking that it would go on
forever.

But at the end of the year they used to turn him out of the territory
empty-handed. So he used to fall in troubles and deprivation and could
not even tell anyone what had befallen him. As result of all this he
used to be completely broken. Once those people caught hold of a man and
appointed him as their ruler.

The man found himself an alien at that place. He also did not have any
friend there. When he learnt about the custom of these people he called
a man from his native place and informed him about the strange custom of
these people. He also showed him the wealth that was at his disposal at
that time and instructed him to transfer it little by little to another
place where the deposed king would have to move one day so that when he
is forced to go there he would find the wealth he had sent ahead of
himself.

The man from the native place did as he was told and in this matter he
did not do anything on the contrary.

Bilohar said: Prince, I understand that you are that person who has no
inclination to the poor and neither are you proud due to power and I am
that person whom you called; I have for you the proof, divine
recognition and a useful thing. The prince said: O Hakim, you have said
the truth. I am that same person and you are my wish that I desired.

Now please explain to me the matter of the hereafter in detail. But as
for the world, I swear by my life, I have testified it and I saw all
that from the world that guides me on its annihilation and which makes
me inclined not have any attachment to it. The world has always been a
worthless thing for me.

Bilohar said: O prince, doubtlessly, renunciation of the world is the
key to the hereafter and one who yearned for the hereafter, reached to
its door and entered its limits. Why should you not renounce this world
as the Almighty Allah has endowed you with reason and you saw that even
though the worldly people are more in number they shall be seen in that
same temporal bodies the physical bodies are not imperishable?

And bodies are also necessary for them that melt in its heat and freeze
in its cold and its wind hits like poisonous spears. Its water drowns,
its sun scorches and its wind makes them fall sick. The beasts of the
world tear them up and devour them and the birds peck at them. Iron cuts
it down and the headache breaks it up completely.

Thus from the aspect of essence it is a compound of various diseases,
pains and maladies and it is always involved in them. He experiences
discomfort in it and is not even interested in escaping from the world.
There he is involved in seven such calamities that it is impossible to
escape from them. They are hunger, thirst, heat, cold, pain, fear and
death. Regarding what you have asked about the hereafter, I hope you
will find near what you think is far and find easy what you feel is
difficult and find more what you think is less.

The prince said: O Hakim, You have seen the community that my father
burnt alive and kept us away from them. Bilohar said: Yes. The prince
said: I have received information that people had unified on his enmity
and used to narrate his defects. Bilohar said: It was so. The prince
asked: Why is it like that? Bilohar replied: But your statement with
regard to their defects; they almost said that one who tells the truth
does not lie.

And he knows and is not ignorant. And he stops and does not give
trouble. He recites the ritual prayer and does not sleep. He fasts and
does not break the fast. When he is in trouble he remains patient. When
he contemplates he gains lesson from it. He does not care for the wealth
of the wealthy and people do not fear him with regard to their wealth
and family members. The prince said: How did the people gather upon his
enmity while there was conflict among themselves?

Bilohar said: It is like the case of the dogs that gather on the rotten
corpse and tear it apart with their fangs, while at the same time
barking upon each other. They are of different kinds and colors but they
immediately pounce on this dead body. Meanwhile a man arrives there.

They forget each other and turn towards this man and start barking on
him because they are scared of him even though he does not want any part
in the decayed dead body neither he wants to have any confrontation with
them. But since he is a stranger they are terrified of him and they
forget each other even though before his arrival they were fearful of
each other.

Bilohar said: The rotten corpse is like the worldly wealth and the dogs
are equivalent to those men who resort to killing and plunder for the
sake of this world. And the example of the man who comes to the dogs is
like that of the religious man who has renounced the world. Thus he does
not fight the people of the world regarding it and does not mind if they
are inimical to him because he is a stranger.

Therefore if you are surprised you must be surprised on human beings as
their aim is only the worldly things, more wealth, pride and dominance
etc. so much so that when they see someone renouncing the world they are
angry at him in comparison to the one who is clutching it. So, prince,
what is the proof which can work by the union of two things on one who
is immune from all arguments? The prince asked him to explain in detail.

Bilohar said: Without any doubt when a kind doctor sees a body subjected
to destruction by corrupted humors, he intends to make it strong. Thus
he does not prescribe in his diet foods based on flesh and blood and
that which strengthens him because he knows that when this food enters
the corrupted humors it will harm the body.

It would weaken the body instead of strengthening it. The doctor
prescribes for him medicines as well as diet to cure his condition. Once
the poisonous substances are removed from the body he would start giving
him nutritious foods. Now the patient will have more appetite and he
will now gain weight in a natural way and also become stronger.

The prince said: O Hakim, tell me what is achieved through eating and
drinking?

The Hakim replied: It is well known among the people that a great king
used to rule over a big country. He possessed a huge army and exceeding
wealth. He started a battle with another king so that he may annex his
territory and increase his wealth by adding to it the wealth of that
king. Thus he took his armies, weapons, ladies, children and treasures
and set out to fight.

When the confrontation took place he was badly defeated and had to flee
with his women and children. In the evening they reached the banks of a
river. They tied up the mouths of their beasts so that their neighing
may not reveal their location to the enemy. They spent the night at the
river bank and continued to hear the enemies go here and there on their
horses.

Neither could they reach open land nor cross the river. It was
impossible to leave that place since they were surrounded by the
enemies. They were troubled by the cold and they were very frightened.
Hunger had made them weak and they had neither food nor rations etc. The
young children of the king were crying of hunger.

Two days passed in this condition. Then one of his sons died and they
had to throw his body into the river. The next day he said to his wife:
All of us are going to die in a short time. In my opinion we should
slaughter one of our children to feed ourselves, till the time Allah
opens up a way for us. If we delay in this matter we shall all perish
one by one. There is no other option.

His wife supported him in this and they slaughtered one of the children
and they fed on the flesh. So, prince, what is your opinion about this
helplessness? What is the difference between these people who are
compelled to do this and the dogs that devour carrion?

The prince said: Those that eat lesser are better.

The Hakim said: O prince, my eating and drinking in the world is like
this only; as I eat and drink under compulsion.

The prince said: O Hakim, that towards which you invite me, is it
something that is according to the intellect of the people in their
view? That they have renounced the world and accepted it? Or it was that
Allah called them towards it and they accepted? More interesting is the
fact that it is decreed by the people and by their opinion and if this
matter is from the side of the people they have invited towards its
work, its embellishment, its protection and its gifts, its bounties, its
pleasures, its pastimes and its joys. But this is a strange matter.

And it is a manifest invitation from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and
it is the straight path which is against the acts of the people of the
world. It points out their defects, it criticizes them, it changes their
joys and it invites them to the worship of their Lord and it is clear
for the one who takes lesson from it and those who are useless, this
matter is concealed from them. So much so that Allah will reveal the
truth after its occultation and exalt the word about which the evil
people are ignorant.

The prince said: You have said the truth.

Then the Hakim said: There are some among the people who contemplate
before the arrival of the prophets (a.s.). Thus they are on the right
path. There are some who are invited by the prophets and they harken to
their call. You, O prince is one who has contemplated on the basis of
your intellect, therefore you are also on the right path.

The prince said: Do you know anyone else, other than you who also
invites people to renounce the world? The Hakim said: Not in this
country. However there is a community among all the communities that
verbally claims to profess religion but does not fulfill its rights. Our
and their ways are different.

The prince said: How is that? Do you truly consider yourself better than
them? And without any doubt this strange matter has reached you from the
same source that has supplied to them also. The Hakim said: All the
truth is from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and indeed Allah, the Mighty
and the High has invited His servants to Himself.

Thus the people accepted it as truth subject to certain conditions. Till
it was returned to those who were qualified for it as was commanded.
Neither they committed injustice nor any mistake; and they did not waste
it. While others accepted it in such a way that they neither rose up for
its truth and conditions nor returned it to one who deserved it. Neither
they had determination nor their action was a hidden secret. Thus they
wasted it and considered it a burden. Hence the one who has wasted is
not like one who protects, neither one who retracts is like the
reformer. Neither is the patient like one who is impatient.

Thus in comparison to them we are closer to the truth and we are better
than them. And some communities are such that they followed the religion
of their prophet after he had passed away for some time and they did not
make any changes in it. After that people fell into various accidents
and began following the selfish desires, continued to waste knowledge.

Thus the reliable scholar used to conceal his identity and did not
reveal his knowledge. People knew his name but not his location. Only
those remained with them who were insincere among the learned and they
continued to dominate the ignorant people. They were making knowledge
anonymous and openly expressed ignorance.

Centuries passed but they did not realize their ignorance and falsehood.
The ignorant were dominant and in majority. The learned were in hiding
and in few numbers. They had changed the divine signs and given up the
aim to tread its path. Along with this they confessed of its decline and
followed their interpretations. They were according to its quality and
were of those who left its reality. They were against its laws.

Thus prophets of every quality arrived who invited towards it. Thus in
this quality we were in agreement with them and we were in opposition of
the law of those prophets and their manners. And we did not oppose them
in any matter till we did not have a manifest evidence or argument based
on the information contained in the present divine scriptures.

Thus each of them (prophets) spoke some words of wisdom and he became a
witness for us and a witness between us that our quality, appearance and
command is in agreement with them and he also used to testify that he is
an opponent of their practice and their deeds. So they did not know the
book except its introduction and neither were they familiar with the
name of religion. In fact they were not from the people of the book that
they may rise up on its basis.

The prince asked: What is the condition of the messengers and the
prophets that arrived from one period to another? The Hakim said: Its
example is that of a king whose lands are barren and where there is no
habitation. Thus when he decided to populate these places he sent a
strong, honest reformer to that country. Then he ordered him to inhabit
that place and plant various kinds of trees and irrigate different types
of farmlands.

He made it a country filled with various hues of crops and became famous
because of myriad kinds of agricultural lands. Then he ordered that
strong, honest reformer not have enmity with the nation and must not do
anything in it that its chief has not ordered. And he ordered him to
make a canal through it and construct the boundary walls so that it may
not be destroyed by any mischief-maker.

Thus the messenger who was deputed to this place, in spite of the fact
that it was barren land he gave it a new life and changed its desolation
into habitation. He irrigated it and cultivated different kinds of crops
that he was ordered. Then he transported water to this place to irrigate
the farms and grow crops. Then he stayed there for sometime. Finally the
one who had developed this land met his death. After him his successors
arrived.

They acted in contravention of all that he had established and they
gained more dominance. They destroyed the population, made the stream
dry up and all the freshness was changed into dryness and the crops were
wiped out.

When after the death of the messenger the people destroyed the place,
the king sent another caretaker so that he may look after its upkeep,
bring it back to its previous condition and work for reform. In this way
divine prophets and messengers were sent by Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime one after the other to correct the affairs of the people and to
reform them.

The prince said: Are the prophets and messengers specialized in such a
way that whatever they bring is for the common people? Bilohar said:
Certainly, when the prophets and messengers arrive they invite the
people.

Thus those who obey them are included with them and those who do not
obey them are excluded. And the earth had never been devoid of a divine
prophet, messenger or their successor; who is obedient. Its example is
like that of Qudam, a bird that lives at the sea shore. It lays many
eggs and desires to have a large number of chicks. But a time comes when
he becomes completely helpless as he is compelled to shift to another
place. Fearing that his eggs will spoil due to neglect he places each of
them in nests of different birds.

So the different birds warm this egg along with their own eggs and its
chick also hatches with their chicks. After sometime the chicks of Qudam
become friendly with the chicks of the other birds and when Qudam
returns to his place he goes to the nests of the other birds at night
and hears the sounds of his chicks as well as of the chicks of other
birds.

When his chick hears its sound it begins to talk as do the chicks of
other birds also. Although it is not necessary that the chick of Qudam
should harken to its call as it is now attached to the chicks of the
other bird. In the same way when the prophets call the people to
religion, those endowed with wisdom and recognition, answer their call.

The example of the bird that raised its voice is like that of the
prophet whose call is common for all the people. And the example of the
eggs placed in different nests is like that of wisdom and the
companionship of the chicks of other birds with the chick of Qudam is
like that of the man who accepted the statements of the wise people
before the arrival of the prophets.

Because Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has endowed His prophets with such
excellence and views that He has not given to anyone else. And gifted
them with such effulgence and evidences that He has not given to anyone
else.

This happens only at the time when He intends to spread the message and
send down the proofs. When the prophets arrive and their call becomes
dominant some people who had not accepted the statements of the wise
also accept them because the Almighty Allah has placed a manifest proof
in their call.

The prince said: You say that whatever the prophets and the messengers
bring is not from the words of humans and it is only the words of Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime and the words of His angels are also words?

The Hakim replied: Have you not seen people who in order to control
animals and birds whistle and produce strange sounds and the animals do
as they order. They also know that they are not eligible to understand
their talks. In the same way there are people who are incapable of
understanding the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and His angels
with all its subtlety and quality, the common people harken to the calls
like sounds made for the animals and birds.

This sound is in the place of that wisdom which shows that these voices
are clear and strong among the common people. And wisdom does not
restrain them from understanding it in different occasions and it also
does not stop them from spreading that through which Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime has established His proof on the people.

For wisdom, the voice is like a body and a house and for the voice,
wisdom is like a spirit and a soul and people cannot reach to the depths
of the words of wisdom.

Neither can they encompass it through their intellects. And before this
the learned have attained excellence in their knowledge. Thus one
learned always obtains knowledge from another. Till the final point of
reference is the being of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime from Whom that
knowledge has arrived. In the same way there are the scholars who gain
something from knowledge that saves them from ignorance.

But the excellence of every excellence owner is sufficient like people
benefit from the light of the sun which is necessary for the needs of
their life and bodies. But they are not capable to look at the sun with
their eyes which are like the natural eyes which though apparently its
status is that of an executive but its element is hidden. Thus people
accept what is obtained through its wetness and do not reach to its
depth. And the example of this eye is like those stars through which
people get guidance but they are not aware of their true position.

Thus whatever I have mentioned; wisdom is loftier and greater than it.
It is the key to all the doors of good and a means of deliverance from
all evil. It is the elixir of life. One who drinks it never dies. It is
such a cure that one who has taken it would never fall ill. It is the
straight path that if one takes he will never go astray. It is the
strong rope of the God Who is never exhausted by forgiving and
bestowing. It saves one from blindness if he takes hold of it. One that
caught it became successful and received guidance.

The prince said: The wisdom that you have explained in such a beautiful
manner if it is something that cannot benefit all the people, what is
the use of it? Bilohar replied: The example knowledge and wisdom is like
that of the sun which throws its light on all, whether dark or fair,
small or big. One who wants to benefit from it, does not stop it from
reaching him. But one who doesn’t like to benefit from the sun the sun
is not to blame.

Neither does the sun restrain people from this, nor does it act as an
obstacle between the people and its benefit. In the same way is the
wisdom which shall remain among the people till the Judgment Day. Wisdom
is common among the people but people have precedence among each other
regarding it. When the sun appears before the seeing eyes it is divided
among three types of people.

Those who have the right view gain benefit from it and his sight becomes
stronger. Some of them are blind; hence even if a number of suns shine
upon them it would not do them any good. There are also some who have
weak eyesight that are neither counted as blind nor those who have
correct sight. In the same way is wisdom which is the sun of the hearts.

When it arises it is also divided into three stages. The first stage is
of the people of insight who understand wisdom and they are counted
among the wise. And they also make this act manifest. The second stage
is of the blind ones whose heart become indolent due to their denial of
wisdom.

They do not accept wisdom just as the blind cannot see the light of the
sun. And the third stage is that of those with a sickened heart who have
very little knowledge and whose deeds are very weak and in their view
the good and the evil and the right and the wrong, all are equal. And
without any doubt those upon whom the sun shines the most, it is that
same wisdom about which the people are blind.

The prince said: Does anyone possess the capability of rejecting wisdom
for some time and then accept it after that? Bilohar said: Yes, this is
how most of the people react to wisdom.

The prince said: Has my father heard all this? Bilohar said: No, I never
found him listening in the right way, which would have reached to the
depths of his heart neither has any kind advisor spoken to him.

The prince said: Why did those wise man omit this; inspite of the fact
that they were senior in age?

Bilohar said: They left it due to exigency and lack of opportunity.
Rather they left to a thing that is better for your father for justice,
which is softer for the self and better in form. So much so that when
people live together a kind of love and attachment develops between them
and nothing except religion and wisdom creates disunity among them. He
bewails for it and is pained for it, yet the effects of wisdom do not
become apparent as he did not find any opportunity for it.

And it has reached us that a wise king who was close to the people and
who reformed their affairs, who had a good view and was very just; he
also had a vizier who very righteous and truthful. He helped the king in
public reforms and advised him in the affairs of people. This vizier was
cultured and intelligent. He was religious, pious and unattached to
material wealth. He used to mix with religious persons, heard their
discourses, recognized their merits, obeyed them and had brotherly
relations with them. For the sake of the king he was also accorded great
respect and honor.

The king did not keep anything confidential from him and the vizier was
also at this stage. But he did not inform the king about the religious
matters and neither did he expose the secrets of wisdom. They continued
in this manner for a long time. When the vizier came into the presence
of the king, he bowed to the idols and accorded respect to them and
enacted many rituals to show that he was following the religion of the
king, although it was very hard upon him. But he did all this for the
sake of dissimulation.

At last he sought the advice of his friends and brothers. They told him
be on the lookout of an opportunity and convey the word of truth to the
king. Otherwise you are helping him against your being and you are
making him infuriated against the people of your faith. Because you must
not deceive the king like this and neither must you be frightened of his
glory. Thus the vizier prepared himself for this and in this hope he
remained his friend so that whenever he got an opportunity, he would
dispense advice to him and convey the truth.

Inspite of his deviation, the king was very humble and kind. He behaved
very nicely with the subjects and was always keen for public welfare. He
also tried to reach to the root of their problems. Thus after a long
time the vizier got an opportunity to be alone with the king. One night
when all the town slept the king asked the vizier:

Will you come with me to tour the city so that we may learn what is the
condition of the people and what ill afflicts them? The vizier agreed
and the two of them set out on the nocturnal excursion. On their way
they came across a garbage lot that looked like a hill. When the king
saw a fire around the garbage he said to the vizier: Alight here so that
we may walk and see what is going on there.

When they went there they saw a hole like a cave in which there was a
poor man. When they looked around in the cave they could not see anyone
else. The poor man was in a terrible condition. He was wearing tattered
clothes of the garbage and he was resting on a pillow of dirt. He had a
canvas huge bag full of wine before him and he held a tambourine that he
was playing. His woman was also dressed in rags and she was serving wine
to him. When he hit out her she responded by dancing for him.

By serving wine to him she was according him the honor that is usually
reserved for kings. The man addressed the woman as the chief of ladies
and they considered each other as extremely handsome and attractive.
There was such a joy and merriment among them that it can hardly be
expressed in words. The king stood motionless and the vizier also
watched this scene in amazement. They were astonished at the pleasure
and attraction that was obvious between the two gypsies.

After that the king and the vizier returned and the king said: How do
you feel about the pleasure that time showed us tonight? I think those
two must be enacting this every night. The vizier found this moment
right and after sometime he said: O king I fear that we are also living
in the same kind of deception and that your kingdom and all the things
we are pleased with and that which is before our eyes; who knows that
this everlasting kingdom is also like the garbage lot and that we are
like those two people.

Who can understand it like the man who has hope in deliverance and the
rewards of the hereafter that our kingdom is like the cave that we have
just seen? Perhaps our bodies that are recognized through purity,
freshness and health are actually like the body of that gypsy and our
bewilderment may astonish the people like we were amazed at those two.

The king said: Do you find anyone worthy of this quality? The vizier
replied: Yes. The king asked: Who are they? The vizier said: They are
the people of faith who have recognized the kingdom of the hereafter and
its bounties and then sought them too. The king said: What is the
kingdom of the hereafter?

The vizier said: It is a bounty after which there is no destruction. It
is a prosperity after which there is no poverty. It is a happiness more
than which there is no comfort and it is such a health that after that
there is no illness. It is a satisfaction after which there is no
dissatisfaction and it is a peace after which there is no fear. It is a
life after which there is no death and it is a kingdom that has no
decline.

It is an abode of eternity and it is such an abode of life that one
would never be separated from it and which will never change. Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime has neither decreed old age for the residents of the
house of the hereafter nor illness or hardship, tiredness, hunger,
thirst or death. This is the description of the kingdom of the
hereafter, O king.

The king said: Can one desire for this abode; and is there any way to
enter this place? The vizier said: Yes, the abode of the hereafter comes
to the lot of one who desires it and one who reaches to its door becomes
successful. The king said: What stopped you from telling me all this
before? The vizier said: Your awe and glory stopped me from it.

The king said: If what you have mentioned is true we must not ignore it
and we must try our best to reach it. However we must assure that the
information we have received about the hereafter is correct. The vizier
said: O king, are you asking me to mention this to you again and again?

The king said: Rather I want you to talk to me about it day and night
and stop never, because it is a strange matter which should not be
regarded easy. One must not be careless about something like this.

Thus was the path of the deliverance of the king and the vizier.

The prince said: I do not have any interest in the royal affairs and the
way of the king. What I want is to accompany you this night itself to
the place from where you have obtained this knowledge. Bilohar said: How
can you accompany me and how can you remain patient in my companionship
when I have nothing that could protect me.

Neither do I have any means of travel not am I a kingdom of gold. I
don’t have anything to eat for supper. I don’t have clothes to wear and
I don’t stay permanently in any place; I leave every place in a short
time. Neither have I rations to travel from one place to another.

The prince said: That which has strengthened you will also make me
strong. Bilohar said: But if you give up the thought of my companionship
you shall have very good morals and manners and you would be like that
rich man who is related to a beggar.

Yuzasif said: How is it possible? Bilohar said: Take for example that
there was a young man among the children of the rich. His father wanted
him to marry the rich and beautiful daughter of his paternal uncle.
Though the young man did not agree to this he did not tell his father
about his unwillingness. Instead of that he went to some other place.

On the way he met a slave girl who was dressed in rags and begging from
people in a pitiable condition from her doorway. This boy was attracted
to that slave girl. So he asked her: Who are you? She said that she was
a daughter of an old man who lived in that house. The boy announced his
arrival to the old man and went into the house.

He said: Will you give the hand of your daughter in marriage to me? The
old man said: You will not marry the daughter of a beggar as you belong
to a wealthy family. The youth said: I have found this girl attractive
and I am running away from a wealthy and noble lady whom I was supposed
to marry as I don’t like her. So you marry your daughter to me and you
will find me a good husband for her.

How can I marry my daughter to you because you will take her away from
us and I also think that your people will not like her living with you.
The youth said that he was willing to stay with them at their house. The
old man said: If what you say is true, you take off this dress and
ornaments. Bilohar said: The youth did the same. He took an old dress
from their belongings, put it on and sat with them.

The old man wanted know about his antecedents and gauge his wisdom so he
spoke to him for sometime and at last concluded that he was in his right
state of mind. Thus he said: Since you have taken a liking to us and
agreed to stay with us, enter this hole. There were many houses behind
that house. They were extremely grand and palatial and they contained
all that anyone could ever need.

The old man then gave him the keys to these houses and said: Whatever is
there is all yours and you can do whatever you like with it because you
are the finest young man. In this way the youth got all that he wanted.

Yuzasif said: Just as the old man tested the intelligence of the youth
so that he may trust him, I also want to be like him. Thus you try to
increase my intelligence and tell me whatever you know about it.

The Hakim said: If you want to entrust this matter to me I can solve the
issue with ordinary conversation. But I have another idea which is the
method of the Imams of guidance to reach to the ultimate end of good
sense. It is a knowledge that is treasured in the breasts. But I fear
that if you oppose this method I may be responsible of starting an
innovation. I will take your leave tonight but pay you a visit every
night.

So you think upon it and gain lesson from this. Employ your
understanding and intelligence and be steadfast. And do not make haste
in acknowledging the responsibility that falls on your shoulders so that
you may know about it after you have fulfilled it. You must also take
care to avoid selfish desires and suspicion. Then you must clarify your
doubts after discussing them in detail with me and then tell me what you
conclude. They parted at this point that night.

When the Hakim paid the second visit he saluted and blessed him and sat
down with him. And in his supplication he said: I pray to that Allah Who
is the first and before Whom there was nothing and Who is such a last
one that after Him there will be nothing. He is such everlasting that He
has no end.

He is so unique and needless that there is nothing like Him. He is so
powerful that He has no partner and such a Creator that there is no
maker with Him. He is so competent that He has no opponent and He is so
self-sufficient that there is nothing like Him. He is such a ruler that
He makes you a just king, whereas no one else can do this. He shows the
way to guidance. He calls you to piety and changes blindness into sight.

He endows abstemiousness and indifference to the material world. He
likes the people of reason and is hateful to those who head for
destruction. He conveys complete benefit to us all and takes us to
Paradise and His pleasure that He has promised through His prophets and
saints. Thus our inclination to Allah bestows us with effulgence and we
are internally fearful of Him due to which we become humble and sincere
and all our affairs return to Him.

This supplication had a profound effect on the prince and he became more
inclined towards righteousness. His surprise was evident from this when
he asked: O Hakim, tell me what your age is? The Hakim said: Twelve. The
prince was astonished. He said: A twelve year old is a child whereas I
thought you were at least sixty!

The Hakim said: From the aspect of birth I am indeed sixty years old but
you asked me about age and age is in fact life and life is gained
through religion and acting according to it and being away from the
world. This is not more than twelve years for me, because before that I
was dead and I don’t include the days of death in my age.

The prince said: Why did you eat and drink if you were dead? The Hakim
said: I was like the dead in blindness, deafness and dumbness. My life
was very weak and I depended on others. As if in this quality I was a
partner of them. Thus I was like them in name.

The prince said: If you cannot calculate your age and neither of that
happiness which is necessary for you, you should take into consideration
death that is going to occur and which you do not dislike.

Hakim said: My being will guide you inspite of knowing that your
father’s absolute deviation will be the cause of destruction for the
people of religion. It is so because I neither consider death as death
nor consider life as life and neither do I expect something hateful from
death. Thus what inclination that person would have for life who has
renounced it all altogether?

And why would he flee from death when he has killed himself with his own
hands? O prince, don’t you see that the religious person had renounced
the people and wealth of the world and also forsaken the things that he
possessed but he did not become inclined to them. He took up the burden
of worship which cannot separate from him except by death. Thus one who
cannot be excited by the pleasures of life why he should need such a
life? And why should he run after that comfort which he can get through
death?

The prince said: O Hakim, you have said the truth. Would you be happy if
death comes to you tomorrow? The Hakim replied: I would be happier if
instead of tomorrow it came tonight. Because one who has recognized good
and evil and understood the enforcement from Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime which is there for forsaking evil and in the fear of its
recompense.

And one who performs good deeds in hope of its rewards and one who is
certain of the oneness of God and one who testifies for His promise; he
is actually fond of death because only he is eager for death who is
hopeful of comfort that is to come after that and who is terrified of
worldly desires and disobedience of the Almighty. The prince said: This
is very strange that one should wish for an early death in order to gain
salvation! Anyway, tell me about this community of mine.

Why does it rely on idols? The Hakim said: A man planted an orchard
through great efforts. Staying in it gave him comfort. One day he saw a
bird in his garden which was feeding at a fruit that grew on a tree. So
he shot hurled stone upon it. When he decided to slaughter the bird,
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime gave it the power of speech and it said to
the garden owner: You want to slaughter me while you cannot satisfy your
hunger through me and neither can you gain any strength from this.

Thus can there be found a good angle in what you have decided? “What is
that good?” asked the man. The bird replied: If you release me I will
tell you three things. If you remember them it will be better for you
than having your family and wealth. The man said: I have decided to
perform the good deed. Now tell me those things. The bird said: Remember
what I say. Do not be sad at what you lose; do not testify for that
which does not exist and do not desire that for which you don’t have the
capability.

When the conversation came to an end the man released the bird. It flew
up and sat upon a tree and said to the man: If you only knew what has
been wasted by you. Let me tell you that a great matter has been
destroyed by you. “What is that?” he asked. The bird said: If you had
slaughtered me you would have found in my stomach a pearl as big as a
duck’s egg. You would have become its owner and financially independent.

When the man learnt what he had lost he became full of regret. He said:
Let bygone be bygone. Come down so that we can go home as I want to gain
goodness from your companionship and greatness through your favors.

The bird said: You fool, you did not remember what I taught you and did
not gain benefit from my statements. Did I not take oath from you that
you must not be sad on that which you lose, you must not believe that
which does not exist and do not vie for that which you cannot obtain?

Are you not regretful of that which you have lost and asking me to come
back to you and that you seek something which you cannot get? You think
it is true that there is a duck-egg sized pearl in my stomach, whereas
my whole body is smaller than the egg of a duck. I had made you take
oath that you will not believe that which does not exist.

In the same way your people made idols with their own hands and thought
that it was them who have created you and tried to save you from fear
and dangers. And you also were of the view that these idols protect you,
therefore you spend your money upon them. And your people thought that
it is the same idols who give them sustenance and they sought from them
that which they cannot get from them and they thought true that which
did not exist. Thus they also considered necessary what the owner of the
garden thought was important.

The prince said: You have said the truth, but I don’t know anything
about the idols. I have never been inclined to them and neither have I
gifted them anything. Now you tell me about that being towards which you
invite me, and also tell me about that which you have preferred for your
self.

Bilohar said: Religion is based on two things. One is the recognition of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and the other is His satisfaction. The
prince said: How is recognition of Allah obtained? The Hakim said: I
invite you to know that Allah is one and He has no associate. He is one
since eternity and everything other than Him are created by Him. He is
the Creator and all else is creation. He is eternal and all else is
temporal. He is the Maker and all else is made.

He is the controller and all else is controlled by Him. He is permanent
and all else is destructible. He is the one with honor and all else is
lowly. He neither sleeps nor becomes oblivious. He neither eats nor
drinks. He is neither weak nor can He be dominated. He can neither be
made a target of displeasure nor anything makes Him helpless.

The sky, the earth, the atmosphere, the land and the sea cannot
disregard His command. He has created everything from nothing. He is
from ever and will remain forever. There are no changes in Him and
circumstances have no effect upon Him. Neither can time bring changes in
Him. He does not change from one condition to another. No place is
devoid of Him, and neither is He confined in a place.

No place is nearer than Him and nothing is hidden from Him. He is the
knower from Whom nothing is hidden. He is such a powerful one that
nothing is beyond His reach. You can recognize Him through His kindness,
mercy and justice. He has decreed reward for one who obeys Him and
appointed punishment for one who disobeyed Him. Therefore you must act
according to the pleasure of Allah and refrain from His dissatisfaction.

The prince said: Is this One Creator satisfied with good deeds? The
Hakim said: O prince, His satisfaction lies in that you obey Him and do
not disobey His commands. And that you must prefer to give to others
what you have been given. You must try to restrain from others what is
kept away from you. Thus this is justice and the satisfaction of Allah
lies in justice and in following the heritage of the prophets messengers
you must not forget their practice.

The prince said: O Hakim, tell me about the piety of the world and its
conditions.

The Hakim said: When I found the world an abode of disposal and decline
and saw it changing from one condition to another, and when I saw the
people of the world becoming targets of calamities and found them
afflicted with different maladies, and sometimes I saw them in sickness
after health and in old age after youth, in poverty after affluence, in
sorrow after happiness, in disgrace after honor, in deprivation after
prosperity, in fear after security, in death after life, and I saw the
short lives, I witnessed sudden deaths without any murder or killing;
and I saw the arrows that were to hit the target, and I saw bodies that
were frail.

Whose joints were shattered, who were not safe; I understood that the
world is something that would separate and that it is temporal. And I
also recognized that whatever I have seen from the world is much less
than what has escaped my view. I have seen the inside and outside of the
world and recognized it to its depths. I saw its hidden aspects in a
manifest way.

When I saw it from its arrival unto its laws I became fearful of this
death of mine and I fled from that which I had seen. In the meantime you
will also see people who are extremely proud and rebellious. You will
see rulers who are at the pinnacle of prosperity, who are proud of their
kingdom. They are intoxicated with the joy of their power and physical
health. When a revolution appears in the world, man is reduced to be its
prisoner.

One who has seen it himself, he testifies for it. So you should come out
of this worldly kingdom, its pride and its prosperity. Replace
degradation with honor, sorrow with joy, destruction with bounties,
poverty with affluence, deprivation with prosperity, old age with youth,
infamy with nobility and life with death.

Thus it is a narrow grave in which there is extreme horror in which man
is alone like a traveler who has separated from his companions who have
deserted him. And his brothers have also abandoned him and there is no
impediment from their side. And his enemies have deceived him. Now he
has no defender. After him his wealth and property and everything he
owns is open to plunder. As if he has never lived in the world.

He is not even mentioned occasionally and no one even remembers him. As
if he never had received any share from the world. Thus, O prince, do
not take up such an abode. And neither should you keep you wealth and
animals in it. Thus there is regret for it as well as fie.

The prince said: Fie on the world and one who is proud upon it while it
is such. Saying this, the prince began to cry and he told the Hakim:
Please elaborate what you have said as it is a cure for my heart.

The Hakim said: Life is very short and the days and the nights are
changing with speed. Departure from the world is soon. No matter how
much you live, death is imminent and the one who departs will have to
leave and whatever is there in this world, has to disintegrate and
whatever acts he has committed in the world, these acts are fed up with
him. And even his most solid constructions are going to be ruined.

People will become unfamiliar with his name and his memory will be
forgotten. His genealogy will become unknown and his body will decay.
His nobility will change into disgrace. His boons will turn into banes.
His profit will change into loss. Someone else will become the owner of
his property and those who remain behind will be disgraced. His women
will become permissible for others. His oaths and vows will be broken.

His responsibilities will be ignored. His heirlooms will become old. His
property shall be divided. His personal effects shall be bundled up. His
enemies shall be pleased, his kingdom shall be destroyed. Inheritors
will appear for his crown and they shall occupy his throne. Everything
shall be taken away from him and he will be made to leave the house and
taken to the grave. They would leave him alone and terrified in the
darkness of the grave. Friends will consign him to the dust and then go
away. He will never become attached to his loneliness and he will never
come out of the condition of alienation.

You should also know that an intelligent man has the right to crucify
his selfish desires especially like the policy of the just Imam and the
cautious man who teaches manner to the public and who reforms the
people. He orders what is right for them and stops them from that which
corrupts them. Then he punishes those of them who disobey and honors
those who obey him. In the same way it is necessary for a man of
intellect that he should teach himself all the good morals and manners
and control his selfish desires. And he must bear it even though he may
like their necessary benefit. He must protect his self from its harms.

When he does something good and is pleased by it, he must prepare
himself for its reward and punishment. In the same way when he is
aggrieved, the man of reason has the right to look objectively at the
circumstances that befall him. He must obtain their correct matters and
restrain his self from making his affairs wrong. He must consider
himself and his deeds lowly and he must never be proud, because Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime has praised the one who has intellect and
condemned the proud.

He has also condemned those who have no sense. Through intellect and by
the permission of Allah one can understand every goodness, whereas souls
are destroyed through ignorance. Doubtlessly the most authentic matter
for the people of sense is that we must derive benefits from that which
their senses have understood and which has reached us through their
experiences.

And it is not appropriate for the sensible man that inspite of being
capable of protecting his deeds, he should consider it unimportant and
leave it while he not capable of performing the act which is more
important than that. And it is one of the secret weapons of Satan that
only one who ponders upon it, sees. And no one is safe from it except
one that Allah has protected. The weaponry of Satan consists of two
weapons.

One of them is denial of intellect that appears in the heart of the man
of intellect and it is that he has neither intellect nor opinion. And
neither there is any benefit in his intellect and opinion. It wants to
stop him from love and acquisition of knowledge.

It presents to him some worldly past times in good light. If man begins
to follow this way, it is the success of Satan. But if he disobeys the
Satan, the latter uses another weapon to defeat him. It is that when a
person does something and thinks upon it, Satan puts such things before
him that he cannot understand that they will put him into some trouble
and that about which he has no knowledge; it will cause such harms to
him.

So much so that those things become the cause of the weakening of his
intellect and he develops hared and suspicion and the Satan says: Don’t
you know that you cannot complete this job and you never had the
capability to do it? You have put in so much effort for nothing. Thus
the Satan subdues many through this weapon. Thus you must keep away from
the acquisition of that knowledge that teaches you this and what you
have obtained from it is deception.

You are in such a place where most of the people have been subdued
through the various machinations of Satan. Among them are also those who
have killed their ears, intellects and hearts and the Satan has
abandoned such people as like animals they do not ask what they don’t
know. There are various religions among the common people. In this some
have gone so much ahead in deviation that consider it permissible to
kill and loot others.

Their deviation takes them away from the true things so that this
religion may continue to dominate them. And that it may embellish this
weakness and stop them from the upright faith. Satan and his army is
always busy in trying to destroy the people and they never despair from
taking them astray, and neither do they flee from the scene. Their
number cannot be calculated by anyone except Allah. No one can save
himself from the deception of Satan except with the help of Allah and by
holding firmly His religion. Thus we pray from Allah for the good sense
of obeying Him and for gaining an upper hand over our enemies, because
no one has any power except Allah.

The prince said: Describe the Almighty Allah in such a way as I am
seeing Him with my own eyes. The Hakim said: One Whose remembrance is so
pure, cannot be described through narrations. And through intellects you
cannot reach to the depths of His realities. Neither can the tongues
reach to His true position.

The people cannot encompass Him through their knowledge except through
the knowledge that the Almighty Allah has taught to His prophets (a.s.).
Only they can truly describe His qualities. And our power of imagination
and understanding cannot perceive His lordship. He is much higher than
this. He is the most beneficent and the most merciful.

Thus He endowed whatever He liked from His knowledge and He made
apparent to them whichever of His quality He liked. And He made them
recognize His lordship and guided them by creating that which was not
present and by turning into nothing those things that existed.

The prince said: What is the absolute evidence for His existence? The
Hakim said: When you see a created thing and its creator is not there
before you, you understand through your intellect that it has a creator.
In the same way the heavens and the earth and whatever is there between
them is also having a creator. What proof can be stronger than this?

The prince said: O Hakim, tell me whether the maladies, pains and
poverty that afflict the people are from the power of Allah or without
it. Bilohar said: No, rather they are related to power. The prince said:
Then tell me about the bad deeds of the people. Bilohar said: The
Almighty Allah is immune from the bad deeds of those people but He has
kept a great reward for those who obey Him and there is terrible
chastisement for those who disobey Him.

The prince said: Now tell me about the most equitable person, the
greatest oppressor, the most hardworking, the greatest fool, most evil
and the most righteous people.

Bilohar said: The most equitable are those who have done justice with
their souls. The greatest oppressors are those who consider their
injustice as justice and in whose view the justice practiced by the just
is injustice. And the most hardworking is one who has achieved more for
the hereafter and the biggest fool is one whose aim is material world
whose mistakes are deeds. And the most righteous is one who ends his
life in goodness. And the most unfortunate is one who end his work on
the dissatisfaction of Allah.

Then he said: One who considers his religion at par with his selfish
desires, he was destroyed. Thus he is the one who has angered Allah and
he is an opponent of that which he should have liked. And one who
believed that religion is like peace, he is the one who has obeyed Allah
and this will save him from divine anger.

Then he said: If there is goodness in doers of bad deeds do not consider
it bad. If something bad is found in righteous people do not consider it
good.

Then the prince said: Tell me who are worthy of success and who are
worth to be called unfortunate? Bilohar replied: The ones eligible for
success are those who obey the commands of Allah and who refrain from
what He has prohibited. And unfortunate are those who disobey the
Almighty and leave aside His obedience. They have followed their base
desires in contravention of his selfish desires.

The prince said: Who are the ones that are best in obeying the Almighty?

The Hakim said: Those who follow His command, are firm on His religion
and keep away from bad deeds.

The prince said: What are good and bad deeds? The Hakim replied: Good
deeds consist of intention, action, good word, good deed and
truthfulness. Bad deeds consist of bad intention, bad action and bad
words.

The prince said: What is the sincerity of intention? The Hakim replied:
Moderation in intention.

The prince asked: What is foul mouthing? The Hakim said: To lie. He
asked: What is bad action? Bilohar said: Disobedience of the Almighty
Allah.

The prince said: Tell me how one can be moderate in intention? Bilohar
said: By talking frequently about the decline of the world and
dissociating from the worldly affairs and by keeping away from the
matters in which lies the destruction of the hereafter.

The prince said: What is charity? Bilohar replied: Charity is to give up
wealth for the sake of Allah. He asked: What is good deed? Bilohar said:
Piety is the name of good deed. He asked: What is miserliness? Bilohar
said: Not paying the rights to the rightful owners and taking away their
rights without any reason.

The prince said: What is greed? Bilohar said: To be always inclined to
the material world and to be attentive to those matters that have
nothing but corruption and whose recompense is the chastisement of the
hereafter.

The prince said: What is truthfulness? Bilohar said: In the path of
religion it is necessary that man should neither deceive himself nor
deny this path of religion.

The prince said: What is foolishness? Bilohar said: To be satisfied with
the world and to leave those having permanence.

The prince asked: What is lying? Bilohar said: It is that man falsifies
himself and he follows his selfish desires and is stubborn on his
stance.

The prince asked: Who are the most perfect for taking advice?

Bilohar said: Those who are perfect in intellect and who have more
insight about the consequences of matters. Those who have complete
knowledge about their enemies and who are earnest in escaping from them.

The prince asked: What is consequence and who are those enemies that a
sensible man should recognize and keep himself safe from them? Bilohar
said: Consequence is the name of the hereafter and the annihilation of
the world.

The prince asked: Who are the enemies? Bilohar said: Greed, anger,
jealousy, selfishness, sensuality, show off and haste are enemies.

The prince said: Who are those that you consider stronger and more
important that one should save oneself from them? Bilohar said: Greed,
in which there is no satisfaction and which is worse than anger and
anger in dominance does more injustice and reduces thankfulness and it
is the greatest recompense of those who harbor malice.

And greed is that which shows the anonymity of intention in more
unfavorable light. And suspicion follows it. And restlessness is worse
than entreaty and it is more troubling than disobedience. The fire of
malice burns for a long time and it is the opposite of mercy and is very
severe. Show off is worse than deception and it hides further that which
is hidden and it is against chance and opportunity. And entreaty
increases enmity and cuts off making of excuses.

The prince asked: What ruses of Satan are more effective in deviating
the people?

The Hakim said: The Satan makes people blind in following the selfish
desires, in good deeds, sins, reward and punishment.

The prince said: Tell me about this power through which Allah has
empowered the people to gain dominance over these evil matters and the
destructive desires.

The Hakim said: It is knowledge that is accompanied by intelligence and
deeds and to restrain oneself from the selfish desires. And to be
hopeful of getting rewarded in religion. To mention more about the
annihilation of the world and proximity of death. To refrain from that
which is the opposite of that which will remain after the end of the
world. Thus the estimation of the past matters depends upon their
consequences.

And to keep them safe in the mind. Except for the people of intelligence
no one else stop himself from bad habits and keeps it on good manners.
The persons of wisdom will reach to a correct stage in their lives. It
is this, which is called contentment and consider the imminent result
must for himself. And one who undergoes the most hardships and who works
hard to gain something, he is not aggrieved at what he has lost, who is
pleased with the self, and one who leaves the cure which cannot be
complete, one who is patient on that which befalls him, one who chooses
the right path instead of the way of misguidance, one who convinces
himself that he if does good he will be rewarded and if he does bad he
will be punished.

Thus one should be aware of all these things, and the rights and the
limits of piety and to act on good advice, one who restrains himself
from following the selfish desires, one who dominates over the selfish
desires and one who looks at every matter based on his opinion. And one
should have the recognition to be firm upon it with certainty. Thus if
he is faced with a trial he considers it excused without any aversion.

The prince said: Which morals are the best and worth respect? The Hakim
said: To behave with people in a nice way.

The prince asked: Which worship is better? The Hakim said: It is the
worship of dignity and love. He asked: Tell which of the worship acts
are superior? Bilohar said: To love the good people.

The prince inquired: Which remembrance is superior? The Hakim said: It
is the mention that encourages one to do good and restrains him from
evil.

The prince asked: Which enemy is the most disliked one? The Hakim said:
There is no enemy greater than sins.

The prince asked: Tell me which excellence is the best? Bilohar said: To
be content with what one has in life.

The prince said: Which respect is best? The Hakim said: The respect of
religion.

He asked: What is that, which does the most injustice? He replied:
Rebellious king and hard-heartedness.

The prince asked: What is that which is most remote? The Hakim said: The
eye of that greedy one which is not satisfied with the world.

The prince said: What are the affairs which are bad from the aspect of
consequences? The Hakim said: To seek the pleasure of the people in the
displeasure of the Almighty Allah.

The prince asked: What is that which changes sooner? Bilohar said: The
hearts of the kings who work for the material world.

The prince said: Tell me which sins are worse? The Hakim said: To accept
the covenant of Allah and then to be unfaithful to it.

The prince said: What is that which is going to end soon? The Hakim
said: The love of a transgressor ends soon.

The prince asked: What is the most dishonest thing? Bilohar said: The
tongue of a liar is the most dishonest.

The prince said: What is it that remains more concealed? Bilohar said:
The evil of the fraudsters.

The prince asked: What is it that is more resembling to the
circumstances of the world? The Hakim said: The false dreams of a person
who sleeps.

The prince asked: Who is the most superior from the aspect of
satisfaction? Bilohar said: Those who expect good from Allah, who are
more pious, who are not careless of the remembrance of Allah, who
remember death and have certainty in the end of the tenure of life.

The prince asked: What is the most pleasing thing of the world? Bilohar
said: A well-mannered son, a supportive wife who is an associate for the
matters concerned with the hereafter.

The prince said: Which is the disease that is stuck to the world?
Bilohar said: One who has a bad mannered son and a irritating wife and
he could not get rid of them.

The prince said: Which prosperity is the best? Bilohar said: When man is
content with what he has and to have regard for the people.

Then the prince said to the Hakim: You may rest your mind for a while as
I am going to ask you about the most important things. While the
Almighty Allah has bestowed me the insight about those things regarding
which I was ignorant. And He gave me the sustenance of religion about
which I was in despair. The Hakim said: Ask me about whatever is exposed
to you.

The prince said: In your view the child who is given a kingdom in
childhood and whose religion is idol worship and who is gaining benefits
from the pleasures of the world and is being reared and shaped on it, so
much so that he becomes an adult and also enters old age and due to
ignorance he does not have his condition changed by Allah and who
entrusts his soul to the selfish desires due to which he fails to
achieve his objective.

It is so because desires have become embellishments for him and they
affect him and he has daring for them and he finds guidance in them
alone and he remains involved in the love and deception of these
desires. For his people and persons of opinion he is a cause of pride
and love and his insight has deserted him. So much so that he is also
ignorant and careless about the affairs of his hereafter and he
considered it light and corruption developed in his self. He became evil
intentioned and narrow-minded.

His enmity to the religious people and those who were hiding from him,
assumed severity. Can he hope to leave the fears in which his life will
be prolonged? Can his coming out be proper to the mercy that is light
and to the proof that is manifest? And the greatest part of religion
will be that he should ask for the forgiveness of his past sins and hope
for good rewards in this religion. Can he achieve this?

The Hakim said: You have understood this; now what do you want in this
matter?

The prince said: I am not the denier of the excellence that is endowed
to you through intelligence and understanding and neither do they deny
the knowledge which is given to you specially.

The Hakim said: It is the king who has these qualities and the person
whose generosity has invited you; from whom you have inquired and one
who has arranged this. Allah had promised chastisement but He dealt with
affection as this man wished.

Along with this you intended to fulfill the rights of the Almighty that
He made incumbent upon you. And I think that you want to reach to the
depths of the excuse in kindness. So that you may remove yourself from a
great peril and save yourself from this perennial trouble, because it is
not possible to escape the chastisement of Allah except with His help.

The prince said: Do not deprive me from whatever you wish. Tell me about
your opinion regarding the fear that a king has about his death due to
which he is in regret and nothing can make up for it. You give me
assurance about it and remove my sorrow because I have no other solution
to it.

The Hakim said: It is my opinion that we cannot make the creatures
despair of the mercy of their Creator, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
till the soul remains in his body even though he may be a profligate and
a rebel because we have described the Almighty to be kind, affectionate
and merciful and have proved faith through it and in that which you are
commanded to seek forgiveness, in that if Allah wills, there is favor of
your choice according to your need.

And people think that once upon a time there was a king who was well
known for his knowledge. He was a kind protector who was always trying
to bring about welfare among his subjects. He lived in this way for a
long time and after that he died. So his people mourned for his death.
His wife was pregnant; so the astrologers and soothsayers said that she
would give birth to a son who will rule the kingdom with competence. One
who lives in his time will witness this.

Thus on the basis of the predictions it was decided to make him the
king. When the child was born the people celebrated the whole of the
first year by music and wine and food. After that the wise men of the
community said that this child is the gift of God but you have thanked
someone else. If he is the gift of someone other than God you have
fulfilled the rights of the one who has bestowed him to you.

But have you tried to fulfill the thanks of the one who gave you
sustenance? So the people told these people that this newborn child is
given to us by Allah and no one other than Him has done a favor to us.
The scholars said: If only Allah has bestowed you this child, you have
pleased someone other than Allah who has not bestowed the child and you
have displeased Allah Who has bestowed him to you.

The people said to the scholars: O wise men, please give us good
counsel; and O scholars, inform us so that we may follow what you say
and accept your advice and act according to your instructions. The
scholars said: In our opinion music, wine and vain pastimes are things
liked by Satan , so you give up all this and instead of that pay thanks
to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime so that God may forgive you for what
you have committed. The people said: We cannot carry the burden of
whatever you have said.

The scholars said: O ignorant people, how you have become obedient to
one who has no right upon you and you are disobeying one whose right is
incumbent on you? How you have become strong in an appropriate thing and
weakened in that which is proper? The people said: O leaders of wise
men, our sensualities have increased and we have become much involved in
worldly pleasures so whatever we found great in resemblance they
strengthened us and our intentions became weak.

Thus we are unable to lift a heavy burden. So let us return to those
things and do not compel us to lift the heavy burden. The wise men said:
You fools, are you not the sons of ignorance and brothers of misguidance
when you find hardship easy and righteousness difficult? So the people
said: O leaders of wise and chiefs of scholars, we seek refuge with the
forgiveness of Allah from this hardship. And we beseech you not to
associate us with disgrace. So do not condemn us and neither should you
call our weakness as disgrace nor blame us for ignorance.

Because if we obey Allah with the same forgiveness and weakness of good
deeds; and we worship like the one who has adjudged our desires unlawful
we shall fulfill our need and Allah will achieve make us our purpose.
And He would be merciful upon us like He has created us. Thus when they
said this, their scholars made them confess and they accepted their
statements and they prayed, fasted, gave charity and worshipped for a
whole year.

When they had done that the soothsayers said: The one who favored the
people by the birth of this child, he has informed that he would be a
sinful ruler and might also be righteous or rebellious or humble.
Sometimes he would commit evil and sometimes perform good deeds. The
astrologers also gave the same prediction. So the soothsayers and
astrologer were asked how they have concluded this.

The soothsayers said: We have said this because first the birth of this
child was celebrated with music and unlawful acts and later they did the
opposite of all this. The astrologers said: We have said this because of
the balance of the Venus and Jupiter because this child was born with
nobility whose greatness cannot be sufficiently praised. And he was born
in such joy that it cannot be described fully.

And he was born with such oppression that no one has the strength to
bear it. Thus he will enact repressive and unjust laws, usurp rights and
his most favorite people will be those who support him and the one he
will hate most will be ones that oppose him. He shall remain oblivious
due to youth, health, power and success. And he will remain in the same
joy. He will see on that which he likes and hear only that which he
desires.

Thus when he was thirty-two years old he told his women, children,
friends, servants and riders to put on the best clothes and decorate
themselves. He ordered them to organize a gathering at the place of the
rising of the sun and instructed them to make the floor of gold inlaid
with jewels. Its length should be 120 yards and breadth 60 yards.

Its roof and walls should be decorated with gold and decorated with
precious items. And he ordered all types of costly items to be piled on
both the sides of the road. Then he ordered all his armies, associates,
scribes and nobles of the town to be present there. They all arrived
decked in their best uniforms and decorations.

They stood there depending upon their ranks. The king had thought that
it would be a pleasing spectacle and he would be glad to see it. Then he
walked to the stage and sat down on the royal throne and all of them
prostrated to him. He told his attendant: I have seen a good spectacle
of my subjects, now I want to see my face. So they brought a mirror and
he looked at his face. He was looking at his face from all sides when he
saw some grey hair in his beard. This terrified him so much that his
mood changed completely and all his happiness turned into sorrow.

Then he said to himself that this time in his prime youth was informing
him about his death and it is telling me that my kingdom and power is to
go away and that I shall be removed from the throne and disgraced. Then
he said: This time is the prelude of death and the messenger of calamity
which cannot be stopped by any bodyguard.

It is informing me about death and predicting the decline of my kingdom.
How much haste it is making in changing my elegance, in killing my joy
and in reducing my strength. That which could not be stopped by the
forts and from which the armies could not save me. This time is going to
take away youth and strength. It will destroy respect and wealth. It
will create discord among the people. It will distribute inheritance
among the friends and enemies. It will destroy the crop of life, spoil
the taste of pleasures, make buildings into ruins, disintegrate the
society, make the lofty one base and humiliate the powerful. It has laid
burdens upon me and it has taken me in its clutches.

Then he descended from his seat in fear and gathered his armies,
summoned his reliable men and said: O leader of the people, since the
time I became a king and took over affairs of governance, what have I
done for you? They said: O nice king, your trouble is great for us and
our lives are spent in your obedience. So you may tell us about this
matter. The king said: A dangerous enemy came in the night.

You did not stop him from me while you are my reliable men. They said:
Your majesty, where is that enemy? Is he visible or invisible? The king
said: It is seen through its effect and eyes cannot see it. The
important people said: Your majesty, you can see our congregation and we
have blessings and tranquility and there are persons of intellect and
understanding among us. You show us that enemy and we shall stop him
from you.

The king said: I was wrongly proud upon you and I reposed reliance in a
wrong place when I made you as a shield for myself. I gave you wealth
and money and increased your status and made your my special associates
so that you may defend me against the enemies. After that I took your
help in building cities and in procuring weapons. I solved your problems
and kept you free so that you may perform in the best way.

So that you should not have any worry that may affect your functioning.
I never feared any danger to befall my mansion because you lived in it
and you were obedient. When I walked you surrounded me and when I came
you were with me. Thus if this happened as a result of your weakness I
would not have feared to rely on you in my affairs.

If it is due to your carelessness you don’t deserve advice and are
neither eligible for my affection and kindness. They said: Your majesty,
as long as we live we shall not let any danger against which our armies
can defend to reach you. But we don’t know about that which we cannot
see and our power is ineffective against it.

The king said: Did you not take oath that you will protect me from my
enemies? They said: Yes. The king said: Will you defend me from the
enemy which can harm me or the enemy that does not cause harm? They
replied: We shall defend you from the enemy who cause harm to you. The
king said: From all harmful people of from someone in particular? They
said: From all harmful ones.

The king said: The messenger of trials has reached to me who is
informing me about my kingdom that he will destroy all I have built and
that he will disperse all that I have gathered; spoil all that I have
improved; spend all that I have saved; change whatever I have done; to
weaken whatever I have strengthened; and in it lies the satisfaction of
the enemy who are pleased in my trouble.

And he also wants to gladden my enemies; he has also said that he would
soon defeat my armies; he would change my company into isolation;
destroy my dignity and orphan my children. He would also disperse my
congregation. My brothers, family members and relatives will have to
undergo hardships because of me. He will cut me into pieces. He will
settle my enemies in my localities.

The people said: Your majesty, we can defend you from people, beasts,
poisonous insects and crawling creatures, but we cannot save you from
this trial. So the king asked: Is there anyway I can be saved from this?
They replied: No. The king said: But you can at least save me from
another enemy? They asked: What is that? The king said: They are
diseases and sorrow. The people said: Your majesty, these are having
subtle power and they attack the body and soul; they reach you without
being identified.

They cannot be concealed from you even though they may be hidden. The
king said: There is one more problem. They asked: What is that? He said:
What is it that has taken precedence on fate? They said: Your majesty,
who is it that can dominate fate and not be defeated by it? Who is it
that has opposed it and was not defeated by it? The king said: What is
your solution regarding it?

They said: We cannot defend you from fate. We are remote from good sense
and reform. So what do you want? The king said: I want companions who
may take a permanent covenant and remain loyal to me. And that their
brotherly love for me should endure forever. And that death should not
keep them veiled from me; trials and tribulations must be able to stop
them from my company.

They should not be able to live without me and they should not leave me
alone even if they were to die for it. If I am alive they should not
entrust me to anyone else. They should protect me from death. Which you
cannot do. They said: Who are those that you have described? The king
said: It is the same who have spoilt your well being.

They said: Your majesty, can you not do a favor on them and on us?
Because your morals are perfect and you are very kind. The king said:
Now your neighborhood is fatal poison for me; there is deafness and
blindness in your obedience and dumbness in your approval. They said:
Your majesty, how is it possible?

The king said: Your neighborhood is because of affluence and wealth;
your approval is because of gathering and your obedience is due to
anticipation of carelessness. You restrained me from resurrection and
showed me the world in favorable light. If you had given me good counsel
and had told me about death and reminded me about it; had behaved in
sincere manner you would have mentioned this trial and had collected for
me that which will endure, and had not made efforts to gather wealth for
me that is going to perish. Thus the benefit that you have mentioned is
in fact, harm. And this love is enmity. I have returned them to you. I
have no need of any of them.

The people said: O wise and well mannered king, we have understood what
you want to say and accepted it in earnest. We cannot present any
argument against you as the proof is exhausted for us. Thus if we remain
silent from our conviction it will result in the destruction of the
country, in the death of our world and in the rejoicing of our enemy.

We are facing an important issue which has changed us from your opinion.
The king said: Tell me everything without any fear and hesitation,
because till now I was subdued by obstinacy and arrogance but today I
have conquered them. So far I was under their influence but now I have
got over them. I was your ruler till today and I had enslaved you, but
now I am free and you are the freed people of my country.

They said: Your majesty, why were you a slave inspite of being our
ruler? The king said: I was slave of my desires, a bondmen of my
ignorance and helpless of my selfish desires. I have myself freed myself
from these attachments and thrown them behind. They said: Your majesty,
What have you decided? The king said: I have decided to become a hermit
for the sake of the hereafter. I have given up arrogance and removed the
burden from my back.

I have prepared myself for death and to defend myself from calamities
because its emissary has informed me that it has been ordered to remain
with me till my death. They said: Your majesty, who is that emissary
that came to you and that we did not see; which is the prelude of death
that we did not recognize? The king said in reply: Its messenger is this
whiteness that is shining in blackness and which is screaming decline in
everything. The people believed him and became certain that the prelude
of death is the calamity of the white path.

They said: Your majesty, will you abdicate? And make your subjects weep?
Will you commit the sin of leaving your people without a successor?
Don’t you know that the greatest reward lies in welfare of the people?
And the best reform is the reform of community? Are you not fearful
about this sin? You must be more concerned about public welfare than the
well being of the noble class. Don’t you know that the best worship act
is doing good to others?

And the most difficult deed is ruling a kingdom and administering the
nation. So, your majesty, as far as possible you must pay attention to
the well being of the people, because as much you work in this regard as
much you would be rewarded. Your majesty, is it not true that if you
leave the throne and keep away from the affairs of the people they will
fall into perdition? Thus in this regard you will be more sinful than
you hope for the reward of your special class.

Your majesty, don’t you know that scholars say that one who has
destroyed his soul he has become a cause of the corruption of his self.
One has maintained it in order, has maintained the well being of his
body. And what evil can be greater than deserting ones subjects? Your
majesty, will you leave it and take off the black dress which is the
medium of the world and the hereafter? The king said: I have understood
what you said.

If I want to rule you for doing justice and in anticipation of divine
rewards I cannot reach this stage alone regarding you. Are you all not
obsessed with the world and worldly desires and pleasures? And neither I
am certain that I will remain in this condition that I want to come out
of. Thus if I do that, I will die in the condition of ignorance which
will take me down from the throne and make me kiss the ground and it
will make me wear the dress of mud instead of the clothes of silk, gold
and brocade and precious jewels.

And after a spacious place make me enter; after this honor and glory
subject me to disgrace. I will then become alone and none of you will
accompany me in this loneliness. You will take out from the inhabited
area and consign me to a deserted place and leave my flesh to the
beasts, birds and worms. And I will be eaten up by the ants and more
than that by the lions. My body will be filled with worms and become
like a decayed corpse. Degradation will be my companion and honor will
become a stranger.

You will try to bury me as soon as possible as an expression of your
affection and leave me alone among my past deeds and sins. I will get
regret by way of inheritance and as the final consequence. And you
people have promised me that you will defend me from the harmful enemy.
Right now you neither have the capability of preventing him nor any
solution to this problem. O people, I am deceiving myself or you are
deceiving? And you have laid out a deceptive trap.

So the people told their popular ruler: We are not what we were before
and you are also not what you were previously. Whatever has changed you
has also transformed us so do not reject our repentance and give us a
beneficial advice. The king said: I will do as you say for the time
being but when you go against your word I will leave you.

After that he continued to rule the kingdom and all his army emulated
his behavior. They remained engrossed in worship. Their country became
green and fresh; their enemies were defeated and their dominion
expanded. This continued for thirty years till the death of the king who
lived for a total of sixty-four years.

Yuzasif said: I am very happy to hear this story. Relate some more
things like this so that it may increase my joy and thankfulness to the
Lord.

The Hakim said: It is known among the people that there was a righteous
king who had soldiers in his army who feared the Almighty and worshipped
Him. The kingdom of his father used to be attacked and there was discord
among them but the prince used to reduce the number of enemies from his
cities and encourage them to become religious, god-fearing and seekers
of divine help and refuge. When he came to the throne he defeated his
enemies, united his people and brought reforms in the cities and set up
administration of the country.

When he was bestowed with so many blessings he became rebellious and
arrogant. He went so astray that he even abandoned the worship of the
Almighty and became thankless of His favors. He went to the extent of
eliminating those who worshipped God. His kingdom lasted for quite a
long time and people forgot the path of rightfulness that they had
previously followed in his initial stage.

They remained drunk and only followed his dictates. They hastened
towards deviation and remained on the crooked way. Their children grew
up in this atmosphere. None of them worshipped God or even uttered His
name. Other than the king, they had no other god. Although the prince,
during the lifetime of his father, had vowed that if he became a king he
will do those things with regard to divine obedience that none of his
predecessors have ever done and neither were they capable of it.

But when he became the king, he forgot his previous opinion and
intention and was always seen in intoxicated condition from which he
never came out again. Among those who were thankful to the king for his
favors there was a righteous man who commanded more respect among his
associates. He was saddened by the deviation of the king and the fact
that he had broken the covenant he had made to God. Whenever he tried to
advise the king the latter used to warn him not exceed the limits of his
position even though there was no other person in the kingdom having
such status. All the people of the kingdom knew him by name.

One day he came to the king with a skull wrapped up in a piece of cloth
and sat down on the right hand side or the ruler. Then he removed the
skull from the cloth and placed it before the king. Then he trampled it
with his feet and continued to rub it on the floor till the seating area
of the king was full of the particles of this skull.

The king was enraged at this and the king and his associates stared at
him. With their swords drawn the guards were just waiting for the
command of his execution. The king was trying to control his anger. The
kings of that time used to contain their anger despite their power and
inspite of their disobedience for the sake of the well being of their
subjects and for the welfare of their nations. So that this helps them
for their benefit and in the collection of land tax.

So the king controlled his anger and finally the man wrapped up the
skull and arose from there. He repeated this procedure on the second and
the third day also, but when he saw that the king never asked him about
the skull, once day he brought a weigh scale and some mud along with
this skull. In one pan of the balance he placed a silver coin and in the
other he kept mud equal to its weight.

Then he placed that mud in the eye socket of that skull and some of it
in the skull’s mouth. When the king saw him doing this he could not
remain patient any more and wanted to know why he was doing this. He
said: I know you are indulging in such antics only because of the post I
have given you and you want to guide me. Although you have a very lofty
position in my view you have done this to invite my attention.

The man bowed to the king, kissed his feet and said: Your majesty, you
have become attentive with your intellect because the example of a
statement is like that of an arrow which if thrown on soft ground gets
embedded in it. But if it is shot at a hard surface it remains
ineffective. And the example of a word is like that of rain; when it
falls on fertile ground it produces vegetation; but when it drops on
barren earth, nothing grows from it. And indeed the desires of the
people are different and intellect and desires both affect the heart.

And if the desires dominate intellect a man acts in anger and
foolishness and if the desire is defeated no deviation is seen in what
he does. I had liking for knowledge since my childhood and I considered
it effective in all my affairs. Thus I did not forsake knowledge and I
reached a lofty stage due to it. Meanwhile once I was roaming through
the graves I took out this skull from the graves of kings. It was
detached from its body. In view of the awe of kings I found this very
regretful. So I picked it up and brought it home. I dressed it in
brocade, washed it with fragrance and rose water and placed it on the
floor.

I said to myself: If it is from the skulls of kings it deserves respect
from my side and that I must keep it decorated. However if it be a skull
of a poor man such respect will not be a cruelty upon it. So I continued
the same behavior with it for a number of days, but I was not able to
learn anything about its life. When I realized this I called my servant
who was very helpful to me. Then I insulted this skull. But its
condition remained same. When I saw this I went to the men of wisdom and
asked them about it.

They also could not enlighten my on the subject. I also knew that the
king was very wise and knowledgeable so I came to you fearing all the
time, but it was not possible for me to ask you anything till you don’t
tell me about it yourself. And I also wanted you tell me, your majesty,
whether it is a skull of a king or a poor man? Because when I thought
about it and looked into its eyes I could not see anything except
emptiness. If I could find out what is behind the skies I would have
come to know what lies above it. So I continued to contemplate what it
is that holds the eyes in the sockets.

At last I took mud equal in weight to a silver coin as the weight of an
eyeball is also almost that much, and placed that mud in the socket. But
I found that there was nothing which could hold the mud. If you say that
it is a skull of poor man, what will you say when I tell you that I
found it in graves of kings? I request you to gather the skulls of kings
and poor people together. Thus if it is from the skulls of you kings,
who have excellence, then what I have said is true and if you can tell
me that it is not from the skull of kings I tell you that it belongs to
the king who was the beauty of his kingdom and its honor like you are
today.

Thus, may Allah protect you from this same condition of getting trampled
and gets mixed up in the soil. On which worms feed; and that you feel
shortage after excess, and experience degradation after honor and placed
in a ditch which is around four yards in length. And that there is no
inheritor of your kingdom. That your remembrance is finished and your
affairs spoil and those whom you have accorded greatness be degraded and
those that you considered debased should be exalted.

And that your enemies may rejoice and your helpers be destroyed. That
mud may come in between you. Thus if we call you, you will not answer
and if we accord you honor you will not accept it. And if we insult you,
you will not be infuriated. Thus your children will be orphaned and your
wives will be widowed and it is possible that your relatives may get
your widows remarried.

When the king heard this he became aggrieved and he began to weep. He
began to utter the word of ‘woe’. When the man saw this he understood
that his discourse had the desired effect and that it has pained the
king.

Thus his audacity increased and he repeated what he had said. He said:
May Allah give you a good reward and may He keep you safe from the evil
of great people. The king said: I swear by my life I have understood
what you said and I have realized the truth.

When the people heard this news, the excellent persons and others like
them prayed for him and the king remained in this manner till his last
moments.

The prince said: Tell some more stories like this.

The Hakim said: There was a king in the days gone by who wanted to have
a male issue. For this end he did not leave any cure. After a long time
passed one of his wives became pregnant and she gave birth to a male
child. When he grew up into a young man one day he said: Your return (to
the hereafter) restrains you from evils.

And the next thing he said: You will become old. And the third thing he
said was: After that you will die. Then his condition became like
children. After his birth the king had summoned the scholars and
astrologers and asked them about the fortune of his son. When they tried
to conclude his destiny they were stumped and could not reach any
conclusion.

When the king saw that they could not say anything he entrusted the
child to the nurses for nursing him. But one astrologer said that very
soon he will become an Imam and such helpers will be appointed on him
who would never leave him. When this child reached adulthood he left his
nurses and guards secretly and came out in the open.

He reached a bazaar from where a bier was being carried. He asked the
people: What is it? They replied: A man is dead. He inquired: What has
made him dead? People said: Old age and the passage of time destroyed
him. Thus his death came near and he died.

He asked: Was he healthy, alive and active? Did he eat and drink?

“Yes,” said the people.

Then he moved ahead and saw a very old man. He was highly astounded on
seeing him. So he asked a youth: What is it? People explained that he
was an old man whose youth had departed and old age has come upon him.
The youth asked: Did he grow up from childhood to youth?

“Yes,” said the people.

When he moved ahead he saw a man suffering from disease lying on his
back. He stood there and stared at him in amazement. Then he asked the
people: What is it? They said: It is a sick man. He asked: Was he
previously healthy and then he fell sick? “Yes,” said the people.

The young man said: By Allah, if what you say is right, people are
insane.

At that moment a slave found him in the bazaar and he took him back to
his house. When he entered the house he looked at a wooden beam of the
roof and asked: What type of a thing is it? He was told: It was
previously a tree. After that it became a wooden piece. When this house
was constructed it was placed there.

Meanwhile the king sent to him some persons to find what the young
prince is talking about. They reported back: The things he says make us
conclude that it is kind of suspicion. When the king heard this he
summoned the scholars and asked them about it but none of them could
enlighten him about this except the one who had initially predicted but
the king had refused to believe him.

Then some scholars said: If you get him married all this will come to an
end. He will accept that condition and become intelligent and develop
insight. So the king sent his men in the country to search for a
suitable girl for his son. They found a very beautiful girl and the king
married his son to her. During the marriage feast performers began to
display dances and musicians played music.

When the prince heard these combined sounds he asked: What is it? He was
told: These are performers, dancers and musicians who have come to
entertain on the occasion of your wedding. The prince fell silent. When
the guests departed after the program the king called his
daughter-in-law and said: I have no other son. When you go to him,
behave with him kindly and gain his proximity.

You must express your love for him. When the bride came to him and tried
to come near him the boy said: Give me sometime because the night is
long. May Allah bless me about you. Be patient so that we may eat
something.

Thus dinner arrived and they began to eat. After they finished he took
wine from this woman and she also drank wine and went to sleep.

The young man escaped the surveillance of the guards and left the house.
But when he reached the city he hesitated and he found among the
citizens a young man of his own built. He went to him and changed his
clothes with him. In this way his appearance changed. Then the two of
them came out of the town and continued to walk the whole night but in
the morning they hid themselves for the fear of being caught.

On the other hand, in the morning when the people asked his drowsy wife
about him she said that he was with her a moment ago.

The two young men used to travel at night and hide somewhere during the
day, till they came out of the territory of his father and entered the
kingdom of another king. The king of this area had a daughter about whom
it was decided that she will marry the boy she likes. Hence a tower was
constructed for her on the main road in which she sat to watch the
passers by. One day her eyes fell on a young man roaming in the market
and his companion was wearing old clothes.

The princess sent a message to the king that she has selected a boy and
that if he wished he could marry her to this youth. This information
reached the queen and she was overjoyed. At once she came to her
daughter to look at her choice. She pointed out the young man to her
mother. The queen was pleased. She came down from the tower, came to the
king and said: Your daughter has fallen in love with a young man. So the
king also expressed his desire to see the boy.

He was also shown the young man. The king descended from the tower and
ordered the youth to change his clothes and asked him who he was and
where he lived. The boy said: Why are you asking me all this? I am a
poor man. The king said: You are a foreigner. Your appearance is not
like that of the people of this country. The young man said: I am not a
foreigner. The king asked him to prove it. The boy refused to offer the
proof.

So the king appointed some spies on him to find where he lived without
his knowledge. Then he returned home and said: I think he is a prince
and he is not interested in marriage.

Finally the king sent a messenger to summon him. The young man said: I
have no worth, yet the king is calling me and I have no need from him;
and he also doesn’t know who I am. Yet he came to the king unwillingly
and the ruler made him sit on a chair. He called his wife and daughter
who sat behind a curtain.

The king said: I have called you for a nice thing. I have a daughter who
has taken a liking for you and I want to give her hand in marriage to
you. If you are poor I shall make you rich and increase your status. The
boy said: I don’t need what you are offering me, but if you like I can
narrate an example for you. “Tell me,” said the king.

The youth said: There is story among the people about a prince who was
invited by his friends for dinner. So he went and they all ate well and
went to sleep in a satiated condition. The prince awoke in the middle of
the night and became restless for his family. So he set out for home at
once. None of his friends were awake.

As he walked in a sleepy condition, on the way he came across a grave.
Thinking that it was an entrance to his house he entered the grave. In
his intoxication when he smelt the stink of the corpse he thought it was
fragrance. When he saw the bones he thought it was a bed that was laid
for him. When he saw the fresh corpse and felt its bad smell he thought
that it was his wife. So he placed his arms around the body and kissed
it and continued to play with it all night.

When he regained his senses and saw that he was lying on a corpse and in
order to hide the stink and dirt of the corpse that had contaminated his
clothes, he headed for the city gates which stood open. So he reached to
his clansmen thinking himself lucky that he met no one in this
condition. He took off his clothes, performed the ritual bath, put on
fresh clothes and applied perfume.

O king, may Allah give you a long age, tell me if in your opinion can
that man return to the condition he was in? “No,” replied the king. He
said: I am that same person. The king turned to his wife a daughter and
said: I told that he is not interested in marriage. The queen said: You
have not fully praised and described my daughter.

So I want to talk to him directly. So the king said to the young man: My
wife wants to come out and speak to you although before this she has
never talked to a stranger. The boy said: She may come. She came out and
said to the boy: Come to the matter that Allah has given you as a
blessing and sustenance, then I will marry my daughter to you. If you
see what beauty Allah has given her you shall be amazed. The boy looked
at the king and said: Shall I not tell you a story? “Do,” replied the
king.

The boy said: Some thieves decided to enter the royal treasury and steal
from there. So they dug a hole in the wall and went in. They saw such
treasures as they had never seen anything like it. Their eyes fell on a
pot of gold which sealed with a seal of gold. They said: There is
nothing better than this pot of gold and whatever is inside the pot is
better than all we have seen. So they took the pot and walked away till
they entered a forest. They did not trust each other so they opened the
pot at once. The pot was full of snakes that rose up and stung them all,
killing them.

O king, may Allah give you a long age, have you ever heard of such an
incident when a man put his hand in a pot containing snakes? “No,” said
the king. The boy said: I am such a man. The princess sought the
permission of her father to come out and speak to the youth directly.
She said: If he sees my beauty that Allah has given me he will not
refuse to marry me.

The king said to the boy: My daughter wants to come out and speak to you
although she has never come out for anyone else. The boy said: Let her
come out if she likes. So she came out to him. She was extremely
beautiful and had a shapely body. After greeting the young man she said:
Have you seen such a pretty girl? I have fallen in love with you. The
young man turned to the king and asked: Shall I relate to you a famous
story? “Do it,” replied the king.

The man said: A king had two sons, one of whom left for another country
where he was arrested and imprisoned in a house. The ruler of that place
issued a command that whosoever passed from there, should stone him. A
long time passed in this manner. His brother sought the permission of
his father to go and find him and try to rescue him.

The king said: Prepare for the journey and take whatever rations and
weapons you may need. So he set out fully equipped. He was also
accompanied with singing girls and those females who cried and wailed on
payment. When he reached the capital of that king, the king was informed
of his arrival. The king ordered the people to go out for his welcome
and he ordered the young man to camp outside the town. So the prince
(disguised as a trader) camped at that place and after settling down
told his men to unpack their goods and instructed them to be generous
while selling the wares to those people.

So they followed these directions and when the prince saw that the
people were busy in shopping he entered the town stealthily. He knew
about the prison where his brother was held. He entered the prison and
cast a pebble to him so that he may know that his brother was alive.
When this prisoner was hit by the pebble he screamed and said: You have
killed me. The royal guards became alert. They came and asked him what
was wrong.

They said: Why did you scream, while we never heard you say a word? Even
though we were hard on you and whoever passed from here stoned you? Now
when this man threw a pebble on you, you screamed? The prisoner said:
People had no information about me but this man hit me even though he
knows who I am.

The brother returned to his entourage and said: Come to me tomorrow and
I will show such clothes, weapons and goods as you have never seen
before. So the people returned home. When they came back the next day he
ordered his men to unpack and display the clothes. He ordered his
performers to begin the show and the people became engrossed in them.
Meanwhile he came to the prison, cut off the chains from his brother and
said: I will get you treated. Then he somehow brought him out of the
town and applied ointment to his wounds. When his pain decreased he was
told about directions of the way: Go now, you will see a boat in the
sea. So he headed towards that direction hiding and in secret.

Suddenly he fell in a deep ditch in which there was a python. Above the
ditch was a huge tree. When his eyes fell on the tree he saw twelve
horrible faces upon it. On its lower portion were twelve swords that
hung out of the scabbards. He continued to struggle to save himself. A
branch of the tree came into his hold, hanging from which he saved
himself. Then he walked on till he reached the sea. There he saw a boat
at the shore. He boarded it and went to his country and then to his
family.

O king, may Allah give you a long life, have you seen a person suffer
such calamities and then again return to them? “No,” replied the king.
The young man said: I am that man. At last the king, the queen and the
princess, all despaired but the man who accompanied the prince spoke to
the prince in ear: Give them proposal to marry the princess to me. So
the prince told the king: This is my companion, he would like to marry
the princess. The king said: I will not. The prince said: Can I relate
to you another famous story?

The king said: Yes, why not? The prince said: A man was traveling with
some people in a boat. They traveled for some days, then their boat was
wrecked near an island and all were drowned except that man whom the
waves threw upon that island. This island was inhabited by wild ghouls
and these ghosts used to watch the sea.

That man became enamored with a female ghost and married her. In the
morning the witch killed the man and distributed the parts of his body
among her companions. The same thing occurred for another man whom they
took for the daughter of the king of ghosts. This man spent the night
with the witch but since this man was aware of what had happened to the
man before him, he could not sleep the whole night. Finally it was
morning and the witch went to sleep. So the man came out quietly and
reached the sea shore. Suddenly he decried a boat and he began to shout
to the boatmen to save him.

They took him aboard and he was able to reach home. In the morning when
the ghosts came to the witch who had spent the night with the man they
asked her: Where is that man who spent the night with you? She said: He
ran away from me. They refused to believe her and said: You have eaten
him all by yourself and preferred yourself over us. If you don’t bring
him to us we would kill you. So she traveled over the sea and reached
the home of this man. She entered the house and sat besides the man.

She asked him: What all happened to you during your journey? The man
replied: I was caught in a trouble from which Allah saved me. And he
related the whole story to her. The witch asked: Have you got free of
the trouble? “Yes,” replied the man. She said: I am that same witch and
I have come to take you back. The man said: I put you under oath not to
harm me and I will tell you the whereabouts of a man with whom your
purpose will be solved. The witch said: I feel sorry for you. Then the
two of them went to the king.

She said to the king: Your majesty, may God bless you. Please listen to
our problem. I had married this man and I liked him very much, but he
dislikes me and doesn’t like my company. Please tell what we should do.
When the king saw her beauty he became infatuated by her. He took the
man aside and said: I want you to leave her so that I can marry her.

The man said: May Allah make better what the king intends to do. So the
king married the witch, they spent the night together and at dawn she
killed the king, cut him into pieces and picking up the pieces headed
for her companions.

O king, have you seen anyone, who being aware of all circumstances may
again go to that island? “No,” said the king. The companion who wanted
to marry the princess said to the prince: I don’t want to leave you and
I don’t want to marry her. So they took leave of the king and continued
to worship and tour the lands. The Almighty Allah showed many people the
right path through them.

The prince earned a lot of respect and he became famous everywhere. Then
he remembered his father and he said to himself: If I am sent towards
him, it is my duty that to save him from whichever condition he is. So
he sent a messenger to his father who told the king: Your son has sent
you his greetings. Then he described all that has passed on him. The
king and his family members came to the prince and he saved them from
the circumstances they were involved in.

After that Bilohar returned to his lodging and continued to visit
Yuzasif for many days till he became sure that he has opened a door of
knowledge for him and has guided him to the path of rightfulness. After
that Bilohar departed from those areas and traveled to other countries.
As a result of which Yuzasif was sad for some days, but finally he went
to the pious and religious people in order to convey to them the voice
of truth and call them towards it.

The Almighty Allah sent an angel to him who came to him when he was
alone and stood before him. The angel said: May God bless you. You are a
human being among the ignorant beasts and oppressors. I bring you
greetings from God and the deity of the creatures has sent me to you so
that I may give you glad tidings and remind you of the affairs of the
world and the hereafter that are hidden from you.

So you much accept my glad tidings and advice and you must not disregard
my statements. You must get rid of the world and free yourself from
worldly desires. You must become disinclined to this hateful country and
rulership. You must leave this temporal rulership whose end result will
be regret and seek the kingdom which will never decline and try for the
joy that never ends, a comfort that will never change. You must be
truthful and just because you are the leader of the people whom you are
calling towards Paradise.

When Yuzasif heard the angel’s discourse he fell down to prostrate
before the Almighty and he said: I am obedient to the commands of God
and His command is His favor so command me about your matter as I am
thankful to you and to that being Who has sent you to me because he has
done a favor to me and He did not leave me among the enemies.

Thus I will make efforts for that being from Who you have brought this.
The angel said: I will come back after some days and take you out of
here, so you be prepared and take care. Thus Yuzasif made a firm
determination to leave that place without telling anyone about it. When
the time of his departure arrived the angel came to him in the middle of
the night and said to Yuzasif: Get up, lets go immediately.

Yuzasif arose and departed with the angel and no one knew about it
except his vizier because when he was mounting, this handsome young man,
whom Yuzasif has appointed over the administration of the towns, came to
him and after paying due respects, asked: Where are you going, prince? O
our reformer with perfect wisdom, we are in dire circumstances at this
time. Are you leaving us because of these problems?

Please stay with us; because after coming into this world we grew up in
comfort and prosperity and we never faced any hardship. Yuzasif remained
silent for some time, then he said: You stay in your houses in the city
with your families because I have to go where I am being sent. Thus if
you help me in this you will share the reward. After that he mounted and
left according to divine commands.

But after riding for some time he had to dismount because his vizier was
holding the reins of his beast, protesting and wailing and saying: How
will I face your parents and what explanation will give to him? They
would kill me! How can you bear such hardships when you are not even
used to them? How can you bear loneliness when you have not remained
alone even for a single day? Can your body tolerate hunger, thirst and
change of atmosphere?

The prince comforted him and showed him his concern. He also gave him
the horse and equipments. So the vizier kissed his feet and said: O my
chief, don’t leave me here. I will come with you wherever you go as
there is nothing here after you. And if you don’t take me along I will
go out in the desert and never meet any human being. Yuzasif again
comforted him and said: O vizier do not think of anything except
goodness because I am sending you to the king and advising you about him
that he should behave with you in a nice way.

Then he took off the royal dress and gave it to the vizier and said: You
wear my clothes. And he also gave him that ruby which he wore in his
crown. He told him: Take this with my horse, and when you reach the king
give him the ruby after paying respects to him and also convey my
greetings to him.

Tell him that when I contemplated on things that are permanent and those
which are temporal I became inclined to that which is permanent and
became disinclined with the temporal matters. And when I learnt about my
reality and genealogy I became aloof from them and the enemies and
relatives. Thus I left the enemies and relatives and cut off myself from
my reality and genealogy.

When my father sees the ruby he would be happy and when he sees you
wearing my clothes he will remember me and mention the love I have for
you. After that through you only I forbid my father to act with you in
any unacceptable manner. Thus the vizier returned and Yuzasif moved on.
He continued to walk till he came to a wide place.

When he raised up his head he saw a huge tree over a spring of water. It
was a very beautiful tree having many branches and very sweet fruits. So
many birds had flocked on the tree that one cannot count them. This
scene elated him and he moved forward to reach near it. He was trying to
understand what it all signified. He took it to be a glad tiding towards
which he was called. And the spring of water he compared with wisdom and
knowledge. The numerous birds stood for people who would gather upon it
and accept religion from him.

As he stood there he saw four angels walking in front of him. He
followed them till they lifted him up in the atmosphere and took him
away and bestowed him that knowledge and wisdom which he used to get
from middle and last things and he was also given the knowledge that was
to come at the last.

Then they brought him back to the earth and the four angels stayed with
him and he stayed in that area for a long time. Then he reached the land
of Saulabath and his father learnt of his arrival. Thus he and all the
dignitaries of the kingdom came and paid respects to him. The people of
his country also arrived with their relatives, greeted him and sat own
before him. Yuzasif laid out the carpet for them and spoke to them about
many things.

He told them to pay attention to him and prepare themselves to
contemplate on divine wisdom which is the light of souls, and that they
must rely on knowledge which is the guide to the right path. They must
awaken their intellects and understand the difference between right and
wrong and between guidance and deviation. And also know that it is the
religion of truth that the Almighty Allah revealed on the prophets,
messengers and the people of the previous centuries.

And that the Almighty Allah has again bestowed us this blessing. He has
done a favor upon us and in this way saved us from the fire of Hell.
Except that man was able to reach the heavens and enter there without
being perfect in faith and who performs the good deeds. So you must
struggle in this regard so that you may achieve eternal comfort and a
life that will never leave you. Those of you who bring faith they should
not do so in hope of material wealth and worldly benefits. Your religion
should be in anticipation of the heavenly kingdom and salvation.

It should be in hope of salvation from deviations and prosperity in the
hereafter because the worldly kingdom is going to end sometime or the
other. Its pleasures will be over. Thus one who is deceived by it shall
be destroyed and degraded. If you believe what the religious people have
faith in you will realize that death is attached to your bodies and
along with your bodies it also subdues your soul.

You must also know that just as birds are incapable of defending
themselves against the predators except through the strength of their
wings and legs in the same way you also cannot get salvation except
through your good deeds. Your majesty, you and your officials must think
deeply on what I am saying and take lesson from it.

They must cross the sea in which a boat is always present. They must
cross the deserts in which the facilities of transportation are always
available. You must continue to travel on your way till the time you
have the lamp and along with the pious continue to increase the treasure
of good deeds. You must become their associates in their good works. You
must follow them properly. You must become their helpers.

You must go on with your deeds in such a way that along with you they
must also enter the illuminated kingdom. You must accept the effulgence
and remember your duties. You must beware of worldly desires, liquor and
sensual wants. You must keep away from every evil that may cause the
destruction of the body. You must refrain from anger, haste, malice and
back biting. If you are given something that you don’t like, don’t pass
it on to someone else. Keep your selves pure and clean, keep your
intentions pure so that when you die you may be on the right path.

After that he departed from the land of Saulabath and traveled to many
areas propagating religion and reached the land of Kashmir. He toured
the place and gave a new life to the dead hearts of the people of this
country and he died during this period. Leaving the mortal body his soul
flew up to the ethereal world. Before his death he summoned his disciple
named, Ayabad who was serving him in sincerity and was a perfect man in
all regards.

He made a bequest to him in which he stated that it was time for him to
depart from the world. You must fulfill all your duties. You must never
give up truth and continue to remain on piety and worship. Then he
ordered Ayabad to prepare a place for him to lie. Then he stretched out
his legs and turned his head to the west and his face to the east. He
died in this position.

The author says that narrations like the above and similar reports about
people with long lives are not relied upon by us to prove occultation
and its occurrence because occultation is proved authentic on the basis
of the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (a.s.). But
in my view after the divine prophets and messengers (a.s.) a number of
rightful guides and righteous people received occultation from the
Almighty Allah and our opponents also do not deny this.

All the narrations on this subject are correct. In addition to this,
there are traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (a.s.)
regarding the twelfth Imam, His Eminence the Qaim (a.s.) and his
occultation and that the time of occultation shall prolong and hearts
will harden and people shall despair of his reappearance. Then the
Almighty Allah will bring him out and the earth shall be filled up with
his effulgence.

Through his justice and equity will be destroyed all the injustice and
oppression. No one denies this except that they agree to these views and
in spite of that intend to put off the divine light and wish to falsify
His religion; and Allah does not want except to perfect His light, and
exalt His word and reveal the reality of truth, and prove falsehood
false even though it may be extremely despicable to the deniers. This is
the promise of Allah to the righteous through the tongue of the chief of
the prophets (S).

Nothing else is intended from this tradition and other traditional
reports like this except that all the opponents and supporters who are
inclined to traditions like this. So when they become successful in this
journey due to this book they should aspire to become aware of the whole
matter. Then they must become familiar with one who denies, one who
views and one who is in doubt. Through one who accepts they must
increase their insight and one who denies it may have the proof
established upon him by Allah.

Those who are in doubt whether they should accept it or not they must be
invited for discussion on the unseen and the occurrence of occultation.
If it is done it would most probably convince them that discussions
about right matters do not increase anything except emphasis and
evidence. It is like gold that when heated in the fire becomes purer and
more beautiful.

Allah, the Mighty and the High has concealed His great name at the
beginning of the chapter of the Holy Quran.

When you supplicate through them it is accepted and when you ask Allah
through it, you are given what you ask for. Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime mentioned words like: Alif Laam Meem, Alif Laam Meem Raa, Alif
Laam Raa, Alif Laam Meem Saad, Kaaf Haa Yaa Ain Saad, Haa Meem Ain Seen
Qaaf, Taa Seen Meem, Taa Seen and Yaaseen etc, for two reasons. One is
because of the veil on eyes of infidels and polytheists from remembrance
of Allah and the Messenger. The Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا رَّسُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder, An Apostle…***[^2]

The infidels and polytheists did not have the capability to hear the
Quran, so the Almighty Allah revealed the great name in different
letters at the beginning of some chapters. These were letters of their
language and they were not familiar with those broken letters. When they
heard whose words they were astounded and they said that they would hear
that which will come after it with attention. After that they heard the
following verses with attention.

Thus the proof was established for the deniers and the insight of those
who agreed to it was increased. Some people remained in doubts who only
had the courage to argue in a doubtful matter and not reach to the
proper conclusion even after that.

The second purpose of revealing the broken letters at the beginning of
some chapters was that so that the persons of infallibility and purity
maybe specialized with them through which they may establish the proof
and by them they may show miracles. If the Almighty Allah had made the
knowledge of those letters common for all the people, it would have been
against wisdom and would have corrupted the divine plan.

No one from the fallibles could be trustworthy that he should have
prayed through these letters against the messenger prophet or the tested
believers. It would also not have been proper for Allah to not have
accepted the supplication because He has promised it and it would have
been going against His word.

Therefore it was only proper for Him to give the knowledge of these
letters to few persons who may become an exemplar for the people. And
not those who may exceed the limits like Balam Baoor. When he wanted to
pray against Prophet Musa (a.s.) he forgot the Great Name and had to
flee from there. It is mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ الَّذِيَ آتَيْنَاهُ آيَاتِنَا فَانسَلَخَ
مِنْهَا فَأَتْبَعَهُ الشَّيْطَانُ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And recite to them the narrative of him to whom We give Our
communications, but he withdraws himself from them, so the Shaitan
overtakes him, so he is of those who go astray.***[^3]

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime did this so that people may know
excellence is only for one who has knowledge as he is eligible for it.
He did not make it free for all as the same thing is expected from
common people as was seen from Balam Baoor.

Thus when it is possible for the Almighty Allah to conceal His Great
Name in the letters at the beginning of some chapters of His Book which
is His Proof, it is also possible for Him to conceal His Proof from the
believers and others because Allah, the Mighty and Sublime knows when He
would not reveal him till the majority of the people do not act against
the divine commands and become eligible for execution. But their killing
shall not be permissible if their loins have believers. And if the Proof
of Allah does not kill them it was also not be right as they must be
deserving death.

In such circumstances occultation becomes a necessity. When they all
separate and their loins contain no more believers Allah will reveal His
Proof and he will eliminate His enemies. Don’t you see that if a married
woman commits fornication and becomes pregnant she is not stoned to
death till she does not give birth to the child and suckles it for the
prescribed period except that a Muslim man may take up the
responsibility of its guardianship during the period of suckling.

The came condition applies to the one who has a believer in his loins
but at the same time he is eligible for death penalty. In that case also
he is not killed till the believer child comes out from him and no one
knows this except the Almighty Allah and His Divine Proofs and none else
can establish divine penalties. That is why Amirul Momineen (a.s.) did
not take up arms against his enemies for 25 years after the passing away
of the Messenger of Allah (S).

Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masroor (r.a.) that: Narrated to
us Husain bin Muhammad bin Aamir from his uncle, Abdullah bin Aamir from
Muhammad bin Abu Amr from one who mentioned it to Abi Abdullah (a.s.)
that he asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.) why Amirul Momineen (a.s.) did not
take up arms against his opponents during the initial period of his
tenure. The Imam replied:

“Due to the following verse of Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوتَزَيَّلُواْلَعَذَّبْنَ االَّذِينَكَفَرُا امِنْهُمْعَذَابًاأَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Had they been widely separated one from another, We would surely have
punished those who disbelieved from among them with a painful
punishment.***[^4]

The narrator says that he asked what was the meaning of the word
‘’تَزَيَّلُو. The Imam replied that it implies those believing trusts
present in the loins of the infidels.”

In the same way the reappearance of Qaim (a.s.) will not take place till
the trusts of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime are not born. When those
trusts take birth, the Imam will appear to the enemies of Allah and
eliminate them all.

Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi; he said: Narrated
to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father; he from Ali bin
Muhammad from Ahmad bin Muhammad from Hasan bin Mahboob from Ibrahim
Karkhi that he said:

I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.) or someone asked him: “May Allah give you
good reward, was Ali (a.s.) not firm in the religion of Allah?” He
replied: “Yes, he was firm and strong.” The narrator asked, “Then how
could the people subdue him and he did not defend himself and neither
did he stop them?” The Imam said, “There is a verse in the Book of Allah
which stopped him from it.” “What verse is that,” asked the narrator.
Imam (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْتَزَيَّلُوالَعَذَّبْنَاالَّذِينَكَفَرُوامِنْهُمْعَذَابًاأَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Had they been widely separated one from another, We would surely have
punished those who disbelieved from among them with a painful
punishment.***[^5]

It was so because the believing trusts of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
were present in the loins of the infidels and hypocrites, therefore it
was not possible for Ali (a.s.) to kill their ancestors till the trusts
do not take birth. When the trusts came out Ali (a.s.) attacked them and
eliminated them. In the same way the reappearance of our Qaim (a.s.)
will not take place till the trusts of Allah do not take birth. After
that he would subdue his opponents and eliminate them.”

Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Samarqandi Alawi:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father that he
said: Narrated to us Jibraeel Ibne Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid
from Yunus bin Abdur Rahman from Mansur bin Hazim that he asked Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) about the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْتَزَيَّلُوالَعَذَّبْنَاالَّذِينَكَفَرُوامِنْهُمْعَذَابًاأَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Had they been widely separated one from another, We would surely have
punished those who disbelieved from among them with a painful
punishment.***[^6]

The Imam said: If the Almighty Allah removes the believers from the
loins of the infidels, He would punish the infidels.

The report about people who lived to a long age was mentioned to us by
Abul Hasan Ali bin Abdullah bin Ahmad Faqih Aswari in Ilaaq. He said:
Narrated to us Makki bin Ahmad Barzai that he said: I heard Ishaq bin
Ibrahim Tartoosi say:

“I reached the house of Yahya bin Mansur at the age of 97 years to see
the Indian king of Kanauj, Sarbanik. We asked him his age. He said that
his age was nine hundred and twenty-five years and that he was a Muslim.
He narrated: The Messenger of Allah (S) sent ten of his companions to
me, including Huzaifa bin Yaman, Amr bin Aas, Usamah bin Zaid, Abu Musa
Ashari, Sahib Rumi and Safinah etc. They invited me to Islam and I
accepted it. When he kissed the letters of the Holy Prophet (S) I asked
him: In spite of your physical weakness, how do you sit for the ritual
prayer? He replied: the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِين َيَذْكُرُون َاللّه َقِيَامً اوَقُعُودًاوَعَلَى َجُنُوبِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on their
sides***[^7]***.***

I asked him: What is your diet? He said: I need a little once a week. I
asked him about his teeth and he said: They have changed twenty times.
In his stable I saw an animal larger than an elephant which is called
Zind Feel. I said: In what way do you make use of it? He replied: He
carries the dirty clothes of the servants to the washer man.

The extent of his kingdom was having length and breadth of four years of
travel and his capital was fifty farsakhs from all sides. On every gate
there were 120000 troops so that if any attack is launched from there
they may tackle it effectively without needing enforcements. The king
himself stayed at the center of his capital. I heard him say: I reached
a western country and saw a desert in which there was no vegetation.
After traveling for sometime I reached the people of Musa (a.s.) the
roof of their houses were equal in height and the store houses of
rations were located outside the town.

They brought home some rations and left the rest in the store houses.
The graves of their dead were inside their houses and their orchards
were located at a distance of two farsakhs. None of them were old in age
and I did not see any of them ill or on the verge of death.

There was a market also where one would go if one wanted anything and
weigh and take whatever one liked without the shop owner being present
there. When they wanted to pray they would come, pray and then go back.
There were no fights among them ever; they spent all the time in prayers
and never talked of anything except about God and death.”

The author (r.a.) says: If our opponents consider the life of Sarbanak,
the king of India as possible they must not present any excuse with
regard to the age of the Proof of Allah and there is no power and
strength except by Allah.

[^1]: This is other than the Luqman who lived during the time of Prophet
Dawood (a.s.).

[^2]: Surah Talaq 65:10-11

[^3]: Surah Araaf 7:175

[^4]: Surah Fath 48:25

[^5]: Surah Fath 48:25

[^6]: Surah Fath 48:25

[^7]: Surah Aale Imran 3:191


