Chapter 55: Narrations about the Reward for Waiting for Reappearance
====================================================================

1 -Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi (r.a.) said:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to us Ja’far bin
Muhammad: Narrated to me Amraki bin Ali Bufakki from Hasan bin Ali bin
Faddal from Thalaba bin Maimoon from Musa Numyari from Alaa Ibne Sayaba
from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Those of you who die (with belief) on this matter (of reappearance),
awaiting it; are like those who are in the tent of the Qaim (a.s.).”

2 - And through the same chain of narrators from Thalaba from Umar bin
Aban from Abdul Hameed Wasiti that he said to Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin
Ali al-Baqir (a.s.):

“May God bless you, we have stopped going to the markets in anticipation
of the reappearance. The Imam said: O Abdul Hamid do you think that
Allah will not open the way for one who controls his self for His sake?
No, by Allah, Allah will indeed open a way for him. May Allah have mercy
on one who controls his self for our sake.

May Allah have mercy on one who keeps our matter alive. I asked: What if
I die before the time of Imam Qaim? He replied: If one of you makes an
intention that he is present in the time of Qaim of Aale Muhammad, he
will render help to him, he is like the one who fights in his company;
rather he is like one who is martyred in his company.

3 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud from
Ja’far bin Maroof that he said: Informed us Muhammad Ibne Husain from
Ja’far bin Basheer from Musa bin Bakr Wasiti from Abil Hasan from his
ancestors (a.s.): The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The best deed of my Ummah is to await for the reappearance from Allah.”

4 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Abdul
Hameed from Muhammad bin Fudhail that he asked Abil Hasan ar-Reza (a.s.)
regarding reappearance and he said:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait***[^1]***.***

5 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud that
he said: Narrated to me Abu Salih Khalaf bin Hammad Kashshi that he
said: Narrated to us Sahl bin Ziyad: Narrated to me Muhammad bin Husain
from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi Nasr that he said: Ar-Reza (a.s.) said:

“How good is patience and awaiting for the reappearance? Have you not
heard Allah, the Mighty and Sublime say?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْتَقِبُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And watch, surely I too am watching with you***[^2]***.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانتَظِرُواْ إِنِّي مَعَكُم مِّنَ الْمُنتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait***[^3]***.***

Thus you must be patient because there is deliverance after despair and
those before you were more patient than you.”

6 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar from Ahmad bin Isa from
Qasim bin Yahya from his grandfather Hasan bin Rashid from Abi Baseer
and Muhammad bin Muslim from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) from his ancestors from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“One who awaits for the reappearance of our Qaim is like one who writhes
in his blood in the path of Allah.”

7 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Haider bin Muhammad and Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Masud that they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to us
Qasim bin Hisham Luluai: Narrated to us Hasan bin Mahboob from Hisham
bin Saalim from Ammar Sabati that he said: I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“I asked Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him: ‘Which is better, worship in
secret with a hidden Imam from among you during government by an illegal
ruler, or worship in during the manifestation of the Truth and its
government with the manifest Imam from among you?’ He said: O Ammar,
giving sadaqah in secret is better, by Allah, than giving it openly;
similarly, by Allah, your worship in secret with your hidden Imam during
government by an illegal ruler, and your fear of your enemy during
government by an illegal ruler and in a state of truce with your enemy,
is better than that you should worship Allah, may remembrance of Him be
made Mighty and Majestic, during the manifestation of the Truth with the
Imam of Truth which is manifest during the government of Truth.

Worship while you fear during government by an illegal ruler is not the
same as worship and security during the government of Truth. Know that
whoever of you now prays a prescribed prayers at its hour in
congregation, thereby concealing himself from his enemy, and completes
it correctly, Allah will register rewards for having completed fifty
prescribed prayers in congregation; and that whoever of you prays a
prescribed prayers at its hour by himself, thereby concealing himself
from his enemy, and completes it correctly, Allah to Whom belong Might
and Majesty, will register thereby reward for having completed
twenty-five prescribed prayers recited alone; and that whoever of you
prays a supererogatory prayers at its hour and completes it correctly,
Allah will register thereby reward for having completed ten
supererogatory prayers; and that whoever of you performs a good deed,
Allah to Whom belong Mighty and Majesty, will register reward for having
performed twenty good deeds; and Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty, will handsomely double [the reward] of the good deeds of the
believer among you when he does good deeds and practices Taqayyah with
regard to his religion, his Imam and himself, and keeps his tongue in
check; for Allah , to Whom belong Might and Majesty is Generous.’

“I said: ‘May I be made your ransom, by Allah you have encouraged me to
do good deeds, and spurred me on to them, but I should like to know how
we shall be better in [our] deeds at this time than the companions of
the manifest Imam from among you during the government of Truth, since
we are of a single religion?’

He said: “Indeed, you outstrip them in involvement in the religion of
Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, and in prayers, fasting, hajj
and in every good deed and knowledge, and in worshipping Allah, may
remembrance of Him be made Mighty and Majestic, secretly from your
enemy, while concealing the truth about your Imam, being obedient to him
and being patient with him, awaiting the government of the Truth,
apprehensive about your Imam and yourselves before oppressive
sovereigns.

You see the rights of your Imam and your own rights in the hands of the
oppressors: they take them away from you and force you to work hard on
the land and struggle to make a livelihood, and be patient about your
religion, your worship, obedience to your Imam and fear of your enemy.
For this, Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, will double the
reward for your actions for you, may it be pleasing to you.’

“I said: ‘May I be your ransom, what do you think? That we should be
companions of al-Qaim and [see] the Truth manifest itself, or that
today, in your Imamate, obedient to you, we are better in [our] deeds
than the contemporaries of the government of Truth and Justice?’ He
said: “Glory be to Allah! Do you not wish that Allah the blessed, the
sublime, should make the Truth and Justice appear in the lands?

That Allah should cause people’s speech to harmonize, and that Allah
should unite the diverse hearts of people? That they should not rebel
against Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, in His land? That His
restriction should apply among His creatures, and that Allah should
return the rights to His people so that it may become manifest, so that
nothing of the Truth might be concealed through fear of any one of His
creatures?

By Allah, O Ammar, indeed no one among you will die in the condition you
are in, but he will be more perfect before Allah than many of the
martyrs of Badr and Uhud. May you rejoice!’ “

8 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abi
Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai from Husain bin
Yazid Naufali from Abi Ibrahim Kufi that he said:

“I went to Abu Abdillah Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Al-Sadiq (a.s.) and was
sitting in his presence when Abu Al-Hasan Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) entered
while he was a boy. I stood up, kissed him and sat with him. Then Abu
Abdillah (a.s.) remarked, ‘O Ibrahim! Know that, he is your master after
me. Know that, concerning him one group will be destroyed while another
will be saved.

Then may Allah curse his killer and multiply His chastisement for the
one who fights against him. Know that, certainly Allah will bring out
from his progeny the best of the inhabitants of the earth in his time.
He will be named after his grandfather, he will be the inheritor of this
knowledge and his laws in his judgments, the treasure-chest of Imamate
and the fountainhead of wisdom.

The tyrant king of Bani (Abbas) will kill him after his amazing acts,
due to envy. But Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) will convey His
affairs even if the polytheists dislike it. And Allah will bring forth
from his progeny the completion of twelve Mahdi (guided leaders). Allah
has chosen them for His nobility, permitted for them the abode of His
Holiness and the twelfth awaited one is from them, as if with an open
sword standing in front of the Messenger of Allah (S) in his defense.’

Then a person from the friends of Bani Umayyah entered due to which Imam
had to cut short his speech. I returned to Abu Abdillah (a.s.) eleven
times that he may complete his talk but was unable to do so. In the
coming year, which was the second year, I went to him while he was
sitting. He said, ‘O Ibrahim! He is the one who will provide salvation
to his Shias after intense straitening, lengthy calamities, grief and
fear. Then congratulations to him who finds his time. This is enough for
you O Ibrahim.’ Ibrahim said, ‘Then nothing was dearer to my heart or
soothed my eyes more than this talk.’”

[^1]: Surah Araaf 7:71

[^2]: Surah Hud 11:93

[^3]: Surah Araaf 7:71


