Chapter 56: Prohibition of uttering the name of al-Qaim (a.s.)
==============================================================

1 -Narrated to us my father: Narrated to me Saad bin Abdullah from
Yaqoob bin Yazid from Hasan bin Mahboob from Ali bin Riyab from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The master of this affair is the man whom none will address be name
except the disbeliever.”

2 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Ali bin Hasan bin Faddal from Riyyan
bin Salt that he said: I asked ar-Reza (a.s.) about the Qaim (a.s.); he
said:

“Neither his person will be visible nor his name pronounced.”

3 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Ismail bin Aban from Amr bin Shimr from
Jabir bin Yazid Jofi that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“Umar asked Amirul Momineen (a.s.) about the Mahdi: O Ibne Abi Talib
tell me about the Mahdi, what his name is?

He replied: As for his name; I cannot tell you that. Indeed my dearest
one and my friend has taken oath from me not to mention his name till
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime does not raise him and these are from the
matters that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has given to His Messenger in
his knowledge.”

4 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Ahmad Alawi from Abi Hashim Ja’fari that he said: I heard
Abul Hasan Askari (a.s.) [Imam Hadi] say:

“The Imam after me is my son, Hasan. How will you behave with his son? I
said: May I be sacrificed on you, why did you ask that? He replied:
Neither will you be able to see him nor uttering his name will be
allowed for you. I asked: Then how do we mention him? He replied: The
Proof from Aale Muhammad (S).”


