Chapter 57: Signs of the reappearance of al-Qaim (a.s.)
=======================================================

1 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari
from Ibrahim bin Mahziyar from his brother Ali from Husain bin Saeed
from Safwan bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hakam from Maimoon Alban from
Abi Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.):

“Five signs will become manifest before the reappearance of the Qaim:
Advent of Yamani and Sufyani, call from the sky, the sinking of Baida
land and the killing of the Pure Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah).”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar from Abbas bin Maroof from Ali
bin Mahziyar from Abdullah bin Muhammad Hajjal from Thalaba bin Maimoon
from Shuaib Hadhdha from Salih, freed slave of Bani Azra that he said: I
heard Abi Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“There will be only a gap of fifteen days between the rising of the Qaim
of Aale Muhammad and the killing of the Pure Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah).”

3 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari
from Ahmad bin Hilal from Hasan bin Mahboob from Abi Ayyub Khazzaz and
Alaa bin Razeen from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said: I heard Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“Before the rising of the Qaim, Allah will appoint signs for the
believers. I asked: What are those, may I be sacrificed on you? He
replied: They are mentioned in the saying of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is before the advent of the Qaim the believers will be tested
through fear and hunger and loss of property and lives and fruits; and
give good news to the patient.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ الْخَوْفِ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِنَ
الْأَمْوَالِ وَالْأَنْفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ ۗ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient,*** [^1]

He said: The believers will be tested through the fear of the last ruler
of Bani so-and-so. Hunger through rise in prices. Loss of property and
lives and fruits means loss in business and agriculture. And give good
news to the patient means those who await for the reappearance.”

4 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Husain bin Hasan Ibne Aban from Husain bin Saeed
from Nadhr bin Suwaid from Yahya Halabi from Harith bin Mughaira Basri
from Maimoon Alban that he said:

“I was with Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in his tent. He lifted the
opening of the tent and said: ‘Our Wilayat is clearer than this sun.’
Then he said: ‘A caller will call out from the sky that so and so son of
so and so is Imam. And he would call out his name. While Iblees, may
Allah curse him, would call out from the earth, in the same way as he
had called the Holy Prophet (S) on the night of Uqbah.’”

5 - And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Safwan bin Yahya from Isa bin Ayyan from Mualla bin Khunais from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed the advent of Sufyani is a certain matter and it shall take
place in the month of Rajab.”

6 - And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Umar from Abi Ayyub from Harith bin
Mughaira from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The call from the sky shall be raised on the 23rd night of the month of
Ramadhan.”

7 - And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Umar bin Hanzala that he said: I heard Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“Five signs will become manifest before the reappearance of the Qaim:
Advent of Yamani and Sufyani, call from the sky, the killing of the Pure
Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah) and the sinking of Baida land.”

8 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Ja’far bin Basheer from
Hisham bin Saalim from Zurarah from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“A caller will call out in the name of the Qaim.” I asked: “Will it be
for some people or for all?” He replied: “It would be for all. And every
community will hear it in its own language.” I asked: “Would the
opponents of Qaim be also called in his name?” “No,” he said, “For them
Iblees will call out at the end of the night and put suspicion in the
hearts of the people.”

9 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.) that he said:
Narrated to us my uncle Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Umar bin Uzaina that he said: Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) said to me: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“The son of the liver-eater will come out from the valley of Yabis. He
shall be of medium height. His face will be horrible. He will be fat.
His face will be pockmarked. He will be one-eyed. His name will be
Uthman and his father’s name will be Anbasa. He will be from the progeny
of Abu Sufyan. He will camp in Kufa where he will sit on the pulpit.”

10 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani: Narrated to us
Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father Ibrahim bin Hashim from
Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Hammad bin Uthman from Umar Ibne Yazid that
he said: Abi Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) said to me:

“If you have seen Sufyani you have seen the most horrible man. He is
red, blond and blue. He will say: My Lord, I will take revenge even if I
have to go to Hell. The extent of his evil is that he would bury alive
his slave mother so that she may not reveal his true ancestry.”

11 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abil Qasim
Majilaway from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi: Narrated to us Husain bin Sufyan
from Qutaibah Ibne Muhammad from Abdullah bin Abi Mansur Bajali that he
said: I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.) about the name of Sufyani. He replied:

“Why do you want to know his name? When he conquers the districts of
Shaam, Hams, Palestine, Jordan and Qanassireen, you wait for the
reappearance.” I asked: “Would he rule for nine months?” He replied:
“No, only for eight months and not a day more.”

12 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ali Ansari from Abi Salt Harawi that he said: I
asked ar-Reza (a.s.):

“What would be the sign of your Qaim when he reappears?” He replied: “He
will be advanced in age but he will seem like a young man. Whoever sees
him will say that he is forty or less. The rotation of days and nights
does not affect him till his last.”

13 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.) from his uncle
Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from his father from
Abi Maghra from Mualla bin Khunais from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said:

“The call of Jibraeel will come from the sky and the voice of Iblees
will come from the earth. So you must obey the first call and do not pay
attention to the second since it would be to spread mischief.”

14 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan
bin Mahboob from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said: I asked His Eminence,
Abu Abdillah Sadiq (a.s.): Abu Ja’far (Imam Baqir a.s.) says: The advent
of Sufyani is inevitable. He replied:

“Yes, and the conflict of Bani Abbas, the killing of the Pure Soul
(Nafs-e-Zakiyya), the advent of Qaim (a.s.) are among the inevitable
occurrences. I asked: How would the call be? He said: On the first day
the caller will call out from the sky: Indeed, the truth is with Ali and
his Shias. After that Iblees, may Allah curse him, will call at the end
of the day that: Indeed, the truth is with Sufyani and his followers.
Thus at that time those who are inclined to falsehood will fall into
doubt.”

15 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Husain bin
Hasan bin Aban from Husain bin Saeed from Safwan bin Yahya from Isa bin
Ayyan from Mualla bin Khunais from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed the advent of Sufyani is inevitable and it shall take place in
the month of Rajab.”

16 - And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Umar from Abi Ayyub from Harith bin
Mughaira from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“There will be a call from the sky on Friday eve on the 23rd of the
month of Ramadhan.”

17 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa (r.a.): Narrated to us Abi
Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ismail Barmaki: Narrated to
us Ismail bin Malik from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abil Jarud Ziyad bin
Mundhir from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali Baqir from his father from his
grandfather that he said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said from the pulpit:

“A man from my descendants would appear in the last period of time. His
complexion would be fair with a reddish hue and he would have a broad
stomach, his thighs would be big. And his sides would be broad. He would
have two moles, one skin colored and the other like the seal of
prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S).

He would have two names, one is confidential and the other, popular. His
secret name is Ahmad and his known name is Muhammad. When he hoists and
waves his flag he would illuminate the east and the west. He would
stroke the heads of the people. Thus there would not remain any believer
but that his heart would become as a strong as a mountain of steel and
Allah, the Mighty and the High would give each of them the strength of
forty men.

And no corpse would remain but that the celebration of his reappearance
would reach its grave as the believers in the grave also would see him
in their graves and they would greet each other upon the reappearance of
Qaim (a.s.).”

18 - And from the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Sinan from
Amr bin Shimr from Jabir from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“Knowledge of the book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and the Sunnah
of His Messenger develops in the heart of our Mahdi, just as a plant
grows to perfection. Thus whosoever of you survives till he sees him,
when you meet him you must greet him by the words: “Peace be on you, O
folks of the house of mercy and prophethood and the mine of knowledge
and the abode of messengership.”

In another narration the Imam is saluted as follows: Peace be on you O
the remnant of Allah on His earth.

19 - Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees (r.a.): Narrated to us
my father from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Husain bin Saeed from Ali
bin Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer that he said: Abu Ja’far (a.s.) said:

“The advent of the Qaim shall take place on a Saturday, the day of
Ashura; that is the day of the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.).”

20 - And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Ibne Abi Umair from Abi Ayyub from Abi Baseer that he said: A man from
Kufa asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“With how many men would the Qaim arise? It is said that he will appear
with 313 persons, equal to the martyrs of Badr?” The Imam said: “He will
not appear till he has the required number of people and that number is
not less than 10000.”

21 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar: Narrated to
us my father from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Abi Khalid Qammat from Dhuraith from Abi Khalid Kabuli from
the Chief of the Worshippers, Ali bin Husain (a.s.) that he said:

“The first people to reach the Imam will be 313 persons, equal to the
number of the martyrs of Badr. From wherever they start they shall be in
Mecca in the morning. And that is the interpretation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together.***[^2]

And they are the companions of the Qaim.”

22 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Yahya al-Attar from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Safwan
bin Yahya from Mandal from Bakkar bin Abi Bakr from Abdullah bin Ijlan
that he said:

We were discussing the advent of the Qaim in the company of Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) when I asked him: “How would we know about this?” He replied:
“When you get up in the morning, a slip of paper will be found below
your head with the following written on it: Obedience with recognition.”

And it is narrated that the following shall be written on the banner of
Imam Mahdi (a.s.): The Allegiance is for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

23 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim from his
father from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Amr bin Abil Miqdam from his
father from Ubaid bin Karb that he said: I heard Ali (a.s.) say:

“There is a flag for us; and one who goes ahead of it is a transgressor
and one who lags behind it, is destroyed and one who follows it would
achieve the truth.”

24 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Abi
Abdullah Barqi that he said: Narrated to me my father from his
grandfather Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi from his father Muhammad bin
Khalid from Ibrahim bin Uqbah from Zakariya from his father from Amr bin
Abil Miqdam from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“A fool from the Bani Abbas will be murdered secretly. The cause of his
death shall be that he would have married a eunuch who will slay him
when he get an opportunity. This murder will remain unreported for forty
days before it would be discovered. So the police will go out in search
of this eunuch but they will not return before the downfall of their
rule.”

25 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Husain bin
Hasan Aban from Husain bin Saeed from Nadhr bin Suwaid from Yahya Halabi
from Hakam Hannat from Muhammad bin Hammam from Ward from Abi Ja’far
(a.s.) that he said:

“Two signs will be seen before the reappearance: there will be a lunar
eclipse for five days and there will be solar eclipse for fifteen days.
Such a phenomenon has not taken place since the arrival of Adam (a.s.)
on the earth. At that time the calculations of the astrologers will
fail.”

26 -And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Nadhr bin Suwaid from Yahya Halabi from Muammar bin Yahya from Abi
Khalid Kabuli from Ali bin Husain (a.s.) that he said:

“The Bani Abbas will establish a city on the banks of the Euphrates.
Their kingdom will last for a year after this.”

27 - And through the same chain of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from
Safwan bin Yahya from Abdur Rahman Ibne Hajjaj from Sulaiman bin Khalid
that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The reappearance of the Qaim will be preceded by two types of death:
the red death and the white death. Five out of seven people will perish
through this. The red death is killing by the sword and the white death
is plague.”

28 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us Ali
bin Husain Sadabadi from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid from his father
from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Abi Ayyub from Abi Baseer from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“There will be a solar eclipse on the 5th of Ramadhan preceding the
reappearance of the Qaim.”

29 - And through the same chain of narrators from Abi Ayyub from Abi
Baseer and Muhammad bin Muslim that they said: We heard Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) say:

“It will not take place till two-third of human population does not
perish.” He was asked: “If two-third perish, who will remain?” He
replied: “Are you not satisfied that one-third will remain?”

Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali Babawahy the author of this book says: I
have mentioned the signs of reappearance of Qaim (a.s.), his biography
and whatever will occur during his time in the book As Sirrul Maktoom
Ilal Waqtul Maaloom. And there is no power and strength except by Allah
the High and the Mighty.

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:155

[^2]: Surah Baqarah 2:148


