Chapter 58: Miscellany
======================

1 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Harun Qadhi and Ja’far bin Masroor and Ali
bin Husain bin Shazan Muaddab - May Allah be pleased with them – they
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far Ibne Jame Himyari:
Narrated to us my father from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab
Daqqaq from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said:
As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) was asked regarding the words of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْعَصْرِ إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I swear by the time, Most surely man is in loss.***[^1]

He replied: The time is the time of the reappearance of the Qaim (a.s.).
‘Most surely man is in loss’ means our enemies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَتَوَاصَوْا
بِالْحَقِّ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالصَّبْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Except those who believe and do good, and enjoin on each other truth,
and enjoin on each other patience.***[^2]

Means: those who believe (in our signs) and do good (by acting equitably
with the brothers), and enjoin on each other truth (of Imamate), and
enjoin on each other patience (during the period when no prophet is
there).”

The author says: Some people argue with us on the basis of the word of
‘Fatara’ in the above tradition. They mean to say that just as there is
no prophet between the period of two prophets, in the same way there is
no Imam during the period of ‘Fatara’.

Thus I beseech the Almighty to bestow good sense that such a theory is
against most of the traditions that state that the earth cannot remain
devoid of the Proof of Allah till the Judgment Day. and it has never
remained thus from the time of Adam (a.s.) till now. These are the well
known traditions that are mentioned in this book and which are famous
among the Shias and other sects and no one had denied them; and neither
can any denier falsify them nor can any interpreter interpret them in
some other way.

All are unanimous till date that the earth cannot be devoid of an Imam
who is alive, whether he is apparent and visible or in occultation. Thus
neither Imamate has discontinued nor its discontinuation permissible. It
is continuous like the continuation of the days and nights.

Narrated to me my father; he said: narrated to me Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Ali bin Hakam and Ali bin Hasan from
Nafe Warraq from Harun bin Kharja from Harun bin Saad Ajali that he
said:

“Ismail, about who you thought that he would be the Imam after Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), died. And Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has also reached
old age and he will also pass away one of these days. After that you
will become without any Imam. I could not give him any reply. So I
mentioned his statement to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.).

He said: “I am surprised at this man. By Allah, if Imamate stops, the
days and the nights will come to an end. When you meet him next time
tell him that Musa Ibne Ja’far will be the Imam after me. After him, his
son will succeed him, if Allah wills.”

In this narration Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has stated under oath that
the matter of Imamate cannot end till the days and nights continue to
follow each other. Hence, the period of Fatara is allowed between
messengers because among the duties of the messengers is that they bring
a new Shariat, they renew the past Shariat and through some commands
they abrogate some laws.

But the period of Fatara is not allowed between prophets and Imams
because they neither bring a new Shariat nor is it their responsibility
to abrogate or renew. And we know that during the periods between
Prophet Nuh and Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.), between Prophet Ibrahim and
Prophet Musa (a.s.), between Prophet Musa and Prophet Isa (a.s.) and
between Prophet Isa and Prophet Muhammad (S) a large number of prophets
and successors were sent and their duty was to remind the people about
the divine commands and to protect the bequests, books and sciences that
have reached them through the messengers.

And all the messengers from them had propagated the matters that reached
them from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and the successors of those
prophets guarded those sciences and wills. When the Almighty Allah ended
the prophethood with Prophet Muhammad (S) it was necessary that there
should be a guide and a successor who would protect the religion of
truth and propagate the faith because the earth cannot remain without
Divine Proof.

That is why the Almighty Allah started the institution of Imamate after
him; which is systematic and continuous because it cannot be allowed
that the heritage of the prophets and messengers, the sciences of
Muhammad, his Shariat, duties, practices and commands should be
destroyed or be abrogated while no messenger was to follow the Holy
Prophet (S).

The Imam is not like a prophet or a messenger, and neither do they call
for the Shariat of anyone except Prophet Muhammad (S); that is why it is
not allowed that there be a period of Fatara between two Imams. Fatara
is allowed only between two messengers and not between two Imams. Hence
it is obligatory that there should be an Imam who is presented along
with proof.

In the same way it is necessary that if there is a period of Fatara
between two messengers during that period it is necessary that there
should be an Imam and successor who is the proof on the people so that
he may call the people to the teachings of that messenger that has come
from the Almighty Allah and that he may awaken the people from the
slumber of ignorance and mentioned those things that they do not know so
that they may know that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has not left them
in vain and that he has not erased their remembrance from the surface of
the earth and He has not left them in any doubt with regard to their
religion and He has also not left them in perplexity with regard to the
duties that He has made obligatory on them. Prophethood and
messengership is the Divine practice (sunnat) while Imamate is an
obligation on the Almighty Allah.

Thus a sunnat can be stopped in some circumstances but the obligation
cannot be over after the Messenger of Allah (S). Thus Imamate is that
great duty through which recommended and obligatory duties may be
established. The religion can be perfected and the bounty can be
completed. Because after the Holy Prophet (S) the series of prophethood
came to an end, therefore now the Holy Imams (a.s.) are those
personalities who can guide the people to the right religion.

And they make the way of salvation compulsory and save them from
destruction. They teach them the divine laws that they may have
forgotten. They guide the people through the book of Allah to achieve
guidance. It is through them that religion is protected and kept above
doubts. And falsehood does not enter the fulfillment of the obligations
specified by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and the laws of Allah shall
endure forever, there shall no change in them.

Prophethood and messengership is the Divine practice (sunnat) while
Imamate is an obligation on the Almighty Allah. And the divine
obligations became known to us through the Holy Prophet (S) and they are
incumbent on us and there would be no change in them till the Judgment
Day.

Yes, we also do not deny the tradition that during the period of Fatara
between Prophet Muhammad (S) and Prophet Isa (a.s.) there was no prophet
or successor. We do not deny it and we say: This report is correct but
we do not agree to the interpretation our opponents present regarding
the discontinuity of prophets and messengers.

Fatara means a time when no messenger, prophet or successor is apparent
and well known as it was before that time. It is also proved by Quran
that the Almighty Allah sent Prophet Muhammad (S) at a time when no
messenger had come for a long time and not at the time when there was no
prophet or successor.

Between Prophet Isa (a.s.) and Prophet Muhammad (S) many prophets and
Imams came who remained in hiding due to the fear of the people. Among
them was also the prophet, Khalid bin Sinan Absasi who none can deny
because traditions about him are found in the Shia as well as Sunni
collections. His daughter was alive till the time of the Holy Prophet
(S), and she came to meet him.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: She is the daughter of the prophet whom his
community had weakened and that was Khalid bin Sinan.’ There was a
period of fifty years between him and the appointment of the Holy
Prophet (S). His full name was Khalid bin Sinan Baeeth bin Mureet bin
Makhzoom bin Malik bin Ghaib bin Qatiya bin Abas. A group of scholars
and jurisprudents has mentioned this fact to me.”

Narrated to me Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid, that he said:
Narrated to me Saad bin Abdullah from Muhammad bin Walid Khazzaz and
Sandi bin Muhammad Bazzaz, the two of them from Muhammad bin Abi Umair
from Aban bin Uthman Ahmar from Bashir Nabbal from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When the daughter of Khalid bin Sinan Abasi came to the Messenger of
Allah (S) he said: Welcome, the daughter of my brother. He called her
near and spread out his cloak for her and made her sit near him. Then he
said: She is the daughter of the prophet whose community had weakened
him and that was Khalid bin Sinan Abasi.”

Her name was Mahiya binte Khalid bin Sinan.

An after that if there had not been the revealed Book and whatever the
Almighty Allah has mentioned to us through the tongue of the Messenger
of Allah (S) regarding which there is unanimity among the Ummah and that
which is related from the Holy Prophet (S). These reports are also in
agreement with the Book of Allah that there will not be any prophet
after the Messenger of Allah (S). It was obligatory in the knowledge of
the Almighty Allah that the people cannot be left without a messenger
who warns them as long as divine duties are incumbent on them. Thus
continuous messengers came for them as the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا تَتْرَىٰ ۖ كُلَّ مَا جَاءَ أُمَّةً
رَسُولُهَا كَذَّبُوهُ ۚ فَأَتْبَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ بَعْضًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then We sent Our apostles one after another; whenever there came to a
people their apostle, they called him a liar, so We made some of them
follow others…***[^3]

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِئَلَّا يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَى اللَّهِ حُجَّةٌ بَعْدَ الرُّسُلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So that people should not have a plea against Allah after the (coming
of) apostles.***[^4]

Because the proof is exhausted on the people only when Allah sends the
messengers as the Almighty Allah has mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لَوْلَا أَرْسَلْتَ إِلَيْنَا رَسُولًا فَنَتَّبِعَ آيَاتِكَ مِنْ
قَبْلِ أَنْ نَذِلَّ وَنَخْزَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Why didst Thou not send to us an apostle, for then we should have
followed Thy communications before that we met disgrace and
shame.***[^5]

Thus Allah sent the messengers to exhaust the proof on the people as the
Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِنْ قَبْلِي بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَبِالَّذِي
قُلْتُمْ فَلِمَ قَتَلْتُمُوهُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Indeed, there came to you apostles before me with clear
arguments and with that which you demand; why then did you kill them if
you are truthful?***[^6]

Thus obligations become incumbent on the people only when there is a
messenger among them who warns them and who may teach them the wisdom
behind the worldly and religious facts. Who may dispense justice to
those who are oppressed and who may take the right of the weak from the
strong. Thus the divine proof is established in this way.

Now when the Almighty Allah has informed us that the chain of prophets
and messengers has ended with Prophet Muhammad (S) and we accepted and
believed that no prophet will come after him, thus there is need of a
system that may take the place of the institution of prophethood and
messengership, through which the divine proof can be established, by
which our ills can be removed. The Almighty Allah said to His Prophet in
Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every people.***[^7]

Thus such a system of guidance will be needed till this world remains
and till there remains the dos and don’ts of religion. And it is
necessary that this guide should not be like us who needs to be guided
aright, who needs to learn manners and morals and who is in need of
others to learn the religious laws. Rather he should be appointed by
Allah and that he should be guided through divine inspiration as the
mother of Prophet Musa (a.s.) was given which saved her and Musa from
Firon and his people.

Thus all the knowledge of the Imam is from Allah and His Messenger. That
is why he is the scholar of the Book of Allah and he knows its
revelations, its interpretation, explanation, its abrogation, its
abrogator, its clear and its ambiguous, its lawful and its prohibited,
its dos and don’ts, its promises and its warnings, its examples and
stories and all this knowledge is from Allah. That is why he does not
use his personal opinion or analogy (Qiyas) because the Almighty Allah
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَىٰ أُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنْبِطُونَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if they had referred it to the Apostle and to those in authority
among them, those among them who can search out the knowledge of it
would have known it.***[^8]

And its proof is that all the sects of Muslims have narrated the
following traditions of the Holy Prophet (S):

“I leave among you that which if you remain attached to it you will
never go astray. The Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and my
progeny my Ahlul Bayt. And they shall not separate from each other till
they reach me at the Pool.”

The Holy Prophet (S) also said:

“You should not teach the Imams of my Ahlul Bayt as they are more
knowledgeable than you.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: We have granted knowledge to them.

He also said that he was leaving his successors for our guidance and the
knowledge of the Book. And the Ummah shall separate from them very soon
except those whom the Almighty Allah protects and whom they consider
necessary and save themselves from deviations and misguidance through
them. And this will be the guarantee that he would be given from the
Almighty Allah if it is not due to some unavoidable circumstances. And
he must not follow that which has not been revealed and that if he
remains attached to the two of them he will never go astray. The two of
them shall not separate till they arrive at the Pool of Kauthar.

The Holy Prophet (S) has said that his community will divide into sects.
One of these sects will be eligible for Paradise and the rest will be
doomed to Hell.

If you put the above two statements together you will conclude that the
sect which follows the Quran and Progeny will be safe from destruction,
as the Holy Prophet (S) has said.

The Messenger of Allah (S) has also said that one who leaves the Quran
and the progeny will exit from my religion like an arrow leaves the bow.
This tells us that what has been left on us is necessary and certain for
our excuse and proof and Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is needless from
sending messengers for us.

We see that after the Messenger of Allah (S) there were numerous
disagreements among the people of the Ummah with regard to the Quran,
the revelation, the chapters, the verses, the recitation, meanings,
interpretation and explanation and everyone based his assertion on the
Quranic verses. So we came to know that the one who has the knowledge of
the Quran in whose need the Ummah is, he is the same one whom the
Messenger of Allah (S) has brought in proximity of the Quran and who
will not separate it till the Judgment Day.

In spite of this it is necessary that there should be proof in the hands
of this companion of Quran and guidance for the people defeated by
proofs who are in need of him. It should display both the things and
both qualities should develop within him. He should have knowledge and
the steadfastness of this guide should be different from the people.

He should be completely needless of them. In this way his recognition
will be a miraculous proof on the people and will be established
properly. People who are defeated by proof will be more eager to confess
to his Imamate so that the true believer is differentiated from a false
infidel by this. Because the one who harbors malice and lies, he does
not accept the evidence readily.

Now the apostates and opponents argue that since all the knowledge is
present in the Quran why do we need a guide? As the Almighty Allah has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have not neglected anything in the Book.***[^9]

In reply we say that indeed everything is mentioned in the Book of Allah
in which there are clear orders, but in some instances there are
contradictions also while contradiction is not possible in the
statements of Allah. As the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِنْدِ غَيْرِ اللَّهِ لَوَجَدُوا فِيهِ اخْتِلَافًا
كَثِيرًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if it were from any other than Allah, they would have found in it
many a discrepancy.***[^10]

Thus it is necessary for those who are duty bound that there should be
someone for him who clarifies the statements of the Quran and removes
ambiguities. As we have seen in the nations of the past that after the
passing away of their prophet they used to fall in discord regarding the
holy book.

And the followers of Torah inspite of having the Torah, the followers of
Zaboor inspite of having the Zaboor and the followers of Injeel inspite
of having the Injeel could not become needless of a guide although
regarding those books the Almighty Allah has said that they there is
guidance and light in them through which the prophets used to command.
Thus these nations were in need of a guide in order to obtain those
commands.

The Almighty Allah did not mention the knowledge present in these books
to the people, but He sent prophets towards them for this purpose. And
for every prophet he appointed a successor and ordered the people that
till the arrival of the next prophet they must obey that successor so
that the proof remains established on them and the successors used to
judge on the basis of the book of Allah as mentioned in Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحْكُمُ بِهَا النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُوا لِلَّذِينَ هَادُوا
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِنْ كِتَابِ
اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***With it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah) judged
(matters) for those who were Jews, and the masters of Divine knowledge
and the doctors, because they were required to guard (part) of the Book
of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof.***[^11]

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime ended the chain of prophets with the Holy
Prophet (S) and appointed in his progeny and Ahlul Bayt guides who may
guide us to the truth. Who may remove our blindness and keep away the
Ummah from discord and disagreements. They are pure of mistakes and sins
and are connected to the book of Allah and we have been ordered to
remain attached to the book of Allah and the progeny of the Holy Prophet
(S) who has also told us that if we remain attached to them we shall
never go astray. If the system of Imamate had not come into being the
purpose of sending the Messenger of Allah (S) would have failed and the
responsibility would have ended on us. The Almighty Allah mentioned this
to His Prophet in the following way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every
people.***[^12]

In this way the Imams are the complete proofs of the Almighty.

The earth has never been devoid of messengers, prophets and successors,
although due to the fear of the enemies some of them did not propagate
openly and they confined their propagation to the believers till the
appointment of Prophet Muhammad (S). The last successor of Prophet Isa
(a.s.) was Aabi and some say that it was Balit.”

Narrated to us my father that: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Muhammad bin Husain bin
Abil Khattab and Yaqoob bin Yazid al-Katib and Ahmad bin Hasan bin Ali
bin Fuddal from Abdullah bin Bukair from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said:

“The name of the last successor of Prophet Isa (a.s.) was Aabi.”

And narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid: Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar and Saad bin Abdullah; all of them from
Yaqoob bin Yazid al-Katib from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from one who
narrated to our associates – from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The name of the last successor of Prophet Isa (a.s.) was Balit.”

And narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): narrated to
us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Haitham Ibne Abi Masrooq Nahdi and
Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar from Ismail bin Sahal from Muhammad bin Abi
Umair from Durust bin Abi Mansur Wasiti and others from Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) that he said:

“Salman Farsi (r.a.) went to many scholars in search of truth. At last
he came to Aabi and he remained with him till Allah wanted. When the
appearance of the Holy Prophet (S) took place Aabi said: O Salman, the
one you are searching for has appeared in Mecca. So Salman (r.a.) went
out towards him.”

Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.); they said:
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah that: Narrated to us a group of our
Kufi associates from Muhammad bin Ismail bin Bazi from Umayyah bin Ali
Qaisi that he said: Narrated to me Durust bin Abi Mansur Wasiti that he
asked Abul Hasan Awwal, that is Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.):

“Was Aabi a divine proof on the Holy Prophet (S)?” He replied, “No,
rather the heirloom of the prophets reached to the Holy Prophet (S)
through Aabi and he accepted it.” I asked, “Was the Holy Prophet (S) a
divine proof on Aabi?” He replied, “He accepted the messengership of the
Holy Prophet (S) and whatever was revealed on him. He conveyed to him
the heirloom of the prophets and died the same day.”

Thus Fatara means secret, hidden and restriction of open propagation and
not the complete absence of a person. As the Almighty Allah has said
with regard to the angels:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُونَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لَا يَفْتُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They glorify (Him) by night and day; they are never languid.***[^13]

Thus if in this verse the meaning of Futoor is the complete
disappearance of a being this verse will become impossible because if
the angels sleep the one who sleeps is absent from the mental aspect.
And the one who sleeps does not glorify Allah as he stops glorifying
when he is asleep. Now sleep is just like death as the Almighty Allah
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنْفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ
فِي مَنَامِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those that die
not during their sleep.***[^14]

The Almighty Allah has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُمْ
بِالنَّهَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He it is Who takes your souls at night (in sleep), and He knows
what you acquire in the day.***[^15]

One who sleeps in the time of Fatara is like dead and that being which
never sleeps or slumbers is the being of the Almighty Allah except whom
there is no god. And the following tradition proves this:

Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to
us Ahmad bin Muhammad Isa from Abbas bin Musa Warraq from Yunus bin
Abdur Rahman from Dawood bin Farqad Attar that he said: Some of our
associates said to me:

“Do the angels sleep?” I said, “I don’t know.” So he said, “Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُونَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لَا يَفْتُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They glorify (Him) by night and day; they are never languid.***[^16]

Then he said, “Shall I mention you something from the sayings of Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) by way of gift?” “Why not?” said I. So he said, “The
Imam said: All those who are alive are asleep except for Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime and the angels.”

I said, “The Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُونَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لَا يَفْتُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They glorify (Him) by night and day; they are never languid.***[^17]

He said, “Their breathing is divine glorification.” Thus Fatara means
not to express dos and don’ts. Arabic lexicology also proves this
meaning. It is often said: So-and-so has ‘Fatara’ (given up)
such-and-such need. Here it denotes giving up ones need not ones
complete absence. Some people present two verses of Quran by way of
argument. The first is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لِتُنْذِرَ قَوْمًا مَا أَتَاهُمْ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before
you.***[^18]

And the other verse is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا آتَيْنَاهُمْ مِنْ كُتُبٍ يَدْرُسُونَهَا وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا
إِلَيْهِمْ قَبْلَكَ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have not given them any books which they read, nor did We send
to them before you a warner.***[^19]

Our opponents use these verses to prove that no prophet, messenger or
Divine Proof came between Prophet Isa (a.s.) and the Holy Prophet (S).
Actually they are misinterpreting these verses. They are talking about a
warner and warners are only messengers and the word of warner is not
used for prophets and successors. As the Almighty Allah says to the Holy
Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every
people.***[^20]

Thus warners are only messengers and the prophets and successors are
called guides. And the statement of Allah: ‘There is a guide for every
people’ itself proves that the earth can never remain devoid of Divine
Proof. It is necessary for the Almighty Allah to appoint prophets and
Divine Proofs for the people of all time and of every community.

Thus for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime it was necessary that till the
divine laws are binding on the people there should be uninterrupted
guidance through prophets and successors as they will fulfill the duty
of warning the people. Although it is possible that the series of
warners may stop as was the case after Prophet Muhammad (S) and no
warner came after him.

Narrated to me my father and Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.); they said:
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain bin
Abil Khattab and Yaqoob bin Yazid, all of them from Hammad bin Isa from
Hariz bin Abdullah from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said:

I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.) regarding the saying of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every
people.***[^21]

He replied: “Every Imam is a guide of his community in his time.”

Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to
us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from his father from Ibne Abi Umair from
Umar bin Uzainah from Buraid bin Muawiyah Ijli that he said:

“I asked Abi Ja’far (a.s.) regarding the meaning of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every
people.***[^22]

He replied: ‘Warner means the Holy Prophet (S) and guide means Ali Ibne
Abi Talib (a.s.). And at every time and in every period there will be an
Imam from us who will call the people towards the teachings of the
Messenger of Allah (S).’”

A large number of traditions like this have been recorded and the words
of Allah when He said to His Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لِتُنْذِرَ قَوْمًا مَا أَتَاهُمْ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before
you.***[^23]

It means that no messenger came to them before that who may have made
changes in the Shariat or community. Neither negation was done to the
guidance of their successors; and how can the Almighty Allah negate this
when He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لَئِنْ جَاءَهُمْ نَذِيرٌ
لَيَكُونُنَّ أَهْدَىٰ مِنْ إِحْدَى الْأُمَمِ ۖ فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ
نَذِيرٌ مَا زَادَهُمْ إِلَّا نُفُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they swore by Allah with the strongest of their oaths that if
there came to them a warner they would be better guided than any of the
nations; but when there came to them a warner it*** ***increased them in
naught but aversion.***[^24]

And we have mentioned other similar narrations in this book. And there
is no strength and power except by Allah, the Mighty and the High.

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari: Narrated to us Hasan bin Zareef from Salih
bin Abi Hammad from Muhammad bin Ismail from Abil Hasan ar-Reza (a.s.)
that he said:

“One who dies without having an Imam, dies the death of the period of
Ignorance.” He was asked, “All those who die without having an Imam die
the death of the period of Ignorance?” He replied: “Yes, the Waqifi
(those who stop) are infidels and the Nasibi (haters) are polytheists.”

3 - Informed me Ali bin Hatim in what he wrote to me that: Narrated to
us Humaid bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Ali bin Sama-a from Ahmad bin Hasan
Muthanna from Sama-a et al from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

The following verse is revealed about the Qaim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلُ فَطَالَ
عَلَيْهِمُ الْأَمَدُ فَقَسَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (that) they should not be like those who were given the Book
before, but the time became prolonged to them, so their hearts hardened,
and most of them are transgressors.***[^25]

4 - And through the same chain of narrators from Ahmad bin Hasan Mithami
from Hasan bin Mahboob from Momin Taq from Salam bin Mustanir from Abi
Ja’far (a.s.) that he said regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُحْيِي الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death.***[^26]

“It means that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will revive it through the
Qaim after its death - that is death due to the disbelief of its
inhabitants – since disbelievers are dead people.”

5 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to us
Abdul Aziz bin Yahya Jaludi Basri: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Zakariya
Jawahiri: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ja’far bin Ammara from his father
from Saad bin Tareef from Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said: I heard
Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) say: I heard the Messenger of
Allah (S) say:

“The most superior statement is ‘there is no god, except Allah’ and the
best creature is one that said ‘there is no god, except Allah’ first.
Someone asked: O Messenger of Allah, who was the first to say: ‘There is
no god, except Allah’? He replied, I. I was before Allah in the form of
light and I used to admit His oneness and glorify and praise Him. Then a
witnessing light was created from my light.

It was asked, “O Messenger of Allah, who is your witness?” He replied,
“Ali Ibne Abi Talib, my brother, my chosen one, my vizier and my
successor, and the Imam of my Ummah and the owner of my Pool, and the
bearer of my standard.” Then it was said to him, “O Messenger of Allah,
who were created from his light?” He replied, “Hasan, Husain the chiefs
of the youths of Paradise, and after them the Imams from the progeny of
Husain who will come till the Judgment Day.”

6 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Husain bin
Hasan bin Aban from Husain bin Saeed from Muhammad bin Hasan Kinani from
his grandfather from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed Allah, the Mighty and Sublime revealed on His Prophet (S) a book
before his passing away and said: O Muhammad, this is your bequest which
you will give to your successor in your family. The Holy Prophet (S)
asked, “And who is my successor in my family, O Jibraeel?” He replied:
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). There were many seals on this book. Thus the
Prophet gave that book to Ali (a.s.) and told him to break the seal and
act upon what it says. So he broke the seal and did what it said.

Then he handed it on to Hasan Ibne Ali (a.s.), and he broke open one
seal and carried out what was in it. Then he handed it on to Husain Ibne
Ali (a.s.), and he broke open one seal and found in it: ‘Go forth with a
group of men to martyrdom, for there is no martyrdom for them except
with you; and sell your self to Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty.’ So he did (this).

Then he handed it on to a man after him [Ali Ibne Husain (a.s.)], and he
broke open one seal and found in it: ‘Lower your head in silence, do not
speak out, stay in your house, and worship your Lord till what is
certain (death) carries you away.’ So he did (this). Then he handed it
on to his son [Muhammad Ibne Ali (a.s.)], and he broke open one seal and
found in it: ‘Speak to the people, give them legal rulings, and
disseminate the knowledge of your ancestors.’ So he did (this).

Then he handed it on to his son [Ja’far Ibne Muhammad (a.s.)], and he
broke open one seal and found in it: ‘Speak to the people, give them
legal rulings and testify for your ancestors. And do not fear other than
Allah, indeed you are in the protection of Allah and in His guarantee.
And he was ordered to transfer it and he transferred it to one after him
and so on till [the rising of Mahdi and] the Judgment Day.”

7 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us Ali
bin Husain Sadabadi from Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi from his father
from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer that
he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said regarding the words of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.***[^27]

“The interpretation of this verse has not yet been actualized and
neither will it actualize till the advent of the Qaim (a.s.). Not a
single denier in the Almighty Allah and polytheist will remain except
that he will detest the Imam and if the disbeliever or polytheist hides
in the center of a rock that rock will say: O believer, there is a
disbeliever in my center, break me up and eliminate him.”

8 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab
and Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa, all of them from Muhammad bin Sinan from
Abil Jarud Ziyad bin Mundhir that he said: Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) sets out from Mecca, a caller of His Eminence would
announce: ‘None of you must carry any food and water.’ His Eminence
would be having with himself the stone of Musa bin Imran that weighs a
camel load. Thus he does not halt at any stage but that streams burst
forth from that stone and anyone that feels hunger eats from it and any
that feels thirsty drinks from it. The beasts of burden also get their
feed from that till they reach Najaf at the rear of Kufa.”

9 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar from Yaqoob bin Yazid from
Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Aban bin Uthman from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said: Abu Abdillah (a.s.) said:

“The first to pledge allegiance to Qaim (a.s.) is Jibraeel who would
come down in the form of a white bird and give him oath of allegiance.
Then keeping one foot on the Holy Kaaba and another on the Holy Qods
issue such a loud call that when the creatures hear it they would cry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَىٰ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ فَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten
it.”***[^28]

10 - And through the same chain of narrators from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“Very soon 313 persons will come to your Masjid – that is the Masjid of
Mecca – the people of Mecca will know that they are not natives. All of
them will be carrying swords and each of the swords will be inscribed
with the Kalima from each of which a hundred Kalimas will be coming out.
Then the Almighty Allah shall send a breeze that shall call out in every
valley, ‘This is Mahdi, who shall judge like Prophet Dawood and Sulaiman
and he would not ask for evidence.’”

11 -And through the same chain of narrators from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said: Abu Abdillah (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim (a.s.) reappears, there will be a sign for every person
by which he would recognize whether he is righteous or evil-doer. And in
it is the sign for those who possess reason and it is the right path.”

12 - And through the same chain of narrators from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“Two bloods are made lawful by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and no one
can issue a judgment regarding them; till the time Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime will send the Qaim from Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and he will judge
according to the command of Allah. Thus at that time testimony will not
be needed. The married fornicator will be stoned to death and the one
who refuses to pay the Zakat will be beheaded.”

13 - And through the same chain of narrators from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“As if I can see the Qaim astride a black speckled horse which has a
white mark between its eyes. When his horse moves no one will remain in
any town who does not think that he is in that town. When he waves the
flag of the Messenger of Allah (S) 13000 angels will come down to him.

Of them 13 will be awaiting for the Qaim. These angels are same who were
with Prophet Nuh (a.s.) in his Ark, who were with Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.)
when he was thrown into the fire and who were with Prophet Isa (a.s.)
when he was taken up to the heavens. And 4000 will be following him with
flags. 313 are those angels who were present in the Battle of Badr and
4000 are those who came down to accompany Imam Husain (a.s.) in fighting
against the Yazidite forces.

However they were not allowed to take part in the battle. So they
returned to Allah to take the permission but when they came down once
more Imam Husain (a.s.) was already martyred. Thus today they remain
with disheveled hair and dust smeared condition at the grave of Imam
Husain (a.s.) where they will continue to lament till the Judgment Day.
And there is constant coming and going of angels between the grave of
Imam Husain (a.s.) and the heavens.”

14 - And through the same chain of narrators from Aban bin Taghlib that
he said: Narrated to me Abu Hamza Thumali that he said: Abu Ja’far
(a.s.) said:

“As if I can see Qaim (a.s.) appearing in Kufa at the back of Najaf.
When he arrives at Najaf he would unfurl the standard of the Messenger
of Allah (S). Its pole would be a pillar of the Arsh and those who
accompany it would be helpers of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. He would
not bring it down for anyone but that the Almighty Allah would destroy
that person.”

The narrator says: I asked in a polite manner: “Is that flag with him or
it would be brought for him?” He said: “It would be brought for him by
Jibraeel (a.s.).”

15 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway that he said: Narrated to
us my uncle Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi
from his father from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar that he
said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

The following verse was revealed about the companions of the Qaim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُوا يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together.***[^29]

“They shall to go bed at night and in the morning find themselves in
Mecca. Some of them will travel on clouds. The Imam will be knowing them
by their names, father’s names, appearance and genealogies.” I asked,
“May I be sacrificed on you, who will be the best in faith among them?”
He replied, “One who will ride the clouds during the day.”

16 - And through the same chain of narrators from Mufaddal bin Umar that
he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“As if I can see Qaim (a.s.) on the pulpit of Kufa surrounded by his 313
men equal to the people of Badr. They are the standard bearers and they
are the divine rulers on His (Allah’s) earth over His creatures. Till he
would bring out from his cloak a parchment sealed with a golden seal. A
covenant from the Messenger of Allah (S).

Then they would go away and disperse from him like tongueless sheep and
none would remain with him except the deputy and eleven chiefs - as had
remained with Musa bin Imran (a.s.) - then they would wander in the
earth but will not be able to find a way except him. Then they would
come back to him. By Allah, I know what he will say to them which they
will deny.”

17 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Ahmad bin Husain bin Saeed from Muhammad bin Jumhur from Ahmad bin Abi
Harasa from Abi Ishaq Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari
that he said: Narrated to us Amr bin Shimr from Jabir bin Yazid from Abi
Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see the companions of the Qaim (a.s.) that have filled up
the earth from the east to the west. Everything, even the wild beasts
and the jungle birds will obey them, and everything will seek his
satisfaction, so much so that a piece of land will pride itself over
others and say: Today a companion of the Imam passed over me.”

18 - Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masroor (r.a.): Narrated to
us Husain bin Muhammad bin Aamir from his uncle Abdullah bin Aamir from
Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Ibne Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer that he said:
Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“When Prophet Lut (a.s.) told his people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي بِكُمْ قُوَّةً أَوْ آوِي إِلَىٰ رُكْنٍ شَدِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: Ah! that I had power to suppress you, rather I shall have
recourse to a strong support.”***[^30]

He did not mean to say anything except that he was wishing for the power
of Qaim (a.s.) and ‘a strong support’ are his companions, each of whom
would have the strength of forty men and their hearts would be more
solid than a mountain of iron, such that if they wanted they could move
a mountain of iron from its place. And they shall not lay down arms till
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is satisfied.”

19 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yahya from
Salamah bin Khattab from Abdullah Ibne Muhammad from Mani bin Hajjaj
Basri from Majashe from Mualla from Muhammad and Faid from Abu Ja’far
(a.s.) that he said:

“The staff of Musa (a.s.) actually was one that Adam had. Then it
reached to Shuaib and at that time it reached Musa (a.s.). That staff is
in our possession and even now when I see it, it is as green and fresh
as it was when it was broken from the tree. If it is spoken to, it
talks. It has come for our Qaim. He would perform all the tasks through
it that Musa (a.s.) had performed. It does whatever it is ordered. And
wherever it is cast, it snaps up with its tongue the deception of the
enemies.”

20 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Husain from Muhammad bin Ismail
from Abi Ismail Sarraj from Bishr bin Ja’far from Mufaddal bin Umar from
Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he asked:

“Do you know what the garment of Yusuf was? ‘No,’ replied I. He said,
“When fire was lit for (burning) Ibrahim (a.s.) Jibraeel brought a
garment of Paradise for him and dressed him in it.

That garment protected him from heat and cold and when his death
approached, he made it into an arm band and tied it to Ishaq; Ishaq in
turn tied it to Yaqoob and when Yusuf was born Yaqoob tied it on him.
And it was tied to his arm till those circumstances befell him. Thus
when Yusuf removed it from the arm band in Egypt, Yaqoob perceived its
fragrance and it is about the same that Allah quotes him saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَأَجِدُ رِيحَ يُوسُفَ لَوْلَا أَنْ تُفَنِّدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely I perceive the fragrance of Yusuf, unless you pronounce
me to be weak in judgment.”***[^31]

It is the same garment that had come down from Paradise.”

I said: May I be sacrificed on you, whom did this garment reach after
him? He replied, “To the one deserving of it. And the garment is with
our Qaim, when he would reappear. Then he said: All knowledge or things
inherited by every prophet have reached to [the progeny of] Muhammad
(S).”

21 - And from the same chain of narrators from Mufaddal bin Umar from
Abi Baseer that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“When the Qaim establishes his rule, Allah, the Mighty and the High will
exalt all downtrodden ones and debase all exalted ones. The earth will
become a place of comfort. Thus which of you will be under the shade of
the invisible cloud?”

22 -Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad Masroor: Narrated to us Husain
bin Muhammad bin Aamir from Mualla bin Muhammad Basri from Hasan bin Ali
Washsha from Muthanna Hannat from Qutaibah Aashi from Ibne Abi Yafur
from the freed slave of Bani Shaiban from Abi Ja’far [al-Baqir] (a.s.)
that he said:

“When our Qaim arises, he will stroke the heads of the people which will
gather their intellects and perfect their understandings.”

23 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yaqoob: Narrated to us Abu Muhammad Qasim bin Alaa:
Narrated to me Qasim bin Muslim from his brother Abdul Aziz bin Muslim
and Narrated to us Abul Abbas Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani
(r.a.): Narrated to us Abu Ahmad Qasim bin Muhammad bin Ali Maruzi:
Narrated to us Abu Haamid Imran bin Musa bin Ibrahim from Hasan bin
Qasim Raqqam: Narrated to me Qasim bin Muslim from his brother Abdul
Aziz Ibne Muslim that he said:

“We had been with ar-Reza (a.s.) at Merv. We gathered at the Friday
mosque on Friday, when we had just arrived (in Merv), and they discussed
the matter of Imamate, and they discussed the many differences among
people in this matter.

Then I came into the presence of my master (a.s.). I informed him about
the various things the people had said respecting him. He smiled, then
said: O Abd al-’Aziz! The people do not know, and have been deceived in
their opinions. Verily, Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, did not
take away (the life of) His Prophet (S) until He had perfected the
religion for him, and sent down on him the Quran in which is the
clarification of all things.

He completely clarified in it what is lawful and what is unlawful, the
restrictions (hudud) and the commands, and all that people need. He to
whom belong Might and Majesty said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have neglected nothing in the Book.***[^32]

And he sent down in the Farewell Pilgrimage, which was at the end of his
life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعْمَتِي وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمُ الْإِسْلَامَ دِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Today I have perfected your religion for you, and I have completed My
blessing upon you, and*** ***I have approved Islam for your
religion.***[^33]

“And the matter of the Imamate is one of the things by which the
religion is completed. He did not pass away until he had clarified the
guiding principles of their religion to his community and made plain
their path for them, and he left them pointing in the direction of the
path of the truth. And he established Ali (a.s.) for them as a sign and
as Imam. He (Allah) has not left for them anything which the community
needs without clarifying it. Hence, whoever imagines that Allah to Whom
belong Might and Majesty, has not perfected His religion has surely
rejected the Book of Allah, and whoever has rejected the Book of Allah,
is an unbeliever in it.

“‘Do they know the value of Imamate and its position in the community
that their selection could be allowable in this matter? Verily, the
Imamate is too sublime among values, too great among ranks, too high
among stations, too impenetrable on all sides, too profound among the
depths, for people to reach it with their intellects, or to grasp it
with their opinions, or to establish an Imam by their choice.

Verily, the Imamate is that in which Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty, has distinguished Ibrahim, the Intimate Friend (al-Khalil),
after Prophethood and Intimacy, as a third degree, and an eminence with
which He honored him and by which He raised his renown, and He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Behold! I make you an Imam for the people.”

Then the Intimate Friend (a.s.) said out of delight in this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And of my seed.”

Allah, the Blessed, the Sublime, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***My covenant shall not reach the evil-doers.***[^34]

Thus, this verse has abolished the leadership (Imamah) of all evil-doers
till the Day of Resurrection, and it has become for the select ones.
Then Allah, the Sublime, bestowed honors on him, by establishing it in
his seed, the ones who are selected and purified (by Allah). And He
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً وَكُلًّا جَعَلْنَا
صَالِحِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا
وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَاتِ وَإِقَامَ الصَّلَاةِ
وَإِيتَاءَ الزَّكَاةِ وَكَانُوا لَنَا عَابِدِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We gave him Ishaq and Yaqoob in superabundance, and everyone made
We righteous*** ***and appointed them to be Imams guiding by Our
commands, and We revealed to them the doing of good deeds, and to
perform the prayer, and to pray Zakat, and Us they served.***[^35]

“So it (the Imamate) did not leave his seed; one of them inheriting it
from another, generation after generation, till Allah, the Sublime,
caused the Prophet (S) to inherit it. And He, the Majestic, the Sublime,
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَٰذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواوَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the people standing closet to Ibrahim are those who followed
him, and this Prophet, and those who believe; and Allah is the Master of
the believers.***[^36]

So it (the Imamate) belonged to him particularly, and hence he invested
Ali (a.s.) with it by the command of Allah, the Sublime, in the way in
which Allah has made obligatory. So it came to be in his (Ali’s)
selected seed, those to whom Allah has given knowledge and faith, as in
the words of He Who is the Sublime: But those who have given knowledge
and faith shall say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ وَالْإِيمَانَ لَقَدْ لَبِثْتُمْ
فِي كِتَابِ اللَّهِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْبَعْثِ فَهَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْبَعْثِ
وَلَٰكِنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who are given knowledge and faith will say: Certainly you
tarried according to the ordinance of Allah till the day of
resurrection, so this is the day of resurrection, but you did not
know.***[^37]

Thus it will be within the sons of Ali (a.s.), especially, till the Day
of Resurrection, since there is no prophet after Muhammad (S). So from
where have these ignorant people got (the right) to select?

“Verily, the Imamate is the position of the Prophets, and the heritage
of the successors. Indeed, the Imamate is the vicegerency (Khalifa) of
Allah and the vicegerency of the Messenger (S), and the station of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the inheritance of al-Hasan and Husain
(a.s.).

“Truly, the Imamate is the reins of religion, the state of order of the
Muslims, the rectitude of the world, and the might of the believers.
Verily, the Imamate is Islam’s growing root, and its lofty branch.
Through the Imam the prayer, Zakat, fasting, hajj and jihad (exerting
oneself, striving in the way of Allah, whether by means of one’s
property, one’s life, one’s knowledge, or by any other means) are
perfected, public funds are increased, restrictions and the commands are
put into practice, and the frontier-posts and borders are protected.

“The Imam allows what Allah allows, and prohibits what Allah prohibits;
he establishes the restrictions of Allah; he defends the religion of
Allah; and he calls to the way of his Lord with wisdom and good
admonition and with the Proof which reaches.

“The Imam is like the rising sun which covers the world with its light
and which is in a place where no hand or eye can reach it. The Imam is
the radiant moon, the shining lamp, the brilliant light, and the star
that guides in the heavy darkness, and in the middle of inhabited lands,
deserted regions and high seas.

The Imam is sweet water for the thirst, the pointer towards true
guidance, and the deliverer from destruction. The Imam is the fire on
the heights (which guides those far away), and which warms those who
seek the heat, and an indicator in dangers. He who moves away from him
will perish.

“The Imam is the rain-bearing cloud, the rainfall that covers
everywhere, the shining sun, the covering that shades, the prairie, the
overflowing spring, the pool and the meadow. The Imam is the gentle,
close friend, the sympathetic father, the blood-brother, the mother who
is tender to her small child, a place of refuge for mankind from
perilous disaster.

The Imam is Allah’s custodian over His creation, His Proof for His
slaves, His vicegerent in His lands, a caller towards Allah and the
defender of Allah’s precincts. The Imam is the one who is purified from
sins, free from all shortcomings, characterized by knowledge,
distinguished by forbearance, the state of order of the religion, the
might of the Muslims, the one who enrages the hypocrites, and the doom
of unbelievers.

The Imam is unique of his time, no one can approach his rank, no man of
knowledge is comparable to him, there is no one who can take his place,
nor is there anyone similar to him or same as him. He is characterized
by every (kind of) eminence, without his seeking it or acquiring it,
rather it is a characteristic from the Bestower of eminence, the
All-giving. So who is there who can arrive at knowledge of Imam, or have
the ability to select him?

How far from the truth is it! Intellects have lost (themselves),
imaginations have gone astray, minds have become perplexed, eyes have
turned away, the great have been made small, the wise have confounded
themselves, those who reflect forever fall short, orators falter, the
intelligent become ignorant, poets become expressionless, prosodists
incapable and the eloquent stammer, in describing one of his aspects, or
one of his eminences.

All of them have confessed their incapacity and inadequacy. How can his
totality be described, and how can his inner essence be characterized?
How can anything concerning him be understood? Who can be found one to
take his place and to give what he can give? No! How and where? Since he
is in the position of the star for hands of those that grasp, and to the
description of those who describe. What is the place of choice in this
affair? What is the place of intellects in this affair?

“Where can someone like this be found? Do you imagine that this can be
found anywhere else but in the progeny of the Messenger, Muhammad (S).
By Allah, they have lied to themselves, they have promised to themselves
the impossible, they have climbed up to a difficult and dangerous
height, (and) their feet will slip and fall to the bottom.

They want to appoint an Imam with (their) confused, unproductive and
defective minds, and (their) misguided opinions. Nothing accrued to them
but remoteness from him. Allah assail them! How they are perverted!
Surely, they are looking for a difficulty. They have uttered an untruth,
and have gone astray into far error; they have put themselves into
confusion, because they have knowingly abandoned the Imam. And Shaitan
decked out fair to them their works, and barred them from the way,
though they saw clearly.

“They have turned their backs on the choice of Allah, the choice of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and his Ahlul Bayt, (and turned) to their own
choice. And the Quran has called them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبُّكَ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيَخْتَارُ مَا كَانَ لَهُمُ
الْخِيَرَةُ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ وَتَعَالَىٰ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Thy Lord creates whatsoever He will and He chooses; they have not the
choice. Glory be to Allah! High be He above that they associate.***[^38]

And He to Whom belong Might and Majesty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلَا مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْرًا أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is not for any believer, man or woman, when Allah and His
Messenger have decreed a matter, to have the choice in the
affair.***[^39]

And He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ أَمْ لَكُمْ كِتَابٌ فِيهِ
تَدْرُسُونَ إِنَّ لَكُمْ فِيهِ لَمَا تَخَيَّرُونَ أَمْ لَكُمْ
أَيْمَانٌ عَلَيْنَا بَالِغَةٌ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ ۙ إِنَّ
لَكُمْ لَمَا تَحْكُمُونَ سَلْهُمْ أَيُّهُمْ بِذَٰلِكَ زَعِيمٌ أَمْ
لَهُمْ شُرَكَاءُ فَلْيَأْتُوا بِشُرَكَائِهِمْ إِنْ كَانُوا صَادِقِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What ails you then, how you judge? Or have you a Book wherein you
study? Surely therein you shall have whatever you choose! Or have you
oaths from Us, reaching to the Day of Resurrection? Surely you shall
have whatever you judge! Ask them, which of them will guarantee that! Or
do they have associates? Then let them bring their associates, if they
speak*** ***truly.***[^40]

And He to Whom belong Might and Majesty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ أَمْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبٍ أَقْفَالُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What, do they not ponder the Quran? Or is it that there are locks
upon their hearts?***[^41]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَضُوا بِأَنْ يَكُونُوا مَعَ الْخَوَالِفِ وَطُبِعَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ
فَهُمْ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or has Allah set a seal upon their hearts, so they understand
not.***[^42]

A seal has been set upon their hearts, or they say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَهُمْ لَا
يَسْمَعُونَ إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ
الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ وَلَوْ عَلِمَ اللَّهُ فِيهِمْ خَيْرًا
لَأَسْمَعَهُمْ وَلَوْ أَسْمَعَهُمْ لَتَوَلَّوْا وَهُمْ مُعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We hear,” and they hear not. Surely the worst of beasts in Allah’s
sight are those that are deaf and dumb and do not understand. If Allah
had known of any good in them He would have made them hear, and if He
had made them hear, they would have turned away, swerving aside.***[^43]

Or they said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have heard and we disobey.***[^44]

But that is the bounty of Allah; He gives it to whom He will, and Allah
is of bounty abounding. How can they have (the right) to choose an Imam?
Since the Imam is the man of knowledge, he is not ignorant (of
anything), a shepherd who does not shirk (his duty), a mine of sanctity
and purity, of piety and renunciation, of knowledge and worship.

He is the one specifically mentioned in the supplication of the
Messenger (S), and he is of the seed of the purified one, the chaste
(Fatima). Aspersion cannot be cast on him in relation to his parentage;
no one can approach him in nobility. He is in the noble house of the
Quraish, at the summit of (Banu) Hashim, of the offspring of the
Messenger (S) and the one accepted by Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty.

He is the nobility of the noblest men, and the true branch of Abde Manaf
(the father of Hashim and Umayyah); the one whose knowledge forever
grows and whose knowledge is perfect, who is completely acquainted with
the Imamate, entirely knowledgeable in statesmanship. Obedience to him
is obligatory, the one who establishes the affair of Allah, to Whom
belong Might and Majesty. He is the sincere advisor to the slaves of
Allah, the protector of the religion of Allah.

“Truly, Allah accommodates the prophets and the Imams, may Allah bless
them, (to the right path). He gives them of His stored knowledge and
wisdom, which He does not give to anyone else. Thus their knowledge is
far above the knowledge of the people of their time, as He, the Sublime,
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لَا
يَهِدِّي إِلَّا أَنْ يُهْدَىٰ فَمَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He who guides to the truth, is he worthier to be followed, or he who
guides not unless he is guided? What then ails you, how you
judge?***[^45]

And as He the Blessed, the Sublime, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْتِي الْحِكْمَةَ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الْحِكْمَةَ فَقَدْ
أُوتِيَ خَيْرًا كَثِيرًا وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلَّا أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and whoever is granted wisdom,
he indeed is given a great good and none but men of understanding
mind.*** [^46]

Also what he says about Talut (Saul):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ لَهُمْ نَبِيُّهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ بَعَثَ لَكُمْ طَالُوتَ
مَلِكًا قَالُوا أَنَّىٰ يَكُونُ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ عَلَيْنَا وَنَحْنُ
أَحَقُّ بِالْمُلْكِ مِنْهُ وَلَمْ يُؤْتَ سَعَةً مِنَ الْمَالِ قَالَ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَزَادَهُ بَسْطَةً فِي الْعِلْمِ
وَالْجِسْمِ وَاللَّهُ يُؤْتِي مُلْكَهُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ
عَلِيمٌٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily Allah has chosen him over you, and has increased him broadly
in knowledge and body. Allah gives the kingship to whom He will. And
Allah is All-embracing, All-knowing.***[^47]

And He said to His Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَانَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكَ عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah’s bounty to thee is very great.***[^48]

And He says about the Imams from the Ahlul Bayt of His Prophet, his
progeny and his seed, may Allah bless them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَىٰ مَا آتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ
فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ آمَنَ بِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ
مَنْ صَدَّ عَنْهُ وَكَفَىٰ بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or are they jealous of the people for the bounty that Allah has given
them? Yet We gave the progeny of Ibrahim the Book and the Wisdom, and We
gave them a mighty kingdom. And some of them (i.e., those they were
jealous) there are that believe, and some of them that bar from it;
Gehenna suffices for a Blaze!***[^49]

“Verily, when Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, selects a slave
for the affairs of His slaves, He expands his breast for it; He entrusts
to his hearts the fountains of wisdom, and profoundly inspires him with
knowledge. So, after this, he does not stammer in answers, and he does
not deviate from the truth in them. Thus, he is infallible (Masoom),
supported (by Allah); he is accommodated (to the right path, his steps
being) firmly guided; he will be safe from errors, slips and stumblings.
Allah distinguishes him by this, because he is His Proof over his
slaves, and His witness over His creatures –

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِك َفَضْلُ اللَّه ِيُؤْتِيهِمَنيَشَء ءوَاللَّهُذُ والْفَضْل
ِالْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That is the bounty of Allah, He gives it to whom He will, and Allah
is of bounty abounding.***[^50]

“So, do they have the power to do the like of this, so that they can
choose him? Or can the one that they choose have this attribution so
that they may prefer him? By the House of Allah, they have transgressed
against the truth, they have rejected the Book of Allah behind their
backs as though they did not know, and in the Book of Allah there is
guidance and cure. So they have rejected it, and they have followed
their own desires. Therefore, Allah has found fault with them, detested
them and cast them down, as He, to Whom belong Mighty and Sublimity, has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنِ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدًى مِنَ اللَّهِ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And who is further astray them he who follows his own caprice without
guidance from Allah? Surely Allah guides not the people of the
evil-doers.***[^51]

And He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَعْسًا لَهُمْ وَأَضَلَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ill chance shall befall them, He will send their works
astray.***[^52]

And He has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَبُرَ مَقْتًا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ وَعِنْدَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كَذَٰلِكَ
يَطْبَعُ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ قَلْبِ مُتَكَبِّرٍ جَبَّارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, hateful is that in the sight of Allah and the believers; so
Allah sets a seal on every heart proud, arrogant.***[^53]

And may Allah bless the Prophet, Muhammad and his progeny, and bestow
peace upon them with much bestowing.’”

[^1]: Surah Asr 103:1-2

[^2]: Surah Asr 103:3

[^3]: Surah Mominoon 23:44

[^4]: Surah Nisa 4:165

[^5]: Surah Taha 20:134

[^6]: Surah Aale Imran 3:183

[^7]: Surah Raad 13:7

[^8]: Surah Nisa 4:83

[^9]: Surah Anaam 6:38

[^10]: Surah Nisa 4:82

[^11]: Surah Maidah 5:44

[^12]: Surah Raad 13:7

[^13]: Surah Anbiya 21:20

[^14]: Surah Zumar 39:42

[^15]: Surah Anaam 6:60

[^16]: Surah Anbiya 21:20

[^17]: Surah Anbiya 21:20

[^18]: Surah Sajdah 32:3

[^19]: Surah Saba 34:44

[^20]: Surah Raad 13:7

[^21]: Surah Raad 13:7

[^22]: Surah Raad 13:7

[^23]: Surah Sajdah 32:3

[^24]: Surah Fatir 35:42

[^25]: Surah Hadid 57:16

[^26]: Surah Hadid 57:17

[^27]: Surah Taubah 9:33

[^28]: Surah Nahl 16:1

[^29]: Surah Baqarah 2:148

[^30]: Surah Hud 11:80

[^31]: Surah Yusuf 12:94

[^32]: Surah Anaam 6:38

[^33]: Surah Maidah 5:3

[^34]: Surah Baqarah 2:124

[^35]: Surah Anbiya 21:72 -73

[^36]: Surah Aale Imran 3:68

[^37]: Surah Rum 30:56

[^38]: Surah Qasas 28:68

[^39]: Surah Ahzab 33:36

[^40]: Surah Qalam 68:36-41

[^41]: Surah Muhammad 47:24

[^42]: Surah Taubah 9:87

[^43]: Surah al-Anfaal 8:21-23

[^44]: Surah Baqarah 2:93

[^45]: Surah Yunus 10:35

[^46]: Surah Baqarah 2:269

[^47]: Surah Baqarah 2:247

[^48]: Surah Nisa 4:113

[^49]: Surah Nisa 4:54-55

[^50]: Surah Hadid 57:21

[^51]: Surah Qasas 28:50

[^52]: Surah Muhammad 47:8

[^53]: Surah Momin 40:35


