Chapter 32: Statements of al-Baqir (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
=============================================================================

1 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Husain bin Umar
bin Yazid from Husain Ibne Rabi Madayni: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Ishaq from Usaid bin Thalaba from Umme Hani that she said:

“I met Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.) and asked him about the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But nay! I swear by the stars, That run their course (and) hide
themselves.***[^1]

He said: The Imam will be concealed from the people (during
occultation). It denotes the Imam who after the death of those who had
his Marefat (recognition) in 260 A.H. will go into occultation. Then at
the time of reappearance he will come out like a meteor on a dark night.
If you live in his time it will be highly pleasing to you.”

2 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Harun Fami and Ali bin Husain bin Shazawayh
Muaddab and Ja’far Ibne Muhammad bin Masroor and Ja’far bin Husain - May
Allah be pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from his father from Ayyub bin Nuh from
Abbas bin Aamir Qasbani. And narrated to us Ja’far bin Ali bin Hasan bin
Ali bin Abdullah bin Mughaira Kufi that he said: Narrated to me my
grandfather Hasan bin Ali bin Abdullah from Abbas bin Aamir Qasbani from
Musa bin Hilal Dhabbi from Abdullah bin Ataa that he said: I asked Abi
Ja’far (a.s.):

“You have a large number of followers in Iraq and by Allah there is none
like you in your family, so why don’t you stage an uprising? He replied:
O Abdullah bin Ataa, you have paid attention to useless talks. I am not
that Imam of yours who will uprise. I asked: Then which Imam is that? He
replied: Look out for the one from us whose birth is concealed from
people. He will be that Imam.”  
 3 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to me Musa bin Umar bin Yazid Saiqal from Ali bin Asbat from
Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) regarding the
words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا فَمَنْ يَأْتِيكُمْ
بِمَاءٍ مَعِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Have you considered if your water should go down, who is it then
that will bring you flowing water?***[^2]

This is revealed for the Qaim. Your Imam will disappear from your view
and you will not know where he is gone. When he will reappear he will
give you news of the heavens and the earth and knowledge of the lawful
and the prohibited of Allah. Then he said: By Allah, this verse has not
yet actualized. It will indeed be actualized (in future).”

4 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Muhammad bin Fudail from Abi Hamza from
Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed Allah, the Mighty and the High sent Muhammad (S) to the jinns
and men and appointed twelve successors after him. Some of them passed
away and some remain. For all the successors after Muhammad (S) the
practice of the successors of Prophet Isa (a.s.) was enforced and it was
that Isa (a.s.) also had twelve successors. And Amirul Momineen Ali
(a.s.) was on the practice of Jesus (a.s.).”

5 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Ali bin Ibrahim from his father Ibrahim bin Hashim from Abdullah bin
Hammad Ansari and Muhammad bin Sinan, all of them from Abil Jarud Ziyad
bin Mundhir from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.) that he
said to me:

“O Aba Jarud, when the time of occultation will prolong, people will
begin to say: The Qaim is dead or he has been killed. And in which
valley does he reside? And the opponents will say: Where does a Qaim
exist? His bones must also have decayed. At that time remain hopeful for
his reappearance and when you hear his call harken to it. You should go
to join him even if you have to crawl on snow.”

6 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa from Sulaiman bin Dawood from Abi Baseer
that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“In the Master of this affair are present practices (Sunnah) of four
prophets: Musa, Isa, Yusuf and Muhammad (S).

From Musa is being fearful for his life and his occultation, from Yusuf
is the imprisonment, from Isa it is that it would be said: He is dead,
while it would not be so. And as for the similarity with Muhammad (S) it
will be his advent and rising up with the sword.”

Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad Hamdani (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to
us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from Muhammad bin Isa from Sulaiman bin
Dawood from Abi Baseer from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) a similar tradition.

7 - And narrated to us Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Isaam (r.a.): Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Yaqoob [al-Kulaini]: Narrated to us Qasim bin Alaa:
Narrated to us Ismail bin Ali Qazwini: Narrated to me Ali bin Ismail
from Asim bin Humaid Hannat from Muhammad bin Muslim Thaqafi Tahhan that
he said:

“I came to His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali Baqir (a.s.) in
order to ask him about the Qaim of Aale Muhammad. His Eminence himself
initiated the matter and said: O Muhammad bin Muslim, in the Qaim of
Ahlul Bayt of Muhammad (S) are present similarities to five prophets:
Yunus bin Mata, Yusuf bin Yaqoob, Musa, Isa and Muhammad - peace be on
them all.

Similarity to Yunus bin Mata: Return from occultation as a young man
though being advanced in age. Similarity to Yusuf bin Yaqoob:
Occultation from the special people and general public and remaining
concealed from the brothers and the becoming difficult of the matter on
his father, Yaqoob inspite of the nearness of distance between him and
his father, his family and his followers.

Similarity to Musa: Always being in fear and the prolongation of
occultation. Hidden birth and the exhaustion of his followers after him
from the excessive torments and tribulations that they suffered till the
Almighty Allah permitted him to appear and helped and assisted him
against his enemies.

Similarity to Isa: Controversy regarding him; such that a group says: He
is not yet born. And a group says: He is dead. And some people allege:
He is killed and is no more.

As for his similarity with his grandfather, Muhammad Mustafa (S): Taking
up armed struggle and exterminating the enemies of Allah and the
Prophet; and the tyrants and the oppressors. He shall be helped with the
sword and awe and no flag shall be hoisted over him. Of the signs of his
reappearance are: The advent of the Sufyani from Shaam (Syria), the
advent of Yamani, the call from the sky in the month of Ramadan and a
caller who will announce from the sky his name and his father’s name.”

8 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar: Narrated to us Ahmad bin
Muhammad Isa and Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and Haitham Ibne
Abi Masruq Nahdi from Hasan bin Mahboob Sarrad from Ali bin Riyab from
Abi Hamza Thumali from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he heard him say:

“The most proximate to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and the most
knowledgeable about Him and the most kind to the people are Muhammad (S)
and the Imams (a.s.). So you enter where they enter and leave off
whatever they leave. It denotes Husain and his descendants as the truth
is with them and they are the successors and the Imams are among them.
So wherever you see them, follow them and when they are not seen beseech
the Almighty Allah and wait for the practice that you got (occultation)
and follow it. Love what they love and hate what they hate. Very soon
you will get deliverance.”

9 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and Muhammad bin Isa
from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Jameel bin Durraj from Muhammad bin
Muslim that he said: Abu Ja’far (a.s.) said:

“None responded to the call of the Messenger of Allah (S) before Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and Lady Khadija (s.a.). The Messenger of Allah
(S) remained in Mecca for three years (after declaring his mission) as
he feared his community and other people.” It is a lengthy tradition, a
part of which we have presented, as it pertains to the topic of our
discussion.

10 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abu Ali Muhammad bin Hammam from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik:
Narrated to me Hasan bin Muhammad bin Sama-a: Narrated to us Ahmad bin
Harith from Mufaddal bin Umar from Abi Abdullah Ja’far bin Muhammad
as-Sadiq (a.s.) from his father, Abi Ja’far al-Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“When Qaim (a.s.) rises up he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنْكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا
وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So I fled from you when I feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom
and made me of the apostles.***[^3]

11 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai
from his uncle Husain bin Yazid Naufali from Hasan Ibne Ali bin Abi
Hamza [from his father] from Abi Baseer that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far
(a.s.) say:

“In the master of this affair there is a similarity to Musa, to Isa, to
Yusuf and Muhammad (S).

As for the similarity to Musa: It is being fearful and watchful. And as
for Isa, it is that it would be said about him what was said about Isa.
And as for Yusuf it is the prison and the occultation. And as for
Muhammad (S) it is rising with the sword and he will follow the style of
His Eminence and expound his traditions. At that time he would carry his
sword in his right hand for eight months and continuously go on
eliminating his enemies till the Almighty Allah is satisfied.

I asked, How do we know that the Almighty Allah is satisfied?

He replied, ‘The Almighty Allah will instill mercy into his heart.’”

12 - Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus (r.a.): Narrated
to us Abu Amr Kashshi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to us
Ali bin Muhammad Qummi from Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Yahya from Ibrahim
bin Hashim from Abi Ahmad Azdi from Dhurais Kunasi that he said: I heard
Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“In the Master of this affair there is a resemblance to Yusuf (a.s.) and
it is that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would improve and reform his
circumstances overnight.”

13 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud
that he said: Narrated to us Jibraeel bin Ahmad: Narrated to us Musa bin
Ja’far bin Wahab Baghdadi am Yaqoob bin Yazid from Sulaiman bin Hasan
from Saad Ibne Abi Khalaf az-Zaam from Maroof bin Kharbooz that he said:
I asked Abi Ja’far Baqir (a.s.):

“Tell me about yourself. The Imam said: We are like the stars. When one
sets, another rises. There is peace, security, submission, Islam, victor
and keys among us till all the sons of Abdul Muttalib become equal and
it is not known which one is worthy of which position. Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime will make your Imam manifest for you. So praise Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime Who has given choice to Imam to either choose
hardships or degradation. I asked: My I be sacrificed on you, which one
would the Imam choose? He replied: He will choose hardships over
dishonor.”

14 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud
from Nasr bin Sabbah from Ja’far bin Suhail that he said: Narrated to me
Abu Abdullah Akhu Abi Ali Kabuli from Qabusi from Nasr bin Sindi from
Khalil bin Amr from Ali bin Hasan Fazari from Ibrahim bin Atiyyah from
Umme Hani Thaqafi that she said:

“I came to my master, Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.) and asked: A
verse in the book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime occurred in my heart
and made me worried and sleepless. The Imam said: Which verse, O Umme
Hani? I said: My chief it is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But nay! I swear by the stars. That run their course (and) hide
themselves.”***[^4]

The Imam said: You have asked a very good question, Umme Hani. This
verse is regarding a newborn child in the last period of time. He is the
Mahdi from this progeny. And for him there shall be a confusion and
occultation in which a group shall deviate and a group shall be guided.
Thus glad tidings for you if you live in that time and glad tidings for
those who live in that time.”

15 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar from Ahmad bin Abi
Abdullah Barqi from his father from Mughaira from Mufaddal bin Salih
from Jabir from Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“A time will come upon the people when their Imam shall disappear from
their view. Blessed be those who remain firm upon our guardianship
during such times. The least divine reward that shall reach them would
be that the Almighty Allah shall call them and say: O My servants and
maidservants, you brought faith in My secret and believed in My unseen.
Then good news to you for My goodness and rewards as you are truly My
servants and maidservants. I shall accept your deeds, disregard your
faults and forgive your sins. And due to you I shall send rain to My
creatures and ward off calamities from them. If you hadn’t been there I
would have sent My chastisement upon them.”

16 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Isaam (r.a.) that he said:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini: Narrated to us Qasim bin
Alaa: Narrated to me Ismail bin Ali Qazwini: Narrated to me Ali Ibne
Ismail from Asim bin Humaid Hannat from Muhammad bin Muslim Thaqafi that
he said: I heard Aba Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.) say:

“The Qaim from us will be aided by awe and helped with divine
assistance. The earth will fold up for him and the treasures will be
exposed for him. His dominions will be in the east and the west and
through him will Allah, the Mighty and Sublime make His religion
dominate over all religions even though the polytheists hate this. Then
no ruin will remain in the earth but that he will restore it. And the
spirit of Allah, Isa bin Maryam (a.s.) will come down and pray behind
him. I said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, when will your Qaim appear?

He replied: When the men will resemble women and women will resemble
men. When men will satisfy their lusts with men and women with women.
When women will ride horses. False testimony will be accepted and true
testimony will be obstructed. Murder will be considered a minor thing.
Adultery and usury will be common. People will fear the talks of the
evil people. Sufyani will arise from Shaam and Yamani will appear from
Yemen.

The Baida desert will sink. A youth from Aale Muhammad will be killed
between the Rukn and Maqam. He will be Muhammad bin Hasan
Nafs-e-Zakiyyah. A call will come from the sky that the truth is with
him and with all the Shias. At that time will arise our Qaim. When he
reappears he would lean on the Kaaba and three hundred and thirteen men
would reach him, and the first words he speaks would be:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَقِيَّتُ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What remains with Allah is better for you if you are
believers…”***[^5]

Then he would say: I am the remnant of Allah on the earth and the
vicegerent of God and His Divine Proof upon you. Then no Muslim would
greet him except by the words:

“Peace be on you, O the remnant of Allah on His earth.”

And when the number of his supporters reaches one Iqd, that is 10000
men, he would set out. Then no deity except Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime would remain on the earth. Idols, statutes and such other things
would be destroyed, and fire would rise up among them; and this would
come to pass after a prolonged occultation till the Almighty Allah knows
who brings faith during the occultation and who obeys.”

17 -Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi (r.a.) that:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father that:
Narrated to us Abul Qasim: I have quoted from the book of Ahmad Dahhan
from Qasim bin Hamza from Ibne Abi Umair that: Informed me Abu Ismail
Sarraj from Khaithama Jofi that: Narrated to me Abu Ayyub Makhzumi that:

“Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) mentioned the biographies of the
twelve guided caliphs, bliss of Allah be on them all, and when he came
to the last of them he said: The twelfth of them will the one behind
whom Prophet Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.) will pray. The practice of this Imam
and the obedience of Quran is incumbent upon you.”

This is the end of the first volume of Kamaaluddin wa Tamaamun Nima by
Shaykh Faqih, Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Musa bin
Babawahy al-Qummi (r.a.), which proves the incidence of occultation and
removes misunderstandings about it.

The second volume begins with the chapter of narrations from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) about the Nass in favor of the Qaim (a.s.).

[^1]: Surah Takwir 81:15-16

[^2]: Surah Mulk 67:30

[^3]: Surah Shuara 26:21

[^4]: Surah Takwir 81:15-16

[^5]: Surah Hud 11:86


