Chapter 33: Statements of as-Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
=============================================================================

The Nass in favor of the Qaim (a.s.); about his occultation and that he is the Twelfth Imam
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Faqih, Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Musa bin
Babawahy al-Qummi (r.a.) says:

1 - Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees (r.a.) that: Narrated to
us my father from Ayyub bin Nuh from Muhammad bin Sinan from Safwan bin
Mehran from as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said:

“One who agrees (believes) in the Imamate of all the Imams but denies
the Mahdi is like one who accepts the prophethood of all the prophets
but denies the prophethood of Muhammad (S).” He was asked: O son of
Allah’s Messenger, who is the Mahdi from your progeny? “The fifth
descendant of the seventh Imam, whose person will remain hidden from
your view and uttering his name is unlawful for you.”

2 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Hasan bin Ali Zaitooni and Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abi Qatada from Ahmad
bin Hilal from Umayyah Ibne Ali from Abi Haitham bin Abi Habba from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“When Imams named Muhammad, Ali and Hasan come one after another, the
fourth will be the Qaim.”

3 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to us
Abu Ali Muhammad bin Hammam: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Mabundaz that:
Informed us Ahmad bin Hilal: Narrated to me Umayyah bin Ali Qaisi from
Abi Haitham Tamimi from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“When the three name: Muhammad, Ali and Hasan come one after another,
the fourth will be the Qaim.”

4 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad Daqqaq (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi from Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his
uncle Husain bin Yazid Naufali from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said:

“I came to my master, Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) and said: O chief, if
you had only taken our oath for the successor after you! He said to me:
O Mufaddal, the Imam after me is my son, Musa and the Imam who will be
expected and awaited for is M-H-M-D son of Hasan son of Ali son of
Muhammad son of Ali son of Musa.”

5 -Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah
Barqi: Narrated to us my father from my grandfather Ahmad bin Abi
Abdullah from his father Muhammad bin Khalid from Muhammad bin Sinan and
Abi Ali Zarrad, all of them from Ibrahim Al-Karkhi that he said:

“I went to Abu Abdillah Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Al-Sadiq (a.s.) and was
sitting in his presence when Abu Al-Hasan Musa Ibn Ja’far (a.s.) entered
while he was a boy. I stood up, kissed him and sat with him. Then Abu
Abdillah (a.s.) remarked, “O Ibrahim! Know that, he is your master after
me. Know that, concerning him one group will be destroyed while another
will be saved.

Then may Allah curse his killer and multiply His chastisement for the
one who fights against him. Know that, certainly Allah will bring out
from his progeny the best of the inhabitants of the earth in his time.
He will be named after his grandfather, he will be the inheritor of this
knowledge and his laws in his judgments, the treasure-  
 chest of Imamate and the fountainhead of wisdom.

The tyrant king of Bani (Abbas) will kill him after his amazing acts,
due to envy. But Allah (Mighty and Glorified be He) will convey His
affairs even if the polytheists dislike it. And Allah will bring forth
from his progeny the completion of twelve Mahdi (guided leaders). Allah
has chosen them for His nobility, permitted for them the abode of His
Holiness and the twelfth awaited one is from them, as if with an open
sword standing in front of the Messenger of Allah (S) in his defense.”

Then a person from the friends of Bani Umayyah entered due to which Imam
had to cut short his speech. I returned to Abu Abdillah (a.s.) eleven
times after that so that he may complete his discourse but he was unable
to do so. In the coming year, which was the second year, I went to him
while he was sitting. He said, “O Ibrahim! He is the one who will
provide salvation to his Shias after intense straitening, lengthy
calamities, grief and fear. Then congratulations to one who lives till
his time. This is enough for you O Ibrahim.” Ibrahim said, ‘Then nothing
was dearer to my heart or soothed my eyes more than this talk.’”

6 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway and Muhammad bin Musa bin
Mutawakkil - May Allah be pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar from Abi
Talib Abdullah Ibne Salt Qummi from Uthman bin Isa from Sama-a bin
Mehran that he said:

“I, Abu Baseer and Muhammad bin Imran, slave of Abu Ja’far (a.s.) were
in a house in Mecca. Muhammad bin Imran said: I heard Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) say: We are the twelve Mahdis. Abu Baseer asked: Did you really
hear this from Abi Abdullah (a.s.)? He swore once or twice that he had
heard it from him. Abu Baseer said: But I have heard it from Abu Ja’far
(a.s.).”

A similar tradition is narrated to us by Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad
bin Walid (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan
as-Saffar from Abi Talib Abdullah bin Salt al-Qummi from Uthman bin Isa
from Samaa-a bin Mehran.

7 -Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees that: Narrated to us my
father from Muhammad bin Husain bin Yazid Zayyat from Hasan bin Musa
Khashshab from Ibne Sama-a from Ali Ibne Hasan Ribat from his father
from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said: As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.)
said:

“Allah, Blessed and the High, created fourteen lights 14000 years before
the creation of the universe, thus they were our souls. It was asked: O,
son of Allah’s Messenger, who are these fourteen lights? He replied:
Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain, and Imams from the descendants of
Husain and the last of them is Qaim who will rise up after occultation.
Then he would kill the Dajjal and purify the earth from every type of
injustice and oppression.”

8 - Narrated to us my father that: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Hasan bin Mahboob from Ali bin
Riyab from Abu Abdillah (a.s.) that he said regarding the saying of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَأْتِي بَعْضُ آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ لَا يَنْفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا
لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِنْ قَبْلُ أَوْ كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا خَيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when some of the signs of your Lord shall come, its faith
shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn good
through its faith.”***[^1]

“Signs are the Imams Mushtarta[^2] and the ayat is Qaim (a.s.). After
that day the faith of no one will profit him if before His Eminence
rises up with the sword he had no faith - even though he may have had
faith in the Imam’s forefathers.”

9 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan and Ali bin Ahmad bin
Muhammad Daqqaq and Ali bin Abdullah Warraq and Abdullah bin Muhammad
as-Saigh and Muhammad bin Ahmad Shaibani - May Allah be pleased with
them - they said: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Yahya bin Zakariya al-Qattan:
Bakr bin Abdullah bin Habib that: Narrated to us Tameem Ibn Bohlool
that: Narrated to us Abdullah Ibn Abi Huzail about Imamate on whom is it
obligatory and what are the signs of an Imam? He said to me:

‘Surely, its evidence is that he is the proof upon the believers, the
establisher of the affairs of the Muslims, speaks with the Quran, knower
of Divine Laws, brother of the Messenger of Allah (S), his caliph upon
his nation, his successor upon them and his administrator who is unto
the Prophet (S) as Harun (a.s.) was to Musa (a.s.). His obedience is
obligatory as per the saying of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Obey Allah, obey the Messenger and those in
authority amongst you.***[^3]

And Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Only Allah is your Master and His Messenger and those who believe,
who establish prayer and give Zakat while they are in a state of
genuflection (Ruku’).***[^4]

He is entitled for mastership and Imamate was confirmed for him on the
day of Ghadeer-e-Khumm by the saying of the Messenger of Allah (S) on
the command of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, “Do I not have more
authority upon you than you yourselves?” They all replied in the
affirmative. He declared, “Then, of whomsoever I am his master, Ali is
his master. O Allah! Take him as Your slave, who takes him (Ali) as his
master and take him as Your enemy, who takes him as his enemy. Help him
who helps him and forsake him who forsakes him. Honor him who supports
him.”

This was Ali Ibn Abi Talib, the chief of the faithfuls, the leader of
the pious, the chief of the handsome, the most superior of the
successors and the best of all creation after the Messenger of the Lord
of the worlds. After him are Hasan and Husain, the two grandsons of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and the sons of the best of the women. They will
be followed by Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad,
Musa Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Musa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad, Hasan
Ibn Ali and Muhammad Ibn Hasan (peace be upon them all), one after the
other.

They are the progeny of the Messenger (S), the known ones through
successorship and Imamate. The earth cannot exist without a proof from
them in every era and in every time. They are the strong rope, the Imams
of guidance, and the proof upon the people of the world till Allah
inherits the earth and whoever is on it. Whoever opposes them, is
deviated and has left the truth and guidance. Indeed, they have been
talked about by the Quran and the Messenger has spoken concerning them
elaborately. Surely, one who dies without recognizing them dies the
death of ignorance.

Verily, in their religion are the traits of precautious piety, chastity,
truthfulness, betterment (of the people), striving hard (in the way of
Allah), repaying the trust to the good doer as well as the transgressor,
prolonging the prostration, performing the night prayers, abstaining
from the prohibited, awaiting the reappearance with patience and keeping
good company and good neighborhood.”

Then Tamim Ibne Bohlool said: Narrated to me Abu Muawiyah from al-Amash
from Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) a similar tradition.

10 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Ibrahim bin Hashim from
Muhammad bin Khalid from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar from
Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The most proximate servants of Allah and those with whom Allah is
pleased are those who when the proof of Allah disappears from sight and
they don’t know about his location, yet they continue to have faith that
the Proof of Allah can never be invalid and day and night they continue
to wait for him. And the wrath of Allah is on those of His enemies who
when the proof of Allah disappears from sight, they fall into doubts and
denial. He (Allah) knew that His special servants will never fall into
doubts and if it were not so He would not have taken away His Proof from
their sight even for a moment. These doubts will reign supreme over the
hearts of evil ones.”

11 - And through the same chain of narrators Mufaddal bin Umar said: I
heard as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad say:

“One who dies awaiting for the reappearance is like one who is with the
Qaim in his tent, rather he is like one who fights the holy war under
the command of the Messenger of Allah (S).”

12 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad Daqqaq (r.a.): Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi from Sahl bin Ziyad Adami from
Hasan bin Mahboob from Abdul Aziz Abdi from Abdullah bin Abi Ya’fur that
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Whosoever believes in the Imamate of my forefathers and descendants but
denies the Mahdi from my descendants is just like one who has faith in
all the prophets but denies Muhammad (S).” The narrator asked: “My
master, from who among you is Mahdi descended?” He replied: “He is the
fifth descendant of the seventh Imam. He would disappear from you and it
is not lawful for you to pronounce his name.”

13 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad Hamdani: Narrated to us Abi Abdullah
Asimi from Husain bin Qasim bin Ayyub from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Sama-a
from Thabit Saigh from Abu Baseer from Abi Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) that he
heard him say:

“From us there will be twelve Mahdis. Six have passed and six are
remaining. Allah will do with the sixth as He pleases.”

14 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to
us Ahmad bin Muhammad Hamdani: Narrated to us Abi Abdullah Asimi from
Husain bin Qasim bin Ayyub from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Sama-a from
Wuhaib from Zarih from Abi Hamza from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“There will be twelve Mahdi (guided leaders) from us.”

15 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to
us Ahmad bin Muhammad Hamdani: Narrated to us Ja’far bin Abdullah:
Narrated to me Uthman bin Isa from Sama-a bin Mehran that he said: I,
Abu Baseer, Muhammad bin Imran, the slave of Abi Ja’far were in a house
in Mecca. Muhammad bin Imran said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“We are the twelve Mahdis. Abu Baseer asked: Did you really hear this
from Abi Abdullah (a.s.)? He swore twice that he had heard it from him.”

16 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Muhammad bin Khalid Barqi
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar from that he said: Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The most proximate servants of Allah and those with whom Allah is
pleased are those who when the proof of Allah disappears from sight and
they don’t know about his location, yet they continue to have faith that
the Proof of Allah can never be invalid and day and night they continue
to wait for him. And the wrath of Allah is on those of His enemies who
when the proof of Allah disappears from sight, they fall into doubts and
denial. He (Allah) knew that His special servants will never fall into
doubts and if it were not so He would not have taken away His Proof from
their sight even for a moment. These doubts will reign supreme over the
hearts of evil ones.”

17 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa
from Hasan bin Mahboob from Muhammad bin Noman that he said: Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) said to me:

“The most proximate servants of Allah and those with whom Allah is
pleased are those who when the proof of Allah disappears from sight and
they don’t know about his location, yet they continue to have faith that
the Proof of Allah can never be invalid and day and night they continue
to wait for him. And the wrath of Allah is on those of His enemies who
when the proof of Allah disappears from sight, they fall into doubts and
denial. He (Allah) knew that His special servants will never fall into
doubts and if it were not so He would not have taken away His Proof from
their sight even for a moment.”

18 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Mualla bin Muhammad Basri from Muhammad bin Jumhur and
others from [Muhammad] bin Abi Umair from Abdullah bin Sinan that he
heard Abu Abdillah (a.s.) say:

“In the Qaim (a.s.) is a resemblance to Musa bin Imran. I asked: What is
that resemblance to Musa bin Imran (a.s.)? He replied: His concealed
birth and his disappearance from the people. I asked: For how long did
Musa bin Imran remain concealed from the people and his family? He
replied: Twenty eight years.”

19 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Isa from Umar bin Abdul Aziz from more than one of our associates from
Dawood bin Kathir Raqqi from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) regarding the words of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who believe in the unseen.***[^5]

“That is regarding those who believe that the uprising of the Qaim is
truth.”

20 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad Daqqaq (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai
from his uncle Husain bin Yazid from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Yahya bin
Abil Qasim that he said: I asked as-Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the words of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم ذَلِكَ الْكِتَابُ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ هُدًى لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ الَّذِينَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Alif Lam Mim. This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to those
who guard (against evil). Those who believe in the unseen.***[^6]

He said: Those who guard against evil (Muttaqeen) are the Shias of Ali
(a.s.) and ‘unseen’ is the hidden proof.”

21 - Narrated to us my father that: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Ahmad bin Hilal from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran from
Fadala bin Ayyub from Sadeer that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.)
say:

“In the master of this affair there is a similarity to Prophet Yusuf.” I
asked: “It seems as if you are informing us about occultation and
bewilderment?” He replied: “These accursed people resembling pigs, why
do they deny this statement? Brothers of Yusuf were sons of prophets,
they completed a transaction with Yusuf, and he was their brother,
inspite of that until he introduced himself they did not recognize him
till he said I am Yusuf.

On the basis of this why does the confused Ummah deny that Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime from time to time conceals His proof from them. Yusuf
had the rulership of Egypt and the distance between him and his father
was not more than that of 18 days’ travel, if the Almighty Allah wanted
He could have made his location known to his father. And by Allah when
Yaqoob and his sons got the good news of Yusuf they covered this
distance in nine days through desert and wilderness.

Then how could this Ummah deny that the Almighty Allah can do with His
proof what He did with Yusuf? He walked in the market and trod on their
carpets but they didn’t recognize him? Till the time that Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime permits him to introduce himself as He allowed Yusuf.
And he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَلْ عَلِمْتُمْ مَا فَعَلْتُمْ بِيُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ إِذْ أَنْتُمْ
جَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا أَإِنَّكَ لَأَنْتَ يُوسُفُ ۖ قَالَ أَنَا يُوسُفُ
وَهَٰذَا أَخِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother when you were
ignorant? They said: Are you indeed Yusuf? He said: I am Yusuf and this
is my brother.***[^7]

22 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us my father from Ibrahim bin Hashim from Muhammad bin Abi
Umair from Safwan bin Mehran Jammal that he said: As-Sadiq Ja’far bin
Muhammad (a.s.) said:

“Indeed he shall go into occultation till the ignorant will say: For the
Almighty Allah there is no need of Aale Muhammad. Then he would appear
like a shooting star and fill up the earth with equity and justice just
as it would be brimming with injustice and oppression.”

23 -Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah Nishapuri: Narrated to us
Hamadan bin Sulaiman from Muhammad bin Ismail bin Bazee from Hayyan
Sarraj from Sayyid bin Muhammad Himyari a long tradition in which he
said: I asked As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.):

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, traditions from your forefathers have
reached us regarding occultation and its authenticity, please tell us
something more about it. He said: Occultation will happen for my sixth
descendant and he is the twelfth of the Imams of guidance after the Holy
Prophet (S), the first of whom is Ali Ibne Abi Talib and the last is the
one who would rise with the truth (Qaim bil Haqq), the Remnant of Allah
(Baqiyatullah) on the earth and the Master of the Age. By Allah, even if
he remains in occultation as long as Nuh lived among his people, Allah
will not end the world till he reappears. And he would fill up the earth
with justice and equity just as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression.”

24 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from
Uthman bin Isa Kilabi from Khalid bin Najih from Zurarah bin Ayyan that
he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“There is an occultation for the Qaim before his reappearance.” I asked:
“Why is it so?” He replied: “He is fearful.” And he pointed towards his
belly, implying that the Qaim fears for his life. Then he said: “O
Zurarah; and he is that awaited one and he is the one in whose birth
they shall doubt. Thus some will say: His father died heirless and some
will say: He was in the womb of his mother when his father died. Some
others will allege that he was born two years before the passing away of
his father. And he is the Awaited one; but the Almighty Allah likes to
test the Shias. It is the time when people of falsehood will fall in
doubts.”

Zurarah says: I asked: “If I am able to live till that period, what
action I should perform?”

He replied: “O Zurarah if you live till that time you must recite the
following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم عرفني نفسك ، فإنك إن لم تعرفني نفسك لم أعرف نبيك، اللهم عرفني
نبيك فإنك إن لم تعرفني نبيك لم أعرف حجتك ، اللهم عرفني حجتك فإنك إن لم
تعرفني حجتك ضللت عن ديني
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘O Allah introduce Yourself to me. For if You don’t introduce Yourself
to me I will not recognize Your Prophet. O Allah introduce Your
Messenger to me for if You don’t introduce Your Messenger to me I will
not recognize Your Proof. O Allah introduce Your proof to me for if You
don’t introduce Your proof to me I will deviate in my religion.’**

Then he said: O Zurarah, at that time a youth will be killed in Medina.
I asked: May I be sacrificed on you, would the army of Sufyani kill this
youth? He replied: No, the forces of so-and-so tribe will kill him.
Those forces will enter Medina, accost this young man and kill him. This
murder will be a rebellion against divine ordinances and injustice and
now Allah will not give much respite. At that time the Imam will
reappear.”

The same tradition is narrated to us by Muhammad bin Ishaq (r.a.) that
he said: Narrated to us Abu Ali Muhammad bin Hammam that he said:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad Naufali that he said: Narrated to me
Ahmad bin Hilal from Uthman bin Isa Kilabi from Khalid bin Najih from
Zurarah bin Ayyan from as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.).

And narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ali Ibne Muhammad Hajjal from Hasan
bin Ali bin Faddal from Abdullah bin Bukair from Zurarah Ibne Ayyan from
as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said

“There is occultation for the Qaim before his reappearance – and he
narrated the same tradition.”

25 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Muhammad bin Musa bin
Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim: Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Salih bin Muhammad from Hani
Tammar that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said to me:

“There is occultation for the master of this affair and every person is
duty-bound to fear Allah and remain attached to his religion.”

26 - Narrated to us Ishaq bin Isa and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Ali bin Hakam from Saif
bin Amirah from Dawood bin Farqad from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) was with the Messenger of Allah (S) during
his occultation and no knew about it.”

27 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Ali bin Ismail bin Isa
from Muhammad bin Amr Ibne Saeed Zayyat [From Jariri] from Abdul Hameed
bin Abi Dailam Tai that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said to me:

“O Abdul Hamid bin Abi Dailam, Allah, the Mighty and the High sent
messengers; some of whom declared their messengership and some kept
their mission secret. Thus whatever is done in case of messengers that
were apparent the same will be for messengers that were hidden.”

28 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin
Abdullah and Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar, all of them said: Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid:
Narrated to us Safwan bin Yahya from Abdullah bin Muskan from Muhammad
bin Ali Halabi from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The Messenger of Allah (S) maintained a low profile and was cautious
for five years in Mecca (after declaring his mission). He did not reveal
his prophethood. With him were Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and Lady
Khadija (s.a.). Then Allah, the Mighty and Sublime told him to reveal
what he had been commanded. So the Messenger of Allah (S) came out in
open and declared his claim.” In another tradition it is mentioned that
he lived in Mecca in fear for three years.

29 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari and Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad
bin Idrees, all of them from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Muhammad bin
Husain bin Abil Khattab and Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of them from Hasan
bin Mahboob from Ali bin Riyab from Ubaidullah bin Ali Halabi that he
said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The Messenger of Allah (S) remained in Mecca for thirteen years after
receiving divine revelation from Allah, the Mighty and the High, out
which for three years he maintained a low profile and remained cautious.
He kept his mission secret till Allah, the Mighty and Sublime ordered
him to declare it. Then he declared his prophethood and began
propagation.”

30 - Narrated to us a group of our associates that: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Hamam: Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari:
Narrated to me Ja’far bin Ismail Hashimi that: I heard uncle Muhammad
bin Ali narrate from Abdur Rahman bin Hammad from Umar bin Saalim, the
slave of Sabirri, that:

I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s.) concerning the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Its root is firm and its branch is in the sky.***[^8]

“He elucidated, “Its root is the Messenger of Allah (S), its branch (in
the sky) is Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Hasan and Husain are its fruits, the
nine descendants of Husain (a.s.) are its twigs and the Shias are its
leaves. By Allah!

Surely when a person from them (Shias) dies, a leaf from this tree
falls.” I asked regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its
Lord?***[^9]

He clarified, “Whatever comes out from the Imam’s knowledge to you every
year from the Hajj and the Umrah.”

31 -Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Imran - May Allah be
pleased with them - that: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abdullah Kufi:
Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his uncle Husain bin Yazid
Naufali from Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Hamza from his father from Abi Baseer
that: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“Matters related to occultation that occurred for the prophets would
also occur in exactly the same way for our Qaim who is from us, Ahlul
Bayt.”

Abu Baseer says: I asked respectfully: “O son of Allah’s Messenger, who
from among you Ahlul Bayt, is the Qaim?” He replied, “O Abu Baseer, he
is the fifth descendant of my son, Musa. He is the son of the best of
the slave girls. He shall have an occultation regarding which the
followers of falsehood would doubt.

After that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would make him reappear and
conquer the east and the west of the earth at his hands and send down
from the heaven, the Spirit of Allah, Prophet Isa bin Maryam (a.s.) who
will recite Prayers behind him. And the earth will be illuminated with
the effulgence of its Lord, and no place will remain on the face of the
earth where other than Allah will be worshipped. Rather Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime will be worshipped everywhere. The religion will only
be for Allah even though the polytheists may be averse.”

32 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim
from his father from Muhammad bin Fudhail from his father from Mansur
that Abu Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“That time (of reappearance) shall not come to pass but after you have
become despondent and hopeless. No, I swear by Allah, till you are
separated from each other. No I swear by Allah, till you are severely
tested. No I swear by Allah, till the time that the unfortunate ones
become unfortunate while the fortunate ones become fortunate.”

33 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan al-Saffar from Ahmad bin Husain from
Uthman bin Isa from Khalid bin Najih from Zurarah bin Ayyan that he
heard: Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) say:

“For Qaim (a.s.), before his uprising there will be an occultation.” I
asked: “May I be your ransom, why is it so?” He replied: “He shall fear
(for his life),” so saying the Imam gestured towards his belly and neck.
Then he said: And he is that awaited one and he is the one in whose
birth they shall doubt. Thus some will say: He died with his father. And
his father died heirless and some will say: He was born two years before
the passing away of his father. But Allah, the Mighty and Sublime likes
to test the people. It is the time when people of falsehood fall in
doubt.”

34 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan and Muhammad bin
Musa bin Mutawakkil and Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway and Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar -May Allah be pleased with them - they said:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar: Narrated to us Ja’far bin
Muhammad bin Malik Fazari Kufi from Ishaq bin Muhammad Sairafi from
Yahya bin Muthanna Attar from Abdullah bin Bukair from Ubaid bin Zurarah
that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The Imam will be unseen by the people. Then he will witness those who
come for the Hajj pilgrimage, he will see them but they will not see
him.”

35 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Salih bin Muhammad from
Hani Tammar that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“There will be occultation for the master of this affair. During this
those who remain attached to their religion will be like those who rub
their hands on a thorny branch. Then he gestured with his hands. Then he
said: There is occultation for the master of this affair and every
person is duty-bound to fear Allah and remain attached to his religion.”

36 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari and Ahmad bin Idrees, all of them said:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Muhammad bin Husain bin
Abil Khattab and Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar and Abdullah bin Aamir bin
Saeed Ashari from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran from Muhammad bin Musawir
from Mufaddal bin Umar Nakhai from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he heard him
say:

“Do not protest! By Allah! Your Imam shall remain hidden from you for a
long time. You will be tried and examined in those times. To such an
extent that some people shall say: He has died or he has gone in some
cave. While the believers will be shedding tears for him. The hearts of
the people will be shaken up by the calamities like the ship is tossed
in the waves of the stormy sea.

None shall get deliverance except those from whom Allah has taken oath,
on whose hearts He has inscribed faith and whom He helped with His
mercy. At that time twelve standards will arise and all of them will be
alike, thus it will not be known which is the standard of truth. I began
to weep on hearing this, so the Imam said: O Abi Abdullah why do you
weep? I replied: Master, why shouldn’t I weep when you say that twelve
standards will arise and all of them will be alike, thus how do we know
which is the standard of truth?

The Imam said: Look at the sun, on which army it is shining. I said:
Maula, this same sun? “Yes,” he replied, “O Abi Abdullah, have you seen
this sun? I said: Yes. Imam said: I swear by Allah, our matter (Wilayat)
is more clear than this sun.”

37 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin Ismail bin
Bazee from Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman Asam from Husain bin Mukhtar
Qalanisi from Abdur Rahman bin Siyabah from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said:

“What will be your condition at that time when you shall be without an
Imam or guide and you will be disgusted with each other. At that time
you shall be severely examined and you shall be differentiated and
sieved.”

38 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Yaqoob bin Yazid, all of them from
Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Mansur from a
man - and his name was Umar bin Abdul Aziz from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that
he said:

“When days and nights pass in such a condition that you are unable to
see the Imam whom you can follow, you must continue to love what you
love and continue to hate what you hate till Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime brings him out.”

39 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from
Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Hasan bin Mahboob from Yunus bin Yaqoob
from one who narrated to him from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“What will your condition be when a part of your life will remain you
will not be able to see your Imam? Someone asked: What shall we do in
such circumstances? He replied: Keep up with the original command till
the matter becomes clear to you.”

40 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin
Walid - May Allah be pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Hasan al-Saffar from Abbas bin Maroof from Ali bin Mahziyar
from Hasan bin Mahboob from Hammad bin Isa from Ishaq bin Jareer from
Abdullah bin Sinan that he said:

“I and my father came to Abi Abdullah (a.s.) and he said: How will you
be when you will not be able to see your Imam or know his location? And
none will get salvation from it except those who recite Dua Ghareeq. My
father asked: What shall we do in such circumstances? He replied: When
such a time comes, remain steadfast on religion till the matter becomes
clear to you.”

41 - Narrated to us Ja’far bin Ali bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abdullah bin
Mughaira Kufi (r.a.): Narrated to me my grandfather Hasan bin Ali from
Abbas bin Aamir Qasbani from Umar bin Aban Kalbi from Aban bin Taghlib
that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said to me:

“There will come upon people a time when the Imam will go from among
you. At that time many flags will arise between the two masjids, that is
Mecca and Medina, like snakes enter their holes. At that time the
Almighty Allah will bring out a star for the guidance of people. I
asked: What is that time when the Imam is absent? He replied: It is the
time of Fitrat and occultation of your Imam. I asked: What shall we do
in such circumstances? He replied: When such a time comes, remain
steadfast on religion till the matter becomes clear to you.”

42 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Musa
bin Sadaan from Abdullah bin Qasim from Mufaddal bin Umar that he said:
I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.) regarding the exegesis of Jabir and he
replied:

“Do not mention such matters to people of less understanding because
they will spread them to others. Have you not seen the verse in the Book
of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***For when the trumpet is sounded.***[^10]

Then he said: There will be an Imam from us Ahlul Bayt, who will remain
in concealment. When the Almighty Allah wants him to come out, He will
create a spot in his heart. Thus he will reappear and enforce the
command of Allah.”

43 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin
Walid - May Allah be pleased with them -they said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Hasan al-Saffar: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain bin
Abil Khattab and Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid Yaqteeni, all of them from
Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran from Isa bin Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Umar
bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said to his uncle as-Sadiq Ja’far
bin Muhammad (a.s.):

“If such a time comes (when we are deprived from your presence) whom
shall we obey? The Imam gestured towards Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.). I
asked: And after him? He replied: His son. If his son dies leaving a son
who is young and a brother who is aged, whom do we follow? He replied:
His son. Then he said: And always do like this only. I asked: What if a
time comes when I cannot recognize the Imam and don’t know his
whereabouts? He replied: At that time you must recite the following
supplication: O Allah I have attached myself to Your remaining Divine
Proof from the sons of the previous Imam. That would be sufficient.”

44 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Ayyub bin Nuh from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Jameel bin
Durraj from Zurarah that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“There will come upon the people a time when the Imam will disappear
from them. It was asked: What should they do in such circumstances? He
replied: They should remain attached to the faith they were on before,
till the matter becomes clear to them.”

45 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to me my
father Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ali bin Kulthum:
Narrated to me Hasan bin Ali Daqqaq from Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abi
Qatadah from Ahmad bin Hilal from Ibne Abi Umair from Saeed bin Ghazwan
from Abu Baseer from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“After Husain (a.s.), there will be nine Imams. The ninth of them is
their Qaim.”

46 -Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father Muhammad
bin Masud Ayyashi: Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Shuja from
Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer that
he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“In the master of this affair there are resemblances with the prophets.
Resemblance to Musa bin Imran, resemblance to Isa, resemblance to Yusuf
and resemblance to Muhammad (peace be on them all).

As for the resemblance to Musa (a.s.), it is constant fear and caution.
And as for the resemblance to Yusuf is that Allah put such a veil
between him and people that they could see him but could not recognize
him. And as of the resemblance to Muhammad (S), he will be guided by his
guidance and follow his practice.”

47 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud:
Narrated to me Jibraeel bin Ahmad: Narrated to me Musa bin Ja’far bin
Wahab Baghdadi: Narrated to me Muhammad bin Isa from Husain bin Saeed
from Qasim bin Muhammad from Aban from Harith bin Mughaira that he said:
I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“Would there come upon people a time when they would not be able to
recognize the Imam? He replied: It has been said thus. I said: What
would they do? He replied: They should remain attached to their original
faith till the other matter becomes clear to them.”

48 - And through the same chain of narrators from Musa bin Ja’far that:
Narrated to me Musa bin Qasim from Ali Ibne Ja’far from Abil Hasan Musa
bin Ja’far (a.s.) that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say
regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا فَمَنْ يَأْتِيكُمْ
بِمَاءٍ مَعِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Have you considered if your water should go down, who is it then
that will bring you*** ***flowing water?***[^11]

“Don’t you see that if your Imam disappears who is it that would bring
him back to you again?”

49 - And through the same chain of narrators from Musa bin Ja’far bin
Wahab Baghdadi that he said: Narrated to me Hasan bin Muhammad Sairafi:
Narrated to me Yahya bin Muthanna al-Attar from Abdullah bin Bukair from
Ubaid bin Zurarah that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The Imam will disappear from the people. He will witness those who come
for Hajj. He will see them but they will not see him.”

50 - And through the same chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Masud
that he said: I saw in the handwriting of Jibraeel bin Ahmad: Narrated
to me Ubaidi Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus bin Abdur Rahman from Abdullah
bin Sinan that Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“After this, a time will come when you will not be able to see the Imam
of the time. In that period no one will be saved except the one who
recites “Dua-e-Gareeq”. The narrator inquired as to what is
Dua-e-Gareeq. Imam (a.s.) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا الله يا رحمن يا رحيم يا مقلب القلوب ثبت قلبي على دينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah! O Beneficent! O Merciful! O the One Who transforms the hearts!
Make my heart steadfast upon your religion!”

The narrator repeated the dua in this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا الله يا رحمن يا رحيم يا مقلب القلوب والابصار ثبت قلبي على دينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

The narrator added “Moqallebal Quloob. Wal Absaar” Imam (a.s.) told him,
“Indeed, Allah is Moqallebal Quloob Wal Absaar”, but you say only “Ya
Muqallebal Quloob Sabbit Qalbee Ala Deenek!”

51 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Hatim Naufali alias Kermani:
Narrated to us Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Isa Washsha Baghdadi: Narrated to us
Ahmad bin Tahir [Qummi]: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Najr bin Sahl
Shaibani: Informed us Ali bin Harith from Saeed bin Mansur Jaushini:
Informed us Ahmad bin Ali Budaili: Informed us my father from Sadeer
Sairafi that he said:

“I, Mufaddal bin Umar, Abu Baseer and Aban bin Taghlib came to our
master Abi Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) and saw him sitting on the floor and
covered with Khaibari sheet made of hair, his neck was open and his
sleeves folded up. He was crying like the mother having only one son
laments at his death. The signs of sorrow were apparent from his face
and its effects were spread on his cheeks.

Tears had moistened the hollows of his eyes and he was saying: My
master, your occultation has taken away my night’s sleep, it has
narrowed my bed for me, and has snatched away the solace from my heart.
My master your occultation has turned my tragedies into the atrocities
of eternity! The loss of one after the other perishes a crowd and a
multitude. No more I feel the tear that drops from my eye, and the moon
that faintly leaves my chest from the places of tragedies and past
calamities except that it exemplifies before my eye the greatest and
cruelest of catastrophes, the most dismal and disdainful mishaps, mixed
with your wrath, and calamities coupled with your anger.”

Sudair says: Our hearts and minds were overwhelmed by that terrifying
scene and mortifying view. We thought that it is the sign of a dreadful
shattering or times have brought him a calamity. So we said, “May Allah,
O son of the best of the creation, never bring tears into your eyes. For
what incidents are your eyes pouring and your tears raining and what
situation has led you to this mourning?”

Sudair says: As-Sadiq (a.s.) took a deep sigh that his chest expanded
and his fright enhanced, and he said, O, you, I looked at the Book of
al-Jafr this morning, and that is the book that encompasses the
knowledge of deaths, trials and tribulations and the knowledge of all
that has been and all that will be until the Day of Judgment, which
Allah, glory to His name, has exclusively imparted to Muhammad and the
Imams after him, peace unto him and them.

I viewed therein the birth of our Qaim and his disappearance and its
protraction and the length of his lifespan and the trials of the
believers through him and after him in that period and the generation of
doubts in their hearts from the length of his disappearance and the
apostasy of most of them from their religion and their removing the cord
of Islam from their necks, about which Allah, glory to His name, has
said, We have fastened to every man’s neck his fateful bird which is the
Wilayah. So emotions overpowered me and griefs overwhelmed me.”

We said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger, dignify us and bestow honor upon
us by sharing some of what you know from the knowledge.”

He said, “Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has consigned three qualities in
the Qaim of ours, which He had consigned to three of the apostles. He
foreordained his birth like the birth of Musa (a.s.); his disappearance
like the disappearance of Isa (a.s.); and his protraction like the
protraction of Nuh (a.s.). Moreover, He made the lifespan of His
virtuous servant, Khizr, a proof of his long life.”

I said, “Remove the curtains for us, O son of Allah’s Messenger, from
the faces of these concepts.”

He said: “As for the birth of Musa (a.s.). “When Firon learnt that his
downfall and destruction was going to be at the hands of Musa (a.s.) he
summoned the soothsayers and they predicted the downfall of his kingdom
at the hands of a youth of Bani Israel.

So Firon issued orders that the bellies of pregnant ladies of the Bani
Israel be slit open, till more than twenty thousand newborns were
killed. But he was not able to get Musa because Allah, the Mighty and
the High protected him. In the same way when the Bani Umayyah and the
Bani Abbas came to know that the downfall and destruction of their
kingdom and tyrant rulers was to be at the hands of our Qaim, they began
to wreak their enmity on us and swords were drawn out to slay the
progeny of the Messenger of Allah (S) and to destroy his descendants so
that through it they may be able to eliminate Qaim (a.s.). But the
Almighty Allah did not accept that His affair be divulged to anyone of
the oppressors. But that His light may be perfected even though the
polytheists may despise it.”

As for the disappearance of Isa (a.s.). The Jews and Christians formed
unanimity that he has been killed; whereas Allah belied them in this
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا قَتَلُوهُ وَمَا صَلَبُوهُ وَلَكِن شُبِّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they did not kill him nor did they crucify him, but it appeared
to them so.*** [^12]

Likewise is the disappearance of the Qaim since one group denies it for
its length – ranging from one misguided person who says, ‘He was never
born’; to another who says, ‘He was born and he died’; to another who
rejects faith by saying that our Eleventh was issueless; to another who
deviates by saying, ‘This will increase to thirteen and upwards’, and
another who sins against Allah, the Mighty and Sublime by saying, ‘The
spirit of the Qaim speaks through the body of someone else’.

“As for the protraction of Nuh: When he prayed for the descent of
punishment against his people from the heavens, Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime sent Jibraeel, the trusted spirit with seven kernels and said, O
Apostle of Allah, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says to you, ‘They are
My creation My servants. I will not destroy them with a lightning bolt
until the call has been stressed upon and the proof has become binding.

Retain your hard labor in making the call to your people, for I will
reward you for that. Plant these kernels, because your relief and
liberation will be at its plantation, outgrowth and fruition when it
reaches fruition. Give this glad tiding to your believing followers.’
When the trees grew and thrived and their trunks and branches developed
and spread out and their fruits grew big, he asked Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime for the fulfillment of the promise. Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime ordered him to plant the seeds of those trees and retain
patience and hard work and make the call to his people.

He informed the community that believed in him; three hundred men of
them turned away from him and said, ‘If what Nuh is claiming were true,
the promise of his Lord would not have been violated.’ Then Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime continued to order him every time to plant the seeds
until they had been planted seven times. The community of believers
continued to lose groups until there were left only seventy and some odd
men. At that time, did Allah, the Mighty and Sublime sent a message to
him and said, ‘O Nuh, now the dawn on your eyes has broken the night as
the truth has manifested with clarity and the order of belief has become
pure from impurity by the apostasy of everyone who had wicked
disposition.

If I had destroyed the disbelievers and kept those who have apostatized
from among the believers in you, I had not fulfilled My early promise to
the believers from your people who were sincere in their belief in Me
and had adhered to the rope of your prophethood that I would make them
heirs in earth and empower for them their religion and replace their
fear with security, so that worship be pure for Me by the departure of
doubts from their hearts. How could I provide heirship and empowerment
and replacement of fear with security while I know the weakness of
certainty of the people who apostatized and their wicked dispositions
and their evil insides, which were the outcomes of hypocrisy and the
initiation of misguidance.

If they had procured from Me the kingdom that will be given to the
believers at the time of heirship when I will have killed their enemies,
they would have sniffed the smells of its attractions, and it would have
strengthened the inner secrets of their hypocrisy, and eternalized the
strings of misguidance and their hearts, and they would have faced their
brothers with enmity and would have battled them in pursuit of chiefdom
and the distinction of commanding and forbidding. And how can the
religion’s empowerment and the Command’s spread among the believers
coexist with rise of mischief and occurrence of wars? Never.

Build the Ark under Our eyes and as We reveal.’” As-Sadiq (a.s.) said,
“Likewise is the Qaim (a.s.). The days of his occultation will be
lengthy so truth may become clear and belief may become pure from
impurity by the apostasy of everyone from the Shia with a wicked
disposition, who are feared they are hypocrites when they expect
heirship and empowerment and a vast security in the reign of the Qaim
(a.s.).” Al-Mufaddal says, I asked, “O son of Allah’s Messenger, the
Ahlul Bayt-haters (Nawasib) believe this verse has been revealed about
Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali.”

He said, “May Allah not guide the hearts of the Nawasib. When was the
religion which Allah and His Messenger empowered through spread of
security in the Ummah and the departure of fear from their hearts and
doubts from breasts during the reign of anyone of them? And in the reign
of Ali (a.s.) especially with the apostasy of Muslims and mischiefs
which were occurring in their days and the wars that were breaking out
between the disbelievers and between themselves.” Then as-Sadiq (a.s.)
recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا اسْتَيْأَسَ الرُّسُلُ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ قَدْ كُذِبُوا
جَاءَهُمْ نَصْرُنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Until when the apostles despaired and the people became sure that
they were indeed told a lie, Our help came to them.***[^13]

“And as for the Righteous Servant, Khizr (a.s.); the Almighty Allah
bestowed him with a long lifespan not due to the fact that He had made
him a Prophet, or because a book was revealed to him, nor that he
brought a new Shariat nullifying the previous one, nor that He made him
an Imam and required the people to follow him, nor because his obedience
was compulsory.

Rather it was because it was there in the knowledge of Allah, the
Blessed and the High, that during occultation the age of Qaim (a.s.)
would be prolonged to an extent that people would not believe it, and
they would deny a long age, He prolonged the age of the Righteous
Servant, Khizr (a.s.) without any justification, except that it be a
basis for proving the age of Qaim (a.s.) so that the arguments and
proofs of the opponents may be invalidated and that people may not have
any argument against the Almighty Allah.”

[Nos. 52 and 53 do not appear in the Arabic-Persian Edition. I have
followed the same numbering in this instance]

54 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Amari
Samarqandi (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ja’far bin Masud and
Haider bin Muhammad bin Nuaim Samarqandi, all of them from Muhammad bin
Masud Ayyashi that he said: Narrated to me Ali bin Muhammad bin Shuja
from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus Ibne Abdur Rahman from Ali bin Abi
Hamza from Abi Baseer that as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) said
regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَأْتِي بَعْضُ آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ لَا يَنْفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا
لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِنْ قَبْلُ أَوْ كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا خَيْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when some of the signs of your Lord shall come, its faith
shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn good
through its faith.***[^14]

That it denotes the advent of the awaited Qaim from us. Then he said: “O
Aba Baseer, Fortunate are the Shias of our Qaim who during the period of
his occultation wait for his reappearance and who obey him during the
period of his reappearance. They are Awliya of Allah for whom there
shall be neither fear nor grief.”

55 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Amari
Samarqandi (r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his
father Muhammad bin Masud Ayyashi from Ja’far bin Ahmad from Amraki bin
Ali Bufakki from Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from Marwan bin Muslim from
Abi Baseer that he said: As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) said:

“Tooba (Glad tidings) for the one who attached to our Wilayat during the
occultation of our Qaim and his heart does not deviate after guidance.
He was asked: May I be sacrificed on you, what is Tooba? He replied: A
tree in Paradise growing from the house of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and
there will not be any believer who does not have one of the branches of
this tree reaching into his house and that is the meaning of the saying
of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبَى لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ مَآبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Tooba (a good final state) shall be theirs and a goodly
return***[^15]***.***

56 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Imran al-Daqqaq:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin
Imran Nakahi from his uncle Husain bin Yazid Naufali from Ali bin Abi
Hamza from Abi Baseer that he said: I said to as-Sadiq Ja’far bin
Muhammad (a.s.): O son of Allah’s Messenger, I have heard from your
father that he said:

“There will twelve Mahdis after the Qaim?” Imam (a.s.) said: “He has
said twelve Mahdis not twelve Imams. They shall be our Shias who would
call the people towards our Wilayat (guardianship) and Marefat
(recognition) of our rights.”

57 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Imran al-Daqqaq
(r.a.): Narrated to us Hamza bin Qasim Alawi Abbasi: Narrated to us
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Kufi Fazari: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Husain bin Zaid Zayyat: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ziyad Azdi from
Mufaddal bin Umar that he asked As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.)
regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ ابْتَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when your Lord examined Ibrahim with some words, then he
completed these***[^16]

What were these words? He replied, “These were the words that Adam
(a.s.) received from his Lord due to which Allah accepted his
repentance. These words were as follows, ‘I ask You for the sake of
Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain that You accept my repentance,
so Allah accepted his repentance. Surely He is the Oft-turning, the
Merciful.” I asked, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! What is the meaning of
‘he completed these’?’ He explained, “It implies that he completed the
words till the Qaim, twelve Imams, of whom nine are the descendants of
Husain (a.s.).” Mufaddal requested, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! Please
inform me about the saying of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘And He made it as a lasting word in his posterity.’***[^17]

He elaborated, “By this, He implies the Imamate. Allah, the High, has
made it in the posterity of Husain till the Day of Judgment.” Again I
inquired, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! How is it that the Imamate
continued in the posterity of Husain and not in Hasan’s, although both
are the sons of Allah’s Messenger, his grandsons and the chiefs of the
youths of paradise?’ He clarified, “Certainly Musa and Harun were
Prophets, Messengers and brothers but Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He,
made Prophethood in the posterity of Harun and not in that of Musa
(a.s.) and it does not befit anybody to question Allah’s action. Surely
Imamate is the Caliphate of Allah in His earth and nobody can dispute
His action as to why He has done so. For surely, Allah, Blessed and High
be He, is Prudent in His actions. He is not questioned about what He
does but the people will be questioned.”

[^1]: Surah Anaam 6:158

[^2]: Conditional

[^3]: Surah Nisa 4:59

[^4]: Surah Maidah 5:55

[^5]: Surah Baqarah 2:3

[^6]: Surah Baqarah 2:1-3

[^7]: Surah Yusuf 12:89-90

[^8]: Surah Ibrahim 14:24

[^9]: Surah Ibrahim 14:25

[^10]: Surah Muddaththir 74:8

[^11]: Surah Mulk 67:30

[^12]: Surah Nisa 4:157

[^13]: Surah Yusuf 12:110

[^14]: Surah Anaam 6:158

[^15]: Surah Raad 13:29

[^16]: Surah Baqarah 2:124

[^17]: Surah Zukhruf 43:28


