Chapter 34: Statements of al-Kazim (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
=============================================================================

1 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Hasan bin Isa bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Ja’far from his father from his
grandfather Muhammad bin Ali from Ali bin Ja’far from his brother, Musa
bin Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“When the fifth descendant of the seventh Imam goes into occultation,
for the sake of Allah protect your religion. None of you must let go of
your religion. O son, occultation is necessary for the master of this
affair. So much so that even those who say that it is a test from Allah,
they would also turn away from him. And if in the knowledge of your
forefathers there had been some other religion more correct and better
than this, they would have followed that only.” I asked: “Master, tell
us who is the fifth descendant of the seventh Imam?” He replied: “Son,
your intellects are small, he cannot be accommodated in it. Your
understanding is so restricted that you cannot bear it, but if you live
till that time you will indeed find him.”

2 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Hasan bin Musa Khashshab from Abbas bin Aamir Qasbani
that he said: I heard Abul Hasan Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“The master of this affair is one about whom people will say that he is
not born yet.”

3 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Musa bin Qasim from
Muawiyah bin Wahab Bajali and Abi Qatadah Ali Ibne Muhammad bin Hafs
from Ali bin Ja’far that he asked his brother Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.)
that the interpretation of the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا فَمَنْ يَأْتِيكُمْ
بِمَاءٍ مَعِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Have you considered if your water should go down, who is it then
that will bring you flowing water?***[^1]

The Imam said: What will you do when your Imam disappears from your
sight and you cannot see him?”

4 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamdani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Muhammad bin
Khalid Barqi from Ali bin Hassan from Dawood bin Kathir Riqqi that he
said:

“I asked His Eminence, Abul Hasan Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.) about the
master of this affair. He replied: “He would be that same wandering,
lonely, remote and hidden from his family who would be the revenger for
his father.”

5 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamdani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Salih bin Sindi
from Yunus bin Abdur Rahman that he said: I came to Musa bin Ja’far
(a.s.) and asked him:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger! Are you the Qaim bil Haqq? He replied, “I
am Qaim bil Haqq, but the Qaim who shall purify the earth from the
enemies of Allah Almighty and who shall fill it with justice in the same
way as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression, is my fifth
descendent who will have a prolonged occultation because his life shall
be in danger. During this period (of occultation) some people will
deviate from the truth but some would remain steadfast on it.’

Then he said, ‘Blessed are those of our Shias who during the occultation
of our Qaim remain attached to our Wilayat (guardianship) and who are
steadfast in devotion for us, who have declared immunity from our
enemies. They are from us and we are from them. And indeed they have
preferred us for Imamate and we have also selected them as our followers
(Shia). Congratulations to them and blessed be they (Shias). By Allah,
on the Day of Judgment they shall be in our grades.”

The author says: One of the causes of occultation is fear as mentioned
in tradition. Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) also used to keep his Imamate
confidential from others. In the same way his Shias who had faith in his
Imamate but feared the people, also did not discuss openly about his
Imamate. So much so that when Hisham bin Hakam was asked in the court of
Yahya bin Khalid who the Imam of that time was, Hisham resorted to
dissimulation and said: The owner of the palace, chief of believers,
Harun Rashid.

At that Harun Rashid was listening to this dialogue secretly. He said:
By God, Allah has put a cruel ruler over us. When Hisham came to know
that Harun has summoned him, he fled to Kufa and passed away there. In
compliance of his will, his bier was placed at the Kanasa highway and a
slip of paper was placed in his hand on which was written: This is
Hisham bin Hakam who was summoned by the ruler of the time. The chief
Qadi and government officials saw this. After that, the rebellious one
gave up pursuing him.

Debate of Hisham bin Hakam (r.a.) about Ghaibat
-----------------------------------------------

1 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamdani (r.a.) and Husain
bin Ibrahim bin Natana - May Allah be pleased with them - they said:
Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Muhammad
bin Abi Umair that he said: Informed us Ali Aswari:

“Yahya bin Khalid used to hold a debate every week at his house in which
scholars of all the sects participated and tried to prove the veracity
of their faith and expose the defects of the religion of their
opponents. When Harun Rashid came to know about this he asked Yahya bin
Khalid: O Abbaside, what type of gatherings you have at your place where
the participants undertake discussions? He replied: O chief of
believers, these gatherings is the highest example of all the honors
that you have bestowed me. I bring together the scholars of all the
sects so that they may expose each other and thus the falsity of all of
them is proved.

Harun Rashid said: I would also like to attend this gathering and listen
to the participants but the audience and participants should not learn
about my presence because they would not be able to have a frank talk
due to my fear. Yahya said: Arrangement will be made as per the wish of
the chief of believers. Harun told him to swear that his presence will
be kept confidential and Yahya swore to assure that. However the
Motazela people learnt about it somehow.

They discussed this among themselves and then decided that they would
argue with Hisham bin Hakam on the subject of Imamate so that Harun
Rashid comes to know what the faith of Hisham is with regard to Imamate.
On the appointed day they all reached the venue of debate. Among those
present were Hisham bin Hakam and Abdullah bin Yazid Abazi, who was the
most truthful person. He was from the Khawarij sect and was a business
partner of Harun Rashid. When Hisham entered, he greeted Abdullah bin
Yazid. Yahya bin Khalid told Abdullah bin Yazid: O Abdullah, talk to
Hisham on the subject of Imamate.

Hisham said: O Vizier, we cannot speak on this subject because these
people were having unanimity with us on the Imamate of the same person,
but after that they separated from us without knowledge and recognition.
And even after separating from us on this matter it is not known why
they separated. That is why they neither have any objection against us
nor a reply to any objection, so how can they talk to us?

Bannan, who was associated with the Hururiya sect, said: Hisham, tell me
whether the people who were among the forces of the day of arbitration,
were they believers or disbelievers? Hisham said: There were three types
of people: Believers, polytheists and misguided. Believer were those who
believed that Ali (a.s.) is an Imam appointed by Allah and that Muawiyah
is not worthy of Imamate. Thus these believers had faith in what Allah
had appointed for Ali (a.s.).

The second group was that of the polytheists who used to claim that Ali
(a.s.) is an Imam and Muawiyah is also worthy of Imamate. Thus with Ali
(a.s.) they also made Muawiyah a partner in Imamate.

The third group was that of the misguided who had joined the forces due
to tribal loyalties. They were absolutely ignorant about such things.

Then he asked: What is your opinion about the companions of Muawiyah?
Hisham said: They are also of three kinds: Disbelievers, polytheists and
deviants.

Disbelievers are those who say that Muawiyah is Imam and Ali (a.s.) is
not worthy of Imamate. Thus they disbelieved in two ways: one was
denying Ali’s divine appointment as an Imam and another was appointing
an Imam from their own side.

Polytheists were those who said that Muawiyah is an Imam and Ali (a.s.)
is also worthy of Imamate. Thus with Ali (a.s.) they also made Muawiyah
a partner in Imamate.

Deviants were those who had come fight on the side of Muawiyah only on
the basis of their tribal bigotry. In this Bannan’s voice was finally
silenced.

Dirar said: Hisham, I want to question you about this. Hisham said: You
cannot question me. He asked: Why? Hisham replied: Because you all
reject the Imamate of my master, hence I should ask you the reason of
your denial and you don’t have the right ask another question. And I
must find out your point of view regarding this. Dirar said: Ask. Hisham
said: Do you believe that Allah is just? And that He does not commit
injustice?

Dirar said: Yes, He is just, He does not commit injustice. Hisham asked:
If Allah makes it obligatory for a cripple to go to the masjid or go to
jihad, or He commands a blind man to read books etc, He would be just or
unjust? Dirar said: Allah does not issue such commands, Hisham said: Can
Allah issue such commands regarding debate that a thing should be proved
when it does not have any supporting arguments? Dirar said: If He issues
such commands He would be called unjust.

Hisham said: Has not Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has made it incumbent
for all to follow one and the same religion and that there is no
controversy that He will accept only the religion that He has made
incumbent to follow? Dirar agreed. Hisham said: Did Allah fix some proof
for this religion or He made it incumbent without a proof? Just as a
blind may be commanded to read a book or a cripple may be ordered to
attend the mosque?

Dirar fell silent for a moment. Then he said: There is indeed proof for
that but it does not justify the Imamate of your Imam. Hisham smiled and
said: You have yourself accepted the existence of Imamate. Now the only
point of difference between us is the identity of that Imam. Dirar said:
I would like to use your statement against you and ask you a question.
Hisham said: Ask. Dirar asked, “How is Imamate established and
confirmed? Hisham replied: “As Allah established Prophethood.” Dirar
said: “So he is a Prophet?” Hisham said: “No, because Prophethood is
established by the Beings in heavens, and Imamate is established by the
people of the earth. So the ratification of Prophethood is by the
angels, and the ratification of the Imam is by the Prophet (peace be
upon him).

The two are established by the will of Allah”. Dirar then said: What
evidence do you have for that? Hisham replied: The necessity of this
issue is…because there can be only three ways in it. Either that Allah
has waived responsibility (taklif) from the creations after the
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), that he no more commands them or
prohibits them from doing anything, and they have become similar to wild
beast and other animals, which are not responsible. Or that people,
after the Prophet (peace be upon him) have acquired knowledge similar to
that of the Prophet, to the extent that one is not in need of the other,
so that they will all be self-sufficient, and attain the truth without
any differences among them.

Only the third option remains, which is that they are in need of others,
because there must be knowledge to be established by the Messenger for
them, in such a way that, he neither forgets, nor errs, nor deviates. He
will be infallible and protected from sins, free of errors, one who all
need, but who needs none. He said: “What is the evidence for that?”

Hisham answered “Eight evidences: four are features of his lineage and
four are his personal features. As for the four features from his
lineage (descent), he will be from a known race and a well-known tribe
and a well known household, and that the Prophet pointed to him. There
has never been a race in this creation as famous as the Arabs, of whom
was the Prophet (peace be upon him).

If it was permissible that the evidence from Allah (Imam) for His
creation can be from any other race of the non-Arabs, and it would have
been that what Allah wanted to be a source of good will is a source of
corruption. This will not be compatible with the wisdom and justice of
Allah, that He imposes on mankind an obligatory duty that does not
exist. As this is not permissible, so it is not permissible that (the
Imam) will be from other than this race, due to his relation with the
prophet.

It is also not permissible that he will be of this race, if he will not
be from this tribe, due to its close relation to the Prophet (peace be
upon him), which is Quraish. As it is not permissible that he will be
from this race, except that he is from this tribe, in similar ways, it
will not be permissible that he (the Imam) will be from this tribe,
except that he is from this household, for its close relation with the
Prophet (peace be upon him). And as the members of this household, are
many, and have quarreled on the issue of Imamate, due to its lofty
position, with each one of them claiming it for himself, so it is not
permissible except that the Prophet points to him in person, and by his
name and his descent, so that all others will be excluded from claiming
it.

As for the four personal features of (the Imam), they are that, he will
be the most knowledgeable person as regards Allah’s injunctions and
precepts, so that nothing small or big will be obscured to him; and that
he should be free from all sins (infallible); and he should be the
bravest of men, and the most generous of them.

Abdullah bin Yazid al-Ibadi then said: “Why do you say that he (the
Imam) will be the most knowledgeable of all men?”

Hisham said: “That is because if he is not conversant with all the
injunctions, precepts and laws of Allah, we cannot be sure that he will
not change the injunctions of Allah, so that anyone who commits an
offence will not be punished accordingly, if it involves cutting up his
hand, he will not execute it: so that he does not establish the limits
of Allah on what He has commanded, being in the long run, a source of
corruption instead of reform as Allah wishes.

Then he said, “How do you say that he is free from sins?”

He replied: “This is because if he were not free from sins, he will fall
into error, so we cannot be secured that he will conceal what he has
done, or conceal his friend or relation: and Allah will not set this
person as his evidence on His creation.”

He then further asked: “How do you say that he (the Imam) is the bravest
of people?” Hisham replied: “It is because that group of Muslims who
will resort to him in wars, Allah says, “And whoever turns his back to
them on such a day— unless it is a stratagem of war, or to retreat to a
troop of his own he indeed has drawn upon himself wrath from Allah…. So
if he were not brave, he will draw the wrath of Allah on himself. It is
not permissible that the one who draws Allah’s wrath will be Allah’s
evidence upon His creation.”

Abdullah further asked him: “How do you say that he is the most generous
of people? He replied: “Because he is the keeper of Muslims treasures.
For if he were not generous, his soul will crave for their wealth and he
will take it, and that will be breach of trust: and it is not
permissible that Allah will present a cheat as His evidence on His
creation.

Dirar said: Tell me who is the bearer of those qualities today? Hisham
said: The master of the palace, the chief of the believers. Harun Rashid
who listening to all this from behind the curtain said to Ja’far bin
Yahya: What a sharp tongue this man has! Ja’far, who does he imply by
‘chief of believers’? Ja’far said: He means Musa bin Ja’far. Harun
Rashid said: He has spoken of him with the titles only he is worthy of.

Then he clenched his teeth and said: I don’t want this man alive even
for a moment in my kingdom. By Allah his tongue is more dangerous for
the hearts of the people than a thousand swords. Yahya learnt that Harun
was terribly infuriated at Hisham. When he came behind the curtain Harun
asked: O Abbaside, who is that man? Yahya said: O chief of believers,
control your anger. Then he came out and made a sign to Hisham to leave
the place immediately. Hisham arose in such a way that people thought
that he was going to answer Nature’s call.

Thus he put on his shoes and departed in the direction of his house and
from there he left for Kufa. On reaching Kufa he hid in the house of
Bishr Nabbal and told him what had passed. Bishr Nabbal was a companion
of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.). Then Hisham fell seriously ill. When Bishr
Nabbal offered to call the doctor he said: No, I am going to die. When
you complete putting the burial shroud on me, in the middle of the night
put my bier on the Kanasa highway and put a written slip in my hand that
says: This is Hisham bin Hakam whom the chief of believers had summoned.
He has died a natural death.

Harun sent some people to his brothers and companions and got them
arrested. In the morning the people of Kufa saw Hisham’s bier. The town
Qadi, assistant-governor, the governor himself and the reliable people
of Kufa gathered and wrote to Harun Rashid about the death of Hisham. On
receiving the message Harun said: Thanks be to Allah that He Himself
performed this task and saved us from getting involved in it. After that
those who had been arrested were released.”

2 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Abi Ahmad Muhammad
bin Ziyad Azadi that: I asked my master Musa Ibne Ja’far (a.s.)
regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْبَغَ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعَمَهُ ظَاهِرَةً وَبَاطِنَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And made complete to you His favors outwardly and inwardly.”***[^2]

He replied: “The apparent bounty is the Imam who is seen and the hidden
bounty is the Imam who is in occultation.” The narrator says: I asked:
“Is there any among the Imams that shall go into occultation?” He
replied: “Yes, his person would be unseen by the people but his
remembrance would remain hidden in the hearts of the believers.

And he is the twelfth one of us. For him the Almighty Allah would make
every difficult thing easy and tame every disobedient one. He would open
up the treasures of the earth for him and make every remoteness a
proximity for him. He would destroy every disobedient sinner and
eliminate every transgressing satan at his hands. He is the son of the
best of the maids. His birth would be concealed from the people and it
won’t be lawful for them to mention his name. Till the time Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime would make him appear. Then he will fill the earth
with justice and equity, as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression.”

The author says: I have not heard this tradition from anyone except
Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.), in Hamadan on the return
journey from Hajj. He was a trustworthy, religious and learned man, may
Allah’s pleasure and satisfaction be with him.

[^1]: Surah Mulk 67:30

[^2]: Surah Luqman 31:20


