Chapter 35: Statements of ar-Reza (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
============================================================================

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan al-Saffar from Yaqoob bin Yazid from
Ayyub bin Nuh that he said: I said to ar-Reza (a.s.):

“We hope that you will be the master of this affair and that may Allah,
the Exalted restore power to you without taking up arms. You have been
pledged allegiance to and coins have been struck in your name.” He said,
“There is no one of us that letters come and go to him, is asked
questions, pointed with fingers, and religious dues taken to, but he
will be assassinated or he will die on his bed, until Allah, the
Exalted, sends for this matter a man whose birth and place of growth
will be hidden and he will not be hidden in his lineage.”

2 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari from Ali bin Hasan
bin Faddal from Rayyan bin Salt that he said: I heard him say: Abul
Hasan ar-Reza was asked regarding the Qaim. He replied:

“His person will not be seen and his name will not be pronounced.”

3 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Ahmad bin Hilal Abartai from Hasan bin Mahboob from Abil
Hasan Ali bin Musa ar-Reza (a.s.) that: He said to me:

“Definitely, there will occur the dumb, catastrophic mischief, in which
every secret and close relation will be dropped. That will happen when
the Shia will miss my third descendant. The dwellers of the heavens and
the earth, and every worthy and merited man, every contrite and
sorrowful person will cry for him.”

Then he said, “May my parents be sacrificed for the namesake of my
grandfather and my look-alike and the look-alike of Musa the son of
Imran. He is dressed in the garments of light, shining with rays of
illumination of sanctity. How abundant worthy men of faith and how
abundant sorrowful men of belief will be perplexed and grievous at the
loss of that crystal spring. As if I see them in their utmost despair,
they are being called by a call that is heard from far away as it is
heard from the near, a call that is a blessing for the faithful and a
curse for the unbelievers.”

4 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us my father from Muhammad bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin
Mehran from his uncle Ahmad bin Zakariya that: Ar-Reza Ali bin Musa
(a.s.) asked me:

“Where is your house in Baghdad?” I said, “At al-Karkh.” He said, “That
is the safest of places. There has to happen the deaf catastrophe
mischief in which every secret and close relation will be dropped. That
will happen after the Shia will miss my third descendant.”

5 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Ali bin Mabad from
Husain bin Khalid that: Ali bin Musa ar-Reza said:

“One who does not have piety does not have religion and whosoever does
not have dissimulation (Taqayyah) does not have faith and indeed the
most honored among you near Allah is the one most pious of you. His
Eminence was asked: Till when does he have to observe Taqayyah? He
replied: Till the day of the appointed hour and on that day is the
reappearance of our (Ahlul Bayt’s) Qaim.

Thus whosoever abandons Taqayyah before his reappearance is not from us.
It was asked: O son of Allah’s Messenger, from which of Ahlul Bayt is
the Qaim? He replied: He is my fourth descendant, the son of the best of
the maidservants. The Almighty Allah would, through him, purify the
earth from every kind of oppression and remove every type of injustice
from it. He is the one in whose birth the people would doubt and he is
the one who would have an occultation before his reappearance.

And when he arises, the earth shall be lit up with his effulgence. He
would establish the scales of justice among the people so that no one
may oppress the other. He is the one for whom the earth would warp
itself and he would not throw a shadow. And he is the one by whose name
the caller would call out from the sky inviting people to the Imam which
all the people of the earth would be able to hear. The caller would say:
Know that the Proof of Allah has appeared near the House of Allah, so
follow him as truth is with him, and that is the meaning of the
statement of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.”***[^1]

6 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani: Narrated to us
Ali bin Ibrahim from his father from Abdus Salam bin Salih Harawi that:
I heard Dibil bin Ali Khuzai say:

I recited my long poem to my master, Ali Ibne Musa ar-Reza, the
beginning of which is:

Schools of verses empty of recitations

And the House of revelation horrendously empty.

When I reached to my verse:

The rise of an Imam who will definitely rise

And stand by the name of Allah and His blessings

He will make distinction between all rights and wrongs

And will proffer requital for charities and malevolence.

Imam Reza (a.s.) cried very profusely and then raised his head and said
to me, “O Khuzai, the Blessed Spirit has spoken on your tongue in these
two verses. Do you know who this Imam is and when he will rise?” I said,
“No, my master, except I have heard that an Imam of yours will rise and
clean the earth from mischief and will fill up the earth with equity as
it will be full of oppression.”

He said, “O Dibil, the Imam after me is my son, Muhammad; after Muhammad
his son, Ali; after Ali his son Hasan; and after Hasan his son, al-Hujja
al-Qaim, the Awaited during his occultation, the one obeyed in his time
of appearance. Even if not more than one day should remain from the
world, Allah will prolong that day so much that he will rise and fill
the world with equity just as it will be full of injustice.

As for when it will happen, that is to describe its time, and my father
has narrated to me through his forefathers through Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) was asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah
(S), when is the Qaim from your progeny going to rise?’ He said, ‘His
example is like the example of the Hour:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ ثَقُلَتْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالأَرْضِ لاَ تَأْتِيكُمْ إِلاَّ بَغْتَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***None but He shall manifest it at its time. It will be momentous in
the heavens and the earth. It will not come on you but
suddenly.’”***[^2]

There is another tradition of Dibil which also we shall mention here.

7 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim (r.a.): from his father
from his grandfather Ibrahim bin Hashim from Abdus Salam bin Salih
Harawi that: Dibil bin Ali Khuzai came to Abil Hasan Ali bin Musa
ar-Reza (a.s.) in Merv and said to him:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, I have composed a panegyric in your honor
and I vowed that I will not recite it to anyone before you. The Imam
said: Recite it for me. And he recited as follows: Schools of verses
empty of recitations And the House of revelation horrendously empty.

When I reached the verse: Their property has been distributed to others
Their hands are empty of their own wealth.

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) began to weep and said: O Dibil you have said the
truth.

When Dibil reached to the verse: When they are being oppressed they
stretch to the enemies Their hands which cannot hold the bow.

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) began to rub his hands and then said: By Allah my
hands are tied. When Dibil reached to the verse: Indeed I am fearful of
the world and the changing times Thus I hope in peace and security after
my death.

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said: O Dibil, May Allah keep you in His protection
till the Judgment Day. When Dibil recited the last verse of the
panegyric: There is a tomb of a purified personality in Baghdad Whom
Allah has given place in the gardens of Paradise.

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said: O Dibil, would it not be better if you add
the following two verses at the end of your panegyric? Dibil said:
Indeed, O son of Allah’s Messenger. The Imam recited:

And a tomb shall be made in Tus by whose tragedy

The inner portion of the body will be scorched.

And this will continue till the resurrection till Allah sends a Qaim

Through him would He remove the calamities from us.

Dibil asked: O son of Allah’s Messenger, whose tomb would be made at
Tus? The Imam said: Mine. I would soon move to Tus where my tomb will
become a place of visitation for my Shias. Thus one who visits me in my
isolation in Tus, he shall be with me on the Judgment Day and he shall
get salvation.

After listening to the verses of Dibil Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) went home. A
servant of the Imam came to Dibil with a hundred dinars minted in the
Imam’s name and said: The Imam has sent these for your traveling
expenses. Dibil said: I don’t need it and neither did I compose the
panegyric for monetary gain. But I beseech the Imam to give me a cloth
he has worn so that it be a blessing and honor for me.

The Imam sent a gown to Dibil and also gave him the dinars saying that
he would need them. Dibil took all the things and departed along with a
caravan of Merv. When the caravan camped at Qauhan they were attacked by
robbers who looted everything and took the travelers as hostages. Then
they began to divide the loot among themselves. One of the robbers
hummed the following verse of Dibil:

Their property has been distributed to others

Their hands are empty of their own wealth.

Dibil asked him: Whose verse is it? He replied: A person of the Khuzai
tribe, a person called Dibil bin Ali. Dibil said: I am the same Dibil
who has compose these verses. That robber took Dibil to his leader who
was praying on top of a mound and he was from the Shias. When he
informed the leader he himself came down to meet Dibil. He asked: Are
you Dibil? Dibil said: Yes. He said: Recite that panegyric. He recited
it. The robbers released all the hostages and returned with respect
everything they had looted.

When Dibil reached Qom it was announced that he would recite the
panegyric composed by him in the mosque. A time was fixed and people
gathered in the Jame mosque. Dibil mounted the pulpit and presented the
panegyric. People gifted him in cash and kind. When they came to know
that Dibil had a gown of Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) they offered a thousand
dinars for the same but he refused. They said: Give us a piece from this
gown for a thousand dinars. But Dibil refused and he departed from Qom.

He has hardly left the Qom area when a desert tribe attacked and looted
the Imam’s gown also. Dibil came back and demanded them to return it,
but they refused. They asked for a ransom of 8000 dinars but Dibil
refused. At last when Dibil became helpless he told them to give only a
piece from this gown. So they gave him a piece of gown and also gave him
8000 dinars.

Dibil returned to his hometown but on the way dacoits surrounded him and
looted everything he had. He was left with only a hundred dinars that
the Imam had given. Dibil converted these into 10000 dirhams. At that
time he remembered the Imam’s statement that he would need that money.
Dibil was also accompanied by a maidservant who was seriously ill. The
doctors said that her right eye was lost, but it was possible to cure
the left eye.

Dibil was shocked and wept much. Then he remembered that he was having a
piece of that gown. In the early evening Dibil rubbed that piece of
cloth against the maid’s eyes and by the morning next both her eyes were
cured and by the blessings of Maula Abul Hasan (a.s.) even the signs of
disease did not remain.”

8 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim from his father from Zayyan bin Salt that he said:
I asked ar-Reza (a.s.):

“Are you the Sahibul Amr (Master of Affair)? He replied: I am also
Sahibul Amr but not the Sahibul Amr who will fill the earth with justice
as it would have been fraught with tyranny and oppression. And how can I
be that person? While you can see that I am physically weak. Whereas the
Qaim is the one who at the time of his reappearance will be senior in
age but have the appearance of the youth.

His body shall be so strong that if he catches hold of the biggest tree
of the earth he shall be able to uproot it and if he shouts between the
mountains, their stones will roll down. The staff of Prophet Musa and
the seal ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) are with him. He is my fourth
descendent. The Almighty Allah will keep him in occultation as long as
Divine wisdom dictates. Then He will reveal him so that he may fill the
earth with justice and equity just as it would fraught with injustice
and oppression.”

[^1]: Surah Shuara 26:4

[^2]: Surah Araaf 7:187


