Chapter 36: Statements of al-Jawad (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
=============================================================================

1 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa Daqqaq (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Harun Sufi: Narrated to us Abu Turab Abdullah bin Musa
Ruyani (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdul Azeem bin Abdullah bin Ali bin Hasan
bin Zaid bin Hasan bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) [al-Hasani] that: I
came to my chief, Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Ali bin Husain Ibne Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and wanted to ask him
regarding the Qaim, that whether he is the Mahdi or someone else. The
Imam began the conversation and said:

“O Abal Qasim, the Qaim from us and he is the Mahdi. It is obligatory to
wait for him in his occultation and to obey him in his appearance. He is
the third from my descendants. By the One Who sent Muhammad with
prophethood and distinguished us through Imamate, even if it does not
remain from the world but a single day, Allah will prolong that day
until he rises. He will fill the earth with equity and justice, as it
will be replete with injustice and oppression. Indeed the Almighty Allah
would reform his affairs overnight in the same manner as He reformed the
affairs of His Kaleem (Musa a.s.) when he went to get fire for his wife
but he returned graced with prophethood and messengership.” Then he
said, “The best action of our Shias is to wait for reappearance.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ahmad Shaibani (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi from Sahl bin Ziyad Adami from Abdul
Azeem bin Abdullah Hasani that he said:

“I said to His Eminence, Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa: We hope that you
would be the Qaim of the Progeny of the House of Muhammad (S), who would
fill the earth with justice and equity just as it would fraught with
injustice and oppression. He replied: O Abal Qasim, none of us Imams are
but Qaim by the command of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and we are the
guides towards the religion of Allah.

But the Qaim through whom the Almighty Allah would purify the earth from
the infidels and apostates and who would fill up the earth with justice
and equity is the one whose birth shall remain concealed for the people
and whose person would remain unseen by the people and pronouncing whose
name would be unlawful. His name and agnomen shall be the same as that
of the Messenger of Allah (S) and he is the one for whom the earth would
wrap itself and every hardship would become easy for him. His companions
numbering same as the fighters of Badr would gather around him from far
off places of the earth. And that is the meaning of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَ أْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah
has power over all things.”***[^1]

Thus when this number gathers around him, the Almighty Allah would
reveal his matter. And when the number of his helpers reaches 2000, he
would, by the permission of Allah set out in pursuit of the enemies of
Allah in order to please the Almighty.” Abdul Azeem says: I asked His
Eminence: “My master, how would he know that the Almighty Allah is
pleased with him?” He replied: “Allah would instill mercy into his
heart. Thus when he enters Medina, he would bring out the Laat and Uzza
and burn them up.”

3 - Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah Nishapuri: Narrated to us
Ahmad bin Sulaiman: Narrated to us Saqr bin Abi Dulf that: I heard Aba
Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali ar-Reza (a.s.) say:

“The Imam after me is my son, Ali. His command is command of his father
and his statement is statement of his father and his obedience is
obedience of his father. Then the Imam fell silent. Then he said: The
Imam after him will be his son, Hasan. His command is command of his
father and his statement is statement of his father and his obedience is
obedience of his father. After this Imam (a.s.) became silent. The
narrator asked: ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger, who will be the Imam after
Hasan?’ Imam (a.s.) started weeping profusely and said: ‘After him, his
son Qaim (a.t.f.s.) will be the Imam’. He will be in Ghaibat and pious
and sincere people will await his reappearance while those in doubt will
deny him and will ridicule his remembrance (zikr). Those who will hasten
will be destroyed and those who submit will be successful.”

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:148


