Chapter 37: Statements of al-Hadi (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
============================================================================

1 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa Daqqaq and Ali bin Abdullah
Warraq - May Allah be pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Harun Sufi: Narrated to us Abu Turab Abdullah bin Musa
Ruyani from Abdul Azim bin Abdullah Hasani that he said:

“I came to my master, Ali bin Muhammad (a.s.). When His Eminence turned
his attention to me he said, “Welcome to Abul Qasim who is our real
supporter.” I told him that I wanted to present my religion to him and
if he had no objection to it I would remain on it till I meet my Lord.
His Eminence said, “You may begin reciting it.”

I said: There is nothing like Allah and the Almighty Allah is beyond the
two invalid extremes and comparison. He has no shape, form or substance.
Rather He is the Creator of all bodies, the maker of faces, the
originator of forms and substances. He is the master and Lord, the one
who appoints for everything. And His Eminence, Muhammad (s.a.) is the
slave and Messenger of Allah and seal of the prophets and no other
prophet will come after him. And his Shariah (religious law) is the last
Shariah. Till the Qiyamat, no other Shariah will arrive.

And I said: “After the Messenger of Allah (S), the Imam, the Caliph and
the guardian (Wali) of the affair is His Eminence, Amirul Momineen Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.) after that. Imam Hasan, Imam Husain, Ali bin
al-Husain, Muhammad bin Ali, Ja’far bin Muhammad, Musa bin Ja’far, Ali
bin Musa, Muhammad bin Ali and after that you are my master! The Imam
said, “The Imam after me is my son, Hasan. Then after him how would the
people be with the successor of His Eminence?” “How would it be so?”

Abdul Azim asked. Imam (a.s.) said, “It is because his person will
hidden from them and pronouncing his name will be prohibited to them.
Till he would reappear and fill the earth with justice and equity as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppression.” I said: I confess to
this and have faith that those who love these Imams love Allah, their
enemies are enemies of Allah, their obedience is Allah’s obedience,
their disobedience is Allah’s disobedience.

I also have faith that Meraj is true, the questioning of the grave is
true, Paradise is true, Fire (of Hell) is true, the Sirat bridge is
true, the balance (Mizan) is true, the Qiyamat is true, the rising from
the grave is true. And I say that after the belief in Wilayat the next
obligations are Prayers, Zakat, Fast, Hajj, Jihad, Enjoining good and
Forbidding evil.

Ali Ibne Muhammad (a.s.) said: “O Abal Qasim! This is the religion Allah
likes for His slaves. May Allah keep you steadfast on this religion in
the world as well as the Hereafter.”

2 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Muhammad bin Umar Katib from Ali bin Muhammad Saymoori from
Ali bin Mahziyar that he said: I wrote to Abil Hasan of Askar (Imam Hadi
a.s.) and asked him about the reappearance. In reply he wrote:

“When your Imam disappears from the land of the oppressors you must
await for the reappearance.”

3 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
that: Narrated to me Ibrahim bin Mahziyar from his brother Ali bin
Mahziyar from Ali bin Muhammad bin Ziyad that he said: I wrote to Abil
Hasan of Askar (Imam Hadi a.s.) and asked him about the reappearance. In
reply he wrote:

“When your Imam disappears from the land of the oppressors you must
await for the reappearance.”

4 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abdullah Ibne Abi Ghanim Qazwini: Narrated
to me Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris that he said:

“I, Nuh and Ayyub bin Nuh were on way to Mecca when we halted at the
valley of Zubala. We dismounted and sat down talking. We ended up
discussing our current situation and the lack of access to the Imam.
Ayyub bin Nuh said, “I wrote this year, mentioning some of these things.
He wrote back to me, ‘When the standard is raised from your backs,
expect the relief from beneath your feet,’”

5 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin
Abdullah: Narrated to us Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ahmad Alawi from Abil
Hashim Dawood bin Qasim Ja’fari that he said: I heard Abal Hasan of
Askar (a.s.) say:

“The successor after me is my son al-Hasan but what will you do with the
successor of my successor?” Al-Ja’fari said, “May Allah make me your
sacrifice! Why?” The Imam said, “Because you will not see his physical
body and it is not permissible for you to reveal his name.” Al-Ja’fari
said, “How shall we mention him?” Al-Hadi said, “Say ‘The proof
[al-Hujja] from the family of Muhammad.’”

6 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to me Hasan bin Musa Khashshab from Ishaq bin Muhammad bin
Ayyub that he said: I heard Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad [bin Ali bin
Musa] (a.s.) say:

“The master of this affair is one regarding whom people will say: He is
not born yet.”

7 - And narrated to us the same report Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq
from Muhammad bin Maqil from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Ishaq
bin Muhammad bin Ayyub from Abil Hasan bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said:

“The master of this affair is one regarding whom people will say: He is
not born yet.”

8 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali
bin Ibrahim from his father from Ali bin Sadaqah from Ali bin Abdul
Ghaffar that he said:

“When Abu Ja’far the second (a.s.) passed away, the Shias wrote to Abul
Hasan of Askar (a.s.) asking him about the position of Imamate. He wrote
to them, ‘The position is mine as long I am alive. When the measures of
Allah, the High, catch me, Allah will send my successor to you. And how
would you be to the successor after the successor?’”

9 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim: Narrated to me Abdullah bin Ahmad Musili from
Saqr bin Abi Dulf that he said:

“When Mutawakkil placed Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) under house arrest, I went
to inquire about the well being of the Imam. When Mutawakkil’s sentry
saw me he called me and said: Saqar, how are you? I said: I am fine,
boss. He told me to sit and began to converse with me. He asked me: Why
have you come here? I said: To meet you. He said: Perhaps you have to
meet your Master. I said: Who is my master. My Master is the ruler of
the time. He said: Keep quiet, your Master is the rightful Imam. Don’t
be afraid of me. I also follow your religion. I said: Praise be to
Allah. He asked: Would you like to see him? I said: Yes.

He said: Sit here, I will let you meet him after the king’s messenger
goes away. I waited till the king’s messenger departed from there. Then
he told a bondman to hold the hand of Saqar, take him to the room in
which an Alawite prisoner was held and leave him there. He took me to a
room and pointed to a dark room. When I entered I saw that the Imam was
sitting and in front of him was a dug out grave. I greeted the Imam and
he responded to my greetings and told me to sit. When I was seated, the
Imam said: Saqar, what is the purpose of your visit? I said: Master, I
have to inquire about your well being. Then I looked at the grave and
began to weep.

The Imam said: Don’t worry Saqar, they cannot cause me any harm I said:
Thank God. Then I said: There is a tradition of the Messenger of Allah
(S) which I cannot understand? He said: Which tradition? I said: The
Holy Prophet (S) said: ‘Do not make enemies of the days as they will be
(in retaliation) inimical to you.’

The Imam said: “It implies ‘our’ days. Due to us, as we have raised up
the skies and the earth; thus Sabt (Saturday) is the name of the
Messenger of Allah (S) Ahada (Sunday) is the name of Amirul Momineen,
Ithnain (Monday) are Imams Hasan and Husain, Thalath a (Tuesday) is Ali
bin Husain, Muhammad bin Ali, al-Baqir and Ja’far bin Muhammad Sadiq
Arba-a (Wednesday) is Musa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Musa and Muhammad bin
Ali, Khamees (Thursday) is my son, Hasan and Friday, is the son of my
son.

And it is through him that the party of truth will gather and it is him
that would fill the earth with justice and truth just as it would have
been fraught with injustice and oppression. Thus this is the meaning of
‘days’ and that you must not be inimical to the days in this world or
they would be inimical to you in the Hereafter. Then he said: Now you
may go as you are not safe here.”

10 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ahmad Musili:
Narrated to us Saqr bin Abi Dulf that he said: I heard Ali Ibne Muhammad
bin Ali ar-Reza (a.s.) say:

“The Imam after me is my son, Hasan. And after Hasan his son, the Qaim,
who would fill up the earth with justice and equity as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression.”


