The Second Characteristic of a Fironic System
=============================================

The second characteristic of the Fironic system as expressed by the Holy
Quran is

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُذَبِّحُونَ أَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَيَسْتَحْيُونَ نِسَاءَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“... killing your children and sparing your women" (Surah al-Baqarah,
2: 49)***

This means he was assassinating your children and kept alive your women.
Why was he keeping alive the women? It was for nudity and vulgarity. If
today you want to understand under which system you are living your
life, you will find many similarities of the Fironic system in your own
existing governance system. The Holy Quran has its own terminologies and
has a very modest way of presenting certain facts. Firon used to give
more importance to women and less to men; this was because he wanted to
strip women. Through women he was corrupting the society with nudity.

Even today this is happening in your system. What was this women's
marathon for (in Lahore)? Try to understand your country and just think
where this system is heading us towards. If it was Firon's time same
things would be happening what is happening today, or in other words if
Firon was present today he would be doing the same thing what is
happening today in our society. Today they make organizations for women
support, media specially works for women support, and statements are
issued in favour of women.

They want to strip off the women and make them run naked on the streets
in a marathon race. They invited corrupted unchaste women from all over
the world and made them run in the marathon race. This country has
chaste and modest women who have kept themselves pure. In order to
adulterate their chastity this government is creating an environment of
corruption. You all have seen this with your own eyes, that from across
the world women participated in this race in a semi naked state and the
television channels presented this race with an appreciating comment
that the country is progressing towards development and the country has
become advanced now.

Just see what picture the Quran is painting for this marathon race. That
is the picture of the system of Firon, who kept the women of Bani Israel
alive for making them immodest, hence spreading corruption and nudity in
the society. The Quran said this is the Fironic system which was
assassinating your children and stripping your women, and we relieved
you from this system, how?


