Moosa (as), The Saviour from Fironic System
===========================================

Allah (s.w.t.) had sent Moosa (as) for the salvation of this Ummah from
this Fironic system. It is a very clearly manifested fact that unless
and until the nation (Ummah) does not support these guides and leaders
like Moosa, salvation is impossible. From Europe these women came to
Lahore, ran naked on the street, and our chaste, modest and veiled women
watched them. They did this to humiliate and tease our modest women. If
these immodest women (coming from West) can very well realize and
deliver their duties towards evil, then it is the duty of our modest
women also to either go away from this country or if they want to stay
then they have to save this country from this corruption.

The duty of our chaste and religious women is not just to participate in
Majalis (religious mourning gatherings) for the sake of earning divine
rewards or to read the Quran. These acts do not relieve us from our
responsibilities. The responsibility and the duties of these chaste
women are to support and assist Moosa (as). Which Moosa? One who has
come to demolish this corrupt system and replace it with a divine system
of governance.

Prophet Moosa (as) also first demanded from women to leave Egypt because
this Fironic system is not suitable for us to spend our lives over here.
The women showed their willingness and came forward with their men to
follow Moosa (as). Firon chased them up to the shore, where he got
drowned in this encounter. The Quran presents this also as a bounty for
Bani Israel.


