Why Should We Be Concerned About Our Governing System?
======================================================

The Quran says we destroyed Firon and relieved you from that corrupt
system which was a bounty for you. I will later talk about the effects
which these corrupt systems leave on the societies. Even though you get
relieved from these corrupt systems, but whatever time you spend in
these corrupt systems it leaves a highly significant damaging effect on
our character. We are not concerned about such things. We always say
what have we to do with this governance system, our duties are to earn
our living, take care of our children, go to Hussainiah for Azadari, do
some mandatory worship, why should we be worried or concerned whether
this system is good or bad? Yes, for sure we might not be concerned
about their evil systems on us, but they are concerned about us. Take my
words for granted that with those whom we are not concerned, they are
for sure concerned about us. Today, we are not concerned about America,
but America is very much concerned about us.

The Supreme Leader Ayatullah Khamenei (d.a) says that these westerners
suggest us to separate ourselves (means religious clerics) from
politics. They say what have these religious scholars to do with state
politics. He says that their suggestion and point is as such invalid,
but just for a moment let us accept and agree to what they say. Let us
separate ourselves from politics, fine we will not interfere in
politics. But then you also promise and assure us that you will also
have no concern with Religion. You also get separated from Religion. You
want us clerics to separate from politics and sit in Religious Schools
(Madrassas), but you don't want to stop your interference with religion.
If separation has to be done, then we both should separate. If the
clerics have to be separated from politics then you politicians should
also separate from religion and stop interfering in religious affairs.


