Women and Current Affairs
=========================

Today we Muslims and specifically you women should be aware about the
current affairs of the Muslim world. It should not be that you are so
busy with kitchen and other household chores that you are not aware
about what is happening around you, in your city, in your country and
not aware about the system in which you are living.

At times we say that the intellectual level of our women is very low,
and hence the scholars should only deliver very simple and preliminary
talks. This perception is an insult to women. These women are also human
beings and they have a role to play in the humanity of this world, they
also have to deliver a character and they also have to live with the
current era. They also need to feel and sense their social and religious
responsibilities along with household duties. These women who went to
Karbala and delivered the message of Karbala afterwards also had homes
with kitchen. They could have also made excuses and done kitchen work,
cleaning the house and other things throughout their lives, but they
decided to go shoulder to shoulder with the men in Karbala.

Religion has not prohibited women at any place. In fact, women have a
very specific role which can be only delivered by them. This is a
reality that many leaders and martyrs of Karbala were the outcome of
efforts of women behind them. If the wife of Zohair Ibn Qain would not
have been present with him in his journey, things would have been
different for him. He was a supporter of the third caliph and was not a
supporter of the mission of Aba Abdillah (as). It was his wife who
reformed him and changed his opinions. After this reformation he got
listed in the names of martyrs of Karbala and that too amongst the
leaders. This is the great courage of this woman who made her life
partner reach such a high divine status and all this was because she
realized and felt her responsibilities.

Do not sit unconcerned. You should be aware about the world you are
living in and the happenings around you. Do not think or say that you
have nothing to do with this governmental system and you want to live a
normal life. You might not be having any concerns with this system, but
this system definitely has serious concerns about you. If we say that we
have nothing to do with the heat of summer or the cold of winter, then
also the heat and the cold have concerns with you, they will impact you
and hence you have to adopt preventive measures. If some virus or a
disease spreads and someone informs you about this, will you say that
you have no concerns about this? You have nothing to do with this virus
but the virus has certainly something to do with you. This virus is a
danger to your body; hence if you do not fight this virus you will
become its captive.

We don't have rights to live in all types of systems. Can you drink any
kind of water? Can you drink water from a stagnant pond? If someone says
this is my personal life and I can drink any water I want, then he is
wrong. Intellectually and also religiously you don't have rights to
drink impure and filthy water; you should drink pure and clean water.

If Shariah can impose laws regarding water even to the extent of purity
of water used for washing clothes, then how is it possible that the same
Islam is not concerned about the purity of the social system governing
us? It is so concerned about the washing of our clothes but not about
our lives, our humanity, our spirituality, our children and our
generations? Though the intelligence and Shariah both prohibits from
drinking dirty water, but there are people who are still drinking it.


