The Effects of Fironic System
=============================

We think that the democratic system in which we are living is the best
system, but in reality it is the same dictatorship which is hidden
inside this democracy. Let me explain this also from the Holy Quran.
Allah (s) commanded Prophet Moosa (as) in the Quran to go to Bani Israel
and give them relief from the Fironic system, because the Ummah has
become senseless, adulterated with this system and their beliefs were
corrupted. This is the point to be concentrated, where we will see now
that what kind of devastating affects a Fironic system can leave on the
religious ideologies of a nation.

They witnessed several miracles of Prophet Moosa (as). He had the
miracle with his staff and his enlightened hand was a miracle. There
were many such miracles given to Prophet Moosa (as) out of which twelve
are listed in the Holy Quran. The greatest miracle of Moosa was his
wooden staff, through which he split the river, defeated the magicians,
destroyed Firon and gave salvation to Bani Israel. All these miracles
were witnessed by Bani Israel by their own eyes, but just see later what
happened.

After all these miracles and finally passing through the river they
moved from Egypt to Palestine and the area of Jordan. When they reached
in this belt of the land of Jordan, they saw a community busy in idol
worship of hand-made gods. Now, emphasizing on this fact that Bani
Israel had seen the miracles of Moosa, had heard the preaching of Moosa
and have seen the end of Firon through the hands of Moosa, they demanded
from Moosa something which stunned him. As mentioned in the verse of the
Holy Quran, they demanded from Moosa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا مُوسَى اجْعَلْ لَنَا إِلَٰهًا كَمَا لَهُمْ آلِهَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O*** ***Moosa, make for us a God as they have (their) Gods" (Surah
al-A’araaf,7:138)***

This shows how low they had gone in their thinking and ideologies. This
proves that the lessons of Monotheism (Tauheed) which Moosa was
delivering to them were not understood by them. But the question is why?
The reason was that the long period, in fact several generations, which
they spent in the Fironic system, had weakened their level of thinking
to such an extent that even now they could not discriminate between Idol
worship and Monotheism. Hence they demanded from Moosa to make a similar
idol for them. They made it a practice now to demand for an Idol god
whenever they saw anyone worshipping a God other than the God of Moosa.

Then Moosa took them towards the land of Qinan. After reaching there,
Moosa told them that Allah (s.w.t.) has asked me to camp for thirty days
on Mountain Tur so as to get the Torah. These thirty days then increased
by ten more and became forty days for which Moosa was away from his
community. He made Haroon as his vicegerent and representative before
leaving. There is one point to ponder over here, that Moosa only went
away from his community for one month and ten days period, but still he
did not leave the community on their own, he made Haroon as his
representative and leader of the community. So how is it possible that
the HujjatAllah (a.t.f.s) is in occultation for 1300 years and he has
left no representative in the Ummah?

When Moosa returned back after forty days, he saw a shocking scene. This
scene was that the community had left Haroon isolated and was following
Saamri. The question here is how Saamri was successful in taking the
community away from Haroon. This is where we can again see the character
of women.


