Saamri and His Idol Calf
========================

Women can play a role on both, the positive as well as negative side.
They can help in turning down the system of Firon and also in
strengthening the evil mission of Saamri.

Saamri approached the women and requested them to bring all their wealth
and specifically their ornaments, so that he can make a God for them to
worship. He told them that the God he will make, will fulfill all their
worldly wishes and desires; if they talk to him the God will reply, you
can touch and feel the God, and above all this you can even kiss the
God. Now, this kissing part is very important even for us; unless we
kiss the holy and sanctimonious things we don't feel we have delivered
our duties. Saamri played a cunning game; he presented all those things
Moosa could not present. The God of Moosa was not touchable, people
could not kiss that God, and they could not see or listen to the God
introduced by Moosa. Hence Saamri used this to inspire the women to
gather their ornaments which they had brought from Egypt along with
them. The Quranic Ayah says that these women gave all their jewellery,
even from their arms and shoulders to Saamri. Saamri now lighted up an
oven, melted these ornaments and made a Calf out of this gold and
silver. This was an idol imitation of the shape of a calf made out of
gold and silver.

Saamri was an intelligent person and an engineer. He was spiritual and a
religious personality. He was aware about the technology otherwise he
would not have been successful in making a calf by melting ornaments. He
just did not make a metallic calf, he inserted inside it such an effect
that the calf was mooing also. Later, when Moosa asked him how he
succeeded in making this idol calf speak, he replied that he had seen
the remains of a messenger. Remains of a messenger, means either he took
something from Gabriel or he took the sand from below the feet of Moosa
and used it in the calf to make it speak. This proves that his
intellectual level was so high that either he knew the effects of the
sand below the feet of Moosa or he took something from Gabriel and made
the calf active. The entire community with this technique of Saamri got
deceived, left Haroon and started to follow Saamri.


