Moosa and Haroon
================

Now, when Moosa returned, he was furious on this situation. He
immediately dropped the Torah from his hand and questioned Haroon about
this situation. Haroon replied that he tried his best to preach them the
truth, stopped them and tried to convince them about this falsehood but
they were not ready to listen to him. The Holy Quran presents the
harshness with which Moosa dealt with Haroon. He caught hold of Haroon
by his beard and hairs on the forehead and then dragged him in anger.
Moosa's concern with Haroon was that he being a Prophet had made Haroon
his representative, given him the leadership of the Ummah and hence his
responsibility was to protect the religion of Ummah, and it should not
have happened that because of his (Haroon's) laziness and negligence
this community went behind Saamri. This always happens, like here, when
Moosa went into an occultation of forty days, Saamri came out of the
community. So be prepared to accept this fact that when an Infallible
goes into occultation for 1300 years, how many Saamris would be coming
out of the community in every generation and era.

This is a proven fact that whenever due to divine legislations and
purposes, the proof of Allah (Hujjat Allah) goes into occultation for
some period, then that community and the religion of theirs faces a big
threat from Saamris. We should not become so simple and innocent that
whoever comes with a calf which speaks and does something, we start to
worship it and become its slaves. First see who has brought this idol to
us, then see who is the representative of the Hujjat of Allah whom he
has left amongst us during this occultation.

This point needs to be emphasized again that when Moosa left for forty
days of occultation and he left his successor amongst the people, and
then when he returned he did not question the Ummah immediately for
their evil actions; he first enquired from Haroon whether this state of
Ummah was an outcome of his laziness or not. Moosa was concerned whether
Haroon became irresponsible and sat silent inside his home, or in
today's terminology sat quietly in his Madrassa (religious school) or
got busy in his daily chores and left the Ummah to play in the hands of
Saamri, and let Saamri take the community in whichever direction he
wanted.

The lesson derived from this narration of the Quran is very clear that,
when the Proof of Allah (s.w.t.) reappears he will first question his
representatives. He will for sure question them: "I have left this Ummah
to you, and was it not that you got involved in your personal, family
affair, or you got too busy in your lectures and gatherings, and as a
result you left the Ummah to become a captive of Saamri". When Haroon
had a sincere logical answer to Moosa's question, only then Moosa left
Haroon and questioned Saamri and then the Ummah.


