The Fundamental Problem of the Ummah that Helps Saamris
=======================================================

On the grounds of ideology and thinking, an Ummah becomes weak by living
in a Fironic system. Saamri then takes advantage of these weaknesses of
the Urnmah. From this simplicity of the Ummah, Saamri takes advantage,
changes their direction and puts them behind an idol calf or somewhere
else.

Today also it is the same situation; it is the same Fironic system. In
our country (Pakistan), from the time it came into existence it has a
Fironic system. But within this Fironic system many times in the shape
of Saamriâ€™s calf we have seen idols of democracy, idols of dictatorship,
idols of military power and all these at times turned the complete
system into Military Fironic system.

And we always think and say, what have we to do with this system.
Whether the president is a leftist or a rightist, a man or a woman, this
or that, let anyone come in power what have we to do with this. Let
anyone become the President we are not concerned, provided he does not
stop us from doing Azadari, provided he does not stop us from mourning.
Let anyone rule and govern us we don't care, we only care that the
government should not stop our Majalis and Azadari. But the reality is
not like this, you might not be concerned with them, but they are
definitely concerned about you. And their concern with us is that they
will make us intellectually so weak that we won't be able to
differentiate between Saamri and Haroon. The Haroon of our era will be
calling us towards him and we will be busy in supporting Saamris. Read
the Quran and see, this is exactly what Bani Israel has done in the past
that too the religious women of theirs cooperated with Saamri to make
the idol calf. Today also it is the same, in the name of women freedom
and women rights, marathon races are organized. They are making idols
for the sake of women and using these idols to deviate people away from
religion.


