Questions and Answers
=====================

Question n. 1
-------------

**Q 1.** **How should we start the process of implementing the system of
Wilayat in our society?**

**Answer:** First of all we need to understand ourselves. At times it
happens we stand against a system, but we don't have any recognition of
the system which is going to replace it. I will explain this situation
in form of a joke.

Once there was a Muslim and an Infidel. They were both arguing about
religion. The Muslim somehow managed to force the Infidel that his
belief is wrong and he should change it. The Infidel agreed and asked
the Muslim to teach him the Kalema (the testimonial for belief) so that
he can convert to Islam. The Muslim felt ashamed and cursed himself and
said "I wish I knew the Kalema myself, at least I would have succeeded
in converting one Infidel to Islam".

We should not end up in such a situation that we start to rise against
dictatorship and democracy, and quote that these systems are not
religious and are the Idols of Saamri, but when someone questions us
about its replacement, we feel aggrieved that we don't know about the
system of Imamat. First, you try to understand yourself about this
system. The method is like this you have done by organizing a seminar.
Imarnat should be a part of our syllabus and we have to spend some time
daily to understand the system of Imamat.

Decide on this fact first that Imamat is not just a belief, but instead
it is the name of a system of governance which needs to be implemented
in the society. During the era of the infallible Imams (as) they were
isolated, some of them were made captives, exiled and martyred. What was
the reason behind these atrocities? The reason was that Ummah, the
followers of these Imams (as) could not understand this system, and
hence the Imams were in a state of destitution. If in that era the Ummah
would have understood Imamat then today the entire world would have been
governed by the system of Imamat.

Hence first you try to understand this system, then start to propagate
and spread it amongst the people. We should be looking forward to
excuses, occasions and reasons to do propagation of truth. It is
obligatory on every one of us to do propagation and specifically women
of our society. Unfortunately our society has made such an environment
that there are very limited opportunities for the women to do
propagation. I am talking about religious women, not about those others
who are even ready for Marathon. The religious women should not be
sitting idle, waiting for someone to come and relieve them from the
clutches of evils.

It is your duty to rise and make people understand the system of
Wilayat. It should not be that any Majalis or story recitation program
is organized and you participate considering this as your duty. You need
to realize and understand your duties very well. We have to understand
and make others understand this system of Wilayat. You never knew
anything about the academic education when you were born, but slowly you
started and became educated. There were many things which you did not
know, but later you learnt it. Similarly if you don't know religion,
then start to learn. Then only after this the women can deliver the most
prestigious character and role.

Question n. 2
-------------

**Q 2. How can a human being become a companion of secrets of Imamat so
that she can understand the system of Imamat?**

**Answer:** I have said earlier that this can be done with Recognition
(Maarifat). By just sitting in one place you can't become a companion of
secrets of Imamat. She can become aware about the secrets only when she
comes near to the religion, studies the outward and inward essence of
religion, and then only she can explore the hidden secrets. You have to
spend a reasonable part of your life in this and give time to religion.

You all love your Imam, but this love only makes you lovers but not a
recognizer of the secrets of Imamat. It is recognition (Maarifat), which
makes you aware about the secrets of Imamat. Only when love gets along
with recognition, you can understand the hidden secrets of Imamat.
Unfortunately we have love for religion, but our recognition is very
less.

Question n. 3
-------------

**Q 3. Is it not the duty of our Ulema to address such subjects and
develop a strong link of this subject with us, and if they are not doing
this then who has to do this?**

**Answer:** It is definitely the Ulema who have to start the link of
this subject amongst the people. There is a saying in Persian "If
something gets spoiled, put salt on it and it will be fine. But woe on
that day when salt gets spoiled". If the Ummah (nation) gets corrupted
then the Ulema should correct and reform it, but if the Ulema themselves
get corrupted then who will reform them?

Question n. 4
-------------

**Q 4. How can we identify the Fironic system in our normal lives?**

**Answer:** The effects of the Fironic system are quite evident not just
in our country but at a global level. The entire world is today governed
by this system. You see that in the entire world there is only one
nation which is not willing to accept this Fironic system and hence they
(enemies of Islam) have surrounded this country from all sides. Every
day they threaten this country. Unfortunately the entire globe is under
the shadow of the Fironic system and our country is on the frontline in
promoting this Fironic system.

If you are still not convinced, then analyze the effects of this system.
In the earlier days that lady newscaster on the TV channel used to put a
scarf around her neck. This slowly started to slip down, then the
marathon race, vulgarity, nudity and moral corruption. All these effects
are coming on your lives and they are increasing every day. What more do
you expect to know and identify, when the President of the country comes
up and supports nude women running on the street. He said that those who
don't like to see such things, they should close their eyes or switch
off their TV sets. This is not Islam. We have forgotten that this
country is a Muslim nation, a nation of respected and chaste people. Our
negligence, carelessness and our silence is helping in promoting this
Fironic system.

Question n. 5
-------------

**Q 5. You said that this country has a system of Firon, hence we should
leave this country. But my question is that the basics of formation of
this country was very solid, the leader who made this nation had made it
on Islamic principles, then why is this like this?**

**Answer:** I did not say that you should leave the country. This
country was created in the name of Islam, but it was never handed over
to Islam and Islam was never implemented in this country. In fact, today
they are talking and discussing that the biggest danger and threat which
this nation has is from Islam. Hence they want to achieve freedom from
Islam in this country. I am not saying that you should leave the country
and go. What I am saying is that the foundations on which this country
was created were correct and we need to return it back to those
foundation principles. We should not sit careless and unconcerned.

We should come forward and introduce the system of religion to the
people, make this religion presentable so as to attract people towards
religion. It is not that we leave and go, wherever we go the situation
would be worse than this, hence we need to stay over here and return
ourselves, this land and this community towards religion. If Imam
Hussain (as) wanted to save his life he could have gone anywhere else,
but then who would have destroyed Yazidiat? To demolish Yazidiat you
have to stay there. Many mistakes have been done in this country. The
question you have asked needs a lot of elaboration and could be a one
day specific seminar. When this country had guides like Allama Iqbal,
then why did such a thing happen? This needs a detailed discussion.

Question n. 6
-------------

**Q 6. Why do some people not accept Wilayat al-Faqeeh?**

**Answer:** There are many reasons behind this. Some people due to
ignorance, some due to created doubts, some due to some other reasons
and some have been misguided by the enemies. In other words some people
are misguided by some sold out agents who are planted amongst us to
block this path. These agents are planted from behind and sent on our
pulpits to change the direction of this community and the main objective
is to deviate this community from the divine system of life.

I present a real case over here as an example for you to understand what
all has been done to deviate people from Wilayat al-Faqeeh. You would
have seen the news also yesterday that, to change the system of
governance in Syria, America has allocated a budget of 5M$. In order to
change the government in Iran they have allocated 21M$ every year. Whom
do they give this? They give to such agents who should come and speak
against the system of Wilayat, write something and keep on doing
something against the system of Wilayat.

They have formed a council in America by the name of UMAA under the
guidance of Paul Wolfowitz. Paul Wolfowitz was the think tank of
America's attack on Iraq. He designed this attack and planned it. Under
his leadership they have formed this committee comprising of Scholars
(Ulema), Religious Speakers and Pulpit holders. The purpose of this
council is to work towards purging of the thoughts of Imam Khomeini
(r.a) from the Shia school of thought.

They said that certain things within the Shia School has come from
outside and these should be eradicated. Paul Wolfowitz, who is now the
Wor1d Bank Chief came on the Television with well-known faces of Shia
community sitting with him. He said that thoughts of Imam Khomeini (r.a)
should be removed from the Shia community. They have allotted millions
of dollars for this task. Hence it is not that if anyone is sitting on
the pulpit and speaking against Wilayat, then it is just a mischief of
his own thoughts and mind. If you trace the links of such person it will
go much far behind, some Embassy or NGO would be behind him. Hence we
need to be alert and be smart.

Question n. 7
-------------

**Q 7. You said if we cast our vote then it is like helping Saamri. In
our country there is no party of government which is correct, then whom
should we give our votes to?**

**Answer:** Our duty is not just to cast votes, our duty is to prepare a
ground for the right system. As I said before that first identify those
fundamental principles on which this country was created and try to
return the nation towards those principles. Our responsibility is not
just to cast our votes, but it is to implement the system of Wilayat. If
you think that there is some person, though he is in this corrupt
system, but still is serving religion, then you can cast your vote to
him. Those who are sitting right now do not deserve our votes.

Question n. 8
-------------

**Q 8. Is it not necessary that the importance of the character of women
should be told to men also, since a woman in our religion cannot do
anything without permission from their husbands?**

**Answer:** What you have said is absolutely correct. This is similar to
the upbringing of children where it is necessary that the parents are
made aware. Even if we take someone's children, bring them up and then
later return to them, it won't be effective. It is necessary that the
parents are with their children. Hence it is necessary for the women
that their guardians, may it be their husband or father, should be made
aware of their character. It is a manifested fact that unless they are
made aware of the duties of women, the women won't be able to deliver
their duties properly.

Our culture is very amazing. In reality we are not living religious
lives, we are living cultural and traditional lives. We marry so that
the wife should serve parents. This is how our culture has been made. If
the daughter-in-law ends up saying that her in-laws should take care of
themselves, then also the husband will force her to serve them. It is
obligatory on the son to serve his parents, not the daughter-in-law. As
a matter of ethics she should serve her husband's parents, she should
consider them as her parents only, respect them and fulfill their
legitimate needs. But there is a difference between a servant and
daughter-in-law, so don't try to marry and bring a servant to your
house. It is our culture that when we look for a girl for marriage, our
criteria is to see if she will serve my parents or not. She is your
wife, the daughter-in-law of your parents and she also has some rights.
Now this series goes on, the same daughter-in-law gets old and now
becomes the mother-in-law, and then she takes her revenge on her
daughter-in-law.

This is what our culture has done; they have taken away the women from
their real duties and have involved them into such things. It is the
duty of the women to take care of their children and take care of their
education, character, and upbringing of the new generation. In fact the
education section should be with the women because they can perform this
task very well. But we have given them a broom, dirty kitchenware and
food to cook. Now it has happened so, that even women also like these
jobs more than anything else.

They are not prepared to come out and lead the education program for
children. They have become expert in household chores. It is also
necessary to do house work. It should not be that because I have said,
you leave house work. What is important to understand is that you should
divide the responsibilities of the house between yourself and your
husband. It should not happen that we use the household responsibilities
as an excuse to neglect the social responsibilities, this won't be
accepted.

Question n. 9
-------------

**Q 9. How can someone revolutionize her own home before even thinking
about revolutionizing a government so that the difference between Halal
and Haram can become manifested?**

**Answer:** What you have said is correct, a government is a bigger
system and a house is a smaller system. If a human being can't reform a
small system he can't reform a larger system. And even before this is
your own self. Those who cannot implement Islam on their own selves, how
can they implement Islam in a society? In this context I will tell you
an incident when General Zia ul Haqq came to meet Imam Khomeini (r.a).

In those days of Iran-Iraq war, a Muslim Committee was formed to try
stopping the war. General Zia had a big desire to become a leader of the
Islamic world, hence he went to Imam (r.a). He was introduced to Imam
(r.a) as one who is struggling to implement an Islamic system in his
country (Pakistan). Imam (r.a) looked at his face and said that the
person who cannot implement Islam on his face, how can he be expected to
implement Islam in his country? We are also similar; first we should
implement Islam on our existence, in our house and then slowly move
towards implementing it in a society. Hence, if we leave our home and
start to do propagation outside and expect changes in society, then
under such situation no changes will come.

Question n. 10
--------------

**Q 10. Where is the current system in this country taking the people
towards?**

**Answer:** I already said this before and it is very clearly manifested
in the words of the Holy Quran (يَسُومُونَكُمْ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ)
(7:141). It is taking the society towards hell. This existing system is
based on secularism, enlightened modern thoughts, liberal Islam where
women are allowed to go out on the streets the way they want and
intentionally moral corruption is spread. If you take men, by just
making the Spring Season (Basant) as an excuse they are indulging in
singing, dancing, alcoholism and lavishness.

All these acts are introduced one after another intentionally to corrupt
the social environment and to desecrate the values. You should have no
doubt about this that those who are governing this system have very
clear intentions to take this nation away from religion and establish an
aversion to Islamic values in the society.


