System, A Means of Achieving Perfection
=======================================

There are two defined ways for achieving perfection, they are Knowledge
and Deeds. But apart from this, human being also has one more essential
need, and that need is a system. A human being can only acquire
knowledge and perform his deeds under the shadow of a system.

In order to get an idea of what is meant by and the purpose of a system,
we can take an example of family. Family is such a gift from Almighty
Allah (s.w.t.) to us, whose importance we don't realize, and in fact
many of us don't even consider this as a bounty at all. Allah (s.w.t.)
has not created human beings like animals. Family is actually an
environment, which we cannot witness with our eyes; what we see are the
walls and windows with few persons living inside them and we call this
as family. Many a times there is a house but no family. This happens
when people living below the same roof are upset with each other, not
communicating with each other, have no respect or right towards each
other, perform no duties towards each other and above all this, have no
trust on each other. This kind of place is a house but not a family.

Family is that entity which comes into existence by few individuals and
then when a generation takes birth from them, it actually takes birth
from the laps of this family, just like the lap of a mother. The lap of
the family is much larger than the lap of a mother, because this lap of
a family is a system. The example of family as a system is a very basic
starting point. Without this system of family a human being cannot get
educated and disciplined, he cannot accomplish his journey of
perfection, and he cannot reach the state of union with God. A human
being irrespective of being a man or woman, literate or illiterate,
whether from a village or a big city, cannot acquire knowledge and
perfection without the lap of this system of family.

The system of family is limited to the extent of few members who live
within it, and then with the support of each other they bring an
environment into existence, and in this environment they get organized,
disciplined and grow spiritually. The importance of family is like a
fruit tree present in a garden which needs certain things in an
environment for its growth and survival, and it is this family which
fulfils these needs. If the family is good then a tree with flowers and
fruits comes into existence, but if the family is not good then
poisonous plants and trees come out of it.

This is the first system which has been given to the human being, in
which he has to live with his own will. And with his own will and
intentions performs his duties by taking benefits from this environment
of a family. A family is essential, not just because a human being
cannot fulfil his needs for physical growth without a family. In fact,
the physical growth of a human being takes place even without a family;
somehow even the orphans live and grow. Those orphans who have no one to
feed and provide them shelter and clothing, they also somehow manage to
grow physically without a family. The physical growth of a human being
does not stop without a family.

The main essence of growth for a human being is the growth of attributes
of humanity inside him, his spiritual growth and discipline of his soul.
The role of family is more for the soul than for the body. Even marital
relation between a man and woman, where they need each other, is more
for spiritual needs than physical needs. Similarly a child needs his
parents for his spiritual growth more than physical growth. On the
physical side anyone can feed him, you don't need parents. But his
spiritual growth, education and perfection cannot be achieved without
parents and the system of a family. Hence a family in reality is a
school and not just a feeding centre.

The growth and development of a human being spiritually is also limited
inside a family, this is not because family has limitations, it is
because the dimensions and abilities of a human soul are so high that a
family cannot fulfil all the needs of the soul. I take an example over
here of some plants which are planted in flower pots where they grow for
some time. After a certain period of time, they cannot grow further
inside the pot, now they should be transferred to a garden or a farm.
This is because it has to further grow into a strong tree and bear
fruits, and this is not possible from within a small flower pot.

Family is essential for the growth of a human being, but its role and
significance is limited to the likelihood of a flower pot. This means
this human being needs at some stage of his growth, a system larger than
this system of family. Without this larger system in place a human being
can never achieve perfection. This larger system can be termed as a
society or a nation (Ummah). The way there are rules and regulations
inside a family, this larger system of society or a nation also needs a
set of rules and regulations to build an environment. This is also a lap
of education for human beings.


