The Islamic System and Other Systems of Society
===============================================

This is where Religion gets separated from politics. The social system
which takes birth from the womb of politics only aims to achieve
perfection in those parameters of life which is related to day-to-day
physical needs of a human being. Like there is a system in a society
which manages the traffic flow of vehicles on street to avoid
disturbance on roads. The point to ponder over here is that even
non-religious visions, thoughts and schools believe in a social system
for human beings, but this is only for the sake of fulfilling the daily
physical needs of a human being, to avoid disturbances, fights, tensions
and to prohibit human beings from using force to take over the rights of
each other.

But the system which Allah (s.w.t.) introduced for human being is not
only to discipline his daily life but to ensure that human being gets
educated spiritually and acquire perfection with the help of this social
system. Hence the system which Allah (s.w.t.) introduced and made human
being dependent upon, is a system that is in line with human being’s
fundamental and survival needs. It is not that the social system is just
aimed to arrange the basic necessities of life, fulfill the desires of
human being, prevent disturbances and give protection from dangers. The
primary and the main purpose of a social system are to create an
environment for the growth and perfection of human being in its
spiritual form. This system of society or governance in Islam is known
as the system of Imamat and Ummat (Leadership and Nation), or also
called as System of Wilayat (Guardianship). This is the system made for
the social development of human beings, not just for an individual, but
in a collective form moving the society towards perfection.

This is where the difference between the system of Wilayat and the other
social systems in its opposition becomes explicitly clear. The
difference between all other systems for a society as compared to the
system of Wilayat lies in its very basic fundamentals. The intellectuals
refer to this fundamental difference as the difference in the core. This
means the difference is in the essence and not in attributes. It is
incorrect to say that in principle all the systems are the same, but
differences are there only in the implementation or attributes. The
essence of a religious social system and that of a non­religious system
of social governance are different. The difference is to the extent of
difference between human being and non-human being, between man and
trees. Similar to this, the system of Wilayat and system of democracy
are different; system of Wilayat and system of dictatorship are
different.

The exact need of a system to be Wilayat or other man made systems can
be realized only after a human being understands the essence or the
reality of human being himself. Once a human being is understood in its
real sense, then we will realize whether we need System of Wilayat or
other systems to govern the society. The Holy Quran too refers to this
same point in context with the narration of a story.


