The Holy Quran – Source of Guidance
===================================

The Holy Quran has a collection of several stories related to different
Prophets, communities and societies. As a matter of fact all these
stories contain a set of lessons of guidance and knowledge for human
beings. Our objective should be to acquire those lessons of guidance
through these stories. This objective can be justified with the fact
that the Holy Quran itself says that it is a book of guidance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُدًى لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"and*** ***it*** ***is a guide for those who guard against evil"
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:2)***

And at other place it says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنُ هُدًى لِلنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"The month of Ramazan is that in which the Quran was revealed, a
guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance"(Surah al-Baqarah,
2:185)***

This is how the Holy Quran has introduced itself as a book of specific
guidance to the pious and a general guidance to the entire humanity. If
the Holy Quran is a book of guidance for humanity, then each and
everything inside it, is for guidance only and has no other objective.
We have treated the Quran in a very indecent manner to the extent that
the Holy Quran will complain about this.

These days there are those infidels who desecrate the Quran by flushing
it in washrooms, but more than those, the Quran will complain against us
for the maltreatment we have done to this Holy Book. This is because
those infidels who desecrated the Quran were ignorant and had no sense
about the significance of this book, but we are inheritors of this book.
We have wrapped the Quran in a beautiful cloth cover and don't even open
to read It. This is the biggest insult to the Quran that its followers
don't even open it, they have no concern with it, don't read it and
worst is that there are many who don't even know how to read it.

It is present in traditions also that the biggest humiliation for a
religious scholar is not that he is stoned, abused and criticized, but
the worst of humiliation and difficulties for a scholar is that he is
present in a society and no one takes benefits from his knowledge.
Hence, the peak of the difficulties for Ameerul Momineen (as) was that
he used to invite people to ask him, but they used to ignore him; they
did not increase their knowledge through him, and they were not
concerned of getting rid of their ignorance through him. They had all
sorts of other dealings with him apart from acquisition of knowledge
from him, and this was the biggest insult to his personality.

Similarly, the Holy Quran is a book of guidance and it contains guidance
in itself. This is not a book of "Istekhara". Since the subject under
discussion is not Holy Quran, hence I am just giving some key indicators
about this, but be certain about what we consider and think about Quran,
it is not that, it is a book of guidance only. It is a not a book of
seeking rewards (thawaab) by mere recitation. Allah (s.w.t.) did not
descend the Quran for us to accumulate as much rewards as we can. It was
not like that Allah (s.w.t.) gave the Quran to Gibrael to give it to the
Holy Prophet (S), so that Allah can keep on giving more and more rewards
to the people for their recitations. We organize Quran recitation
ceremonies for the sake of seeking rewards. An analogy to this is when
we want to distribute or invite some people for having food we organize
a majalis, or a miracle recitation program to make it a means of
distributing food. As if Allah (s.w.t.) wants to distribute rewards and
hence he created Quran so that people can read it and earn rewards.

The purpose of associating rewards with the Quran is related to the
purpose of creation, whereby Allah (s.w.t.) wants us to acquire
guidance, acquire spirituality and be disciplined. Holy Quran is the
means to acquire these essential things for our lives and hence there is
a reward associated with its recitation, so that if not explicitly for
the ·sake of guidance, but at least for the sake of getting rewards we
will come near to the Holy Quran.

There are several acts which are done for the purpose of attracting
others towards a much higher goal behind those preliminary acts.
Reverting to the same example of distribution of food in Majalis, many a
times when we are not certain of people's attendance in the majalis, we
announce that food will be served after the majalis. This ensures a much
larger audience who even if they come for the sake of food, they will
still listen to the lecture that would be a means of guidance for them.
Allah (s.w.t.) established guidance for human being and along with this
said that if you come closer to this guidance I will give you rewards
also, so that your involvement with this source of guidance becomes
certain.

But our approach towards the Holy Quran is to just open it and read it
for the sake of rewards but not with the purpose of getting guidance
from it. The Book of Guidance without understanding it is of no use, but
a book of rewards whether you understand it or not, you still get
rewards. So it is up to us to decide how we want to treat the Quran as,
a book of guidance or a book of rewards. If as a book of guidance, then
we need to ponder over its verses and these stories to understand it.

Quran has everything inside it related to our life, but we give more
importance to Quran only after death. If someone cannot achieve
something from the Quran during his life, for sure he will not gain
anything from this book after his death also. We have selected few
chapters like Yaseen and Rahman which have more rewards; we read it
regularly just to earn those rewards.


