Bani Israel and the System of Firon
===================================

Going back to our subject, the Holy Quran has adopted many different
methods of presenting lessons of guidance inside it. Amongst these, one
method is through the narration of stories of different personalities,
prophets, era and communities. One of the stories which the Holy Quran
narrates is about Prophet Moosa (as)'s guidance to his community. Allah
(s.w.t.) aroused Prophet Moosa (as) for the guidance of Bani Israel
since Bani Israel was living their lives under a system of governance
which was useless, dangerous, destructive and corrupt, prohibiting the
development of human values and perfection. It was not just that the
system was preventing the growth of this human being of flesh to become
a human being by essence (i.e. to achieve perfection), but instead it
was degrading the human being to a much lowly state, as that of beasts.
The Holy Quran referred to this system as the System of Bani Israel.
They were living their lives under this Fironic system.

From the very beginning of the Quran in Surah al-Baqarah, the story of
Bani Israel begins. They were reminded and told:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتِيَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O children of Israel! Remember My favor which I bestowed on you…"
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2: 40)***

And then the Quran continues to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِّي فَضَّلْتُكُمْ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***" we excelled you over everyone else in the entire world" (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:122)***

Then amongst the bounties which the Quran counted, the first one which
was reminded to them was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ نَجَّيْنَاكُمْ مِنْ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And we delivered you from the people of Firon" (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:
49)***

This means we relieved you from the atrocities and difficulties you were
facing in the Fironic system of governance. This is considered by the
Quran as the greatest of all the bounties given to Bani Israel.

Bani Israel were living their lives under the Fironic system in Egypt,
where they were divided into two major clans. One was called as "Sibti"
and other as "Qibti". The Qibtis belonged to the tribe of Firon, whereas
the Sibtis were from the progeny of Prophet Yaqoob (as) and Yusuf (as),
i.e from the family of Prophets, or in today's terminologies, they were
all ''Sayyids". Prophet Yaqoob had twelve children, all brothers of
Prophet Yusuf. They went to Egypt and from there their generations
started and were being referred as "Sibti".

We need to concentrate and ponder over one important fundamental point
over here. These were all from the progeny of well-known Prophets like
Ibrahim, Ismael, Ishaac and Yaqoob. Their forefathers were all these
renowned Prophets and hence they were the "Sayyids" of that era. The
Bani Israel were divided into twelve tribes and each tribe had hundreds
of thousands of people, but unfortunately all these Sayyids were living
their lives under the Fironic system.

The Quran says that the Fironic System was the worst system on earth for
humanity since the existence of the world. There were two major evils in
this system, one of which was phrased by the Quran as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسُومُونَكُمْ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***".. who was taking you towards divine punishment" (Surah al-Baqarah,
2: 49)***

This means the entire community was being dragged towards severe
chastisement. At times, the government or the system in which a human
being lives his life, that system drags the entire community, nation and
country towards final destruction (i.e. punishment). We can call such
systems as the Systems of Hell or corrupt systems. Now, we have to take
guidance from this narration of the Holy Quran.


