Ancestral Association Does Not Guarantee Protection
===================================================

ln our society today, some people refer to themselves as Muslims, Shias,
Sayyids, Jafri, Kazmi, Hashmi and followers of Religion of Islam. We all
have this ancestral status just like Bani Israel with all associations
going up to great personalities, but we need to see in practical sense
the kind of system that is governing our lives. This is highly relevant
in the light of the Holy Quran as mentioned before.

To make this point clear, let me take some examples over here. If for
instance a well known respected and pious Sayyid is sitting on a horse,
which is not tamed and is riding him towards a deep valley, just because
he is a Sayyid will this accident be naturally avoided? We should not
think that accidents don't happen with Sayyids and Shahs. Accidents do
happen with Sayyids and people of higher status also. A person could be
from a very good family, decent family but at this time the vehicle in
which he is sitting is going down a deep valley. His association with a
good family will not protect him from the tragic end he is about to meet
in this vehicle. Similarly at times human beings have very good
associations, he is a Muslim, maybe a master of the Holy Quran also and
a follower of the Infallibles also. All these relations and qualities
are good in absolute sense, but the system which he has accepted for
living his life could still be taking him towards the valley of hell,
similar to the vehicle.

We need to seriously think what direction is our system of governance
taking us towards? The system in which we are living our lives - where
is it taking us, our family, our children and our entire society? Maybe
it is the same as "Yasumunakum Soo al Azaab", which means all are
sitting in a vehicle which looks very nice but is taking us towards
hell. Hence it is essential for all of us to think and see which system
is driving us, in whose laps are we and where is it taking us towards.

The role of a government is not just to organize food for us, establish
a traffic system, make schools and universities, and our duties are also
not just limited to casting a vote to the government. Religion has a
different perception for a system and government. Government is like a
train on which we have all boarded and going somewhere. So before
boarding this train it is better to assess where is this going to take
us, towards salvation or towards destruction. Rather than taking lessons
from these stories narrated by the Holy Quran which are for our
guidance, we have used these for mere meaningless recitations culture.
Read these Ayahs and ponder:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتِيَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O children of Israel! Remember My favor which I bestowed on you…"***
***(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:40)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسُومُونَكُمْ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***".. who was taking you towards divine punishment"*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah, 2: 49)***

These Ayahs are not for earning rewards; instead they are for opening
our eyes. These Ayahs are asking us first and foremost to see how Bani
Israel despite of being from the generation of Prophets was living in a
system which was taking them towards Hell. And unfortunately we just
recite these verses for rewards and don't even think on the message
embedded in these.


