The First Characteristic of a Fironic System
============================================

The Holy Quran presented the reality of the Fironic system. We cannot
deny that the Firon also had a well-established system of governance
which was providing the necessities of life to the people. They were
getting food, water, doing business in market, there was a system of
mobilization in form of horses, camels and ships; people were getting
jobs, they were earning money, and they were getting married and were
having children. All these things were happening in the Fironic system,
but when the Quran painted the picture of this Fironic system it said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ نَجَّيْنَاكُمْ مِنْ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ يَسُومُونَكُمْ سُوءَ
الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And we delivered you from the system of Firon, which was taking you
towards punishment" (Surah al-Baqarah, 2: 49)***

This means, remember that system in which you were living your lives,
and remember that we gave you freedom and salvation from that system
which was taking you all towards hell. This Holy Quran is our religious
book which has discussed this incident for us to seriously think and
ponder over the system in which we are living our lives, to check and
see where this system is taking us towards.

The Quran is warning us to check and see which train you have boarded or
which boat you are sailing in. Maybe this boat is taking you into a
hurricane. This system of government which is governing our lives could
be taking us towards the fire of hell. At times the people sailing in a
boat would be very religious and pious, but the boat is sailing towards
a storm. Now all of them will end up into this storm in spite of their
piety and worships. Irrespective of whether you are good or bad, if the
system itself is moving towards destruction, your end will be the same
as that of the system.

Where are these worldly systems moving towards, these systems of
Yazidiat and why did Imam Hussain (as) start an uprising to eradicate
this system? This was because though the people living under this
governance of Yazid were religious, they were offering their prayers,
fasting and performing their Hajj rituals, but this system was going
towards hell. Their Prayers and Hajj would not save them from this
system which was taking them towards destruction.

There was a dire need to demolish this liberal system of Yazidiat, to
get freedom from this system and to make people aware about the evil
facts of this system. This is why he started his uprising, gave
sacrifices of his children, family and companions. He took the women
along with him so that he can tell the world that this is not the system
to which we will agree to live our lives. This was the first
characteristic of the Fironic system whereby it takes the entire nation
(Ummah) towards eternal destruction (Hell).


