Necessity of Learning Other Sciences
====================================

There is no division of opinion on the necessity of acquiring knowledge
particular to religious studies.

Accordingly, we shall abstain from any further discussion of the
subject. [^24] Instead, it is worthwhile to con­centrate on the question
of necessity of learning other sciences in the view of the Quran and
sunnah. In this regard there are a number of argu­ments whose discussion
we shall take up immediately.

1. If knowledge of a science is a preliminary requirement for attaining
an Islamic goal as envisaged by the Shari ah, its pursuit is an
obligation (wajib) since it entails the preliminary condition for
fulfill­ment of a duty prescribed by the Shari\`ah. For example, the
physical welfare of individuals in an Islamic society is necessary,
hence it is a wajib kifa'i for the Muslims to study medicine.

Some are of the opinion that in this context the duty to learn any
specific science depends on the need of the society for it. For example,
in our day, in order to succeed in large-scale agriculture or commerce,
specialized knowledge of these subjects is necessary. Accordingly, it is
a wajib kifa'i for Muslims to acquire specialty in these fields.

Evidently, if the Muslims restrict themselves to the religious sciences
and limit themselves to a minimum of what is necessary for their
survival, they can never hope to overtake the non?Muslim world in its
scientific progress.

2. The society envisioned by the Quran is an independent society of
majesty and grandeur, not one subservient to and dependent on the
unbelievers, as can be seen from this verse of the Quran:

...and Allah does not grant the unbelievers any way (of domination)
over the believers. (4:141)

In order to realize this goal set by the Quran, it is essential that
the Islamic society should have cultural, political and economic
indepen­dence; this in turn necessitates training of specialists of high
calibre in every field and creation of the necessary scientific and
technical facili­ties in Islamic societies. It is clear that one of the
reasons of decline of Muslim societies in the recent centuries is that
they left the study of those sciences to others which they themselves
deserved to study most and made themselves dependent on others.

Should not the Muslims equip themselves in every way to defend
themselves against the non?believers as stressed by the following
verse?

And prepare against them what force you can...so that you may dismay
the enemy of God and your enemy and others beside them whom you know
not; God knows them. Whatever you spend in the way of God it will be
repaid to you in full, and you will not be cheated. (8:60)

And is it not true that in our world today, possession of defence
facilities to face the enemies of Islam requires all kinds of scientific
and technical know?how? Then why don't the Muslims give the neces­sary
attention to the issue of preparing themselves adequately for their
self-defence?

In the modern age, human life is inextricably linked with the effort
for scientific advancement and the key to success in all affairs lies in
knowledge. It is an obligation of Muslim scholars and researchers,
living in the countries of the Eastern or Western block and are engaged
in education, to acquire the latest and most complete scientific and
tech­nical knowledge. Otherwise their societies will inevitably remain
under the domination of one superpower or another. Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq
(A) says:

A knowledgeable man who is abreast of his time will not be overwhelmed
by unexpected problems. [^26]

To sum up, if the Muslims want to succeed in their struggle against the
evil powers of this age, they should equip themselves with the
essentials of scientific advancement and endeavour to make up their lag
in scientific and technical fields. Whatever subject is essential for
safe­guarding the existence and vitality of the islamic societies should
be learnt.

3. The Holy Quran invites mankind to study the system and scheme of
creation, the wonders of nature and the causes and effects of all things
that exist, the conditions of living organisms, and in short all signs
of God discernable in the external universe and the inner depths of the
human soul. The Quran enjoins thought and meditation about all aspects
of creation and requires human beings to apply their reason and
perceptual faculties for the discovery of the secrets of nature. Few of
these verses we shall quote here:

What, have they not beheld heaven above them, how We have built it, and
decked it out fair, and it has no cracks? And the earth?We stretched it
forth, and cast on it firm mountains, and We caused to grow therein of
every joyous kind for an insight and a reminder to every penitent
servant. (50:7)

What do they not consider how the camel was created, how heaven was
lifted up, how the mountains were hoisted, how the earth was
outstretched? (88:18-21)

Say: Journey in the land, then behold how He originated creation; then
God causes the second growth; God is powerful over everything. (29:20)

In the earth are signs for those having sure faith; and in yourselves;
what, do you not see? (51:20-21)

Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and in the
alternation of the night and day there are signs for men possessed of
minds who remember God, standing and sitting and on their side, and
reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth: \`O Lord, Thou
hast not created this out of falsehood. Glory be to Thee! Guard us
against the chastisement of the Fire..' (3:190-191)

Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation
of night and day and the ship that runs in the sea with profit to men,
and the water God sends down from heaven therewith reviving the earth
after it is dead and His scattering abroad in it all manner of crawling
thing, and the turning about of the winds and clouds compelled between
heaven and earth??surely there are signs for a people having
understanding. (2:164)

As can be seen from the foregoing verses, God refers to all existing
things in the universe as the "signs" of their Creator, and the system
of the universe as the imprint of an omniscient designer and programmer.
The study of the universe and what exists in it is considered one of the
most important means for knowledge of God and recognition of the majesty
of its Creator. The prophets also based their invitation to belief on
this point. The Prophet Moses (A) makes a similar argument in his
confrontation with Pharaoh. The Quran quotes Moses as putting his
argument in these words:

He said, \`Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation, then guided
it... He who appointed the earth to be a cradle for you and therein
threaded roads for you and sent down water out of heaven, and therewith
We have brought forth diverse kinds of plants. (22:50-53)


