Supplement 1
============

Prophet Noah (A) is quoted in the Quran as saying to his people:

He said, "My Lord, l have called my people by night and by day, but my
call­ing has only increased them in flight...and I said, Ask you
forgiveness of your Lord; surely He is ever All-forgiving..., that you
look not for majesty in God, seeing He created you by stages? Have you
not regarded how God created seven heavens one upon another, and set the
moon therein for a light and the sun for a lamp? And God cause you to
grow out of the earth, then He shall return you into it, and bring you
forth. And God has laid the earth for you as a carpet, and thereof you
may tread ways, ravines.' " (71:5-20)

Obviously, it is not for everyone to be able to read the "book" of the
universe. The Quran considers only men of knowledge to be capable of
benefiting from the book of nature as can be seen from the follow­ing
verse:

Hast thou not seen how that God sends down out of heaven water, and
there­with We bring forth fruits of diverse hues? And in the mountains
are streaks White and red, of diverse hues, and pitchy black; men too,
and beasts and cattle?,diverse are their hues. Even so only those of His
servants fear God who have knowledge; surely God is Almighty,
All-forgiving. (35:27-8)

The Quran regards only men of knowledge as being capable of discerning
the majesty and magnificence of God's creation and as possessing the
humility produced by their knowledge of Divine power and greatness. This
point is stressed in other verses of the Quran:

And these similitudes?We strike them for the people, but none
understands them save those who know. (29:43)

Nay; rather it is signs, clear signs' in the breasts of those who have
been given knowledge; and none denies Our signs but the evildoers.
(29:49)

Obviously, as implied by the abovementioned verses, understanding of
the "signs" of the Creator, is considered possible only for the learned
and the men of knowledge who have strived to fathom the secrets of
nature and have acquired knowledge in their fields of study. Otherwise,
only a superficial acquaintance with the "book of creation" is not very
revealing.

A suitable initiation into this book of nature can only be achieved
through such sciences as mathematics, physics, chemi­stry, astronomy,
botany, zoology (which we shall refer to as \`natural sciences'). It is
with the aid of these and the rational sciences that we discover the
laws of nature and unravel the wonderful order and scheme of creation
that underlies nature. It is in this light that we should read the
verses of the Quran as the following:

Thou seest not in the creation of the All-merciful any imperfection.
Return thy gaze; seest thou any fissure? Then return thy gaze, and
again, and thy gaze comes back to thee dazzled, aweary. (67:3-4)

It means that the further does human knowledge make progress in
understanding God's creation, the more His Greatness and Majesty will
become obvious to men. Consider the following verse:

We shall show them Our signs in the horizons and in themselves, till it
is clear to them that it is the truth. (41:53)

In the above verse God promises revelation of His signs, in the
universe -without and the world of spirit within, to mankind in future
so as to make them convinced that it (the Quran) is indeed absolutely
the Truth.

Another reason for the study of the natural phenomenon and the scheme
of creation is that the knowledge of the laws of nature and
characteristics of things and organisms can be useful for improvement of
conditions of human life. This aspect is emphasized by numerous verses
of the Quran of which we quote a few:

And He subjected to you the night and day, and the sun and moon; and
the stars are subjected by His command. Surely in that are signs for
people who understand. And that which He has multiplied for you in the
earth of diverse hues.

Surely in that is a sign for a people who remember. It is He who
subjec­ted to you the sea, that you may eat of it fresh flesh, and bring
forth out of it ornaments for you to wear; and thou mayest see the ships
cleaving through it; and that you may seek of His bounty, and so haply
you will be thankful. And He cast on the earth firm mountains, lest it
shake with you, and rivers and ways; so haply you will be guided; and
waymarks; and by the stars they are guided. (16:12-16)

Have you not seen how that God has subjected to you whatsoever is in
the heavens and earth, and He has lavished on you His blessings, outward
and inward? And among men there is such a one that disputes concernig
God without knowledge orguidance, or an illuminating book. (31:20)

And He has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the
earth, all together, from Him. Surely in that are signs for a people who
reflect. (45:13)

He who created the pairs, all of them, and appointed for you ships and
cattle such as you ride, that you be seated on their backs and then
remember your Lord's blessing when you are seated on them, and say,
\`Glory be to Him, who has subjected this to us, and we ourselves were
not equal to it.' (43:12-13)

According to the Quran, the study of the book of nature reveals to man
its secrets and manifests its underlying coherence, consistency and
order. It allows men to use the agency of knowledge to uncover the
riches and resources hidden in nature and to achieve material welfare
through his scientific discoveries.

God has appointed man His vicegerent or deputy upon the earth and
provided him with unlimited opportuni­ties. It is for him to recognize
his own possibilities and benefit from his opportunities and acquire the
power and wisdom befitting his role as a \`deputy' of God and a \`sign'
of His wisdom and omnipotence:

It is He who has appointed you viceroys in the earth, and has raised
some of you in ranks above others, that He may try you in what He has
given you. Indeed your Lord is quite in retribution, and He is Forgiving
and. Merciful. (6:165)

In fact, this station of being God's viceroy or deputy upon the earth
has been bestowed upon man as a result of his capacity for acqui­sition
of knowledge as borne out by this verse:

He taught Adam all the names then presented them to the angels; then He
said: \`Tell me the names of those if you are right.' (2:31)

Unfortunately Muslims have since long tended to overlook such verses of
the Quran as quoted above, while this matter was appreciated by
non?Muslims who afterwards monopolized the scientific tradition.

Heretofore we have tried to establish that the injunction to acquire
knowledge as found in the Quran and prophetic traditions is not
restricted to the knowledge of the teachings of the Shari \`ah, but
equally applies to all fields of knowledge that are beneficial for
man­kind.

We have tried to make the point that every science that serves as a
preliminary to the performance of a religious obligation or serves the
necessary requirements of an Islamic society, or helps in our
under­standing of the creation and the knowledge of God, or allows us to
benefit from Divine blessings that are provided to man, should
necessarily be regarded as useful knowledge by Muslims.

Now in the light of the verses quoted below, we may as well assert that
the basic criterion for the utility of a scientific discipline is that
it should be an equivalent of worship of God, be instrumental in
obtaining His good pleasure and bring man closer to His Creator. Here
are the Quranic verses:

I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve Me. (51:56)

They were not commanded but to serve in all sincerity of their
religion. (98:5)

Knowledge is useful and beneficial for mankind only if it is seen as an
instrument for obtaining knowledge of God, His good pleasure and
nearness; otherwise knowledge itself is an iron curtain, a great
inscrutable veil (hijab akbar), whether it is linked with the natural
sciences or the sciences of the Shari\`ah. The great Prophet of Islam
(S) has said:

Anyone who seeks knowledge not for the sake of God and uses it not in
the way of God, should be certain of his place in hell. [^27]

A scholar who seeks knowledge for the sake of God will receive the
reverence of everything; whereas a scholar who seeks knowledge as a
means to amass wealth will be awed by everything. [^28]

God, the Most exalted, has said: \`Learned discussion between My
servants enlivens their hearts if it leads them towards My command.'
[^29]


