Proposals
=========

We have seen how Islam has strongly emphasized the need for acquisition
of knowledge in its widest sense, and how the Muslims, following the
teachings of Islam, created a brilliant civilization and were the
leaders of human intellectual advancement for centuries. We saw how the
separation of religion from science in Muslim societies caused the
Muslims to abandon their role of intellectual leadership of mankind.

But now that the Muslim community is showing gradual reawakening, and
enthusiasm has emerged in almost every corner of the Muslim world, the
time seems most suitable for taking decisive steps towards bringing
about a scientific renaissance. In this context, we call the attention
of the honoured reader to the following proposals:

1. Like the scholars and scientists of the early centuries of the
Islamic civilization, we should acquire the knowledge of all useful
sciences from others. We can liberate scientific knowledge from its
attending Western materialistic interpretations and rehabilitate it in
the context of Islamic world-outlook and ideology.

2. The kind of alliance which existed between religious and natural
sciences during the peak days of Islamic civilization should be
re-established, since, as has been pointed out, there is no separation
between the ends of religion and science. Religion teaches that all
creation is oriented towards God as stated in the Quranic verse:

All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God, the Supreme,
the All­ holy, the Almighty, the All-wise. (62:1)

Modern science is engaged in an attempt to unravel a comprehensive
unity in the laws of nature. The present day physicists are involved in
an effort of reducing all apparently independent forces of nature to a
single fundamental principle and have obtained some success in this
field.

For the achievement of this goal, it seems inevitable that the latest
scientific principles should be taught in theological centers, and, in
the same way, religious sciences should be taught in universities on a
com­paratively advanced level. This will be instrumental in
familiarizing Muslim research scholars with the Islamic world-outlook.
Moreover, it would give the opportunity to theological schools to
utilise latest scien­tific findings for interpretation and elucidation
of the laws of the Shari \`ah.

3. For the achievement of a comprehensive independence of the Islamic
ummah, it is essential that all the Muslim countries take steps towards
the training of specialists in all important scientific and indus­trial
fields.

Moreover, research centers should be established in all Muslim
communities where the Muslim researchers can work without any anxieties
or problems, and with all necessary facilities for research, so that
they are not forced to take refuge in atheistic environments, and as a
result compelled to put their expertise in the service of others.

4. Scientific research should be thought of as a fundamentally
essential and not an ancillary pursuit. The Muslims should think of it
as an obligation imposed upon them by the Quran so that they do not come
to rely and be dependent on others.

Presently, the practice in most Muslim countries is to import the craft
of assembly from Eastern and Western countries instead of making a
serious attempt in fundamental scientific research. The present trend
will never lead Muslim countries to scientific and technological
self?sufficiency. Imported technology should be accom­panied by
indigenous research work.

5. There should be cooperation between Muslim countries in the
scientific and technological research. For this purpose, establishment
of communication links between their universities can serve as a
preli­minary ground. Moreover, joint research and development bodies
(such as the Geneva-based CERN organization) should be formed by the
Muslim countries where Muslim scientists and research scholars can come
together. There should be no nationalistic bias in this regard. Such
centers were widely prevalent during the past ages of Islamic
civilization.

All that has been done hitherto in this connection was more or less of
a preliminary nature. Now it is time for a decisive step in this
direction.


