Chapter 12: Discovery of Hydrogen
=================================

According to the Western world, the greatest miracle of the Imam was his
revelation of the presence of oxygen in the air. The western world admit
now that the Imam discovered this twelve and a half centuries ago. Imam
Baqar had said about the presence of hydrogen in water and that water
can be turned into fire, as hydrogen was a highly inflammable gas. The
discovery of these two gases depended upon their separation from air and
water. Separation of hydrogen from water was more difficult that
separation of oxygen from air. Pure oxygen is available in the air, but
pure hydrogen is not available anywhere. Hence hydrogen could not be
obtained till sufficient power was developed and water was hydrolysed.
The world amazes as to how both our Imams could reveal the presence of
hydrogen in air which was a colourless, odourless and tasteless gas and
does not exist freely in nature. They could not have identifi! ed this
gas and found out its properties without separating it from water
through the process of hydrolysis, which was impossible without a strong
current of electricity.

The first person who was able to separate hydrogen from water in modern
times was the English scientist Henry Cavendish, who died in 1810.

After many years of research he was able to hydrolyse water and obtain
hydrogen gas. He was also able to confirm that hydrogen gas was highly
inflammable as a result of a freakish accident that he had while doing
his experiments, which resulted in his house catching fire. It was
eventually Lavoisier, the French chemist, who gave the name of hydrogen
to this gas.

The Imams knew such secrets but revealed only to the extend that would
be useful to the world, hence the secret of how hydrogen could be
separated from water without the use of electricity was never made known
to common man. It has been proved that this discovery by Man has not
done any good to mankind. On the contrary, it has led to the production
of the hydrogen bomb, which is threatening to annihilate the human race.
It was better that this instrument of death, destruction and devastation
was not invented and manufactured at all so that mankind would be saved
from the impending catastrophe.


