Chapter 16: Theory of the Light of the Stars
============================================

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) has said that among the clusters of stars
which we see at night, some are so bright that our sun, in comparison,
is quite insignificant.

Because of man's limited knowledge, many people during the Imam's time
and centuries after him, considered this theory to be illogical,
irrational and unacceptable. They could not believe that these small
specks of light which are called stars, can have more light than the
light of our big bright sun.

About twelve and a half centuries later, it was proved that what he said
was quite correct. It has been discovered that there are stars in the
universe, which are billions of times brighter than the sun. They are
called quasars. The light of quasars is about quadrillion times (ten
thousand billion times) the light of our sun. Some of them are at a
distance of about 9000 million light years from the earth. The first
such quasar was discovered in 1927.

Another important theory was that there are many worlds other than
ourown, that we cannot even count them. Their number is only in the
knowledge of Allah (swt). Just as we have living beings on this planet,
there are living beings on many other planets in the universe where
conditions are suitable.

Our telescopes are even today not powerful enough to enable us to see
what is beyond the quasars. Therefore we do not know how vast the
universe is. It can only be surmised that in the universe there would be
millions and millions of worlds, which have existed for billions of
years and shall continue to do so for billions of years to come.

We must therefore accept as Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) has said, that, no
one except Allah (swt) knows the number of large and small worlds.


