Chapter 19: Good Advice for Mothers
===================================

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) has advised mothers that they should put their
new born babies to sleep on their left side.

For centuries this advice was considered by many as meaningless and
absurd since no one could see any use in putting babies to sleep on the
left side of mothers. Some people even went to the extent of remarking
that it was dangerous to carry out his instructions. Mothers may take a
turn while sleeping and crush the baby to death. No one in the East or
West took that advice seriously. Even during the Renaissance period,
when scholars in Europe studied every theory critically, no one tried to
find out whether it had a scientific basis.

In 1865, Ezra Cornell founded the Cornell University in NYK. In this
university he set up under the department of medicine, an institute for
the Research on New Born and Suckling Babies. A research scholar of this
institute who travelled to different parts of the world, observed that
mothers in every country carried their babies in the left arms. Doctors
in this institute observed that babies who are put to sleep on the left
side of their mothers sleep more soundly and peacefully but those who
are put on the right side, wake up every now and then and cry. It was
reported that for the first few days after their birth, babies would
have no rest at all, if they are not on the left side of their mothers.

After the invention of holography, holographic pictures of unborn babies
were taken which revealed that the mother's heartbeat reached the ears
of the baby in the womb. Experiments were made of different mammals to
find out the reaction of the foetus. All experiments showed that
whenever the heart of the mother stopped beating, the foetus became
restless and agitated, because it feeds on the blood, which comes to it
with each and every heartbeat.

These experiments proved that unborn babies are not only used to hearing
their mother's heartbeat, but their very existence depends upon them.
Heartbeats mean to them a constant supply of food. Stoppage of
heartbeats signals starvation and death. They depend so much upon the
heartbeat that even after they are born, they become restless, if they
do not hear it. A new-born knows its mother's heartbeat quite well and
that is why it sleeps comfortably and peacefully, when it is on the left
side of the mother and can hear the heartbeats clearly.

If the Cornell University had not been established and the research work
on babies was not done, no one would ever haverealised the scientific
importance of the advice of the Imam that mothers should put their
babies to sleep on their left side.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) was ahead of his time by 1,100 years. Indeed
he had access to Ilm Ladunni (divine knowledge).

End


