Chapter 3: Saviour of Shi'ism
=============================

When Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) was still in his infancy some people were
following the example of the Christians spread the belief that the Holy
Prophet, Ali ibn Abi Talib and the Imams had two natures - the nature of
man and the nature of God. They were partly human and partly divine.
This belief posed a great danger to their sect. The Imam fought against
this thought and saved Shi'ism from disintegration. He realised that it
would create differences, split the people into factions, weaken the
Shia movement and finally destroy it totally.

The Imam knew the history of the Christians. He knew the origin of the
Orthodox and Catholic churches and the main cause of differences among
Christians and their division into so many sects. In reply to those who
propagated that idea, he said that all of them were human beings and had
no essence or elements of God in them. But they were God's most favoured
servants and were chosen by Him to lead and guide mankind. He announced
that anyone who believed or confessed that they had an essence of God in
them will be believing in many gods and would not remain a muwahid
(monotheist). They would become a mushrik (polytheist).

Another great danger threatening Islam was Monasticism which the Muslims
wanted to adopt from the Christians. The Imam fought against that
tendency and saved Muslims from a great catastrophe.

In the first half of the 2nd century Hijra, many Muslim sects were
inclined to borrow Monasticism from the Christians and introduce it in
Islam. They believed that one should give up worldly life and spend his
time in seclusion and prayers. The leaders of those sects had arranged
some solitary places where they and their followers could go and spend
their lives in prayers. Some of them said that in Islam there was
nothing better than Salaat (Namaaz), while others said that fasting was
better than prayers and if someone had withdrawn from the world he
should fast everyday throughout his life and think of nothing but Allah.
Shias also, like others, were also attracted to Monasticism. This
philosophy appealed to those who did not want to work and earn their own
living.

At the beginning of the 2nd century Hijra Muslims were attracted not
only to Monasticism, but they also wanted to follow another Christian
practice which was Baptism.

The Imam opposed Baptism among Muslims just as he had opposed
Monasticism. He told the Muslims: "We have customs which were practiced
by non-Muslims before Islam, but the Prophet of Allah approved them and
thus they became part of Muslim customs and traditions. Although the
Holy Quran has praised and exalted Christ and him mother Mary, it is not
permissible for us to follow Christian customs and traditions."

Another Christian practice, which was being followed by the Muslims, was
celibacy. Considering it as a means of purification of the soul many

Muslims did not marry. Addressing the Muslims, the Imam said: "Do not
follow the example of Christians. Celibacy is against the Commandments
of Allah and tradition of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s). Not only it
hurts a man intellectually and spiritually, it endangers the Muslim
nation as a whole. It would reduce the number of Muslims. If celibacy
was useful, the Holy Prophet of Allah would not have married at all.
Since our Prophet himself married, it is the duty of every Muslim to
follow his example and get married so that he may save himself from
intellectual and spiritual degeneration and also help increase the
Muslim population."


