Chapter 4: Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) & Abu Shakir
=================================================

Jafar al-Sadiq (A. S.) was one of the most patient and tolerant teachers
of his time. He used to take his classes every day. After his lectures
he would listen and reply to the objections of his critics. He had asked
his critics, who attended his classes, not to interrupt him during his
lectures. They were quite free to ask him any question or raise any
objection after the classes were over.

Once Abu Shakir, one of his opponents, said to him: "Would you allow me
to say something and ask some questions?"

"Yes, you can", replied Imam Jafar as-Sadiq.

Said Abu Shakir: "Is it not a myth that there is Allah? You want people
to believe in a thing which does not exist. If there was Allah, we could
have felt his existence through our senses. You may say that we can feel
His presence by the help of our inner senses, but our inner senses also
depend upon our five outer senses. We cannot conjure up an image of
anything in which some of our senses were not involved. We cannot
conjure up the picture of a person whom we have not met; recall to our
memory his voice if we have not heard him and feel the touch of his hand
by our inner senses if we have never taken his hand in our hand."

"You may say that we can perceive the presence of Allah by our
intelligence and not through our inner or outer senses. But our
intelligence also needs the assistance of our five outer senses, without
which it cannot function. We cannot make any reasoning or come to any
conclusion without the help of our senses.

By your imagination you have created a being, which is of your own
image. Since you see, talk, hear, work and rest, He also does exactly
what you do."

"You do not show Him to anyone. To maintain your hold on the people you
say that He cannot be seen. You also say that He was not born from the
womb of a woman. He does not procreate and that He would not die. I have
heard that there is an idol in India, which is hidden behind a curtain
and is not allowed to be seen by the Hindu devotees. The custodians of
the idol say that it is out of mercy that their god does not appear
before them, because whoever casts his eyes on it, would instantly die."

"Your Allah is also like the veiled god of the Hindus. It is out of His
mercy that He does not appear before us. If he does, we shall surely
die. You say that the universe was created by Allah, who did not talk to
anyone, except to the Prophet of Islam. As a matter of fact the universe
came by itself. Does anyone create the grass, which grows in the field?
Does it not grow and get green by itself? Does anyone create the ants
and the mosquitoes? Do they not come out by themselves?"

"I must tell you, who claims to be a scholar and the successor of the
Prophet, that among all the stories, which circulate among the people,
none is more absurd and baseless than the story of Allah, who cannot be
seen. There are many baseless stories, but they, at least, depict real
life and present before us the people and personalities, who may
themselves be fictitious, but their acts and deeds are like those of
real human beings. We can see them. They eat, they drink, they talk,
they sleep and they love. When we read these fictitious stories, we
enjoy them. We know that they are false, but we see in them the faces of
men and women, who are like us. The people mentioned in the stories
might not have existed, but our common sense accepts existence of such
people in the world. However, when we cannot see, feel or touch your
Allah, our logic and reasoning, which depend upon our senses, do not
accept his existence."

"l know that some people, who have been deceived by you, believe in your
invisible Allah, but you cannot deceive me and make me believe in Him. I
worship God, who is made of wood and stone. Although my God does not
talk, but I can see him with my eyes and touch him with my hands."

"You say that the God whom I have made from my own hands is not worthy
of being worshipped, while you ask the people to worship Allah, you have
created by your imagination. You deceive innocent people by saying that
your imaginary Allah has created the universe, but I do not deceive
anyone. No one created the universe. There was no need of any god to
create it. It came by itself. God cannot create anything. He is himself
our creation. I created him by my hand and you by your imagination."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A. S.) did not say a word during the long tirade of
Abu Shakir. Sometimes his students, who were present, wanted to
intervene but he asked them to remain quiet. When Abu Shakir stopped his
lengthy discourse, the Imam asked him, if he had anything more to say.

Retorted Abu Shakir: "By introducing your invisible Allah to the people,
you want to acquire wealth and position and have a respectable,
comfortable and luxurious life. These are my last words. I do not want
to say anything more."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A. S.) said: "l would like to start with the last
part of your speech. Your accusations that I want money, position and a
comfortable life would have been justified if I was living like a
caliph. You have seen today that I have eaten a few morsels of bread
only and nothing else. I invite you to my house to see for yourself what
I will have for dinner and how I live."

"Abu Shakir, if I wanted to acquire wealth and have a good life, as you
say, I was not obliged to teach and preach to get rich. I would have
earned money and got rich by my knowledge of chemistry. Another way to
get rich was to do business. I have more knowledge' about foreign
markets than any merchant in Medina. I know what goods are produced in
different countries and where to sell them for profit. I also know how
to bring them here to reduce the cost of transport. Our merchants import
goods only from Syria, Iraq, Egypt and some other Arab countries. They
do not know what goods are available in Isphahan, Rasht and Rome,
otherwise they would have imported them and sold them with profit."

"Abu Shakir, you have said that I ask the people to worship Allah to
deceive them and to get rich. I must tell you that I have never taken
anything from anyone, except some fruits as presents. One of my friends
sends to me every year fresh dates from his garden and another some
pomegranates from Taif. I accept these presents so that they may not get
offended."

"I have heard, O Abu Shakir, that your father was a pearl merchant.
Perhaps you may have some knowledge about pearls. But I know all about
pearls and precious stones. I can also appraise their market value. If I
wanted to get rich I would have worked as a jeweller. Can you test and
recognise a precious stone? Do you know how many kinds of rubies and
emeralds there are in the world?"

"I know nothing about them", replied Abu Shakir.

"Do you know how many kinds of diamonds there are and what colours they
have?" asked Imam Jafar as-Sadiq.

"I do not know", replied Abu Shakir.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) said: "I am not a jeweller, but I know all
about the pearls and precious stones. I also know where they come from.
All jewelers must know about gems, what I know, but few of them know
their sources."

"Do you know what makes a diamond shine?"

"I never was a diamond merchant, nor was my father. How can I know why
diamonds shine?; replied Abu Shakir.

Said the Imam: "Diamonds are obtained from the beds of rivers and
streams. Rough diamonds are cut by experts. This is the cut of a
diamond, which gives it its brilliance. Those who are experts in cutting
diamonds are trained from the childhood in the profession of their
fathers and forefathers. Cutting a diamond is a very delicate and
difficult art. A diamond is cut only by a diamond."

"Abu Shakir, I have said all this simply to show to you that if I wanted
to accumulate wealth, I could have done so by making use of my knowledge
about jewels. I have replied to your accusations and now I shall deal
with your objections."

"Abu Shakir, you have said that I have fabricated stories and ask
thepeople to worship Allah, who cannot be seen. You refuse to
acknowledge existence of Allah, because He cannot be seen. Can you see
inside your own body?"

Replied Abu Shakir: "No, I cannot."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) said: "If you could have seen what is inside
you, you would not have said that you do not believe in Allah, who
cannot be seen."

Abu Shakir asked: "What is the relationship between seeing within one's
own body and the existence of your unseen Allah?"

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A. S.) replied: "You have said just now that a
thing, which cannot be seen, touched, tasted or heard, does not exist."

Abu Shakir said: "Yes, I have said that and I believe it is true."

Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) asked: "Do you hear the sound of the movement of
blood in your body?"

Said Abu Shakir: "No, I do not. But does blood move in the body?

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A. S.) said: "Yes, it does. It makes a full circuit
of your body. If the circulation of blood stops for a few minutes you
will die."

Abu Shakir said: "I cannot believe that blood circulates in the body."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) said: "It is your ignorance, which does not
let you believe that your blood circulates in your body, and the same
ignorance does not let you believe in the existence of Allah, Who cannot
be seen."

Then the Imam asked Abu Shakir whether he has seen the tiny living
beings, which Allah has created in his body.

Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) continued: "It is because of these small creatures
and their wonderful work that you are kept alive. They are so small that
you cannot see them. Since you are a slave of your senses, you do not
know about their existence. If you increase your knowledge and decrease
your ignorance, you will come to know that these small beings in your
body are as large in number as the particles of sand in the desert.
These small creatures are born in your body, multiply in your body, work
in your body and die in your body. But you never see them, touch them,
taste them or hear them in your life time."

"It is true that one who knows himself knows his Allah. If you had known
yourself and had the knowledge of what is going on inside your body, you
would not have said that you do not believe in Allah, without seeing
Him."

Pointing his finger to a huge stone he said: "Abu Shakir, do you see the
stone, which is in the foot of that portico? To you it seems lifeless
and motionless, because you do not see the brisk motion, which is inside
the stone. Again it is lack of knowledge or your ignorance, which would
not let you believe that there is motion inside the stone. The time will
come when the learned people would see the motion which is in the
stone."

Continued the Imam: "Abu Shakir, you have said that everything in the
universe came by itself and has no Creator. You think that the grass in
the field grows and gets green by itself. You must know that the grass
cannot grow without seeds and seeds would not germinate without moisture
in the soil and there would be no moisture if no rain falls. The rain
does not fall by itself. First the water vapours rise and gather above
in the atmosphere in the form of clouds. The winds bring the clouds.

Then the water vapours condense and fall down as rain drops. The rain
must also fall at the right time, otherwise no grass will grow and
become green. Take the seeds of ten kinds of herbs and put them in a
closed jar, which has sufficient water, but no air. Would they
germinate? No, in addition to water, seeds need air also. It is possible
to grow grass, herbs and fruits in hot houses, when it is very cold,
provided there is sufficient air. Without the presence of air no grass
will gr! ow in the fields and get green. If there is no air, all plants
and animals, including human beings, would die."

"Abu Shakir, do you see the air, on which your very existence depends.

You only feel it when it moves. Can you refuse to believe in th
existence of air? Can you deny that to grow and get green the grass
needs many things like seeds, soil, water, air, a suitable climate and
above all a strong managing power, which may co-ordinate the action of
these different elements. That Managing and Co-ordinating Power is
Allah."

"You say that everything comes by itself because you are not a
scientist.

No scientist would ever say that. All scientists and all scholars
believe in the existence of a creator, albeit, they may call Him by
different names.

Even those, who do not believe in Allah, believe in a Creative Force."

"Abu Shakir, it is not because of one's knowledge, but it is due to his
ignorance that he does not believe in Allah. When a wise man thinks of
himself, he finds that his own body needs a controller so that all its
organs and systems may function properly. He then realises that this
vast universe also needs a controller or supervisor so that it may run
smoothly."

"You said just now that both of us create our own gods - you by your
hands and I by my imagination. But there is a big difference between
your god and my Allah. Your god did not exist before you made him out of
wood or stone, but my Allah was there before I could think about Him. I
do not create my Allah by my hands or by my brain. What I do is to know
Him better and think of His Greatness. When you see a mountain you try
to know more about it. It is not creating the mountain by imagination.
That mountain was there before you saw it and it would be there when you
are gone."

'You cannot know much about the mountain because of your limited
knowledge. The more your knowledge grows, the more you will learn about
it. It is impossible for you to find out when and how that mountain came
into being and when it would disappear. You cannot find out what
minerals are there inside or underneath the mountain and what is their
benefit to mankind."

"Do you know that the stones, out of which you make your idols came into
being thousands of years ago and shall exist for thousands of years
more. These stones have come here from a distant place. They could
travel that long journey because different parts of the earth are always
moving, but this movement is so slow that you do not feel it. There is
nothing in the universe, which is not in motion. Rest or motionlessness
is meaningless. We are not at rest even when we are sleeping. We are in
motion because the earth is in motion. Besides, we have a motion inside
our own bodies."

"Abu Shakir, if you had any knowledge about the piece of stone, out of
which you carve an idol, you would not have denied the existence of
Allah and said that I have created Him by my imagination. You do not
know what a stone is and how it came into being. Today you can handle it
as you like and cut it into any shape or form, but there was a time when
it was in liquid state. Gradually it cooled down and Allah solidified
it. In the beginning it was quite brittle and would have broken into
pieces in your hand like a piece of glass." Asked Abu Shakir: "Was it in
a liquid condition before?"

"Yes, it was", replied Jafar asSadiq (A. S.)

Abu Shakir burst into a peal of laughter. One of the students of Jafar
as-

Sadiq got angry and was about to say something when he was stopped by
his teacher.

Abu Shakir said: "I am laughing because you say that the stones are made
of water."

Jafar al-Sadiq (A. S.) replied: "I did not say that the stones are made
of water. What I had said was that in the beginning they were in a
liquid state."

Abu Shakir said: "What difference does it make. The liquid and water are
the same things."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) replied: "There are many liquids which are not
water.

Milk and vinegar are liquids, but they are not water, although they have
a water content in them. In the beginning the stones were liquid like
water and they flowed like water. Gradually they cooled down and became
hard so that you could cut them and make them into idols. The same hard
stones will turn into liquid, if they are heated."

Said Abu Shakir: "When I go home I will check the truth of your
statement.

I will put the stone in the fireplace and see if it turns into liquid or
not."

Said the Imam: "You cannot liquefy stone in your fireplace. Can you
liquefy a piece of iron at home? A very high temperature is required to
turn solid stone into liquid."

"Do you realise how you could make the idols out of stones? It was
Allah, who made the stones. It was He Who created you and gave you the
hands with the unique fingers, which enabled you to handle tools and
chisel out the idols from the stones. Again it was He who gave you power
and intelligence, which you used in making the idols."

"Abu Shakir, do you think that the mountains are only heaps of stones?

The Great Allah has created them to serve some very useful purpose.

They were not created so that you may take stones and turn them into
idols. Wherever there is a mountain there is flowing water. Rain and
snow which fall on the mountain tops produce streams of fresh water.

These streams combine together to form big rivers, which irrigate farms
and fields. The people who live in the valleys, through which the rivers
flow, are assured of constant supply of water. People who can afford it,
go to the mountains during the summer season to escape the heat of the
plains."

"The mountains work as a great bulwark and protect towns and villages,
which are in their valleys from the devastation and destruction of
hurricanes.

Green mountains provide good grazing grounds for sheep.

When scorching heat burns the pastures down in the plains and no fodder
is left, the shepherds take their flocks of sheep to the mountains and
stay there till the end of summer. Mountains are also habitats of birds
and animals, some of which are a good source of food for those, who live
there. Even the mountains, which are not green, are not without some
use. If the people try, they may discover in them mines of metals and
minerals which are useful for mankind."

"Abu Shakir, I am too small and too weak to create Allah with my brain.

It is He, who has created my brain, so that I may think of Him and know
Him - my Creator. He was there before I came into being and He would be
there when I am no more. I do not mean that I would be totally
destroyed.

Nothing in the universe is totally destroyed. Everything is subject to
change. It is only Allah, Who does not change."

"Abu Shakir, please tell me sincerely to whom will you turn for help
when you are in trouble? Do you hope that the idol you carve out of
stone can come to your succour? Can it cure you when you are sick; save
you from mishaps and calamities; save you from starvation and help you
pay your debts?"

Abu Shakir replied: "I have no such expectations from the stone, but, I
think there is something inside the stone, which will help me. Moreover,

I cannot help worshipping it."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) enquired: "What is inside the stone? Is it
also stone?"

"I do not know what it is. But it cannot help me if it is also stone,"
replied

Abu Shakir.

Said Imam Jafar as-Sadiq: "Abu Shakir, what is inside the stone and is
not stone and can help when you are in trouble is, Allah."

Abu Shakir pondered over the subject for a while and then said: "Is
Allah, who cannot be seen, inside the stone?"

The Imam replied: "He is everywhere."

Abu Shakir said: "I cannot believe that a thing may be everywhere but
remain unseen."

The Imam said: "Do you know that the air is everywhere but cannot be
seen?"

Said Abu Shakir: "Although I cannot see the air, I can, at least, feel
it when it moves. But I can neither see your Allah nor feel his
presence."

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) said: "You do not feel the presence of air
when it is not moving. The air is only a creation of Allah. He is
everywhere, but you cannot see Him or feel His presence by your senses.
You have admitted just now that although you do not see it, but your
instinct or your soul tells you that there is something inside the
stone, and is not the stone, which can help you. That something is
Allah. Your instinct also tells you that you cannot live without Allah
and without worshipping Him."

Abu Shakir said: "It is true. I cannot live without worshipping idols."

Said Imam Jafar as-Sadiq: "Do not say idols. Say Allah. It is He, Who is
worthy of worship. just like you everyone is obliged to worship Him.
One, who does not worship Allah has no guide and no guardian. He is just
like one, who cannot see, cannot hear, cannot feel and cannot think.

He does not know where to go and on whom to depend when in trouble.

Worshipping Allah is a part of living. Every living being worships Him
instinctively. Even the animals cannot live without worshipping Him.

We cannot ask them and they cannot tell us that they worship Allah, but
their well regulated and orderly life is sufficient proof that they
worship Him.

"I do not say that the animals believe in Allah and worship Him just as
we do. But there is no doubt that they obey the laws made by their
Creator faithfully, which means they worship Him. If they were not
obedient to their Creator, they could not have such an orderly and
regulated life."

"We see that just before the advent of spring the titmouse (a kind of
small bird) always comes at the same time and sings, as if to give us
the tiding of the new season. The itinerary of these migratory birds is
so regulated and their schedule so fixed that even if the last days of
winter are still cold, their arrival is not delayed for more than a few
days. When

Chilchila (a migratory bird) returns after covering a distance of
thousands of miles, it builds its nest at the same place, where it had
built it last spring. Was it possible for these small birds to have such
a well organized life if they did not obey the laws of Allah and worship
Him?"

"Abu Shakir, even the plants obey the laws made by Allah faithfully and
worship Him. Out of 150 species of plants, which are further divided
into hundreds of sub-species you will not find even one plant, which has
a disorganised and disorderly life."

"Abu Shakir, just like us the plants also do not see their Creator, but
they worship Him by obeying His laws instinctively."

"I know that you will not accept, or perhaps you do not understand, what
I say. A man must have sufficient knowledge to understand complicated
problems."

"Abu Shakir, not only animals by their animal instinct and plants by
their plant instinct obey Allah and worship Him, the lifeless and
inanimate objects also, with whatever instinct they have, obey Allah and
worship Him. If they did not worship Him, they would not have followed
the laws made by Him. As a result, their atoms would have broken apart
and they would have been destroyed."

"The light which comes from the sun also worships Allah by obeying his
laws, which are very stringent and exact. It comes into being by the
combination of two opposite forces. These forces also obey the laws of
Allah and worship Him, otherwise they cannot produce light."

"Abu Shakir, if there was no Allah there would have been no universe and
no you and me. The sentence, "There is no Allah', is meaningless.

The existence of Allah is a must. If attention of Allah is diverted,
even for a moment from the affairs of the universe to something else, it
would break up. Everything in the universe obeys His laws, which are
permanent and eternal. Because of His absolute wisdom and knowledge, He
could make such wonderful laws, which will last for ever. Each and every
law, made by Him serves some special and useful purpose."

When the Imam concluded his discourse, Abu Shakir fell into a deep
reverie as if he was greatly inspired.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) asked: "Do you now believe that Allah, who
cannot be seen, does exist and what you worship is the unseen Allah?"

Abu Shakir replied: "I am not yet convinced. I am in a quandary. I am
full of doubts and misgivings about my faith and my convictions."

Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) remarked: "The doubt about idol worship is the
beginning of the worship of Allah."


