Chapter 5: Revelations of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S)
===================================================

Imam Mohammed al-Baqar and Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S) knew that the
Muslim world would be flooded with books of the philosophers of Greece
and Alexandria and that the Muslims would blindly accept everything they
had written as the Gospel truth. Thus, many of the false and fallacious
theories would catch their imagination, corrupt their minds, and keep
them under total darkness for centuries, which is actually what had
happened in the past. For example the theory of Ptolemy that the earth
is the centre of the universe and the sun, the planet and the stars
rotate around it was generally accepted by the Muslims as true.

The two Imams explained to their students who were to spread their
teachings among the Muslims the theories of those philosophers, pointed
out their mistakes and presented their own correct theories. Similarly
they taught them physics, chemistry, geography etc prior to the
translation of these subjects from Indian ,Greek and Persian into
Arabic. Because they were Imams (representatives of Allah on Earth) they
had the knowledge of the theories of Greek philosophers and others.

The momentous intellectual awakening of Muslims witnessed in the second
century of the Hijra was not due to Hellenic or other foreign
influences, as some Western historians have recorded. It was this result
of the untiring and ceaseless efforts made by the members of the
Prophet's family to bring about that golden age of knowledge. Among all
the Abbasid caliphs, only al-Mamun was interested in knowledge. The rest
were only interested in accumulation on wealth, worldly pleasures and
satisfaction of carnal desires. A halo of glory and grandeur has been
placed round the head of Harun by the historians and story tellers. He
was nothing but a tyrant and a despot.

The Abbasid caliph al-Mansur was well aware of the popularity of the
Living Imam - Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (A.S). It is reported on the authority
of Mufazzal bin Umar that al-Mansur wanted to kill the Imam. He called
him many times with this intent, but when he saw him, he was filled with
fear and could not carry out his vicious plan. Instead, he placed the
Imam under house arrest for long periods of time. He eventually poisoned
him secretly. This was the end of the Medina Academy which was founded
by the Imam. To destroy the influence of the Imam in the field of
Religion, al-Mansur and his successors encouraged sectarianism. Many new
schools of Islamic Jurisprudence appeared in that period and were fully
supported by them. Since the leaders of these new sects had the backing
of the government, their ideologies spread and the number of their
adherents increased. On the other hand those who followed the teachings
of the Imam were systematically persecuted by the Abbasid !caliphs.
However, as al-Mansur could not still find in the Muslim world anyone
who could rival the Imam in physics, chemistry, astronomy, mathematics
and other sciences, he spent large sums of money and imported books from
different countries on scientific subjects. They were translated in to
Arabic, and taught in schools and colleges. Gradually the names of
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle and Ptolemy became a household name and their
scientific and philosophical theories captured the imagination and
dominated the thoughts of the Muslims for centuries. That scheme proved
so successful that in the course of time, Muslims totally forgot about
the scientific achievements of the Imam and the important discoveries
made by him. As a result the world lost more than a thousand years of
knowledge as the science introduced by the Imam was only discovered by
common man in the 19th century onwards. And the credit of this discovery
also went to the person who discovered it rec! ently. Little does the
world know that they were all made known by the Imam 14 hundred years
ago. Learned scholars from Europe started studying Islamic literature
from the beginning of the 17th century.


