Chapter 6: Rotation of the Earth round the Sun
==============================================

At the age of 11, the Imam refuted the theory that the sun, moon and the
planets rotated around the earth. He said that the sun, during its
course round the earth, passes through the 12 constellations in one year
and remains in each constellation for 30 days, so why does it then
disappear from sight during the night. It should remain visible in each
constellation for 30 days. Ptolemy\*\* theory said that the sun has two
movements. One of its movements is that it crosses the sign of the
zodiac and goes round the earth in one year and the other movement is
that it goes round the earth in one night and one day, as a result of
which we see it rise in the east and set in the west.

\*\* Ptolemy was a geographer and astronomer who was born in Alexandria
in the 2nd century B. C. He enriched his knowledge by reading the books
of great scholars of Greece in the library of Alexandria. He borrowed
from Euclid, the great mathematician, the idea that the sun rotated
round the earth and then developed his own theory known as the Ptolemaic
System. Since then up to the 8th century BC no one refuted this theory.

Aristotle was a great thinker and philosopher. His books, Arganan and
Physics, are the most precious literary treasures of mankind, but his
theory that the earth is stationary and the sun and stars rotate around
it, delayed the progress of the science of Astronomy and kept mankind in
the darkness of ignorance for 1800 years.

The Imam remarked that those two movements were not compatible. When the
sun had to pass through the sign of the zodiac in one year and stay in
each constellation for 30 days how could it change its course and go
round the earth in 24 hours?

He also announced that the earth rotated around its own axis. The great
scholar Poincare who lived in the 20th century made fun of this theory.
When such a scholar could refuse to believe this, how could people in
the 1st and 2nd century of the Hijra believe in the theory of the Imam.
The rotation of the earth on its own axis could be proved by observation
only. When astronauts landed on the surface of the moon, and directed
their telescope towards the earth they observed that it was rotating
slowly on its axis.

Some people might say that it was only by guesswork that Imam Jafar
al-Sadiq (A.S) said that the earth rotates on its own axis. Sometimes it
happens that guesswork proves to be correct. But the question arises as
to why no one else had guessed that for such a long time. This proves
that he knew the laws of astro-physics which enabled him to make that
discovery. If he had not known those laws, it would have been impossible
for him to discover the rotation of the earth on its axis. This
discovery could not have been accidental. One must know the cause to
know its effect.

Tragically, for reasons stated above, the real credit of discovery of
the movement of the earth round the sun was given to Copernicus who was
an astronomer and mathematician, in the 15th Century. The theory of the
earth rotation around its own axis went to Galileo who discovered the
telescope.


