Chapter 8: Origin of the Universe
=================================

Origin of the Universe:

The Imam's another wonderful theory is about the 'Origin of the
Universe'. When modern scientists read this theory they confirm that it
totally agrees with the modern theory, which has not yet become a law of
physics. However, it has the unique distinction that it was enunciated
12 centuries ago. The theory read as follows :

" The universe was born out of a tiny particle, which had two opposite
poles. That particle produced an atom. In this way matter came into
being.

Then the matter diversified. This diversification was caused by the
density or rarity of the atoms."

The most significant point in this theory is the description of two
opposite poles. The importance of this point was realised when the
presence of two opposite poles was proved by modern science. Today it is
an undisputed fact in atomic science and electronics.

Another of his interesting theory was that the universe is not always in
one and the same condition. In one periods it expands and in another it
contracts.

This phenomenon was considered for centuries as inconceivable and the
theory remained quite incomprehensible to the leading astronomers. After
the 18th century more and more powerful telescopes were built and
astronomers could see beyond our solar system. It was in 1960 that it
was observed and confirmed by astronomers that distances between our
galaxy and the neighbouring galaxies are increasing. These observations
have provided sufficient proof that the universe is in a state of
expansion. We do not know when this expansion started. The discovery of

black holes has proved his other statement that the universe sometimes

contracts was also proved true. Hence the Imam's theory was proved to

be correct.

The Imam also stated that everything in the universe including inanimate

objects, is always in motion although we may not see it. There is

nothing without motion.

This theory, which was unacceptable in his time, is a scientific fact
today.

It is impossible to imagine, explain and describe an object in the
universe, which is without motion. Motion is the essence of being. If
there is no motion these is no existence. It is perpetual motion which
creators life. In other words perpetual motion itself is life. If the
motion stops, life would cease to exist. It is by the Will of Allah that
eternal motion never stops and the life cycle continues. This eternal
movement will continue till the Dooms-Day.

Jaber, his pupil once asked the Imam "How does the movement of the stars
keep them from falling?"

The Imam Â replied : "Put a stone in a sling and swing it round your
head. The stone will stay in the sling so long as you are rotating it.
But as soon as you stop the rotation, the stone will fall down on the
ground. In the same way the perpetual motion of stars keeps them from
falling down.


