Author’s Preface
================

***In the name of Allah the Most Beneficent the Most Merciful***

For those of us who want to take a step and get closer to Allah, there
is a special and opportune season. In this period of time one’s efforts
and attempts are more rewarded and the journey towards Allah gets
quicker. The scent of divinity and the tune of the Quran are spread
everywhere. The golden opportunity of dawn (sahar) becomes more
important. Righteous people identify the months of Rajab, Shaban and
Ramadan as the spring of the heart.

According to some the Ahadith, the first one is the month of Velayat,
the second month is the month of Prophethood and the third month is the
month of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقد روي عن أمير المؤمنين ع أنه كان يصومه (رجب) و يقول شهر رجب شهري و
شعبان شهر رسول الله ص و شهر رمضان شهر الله عز و جل
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated about the Commander of the Faithful that he would fast in
the month of Rajab and he is narrated to have said, “The month of Rajab
is my month and the month of Shaban is the month of Messenger of Allah
and the month of Ramadan is the month of Allah Almighty.” [^1]

According to some Islamic scholars, most of the people who wanted to
start a special program for refinement of their souls and to purify
themselves, implemented a forty day plan within these months.[^2]

So the wayfarers towards Allah in the month of Shaban are in the middle
of this spring and if they have used the opportunity of Rajab, they have
already achieved a certain level of proximity to Allah. They can
continue their ways and add to it by prayers, worship and recitation of
the Quran. Even if some of us were lazy in the month of Rajab we can
make up for our shortage in the month of Shabaan and prepare ourselves
for the upcoming month of Ramadan.

The month of Shaban is really valuable and a lot of our Ahadith point to
the significance of this great month. Some of our great scholars and
narrators of Ahadith like Shaikh Saduq have gathered these Ahadith in a
book and in order to remind ourselves of the high rank of this month we
narrate some of them here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصدوق بسنده عن ابن عباس قال‏قال رسول الله ص و قد تذاكروا عنده فضائل
شعبان فقال شهر شريف و هو شهري و حملة العرش تعظمه و تعرف حقه و هو شهر
يزاد فيه أرزاق المؤمنين و هو شهر العمل فيه يضاعف الحسنة بسبعين و
السيئة محطوطة و الذنب مغفور و الحسنة مقبولة و الجبار جل جلاله يباهي
فيه بعباده و ينظر إلى صيامه و صوامه و قوامه و قيامه فيباهي به حملة
العرش
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقام علي بن أبي طالب ع فقال بأبي أنت و أمي يا رسول الله صف لنا شيئا من
فضائله لنزداد رغبة في صيامه و قيامه و لنجتهد للجليل عز و جل فيه‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال النبي ص من صام أول يوم من شعبان كتب الله له سبعين حسنة تعدل عبادة
سنة ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و من صام ثلاثين يوما من شعبان ناداه جبرئيل من قدام العرش: يا هذا
استأنف العمل عملا جديدا فقد غفر لك ما مضى و تقدم من ذنوبك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sheikh Saduq narrates from Ibn Abbas with the chain of narration, “In
the presence of Prophet Mohammad we discussed the greatness of the month
of Shaban. Prophet Mohammad said, “It is an honorable month and it is my
month. The carriers of the throne of Allah respect it and know its great
magnitude. The blessings for the faithful increase in this month. This
month is the month of performing actions, so the reward of good actions
is seventy times more (than other months). The evil gets cleansed and
sins get forgiven and the good deeds are accepted. Allah is proud of his
servants. (In this month) Allah looks at the fast of those who fast and
the worship of worshipper and boasts about it to the carriers of His
throne.”[^3]

At that moment Ali Ibn Abu Talib stood up and asked, “May my mother and
father be sacrificed before you, please tell us some of the virtues of
this month so we are encouraged to pray and fast more and strive more in
the way of our Beloved Lord.” Then the Prophet started with some of the
rewards of fasting in this month and said, “Anyone who fasts on the
first day, Allah gives him seventy rewards each equal to the reward of
one year of worship….” And at the end he said, “Anyone who fasts all the
thirty days of Shaban, Gabriel calls out to him from the front of
Allah’s throne and says, “Start your life anew! Allah has forgiven all
the sins that you had done!”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصدوق بسنده عن ابی عبد الله ع سمعت أبي قال‏:كان أبي زين العابدين ع
إذا اهل شعبان جمع أصحابه فقال معاشر أصحابي أ تدرون أي شهر هذا؟ هذا شهر
شعبان و كان رسول الله ص يقول: شعبان شهري ألا فصوموا فيه محبة لنبيكم و
تقربا إلى ربكم فو الذي نفس علي بن الحسين بيده لسمعت أبي الحسين بن علي
يقول سمعت أمير المؤمنين ع يقول: من صام شعبان محبة نبي الله ع و تقربا
إلى الله عز و جل أحبه الله عز و جل و قربه من كرامته يوم القيامة و أوجب
له الجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

In another hadith Saduq narrates from our sixth Imam that he said, “My
father told me that his father gathered all of his companions on the
first of Shaban and he said, “Do you know what month is this month? This
month is the month of Shaban. About this month Prophet Mohammad has
said, “Shaban is my special month. Be aware and fast in this month to
get closer to Allah, for the love of your Prophet.”

I swear by Allah who holds my life in His Hand, I heard from my father,
Imam Husayn and he said, “I heard my father Ali Ibn Abu Talib say,
“Anyone who fasts in this month for the love of the Prophet and wants to
get closer to Allah, Allah will make heaven obligatory for him.”[^5]

About the month of Shaban, the great scholar Ayatollah Mirza Javad
Maleki Tabrizi in his book of Almoraqebat said,

“This month is extremely valuable for the seekers of Allah. One of the
nights that could be the Night of Qadr is in this month. From the time
that Adam came to earth, God promised all of His messengers that victory
will be in the hands of the man who will be born in this night (the
fifteenth night). Also God promised that He will fill the earth with
justice after it will be filled with oppression and cruelty.”

About the importance of this month it is enough to know that the Prophet
has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شعبان شهري، رحم اللّه من اعانني على شهري”
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This month is my month and may Allah bless those who help me in this
month”

Whoever hears this invitation must strive to respond to it and be
included amongst the invited ones. His brother and his successor said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ما فاتني صوم شعبان مذ سمعت منادي رسول اللّه صلّى اللّه عليه و آله و
سلّم ينادي في شعبان، فلن يفوتني ايام حياتي ان شاء اللّه»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I have not missed the fasting in Shaban from the time that I heard
someone calling out at the Prophet’s order (to encourage people for the
fasting in Shaban) and I will not miss it until the end of my life
Insha’Allah”.

By this hadith you can understand the significance of fasting over
praying, donation and other good deeds.[^6]

One of the Mostahabaat that are highly encouraged in this month is a
Salawat that has been narrated from Imam Zein Al-Abedin. This salawat is
not only a religious masterpiece or a lovely supplication with Allah,
but it is also a deep sea of theology and knowledge. Its teachings are
primarily about the Imamat and its high position in Islam.

I had a chance to speak on Iran’s national TV about the Salawat
Shabaniyeh but unfortunately the program was very short and the
information that I could gather from the Quran and Ahadith was more than
could be delivered in the program. So, I decided to publish it in a
small booklet for anyone who wants to take benefit from the seas of the
knowledge of the Ahlul Bayt.

**The fourth of Shaban 1428 A.H**
**Seyed Mahmoud Madani**

[^1]: مصباح‏المتهجد ص : 795 المقنعة373 مسارالشيعة ص : 57

[^2]: Ayatollah Javadi Amolly

[^3]: فضائل الاشهر الثلاثة ص

[^4]: فضائل‏الأشهرالثلاثة ص : 56

[^5]: فضائل‏الأشهرالثلاثة ص : 62

[^6]: المراقبات ص 166


