Chapter 10: Following The Tradition Of Prophet
==============================================

At first look, one may think why we must follow his way of life.

The root of this order is in the Holy Quran. In many verses, Quran
ordered us to follow him and In Surah of Hashr, the Quran says,

> وَ ما آتاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَ ما نَهاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا
> وَ اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ شَديدُ الْعِقابِ (7)

”[^1] The Quran also tells us to monitor his actions and make it as a
plan for our life.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كانَ لَكُمْ في‏ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِمَنْ كانَ
يَرْجُوا اللَّهَ وَ الْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ وَ ذَكَرَ اللَّهَ كَثيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^2].

In addition, we must know that in every aspect of our life we have a
tradition from the Prophet. For choosing the way of their life, Muslims
do not need to beg their lifestyle from different ideologies and
academies. All the necessities of perfection have come in the lifestyle
and Hadith of Prophet. There is a Hadith in the book of Basaer
Al-Darajat by Safar Qomi that explains this point very well.

المجلسی عن بصائر الدرجات بسندهٍ عَنْ أَبِي أُسَامَةَ قَالَ كُنْتُ عِنْدَ
أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع وَ عِنْدَهُ رَجُلٌ مِنَ الْمُغِيرِيَّةِ
فَسَأَلَهُ عَنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ مِنَ السُّنَنِ فَقَالَ مَا مِنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ
يَحْتَاجُ إِلَيْهِ وُلْدُ آدَمَ إِلَّا وَ قَدْ خَرَجَتْ فِيهِ السُّنَّةُ
مِنَ اللَّهِ وَ مِنْ رَسُولِهِ وَ لَوْ لَا ذَلِكَ مَا احْتَجَّ عَلَيْنَا
بِمَا احْتَجَّ فَقَالَ الْمُغِيرِيُّ وَ بِمَا احْتَجَّ فَقَالَ أَبُو
عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع قَوْلُهُ الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ وَ
أَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعْمَتِي حَتَّى فَرَغَ مِنَ الْآيَةِ فَلَوْ لَمْ
يُكْمِلْ سُنَّتَهُ وَ فَرَائِضَهُ وَ مَا يَحْتَاجُ إِلَيْهِ النَّاسُ مَا
احْتَجَّ بِهِ

Abi Usameh has said, “I was in the presence of Imam Ja’far Sadiq and
someone from the tribe of Moghayreh came and asked Imam about the
lifestyle of the Prophet. The Imam answered him, “There is nothing that
humankind needs unless the Prophet has some tradition about it. If it
was not like that the proofs for our Imamat would be incomplete.” The
man asked him, “What proofs?” Imam replied, ”الیوم اکملت” so if what
people need does not exist in his tradition this verse will be
disproven”[^3].

The Measure For Evaluating Action
---------------------------------

In the scale of justice, one criterion for prizing action is the
correspondence of action to the Prophet’s tradition, not the quantity.
Imam Sadiq narrates from his fathers from the Commander of faithful, “I
heard from Prophet that he said, “Follow my tradition because acting a
little upon my tradition is much better than acting upon your own
innovation.”[^4]

Imam Mahdi’s Plan
-----------------

According to Ahadith, when Imam Mahdi will reappear, he will declare the
global rule for the whole universe to be the tradition of the prophet.
The great companion of Imam Sadiq, Mufaddhal Ibn Amr narrates from our
sixth imam,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى المفضل بن عمر الجعفي قال سمعت أبا عبد الله جعفر بن محمد ع يقول إذا
أذن الله عز و جل للقائم في الخروج صعد المنبر فدعا الناس إلى نفسه و
ناشدهم الله و دعاهم إلى حقه و أن يسير فيهم بسنة رسول الله ص و يعمل
فيهم بعمله فيبعث الله تعالى جبرئيل ع حتى يأتيه فينزل على الحطيم و يقول
له إلى أي شي‏ء تدعو فيخبره القائم ع فيقول جبرئيل ع أنا أول من يبايعك
ابسط يدك فيمسح على يده و قد وافاه ثلاثمائة و بضعة عشر رجلا فيبايعونه و
يقيم بمكة حتى يتم أصحابه عشرة آلاف ثم يسير منها إلى المدينة
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whenever God permits our Mahdi to rise he will climb the pulpit and
invite people to pay homage. Imam will make them swear and will invite
them to his right. He will deal with people according to the tradition
of Prophet and he will act like Prophet. Then Gabriel will come down to
him in the place of Hatim and will ask, “What do you invite people to?”
Imam will repeat what he initially said, and then Gabriel will say, “I
am the first one who makes the homage with you, open your hand”. At that
time Gabriel will take Imam’s hand, three hundred thirteen people will
make the homage, and Imam will stay in Makah until he gathers ten
thousand companions and will then proceed to Medina”.

O Allah help us to model our conduct on his "way of life" and obtain the
intercession he is entitled to put forward.

[^1]: حشر 7

[^2]: 21 احزاب

[^3]: بحار ج 2 ص 168

[^4]: المجلسی بسنده عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللَّهِ عَنْ آبَائِهِ عَنْ أَمِيرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ع قَالَ سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ ص يَقُولُ عَلَيْكُمْ
بِسُنَّةٍ فَعَمَلٌ قَلِيلٌ فِي سُنَّةٍ خَيْرٌ مِنْ عَمَلٍ كَثِيرٍ فِي
بِدْعَةٍ بحارالأنوار 2 261


