Chapter 11: Seeking Comfort And Intercession
============================================

There are some very important and fundamental questions, which we will
briefly address here.

What Is Intercession?
---------------------

Intercession in a simple word is help of a strong to a weak in the way
of perfection, so the weak can climb the steps to perfection fast and
successfully. However, we usually use this word for the intercession for
sinners. We must know that intercession includes all the elements of
development. As an example: soil, water, air and light are all the four
ingredients that help a seed to turn into a complete prolific tree or a
beautiful flower. These four are the genetic guides and the intercessors
of seed for perfection. If we understand the intercession in this way,
we would not see the Intercessors as the restrictions for God’s power.
They are the appliances for God to apply his power in this world and all
of them get their efficiency from Allah. With this point of view, all of
them will be the sign of God’s power and they work only for performing
God’s will.

Unfortunately, some of us think about the intercession as an immoral
social phenomenon like. Awkwardly it causes some people to think that we
can sin as much as we want and as much as we can, and then we can hold
onto the intercession of our Imam.

As we have pointed out, intercession for humans is like the seed and its
genetic Intercessors. If a seed does not have the potential for growing,
the Intercessor of nature cannot help it. The soft bed of soil, life
giving sunlight, breeze of spring and the refreshing drops of rain have
the same effect on that seed and piece of pebble. Intercession of Imams
or any righteous will not affect those who did not prepare the basis of
development in their soul. Also our wise Imams will not waste their
intercession for them.

Intercession needs adequacy between the Intercessor and the one who
wants to get the intercession. Those who want to receive the
intercession must make a connection of compatibility with their
Intercessors. This connection is a tool for preparing the one who will
receive the intercession to be more like his Intercessor. In this way,
intercession makes us more responsible and gives us hope to get better,
and it is not a method of escaping our duty and responsibilities. This
also makes it clear that the intercession does not stand against God’s
will when he wants to punish the sinner. In the other hand, it gives
opportunity to be more like those who God loves and prepares them to be
forgiven by Allah’s mercy.

What Is The Root For Believe In Intercession?
---------------------------------------------

Intercession is a Quranic subject and no one can deny it. The rejection
expressed by some newly invented political group such as Wahabism is not
strong or worthy enough, and the root of this denial is due to their
ignorance towards Quran. Some of the Quranic verses clearly talk about
intercession on the Day of Judgment, such as, “…no one will be able to
intercede for the others except those whom the Beneficent God has given
authority.[^1]”

“On that day no one's intercession will be of any benefit unless he has
received permission from the Beneficent God and whose word is acceptable
to Him.[^2]”

“No intercession with Him will be of any benefit except that of those
whom He has granted permission. The angels cannot intercede. They are
always submissive to their Lord. Fear vanishes from their heart when
(they receive a message from their Lord).They ask each other, "What did
your Lord say?" Others answer, "He spoke the Truth. He is the Most High
and the Greatest."[^3]”.

Allameh Majlisi in regards to his discussion about the proofs of
intercession and the opinion of other Islamic sects for intercession
says, “Whatever we have said proves that all of the Ummah accept the
concept of intercession. Though there are some differences in opinion
about its condition. In Shia ideology, the effect of intercession is
removing the harms and the punishment of sins from the faithful. However
the Motazeleh[^4] say that the intercession is just for increasing the
rewards of good action for the submissive and repentant but it does not
benefit sinners.[^5]

What Are The Proofs For Intercession Of Prophet Muhammad?
---------------------------------------------------------

After the above argument, a question may arise in our mind that whether
Prophet Muhammad has the right for intercession. And if so, then what is
the proof for it?

We have to say that the perfect example of those named in the Holy Quran
as the intercessors is our beloved Prophet. In addition, there are many
Ahadith narrated by Shia and Sunni sources that tell us about the
superiority of his intercession. In this short record, we cannot mention
many of them but we will try to name some that show the important
quality of his intercession. In these Ahadith, even other prophets seek
the intercession of Prophet Muhammad.

Ali Ibn Ibrahim Qumi in his great and precious interpretation narrates
from Samaaeh. He says, “I asked from Imam Sadiq about intercession of
Prophet. Imam answered, “On the Day of Judgment people will be drowning
in their sweat (they will sweat a lot because of hardships) so they will
say to each other to go and ask Adam to intercede for them. They will
come to Adam and say intercede for us. Prophet Adam will say, “I have
guilt. Go to Prophet Noah.” Then people will go to Noah but he will send
them to next prophet and that will repeat until they will come to Jesus
and Prophet Jesus will send them to Prophet Muhammad. Prophet Muhammad
will tell them, “Come with me” then Prophet will take them to the door
of Heaven, the door of mercy.

Then the Prophet will prostrate and he will remain in that posture for
as long as God’s will. Then God will say, “Lift your head and intercede.
We will accept your intercession and ask me to give you” then Imam said,
“This is the real story behind the verse, “pray your special (tahajjud)
prayer during some part of the night as an additional (obligatory)
prayer for you alone so that perhaps your Lord will raise you to a
highly praiseworthy position.[^6]”.Another interesting point is that
even the Ahlul Bayt are included in the Prophet intercession. In
relation to the interpretation of the verse “Your Lord will soon grant
you sufficient favors to please you” Ibn Abbas is reported to have said,
“the interpretation is that soon God will accept your intercession about
all of your Ahlul Bayt. So they all enter the heaven and you become
glad[^7]”.[^8]

There is also an interesting Hadith about the place of intercession.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِ ع عَنْ جَابِرِ بْنِ عَبْدِ
اللَّهِ الْأَنْصَارِيِّ عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ ع قَالَ
قَالَتْ فَاطِمَةُ ع لِرَسُولِ اللَّهِ ص يَا أَبَتَاهْ أَيْنَ أَلْقَاكَ
يَوْمَ الْمَوْقِفِ الْأَعْظَمِ وَ يَوْمَ الْأَهْوَالِ وَ يَوْمَ
الْفَزَعِ الْأَكْبَرِ قَالَ يَا فَاطِمَةُ عِنْدَ بَابِ الْجَنَّةِ وَ
مَعِي لِوَاءُ الْحَمْدِ وَ أَنَا الشَّفِيعُ لِأُمَّتِي إِلَى رَبِّي
قَالَتْ يَا أَبَتَاهْ فَإِنْ لَمْ أَلْقَكَ هُنَاكَ قَالَ الْقَيْنِي
عَلَى الْحَوْضِ وَ أَنَا أَسْقِي أُمَّتِي قَالَتْ يَا أَبَتَاهْ إِنْ
لَمْ أَلْقَكَ هُنَاكَ قَالَ الْقَيْنِي عَلَى الصِّرَاطِ وَ أَنَا
قَائِمٌ أَقُولُ رَبِّ سَلِّمْ أُمَّتِي قَالَتْ فَإِنْ لَمْ أَلْقَكَ
هُنَاكَ قَالَ الْقَيْنِي وَ أَنَا عِنْدَ الْمِيزَانِ أَقُولُ رَبِّ
سَلِّمْ أُمَّتِي قَالَتْ فَإِنْ لَمْ أَلْقَكَ هُنَاكَ قَالَ الْقَيْنِي
عَلَى شَفِيرِ جَهَنَّمَ أَمْنَعُ شَرَرَهَا وَ لَهَبَهَا عَنْ أُمَّتِي
فَاسْتَبْشَرَتْ فَاطِمَةُ بِذَلِكَ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهَا وَ عَلَى
أَبِيهَا وَ بَعْلِهَا وَ بَنِيهَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Sadiq narrates a hadith from Imam Baqir from Jabir Ibn Abdullah
from Imam Ali. The Commander of faithful has said, “Fatima Al-Zahra
asked the Prophet: “On the day of judgment, in that great place, in that
horrifying day where can I meet you?” Prophet said, “O, Fatima at the
door of heaven when I hold the flag of praise and I intercede for my
Ummah.” Fatima said, “If I do not find you?” Prophet said, “On the
bridge of Serat while I say, “O, God keep my Ummah safe.” Fatima said,
“If I do not see you there?” Prophet answered, “By the scale of justice
while I say, “O, God keep my Ummah safe.” Fatima said, “If I do not see
you there?” Prophet replied, “At the edge of hell when I keep away the
fire of hell from my Ummah.” Then Fatima became happy. May Allah send
His peace and blessings on Fatima and her father and her husband and her
children”.[^9]

Also in Ahadith we find that Prophet Muhammad will use the intercession
to save his Umah from hellfire.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنْ أَنَسِ بْنِ مَالِكٍ قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ ص لِكُلِّ نَبِيٍّ
دَعْوَةٌ قَدْ دَعَا بِهَا وَ قَدْ سَأَلَ سُؤْلًا وَ قَدْ أَخْبَأْتُ
دَعْوَتِي لِشَفَاعَتِي لِأُمَّتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anas Ibn Malik narrates from Prophet, “Every prophet has a demand and
request from Allah (that it will not be rejected). All of them asked
their request from Allah and I saved that request to intercede for my
Ummah on the Day of Judgment.”[^10]

Intercession Is Just For The Benefit Of Good People Or Even Sinners Will Be Interceded?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is an important question for some of us, because we want to know
whether we will miss the chance to be interceded or not? According to
Ahadith, intercession will include the sinners and some of those who
have committed the great sins will be interceded too.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المجلسی بسنده عَنِ الرِّضَا عَنْ أَبِيهِ عَنْ آبَائِهِ عَنْ أَمِيرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ع قَالَ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ ص مَنْ لَمْ يُؤْمِنْ
بِحَوْضِي فَلَا أَوْرَدَهُ اللَّهُ حَوْضِي وَ مَنْ لَمْ يُؤْمِنْ
بِشَفَاعَتِي فَلَا أَنَالَهُ اللَّهُ شَفَاعَتِي ثُمَّ قَالَ ع إِنَّمَا
شَفَاعَتِي لِأَهْلِ الْكَبَائِرِ مِنْ أُمَّتِي فَأَمَّا الْمُحْسِنُونَ
فَمَا عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allamah Majlesi in the great book of Bihar Al-Anwar narrates from Imam
Ridha’ that he narrates from his honorable ancestors that Prophet
Muhammad said, “Those who do not believe in my pool (of Kawthar) they
will not enter it and those who do not believe in my intercession, God
will not include them in my intercession”. Then he said, “My
intercession is for those who have committed great sins from my Ummah
however there is no blame on them”.[^11]

Imam Sajjad in his last phrase of this Dua says, “O, Allah make him for
me such interceptor that you accept his interception and make my way to
you straight and smooth and make me the follower of the honorable man
until the day of judgment, when I meet you, you are happy from me and
forgive my sins meanwhile you obligate your mercy and grace upon me and
inhabit me eternally between the righteous.”

[^1]: لا يَمْلِكُونَ الشَّفاعَةَ إِلَّا مَنِ اتَّخَذَ عِنْدَ الرَّحْمنِ
عَهْداً مريم87

[^2]: يَوْمَئِذٍ لا تَنْفَعُ الشَّفاعَةُ إِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ
الرَّحْمنُ وَ رَضِيَ لَهُ قَوْلًا طه109

[^3]: وَ لا تَنْفَعُ الشَّفاعَةُ عِنْدَهُ إِلاَّ لِمَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ
حَتَّى إِذا فُزِّعَ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ قالُوا ما ذا قالَ رَبُّكُمْ قالُوا
الْحَقَّ وَ هُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبيرُ السباء (23)

[^4]: معتزله

[^5]: بحار ج 8 ص 30

[^6]: 79الاسراء

[^7]: الضحی 5

[^8]: عَنِ ابْنِ مَحْبُوبٍ عَنْ زُرْعَةَ عَنْ سَمَاعَةَ عَنْ أَبِي
عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع قَالَ سَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ شَفَاعَةِ النَّبِيِّ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ قَالَ يُلْجِمُ النَّاسَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ الْعَرَقُ
فَيَقُولُونَ انْطَلِقُوا بِنَا إِلَى آدَمَ يَشْفَعُ لَنَا [عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِ‏] فَيَأْتُونَ آدَمَ فَيَقُولُونَ اشْفَعْ لَنَا عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ
فَيَقُولُ إِنَّ لِي ذَنْباً وَ خَطِيئَةً فَعَلَيْكُمْ بِنُوحٍ
فَيَأْتُونَ نُوحاً فَيَرُدُّهُمْ إِلَى مَنْ يَلِيهِ وَ يَرُدُّهُمْ كُلُّ
نَبِيٍّ إِلَى مَنْ يَلِيهِ حَتَّى يَنْتَهُونَ إِلَى عِيسَى فَيَقُولُ
عَلَيْكُمْ بِمُحَمَّدٍ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ
وَ عَلَى جَمِيعِ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ فَيَعْرِضُونَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ عَلَيْهِ وَ
يَسْأَلُونَهُ فَيَقُولُ انْطَلِقُوا فَيَنْطَلِقُ بِهِمْ إِلَى‏ بَابِ
الْجَنَّةِ وَ يَسْتَقْبِلُ بَابَ الرَّحْمَنِ وَ يَخِرُّ سَاجِداً
فَيَمْكُثُ مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ فَيَقُولُ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ ارْفَعْ
رَأْسَكَ وَ اشْفَعْ تُشَفَّعْ وَ سَلْ تُعْطَ وَ ذَلِكَ قَوْلُهُ عَسى‏
أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقاماً مَحْمُودا بحارالأنوار ج : 8 ص : 36

[^9]: بحار ج‏8ص 35

[^10]: بحار 8 ص‏34

[^11]: بحار ج 8 ص 34


