Prologue
========

***“We are the slaves of Yazid and it is entirely upon him to either
give back our freedom or sell us in the slave-market”***

The people of Madina were forced to repeat the above words as a sign of
accepting the rule of Yazid who reigned from 680 CE to 683 CE. Those who
resisted had their heads chopped off.

The army of Yazid invaded Madina and Makka, the two holy cities of
Islam.

Openly and publicly, Yazid rejected the belief in the Prophet of Islam.
He mocked the Day of Judgement, made fun of the daily prayers (salat),
wine being his drink and chess gambling was his favorite pastime at all
times. He committed indecent acts even with his stepmothers and aunts.
Does a person of this character and behaviour deserve to be called
*Amirul Mu’minin* (Commander of the Faithful)?

This book is a translation of the original title *Yazid Hakuwa Amirul
Muminin* authored in Kiswahili by Sheikh Abdillahi Nassir.

In this book Sheikh Abdillahi Nassir corrects the claim made by the
Wahhabis that Yazid was *Amirul Muminin,* with proofs and evidence from
the traditions (ahadith) of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and the books of
prominent Muslim scholars.

\*\*\*

When Walid bin Utbah bin Abi Sufyan, the Governor of Madinah, informed
Imam Husayn that Yazid demands a pledge of allegiance from him, the Imam
politely refused by saying that an allegiance in secret will be of no
value, we shall see into this matter tomorrow in public.

But then Marwan bin Hakam, who was also present in the meeting, told
Walid to force the Imam for pledging allegiance to Yazid or to kill him
and send his head to Damascus.

At that time, the Imam said:

*…We are the household of the prophethood, the source of messengership,
the descending-place of the angels, through us Allah has begun
(showering His favours) and with us He has perfected (His blessings).
Whereas Yazid is a sinful man, a drunkard, killer of innocent people,
and one who openly indulges in sinful acts. A person like me can never
pay allegiance to a person like him…*


