Foreword
========

All praise be to Allah (S.W.T); and may His salutations and peace be
upon His prophet and his household who have been purified from all
uncleanliness; Amin.

At the onset of the month of Muharram this year (1424 A.H.), a pamphlet
with the heading “Open letter to the Sunni preachers and Imams” was
circulated in Mombasa. (See the last section “Appendix”)

The objective of this pamphlet was to show the Sunni preachers and Imams
the mistake that they were committing “by holding lectures, particularly
in the first ten days of Muharram”. In the opinion of the authors of
this pamphlet, “there is no Tradition (evidence) that tells us to do
so”. To them, this is “an innovation” following which causes them to
mislead the Sunni congregation by imitating the Shias.

The writers of this pamphlet called themselves “Ahlul-Tawheed”, but the
entire public/reader *(wasomi)* knows that they are Wahabis. They use
this pseudo-name for two reasons. Firstly to conceal their Wahabi
identity, knowing that all muslims abhor it. Disclosing their true
identity would therefore cost them their support. The second reason is
related to their faith which is that only they are the true believers of
Unity *(Tawheed)* of Allah, the rest of the muslims, who *do not concur*
with their views, are *polytheists.* Since all muslims believe that they
are *Ahlul tawheed*, as it entails acceptance of LA ILAAHA ILLALLAH, by
the use of such a terminology, the Wahabis intend to hoodwink the
muslims to believe that the writers of the pamphlet, too, are bona fide
muslims.

In order to respond to their allegations against the Shias regarding the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s), and in order to correct the claims, in
the pamphlet referred, that Yazid was *Amirul-Muuminin*, I issued a
series of ten pamphlets in Kiswahili, from 8th Muharram 1424 A.H. / 12th
March 2003 to 14th Rabi ul Awwal 1424 A.H. / 16th May 2003 under the
heading: “Open letter to the Wahabis” *(Barua ya wazi kwa Mawahabi).*

These pamphlets have been compiled into this booklet the English
translation of which, thanks to Dr. Mohamed Raza Dungersi PhD of Dar ul
tableegh, New York, U.S.A., is now in your hands.

I have gone through this translation and found it to be a correct
version of what I wrote originally in Kiswahili. For this I would like
to express and record my sincere thanks to Dr. Mohamed Raza Dungersi and
pray to Allah to reward him for the good job done.

And success is due to Almighty Allah (S.W.T).

Abdilahi Nassir

Mombasa, Kenya  
 26th Rabiuth Thani, 1425 A.H.  
 15th June, 2004


