It is Not an Innovation of The Shi’as
=====================================

In their pamphlet, the wahabis state: “The Sabai writers of Iraq
concocted false, brutal and frightful traditions such that Husayn and
his kith and kin were deprived of water, forced into a battle, and then
beheaded. Such traditions are neither believable nor reliable, and are
far from being true.”

**Our reply:** Where we can find our reply from books written in
Kiswahili and available in local shops, there is no need to refer to
books which may not be available, or which may have been written in
languages unfamiliar to most of us. For that reason, let us review a
book named *Maisha ya Sayyidna Husayn* 1999 ed. **(The Biography of
Sayyidna Husayn)** authored by Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy and published
by Adam Traders of Mombasa.

On page 37 of this book, Sheikh Abdallah states that: “when he (Imam
Husayn) told them that he was not prepared to surrender to Ubeydillah
and then be humiliated and killed together with his followers, family
members, both male and female, young and old, they *surrounded them
completely* so that they should not be able to escape. *They were
deprived of water and food from the eighth to the tenth of the month (of
Muharram) 61 (A.H.). Thus having been made weak through hunger and
thirst,* they were then killed.”

At this point, the author then names “the first eleven martyrs”, **all**
of them belonging to the Prophet’s family. Again, on page 39 of the same
book, he says that after this massacre, (their heads) were “dispatched
*with festivity and drum beats* to the governor of Kufa. Each carrier
was boasting in the presence of the governor, saying, ‘I killed so and
so’ as *they each received their prizes.*” The Sheikh then adds: “The
heads were then put on display.”

Our question is: Did these heads fall off their respective bodies on
their own if they had not been severed?

2. Over and above this, they (the Wahabis), allege in their pamphlet
that: “And the Shia’s claim that Husayn was beheaded is an utter lie.”

**Our reply;** Re-visit Sheikh Abdallahh’s book. On page 38 of his book,
our Sheikh says that having been “surrounded from all sides and attacked
with arrows, spears and swords, he (Imam Husayn) fell down and *his head
was severed* by them (the oppressors). And by common account, *this act*
was carried out by Shimr bin Ziljawshan …” Further more, he adds: “What
is it that fortune and the love of fame cannot do!”

However, these oppressors were not satisfied by cutting off Imam
Husayn’s head. Sheikh Abdallah Farsy explains (on page 39) that when the
severed head was presented to the governor, Ubeydillah, the governor
*struck the head with a cane as if it were a drum*.” When the head was
presented to the Ruler himself (Yazid bin Muawiya), Sheikh says on page
40 that “he (the Ruler) repeated what his governor of Kufa had done
before, *holding a cane and poking at the teeth of Husayn*…”

These are the writings of Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy, who was the Chief
Kadhi of Kenya and, prior to that, of Zanzibar. What! Do we count him
“as a Sabai author from Iraq?” Was he a Shia? A “liar”? Was not he the
same Sheikh of whom the “Ahlul Tawheed” were proud, then and now? What
have they to say?


