Installation of Yazid as Ruler
==============================

Before Yazid’s reign in 60 A.H., his father, Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan,
ruled over the Muslims. Both, the father and the grandfather, accepted
Islam *only as a measure of last resort*, after the recapture of Mecca
and their defeat as leaders of intense opposition against Prophet
Muhammad (S).

This is the same Muawiya who, not only rebelled and waged a war against
“The Fourth Caliph” (Imam Ali bin Abi Talib a. s.), who had been elected
by the Muslims to be their Caliph, but also opposed and fought Imam
Hasan (the brother of Imam Husayn a. s.), who, according to Sheikh
Abdallah S. Farsy, “was murdered by being poisoned” by Yazid, the so
called *Amirul Mu’minin!* (Refer Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy’s book *Maisha
ya Sayyidnal Hasan* (**The Biography of** **Sayyidna Hasan)** p. 24,
1999 ed., published by Adam Traders, Mombasa.

Ten years before he was poisoned, Imam Hasan had signed a ceasefire
agreement with Yazid’s father, Muawiya, after an intense battle. In his
book, on page 16, Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy states that one of the
conditions of this ceasefire agreement was that Imam Hasan would cede
Caliphate to Muawiya. However, on the death of Muawiya, the Caliphate
would revert to Imam Hasan (a.s.), if he were still alive, or else, it
would revert to Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy continues to explain on page 24 of the same
book that “Yazid realized the fact that on the death of his father, he
would lose the opportunity to inherit his rulership, which would pass on
to Hasan, as per the treaty. He decided to murder him (Hasan) by
poisoning him. He sent some trusted individuals secretly to Sayyidnal
Hasan’s last wife, Jaada binti Asha-ath, who had no children with him.
She was promised that if she murdered her husband, Yazid would marry her
and that she would be given one hundred thousand Dirhams in advance, and
much more, if she so wished. She was overcome by this temptation and
poisoned her husband, who suffered for forty days, and passed away, a
martyr…”

On page18 of his book titled **The Biography of Sayyidina Husayn**,
Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy says: “Before the death of Sayyidina Hasan,
Muawiya *had made up his mind to unbind himself from his treaty to let
Al Hasan*, or any one else, to succeed him. He decided to *make his
favorite son, Yazid, heir-apparent to his throne*. He would let the
public know that on his death, *there would be no nomination, except
that his son, Yazid would become the Caliph*. This would be done
regardless of *Hasan’s consent or not*, and in face of acceptance or
rejection by all and sundry.” He concludes thus: *“So that they should
continue to stay in their positions,* most of his governors strongly
supported this idea despite the fact that it was un-Islamic…”

After the martyrdom of Imam Hasan that resulted from him being poisoned,
Muawiya planned his strategy to establish his son Yazid’s succession.
But to do this was not easy. According to what Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy
states in his book **The Biography of Sayyidina** **Husayn** on page 18,
“(Muawiya) perceived the difficulties in breaching the covenant and
planned to execute his stratagem stealthily by *prompting his governors
to air this view and thus create an impression that this idea was not
his but that of his governors*. He instructed his governors to promote
this idea in their domains of authority casually, in the initial stage.”

Having done so, he then assembled them all at one venue and as
preplanned, made each of them, one after the other, propose Yazid’s
succession. However, all of them did not comply; among those who opposed
this idea was Al Ahnaf bin Qays, who, according to Sheikh Abdallah S.
Farsy (refer his book Page 20), said: *‘No! We, the people of Iraq, and
the people of Hijaz, too, are not in agreement with this. We are not
satisfied with the prospect of having Yazid as the Caliph of Muslims*.
And you, more than any one else, know that your son is unfit (for this
position). Do not purposely condemn yourself to Hell. As for us, *we
shall not be satisfied unless we see this position goes to one from the
progeny of Ali.”*

There ensued a commotion. Sheikh reports (page 20): “Abu Khunayf
*unsheathed his sword*…Addressing Muawiya, he said, *‘Let him who
opposes me taste this:* *he will then come* *to his senses.*’ Preparing
to go away, Muawiya said: *‘Indeed, this is a true patriot*, one who is
man of action, not mere words, one who is the best of all who are
present here.’ The assembly then dispersed.”

Sheikh Farsy continues (page 21) saying that when Bibi Aisha, the
Prophet’s wife, came to know about this, “*she was very angry* because
*Muawiya was going back on his promises given to Sayyidnal Hasan…”*

This matter ended at that, and no further action was taken. However,
after a while, (in 50 A.H.), Muawiya went to Medina, in the words of
Sheikh Farsy, “to send out his feelers.” There, “he had a meeting with
the sons of prominent companions (of the Prophet, (S)), namely, Abdullah
bin Abbas bin Abdil Muttalib, Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib bin
Abdil Muttalib, and Abdullah bin Zubair bin Awam; he did not call for
Sayyidinal Husayn.” He talked with them very graciously so as to win
their approval, *but* *all of them turned him down,* and he went home
empty handed!

“On the death of Sayyidnal Hasan,” says Sheikh A.S. Farsy (page 22),
“Muawiya *ordered* people of Syria to *accept Yazid* as their Caliph
after him. *They complied* *unanimously.*” He then ordered the governor
of Medina to force all people of Medina to accept Yazid (as their next
Caliph). According to Sheikh A. S. Farsy (page 23), “he (the governor of
Medina) was *deeply agitated,* seeing no reason why a *depraved young
man* should rule over the elders and the companions of the Prophet (S).”
Therefore, he let Muawiya know his stand; Muawiya responded immediately,
“writing him a letter to terminate his services as governor.”

On receiving this letter, the governor (Merwan bin Hakam) “was furious,
and accompanied by elders of his maternal relatives and members of his
clan (Bani Kinana), he went to Syria to meet Muawiya with a threat of a
coup. Thus threatened, *Muawiya treated the governor and his relatives
with soothing words, plenty of cash and a life-long pension comprising
three hundred pounds per month for him, and fifty pounds per month for
each of his relatives...”*

Back in Medina, the new governor implemented Muawiya’s orders fully, and
reported to him those who were in the front line opposing this order. In
turn, Muawiya dispatched to him individual letters for each one of them,
and ordered him to extract from each of them a response. The addressees
of these letters were: Abdullah bin Abbas bin Abdil Muttalib, Husayn bin
Ali bin Abi Talib bin Abdil Muttalib, Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib
bin Abdil Muttalib, and Abdullah bin Zubair bin Saffiya bint Abdil
Muttalib.” Sheikh A. S. Farsy reports in his book on page 24, that “the
content of this letter was very harsh, *warning the addressees that he
would kill them if they refused to accept Yazid‘s succession to
Caliphate after his death.”*

As per Sheikh A. S. Farsy (page 24), these dignitaries “responded in
sharp and stern words. The longest reply was from Sayyidinal Husayn.”

On receiving these replies, Muawiya instructed his governor, once more,
to put *“severe pressure on them to make them comply*. The governor did
so, but with no success,” says Sheikh A. S. Farsy (page 24). He,
therefore, advised Muawiya to go to Medina to meet them personally.

Muawiya went to Medina and “after resting, he met secretly with each one
of them separately, so that they should not give him one reply
unanimously,” says Sheikh A. S. Farsy (page 25). The first one he talked
to was Imam Husayn a. s. “He told him, ‘My son! Do not create division
in the community of your grandfather. Every one is satisfied that Yazid
should succeed me as the Caliph. There are no opponents to this except
you and those whom you lead. They have told me that as soon as you have
agreed, they, too, will be satisfied.’ He (Imam Husayn) replied, ‘Bring
them here and let them say so in my presence. For I do not believe that
they have really told you so. However, if they truly reiterate what they
have told you I, too, will, comply, but I’m certain that they will not
concur.’ Muawiya retorted: ‘Fine, you can go, but do not disclose to any
one any thing that transpired in the course of our conversation.” This
is what Sheikh A. S. Farsy has recorded in his book on page 25.

After Imam Husayn a. s., Muawiya called Abdullah bin Zubair, and then
Abdullah bin Umar bin al Khattab. They, too, gave the same reply as that
of Imam Husayn a. s. - “verbatim”. Here, Sheikh A. S. Farsy, adds (page
25-26), Muawiya sent for Abdul Rahman bin Abi Bakrinis Sidiqq. They had
an *intensively bitter exchange of words*. As they both were of the same
age, their exchange of words was at par with each other, with anger.”

After that, Muawiya had to change his strategy. “On the next day,” says
Sheikh A. S. Farsy (page 26), “he called for Sayyidinal Husayn and
Abdullah bin Abbas.” After inquiring about “them and their families, he
began to praise his son, Yazid, attributing to him *qualities that he
had, and ones that he did not have*. Having done so, he told them, ‘For
this reason he deserves to become the Caliph of Muslims…’” Sheikh A. S.
Farsy says on page 26 that, Imam Husayn retorted by describing *Yazid’s
viciousness* and then added, “Do not add more sins to what you have
already accumulated for yourself. Enough is enough. *You are violating
Islamic values and Muslims’ rights. by imposing on them your whims*.”

When this strategy also failed, Muawiya ordered that all the three
dignitaries be presented to him: they being Abdur Rahman bin Aby Bakr,
Abdullah bin Umar and Abdullah bin Zubair. (See Sheikh A.S. Farsy, page
27). “He welcomed them collectively, and then told them, ‘This issue of
Yazid’s succession *is the* *choice of Allah* and acceptable to all
except you three. Be careful not to cause a calamity. Or else, you will
incur both Allah’s and *my* wrath…’ *All of them contradicted* him… He
decided to talk in confidence with Adur Rahman bin Abi Bakr. On hearing
this talk about Yazid’s succession, Abdur Rahman said: *‘We don’t want
that to happen*. And if you implement your decision by force, *we shall
re-enact the first battle fought by the Muslims, you and those who share
your views being on the side of polytheists, the way your father was
then*.’” So saying, Abdur Rahman walked out.

After three days, all the people of Medina were ordered to assemble.
Muawiya kept close to himself all those who were opposing him; announced
to those present that every nook and corner of his empire had accepted
Yazid as their next Caliph except the people of Madina, and that if he
knew of any other person better qualified than Yazid, he would have
paved way for that person’s succession, but there was no such person.
Then he warned them all that he did not want to hear any opposition. He
adjourned the assembly, to resume it again in the evening.

Sheikh Abdallah narrates (page 28-29) that prior to going to this
meeting, Muawiya “assembled all his opponents and went with them to the
meeting. When he arrived there, he said, *‘I have arranged for hired
killers* to be present at the assembly. I shall announce to the public
that *you have now agreed with the succession of Yazid. He who does not
value his life should raise his objection*. *For no sooner does he do
so, than people will see his head rolling on the ground.’* And he had
instructed his soldiers to *instantly kill anyone* *who dared oppose
him*. Besides that, he made this threat known to all those who were
present there, so that *all of them remain in a state of fear*.”

Now, this is Muawiya and this is how he planned his son’s succession --
that son, Yazid, whom the Wahabis regard as *Amirul–mu’minin* (the
Prince of Believers), May Allah forgive us!

At this public assembly, assuming the same threatening posture that he
had used in warning Imam Husayn and others, Muawiya mounted the pulpit
and said, “Be my witness that those who had been opposing me (regarding
Yazid’s succession) are now in agreement (with my proposal); and they
are all present here. They are the patriots of Madina and the companions
(of the Prophet (S). All is now well.” This is what Sheikh Abdallah S.
Farsy narrates in his book, page 29. He then adds, “After that, he
distributed *large sums of money to the elders of each clan belonging to
Muhajirs and Ansars, and others*…” This is how Yazid secured his
Caliphate in the month of Rajab, A.H. 60, on the death of his father.

O my Muslim brothers! If this is how things were, as portrayed by Sheikh
Abdallah Saleh Farsy, then would any genuine Muslim, who truly
understands his religion, and who wishes to protect the honor of Islam,
ever perceive a man like Yazid to be among the leaders of Islam, let
alone accept him as *Amirul Mu’minin* or the Prince of the Believers?
Bear in mind that these are not the direct acts of Yazid as such; they
were perpetrated by his father, Muawiya. However, the heinous acts that
he himself committed after his succession surpasses those of his father.


