What Yazid did as a Ruler
=========================

In brief, these acts are narrated by Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy, on pages
29 to 41, and they are as follows:

1. He ordered his Governor of Madina, Khalid bin Hakam, to extract oath
of allegiance from Husayn bin Ali bin Abi Talib, Abdullah bin Umar bin
Al Khattab, Abdullah bin Al Abbas and Abdullah bin Zubair. (By then
Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr was dead). The order was *“He should make it
absolutely sure that they accepted Yazid as the Caliph of all Muslims.
If they refused to do so, then their properties should be confiscated,
their marriages nullified, and their slaves be declared free.”*

2. When the governor wanted to impose Yazid’s terms on Imam Husayn and
Abdullah bin Zubair, they asked him to wait till the following day.
Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy reports (page 30) that “On reaching their
homes, they bade farewell to their kith and kin and went secretly to
Mecca, which was the haven of safety for them…” When Yazid came to know
about this, he was outraged and “revoked his governorship.”

3. No sooner had Yazid ascended the throne by force, than the people of
Kufa (Iraq) “invited Imam Husayn to hasten to Iraq, to lead an uprising
to dethrone the one who was *most unworthy of being the Caliph of
Muslims*.” The Imam did not make an immediate move; rather, he
dispatched to Kufa, his cousin, (Muslim bin Aqyl) to investigate the
truth of the matter. Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy says (page 34-35),
“Yazid appointed, as his governor of Kufa, *one who was murderous,
oppressive, high-handed and aggressive, and who was hostile to Sayyidna
Ali and his progeny;* his name was Ubaidillah bin Ziyad, the son of that
person whom Muawiya declared to be his brother, only *out of political
necessity*. As a matter of fact, though he (Ziyad bin Abihi) was
regarded to belong to Muawiya’s clan of Umayyad, *he was in no way
related to Muawiya, neither was he from the tribe of Qureish or even an
Arab! He was of illegitimate birth* and so crafty that he dared compete
with Muawiya. The latter, out of contrivance, thought it prudent to
declare the former his brother and let him manage Iraq completely.” Thus
Ziyad was the first bastard, in Islamic History, to be given the status
of legitimacy!

4. Sheikh Abdallah writes on page 35, that having appointed this new
governor, Yazid ordered him to “kill Muslim bin Aqyl, those who
accompanied him, those who received him, and those who supported him;
and imprison their neighbors and their kith and kin, showing them *no
mercy at all*.” Indeed, these instructions were fully executed. “He did
exactly what Yazid had instructed him to do. He *killed all those he was
instructed to kill,* and he imprisoned all those he was ordered to
imprison…”

In his book Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy does not write how Muslim bin Aqyl
was martyred. However, other historians have recorded in their books,
stating that he was taken to the top of the royal castle, he was then
beheaded and both his severed head and body were thrown from the castle.
Later his severed head was dispatched to Yazid!

5. As was described in Chapter One, Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsy narrates on
page 40 that after Imam Husayn a. s. and his followers had been beheaded
brutally and their heads presented to Yazid, “he (Yazid) began to strike
the teeth of Husayn, and singing aloud, he said: *‘Today, I squared up
with Muhammad. The way he killed my ancestors on the Day of Badr, I
killed his grandchildren*. And now onwards this is going to be our
policy: *Whoever opposes us, we shall kill them, even if they happen to
be our relatives…’”*

O my Muslim brothers! Ask yourselves: Can a person, who has the audacity
of saying that he took his *revenge on Prophet Muhammad* (S) for killing
his (Yazid’s) polytheist ancestors, deserve to be addressed as
*Amirrul-mu’minin?* Let alone calling him The Prince of Believers, can
you consider him to be even a Muslim? Didn’t the Wahabis know of this
fact? Or will they tell us that Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy, too, was a
Shia?

There is much more to know.

6. After the martyrdom of Imam Husayn in 61 A.H., Yazid invaded Madina.
Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy tells us about this thus (page 41): *“A
large number of the companions of the Prophet* (S), and others were
killed in Madina. There was a *complete anarchy* in Madina for three
consecutive days. Destruction was rampant, not only in terms of lives
and wealth, but also human dignity. *All this was carried out by Yazid’s
orders*... As for those companions of the Prophet (S) whose lives were
spared, *Yazid ordered that they be branded on their backs as his
slaves*.” Lord of Mercy! This person (Yazid) is indeed *Amirul Mu’minin*
(The Prince of The Believers) of the Wahabis!

Sheikh Abdallah presented this account covertly. Other narrators,
however, have given a more overt description of these events. Among them
is Ibn Kathir, who is highly esteemed by the international Wahabis in
the same way that Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy is esteemed by the Wahabis
of East Africa. In his book*, Al Bidaya Wan Nihaya*, Chapter Seven, page
220, he gives a numerical count of “the many companions of the Prophet
killed *as 700, comprising the notable Muhajir and Ansars,* and for
others as 10,000.” Elaborating what Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy calls
“anarchy”, Ibn Kathir, on page 222, states that the atrocities committed
by the orders of Yazid are indescribable, and their impact “is known
only to Allah.” This is despite the fact that earlier, on page 220, he
had already stated that *“women were raped to the extent that 1000 of
them became pregnant and gave birth to children though they were
unmarried...”*

Having narrated these evil deeds, and wishing us to be cautious about
whom Yazid really was, Ibn Kathir, on page 223, quotes three Traditions
of the Prophet (S) . . . . First, he takes a Tradition from Bukhari,
quoting the Prophet (S) to have said “There will be none who will
oppress the people of Madina *without disintegrating the way salt
dissolves in water.*” Second, he borrows a Tradition from Muslim that
says; “Whoever has bad intentions for Madina, *Allah will melt him the
way solder melts in fire, or He will dissolve him the way salt dissolves
in water.*” Third, he narrates on the authority of Ahmad bin Hanbal, who
says, “He who wishes to cause fear through oppression to people of
Madina, *Allah will cause him to be gripped by fear, and to be cursed by
Him, His angels and by everyone else. Moreover, on the Day of Judgment,
Allah will not accept his repentance and will not grant him
forgiveness.”*

Now then, is there any salvation for Yazid after what was done in Madina
by his orders as stated by Ibn Kathir (page 220), and Sheikh Abdallah
Saleh Farsy (page 41), and in light of the Traditions mentioned above?
What type of *Amirul Mu’minin* is this who is subject to the curse of
Allah, His angels and all human beings?

7. Sheikh Abdallah S. Farsi says, on page 41, that one year after the
invasion of Madina, Macca, too, was invaded. “*Yazid’s army massacred
many people and demolished Al Kaaba*...” Here, too, Sheikh Abdallah’s
narration is understated, though others have been more forthright. For
instance, the same Ibn Kathir, on page 225, says that Yazid’s army
“pelted Al Kaba with stones through the use of catapults and attacked it
even with *fire balls till its walls were set ablaze*.” In
*Shadharaatudh Dhahab,* Chapter Three, page 72, Ibnul Imaad Al Hanbali
says that so much fire was used that “the entire building (Al Kaba)
collapsed.”

This is what was meted out to “The House of Allah” which, according to
the Holy Quran (Ch. 3: v 97), is a place where security is guaranteed to
any one entering there, seeking refuge. This security was eliminated by
Yazid. And this Yazid is the *Amirul Mu’minin* of the Wahabis who
advocate that all Muslims, too, must view him as such! *Subhaanallah!*

In a nutshell, these are the evil deeds of Yazid. Let alone *Amirul
Mu’minin,* would even a common Muslim dare commit such actions?
Certainly not; then how come Yazid did so?

To address this question, it is essential to know what kind of a person
Yazid was. Allah willing, we shall do that in our next chapter by
quoting from the books of various Muslim scholars of high repute (none
of whom is a Shia).


