What the Sunni Scholars Have Said
=================================

We begin with what Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Farsy says in his book, *Maisha
ya Sayyidnal Husayn* (Biography of Sayyidna Husayn), on page 40: “As we
saw earlier, Yazid’s succession was established by *force and contrary
to the wishes of the people*.” What needs to be asked is: Is it possible
that although his succession was “by force”, he himself is exculpable?
Is it permissible in Islam for one to rule over Muslims as
*Amirul–mu’minin* on the basis of force and “contrary to the wishes of
the people”?

Similar statements have been made by Sheikh Muhammad Abduh. In his
exegesis of the Holy Quran, known as *Tafsirul Manaar*, commenting on
Chapter 5: 36-37 (p.367, Volume Six), this Sheikh brands Yazid as *“an
oppressive and tyrannical leader, who conducted the affairs of Muslims
with force and deceit*.” Does he deserve to be addressed as *Amirul
Muminiin?*

Our third source is Allaamah Shawkaani who, in his book on the
Traditions of the Prophet, called *Naylul Awtwaar* (in Chapter Seven,
page 362) characterizes Yazid as *“pathological drunkard*, and violator
of the sanctified ordinances.” Yet he is *Amirul Mu’minin* of the
Wahabis!

Our fourth source is Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad Bin Ali Al Twabarii, a
famous Shaafi’i scholar, who, when asked about Yazid, among other
things, called him “a *notorious drunkard* whose poetry in *praise of
liquor* was of public knowledge.” This has been extracted from page 287
of Chapter Three of Ibn Khalikaan’s *Wafayaatul A’yaan*.

Fifthly, Ibn Hazm, on page 98 of Chapter Eleven of his book, *Al
Muhallaa*, has categorized Yazid bin Muawiya with those *“who were
secularist”*, the thrust of whose policy was “*oppressive and devoid of
any legitimacy*..” Can such a person claim the title of *Amirul
Mu’minin?*

The sixth source is Abul Falaah Abdul Hayy Ibnul Imaad, who is an
eminent Hanbali scholar and who, on page 69 of Chapter Three of his
famous book, *Shadharaatudh Dhahab*, quotes another famous scholar, Imam
Dhahabi, to have said: “Yazid was *hateful of Imam Ali a. s., arrogant,
insolent, wine-bibber and sinful. He initiated his kingship by murdering
Husayn, and he sealed it with the incident of Harra. People hated him
and he was not graced with a long life*.” The incident of Harra here
refers to the sacking of Madina, explained by us on page 14.

Do you still think it appropriate to call *Amirul Mu’minin* that person
who initiated his kingdom by murdering the grandson of the Prophet (S),
and crowned it with the sacking of the Prophet’s city, and violating the
sanctity of not less than one thousand women (of the city) by
impregnating them through raping? We ask the Wahabis: What Islamic
justifications do you have to back your claim?

Our seventh source is Ibn Kathir who is regarded as an authority by the
Wahabis. On pages 235-236 of Chapter Four of his *Al Bidaaya Wan
Nihaaya*, he enlists what have been confirmed about Yazid. Amongst these
are that “Yazid was *notorious for his love of music and liquors… his
illicit friendship with singing boys and girls… There was not a single
day that he woke up not intoxicated*…”

Before that, on page 216 of the above mentioned Chapter and book, Ibn
Kathir writes about the delegation, “comprising three citizens of
Madina”, going to Yazid. He says: “When they returned to Madina, they
made public their grave findings pertaining to Yazid’s perversities.
They said: ‘We are returning from that *person who is irreligious, who
is a wine-bibber and who is surrounded by singing girls, entertaining
him with music*…”’. He also writes about the comments made by the Head
of this delegation, Mundhir bin Zubair, upon his return from Basra,
where he had gone to meet his friend, the governor (Ubaidillaah bin
Ziyaad), namely that Yazid *“consumes so much intoxicants that he misses
prayers!”*

There we are! When such is the case with Yazid, then what kind of a
Muslim will take pride in having him as his *Amirul Mu’minin?* Let the
Wahabis, who distributed the pamphlet calling Yazid *Amirul Mu’minin*,
thank their stars for not having lived during the reign of Umar bin
Abdul Aziz. Or else, they would have got the best of what they deserve!
This Caliph was from the same clan as Yazid*;* nonetheless, he flogged
*20 lashes* that individual who addressed Yazid as *Amirul Mu’minin!*
Those who want to verify this may turn to page 69 of Chapter Three of
*Shadharaatudh Dhahab*.


