Preamble
========

The cultural assault rests on two pillars: first, humiliating the
pristine culture; and second, overstating in publicizing for the
substitute Western culture. Through this cultural ravishment and
vilification for the genuine culture, people may feel to be despised in
comparison to others, heedless of their own culture and peerless
containments of treasures, begging help from aliens, and offering their
culture and civilization at an underrate.

The defunct Pahlavi dynasty adopted this wicked policy with the West,
declaring it as the deity of civilization, modernism and art, beside
even ethics and religion. Whereas it introduced the East as an example
and source of savagery and backwardness, or at the best, be called the
“Third World’ “the non-developed countries. These devilish policies
have, to some extent, managed in achieving their goals, as a large
number of people “particularly the youth “began to view the West as
representing the free world that defends the human rights, democracy and
freedom.

But, the sun cannot be kept behind clouds forever, as said by the known
dictum, and realities began to emerge as clear as noonday, with the
start of the era of Islamic resurgence “the era characterized with the
contemporary generation’s return to its inborn nature and disposition,
to the Holy Qur’an and real dogma and its elements.

In spite of the present optimistic illumination auguring well, the state
of thought ravishment is still suffering “in many of the sensitive and
important fields”from the Western abnormal effects.

The high certificates got in the West, for example, are still dazzling
our sights, and the medicine that does not hold an attractive and
illustrious Western mark has actually no effective influence. Yet, a lot
of Western cultural phenomena are still penetrative or rather firmly
rooted in our society’s behaviorism. Meanwhile, the West is still
selecting for us the costumes we wear, and determining the kinds of
medals to be granted to the winning athletes. Not only that, but also we
expect it to distribute the literary prizes, for which all are longing
eagerly.

In any case, is it correct to regard the West as our unique model and
example? That West whose ill-favoured intention has been revealed
through its void mottos and false claims in defending the democracy and
human rights. What are the reasons behind such feelings of inferiority
towards the fifteenth Hijrah Century executioners?

We still view the West as an ideal, despite its adopting the apartheid
policy, and awarding its literary prizes to those who are devoid of
decency and good manners, like Salman Rushdie, while withholding the
Muslim genius students from participating in the Physics Olympiad.

The Islamic world is asked then to strive hard to establish an ‘slamic
World Order’, and to sever all connections between it and the Western
slogans and pretensions, like democracy, freedom and defending the human
rights.

Can we have any hope, then, in the West while we are witnessing the
catastrophic events occurring all over the Islamic countries, such as
Bosnia Herzegovina, Algeria, and Palestine? Whoever is concerned with
the Muslims’ affairs should realize that no outlet or solution (for the
crises) is there, but only through resorting and returning to the warm
wings of the Holy Qur’an and its expansive patronage.

“Meeting the Pious”series is then a practical attempt and an earnest
endeavour to return to our genuine identity, through introducing the
biographies of the beacons of Islamic thought, those stars whose
scientific horizons may inundate the leaders of other ideological dogmas
and creeds, and other well-known thinkers.

One of the most sensitive facts that disturbs the West and robs its
sleep, is the serious return of the Islamic nation (ummah) to its real
identity, to its leading figures “to those who managed in paving the
hard way of Islam through their concerted efforts and honest
contribution.

The staff of “Meeting the Pious”series has made a pledge to investigate
the inherent characteristics and biographies of seventy gliterring stars
of the high sphere of Islamic thought, and introduce them as lofty
shining ensigns who struggled to rebuild the Islamic civilization anew.

**Baqir al-’Ulum Research Foundation**
**Qum**


