Translator’s Introduction
=========================

It is really perplexing to see how identical were the two characters
between whom a hundred and fifty years separate. Whoever investigates
the biography of al-Shaykh Zayn al-Din al-’Amili, will verily realize
its being complementary to the character of Muhammad ibn Makki, who was
martyred in 786 H, and known later as al-Shahid al-’Awwal. No doubt then
that al-Shaykh Zayn al-Din be called al-Shahid al-Thani, since both of
them experienced identical circumstances, encountering similar
conspiracies.

Each one of them was the superior intellectual character at their time,
with his life being characterized with many travels among Islamic cities
and metropolises. Their only objective was knowledge seeking, till each
of them turned to be an encyclopedia in thought and knowledge, leaving
behind a voluminous heritage indicating their genius and
knowledgeability.

Both were born in Jabal ‘Amil, living the same period of time, facing
the same bloody fate, being victims of the plots of politicians and
covetous people having malicious nature and degraded morals.

They resembled each other to the extent that al-Shahid al-Thani has
embarked on studying *al-Lum’ah alDimashqiyyah* on *fiqh*, which is
authored by al-Shahid al‘Awwal. Then he expounded it under the title
*al-Rawdah al-bahiyyah fi sharh al-Lum’ah al-Dimashqiyyah*, after which
the original book and the exposition occupied the priority among the
curricula of the theological schools despite the succession of numerous
centuries.

Al-Shahid al-’Awwal was tried in Damascus, executed, then his body was
crucified for several days, stonned and burnt, and transformed then to
ashes dispersed by winds. Whereas al-Shahid al-Thani was taken guarded
to Qastantine, whereat his fate was to be killed on the shores of the
Mediterranean, and his body to be thrown into the sea, and be devoured
by the whales.

The only reason behind liquidating them in this tragic way was their
holding an opinion contradictory to that of the rulers, and enjoying the
masses support, the fact exciting the then rulers’ fears.

At last, we have to refer to the fact that the sequence of murder and
bloody liquidations is still going on to the present time, inflicting
the offspring of the Two Martyrs (al-Shahidayn), as al-’Imam Muhammad
Baqir al-Sadr met his end at the hand of Iraq despot (Saddam) in 1980.
After him his sister Aminat al-Sadr, known with the name Bint al-Huda,
was martyred, and before them al-Imam Musa al-Sadr disappeared in vague
circumstances in 1978.

This being the history of tragedies, initiated from Karbala’ of
al-Husayn (A), since the moment of ‘Ashura’, and is still continuing its
course toward the age of green peace.

**Hasan M. Najafi**


