Chapter 1: The Beginning
========================

The Sacred Wrath
----------------

Al-Shahid was verily a spirit full of sacred wrath ... a heart beating
with faith (*iman*) and bravery ... a peremptory tongue like a trenchant
sword, and a man knows nothing but the truth.

He persevered on rejecting oppression, deploring prodigality, and
condemning extravagance and deviation. Thus his heart burst like an
outbreaking volcano, ejecting its lava against the palaces of those
unjust people given to luxury.

He found the straightforward path, being guided toward the right course,
stepping forward with full confidence in Allah, relying upon his Lord,
fearing neither the reproach of those who are entitled to reproach, nor
the rulers’ repression.

One day the Messenger of Allah, on looking at him, recognized his
magnanimous self and high spirit, saying: “No meadow could overshadow
and no earth could carry over it a man more truthful in speech than Abu
Dharr.”

True, it is Abu Dharr, the champion of the pricky hard way ... the way
of bidding to good and forbidding evil. He recognized the truth, bidding
people to follow it, and rea-

lized falsehood, forbidding from following it, being thus a source of
fear for the oppressors, and a danger threatening the rulers. So, they
did their utmost to dissuade him from his course, but failed, and all
the abundant sums of money could never tempt him or weaken his resolute.
All swords, lashes or other means of horror were humbled in front of his
strong will.

Once upon a day a servant knocked at his house-door saying to him:

“O the Companion of the Messenger of Allah, here you are, this is the
caliph’s present to you ... an amount of money that is sufficient to
sustain on all your life.” Abu Dharr refused to accept the gift, but the
servant insisted on him, begging him by saying:

“They promised to set me free ... O Abu Dharr, please accept it ... my
emancipation is entailed from (your accepting) it.

Abu Dharr refused the rulers’ presents, and decisively exclaimed:

“If it entails your emancipation, it causes my slavery. Yea, o gullible
lad, are you asking such a thing from Abu Dharr? Are you asking him to
have confidence in or submit to the oppressors?

In this way everywhere was resounded with Abu Dharr’s voice calling for
truth, demanding to establish justice on earth. Consequently, the orders
were issued to arrest and exile him to Sham, separating him from his
beloved people and his struggle comrades, depriving him from the
tenement-houses of revelation, the scent of Pro phethood and warmth of
Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon them).

It was destined for Abu Dharr to tread, with his feet, the roads of
Jabal Amil, that goodly region of the land of Lebanon, where lie simple
hills, spacious valleys and limited-scope plains.

And thus was the fate of Jabal ‘Amil to initiate a new chapter in its
deep-rooted history. There, people came to discover a firebrand from the
spirit of Muhammad (God’s benediction be upon him and his pure Progeny),
as from the heart of his great Companion, Islam’s concepts and message
values began to effuse, and the rebellious words started to proceed into
the heart of earth and history. Hence, sun of Islam began to rise from
among the clouds, overwhelming that land with light, warmth and hope.

The palaces of the Umayyad ruler began to be shaken violently by the
Ghifari earthquake, and strong feeling of trepidation and fright
overwhelmed Mu’awiyah, who gave his orders to return the honourable
companion to the centre of caliphate, with instructions to treat him
very harshly.

So the Companion of Allah’s Messenger returned to alMadinah, to see
nothing but frowned faces and executioners’ lashes. There, the expulsion
cycle started anew, till his last exile be at Rabadhah “the severest
region in the world in respect of climate and voidness of any traces of
life.

In this place, Abu Dharr passes away, joining the caravan of freemen and
the righteous, with his words in Jabal ‘Amil turning to be seeds and
buds, growing, blossoming and setting their roots firm into the depths
of earth, history and civilization. Thereafter, Jabal ‘Amil commenced to
play its effective role on the scene of life, producing to the mankind
“over long ages and eras “numerous reputed *‘ulama’*, litterateurs and
thinkers.

Among the *‘ulama’* produced by that generous land, we can refer to the
renowned scholar Zayn al-Din al-Jub’ii al-’Amili, who was known later
with the name of al-Shahid al-Thani[^1].

His Household
-------------

Zayn al-Din ibn ‘Ali ibn Ahmad al-’Amili is verily counted among the
great *‘ulama’* and *fuqaha’*, endowed with a versatile personality,
being prominent in the fields of literature and medicine too.

He was brought up in an inveterate family of noble social and
theological status. His father was Nur al-Din ‘Ali, one of the
honourable *‘ulama’*, and so also were his both grandfathers Jamal
al-Din and al-Taqi, beside his great grandfather al-Shaykh Salih. Hence
his family was called Silsalat al-Dhahab (Golden Chain). Further his
only son al-Shaykh Yasan was one of the most eminent Imamiyyah
*‘ulama’*, compiling the book *al-Ma’ali*[^2]*m* on *usul al-fiqh*.

Also his grandson, from his daughter, al-Sayyid Muhammad ‘Ali al-’Amili,
who was one among the most reputable Shi’ah researchers. He authored the
book *al-Madarik* on *fiqh*.[^3]

To him belong scientific personages of great influence and role in the
thought and social fields, like al-’Imam Musa al-Sadr,[^4] the President
of the Supreme Shi’i Council in Lebanon, and the martyr al-Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr[^5] with his sister the martyr Aminat al-Sadr,
known as Bint al-Huda.

His Birth
---------

On the thirteenth of Shawwal 911 H., at Jub’i, one of south Lebanon
villages, a lightening planet has brightened from Nur al-Din ‘Ali’s
house, overshadowing the world with a shining comely face, overwhelming
his parents heart with warmth and hope. So they gave him the name Zayn
al-Din, and after elapse of few days, the signs of smartness and genius,
began to emerge as talents endowed on him. The boy grew up inside a
chaste house, overfull of piety (*taqwa*), faith and modesty. He recited
the whole holy Qur’an before reaching the age of nine.

His Learning
------------

Al-Shahid has betaken himself at this prime age to study the arts of
Arabic literature and jurisprudence (*fiqh*). His first teacher was his
father, who was among the grand *‘ulama’* of Jabal ‘Amil during his
time, teaching him the books *al-Mukhta’ar al-nafi’i* and *al-Lum’ah
alDimashqiyyah*. For the latter one, al-Shahid has compiled his
well-known exposition (*sharh*) under the title: *al-Rawdhah
al-bahiyyah*, beside other various literary books.

Enough be for his father to boast of, is that he has educated al-Shahid
in a way that put him on the course leading to geniusness and aptitude.
He continued his study till the year 925 H. when his father deceased,
while his age was less than 14 years.

But the dread of this shock and bitterness of orphanhood could never
curb his activity, or frustrate his enthusiastic spirit from seeking
knowledge, as it was the conduct of other genius unique men, whose
talents were burnished by experiences of life.

Toward Mays Village
-------------------

Thus Zayn al-Din, the novice pupil, has set off toward the village of
Mays in Jabal ‘Amil, after being aware of the presence of a great
scholar like al-Shaykh ‘Ali ibn Abd al-’Ali in it. Under that man he
learnt *Shara’i’i al-’slam* of al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, *Irshad al-’adhhan*
of al‘Allamah al-Hilli, and *al-Qawa’id* of al-Shahid al-’Awwal Muhammad
ibn Makki, which all being among sublime *fiqhi* books.

Al-Shahid resided for eight years at Mays, till 933 H., prompted by the
fact that his teacher was the husband of his aunt, who used to treat him
compassionately, taking care of him throughout all that period.

His Marriage
------------

Al-Shahid persevered on learning so hard and actively, acquiring
knowledge, and quaffing from its serene fountains, till reaching the age
of twenty-two. Thereat he thought that it was opportune time to complete
the other half of his religion, and start a new life ... a life common
with his dreamgirl. And no one could be better than the daughter of his
compassionate aunt and of his honourable professor. Thus al-Shahid found
his promised rest[^6] in that faithful girl, whose character was
distinguished with all features of a goodly village, such as simplicity,
content and serenity.

Toward Karak Noah
-----------------

Within only a short time after Zayn al-Din’s marriage to his aunt’s
duaghter, the idea of migration has striken the mind of his new family,
so they packed off to another village, being Karak Noah.[^7] So, the
knowledge-seeker, after acquiring much *fiqh* and other fields of
knowledge, set off with his family.

In Karak Noah, he attended the lessons of literature, *fiqh*,
philosophy, *kalam* and *usul*, under al-Sayyid Badr al-Din Yasan
al-’A’raji, who taught him *al-Qawai'd* of Ibn Maytham al-Bahrani, on
*ilm al-kalam*, beside *al-Tahdhib* and *al-’Umdah al-jaliyyah* on *usul
al-fiqh*, with the book *al-Kafiyah* on *‘lm al-nahw* (grammar).

After only seven months, the knowledge-seeker was bereaved with the
decease of his teacher, whereat he recalled the passing away of his
father a long time ago, yearning strongly for Jub’, his birthplace.

Returning Home
--------------

In Jumada al-Thaniyah 934, Zayn al-Din departed Karak Noah, betaking
himself toward Jub’, in which he stayed till the year 937, which he
spent in reading, preaching and meeting people’s needs. Hence he
attained high position among people, deserving much applause and
appreciation.

At Damascus
-----------

Al-Shahid migrated to Damascus, the capital of Sham in 937 H. when he
was twenty-six years old, prompted by the keen desire to seek knowledge.
So he resided there for one year, attending the lectures of the
philosopher Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Makki, learning under him the
books authored by his teacher: *Sharh al-Mujaz* and *Ghayat al-Qa’Id fi
mairifat al-fa’Id*. Besides, he learned the book *Fu’Iul al-Farghani* on
*‘ilm al-hay’ah*, and *Hikmat al-’Ishraq* of al-Suhrawardi on
philosophy. Also he learned under al-Shaykh Ahmad ibn Jabir, the book al
ShaÏibiyyah on *‘lm al-qira’ah* (science of reading), studying the
readings of Nafi’, Ibn Kathir, Ibn ‘Amr and ‘A’Iim.

Returning Home
--------------

Homesickness has pushed al-Shahid to return home, *Jub’i*, staying at
his village till the year 941. Throughout all that period, he was
engaged in reading, verification, teaching and preaching people.

Damascus Again
--------------

Again, at the outset of 942, al-Shahid returned to Damascus to resume
his learning there. During that period, he established contacts with
many personalities from different Islamic schools of thought, to be
acquainted with other thought trends.

So he met, on this course, the Damascene scholar al-Shaykh Shams al-Din
ibn Ãawlawn, reading for him parts of *Sahih al-Bukhari* and *Sahih
Muslim*, after which Ibn Ãawlawn has licensed him to narrate both of
them. At that time, his disciple Ibn al-’Awdi came out to light,
accompanying him for a long time.

In Land of Pyramids
-------------------

On the fifteenth of Rabi’i al-’Awwal 942 H., al-Shahid al-Thani departed
Damascus[^8] toward Egypt, in order to enrich his religious knowledge,
and living in new thought spheres.

Since Egypt, at that time, was a huge thought centre, al-Shahid
endeavoured, on his arrival there, to make contact with the leaders of
other schools of thought.

He started to closely study their trends of thought, for having full
knowledge of their rational point of view, and comprehending their
scientific signification.

Al-Shahid proved his effective attendance at various circles of learning
held everywhere, in mosques and schools, learning under a large number
of professors of *fiqh*, exegesis (*tafsir*) and *hadith* (tradition).
Among them he refers to:

“Al-Shaykh Shahab al-Din Ahmad al-Ramli al-Shafi’i, studying under him
*Minhaj al-Nawawi* on *fiqh*, and *Mukhtaar al-’u’Iul* with reading the
commentaries (*hawashi*) on it: *al-Sa’diyyah* and *al-Sharifiyyah*. I
also heard under him many books on Arabic and rational arts, and other
fields, like: *Sharh al-Talkhi’I* for the book *al-Mukhtaar fi al-maAni
wa al-bayan* of al-Mulla Sa’id al-Din; al Shaykh Imam al-Haramayn
al-Juwayni’s *Sharh* on *u’sul al-fiqh*; and Ibn Hisham’s *Taw’ih* on
*nahw* (grammar), beside other books whose mention is out of scope here,
and he granted me a general license in reporting what is permitted to be
narrated in 943 H.

“Among them also is al-Mulla Husayn al-Jurjani, under whom I learned
al-Mulla ‘Ali al-Qawashachi, with Mulla Jalal al-Din al-Dawwani’s
*Aashiyah*, *Sharh ashkal alta’sis* on geometry by Qa’Ii Zadah al-Ruhi
and *Sharh alJaghmini* on *hay’ah* by him.

“Among them too is al-Mulla Muhammad al‘Astrabadi, under whom we learned
a portion from the book *al-MuÏawwal*, with al-Sayyid Sharif’s
*Aashiyah* and *Sharh al-Kafiyah*. Beside al-Mulla Muhammad ‘Ali
al-Jilani, under whom we heard some parts of *ma’ani* (rhetoric) and
*manÏiq* (logic).

“Among them further is al-Shaykh Shahab al-Din ibn al-Najjar al-Yanbali,
under whom I learned all of the books *Sharh al-Shafiyah* and *Sharh
al-Khazrajiyyah* on prosody and rhyming of al-Shaykh Zakariyya
al-’Ansari, reciting numerous books on arts and *hadith*, among which
are *al-Sahihan*, and he licensed me to report whatever I heard and
recited, beside all that was permitted for him to narrate in the said
year.

“Also among them is al-Shaykh Abu al-Yasan al-Bakri, under whom I heard
a number of books on *fiqh* and exegesis (*tafsir*), beside his *sharh*
on *al-Minhaj*.

“Of them too is al-Shaykh Zayn al-Din al-Jarmi alMaliki, under whom I
recited *Alfiyyat Ibn Malik*.

“Of them again is al-Shaykh al-Muhaqqiq Na’sir al-Din al-Malaqani
al-Maliki, the time researcher and honourable man of that town, who was
the best scholar in rational and Arabic sciences, under whom I read
*al-Bayawi fi altafsir*, with other books.

“Of them is al-Shaykh Na’sir al-Din al-Hablawi al-Shafi’i, under whom I
recited the Qur’an according to Ibn Amr’s reading (*qira’ah*), and a
treatise on reading authored by him.

“Of them is al-Shaykh Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Abi al-Nahhas, under
whom I read *al-ShaÏibiyyah fi al-qira’ah wa al-Qur’an al-Aziz li
al-’A’immah al-Sabah*. Then I started to recite for him the ten without
completing them to the end.

Ibn al-Awdi[^9] commented on this by saying: “Most often al-Shahid was
labelling this Shaykh with piety, uprightness and modesty. It was
customary for the virtuous men of Egypt to frequenting to him for
reading under him arts of the holy Qur’an due to his being distinguished
in this field. He was so concerned with this profession, that people
used to recite (the Qur’an) for him while he being busy in his
occupation, never dropping the hammer from his hand, except when visited
by one of the great dignitaries, whereat he would spread a rug for him,
whereas he himself sat on a straw mat.”

Some of them are mentioned by al-Shahid when saying: Among them is the
virtuous perfect Shaykh ‘Abd al Hamid al-Sanhuri, for whom I read a good
sum of arts, after which he granted me a general license.

Ibn al-Awdi commented thus:

This Shaykh also deserved the appraisal of our Shaykh, may Allah
sanctify his soul, al-Shahid al-Thani, who used to ascribe to him the
two virtues of *‘ilm* (knowledge) and generosity. He says that during
the Month of Ramadhan, he used to invite all his friends to break their
fasting at his house, so as that once upon a night they were absent
during the time of *ifÏar* (breakfast at *maghrib* during RamaAn), but
when coming after that, he treated them so kindly, saying:

“We all felt lonely and longed for you yesterday, even Latifah (his
younger daughter).

He owned a maid servant, that whenever someone would come to invite him,
he would tell her:

“Inform your master that so-and-so has invited the company to be his
guests tonight.

Thereat she would reply:

“I never apprise him of this news at all.

Al-Shahid al-Thani goes on to introduce the Egyptian personalities he
met, saying:

Among them is al-Shaykh Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Abd al-Qadir al-Far’i
al-Shafi’i, for whom I read many books on Indian arithmetic, and
*al-Yasaminah* with its *sharh* (exposition) on algebra and comparison
science, besides reciting *Sharh al-Wasilah* for which he granted me a
general license.

In the same country, I recited under a large number of shaykhs, whose
mention is out of scope, among them are: al-Shaykh ‘Umayrah, al-Shaykh
Shahab al-Din ibn Abd al-Yaqq, al-Shaykh Shahab al-Din al-Balqini, and
al-Shaykh Shams al-Din al-Diruti, beside others.[^10]

This document explicitly indicates the extent of al Shahid’s activity,
and his keenness to be acquainted with the different sciences prevalent
at that time, besides endeavouring to comprehend the different schools
of thought and methods of teaching. Though the period spent by al Shahid
in the land of Egypt was so short “eighteen months “but he exploited it
in an astounding way, as it was feasible for him to grasp numerous
fields of knowledge, that others could not grasp, during that
comparatively short time.

Toward the Ancient House
------------------------

When the youth felt quenched of knowledge and science, his sublime
spirit started to strongly yearning for Makkah, the descension place of
revelation and cornerstone of the everlasting message. So he eagerly set
out to make pilgrimage to the Ancient House, on the seventeenth of
Shawwal 943 H., taking with him as companions two of his disciples.

The small caravan crossed the thorney deserts and sandy flat lands, to
reach the land of Makkah ... the homeland of Ibrahim and Isma’iil and
Hajar, to witness by his own eyes the first house placed for mankind.
Also to sight al-Madinah, which witnessed the birth of the best of human
beings Muhammad (peace and benediction be upon him and his pure
Progeny), and that of the eternal champion of Islam ‘Ali (A). There at
the youth began to recall to mind the vivid images of the *jihad* of the
earlier Muslims ... Abu Talib, the Messenger’s uncle and guardian,
Khadijah with her sacrifices, Yasir with his steadfastness, Sumayyah the
first martyr throughout the Islamic history and Bilal ... etc.

After performing the rites of *‘umrah* and *hajj*, al Shahid betook
himself toward al-Madinah al Munawwarah ... to the land that witnessed
the great miracle “the miracle of Islam and birth of the new Ummah
(nation).

Peace be on Ahmad in the Worlds
-------------------------------

As the small caravan set out toward Yathrib, the youth started to
imagine the memoir of the perilous travel, when the Prophet (S) decided
to depart Makkah and migrate toward Yathrib, the event recording the
Hijrah calendar that changed the face of the world, and rectified the
human course all the world over.

There at the love fountains began to gush out, with the youth starting
to chant:

*Peace and salutation be upon the best of mankind, Whose grace exceeding
limitation and confinement, That who ascended the seven skies with
slippers, Whom Allah substituted with Barraq for his foal, Whom the
Almighty Allah addressed with His love, Orally, that never occurred for
a slave or freeman, My inability to citing your virtues is seemly,*

*Of which my tongue is fatigued through poetry or prose, What have
people to say in praise of that those,*

*Lofty laudations are mentioned in the holy Book, I rushed toward him
hastily as a powerless*

*Burdened with abundant sins on my back, But love wind instigated my
vigour,*

*And soul of hope in my self-weakness with poverty, The generous Arabs’
habit toward their guest,*

*Is showering him with good, cheerness and affluence, They abundantly
give their guest with no precedence, How then of the good you promised
me in Egypt,*[^11]

*My master, make me realize my hope of the visit, Through attaining my
wish and intercession at resurrection.*[^12]

Returning to Homeland
---------------------

After traversing some parts of the Islamic world, travelling between
Damascus and Cairo, then Makkah and al-Madinah, in a journey taking two
years, strong yearning controlled him, pushing him to return to Jub\`,
his small lamblike village. So he set out, betaking himself toward it,
on the fourteenth of Safar 944 H.

His arrival to the village turned to be a feast for its inhabitants, as
all without exception went out for his reception with extreme
hospitality.

Ibn al-Awdi says:

“His coming to the town resembled a descending mercy, or downpouring
rain. With his knowledge he revived souls deadened by ignorance
(*jahl*), and around him men of knowledge and virtue crowded, thronging
to him as if gates of knowledge that were closed began to open
witnessing the blossoming of his mart that was stagnant. The darkness of
illiteracy was illuminated by his bright lights, and the hearts of men
of knowledge were rejoiced and enlightened. He exposed and propagated
all the sciences he acquired through his tireless exertion, benefitting
people to a matchless extent, arranging the knowledge-seekers like men,
showing the right way for whoever sought it.”

Thus al-Shahid’s arrival to the small village led to the revival of a
cultural movement, activating the thought arena, with his being object
of attention of knowledge seekers who betook themselves to him from
different cities and countries, and the *‘ulama’* gathered around him.
So al-Shahid took upon his shoulders the responsibility entrusted to him
in preaching and guiding people, besides conducting the religious
affairs, building a new mosque, executing some public charitable
programs.

[^1]: Al-Shahid al-’Awwal is the scholar Muhammad ibn Makki al-\`Amili,
who was martyred in 786 H., after a fictitious unjust trial.
(Translator).

[^2]: The book is still occupying an outstanding position among the
curricula in the theological schools, though it was compiled several
centuries ago.

[^3]: It is among the well-known fiqhi books among the Shi’ah.

[^4]: He disappeared in 1978 in vague circumstances, and his fate is
still unknown. (Translator)

[^5]: He was murdered by the Tyrant of Iraq Saddam in 1980. (Translator)

[^6]: In reference to the holy verse: “And of His signs is this: He
created for you helpmeets from yourselves that ye might find rest in
them ...”(30:21).

[^7]: It is situated near to Ba\`labakk. It is called with this name due
to its nearness to the tomb of the Prophet Noah (A).

[^8]: The expenses of his travel to Egypt were subscribed by al- Hajj
Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Hilal. It is worth mentioning that his
benevolent man, about whom nothing is reported in history books, had
allotted for al-Shahid a special stipend during his learning period in
Damascus. Later on he was found slain with his wife and two sons, one of
whom was still fosterling in the cradle, in 952 H., through dubious
circumstances. (Translator)

[^9]: He was one of al-Shahid’s disciples, enjoying his company for a
long time during which he wrote a part of his biography.

[^10]: Excerpts from Ibn al-’Awdi’s treatise on al-Shahid’s biography.

[^11]: It is a reference to a vision he dreamt of in Egypt.

[^12]: Rawdat al-jannat, Vol. III, p. 363.


