Chapter 2: School for Generations
=================================

His Character
-------------

The human character rests upon three pivots.

First: The ethical pivot, whereat the individual’s behaviorism inside
the society and method of living can be incarnated through the ethical
capabilities he has.

Second: The rational pivot, through which man deals with nature and
thought, out of the rational faculties he possesses.

Third: The spiritual pivot, which organizes the association between man
and his Lord, that identifies, in turn, the nature of connection
according to the spiritual powers man owns.

Al-Shahid’s character was prominent in all these pivots, being
established on balanced pillars, rendering him a centre of attraction,
respect and veneration of people everywhere. This was due to the fact
that al-Shahid attained a high degree of *zuhd* (asceticism), knowledge
and credibility, that made some magnates believe in his reaching the
level of infallibility.

Following the Prophet’s Guide
-----------------------------

Al-Shahd al-Thani used to take the holy Messenger (S) as his pattern, in
his morals and conduct, the fact making his love to grow inside the pure
hearts.

During his meeting (*majlis*), he behaved among his companions and
disciples as if being one of them, seeing no superiority for himself
over them; doing everything himself without asking anyone to perform any
of the house services for him. He used to go shopping himself,
purchasing all the family necessities, setting out to the desert or
forest for cutting and gathering firewood, carrying it on his back. He
was doing all these practices while being at the climax of his
scholastic and social glory, disdaining from all forms of haughtiness,
and kinds of hypocrisy.

This is true, as al-Shahid (may Allah be pleased with him) got his
education at the school of Ahl al-Bayt (A) far from whom Allah removed
uncleanness and cleansed with a thorough cleansing.

Others’ Views about Him
-----------------------

Al-Shahid al-Thani’s character drew the attention of many great
dignitaries throughout history, deserving veneration of the *‘ulama’* of
all eras. In his regard, al-Shaykh al-Hurr al-’Amili, the author of
*Wasa’il al-Shi’ah*, has said:

“His attainment of *fiqh*, knowledge, honour, asceticism (*zuhd*),
worship, righteousness, scrutiny, holiness, sublime position, and all
other virtues and perfect attributes is so famous that needs no mention
... and his excellences and meritorious traits exceed numeration and
limitation beside leaving behind well-known compilations. He was a
*faqih* (jurisprudent), a *mujtahid*, a grammarian, a philosopher, a
*mutakallim*, having full command over all fields of knowledge. He was
the first among the Imamiyyah to compile a book on *dirayat al-hadith*
(acquaintance of traditions).”[^1]

In his book *Rawdat al-jannat*, al-Sayyid al-Khunsari says in his
regard:

“Till the present time “1260 H. “I have never met, among the renowned
*‘ulama’*, anyone reaching his sublime status, great position, high
rank, efficient comprehension, firm resolute, elegant instinct,
straightforward method, discipline in acquiring knowledge, multiplicity
of professors, delicate disposition, tender making, and objectivity and
perfection of his compilations and works. Rather he was characterized
with the morals prescribed by Allah “the Exalted “to the extent making
him occupy the second rank after the infallible (*ma’lum*).”[^2]

He also was referred to by al-’Allamah al-’Amin, the author of
*al-Ghadir*, when he said:

“He was the greatest of time graces, the most profound in knowledge, the
best of religion and sect, and shaykh of the reputable *fuqaha’*.
Further, he contributed to significant sciences including philosophy,
*kalam*, *fiqh*, *u’Iul* (principles), poetry, literature, natural
philosophy, and mathematics. His large-scale fame and reputation can
introduce him much better than all that we said, leaving no room for
uttering more words in his regard, as what can be said by that who
drawls with his rhetoric. Whatever is said fails short of realizing his
far-reaching privileges and wide-spread renown. Peace be upon him for
the services he contributed to his *ummah* (nation) by his generous
hands, and his propagation of beneficial sciences.”[^3]

The Martyr Murtaza Mutahhari,[^4] in his book *al-\`Ulum
al-’Islamiyyah*, extolled him by saying:

“Al-Shaykh Zayn al-Din, known as al-Shahid al-Thani, is counted among
the greatest Shi’ah *‘ulama’*, comprehending all fields of knowledge,
belonging to Jabal ‘Amil. His sixth grandfather (Salih), was a disciple
under al- \`Allamah al-Hilli. He was born in 911 H., and was martyred in
966 H. He made so many trips and travels, meeting a large number of
professors in Egypt, Damascus, Yijaz, Quds, Iraq, Istanbul, picking from
every farm a fruit. The number of his teachers among Ahl al-Sunnah
reached twelve, the fact making him an all-inclusive character, as
besides *fiqh* and *usul*, he had a good command over philosophy,
gnosticism, medicine and astronomy, enjoying the merits of *zuhd*
(asceticism) and *taqwa* (piety).

Recording his biography, some of his disciples state that he used to cut
firewood at night, to provide for his family, while practising the
profession of teaching in the morning. He spent a long time at
Ba’labakk, teaching the rules of the five schools of thought (Ja’fari,
Yanafi, Shafi\`i, Maliki, and Hanbali). Al-Shahid has left numerous
works, the foremost of which being *Sharh al-Lum\`ah* of al-Shahid
al-’Awwal, beside *Masalik al-’ifham* which was an exposition (*sharh*)
for al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli’s *al-Shara’i’i*. He learnt under al-Muhaqqiq
al-Karaki (before the latter’s coming to Iran), never visiting Iran. His
son was called Sahib al-Ma’alim, who was among the most renowned Shiah
*‘ulama’*.[^5]

### Ibn al-Awdi

His disciple and faithful follower, who accompanied him a long time, Ibn
al-Awdi, says about him:

“Of the perfection merits he attained the best and most excellent, being
clothed in the best of their sorts. He had a lofty self-brightened with
flanks and ribs, and splendid temper of which honour diffuses and
emanates. He was the Ummah’s shaykh and youth, the origin of virtues and
their end ... no moment of his life was spent but in acquiring virtues,
beside occupying himself all the time with that benefitting people day
and night.[^6]

Ibn al-\`Awdi, who was admiring his teacher to a great extent, never
forgot to demonstrate some of his features and complexion, saying:

“He was a square-built man, of straight stature, and at the last days of
his life he inclined toward fatness ... of a circular radiant face, a
lank hair nearer to fairness. He was of black eyes and brows,
white-faced, of huge arms and legs, with fingers like silver bars,
whoever looking at his face, hearing his sweet utterance would never
allow himself to depart him, seeing comfort in talking to him with
neglecting everything, ... all eyes be filled of his solemnity, with
hearts rejoicing at his splendour. By Allah, he is higher than all that
description, having praiseworthy attributes many more than those I
cited.”

He goes on to say that once upon an eve, he saw him leading his donkey,
that was burdened with firewood, toward his house, while getting up
early in the morning, betaking himself to teach at the mosque. His
daytime was spent in investigation, researching and reading, setting
out, after performing *maghrib* (evening) prayers in congregation, to
inspecting his vintage orchard on the outskirts of the town.

Ibn al-\`Awdi was so infatuated with al-Shahid’s character, that he was
used to keep his company wherever he travelled or resided, till the last
days of his life.

### His Teachers

Al-Shahid’s character was distinguished with versatility and manifold
talents, with making various travels and establishing links with many
professors that played an effective role in the formation of his
all-inclusiveness and profundity of his scholarly personality.

His keenness to seek and learn different sciences was like the curiosity
of a thirsty man desiring to drink water from serene fountains, the fact
providing him a good opportunity to be acquainted with his time culture,
going deeply into it within a very short period.

Making a thorough review over his works, that constituted an
encyclopedia, one comes to realize the extent of comprehensiveness and
profundity al-Shahid attained in most of the branches of knowledge known
during the era he lived.

Below are some of his teachers:

1. ‘Ali ibn Ahmad al-’Amili, known with the nickname \`Ibn al-Hajjah’,
who was his father and first teacher. Under him al-Shahid learnt Arabic
grammar (*nahw*) and a part of principles of literature, beside the book
*al-Nafi\` fi Mukhtaar al-Sharayi\`* and *al-Lum\`ah al-Dimashqiyyah*.

2. Al-Shaykh ‘Ali ibn \`Abd al-’Ali al-Maysi, under whom al-Shahid
learnt for eight years, reading to him *alShara’i\`* of al-Muhaqqiq
al-Hilli, *al-’Irshad* of al-\`Allamah al-Hilli and *al-Qawa’id* of
al-Shahid al-’Awwal, all being on *fiqh*. We have previously stated that
this man is the husband of al-Shahid’s aunt, who has married his
daughter to al-Shahid later on.

3. Al-Sayyid Yasan al-’A\`raji, under whom he studied *al-Qawa\`id* of
Ibn Maytham al-Bahrani on *kalam*, *alTahdhib* and *al-\`Umdah
al-jaliyyah* on *u’sul*, beside *alKafiyah* on *nahw* (grammar).

4. Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Makki al-Dimashqi, under whom al-Shahid
learnt *Sharh al-Mujaz al-Nafisi* and *Ghayat al-qa’Id fi ma\`rifat
al-fa’Id*, both being on medicine. Further he studied under him *Fu’sul
al Farghani* on cosmography and astronomy, beside some parts of *Hikmat
al-’Ishraq* of al-Suhrawardi, *Sahih alBukhari* and *Sahih Muslim*, all
being on *hadith*.

Beside the above-mentioned books, al-Shahid learnt other ones under
Egyptian professors, being the following:

5. Shahab al-Din Ahmad al-Ramli, under whom he learnt *al-Minhaj
al-Nawawi* on *fiqh*, *Mukhtaar al-’u’Iul* of Ibn Yajib, *Sharh \`Aqa’id
al-\`A’Iudi* and *Sharh alTalkhi’I* on rhetoric, beside *Sharh
al-Ta’Irif al-\`Arabi* and *Sharh Jam\` al-jawami’* on *u’Iul al-fiqh*,
with *Taw’ih Ibn Hisham* on grammar (*nahw*) and other books.

6. Mulla Husayn al-Jurjani, under whom al-Shahid learnt the books *Sharh
al-Tajrid* of Mulla ‘Ali al Qushachi, *Sharh al-’Ashkal* on geometry and
*Sharh al Jughmini* of Qa’Ii Zadah al-Rumi.

7. Shahab al-Din ibn al-Najjar al-Yanbali, under whom al-Shahid learnt
*Sharh al-Shafiyah* of al-Jarburdi, and *Sharh al-Khazrajiyyah* on
prosody.

8. Na’sir al-Din al-Malaqani, under whom he learnt *Tafsir al-Baydawi*.

9. Na’sir al-Din al-Hablawi,under whom he studied science of reciting
the Qur’an, reading to him a treatise authored by him.

10. Muhammad ibn Abi al-Nahhas, under whom he studied *al-ShaÏibiyyah*
on Qur’an recitation too.

11. \`Abd al-Yamid al-Sanhuri.

12. Muhammad ibn \`Abd al-Qadir al-Shafi\`i, under whom al-Shahid learnt
books on mathematics, and the book *al-Yasaminah* on algebra and
comparison.

### His Disciples

A large number of knowledge-seekers have learnt under al-Shahid, some of
whom turning to be reputable *‘ulama’*. Al-Shahid was so concerned to
convey and communicate all the sciences he learnt, to the largest
possible number of knowledgeand thought-seekers, deeply believing in the
fact that *zakat* (purity) of knowledge (\`*ilm*) lies in propagating
and disseminating it.

The most notable of his disciples are the following:

1. Al-Sayyid Nur al-Din ‘Ali al-’Amili al-Jub\`i, the author of *Madarik
al-’ahkam*, which was widely known. He was the most intimate of his
disciples, being his son-inlaw later on.

2. The investigating scholar al-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Husayni al-’Amili
al-Jizzini, known as al-Sa’igh, who is the author of the books *Sharh
al-Sharayi\`* and *Sharh al-’Irshad* of al-\`Allamah al-Hilli (i.e.
*al-’Irshad*).

3. Al-Shaykh Husayn ibn Abd al-Samad al-Harithi al‘Amili, who was among
the eminent *fuqaha’*, being the father of the well-known al-Shaykh
al-Baha’i. He was the first among al-Shahid’s disciples to accompany him
in his travel to Egypt, Istanbul and then in his pilgrimage to the holy
shrines in Iraq. After staying there for a long time, he visited Iran,
where he got a license from al-Shahid al-Thani.[^7] His son was
considered the most sagacious star in the sphere of the Islamic thought
during the eleventh Hijrah century.[^8]

4. Muhammad ibn Husayn, known with the nickname al-Hurr al-’Amili
al-Mashghari, who was the great grandfather of the author of *Wasa’il
al-Shi\`ah*.

5. Finally, not the last, Baha’ al-Din Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-’Awdi,
known as Ibn al-\`Awdi, who was the most outstanding of his disciples
and followers. He enjoyed al-Shahid’s company for about seventeen years,
from 945 up to 962 H., when he travelled toward Khurasan, never meeting
his teacher afterwards.

### School for Generations

Those to whom we referred were only the most eminent of his genius
disciples, but has al-Shahid’s school come to an end with his passing
away from the world?

Never, as his books and works are still extant to the present day, with
knowledge-seekers keeping on studying his valuable works, and his books
being printed and published throughout days and with passage of years
and differing of ages.

His books, like *Sharh al-Lum\`ah*, *al-Masalik*, *Irshad al-’adhhan*,
*Raw’ al-jinan* and *munyat al-Murid* are still constituting fountains
gushing science, knowledge and thought. Besides, *Sharh al-Lum\`ah* is
still an essential curriculum in the theological schools, though it was
compiled four centuries ago.

Hence, isn’t it possible to claim that al-Shahid is still giving his
lectures and lessons, with his school keeping on producing generations
after others of *fuqaha’* and *‘ulama’*?

His Works
---------

Verily, al-Shahid’s character makes men stand in awe while studying it,
as he managed to leave behind a huge heritage in thought and sciences,
despite his relatively short age and hard bitter circumstance he
experienced.

He used to labour to provide for his family, receiving people warmly,
endeavouring to meet their needs and demands, travelling from a country
to another, spending a part of his life under persecution and
surveillance. Despite all that, he has compiled about seventy books on
different fields of knowledge.

This phenomenon has excited the astonishment of his disciple Ibn
al-\`Awdi, striking him with wonder, while witnessing the bulkiness of
problems inflicting al-Shahid, and people’s frequenting to him and
welcoming him with that extreme veneration. He would ask himself: how
could al-Shahid leave for us all these great works, while he was
supposed to be completely occupied by all these matters.

In front of this manifestation, it is inevitable for everyone but to
admit and recognize al-Shahid’s genius, rendering him to be among the
everlasting history ingenious men.

Following is a survey for his works and treatises:

1. The licenses he granted to his disciples: The licenses were regarded
at that time as graduate certificates. Al-Shahid has granted his
disciples different licenses, some being epitomized, and others being
protracted like the one he granted to al-Shaykh Husayn \`Abd al-Samad,
the father of al-Shaykh al-Baha’i, whose date goes back to the year 941
H[^9].

2. *Asrar al-Alat*.[^10]

3. *Al-Bidayah fi al-dirayah*: Which deals with *\`ilm alhadith*. He
finished its compilation on the night of Tuesday the fifth of Dhu
al-Yijjah 959 H. It was published, with its exposition (*sharh*), at
Tehran in 1310 H.

4. *Al-Bidayah fi sabil al-hidayah*: It deals with the Islamic
doctrines.

5. *Tamhid al-qawa\`id al-’u’Iuliyyah wa al-\`arabiyyah*:[^11] It
contains a hundred rules about *u’Iul alfiqh*. It was printed in Tehran
in 1272 H.

6. *Al-Tanbihat al-\`alaniyyah fi wa”a’if al-Alat alqalbiyyah*: It deals
with obligatory and supererogatory prayers and secrets of prayer.
Al-Shaykh Aqa Buzurg alTehrani reports that al-Shahid completed
authoring the book on Saturday the ninth of Dhu al-Yijjah (Day of
\`Arafat) 951 H. It was published several times, one of which being in
1305 H.[^12]

7. *Tahqiq al-’iman wa al-’Islam*.

8. *Jawab al-masa’il al-Khurasaniyyah*.

9. *Jawab al-masa’il al-Shamiyyah*.

10. *Jawab al-masa’il al-Najafiyyah*.

11. *Jawab al-masa’il al-Hindiyyah*.

Hence we come to know that al-Shahid used to give replies to the
letters, reaching him from all over the Islamic world, giving, solutions
to the different questions they put forth, about many subjects, like
*fiqh*, *kalam*, literature and philosophy and other fields. His answers
were printed in leaflets meeting the aspired purpose. Seemingly many of
them have been lost.

12. *Jawahir al-kalimat fi ‘iyagh al-\`uqud wa al’qa\`at*.

Al-Shaykh Aqa Buzurg al-Tehrani reports that he found a copy of the book
in the library of al-Sayyid Muhammad ‘Ali Hibat al-Din. It was in the
form of a manuscript, dated 996 H., that was inscribed by Maq’Iud \`Ali,
the son of Shah Muhammad al-Damghani, but without holding the book’s
title[^13] (*Jawahir al-kalimat*).

13. *Aashiyat al-’Irshad*.

14. *Aashiyat Tamhid al-qawa\`id*.

15. *Aashiyat Fatwa Khilafiyyat al-Sharayi\`*.

16. *Aashiyat al-Qawa\`id*.

17. *Aashiyat Mukhtaar al-Nafi\`*.

18. *Aashiyah \`ala \`Uqud al-’Irshad*.

19. *Risalat adab al-Jumu\`ah*: A treatise dealing with the
recommendable deeds on Fridays.

20. *Risalah fi tahrim Talaq al-ha’i’dh* (A Treatise on forbiddance of
divorcing the menstruant).

21. *Risalah fi tayaqqun al-Taharah wa al-hadath* (being sure of purity
and any act invalidating the ablution).

22. *Risalah fi Alat al-Jumu\`ah*. A booklet dealing with the Friday
prayer. Al-Shahid was believing in the obligation of performing Friday
prayer in person.

23. *Risalah fi al-bahth \`an Alat al-Jumu\`ah*.

24. *Risalah fi Talaq al-gha’ib* (about divorce of the absentee).

25. *Risalah fi man ahdatha fi athna’ ghusl al-janabah*.

26. *Risalah fi hukm al-muqimin fi al-’asfar*.

27. *Risalah fi niyyat al-hajj wa al-\`umrah* (pilgrimage).

28. *Risalah fi da\`wa al-’ijma\`* (unanimity).

29. *Risalah fi al-wilayah* and that prayer is never accepted without
it. Al-Shahid finished its compilation on the fifth of Safar 950 H.[^14]

30. *Risalah fi najasat al-bi’r bi al-mulaqat wa \`adamiha* (about
impurity of the well).

31. *Risalah fi ahkam al-hibwah* (rulings of gift).

32. *Risalah fi mirath al-Jumu\`ah* (Friday inheritance).

33. *Risalah fi jawab thalath masa’il* (replies for three questions).

34. *Risalah fi \`adam jawaz taqlid al-mayyit* (impermissibility of
imitating the dead [*mujtahid*]).

35. *Risalah fi al-’ijtihad*.

36. *Risalah fi \`ashrat mabahith* (ten issues) formed within ten
sciences.

37. *Risalah fi hadith* “the world is the farm for the Hereafter”.

38. *Risalah fi tahqiq al-niyyah* (making the intention).

39. *Risalat fatwa al-khilaf min al-Lum’ah* (verdict of dispute from
al-Lum\`ah).

40. *Risalah fi tahqiq al-’ijtima\`*.

41. *Risalah fi tafsir* Allah’s saying: “And the foremost in the face,
the foremost in the face.”

42. *Risalat masa’il IsÏanbuliyyah fi al-\`wajibat al-‘ayniyyah* (about
obligatory acts).

43. *Risalah fi sharh al-Basmalah*.

44. *Risalah fi dhikr ahwalih*: It was a booklet in the form of memoir,
covering a part of his life since he was a boy learning under his
father, till his travel to Sham and Egypt, beside his pilgrimage to the
Holy Sanctuary of Allah (Mecca). It also covered his visit to the holy
shrines in Iraq, with his journey to Turkey, and lastly his settlement
in Ba\`labakk, with shouldering the religious leadership.

45. *Risalah fi tahqiq al-\`adalah* (justice).

46. *Su’alat al-Shaykh Ahmad wa ajwibatuha*.

47. *Su’alat al-Shaykh Zayn al-Din wa ajwibatuha*.

48. *Al-Rawah al-bahiyyah fi sharh al-Lum\`ah al Dimashqiyyah*, which is
considered his most ever well-known work, that will be exposed later on.

49. *Raw’I al-jinan fi sharh Irshad al-’adhhan*: May be it was the first
book of al-Shahid about the inferential *fiqh*, that he compiled in 948
H. when being in the age of

37 years. Ibn Al-’Awdi reports that al-Shahid has never let anyone be
acquainted with it. It is reported that al-Shahid has not managed to
complete it, and only one volume of it was published, dealing with
*taharah* (purity) and prayer. It was published in Tehran, in 1307 H.
with the book *Munyat al-murid*.[^15]

50. *Sharh Irshad al-’adhhan*.

51. *Sharh al-’Alfiyyah* of al-Shahid al-’Awwal, which is an abridged
exposition.

52. *Sharh al-’Alfiyyah*, a medium exposition.

53. *Sharh al-’Alfiyyah*, a detailed one.

*Al-’Alfiyyah* included one thousand issues about the obligations of
prayer. The author of *al-Dhari\`ah* has enumerated 31 commentaries on
*al-’Alfiyyah*, the foremost of which being the one written by the
author of *al-Ma\`alim*, who was the son of al-Shahid al-Thani, and was
dead in 1011 H. After it in importance comes the commentary of Husayn
ibn \`Abd al-Samad, the father of al-Shaykh alBaha’i, who passed away in
984 H.[^16]

54. *Sharh al-Nafliyyah* of al-Shahid al-’Awwal, dealing with
recommendable acts of prayer.

55. *Sharh al-Dirayah*, which was completed by al Shahid on the fifth of
Dhu al-Yijjah 959 H.

56. *Sharh al-Man”umah*, that was authored by al Shahid himself
(*al-Man”umah*), and was on *\`ilm al-nahw* (grammar).

57. *Ghunyat al-qa’Iidin fi i’ilahat* *al-muhaddithin*.

58. *Fatawa al-Sharayi\`*.

59. *Fatawa al-’Irshad*.

60. *Fatawa al-Mukhtaar*.

61. *Fawa’d KhulaAt al-rijal*.

62. *Kashf al-ribah min ahkam al-ghibah*: It deals with the issue of
backbiting, the narrations about its forbiddance, and how to avoid it.
Its compilation was finished on the thirteenth of Safar 949 H., was
published several times in Najaf and Iran, and was translated then into
Persian.

63. *Kitab al-rijal wa al-nasab*.

64. *Kitab tahqiq al-’iman wa al-’Islam*.

65. *Kitab al-’ijazat*.

66. *Mansak al-hajj al-Aghir*.

67. *Mansak al-hajj al-kabir*.

68. *Manar al-qa’Iidin fi asrar ma\`alim ahkam al-Din*: It is an ethical
book, to which al-Shahid has referred in his book *Munyat
al-murid*.[^17]

69. *Musakkin al-fu’ad \`inda faqd al-’ahibbah wa al-‘awlad*: Which we
shall discuss later on.

70. *Mubarrid al-’akbad fi mukhtaar Musakkin al fu’ad*: Which is an
abridgement for the previous book.

71.*Mukhtaar al-Khulaah*.

72. *Man”umah fi al-nahw*.

73. *Al-Maqa’id al-\`illiyyah fi Sharh al-’Alfiyyah*: it is the big
commentary on al-Shahid al-’Awwal’s *al‘Alfiyyah*. He completed its
compilation on the nineteenth of Rabi\` al-’Awwal 950 H.

74. *Al-Masalik fi sharh Shara’i\` al-’Islam*: It is counted among the
valuable works on the inferential *fiqh*. In it al Shahid has exposed
and commented on the book *Shara’i’ al-’Islam* of al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli
(d. 676 H.). The book has drawn the attention of Shi’ah *fuqaha’*,
throughout all ages, with al-Shahid’s *fiqhi* opinions being an
authority (*hujjah*) in the Imami *fiqh*.

It is noteworthy that there were other commentaries on the book
*al-Sharayi\`*, the most important of which are: *Jawahir al-kalam* by
the great Shi’ah *faqih* al-Shaykh Muhammad Husayn al-Najafi, who was
known later with the name Sahib al-Jawahir (d. 1266 H). The book
consists of 43 volumes, and was published several times.

### Musakkin al-Fu’ad \`inda Faqd al-’Ahibbah wa al-’Awlad

The reason behind al-Shahid’s compilation of this book lies in the fact
that al-Shahid was bereaved with the death of his young children, that
no one was left except alShaykh Yasan the author of *al-Ma\`alim*. So he
compiled an abridged treatise under the above title, stating in it how
man should face life hardships and tribulations with forbearance and
consolation, particularly during bereavement of the dearest relations
and children. Then he abbreviated all this in a book under the title
*Mubarrid al-’akbad fi mukhtaar Musakkin al-fu’ad*, which was published
several times in Iran.

Its compilation was finished by al-Shahid on the first of Rajab 954 H.,
and it was translated into Persian many times, the foremost of which
being the one done by alSayyid Muhammad Baqir Hujjati.

### Sharh al-Lum\`ah

The book *al-Rawah al-bahiyyah fi sharh al-Lum\`ah al-Dimashqiyyah*,
actually occupies the foremost position among the *fiqhi* books till the
present time. It is still regarded the basic curriculum in the
theological schools, in the field of the inferential *fiqh*, of which
every knowledge-seeker can never do without.

As explicitly indicated from the title, the book is a commentary written
by al-Shahid al-Thani on *al-Lum\`ah al-Dimashqiyyah* of al-Shahid
al-’Awwal Muhammad ibn Makki[^18] (may Allah be pleased with him). This
book is considered the most outstanding work ever compiled by al-Shahid
al-Thani, distinguished with accuracy, scrutiny and comprehensiveness.

It has procured the attention of the Imami *fuqaha’*, throughout
different eras and times. Contrary to the common belief, the book was
not al-Shahid’s last work. The origin of this belief may be sought in
the fact reported by al-Shaykh al-Hurr al-\`Amili In his book *Amal
al-’amil*, when citing the event of al-Shahid’s arrest, that was
executed “according to him “in a vine orchard in one of Damascus
suburbs, while al-Shahid was busy compiling his book *al-RawAh
al-bahiyyah*.

But in fact, the book was authored nine years before his martyrdom, as
indicated by al-Shahid himself when stating that the date of finishing
its compilation was the night of Saturday 21st of Jumada al-’ la 957 H.

The *fuqaha’* were interested in the book *al-Rawah albahiyyah* to a
great extent that many expositions and commentaries were written on it,
numbering about a hundred, the fact indicating its extreme importance
and scientific value.[^19]

### Munyat al-Murid

The full title of the book is *Munyat al-murid fi adab al-mufid wa
al-mustafid*. It is regarded an ethical treatise containing precepts
recommending the meritorious morals to be assiduously maintained by the
scholar and knowledge-seeker, beside the rules to be followed by the
judge and *mufti* when issuing a judgement and giving a verdict
(*fatwa*). The book is considered a good turning point on the part of
al-Shahid, in respect of the importance of the ethical aspect in the
life of the *‘ulama’* and *fuqaha’*, and its constructive social role.

About it a scholar said:

“... Al-Shahid al-Thani has derived his ethical precepts from the holy
Qur’an, Prophetic Sunnah and traditions of Ahl al-Bayt Imams (peace be
upon them), to establish sound and proper links between the scholar and
his disciple and with common people, beside the relation between the
disciple and his teacher, and even the duties and conduct of each of
them in the class during learning.”[^20]

Hence *Munyat al-murid* is truly considered a pioneer book in this
respect.

The book consists of an introduction, four chapters and a conclusion.
The introduction deals with the importance of knowledge and
knowledge-seeking, in the light of the Qur’an and traditions of the
*Mu\`umun* (Infallibles). The first chapter elucides the functions of
both the disciple and teacher, while the second chapter deals with the
good manners of the *mufti* (one giving *fatwa*), and *mustafti* (one
seeking *fatwa* or ruling) and the conditions of issuing a *fatwa*
(*futya*). The third chapter refers to the etiquette of debate and
methods of dialogue and conversation, whereas the fourth chapter is
designated to exposing the style of writing and compilation. At last
comes the conclusion that elucidates the degrees of the legal sciences,
and their preliminaries, supported by counsels and aphorisms that are of
use for the seekers of religious sciences.

The book’s significance lies in its determining the earmarks of the path
... the path of theological learning, and its role in fixing the
objectives, being in itself an extremely vital matter.

Therefore the theological institute appeals to the knowledge-seekers and
professors, asking them to study this book and benefit from the
knowledge contained in it.[^21]

The book was translated into Persian, for the first time in 1369 H., by
al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sa\`idi al-Khurasani, and was published in
Tehran in 1372 H.

Again it was translated in 1376 H. by al-Sayyid Mahmud al-Dehsurkhi
al-’IsIfahani, under the title *Siraj al-mubtadi’in*.

Recently it was translated into Persian in 1400 H., by Dr. Muhammad
Baqir Yujjati, which is the best translation. It was reprinted sixteen
times, with the translator’s annexing a detailed survey for the
biography of the book’s author: al-Shahid al-Thani.

#### Excerpts from Munyat al-Murid

Following are some excerpts from the book that shed light upon the way
of thinking of the most eminent man of knowledge and human thought.

“That he never disdains from learning and benefitting from that who is
lower, in position or age or fame or religion or any other knowledge.
But he all the time benefits from whoever be of benefit, never being
kept by any feeling of superiority due to high post or fame, to get
benefit from that unknown to him so as to lose his commerce and his
knowledge be decreased, the fact entailing Allah’s abhorrence. It is
according to the tradition reported from the Prophet (Allah’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny): Wisdom is the believer’s
sought request, wherever finding it being its deservant better than any
other one.”

“That the knowledge-seeker should never attend the class but only when
being ritually pure from any *hadath* (anything invalidating ablution),
and *khabath* (scum or major mischief), cleansed and scented in respect
of body and clothes, wearing the best of his garments, intending thus to
glorify knowledge...”

In another chapter al-Shahid recommends every knowledge-seeker by
saying:

“He has to evade the company of that who keeps his attention away from
his request, as leaving it being the most necessary act the
knowledge-seeker should do ... and the worst blight of company being
loss of life in vain...”

“That he has to treat his shaykh (teacher) as being his real father and
spiritual guardian, who is greater than the corporeal father,
exaggerating in venerating him in view of observing the right of his
parents, and to fulfil and pay the right of bringing him up. Alexander
has once asked a boy: What is the matter with you that you dignify your
teacher in a way more highly than your father? He replied:

Because the teacher is verily the means for my next life, while my
father being the means for my mortal life.”

“It is incumbent upon anyone of them attaining any field of knowledge
and sort of perfection, to guide his companions and encourage them to
hold meetings, be engaged in learning and seeking knowledge, making his
sustenance easy for them, telling them about all the benefits he got,
rules and novelties in respect of advice and study. Through guiding and
leading them to the right path, Allah will verily bless and make his
knowledge abundant, illuminating his heart, with being assured of all
issues of having plentiful reward of the Almighty Allah, and His kind
patronage and grace.

But whenever being miser and depriving them from anything
aforementioned, the opposite shall be true, with his knowledge being not
confirmed ... and if confirmed it will be barren, unproductive, and with
no blessing showered from Allah. This case occurred for a number of the
predecessors and those who succeeded them.

He also never be jealous of any of them, or despises him or prides
himself on him, never boasting in his ability of comprehension and
excelling the others, since he used to be like any other one but then
was graced by the Al-mighty Allah. So he has to thank Allah for this
favour, begging Him to shower upon him much more, through persisting on
being grateful. Being so submissive, attaining full eligibility, with
his virtue being so widely known, he would verily rise to a higher rank,
and Allah is the warrantor of success.”

The book proceeds in this manner in laying down a noble ethical course,
indicating a pure spirit and a sublime self-towering up in the spheres
of noble-heartedness, till joining the caravan of immortal martyrs.

[^1]: Amal al-’amil, Vol. I, p. 85.

[^2]: Rawdat al-jannat, pp. 287-288.

[^3]: Shuhada’ al-fadhilah, p. 132.

[^4]: He is one of the personalities of the Islamic Revolution in Iran,
and was assassinated after its victory. (Translator)

[^5]: Al-\`Ulum al-’Islamiyyah, p. 302.

[^6]: Risalat Ibn al-\`Awdi (a manuscript).

[^7]: ‘Ali al-Dawwani: Mafakhir al-’Islam, Vol. IV, p. 475.

[^8]: Kashkul al-Shaykh al-Baha’i (the introduction).

[^9]: Al-Dhari\`ah, Vol. 1, p. 193.

[^10]: Ibid., Vol. III, p. 58.

[^11]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 433.

[^12]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 452.

[^13]: Ibid., Vol. V, p. 278.

[^14]: Ibid., Vol. V, p. 278.

[^15]: Ibid., Vol. SI, p. 275.

[^16]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 296.

[^17]: Muqaddimat Munyat al-murid, by Ridal-Mukhtari.

[^18]: He was martyred in Damascus in 786 H.

[^19]: Al-Dharish, Vol. VI, pp. 90, 98, Vol. SIII, pp. 292, 296.

[^20]: Muhammad Baqir Hujjati: Adab al-ta’ilim wa al-ta’aum fi
al-’Islam.

[^21]: Al-Aawzah journal, issue No. 29 “1408 H.


