The Rules of Conduct For Judgement Between the People of the Book
=================================================================

The two litigants may be Muslims, or Jews or Christians, or of
differing religions. If the two litigants are Muslims, the judge will
rule between them only in accordance with Islam. If they are Jews or
Christians, then the judge has the choice of ruling between them
according to Islam, or referring them to special courts of their
religious communities so that they may be judged according to them.
Allah, the Exalted, says:

"If they come to thee, judge thou between them, or turn away from them;
if thou turnest away from them, they will hurt thee nothing; and if thou
judgest, judge justly between them; God loves the just." (5:42)

This noble verse expressly suggests the choice between the two
alternatives, and it is not contradicted by the literal meaning (zahir)
of another text stipulating judgement between them in accordance with
Islam, because, firstly, an express text (nass) enjoys precedence over
the literal meaning (zahir) and also because the choice between the two
alternatives is also in accordance with Islam. Thus there is no room for
thinking that this verse is abrogated by the following one:

"So judge between them according to what God has sent down, and do not
follow their caprices." (5:48)

There is no contradiction between the nass allowing choice and the
zahir specifying judgement in accordance with Islam. In addition, the
choice has also been revealed by Allah, the Exalted. As regards the
elaboration of the opinion which says that when the two litigants are
from different religious communities, it is permissible for a Muslim
judge to rule according to their laws, Imam \`Ali, peace be upon him,
"Were the cushion folded for me, I would judge between the people of the
Injil in accordance with their Injil...". Details on the topic can be
found in legal works.

Some of our Imami legists [^3] have supported the necessity of ruling
between the two parties in accordance with Islam, since referring them
back to one of the religious communities would cause fitnah. Our
teacher, al-'Imam al-Khumayni, has ruled that if a dhimmi man committed
adultery with a dhimmi woman, or if one dhimmi committed sodomy with
another, the Islamic punishment (hadd) should be enforced. [^4]

**Notes**

[^3]. Al-Suyuti, Kanz al-\`irfan, ii, 378.

[^4]. Tahrir al-Wasi'lah, ii, 464, 470, 506, 507.


**The Rules of Conduct for the Witness**

Judgement has a particular basis on which the judge relies when giving
his judgement. If it is strong, then the ruling is correct and in
keeping with the facts, not otherwise. Like the judge, the witness must
be knowledgeable and just. The difference between the two is that the
judge must have a knowledge of the Divine law, while the witness must
have knowledge of the matter that has been witnessed.

He must comply with two points: firstly, he must have been present at
the event in order to have witnessed it himself; secondly, he must be
present in the court to report it (2:282) without alteration or evasion.
He must not avoid, conceal, or alter testimony, because "the one who
conceals it, his heart is sinful; and God has knowledge of the things
you do" (2:28). Allah, the Exalted, says:

"O believers, be you securers of justice, witnesses for God, even
though it be against yourselves, or your parents and kinsmen, whether
the man be rich or poor; God stands closer to you than either of the
two. Then follow not desire, so as to swerve; for if you twist or turn,
God is aware of the things you do." (4:135)

The conclusion of this noble verse is that no personal, communal or
economic factor should interfere with the testimony, not even the love
of oneself or of parents or kinsmen. Similarly, economic factors, such
as prosperity or poverty, should not influence the mode of giving
witness or abstention from it. That is because Allah, the Exalted, is
aware of the actions of His servants and witness to them, whatever they
may be. Whoever knows that protects himself against lapses and
humiliation.

The verse also shows that kinship is no hindrance to acceptance of the
evidence of one of the relatives, even if it is the child's against the
father. The details concerning the verse can be found in the books on
law.


**The Rules of Conduct for the Litigants**

It has been demonstrated that the criterion for judiciary is nothing
other than Divine revelation, and that the sole authority in settling
disputes is someone learned in the revelation, who believes in it and
possesses the attributes that have made him fit for adjudication. It is
essential that he should be referred to in a dispute, and turning away
from him to refer to someone else is turning from truth to falsehood. It
is \`far error' as God, the Exalted, has said:

"Hast thou not regarded those who assert that they believe in what has
been sent down to thee and what was sent down before thee, desiring to
take their disputes to tyrants (taghut), yet they had been commanded to
disbelieve in them? But Satan desires to lead them astray into far
error" (4:60).

It is not for a believer to seek the judgement of one in whom he has
been commanded to disbelieve. It is also not for an oppressor (taghut)
to appoint himself to judgement. Man will not attain the degree of faith
until he makes the Messenger of Allah the judge, choosing him as the
arbiter, as Allah, the Exalted, had chosen him, referring to him in his
disputes with others, and then not finding any objection or reservation
in himself against what the Messenger has ruled, whether it is for or
against him, since a believer is one who submits his affair to Allah,
the Exalted:

"But no, by thy Lord! they will not believe till they make thee the
judge regarding the disagreement between them and then find in
themselves no impediment touching thy verdict, but surrender in full
submission." (4:65)

The noble verse clearly explains the duty of the litigants in a
disagreement or dispute, and urges taking recourse to the Messenger and
no other person. It also urges complete submission to his judgement when
an appeal is made to him--may blessings of Allah on him and his
family-for faith is the tranquillity and peace of the soul, and is not
achieved except through the submission of both the heart and the action
of bodily members.

The Noble Qur'an has described as wrongdoing (zulm) the act of one who
does not seek the judgement of God and His Messenger except if he is in
the right. Similarly it has described as \`success' the act of one who
complies and is obedient when called to Allah and his Messenger so that
judgement may be made between him and his adversary. The Almighty
says:

"When they are called to God and His Messenger that he may judge
between them, lo, a party of them swerve aside; but if they are in the
right, they will come to him submissively. What, is there sickness in
their hearts, or are they in doubt, or do they fear that God may be
unjust towards them and His Messenger? Nay, but those-they are the
wrongdoers." (24:48-50)

This indicates that turning away from the judgement of the Messenger
only arises from wrongdoing. God, the Exalted, also says:

"All that the believers say, when they are called to God and His
Messenger, that he may judge between them, is that they say, \`We hear,
and we obey'; those-they are the successful." (24:51)

This indicates that success requires submission to Allah and His
Messenger. It means that the believer pledges allegiance to Allah and
His Messenger, and the requirement of allegiance is that he \`sell'
himself and all the wealth and family he possesses to Allah and His
Messenger. In this way, he neither owns his ownself nor anything
attached to him, since he has sold it all to Allah and His Messenger,
and it is not for him to act independently concerning himself or what
appertains to him, except with the approval of Allah and His Messenger.
Therefore Allah, the Exalted, has said:

"It is not for any believer, man or woman, when God and His Messenger
have decreed a matter, to have the choice in the affair. Whooever
disobeys God and His Messenger has gone astray into manifest error."
(33:36)

Just as the believer does not have a choice in seeking the judgement of
Allah and His Messenger, since it is incumbent on him, similarly, he
does not have a choice in his affair after their judgement has been
passed against him. Not submitting to their judgement is disobedience
and straying from the right path. In addition, the Messenger was sent
with the Book to judge between the people with the truth, and this
judgement was made obligatory on him, may benediction of God be on him
and his family. Thus, referring to him and accepting his judgement
became incumbent.

If it were not so, then, on the one hand, judging between the people
with the truth would not have been made obligatory on the Messenger, and
on the other hand, it would not have been incumbent on the people to
seek the judgement of the Messenger and abstain from determining it
among themselves.

**Note:**

Firstly, it should be noted that taking recourse to the taghut is
disobedience, and taking wealth by virtue of his judgement is unlawful
gain, even though what has been taken may be lawful. This is if the
disputed wealth consists of a particular property or article. As regards
debt, it is doubtful whether the same rule applies to it. Details of
this should be sought from books on jurisprudence.

Secondly, adjudication is only for the settlement of disputes, and has
no effect in altering facts, whatever they may be. When someone makes a
false claim and supports it with a false witness, or denies a truth and
takes a false oath, and that is hidden from the judge, the latter will
rule according to the false evidence or oath and contrary to the facts.
It is incumbent on everyone who has knowledge of it to be on his guard
against it, for it is a piece of fire. The details of it are also in
legal books.


