Publishers Preface
==================

The great scholar and brilliant Islamic thinker, as-Sayyid Muhammad
Baqir as-Sadr, one of the great scholars and jurists of Imami (Twelvers)
Shi'ism, in the noble city of an-Najaf al-Ashraf, Iraq, is too well
known through his works and originality of thought for us to introduce
him to readers in the Muslim world.

He has written, on Islamic philosophy, *Falsafatuna* (Our Philosophy), a
comparative study of Islamic philosophy and other schools of philosophy
in the West, both ancient and modern, with special attention to the
philosophy of dialectical materialism.

He has also written *al-Usus al-mantiqiyyah li'l-istiqra'* (The Logical
Foundations of Induction), a study with a new approach to the inductive
argument aiming at the discovery of the common logical foundation of
scientific investigation and faith in God. The present book is based on
that study ,and contains a good summary of it.

In the field of Islamic economics, the author has written *Iqtisaduna*
(Our Economics), in two volumes. The first volume is dedicated to a
comparative and objective study of contemporary schools of economics,
especially Marxist economics. The second volume is an attempt to
discover a basis for an, Islamic economics, or an Islamic school of
economics. This study is thorough and broad in its scope.

The author has also written in this field *al Bank al-la rabawi fi*
*al-Islam* (Towards a Non-usurious Islamic Bank), which is a
dissertation presenting an Islamic alternative to usury. Usury, which is
the foundation of the banking and exchange business in modern capitalist
society, is strictly prohibited by Islam. The author has also written a
detailed study of all aspects of banking in the light of Islamic
jurisprudence *(fiqh) .* On a somewhat related subject, he has also
written a book entitled *al-Insan al-mu'asir wa'l-mushkilah
al-ijtima'iyyah* (Contemporary Man and Social Problems).

In the field of historical studies, the author has written *Fadak fi*
*'t-tarikh* (Fadak in History), which is a study of the political
history of Islam during the first century of the *hijrah.* The starting
point of this study is the investigation of Fadak, a region of the
Hijaz, near Medina, the Illuminated, which the Prophet gave as an
inheritance to his daughter, the pure and righteous Fatimah az-Zahra
(the Radiant); peace be upon her.

The author examines in this book the opinion adopted by the authorities
which came to power after the death of the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his household, concerning this inheritance. It is a study of the
.point of view of the rulers and their attitudes towards this problem,
as well as the point of view of those who were wronged and whose
rightful claim to their usurped property was ignored; these are the
people of the household of the Prophet, peace be upon them all.

The Sayyid has composed another work on *wilayah* (authority of the
Imams), which relates on the one hand to the study of Fadak, and on the
other to the fundamentals of Islamic faith. In this work, he attempts to
answer two questions: How did Shi\`ism originate and how did the Shi\`ah
community arise? This book was originally written as an introduction to
another work entitled *Tarikh al Imamiyyah wa aslalhim min ash-Shi'ah*
(A History of the Imam's and their Shi \`ah Predecessors), written by
Dr. \`Abdullah Fayyad.

The Sayyid's introduction was later extracted from \`the book and
published separately in several editions. He has written several other
works on the fundamental of Islamic belief, other than the work under
consideration, including a book on the al Mahdi, and the present study.
Similarly, in usul *al fiqh* (Fundamentals of Jurisprudence), which is
the author's primary field of specialisation, he has written a number of
works. All his books appeared in closely successive editions, a fact
which proves much more than can be expressed here concerning the eminent
place which the author occupies as a scholar.

Among the many works of the author is the present study, small in its
size, but large in its significance and scope, a book of great benefit.
This treatise was first written as an introduction to the author's book
*al-Fatawa al-wadihah* (Clear Legal Opinions) and published with it.
Later, however, it was detatched and published separately.

When we decided to bring out this profound study in an English
translation, we saw fit to let the book itself and our brief
introduction to some of the author's works suffice to introduce him to
English readers. God, praised be He, has provided Dr. Mahmoud Ayoub, a
professor at the University of Toronto, Canada, to undertake the task of
translation.

We pray God, praised and exalted be He, to make of this book a source of
blessing and benefit. We pray also that he prolong the life of His
Eminence, the author, and grant success to the translator. We pray that
God accept our endeavour as a pure offering for the sake of his noble
face and that He set our steps firmly on the straight path and grant us
success to do that which pleases Him. He alone is the best Master and
best Supporter.

Peace be upon you, God's mercy and His blessings.

World Organization For Islamic Services,  
 (Board of Writing, Translation and Publication).  
 17/7/1399, 12/6/1979  
 Tehran - IRAN.


