Author's Foreword
=================

**In the name of God the All-merciful, the Compassionate**

I have been requested by some of our great scholars, a large number of
our students and other believers to follow the guidance and example of
the great scholars before us, in investigating a subject whose
importance grows day by day. Earlier scholars used to append to their
treatises either a brief or detailed introduction in proof of the
existence of the Creator and the basic fundamentals of religion.

This was because any scientific study is only an expression of personal
reasoning *(ijtihad),* attempting to comprehend the precepts of the
sacred Islamic law *(shari'ah)* with which God the Exalted sent the Seal
of the Prophets as a mercy to humankind.[^1]

This expression, moreover, depends fully on the acceptance of these
fundamentals: faith in God, the Revealer, the Prophet as Messenger and
the message with which he was sent. These together constitute the basis
and content of any scientific study, as well as the reason for
humanity's need for it.

I complied with this request in the belief that therein, is God's
pleasure, and because the need it would fulfill is great indeed.
Nonetheless, I was faced with the following question. In what style
should I write this introduction so that it should have the same degree
of simplicity and clarity as the work for which it was originally
prepared, that is, my book *al-Fatawa al-wadihah* (Clear Legal
Opinions)?

I also wished the .book to be accessible to anyone capable of
understanding the legal ordinances contained in the *fatawa.* I
discerned, however, a basic difference between this introduction and the
book.

Legal *fatwas* are simply the results of analogical reasoning
*(ijtihad)* and deduction *(istinbat)* without the need for proof or
analysis, while mere presentation in such an introduction would not
suffice. It is imperative, therefore, to resort to verification
*(istidlal)* because sacred law demands persuasion and conviction with
regard to the fundamentals of religion.

The purpose of such an introduction must be the firm establishment of
the fundamentals of, religion and its basic principles. This is possible
only through argument, yet argument as well hasp its own., levels. Each
level, even the simplest and most obvious, must be completely
persuasive. Had human sentiment *(wijdan)* been truly free, the simplest
means of proof of the existence of the wise Creator would have sufficed.
*Were they created out of nothing, or are they the creators* ?[^2]

For the last two centuries, modern thought has not allowed human
sentiment to remain liberated and pure. Hence the need for proof was
made all the more imperative for those who have obtained some knowledge
of modern thought and its special methods of investigation, in order for
those gaps to be filled which simple obvious proofs would have filled
had human sentiment been left unfettered.

I had before me two choices: the first was to write for those who still
live with a free sentiment, untouched by the demands of modern thought,
and thus require only simple arguments.

In that case, the idiom would be clear to the readers of the entire
work, that is, *al-Fatawa* *al-wadihah* and the introduction to it. The
second choice was to write for those who have come into contact with
modern thought and have, to a greater or lesser degree, accepted its
framework and attitudes with regard to theology. I decided that the
second choice was more suitable.

Nevertheless, I endeavoured to be generally clear in what I wrote,
bearing in mind the average university student as well as the reader of
higher educational achievements. I have, as much as possible, avoided
complicated terminology and the language of mathematics. I also avoided
complex expositions. At the same time, I took into consideration the
capacity for comprehension and retention of the more serious student, in
that I have presented points of special significance with brevity, and
have referred him to other of my works for greater depth, such as The
Logical Principles of Induction *(al-Usus al-mantiqiyyah l'i-istiqra').*

 We likewise endeavoured to enable the less accomplished reader to find
in the parts of the introduction a good source of clear ideas and
convincing evidence. The first step in the scientific inductive argument
for the existence of the Creator may be considered in itself sufficient
on a general level. We shall first discuss the Revealer, then the
messenger and finally the message. Success comes from God; on Him I rely
and to Him I turn for help.

[^1]: See Qur'an, 22:107. (Translator's footnote)

[^2]: Qur'an, 52:35. All Qur'anic translations are those of the
translator.


