Part 1 - The Revealer
=====================

Belief in God, The Exalted
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﷲ سبﺣﺎ نه و تعالى
  </p>
</blockquote>

**God, Praised and Exalted be He**

Since the earliest times of human history, man had attained faith in
God, worshipped Him alone in sincerity and manifested a deep
relationship with Him. This took place before man reached any stage of
purely philosophical reasoning or the comprehension of the methods of
demonstration.

This faith was not the child of class struggle, nor was it the invention
of exploiters or tyrants as a justification of their exploitation. It
was not the invention of the exploited in order to justify their own
suffering. This is because faith has preceded all such conflicts in
human history. Faith in God was not born out of fear and the feeling of
awe in the face of natural catastrophes and nature's unpredictable
behavior.

For, had faith been born of fear, or had it been the result of awe, then
the most religious among men throughout history would have been the ones
most given to fear and dread. On the contrary, those who have carried
the torch of faith across the ages have been people of great strength,
of character and will. This faith, rather, expresses a fundamental
inclination in man to be devoted to his Creator. It manifests a pure
conscience enabling him to discern the connection between man and his
Lord and between God and the universe which He created.

In the next stage, man reached metaphysical thinking and inferred from
things around him in the universe general concepts such as being
*(wujud)* and non-being *(\`adam),* possibility *(imkan)* and
impossibility *(istihalah),* unity *(wahdah)* and multiplicity
*(kathrah),* compositeness *(tarakkub)* and simplicity *(basatah),* part
(*juz'*) and whole *(kull),* priority *(taqaddum)* and posteriority
*(ta'akhkhur)* and cause *('illah)* and effect *(ma'lul).* Man then
tended to use these concepts and apply them to the construction of
arguments in support of his original faith in God, praised and exalted
be He, and to justify and explain it in philosophical terms.

When, however, scientific experimentation began, to appear, as a tool
of. knowledge; and thinker thus realized that these general concepts in
themselves were inadequate for the study of nature and the discovery of
its laws and for the uncovering of the secrets of the universe, they
believed sense perception and scientific observation to be the principle
avenue of any pursuit of these secrets and laws.

This orientation toward sense perception in investigation generally
enhanced human knowledge of the universe and broadened it to a high
degree. This trend began its march by asserting that sense perception
and experimentation are two of the most important tools which human
reason and knowledge must employ in pursuit of the discovery of the
secrets of the universe and its all-encompassing order.

Thus instead of a Greek thinker. like Aristotle, for instance, sitting
in his closed room and pondering over the relationship between the
motion of a body in space and the power of a body moving it, and then
deciding that the motion of that body would cease with the cessation of
the moving power, instead of that, Galileo began his experiments and
continued his observation of moving bodies to infer a relationship of a
different sort. He asserted that a body encountering an external force
which moved it would not cease its motion, even when that force ceased
until it encountered another force. which arrested its motion.

This empirical trend meant encouragement for investigators of nature and
the laws governing its phenomena to arrive at their conclusions in two
stages. The first is observation by the senses and experimentation, and
the gathering of results from these. The second is a rational stage
consisting of the arranging and harmonizing of these results and the
interpretation of them in a general and acceptable manner.

This trend, however, as a scientific method, was not meant to take the
place of reason. Nor was any scientist able to discover a secret of the
universe or a law of nature simply by observation by the senses and
experimentation without the aid of reason. This is because a scientist
must always analyze the data gathered through observation by the senses
and experimentation in order to reach conclusions through the use of his
rational faculty.

We know of no great scientific investigation which has been able to
dispense with the second stage in favour of: the first, or that did not
go; from, the first to the second stage, as .has already been indicated.
Thus the problems of the first stage would be matters of sense
perception, while those of the second, conclusions based on rational
proofs discerned by the mind, but not matters of direct sense
perception.

Thus, for instance, with regard to the law of gravity, Newton did not
feel directly the gravitational force of two bodies. Nor did he feel
that this force was proportional to the inverse of the square of the
distance between the centres of mass of the two bodies, and directly
proportional to the product of the masses of the two bodies.[^1]

Rather he perceived the stone as it came down towards the ground and the
moon rotating around the earth and the planets around the sun. He
pondered all this and endeavoured to interpret these phenomena, relying
on Galileo's theory of the uniform acceleration of bodies falling or
rolling down inclined planes.[^2]

He likewise made use of Keppler's laws of planetary motion, the third of
which states, “The Square of the period of rotation of a planet around
the sun is proportional to the cube of its distance from it.”[^3]In the
light of all this Newton discovered the law of gravity. He supposed
that, “A gravitational force of attraction between two particles is
always determined by the masses and the distance between them. “[^4]

It should have been possible. for this empirical trend as a method of
investigating the order of the universe to present a new and
illuminating argument in support of faith in God, exalted be He. This
should have been possible, in view of the fact that this method has
uncovered aspects of harmony in the universe which can be used as proofs
of an intelligent and wise Creator.

Scientists, in as much as they are concerned with natural phenomena,
have not interested themselves with the clarification of this problem,
which has for long been considered as a metaphysical matter outside the
scope of strictly scientific concern. Soon, however, new directions
appeared within the discipline of philosophy, outside the scope of
natural science, which endeavoured to “philosophize” this empirical,
method and present it in the terminology of formal logic.

This new philosophy declared that the only means of knowledge is sense
experience, and where sense perception ends human knowledge ceases. Thus
whatever is inaccessible to the senses and cannot, be verified by direct
experimentation, cannot be proved by any other means.

This empirical and experimental trend was used to counter the idea of
faith in God, the Exalted. Since God is not a being subject to sense
experience, capable of being seen and felt, there is no way of proving
His existence. The method was not employed by scientists, who practised
the experimental method with success, but by people with different
philosophical and logical inclinations, who attempted to interpret, but
misapplied, the empirical method.

They used it in accordance with their own inclinations. Gradually, these
extreme approaches fell into conflict. From the philosophical point of
view, for instance, they found themselves obliged to deny objective
reality, that is to say, to deny the reality of the universe in which we
live, as a whole and in its details. This is because, they argued, there
are no means of knowledge other than the senses.

The senses introduce us to things as we perceive them, not as they are
in themselves. Therefore, when we perceive something, we can assert its
existence in our sense perception. As for its existence outside our
consciousness, that is, its objective existence in itself, independent
of and prior to our act of experiencing it, we have no proof. Thus when
one sees the moon in the sky, for example, one is able only to assert
his perception of the moon at that instant.

But the advocates of this new philosophy were unable to ascertain or
demonstrate fully whether the moon exists in the sky in reality, or
whether it had an objective existence before the viewer opened his eyes
and saw it. This is like a cross-eyed person seeing things which do not
exist in reality: he can assert his own perception of these things but
is unable to ascertain their actual existence.

This new empirical trend in the end destroyed sense experience itself as
an epistimological method, by making it the final arbiter of the limits
of human knowledge. This meant that sense knowledge became a mere
phenomenon of the mind, lacking objective existence independent of our
consciousness and perception.

With regard to logical aspects, the logical positive school, the most
recent current school in the development of empiricist philosophy, came
to the conclusion that every sentence the truth or falsehood of which
cannot be verified by sense experience is simply, a cluster of empty
words. It is like haphazard sounds of the alphabet repeated endlessly.
The sentence, on the other hand, whose truth or falsehood may be
verified, must be made up of meaningful words.

If sense experience can ascertain the agreement of its purport with
reality, then it must be considered a true sentence. Thus the sentence,
“Rain comes down from the sky in winter” is a true sentence. The
sentence, “Rain comes down from the sky in summer”, while being a
meaningful sentence, is false in its purport. The sentence, “Something
comes down during the \`Night of Power' *(Laylatu'l-qadr)'*[^5] which
can be neither seen nor felt”, has no meaning regardless of whether it
is true or false. Thus any report whose truth cannot be verified by the
senses is nonsense. Therefore, with reference to the above sentence, it
is like saying 'daas' descends from heaven on the Night of Power ('daas'
being only a nonsense syllable).

The reference to a subject such as \`daas' adds nothing to the truth
value of a sentence. Hence, both sentences tell us nothing, even though
the second provides a subject. From this it , Follows that the
sentence,! ”God exists” like saying “Daas exists”, and the two reports
are equally meaningless. This is so because the existence of God, the
Exalted, cannot be known through sense perception or experimentation.

This logical approach has its own inner contradiction because its own
general premise cannot itself be verified by direct sense experience. In
addition, it is, in its assertion, a meaningless premise. This logic,
which claims that any report which sense experience cannot verify is
meaningless, makes a general claim.

Every generalization, however, ipso facto goes beyond the realm of sense
experience because senses can only perceive at any given moment
individual objects or parts of a whole. This approach, therefore, is not
only self-contradictory, but also contradicts all scientific
generalizations which we employ to explain natural phenomena in general
terms. This is because generalization in any form cannot be verified by
sense experience: It is rather inferred from observation of concrete
and, limited phenomena of sense experience.[^6]

Fortunately, however, science did not lend such philosophical trends;
any appreciable attention in its forward march and continuous evolution:
Instead, scientists always began with sense perception and
experimentation in their endeavour to discover the universe, but then
went beyond this narrow approach which such schools of philosophy or
logic had imposed on scientific investigation. Science must in the end
endeavour to rationally arrange these phenomena within the framework of
general laws and then go on to discover and explain their
inter-relationships.

The influence of these extremist philosophical schools has greatly
diminished even over the materialistic schools of philosophy. The new
materialistic philosophy, as chiefly represented by the advocates of
dialectical materialism, has clearly rejected these trends. Dialectical
materialism gave itself the right to go beyond the framework of sense
perception and experimentation with which a scientist begins his
investigation; it sought to go even beyond the second stage with which a
scientist must conclude his investigation. This was necessary in order
for the investigator to be able to compare the various results \`of
scientific theories and arrange them under a general theoretical set of
rules and specify the relations between natural phenomena which these
results presuppose.

Dialectical materialism, which is heir to materialistic thought down
through history, has itself become an abstract philosophy from the point
of view of these modern empirical extremist philosophical positions. The
new materialistic philosophy has finally arrived at a view of the world
within a dialectical framework.

This means that both materialistic and theistic thought have reached a
consensus on the need to transcend the limits of sense experience, by
which the new extremist materialistic schools advocated that science and
philosophy be bound. It then becomes possible for investigation and
knowledge to utilise two stages. The first consists of collecting the
results of sense experience and experimentation and the second of
interpreting these results theoretically and rationally.

The actual disagreement between the theistic and materialistic
approaches is concerned with the way in which the conclusions reached in
the second stage are to be interpreted. Materialism rejects any
interpretation, which presupposes the, existence of wise creator, while
this insists that the interpretation of these results can never. be
ultimately convincing without the assumption of a wise Creator.

We shall now present two modes of demonstration of the existence of the
wise Creator, praised and exalted be He. In each, the results of sense
experience and experimentation will be presented on the one hand, and
the rational influence in proof of our argument on the other. We shall
call the first mode the scientific or inductive proof *(ad-dalil
al-istiqra'i)* and the second the philosophical proof *(ad-dalil
al-falsafi)* We must first, however, explain what we mean by scientific
proof.

Scientific argument is any proof which depends on sense experience and
experimentation. It follows, moreover, the method of inductive
demonstration, which is based on the principle of the computation of
probability *(hisab al-ihtimalat).* Hence, the method we shall follow,
in demonstrating the existence of the Creator is scientific proof based
on the method of inductive argument, which itself rests on the
computation of probabilities.

(The method of the argument is not the argument itself. One may, for
instance, demonstrate that the sun is bigger than the moon because
scientists say so: The method employed here is the acceptance of\` the
statement of scientists as a proof of the truth. You may argue that
someone will die soon because you saw in a dream that that person
actually died. The method employed here is the use of dreams as an
argument for the truth.

Likewise, you may argue that the earth is a big bipolar magnetic field,
possessing two poles, one negative, the other positive. The argument in
this case is based on the fact that the needle of a compass which is set
in a horizontal position faces north and south. The method followed here
is the use of the experiment as proof. Thus the validity of any argument
is fundamentally related to the method on which it depends.)

For this reason we refer to the scientific argument for the existence of
the Creator as the inductive proof. It will be our task now to clarify
this method.

The Scientific Argument for the Existence of God, The Exalted
-------------------------------------------------------------

It has already been observed that the scientific argument for the
existence of the Creator follows the method of inductive demonstration,
which is based on the computation of probability. We wish, however,
before presenting this argument, to explain this method and then to
evaluate it in order to determine the extent to which it can be relied
upon in the discovery of the truth of things.

The inductive method based on the computation of probability has an
extremely complex and highly precise structure. Therefore, a complete
and precise evaluation of this method can be achieved only through a
detailed and thorough analysis of the logical foundations of induction
*(al-Usus al-mantiqiyyah lil-istiqra')* as well as the theory of
probability.'[^7]

Our purpose here is, however, to avoid difficult and complicated
constructions and analysis not readily accessible to the average reader.
We shall therefore do two things; first, delimit the demonstrative
method we shall follow and explain its steps briefly and succinctly. We
shall secondly, evaluate this method and determine its validity. We
shall do this not through a logical analysis of the method and the
discovery of its logical and mathematical bases, but through practical
applications acceptable to any rational human being.

It must be stated at this point that the method we use in demonstrating
the existence of the wise Creator is the same method we confidently
employ in our daily life as well as in our scientific experiments. What
follows will provide sufficient evidence of the fact that the method of
demonstration of the existence of a wise Creator is the same method we
use to prove the truths of everyday reality as well as scientific
truths. Since, therefore, we trust this method with regard to the
reality of everyday life, we must trust it also with regard to the proof
of the wise Creator, who is the source of all truth.

You receive a letter in the mail, and you conclude from merely reading
it that it is from your brother. Similarly, when one sees that a certain
physician has succeeded in curing many illnesses, one trusts this
physician and considers him to be a skillful one. Likewise, if after
taking penicillin ten times, one found each time that his body reacted
to it in the same negative manner, one would conclude that he had an
allergy to penicillin. In all these cases, the method used is the
inductive method based on the computation of probability.

Similarly, with regard to natural science, when a certain scientist had
observed some particular characteristics of the solar system in the
course of his research, he was able to conclude that these separate
bodies had all been a part of the sun from which they had later
separated. When this same scientist monitored the paths of planetary
movements, he was able to deduce the existence of the planet Neptune,
even before he was able to observe the planet with his sense of vision.

Science, in light of special phenomena, was also able to postulate the
existence of electrons before the discovery of the cloud chamber.
Scientists, in all these cases, have used the inductive method of proof,
based on the computation of probability: We shall employ the same method
in our argument for the existence of they wise Creator.

### a) Definition of the Method and Delineation of its Steps

The method of inductive argument based on the computation of probability
may be summarized clearly and simply in the following five steps:

1. We encounter on the level of sense perception and experimentation
numerous phenomena.

2. After observing and collecting our date, we go on to interpret them.
What is required in this stage is to find a suitable hypothesis on the
basis of which we can interpret and justify these phenomena. By its
being suitable for the interpretation of these phenomena, we mean that
if it is actually established it must be inherent in, or at least in
consonance with, all these phenomena which themselves actually exist.

3. We notice that the hypothesis, if it were not suitable and actually
established, would indicate that the possibility of the existence of the
phenomena is very scant. In other words, to suppose the incorrectness of
the hypothesis would mean \`that the degree of probability of the
existence of the phenomena, compared with the probability of their
non-existence, or the non-existence of at least one of them, is very
small, one in a hundred or one in a thousand, and so forth.

4. We therefore conclude that the hypothesis must be true, a fact which
we infer from our sense experience of the phenomena on which it is
based, as we have seen in step one.

5. The degree of verifiability by the phenomena of the hypothesis
offered in the second step is directly related to the probability of the
existence of these phenomena and inversely related to the probability of
their non-existence. (We mean by the probability of their non-existence
either their non-existence altogether or that of at least one of them.)
If we assume the incorrectness of the hypothesis, even then the smaller
this ration, the greater would be the degree of verifiability, so that
in many ordinary cases it could attain a degree of absolute certainty.
(This according to the second stage of proof by induction)” [^8]

There are, in reality, precise measures or regulations for evaluating
degrees of probability based on the theory of probability. In ordinary
everyday situations, people apply these measures unconsciously in ways
that are very close to their correct application. For this reason, we
shall limit ourselves to the evaluation of this natural application
without entering into the logical and mathematical principles of its
evaluation.[^9]

These are, then, the steps which we usually follow in any inductive
argument based on the computation of probability, whether in our every
day life on the level of scientific investigation, or in proof of the
existence of the wise Creator, praised and exalted be He.

### b) Evaluation of the Method

We shall, as we have already promised, evaluate this method in the light
of its practical application with illustrations from ordinary everyday
life. We have already observed that when you receive a letter in the\`
mail, and upon reading it conclude that it is from your brother and not
from another person who happens to like you and wishes to correspond
with you, you are employing the method of inductive proof based on the
computation of probabilities. The problem of the identity of the sender
would be solved by using the following steps.

1. You observe many indications such as the letter bears a name which
agrees completely with that of your brother. The handwriting is that of
your brother and the style of writing and format are those usually
employed by your brother. In addition, even the mistakes and items of
information are those usually made, or supplied by your brother. All
this you infer from the habits and ways of thinking of your brother. The
letter would, moreover, express opinions and ask for things which you
know to expect from your brother.

2. In the second step you ask, “Did my brother actually send this letter
to me, it is it from another person with the same name?” Here you would
find in the indications previously observed sufficient bases for a good
hypothesis for interpreting and justifying these data as evidence of the
fact that the letter was in reality from your brother. Conversely, if
you were led to conclude that the letter was , from your brother, then
all the data observed in the first step would. have to be provided.

3. In the third step you would further ask the following question: “If
this letter, was not from my brother, but from another person then what
is the degree of probability of all these indications and
characteristics being simultaneously present for me to observe in the
first step?” Such a possibility requires a large number of assumptions.
This is because for us to accept all these indications and
characteristics we must first assume that another person bears the same
name as the brother. He must further resemble him in all the
characteristics above discussed. The possibility for such a large number
of coincidences to happen simultaneously is slight indeed. Moreover, as
the number of the coincidences that must be assumed increases, the
probability of their simultaneous occurrence is conversely diminished.

The logical principles of induction teach us the way to measure
probability and explain how it diminishes. They further explain how
probability decreases in proportion to the assumptions it requires. We
need not enter into the details of all this because it is a complex
subject too difficult for the average reader to comprehend. Fortunately,
however, perceiving low probability does not depend on the
:understanding of these details, as for example; the falling of a man
from a high place to the ground does not depend on his understanding of
the force of gravity or his, knowledge of the scientific principles of
gravity. Thus the recipient of the letter requires nothing to infer that
the existence of a person resembling his brother in all the coincidences
and characteristics above discussed, is very improbable.

4. In the fourth step, you would reason as follows. Since the congruence
of all these occurrences is very improbable, if you were to suppose that
the letter was not from your brother, there would then be a far greater
likelihood that the letter was from your brother because these
coincidences do actually exist.

5. In the fifth step, you would connect the conclusion of the fourth
step, i.e., the possibility that the letter was from your brother, with
the small degree of probability of the existence of all the
characteristics of the letter without it being from your brother. The
connection between these two steps means that the possibility of the
letter being from your brother negates the probability of its being from
someone else, in inverse proportion. Thus the smaller the degree of
probability; the greater would be the opposite likelihood and the more
persuasive. If moreover there was no a opposing evidence, then the five
steps just presented provide convincing evidence of the validity of the
method on the level of everyday life.

Let us now take another example, this time from the realm of scientific
knowledge, where the method may be employed to demonstrate a scientific
theory. Let us consider the theory concerning the development of the
planets and their separation from the sun. The nine planets were
originally part of the sun from which they separated as burning pieces
millions of years ago. Scientists generally agree with regard to the
principle of the theory, but differ concerning the cause of the
separation of these pieces from the sun. Demonstration of the principle
on which they agree would follow these steps.

i. Scientists have observed a number of phenomena which they perceived
by means of the senses and experimentation. These are:

a. The rotation of the earth around the sun is in harmony with the
rotation of the sun around its axis each complete rotation being from
west to east.

b. The rotation of the earth around its axis is concurrent with the
rotation of the sun around its axis, that is, from west to east.

c. The earth rotates around the sun in an orbit parallel to the
equatorial line of the sun, so that the sun would resemble a pole and
the earth a point rotating around it, like a millstone.

d. The elements of which the earth is made are for the most part found
in the sun as well.

e. There is a close similarity between the elements of the earth and
those of the sun in their chemical composition, in both hydrogen
predominates.

f. The speed of the rotation of the earth around the sun and around its
own axis is in harmony with that of the rotation of the sun around its
axis.

g. There is a measure of agreement between the age of the earth and the
age of the sun, according to the calculations of scientists.

h. The inside of the earth is hot, which proves that the earth in its
early stages was very hot.

ii. These were some of the phenomena which, scientists observed through
sense experience and experimentation in the: first step. In the second,
they decided that there is a hypothesis by which all these phenomena
could be explained. This means that if the hypothesis were to be
actually true, then it would inherently belong to these phenomena and
justify them. The hypothesis holds that the earth was part of the sun
from which it separated, for whatever reasons. With this assumption, we
can explain the foregoing phenomena.

The first is the fact that the harmony of the rotation of the earth
around the sun and that of the sun around its own axis is due to the
motion of both being from west to east. The reason for this harmony
becomes clear on the basis of the above hypothesis, which further holds
that if part of any body in motion is separated from it while remaining
drawn towards it by a thread or some other means, that separated part
will always move in the same original orbit in accordance with the law
of continuity.

As for the second phenomenon, which is the harmony of the rotation of
the earth around its axis with the rotation of the sun around its axis
this also can be sufficiently explained by the same hypothesis and
according to the same law. The same holds for the third phenomenon as
well. As for the fourth and fifth phenomena, which demonstrate a close
similarity of composition and proportion of the' elements which make up
the earth and the sun, they become self evident on the basis of the fact
that the earth was part of the sun.

The elements of a part must be those of the whole. The sixth phenomenon,
namely, the harmony between the speed of the earth's rotation around the
sun and around its axis and that of the sun around its axis becomes
clear because we know that both motions of the earth originated from the
motion of the sun. This we know on the basis of our earlier hypothesis,
which pre-supposes the separation of the earth from the sun. This not
only explains the observed harmony, but also delineates its cause. On
the basis of the same hypothesis, we can explain the similarity in age
of the two bodies, which is our seventh phenomenon. Likewise, the
eighth, which is the intense heat-of the earth in its early stages, can
be explained on the basis of the same hypothesis.

iii. If we were to suppose that the theory of the separation of the
earth: from the sun is not true, it would be highly unlikely for all
these phenomena to exist together and be closely connected. In this
case, they would simply be a collection of coincidences without any
intelligible connection among them. Therefore, the probability of their
existence, if we suppose the falsity of our theory, would be very small
indeed. This is because this supposition would require a large number of
hypotheses for the explanation of these phenomena.

With regard to the harmony between the motion of the earth around the
sun and the sun around its own axis, from west to east, we would have to
assume that the earth was a body far away from the sun, created
independently or part of another sun from which it separated
subsequently drawing near to our sun. We would also have to suppose that
this earth, travelling freely in space, upon entering its orbit around
the sun entered at a point west of the sun. For this reason, it
continues to rotate from west to east, that is, in the direction of the
sun's own rotation around its axis. If it had instead entered at a point
east of the sun, it would have moved from east to west.

As for the harmony between the rotation of the earth around its axis and
the rotation of the sun around its axis from west to east, we would have
to suppose that the other sun from which the earth separated was itself
rotating from west to east. As for the rotation of the earth around the
sun, in an orbit parallel to the equatorial line of the sun, we would
likewise have to suppose that the other sun from which the earth
separated was at that moment situated in the same plane as the
equatorial line of our sun.

As for the similarity of the elements of the earth and the sun and their
composition, we would have to suppose that the other sun from which the
earth separated contained the same elements and in similar proportion.
As for the speed of the rotation of the earth around the sun and around
its own axis, being harmonious with the speed of the sun's rotation
around its axis, we would have to suppose that the other sun from which
the earth separated exploded. in a way which gave the moving earth a
speed similar to that of our sun.

As for the age of the sun and the earth and the heat of the earth in the
early stages of its development, we would, have to suppose that the
earth separated from another sun having the, same, age as our sun and
that it separated in a manner which led to its intense heat. Thus we see
that the possibility of the simultaneous existence of all these
phenomena, on the principle of the invalidity of the theory of the
separation of the earth from our sun, requires a large number of
coincidences, the probability of whose simultaneous occurrence is very
small. In contrast, the separation theory alone is sufficient for
explaining these phenomena and connecting them together.

iv. In the fourth step we conclude that since the coincidence of all
these phenomena, which we observe in the earth, is improbable except to
a very small degree, on the assumption that the earth was not separated
from our sun; it must be highly probable (since all these phenomena do
indeed exist) that the earth did indeed separate from our sun.

v. In the fifth and last step, we connect the possibility of the
separation hypothesis, as inferred in the fourth step, with the low
probability of the coincidence of the phenomena in the earth without its
having been separated from the sun as we decided in the third step: The
connection between these two steps would show a strong improbability for
the third step and conversely a high probability for the fourth. We are
able by means of this method to demonstrate the separation of the earth
from the sun, by which means scientists achieve absolute conviction of
this fact.

How To Apply The Method to prove the Existence of the Creator
-------------------------------------------------------------

After having become acquainted with the general method of the inductive
argument based on the computation of probabilities, and evaluated it
through the foregoing applications, we shall now proceed to apply it to
the demonstration of the existence of the wise Creator. We shall follow
the same steps as before.

1. We notice a constant concord between a vast number of individual
phenomena and man's needs as a living being and the continuation of life
for him. We find for instance, that any change or substitution of any of
these phenomena could mean the extinction of human life on this earth,
or at least its paralysis. We shall now give a few examples of these
phenomena.

The earth receives from the sun a quantity of heat sufficient for the
development of life and the fulfillment of the needs of living beings
for heat, no more and no less. It has been observed that the distance
separating the earth from the sun is-in complete harmony with the-amount
of heat required for the existence of life on this earth. Had this
distance been double its present measure, there would have not been
enough heat to support life on earth.

Conversely, if it were half its present measure, the heat would have
been too intense for life to endure. We observe further that the earth's
crust and the oceans together contain in their various chemical
compounds a preponderant quantity of oxygen, such that it constitutes
eight-tenths of all of the water in the world. In spite of this, and in
spite of the great tendency of oxygen to combine with other chemical
elements, still a portion of it remains free in order for it to
participate in the formation of air.

This portion provides one of the most essential conditions of life
because all living beings, humans as well as animals, require it for
breathing. Were all the oxygen on earth to be combined with other
elements, it would not have been possible for life to exist. It has been
further observed that the quantity of pure oxygen available accords
perfectly with man's needs in his everyday practical life.

The air contains twenty-one percent oxygen had this ratio been greater,
the environment would have been constantly, threatened with outbreaks of
fire. Had this ratio, on the other hand, been smaller, life would have
been difficult if not impossible. Nor would fire have been available in:
sufficient quantity to fulfill its proper functions.

We observe another natural phenomenon which repeats itself millions of
times throughout life. It is an activity which ensures the availability
of a specific quantity of oxygen all the time. When humans and animals
breathe in air, they inhale oxygen which is received by the blood and
distributed throughout the body. Oxygen then begins the process of
combustion of the food in the body, from which carbon dioxide is
produced.

Carbon dioxide then passes into the lungs and is exhaled, thus ensuring
a constant flow of this gas. Carbon dioxide is in turn a necessary
condition for plant life. Plants separate oxygen from it, which they
breathe out into the air, purified and ready to be breathed in again.
Through this exchange between animals and plants, it is possible to
retain a constant quantity of oxygen and without it- this gas would have
been unavailable and human life would never have been possible.

This exchange, moreover, is the result of thousands of natural phenomena
which have coincided in order to produce this specific phenomena which
is in perfect accord with the requirements of life. We further observe
that nitrogen, because it is a heavy gas, has a tendency to descend.
Thus when it combines with oxygen in the air it becomes light enough to
be useful for life on earth. We observe also that the quantities of both
oxygen and nitrogen which remain free in the air are in perfect
proportion for the one to lighten the other. Were oxygen to increase or
nitrogen to diminish, this process could not take place.

We notice that the air in the earth remains at a constant amount, not
exceeding one millionth of the global mass. This quantity is just right
to ensure the possibility of human life. Had it been greater or smaller,
life would be difficult or even impossible. This is because its increase
would have meant a greater pressure on human beings which they would not
have been able to support. Like wise, any decrease in it would make it
possible for meteors, which we see every day to burn all living things,
and- even to penetrate the earths itself.

We further notice that the earth's crust, which absorbs carbon dioxide
and oxygen, is so, structured that it cannot absorb them completely. Had
it been thicker, it would have absorbed them, and plants, animals and
men would have perished. Similarly, the distance of the moon from the
earth is of a specific measure necessary for making human life on earth
possible. Had this distance been relatively smaller, the tide caused by
the moon would have been so strong as to move mountains from their
places.

We observe many instincts in living beings. Even though an instinct is
an abstract notion, incapable of observation by direct sense experience,
the conduct which such instincts express is not abstract. It is, rather,
a phenomenon perfectly capable of scientific observation. Instinctive
conduct resulting from thousands of instincts with which we become
acquainted in our daily life and scientific investigation, is in
constant accord with the aim of promoting and protecting life. Such
instinctive conduct is often on a high level of complexity and technical
skill. If we were to break down this conduct into its individual
components, we see that every component is perfectly suited for the
promotion and protection of life.

The physiological structure of man exhibits millions of natural,
physiological phenomena. Yet each phenomenon, both in its physiological
role and structure, as well as in its close link with all other
phenomena is always suited to the job of promoting life and protecting
it.

Let us consider, for instance, the group of phenomena which work
together to produce the faculty of sight and help us to sense things
around us in useful ways. The lens in the eye refracts images onto the,
retina which is made up of nine layers. The last layer contains millions
of rods and cones all arranged in such a way as to make possible the
faculty of sight.

There is one anomaly, namely, the image which is reflected onto the
retina, which is reversed. This, however, is only a slight anomaly,
because sight itself is not involved at this stage. Instead, the image
is corrected by millions of nerves leading to the brain, where it is
transmitted from the eye. Only then is the process of seeing complete,
at which stage it begins to play its important role in the overall
purpose of promoting life.

Even beauty, fragrance and splendour as natural phenomena are found to
exist in environments suited for their role of promoting life.

Thus flowers which are usually pollinated by insects are especially
attractive, possessing bright, beautiful colours and enticing fragrances
in order to attract the insect and therefore facilitate the process of
pollination. Flowers, which are pollinated by air, on the other hand, do
not possess these characteristics. The phenomenon of sexual pairs or
mates in its general similarity between the physical structure of male
and female in man, animals and plants, and in sexual interaction for the
perpetuity of life, is yet another manifestation of the harmony of
nature with the function of promoting life.

“***If you were to reckon up the dimensions of God's favour, you would
not be able to compute them; surely God is ever forgiving, ever
merciful***“ (Qur'an, 16:18)

2. We find that, in millions of cases, the continuous harmony between
natural phenomena and the process of insuring and promoting life may be
explained by a single hypothesis which postulates a wise Creator of this
universe who willed to provide this earth with the elements of life and
Himself direct their functions. This hypothesis presupposes all these
instances of harmony.

3. In the third step, we pose the following question: If the hypothesis
of a wise creator were not actually demonstrable, what would the
possibility of the existence of all these congruences between natural
phenomena and the process of life preservation be without there being an
intended purpose for this order?

It is clear that the probability of this alternative must presuppose a
vast number of coincidences. If, as we saw in a previous example, the
possibility is very remote that the letter you received was not from
your brother but from another person resembling him in all respects
(since the possibility of resemblance of one thousand characteristics is
very small), how great do you think is the probability that this earth
on which we live was the creation of non-teleological matter, one which
resembles the wise Creator in millions of attributes?

4. In the fourth step we conclude that the hypothesis presented in: the
second step which postulates a Wise creator, is valid.

5. In the fifth step, we connect this prevailing possibility with the
small probability which we postulated in the hypothesis of the third
step. Since probability decreases as the number of coincidences in the
contrary increases, it is natural for the degree of this probability to
become so small that it cannot in any way compare with the high
probability of the third step in the demonstration of any scientific
law.

This is because the number of coincidences which must be postulated in
the third step is greater than that of the possibilities of the opposite
case. Hence, every probability of this kind must in the end
disappear.[^10] Thus we reach the incontrovertible conclusion: that
there is a wise creator of this universe as the innumerable signs
(*ayat*) of His power and wisdom in the universe testify.

“***We shall show them our signs in the furthest regions and in,
themselves so that it may become manifest to them that it is the truth.
Is it not sufficient that your Lord*** **is** ***witness over all
things?***“ (Qur'an, 41:53)

“***Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth; and the
alternation of night and day; and the ship which sails over the sea,
laden with goods useful to humankind; and the water which God has sent
from heaven to revive with it the earth after its death, and dispersed
in it every kind of beast; and the change of the winds; and the clouds,
made to serve between heaven and earth, are signs for people who
understand***“ (Qur'an, 2:164)

“***Turn your gaze again (to*** **heaven) do** ***you perceive any flaw?
Then turn your gaze twice again; your sight shall return to you dull and
discomforted.***“ (Qur'an, 67:3 -4)

The Philosophical Argument
--------------------------

Before embarking on, the discussion of a philosophical argument for the
existence of the Creator, praised and exalted be He, we must say a word
about the philosophical argument and its parts and the difference
between it and the scientific argument. Argument itself may be
considered under three categories: the mathematical, the scientific and
the philosophical.

The mathematical argument is employed in the area of mathematical
sciences and formal logic *(al-mantiq as-suri ash-shakli).* This
argument rests on one fundamental principle, the principle of
non-contradiction, which asserts that A is A and will always remain A.
Any argument based exclusively on this principle and its consequences,
we call the mathematical argument. Its validity is admitted by everyone.

The scientific argument is usually employed in the domain of the natural
sciences. It rests on data capable of proof either, through sense
experience or scientific induction, in addition to mathematical proof.

The philosophical argument, depends for its establishment on objective
reality in the external world, on intellectual knowledge which needs no
empirical verification or sense experience. 'It presupposes, however,
mathematical proof. This does not necessarily mean that the
philosophical argument does not actually rely on information obtained
through sense perception or the inductive method. It rather means that
it does not regard these as sufficient evidence, and therefore relies on
the intellectual information within the context of the demonstrative
method applied to prove a case which had been established.

The philosophical argument, therefore, differs from the scientific
argument in the way in which it deals with intellectual information
which remains outside the scope of the mathematical argument. On the
basis of our discussion so far of the notion of the philosophical
argument, we must face the following question: Is it possible to rely
simply on intellectual information or ideas which the mind intuits
without recourse to sense perception, experimentation or scientific
induction?

The answer to this question must be in the affirmative. These are the
data of our understanding, the validity of which is accepted by all such
as the principle of non-contradiction, on which are based all pure
mathematical sciences. Its is a principle whose validity we establish on
the basis of intellectual reasoning, and not on the basis of supporting
evidence and experiments within the scope of the inductive method.

The proof of this is that the degree of our trust in this principle is
not affected by the number of experiments and verifications which do not
agree with it. Let us take a concrete example: two plus two equals four.
Our belief in the validity of this simple mathematical equation is too
firm to need further verification. We would not even be ready to listen
to any argument in proof of the opposite fact. nor would we believe
anyone telling us two plus two in one unique case equals five or three.
This means that our belief in this truth has no connection with sense
perception or experimentation, for in that case it would be affected by
them positively and negatively.

If we actually admit the truth of this principle, in spite of its
independence from sense perception and experimentation, it is natural
for us to admit that it is sometimes possible for, us to trust the
validity of our intellectual perceptions on which depends the
philosophical argument. In other words, the rejection of the
philosophical argument simply because it is based on intellectual
perceptions which do not rest on empirical or inductive knowledge, must
also mean the rejection of the mathematical because it rests on the
principle of non-contradiction, in which our belief depends neither on
experimentation nor induction.”[^11]

### a) An Example of the Philosophical Argument for the Existence of the Creator

This argument depends on the following three principles. The first is
the axiom which asserts that every effect has a cause from which it
derives its existence. This is a truth which man perceives intuitively
and which scientific induction confirms. The second is the principle
which asserts that whatever differing degrees of possibility, fullness
and perfection exist, it is impossible for the less possible, less
complete or less perfect to be the cause of that which is higher than
itself.

Temperature, knowledge and light are of varying degrees of intensity and
perfection. It is impossible for a higher degree of temperature to
emanate from one lower than itself. It is likewise impossible for a
person to obtain a good knowledge of the English language from one who
himself has little or no knowledge of it. Nor is it possible for a
feeble source of light to be the cause of a source greater than itself.

This is because every higher degree constitutes a qualitative and
quantitative increase over the one below it. This quantitative increase
cannot be bestowed by one not in possession of it. When you wish to
finance a project from your own capital, you cannot put into this
project an amount greater than that you already have.

The third principle is the assertion that matter, in its continuous
evolution, assumes various levels of change and intensity. Thus even a
small particle which has no life and is not a vital component,
constitutes an aspect of being of matter. Protoplasm, which is the
essential component of life in plants and animals, constitutes a higher
form of existence, of matter. The amoeba, which is a microscopic
unicellular animal, constitutes a still higher step in the evolution of
matter. Man, as a living, feeling and thinking being must be considered
to be the highest form of being in his universe.

These different forms of being raise the following question: Is the
difference among them simply a quantitative one in the number of
particles and elements and the mechanical relation among these, or is it
a qualitative and quantitative difference, expressing a variety of
degrees of being and stages of evolution and perfection? In other words,
is the difference between man and the dust of which he was made simply
one of number, or is it a difference between two levels of being and two
stages of evolution and perfection, just like the difference between a
feeble and a brilliant source of light?

Ever since man put this question to himself, he has believed, through
his a priori intuition (*fitrah*), that these forms constitute levels of
being and different stages of perfection attained by life, wherein the
human form is the highest manifestation of being in matter. This high
level moreover is not in itself the limit of evolution. Rather, as life
attains new and higher forms, it manifests higher levels of being. Hence
the life of a living, feeling and thinking being constitutes a higher
and fuller degree of being than the life of plants and so on.

Materialistic philosophy, however, for over a century, has rejected this
idea and adopted instead a mechanical view of the universe. According to
this view, the outside world is made up of small molecules moved by a
simple homogeneous electro-magnetic forces attracting and repelling them
within the framework of general laws. That is to say, the function of
this force is limited to influencing the interrelated motion of these
molecules from one locus to another. Through this motion of attraction
and repulsion, these molecules unite and separate to produce different
material forms.

On this basis, mechanical materialism limited evolution to the motion of
material particles from one locus to another in space. It explained the
variety of material forms by the motion of coalescence, separation and
distribution of material particles without any novelty occurring in this
process. Matter, according to this view neither grows nor attains a
higher level of being through its evolution; it only coalesces and
scatters in various ways like a piece of dough which, you
may -manipulate into various states, although remaining a piece of dough
in. your hand without any essential change.

This hypothesis was inspired by the science of mechanics, which was the
first branch of science to be allowed to develop freely its methods of
investigation. The discovery by this science of the laws of mechanical
motion and the explanations it offered of familiar motions of ordinary
bodies, encouraged the development of this hypothesis, which took into
account the motion of stars in space.

The constant growth of knowledge and the introduction of scientific
methods of investigation into many fields of study, demonstrated the
invalidity of this hypothesis and its inability to explain all motions
in space mechanically. It also demonstrated its inadequacy in subsuming
all material forms under the mechanical motion of bodies and particles.

Science thus confirmed what man had perceived in his pure intuitive
state (*fitrah*), namely that the diversity of material forms is not
simply the result of the motion of material bodies from one place to
another. Rather, it is the result of a variety of quantitative and
qualitative evolutionary processes. It has also been proven through
scientific experiments that no numerical structure of molecules would
constitute life, feeling and thought.

This leads us to suppositions which are completely different from those
advanced by mechanical materialism, because we discern in life, feeling
and thought an actual process of growth of matter and a characteristic
evolution in the degrees of its existence. This is true regardless of
whether the content of this characteristic evolution is itself material
or nonmaterial.

To recapitulate, these are the three problems with which we have been
concerned:

1. Every effect has a cause.

2. The lower cannot be the cause of something higher than itself, with
regard to degrees of being.

3. The diversity of degrees of being in this universe and the variety in
its form are qualitative.

In light of these three issues, we can clearly discern an actual
development in quantitatively evolved forms, which: means the
manifestation of the fullness of being in matter and. a quantitative.
increase in it.

We should therefore ask; “Where did this increase come from, and how did
this new multiplicity appear, since every effect must have a cause?”
There are two answers to this question. The first is that it originated
in matter itself. Matter which has no life, feeling or thought created
through its process of evolution life, feeling and thought. This is to
say a lower form of matter was itself the cause of a higher form without
itself possessing the properties of being enabling it to perform such a
function.

This answer, however, contradicts our second principle, which asserts
that a lower form cannot be the cause of another greater than it and
richer in being. Thus, the idea that dead matter, devoid of the
pulsation of life can grant itself or another matter life, feeling and
thought, is like the idea of someone who has no knowledge of the English
language, nonetheless attempting to teach it to others; or that of a dim
light emanating a light greater than it in brilliance, such as the light
of the sun; or that of a poor man with no capital, attempting to finance
big projects.

The second answer to this, question is that this additional property
which matter manifests through its evolution, must have originated from
a source which is in full possession of it. This source is God; the Lord
of the worlds, praised and exalted be He. The growth of matter,
therefore is no more than the creative process of growth and development
which God manifests in His wisdom, ordinance and lordship over all
things

***We have created man from a piece of clay. Then We made him into a
sperm in a secure receptacle. Then We made the sperm a blood clot;
thereafter, We made the blood-clot into a lump of flesh; then We made
the piece of flesh into bones; then We clothed the bones with , flesh;
thereafter We brought him into being as another creature; blessed
therefore is God, the best of creators.*** (Qura'n; 23:12-14)

This is the only answer that, would harmonize with the three principles
presented above. It alone can offer a reasonable explanation of the
process of growth and completeness of the forms of being on the stage of
this vast universe. To this argument, the noble Qur'an points in a large
number of its verses, with which it addresses the uncorrupted, original
intuition *(fitrah)* of man and his untainted reason.

“***Have you then considered the sperm that you sow? Do you create it or
are rather We the Creator?***“ (Qur'an, 56:58-59)

“***Have you then considered that which you sow? Do you sow it or are
rather We the Sower?***“ (Qur'an, 56:63-64)

“***Have you then considered the fire which you kindle? Did 'you create
its tree or are rather We the Creator?***“ (Qur'an, 56:71-72)

“***Among His signs is that He created you from dust, then behold, you
are humans, scattering yourselves about.***“ (Qur'an, 30:20)

### b) The Materialist Position toward this Argument

We shall now indicate the attitude of materialism toward this argument.
Materialism, as a mechanical philosophy, is not obliged to consider this
argument. This is because, as we have already observed, it explains
life, feeling and thought as forms of the coalescence and separation of
particles and molecules. This operation results in no novelty as such,
except that of the motion of. particles in accordance with a mechanical
law.

Neo-materialism, however because it admits the principle of quantitative
and qualitative evolution of matter through these forms, encounters some
difficulty from this argument. It has chosen a method for the
explanation of this qualitative evolution which can harmonize with the
second problem already discussed and its own desire to regard matter as
itself sufficient for the explanation of its own evolutionary stages.

This method holds matter to be the source of fulfillment, and to thus
provided the necessary properties for the process of its own qualitative
evolution. This it does, not in the same way in which a poor man would
attempt to finance large projects, but because all the forms and
properties of this evolution are latent in matter from the very'
beginning. Thus the chicken is present in the egg, gas in water and so
forth.

The question of how matter could at one and the same time be egg and
chicken, or water and gas, dialectical materialism answered by asserting
that although this is a contradiction, contradiction is the general law
of nature. Everything innately contains its opposite with which it is in
continuous struggle. Through this struggle of two opposites, a third
inner contradiction arises and grows until it becomes the synthesis of
the two opposites. Thus, it causes change in matter,[^12] such as an egg
exploding suddenly and a chicken bursting out from it. Through this
process, matter achieves its perfection continuously, in that the
resulting synthesis constitutes the future, or next step forward.

In light of all this, we notice the following. What neo-materialism
means precisely by its assertion that a thing contains its opposite must
be one of the following:

1. It may mean that the egg and the chicken are two opposites or
antagonistic forms, and that the egg makes the chicken and bestows on it
the qualities of life, that is to say, a dead thing can give birth to a
living being and make life. This is Exactly like a poor man attempting
to finance large projects; it contradicts the a priori principle just
discussed.

2. Does neo-materialism mean, on the other land, that the egg does not
make the chicken, but rather brings it forth, since it was already
latent in the egg? Thus an egg while being an egg, was at the same time
a chicken, just like a picture which looks different from different.
angles. It is obvious that if the egg is at one and the same time a
chicken, there is no process of development or fulfillment in the egg
becoming a chicken. This is because whatever comes into being through
this process, was already in existence. It is like a man taking out of
his pocket money which, while in his hand, was in his pocket.

For any process of growth to take place, that is, for anything new to
actually occur through the process of an egg becoming a chicken, we are
obliged to suppose that the egg was not previously a chicken but a
chicken in the making, or something capable of becoming a chicken. In
this way an egg becomes different from a stone, which can never become a
chicken, as an egg can within specific conditions and circumstances. The
mere potentiality of a thing does not necessarily mean its
actualization. Hence, if an egg is actualized into a chicken, the mere
possibility of this is not enough to explain the actual event.

If the various forms which matter takes were to be the result of its
internal opposites, then the variety of forms must be explained by the
variety of these inner opposites or contradictions. The egg, for
example, has its own contradictions, which are different from those of
water. For this reason, its contradictions result in the chicken while
those of water result in gas.

This proposition becomes obvious when we consider the primary stages in
the process of differentiation among material forms at the level of
particles, which constitute the basic units of the material universe,
such as protons, electrons, neutrons, anti-protons, anti-electrons
(positrons) and photons.

Did every particle take a special form on the basis of its inner
contradictions so that a proton was concealed in its own material
particle and subsequently came forth as a result of motion and struggle
as in the case of the egg and the chicken? If we suppose this then how
can we account for the variety of forms which these particles have
taken, since this presupposes, according to the logic of inner
contradiction, that these particles must themselves be different and
valid in their inner contradictions. That is to say, they must be
different with regard to their inner characteristics.

We know that modern science tends to the view of the essential unity, of
matter, and that the inner content of matter is one. Moreover, the
different forms which matter assumes are not substitutes for a single
and constant content. Otherwise, it would have been possible for a
proton to become a neutron and vice versa; that is, it would have been
possible for the molecule to change its form as well as the atom and
particle, in spite of the unity and constancy of the content. This would
mean that the content is one, although forms vary. If so, how can we
suppose that all these different forms result from inner contradictions.

The example of the egg and chicken is itself useful in explaining this
position. In order for forms to assume their characteristic variety in
different eggs through their inner contradictions, it is necessary that
eggs be different in their inner structure. The egg of a hen and that of
another bird produce two different birds. If, on the other hand, the two
eggs were those of a hen, then we could not suppose that their inner
contradiction would produce two different forms.

Thus we see that the explanation of material forms offered by
neo-materialism, on the basis of inner contradiction on the one hand,
and the trend of modern science with its insistence on the unity of
matter on the other, have developed along two completely divergent
lines.

The third alternative is the view that holds that the egg consists of
two independent opposites, each possessing its special mode of
existence; the one being the portion of the egg concerned with
fertilization, the other the rest of the egg's content. These two
opposites engage in a continuous struggle until the fertilized portion
prevails and the egg becomes a chicken. This kind of struggle is
familiar in the life of human beings and has been for long recognized
both in their daily lives and their intellectual life.

Why, it must be objected, must we consider the interaction between the
fertilized portion and the rest of the egg the struggle of opposites?
Why should we consider the interaction between the dust particles, its
soil and the air, or the interaction between the embryo in the mother's
womb and the nutritive materials it obtains from the mother's body a
struggle between opposites? This in fact is no more, than a designation;
no better than saying that, one form is intergrated into or unified with
another form.

Even, if we grant that this interaction must be called, a struggle the
problem remains unsolved as long as we admit that this interaction leads
to a new third form which is a numerical addition to the two opposites.
The question remains, where did this additional form come from? Did it
come from the two struggling opposites, even though they both lacked it?
It must be remembered that a thing cannot give something else which it
does not possess, as we have argued in the second of our three
principles just presented.

We are not aware of any instance in nature wherein the struggle between
two opposites is the real cause of growth. How could a being participate
in the growth of its own opposite through a struggle against it when
struggle means a degree of resistance and rejection. Resistance, as we
know, diminishes the energy of growth in the thing resisted instead of
helping it to achieve it.

We know that a swimmer, when he encounters high waves, finds his
movements hampered to a high degree rather than enhanced. If, therefore,
the struggle between opposites however considered, were to be the cause
of the growth and evolution of the egg into a chicken where is the
growth caused by struggle of opposites of water into gas and its return
into water?

Nature reveals that when opposites coincide or unite, the result is not
growth, but the destruction of both opposites. Thus the positive proton,
which constitutes the cornerstone of the atom, and which carries a
charge of positive energy, has as its counterpart a negative proton.
Similarly, the negative electron which moves in the orbit of an atom has
its opposite counterpart. When these two opposites meet, a process of
atomic destruction takes place which causes the virtual disappearance of
matter, as the resulting energy is released and scattered in space.

We conclude from all this that the motion of matter without provision
from and direction by an external source could not cause real growth or
evolution to a higher and more specialized stage. It is therefore
necessary in order for matter to grow and rise into higher planes of
existence, such as life, feeling and thought, that there be a Lord who
Himself enjoys these characteristics and is able to bestow them on
matter. The role of matter in this process of growth is no more than
that of suitability, readiness and potentiality. It is like the role of
a good child who is ready to receive the knowledge imparted to him by
his educator; blessed is God, Lord of the worlds.

The Attributes of God, Exalted Be He
------------------------------------

When we believe in God, praised and exalted be He, as the Creator and
Sustainer of the universe, directing its course in accordance with His
wisdom and providence, it becomes imperative for us to know His
attributes through His creation and the perfection of His work. We
should, furthermore, evaluate His characteristics in light of the
splendorous manifestations which His works display.

This we do in exactly the same way as we evaluate an engineer on the
basis of the mastery of his product or an author on the basis of the
depth of his knowledge and learning which his works contain, or the
personality of an educator on the basis of the qualities and virtues
which he imparts to those under his care. In this way we shall be able
to enjoy a brief glance of the attributes of knowledge, wisdom, life,
power, sight and hearing with which the exalted Creator is
characterized.

For the mastery and precision manifested in the order of the universe
reveal His omniscience and wisdom. The great energies it manifests
reveal His sovereignity and omnipotence. The variety of life and the
degrees of intellectual discernment and sense perception reveal the life
and consciousness which the Creator enjoys. The unity of purpose and
architectural mastery with which this universe was executed, as well as
the close connections among its many aspects, reveal the oneness of the
Creator and the unity of power from which this vast universe emanated.

### a) His Justice and Rectitude

We all believe, through our native intuition and a priori reason, in
general values that must govern our conduct. These are values which
assert that justice is truth and goodness and wrongdoing is falsehood
and evil. We also believe that whosoever deals justly with others is
worthy of respect and praise and whosoever commits wrongdoing and
treachery deserves the opposite.

These values, from the point of view of native intuition *(fitrah)* and
the science of induction *(istiqra')* are fundamental in directing human
conduct aright, provided that there are 'no' obstacles such as ignorance
or the quest for material personal gain. This is because every human
being, if faced with the choice between truth or falsehood in his
inter-course with others, or between trustworthiness and treachery in
his dealings, would choose truth over falsehood and trustworthiness over
treachery, provided that there is no personal reason or special interest
that may cause him to deviate from these values.

This means that whosoever has no personal interest in committing
falsehood or treachery, would deal truthfully and with trustworthiness
and justice in his daily conduct. This principle applies exactly to the
wise Creator, praised and exalted be He, for He encompasses all these
values which we discern with our native reason because He granted us
this rational faculty. Because of His absolute power and sovereignty
over this universe, He has no need for any bargaining or recourse to
clever manoeuvres. Thus we believe that God is just and would not wrong
anyone.

### b) Divine Justice as Argument for Reward and Punishment

The values in which we believe enjoin justice, straightforwardness,
trustworthiness, truthfulness, fidelity and other such qualities, and
condemn their opposites. They do not just enjoin good qualities and
condemn bad ones; they also call for the appropriate reward or
punishment for each.

The untainted native intellect perceives that wrongdoers and traitors
deserve blame and just and trustworthy people, who are ready to
sacrifice everything in the way of justice and truth deserve praise.
Everyone of us finds in his own conscience *(wijdan)* the tendency,
based on these values, to blame the deviant wrongdoer and to land the
just and straightforward person. The only obstacle in the way of this
attitude is a person's inability to take a suitable stance or his own
personal prejudice.

Since we believe that God, the Exalted, is just and impartial in His
dealings and is capable of assigning the appropriate reward or
punishment, there can be no obstacle in the way of his executing those
values which demand just reward or punishment for good or bad conduct.
We should naturally conclude, therefore, that God would reward the
righteous for his righteousness and uphold the right of the wronged
against his wrongdoer.

We notice, however, that rewards and punishments are not exacted by God
in this life, although he is capable of so doing. This demonstrates, if
we take into account our previous arguments, that there will come a day
of judgement on which the righteous person whose good deeds and
sacrifice in the way of noble ideals which went unnoticed in this life,
and the wrongdoer who lived on the destruction and blood of innocent
people and had escaped punishment in this life, will both reap their
just reward and punishment. This is the day of resurrection, which will
embody all these absolute values by which human conduct will be judged;
without it they would remain meaningless.

[^1]: On Newton's law of gravitation, see Classical Mechanics, H.
Goldstein ( Redding, Mass.: Edison Wesley), fifth printing, 1957, p.65.
(Translator's footnote)

[^2]: Galileo's law of uniform accelerated motion is also Newton's
second law of motion. See ibid., p. l . (Translator's footnote)

[^3]: On Keppler's laws of planetary motion, see ibid., p.80. (
Translator's footnote)

[^4]: ibid., p.65. (Translator's footnote)

[^5]: No one exactly knows when this night occurs, but tradition. has it
that it comes during the month of Ramadan, perhaps the twenty-seventh.
On the essential significance of Laylatul - qadr, see Qur'an, chapter
97. ( Translator's footnote)

[^6]: For greater detail, see our book al-Usus al-mantaqiyyah
li'l-Istiqra', p.489.

[^7]: This we have done in our book, al-Usus al-mantiqiyyah
lil-Istiqra'. See especially the second part, pp. 131-410.

[^8]: ibid., pp.355-410.

[^9]: For greater detail, see ibid., p.146-247.

[^10]: There are two further problems which must be over-come. First, it
may be observed that any probable substitution for the wise Creator, in
accordance with the method of inductive argument, requites that every
phenomenon be fully adjusted to the process of life preservation and be
the creation of a blind necessity in matter. It further requires that
matter, in spite of inner contradictions and Its effects in itself, be
the cause of whatever phenomena take place in it. The purpose of the
inductive method is to establish a preference for the hypothesis of a
wise creator over any substitute theory. This is because that hypothesis
requires only one a priori supposition, namely, a wise being. Any
substitute theory, on the other hand, pre-supposes practical necessities
in matter equal to the number of the phenomena under investigation. The
probability of such a substitute would be the probability of a large
number of events and coincidences; it would therefore increasingly
diminish until it completely disappears. This would be the case only if
the hypothesis of a wise creator is not presupposed in explaining a
large number of occurrences and coincidences. This appears to be the
case because a wise creator, who would be an explanation for all the
phenomena in the universe, must himself possess aspects of knowledge and
power equal to their number. Hence, the number which this hypothesis
must pre-suppose should equal the number of blind necessities which any
substitute theory must presuppose. The question, then, must be asked:
Which of the two hypothesis should be preferred? In answer, it must be
said that a preference arises from the fact that these blind necessities
are completely unrelated, in that the presupposition of any one of them
in no way determines the possibility of the existence or non-existence
of any other one. This means in the language of the computation of
probabilities that each occurrence must be independent from any other
one, or at least the degree of probability of each must be independent
from that of any other one. In contrast, the knowledge and potencies
which are required by the hypothesis of a wise creator behind the
phenomena under investigation, are not independent because what is
required in the way of knowledge and power as cause of some of the
phenomena, must also be required for all. Thus the presupposition of any
number of aspects of knowledge or power is not in-different to the
presupposition of any other number. Rather, the one is inherently
required by the other. This further means, in the language of the
computation of probabilities, that the possibility of the entire cluster
of aspects of knowledge and power is conditioned by the fact that the
possibility of some as inferred from the possibility of others is so
high that it often reaches the level of absolute certainty. If we wish
to evaluate the aggregate of knowledge and power (which we must
presuppose the wise Creator to possess) and compare it with its
counterpart of blind necessities, as to their degree of probability, we
must follow the method of the multiplication of the degrees of
probability which is based on the principle of computation of
probabilities. The value assigned to each member of this, aggregate must
equal the of every other member, and so on. This computation, as we
know, leads to the decrease of probability and as the computation
factors diminish in number, the degree of improbability diminishes in
like proportion. The multiplication principle, whether it be conditioned
or independent, can demonstrate mathematically that in conditional
probabilities we should multiply the degree of one with that of another;
though we must presuppose the existence of the first member, which is
often certain or very close to certainty. Thus the multiplication could
not lead to absolute invalidation or to a very small degree of
probability. This is in contrast to independent probabilities, each
member of which would be neutral with regard to any other. In the first
instance the computation would lead to great contradictions in value.
From this would also result the necessity of a detailed application of
one method in favour of the other, in order to explain the conditional
principle of multiplication as well as the independent principle. (For
further clarification of the principle of independent and conditional
probability, see al Usus al mantiqiyyah li'l istiqra, pp. 153-154.) The
other problem is that arising from assigning a value to the prior
probability (Ihtimal qabli) of the case which has been demonstrated
inductively. In order for this to be clarified, a comparison must be
made between the inductive proof of the Creator, and its application in
our previous example demonstrating that the letter you had received in
the mail was actually from your brother. This example implies that the
speed with which a person arrives at the belief that the letter he
received was actually sent by his brother (even before opening the
letter and reading it) is directly influenced by the probability of the
case. This we call \`the prior probability of the case.' If, before
opening the letter, he supposes fifty per cent probability that his
brother would send a letter to him, then he would quickly arrive at the
belief that the letter was actually from his brother, in accordance with
the five steps of the inductive argument already discussed. If, on the
other hand, the possibility of receiving a letter from his brother is
negligible, because there is a high degree of probability that his
brother was dead, he would not so quickly conclude that the letter was
from his brother, unless he receives further evidence. What, then is the
way to demonstrate the existence of the Creator on the analogy of the
principle of prior probability of the case? In reality, the case of the
existence of the wise Creator, praised be He, does not fall under the
law of probability. It is rather, an a prior truth whose 'certainty
man's native intuition (fitrah) and conscience or pure sentiment
(wijdan) assert. If, however, we suppose that it is a case of
probability and wish to demonstrate' it by the inductive method, then we
would determine the value of its prior probability in the following
manner. We begin by considering every phenomenon under investigation
independently. Two possibilities would then present themselves: One is
that of a wise creator, the other of a bend necessity in matter. Since
we are faced with two possibilities without any prior justification for
preferring either one over the other, we should divide the numerical
ratio of certainty equally between them, so that each would be assigned
fifty per cent. Since, however, the probabilities in favour of a wise
creator are interconnected and conditioned, in contrast with those of
blind necessity, which are independent and unconnected, the
multiplication results constantly in a decrease of the probability in
the hypothesis of blind necessity and a constant in-crease of the
probability of the hypothesis of a wise creator. I have observed,
however, after long study, that the reason why the inductive scientific
argument does not meet with much approval in European thought and is
rejected by thinkers like Bertrand Russel is the inability of those
thinkers to overcome the two problems which we have here indicated and
solved. (For an in depth discussion of the application of the inductive
argument for the existence of a creator and the way in which it is
possible to overcome these two problems, see al-Usus, pp. 441-451.)

[^11]: For a detailed discussion of this point and the methods of pure
logic and positive logic as these relate to it, see al-Usus . . .
pp.480-500.

[^12]: This is the dialectical process of thesis, antithesis and
synthesis on which Marxist materialism is based. (Translator's footnote)


