Part 3: The Message
===================

Islam
-----

As for the message, it is Islam, the religion of God with which He sent
Muhammad, Allah's blessings and peace be upon him and his household, as
a mercy to humankind.[^1] The first and foremost purpose of Islam is the
establishment of a relationship between man and his Lord and man's
return *(ma\`ad)* to God (on the Day of Judgement).

Thus it first related man to the One and true God, to Whom man's
untainted native religious intuition *(fitrah)* points. It stressed the
Oneness of the true God in order to abolish all manner of artificial
deification, so that it made the profession of Divine Oneness
*(shahadah),* “There is no God but Allah,” its motto.

Since prophethood is the only direct mediation between creation and the
Creator, its witness for the oneness of God, the Creator, and its link
with the One and true God may be considered as sufficient basis for the
proof of Divine Unity *(tawhid).* Secondly, the connection of man with
the bay of Judgement and the return *(ma'ad)* to God is stressed in
order that the only way in which conflicts may be resolved and at the
same time Divine Justice established can be found, as we have already
seen.

The message of Islam has its own characteristics which distinguish it
from all other heavenly messages. It has its peculiar qualities which
make it a unique event in history. We shall now discuss briefly a few of
these qualities and characteristics.

First, this message has remained sound within the Qu'anic text without
becoming subject to any change or alteration *(tahrif)* while other
heavenly scriptures suffered alteration and became devoid of much of
their content. God the exalted says:

“***We have surely sent down the noble recitation (the Qur'an) and We
shall surely safeguard it.***“ (Qur'an, 15:9)

The preservation of the religious and legislative contents of the
message is the only means of enabling it to continue to play its
educative role in society.

A message that becomes devoid of its content through loss or alteration,
becomes inadequate as a link between man and his Lord. This is because
this link is achieved not through mere nominal membership in a religious
community, but through interaction with an interiorization of the
contents of the message, both in thought and conduct. For this reason
the soundness of the message of Islam has been safeguarded by the
soundness of the Qur'anic text, which provides the message with the
necessary condition enabling it to carry out its aims.

The second characteristic is that the preservation of the Qur'an, both
in letter and spirit, means that the prophethood of Muhammad, Allah's
blessings and peace be upon him and his household, did not lose the most
important argument in proof of its validity. This is because the Qur'an
itself as containing the fundamentals of the message and its sacred law,
stands as the inductive proof, in accordance with our preceding
arguments, of the prophethood of Muhammad and his apostleship. This
proof will remain valid as long as the Qur'an itself remains.

In contrast with this fact are other prophethoods, the proof of which is
linked to specific, occurrences which happened in a moment and were no
more, such as the healing of the blind and the leper. Such occurrences
are witnessed only by their contemporaries. With the passing of time and
the succession of centuries, such an events loses their primary
witnesses. It becomes thereafter difficult if not impossible to
ascertain their truth by means of research and investigation. God would
not oblige men to believe in or to seek to prove any prophethood whose
proof could not be historically ascertained. This is because

“***..... God does not burden a soul except with that which He has given
it. . .***“ (Qur'an, 65:7)

If today we rely on our faith in earlier prophets and their miracles, it
is because we rely on the reports of the Qur'an.

Thirdly, the mere passage of time, as we have argued, does not diminish
the basic argument for the validity of the Islamic message. Not only
this, it provides the argument with new dimensions through the-growth of
human knowledge and man's tendency to study the universe through
scientific methods and experimentation. Furthermore, the Qur'an itself
preceded modern science in this trend.

It linked its argument for the existence of the wise Creator with the
study of the universe and the investigation of its phenomena. It alerted
man to the mysteries and benefits that would accrue to him from such an
investigation. Even modern man can still find in this book (which was
proclaimed by an unlettered man in an ignorant environment hundreds of
years ago) clear allusions to the discoveries of modern science.

Thus the British orientalist, A.J. Arberry, Professor of Arabic at
Oxford University, said when modern science discovered the role of the
wind in plant fertilization, “Camel herdsmen knew that the wind plays a
role in the pollination of trees and fruits centuries before European
science discovered this fact.”[^2]

Fourthly, this message has encompassed aspects of life. On this basis
it-has been able to balance these various aspects. It was able to unify
their principles and combine in one perspective the mosque and the
university; the factory and, the field, so that man is no longer obliged
to live in a dichotomy between his spiritual and material life.

Fifthly, this message is the only heavenly message which was implemented
by the messenger, who brought it, and in the process of this
implementation, achieved dazzling success. It was able to turn the
slogans it proclaimed into realities in the daily lives of human beings.

As the message entered into the stage of implementation, it entered into
human history and shaped it; this is the sixth characteristic. The
message, furthermore, was the cornerstone in the process of constituting
the community which bore it and followed the light of its guidance.
Because this message is of a divine origin; constituting the gift of
heaven to earth, above the logic of concrete factors and influences, the
history of its community was consequently linked to an unknown
*(ghaybi)* factor. It has an unseen basis which is not subject to the
materialistic considerations of history.

It is therefore a mistake for us to understand our history only in the
context of concrete factors and influences. Nor should we consider it as
the result of materialistic circumstances, or simply a development in
the capacities of production. Such a view of history does not apply to a
community whose very being is based on heavenly message. Hence, unless
we include this message as a divine reality in our assessment, we cannot
understand our history correctly.

The seventh point we wish to make is that the effect of this message was
not limited to the task of building a community. It rather went beyond
it to become an effective power in the world throughout history. Fair
minded European scholars have admitted that the Islamic cultural push
was the power which awakened Europe from its slumber and guided it to
its new course.

The Prophet Muhammad, Allah's blessings and peace be upon him and his
household, who came with this message, (which is our eighth point) must
be distinguished from all other prophets in the way he presented his
message. This is because the message itself was the last divine
dissertation; thus he declared that his was the final prophethood.

The idea of the seal of prophecy rests on two arguments. The first is a
negative one based on the fact that no Other prophet, had appeared since
on the stage of history. The other is a positive one, asserting the
continuity of this final prophethood, across the ages. It is important
to observe that the negative argument has held true for the fourteen
centuries which followed the appearance of Islam, and will continue to
do so for all time to come.

The fact that no other prophethood has since appeared on the stage of
history does not mean that prophethood has lost its role as one of the
foundations of human culture. Rather it is because the final prophethood
came as heir to all the messages expressed by the long history of
prophecy. It also contained all the perennial values proclaimed by
earlier prophetic messages, not the transient values which surrounded
the long evolution of that history. It therefore became the
authoritative norm capable of withstanding the test of time with all the
factors of novelty and evolution it had brought.

***“We have sent down to you the Book in truth, confirming that of the
scriptures which was revealed before it and safeguarding it ...“
(Qur'an, 5:48)***

The ninth point we wish to make is that divine wisdom, which had sealed
prophethood with Muhammad, decreed that he should have vicegerents
*(awsiya')* who would carry the burdens of spiritual leadership
*(imamah)* and temporal authority *(khilafah)* after the end of
prophethood. They are twelve imams appointed by clear texts *(nass)*
from the Prophet, peace be upon him and his household, in many authentic
traditions *(ahadith),* on whose authenticity all Muslims have agreed.

The first is the Commander of the Faithfuls 'Ali (Amir al-mu'minin), son
of Abu Talib, then his two sons al-Hasan and al-Husayn, respectively.
Husayn was followed by nine of his descendants, in the following order:
his son 'Ali as-Sajjad (the Prayerful); then his son Muhammad al-Baqir
(penetrator of divine knowledge); followed by his son Ja'far as-Sadiq
(the Truthful); then his son Musa al-Kazim (the Serene One or one who
conceals his anger); followed by his son \`Ali ar-Rida (the one
contented. with God) then his son Muhammad al-Jawad (the Magnanimous);
then his son 'Ali al-Hadi (the guide to truth); followed by his son
Hasan al-\`Askari and the last, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Mahdi (the
rightly guided one).

Finally, during the occultation *(ghaybah) of* the twelfth Imam, peace
be upon him, Islam has referred the people to the jurist-scholars. Thus
it opened the gate *of ijtihad,* that is to say, the discovery of legal
judgements, on the basis of the Book, (the Qur'an) and *sunnah*
(prophetic practice).

*Al-Fatawa al-wadihah is* an example *of* personal effort *(ijtihad)* in
the discovery *of* the ordinances *of* the Islamic *shari\`ah* (sacred
law) with which the seal of the prophets, God's blessings be upon him
and the noble guides, his pure descendants, was sent. I began writing
this brief treatise on the fundamentals of religion on the
twenty-seventh day of *Dhu'l-hijjah,* 1396 and completed it on the
afternoon of the tenth day of the sacred month, Muharram, 1397.

We finished writing the last lines while sorrow was wringing the heart
and tearing the soul. Today we live the day of \`Ashura', commemorate
the, martyrdom of the eternal hero of Islam, Imam Husayn, son of 'Ali,
peace be upon them both, who sacrificed his precious-blood on this day.
This he did in order for us to stand firm on the path of The Revealer
(*al Mursil*), The Messenger *(ar-Rasul* ) and The Message *(ar-Risalah
).*

He faced death with his soul and all his loved ones with unequalled
courage. All this he did in defence of the Message and the establishment
of its standards, for the protection of the wronged ones and the
alleviation of the sufferings of those who are tormented on earth. He
fell along with the elect of his household and companions at the hands
of reprobates, in defence of Islam and Muslims everywhere and in every
age.

He died in defence of a community where reprobates wished to deprive it
of its will and to freeze its revolutionary conscience and its sense of
its own existence. The Master of Martyrs stirred its conscience with his
blood and by his courageous stand revived its will, and with his
calamitious death rekindled its great feelings.

To you; O' my master, Abu 'Abdillah, (al Husayn) I present the divine
merit *(thawab)* of this treatise. With the copious flow, of your
precious blood you have preserved the lofty edifices of thought: With
the power of your stirring voice, the Message reached us sound and
fragrant with the blood of martyrs, with your blood and the blood of
your children throughout history. I seek guidance from God alone, He is
our refuge “To God do we belong and to Him shall be our return.”

[^1]: See Qur'an, 21:107. ( Translator's footnote)

[^2]: In this he refers to God's words: And we have sent the winds as
fecundators. (Qur'an, 25:22)


