Glossary
========

*ADAM:* non-being, the opposite of *wujud* (existence).

AWSIYA': vicegerents or representative of the Prophet, referring
specifically to the twelve Imams.

*BASATAH:* simplicity; as a philosophical term, it refers to an
uncomposite thing or being, which is not subject to generation and
corruption.

*DALIL.:* proof or argument; an argument to demonstrate a hypothesis.

*DALL FALSAFI:* the philosophical proof or argument, used specifically
to prove the existence of God.

*DALIL ISTIQRA':* inductive proof or argument; in this book specifically
used to indicate-the method of scientific induction used to prove the
existence of God.

*DIN:* religion or faith; an ideal to which a person adheres and is
willing to be judged by.

*FATWA (pl. fatawa*): legal opinion issued 'by a jurist dealing with a
current problem.

*FITRAH:* that width is originally created; specifically, man's original
state of pure intuitive knowledge of God; generally, the native
religious sense.

*AL-GHAYB:* unknown, unseen and unpredictable; usually used to refer to
divine knowledge of things to come, e.g., the Day of Judgement.

*GHAYBAH:* lit., absence; used to describe the concealment or
occultation of the twelfth Imam, who is in the world but hidden from
human sight.

*HADITH:* an account, report or a statement; technically, traditions or
statements related from the prophet on the authority of various
transmitters.

*HISAB AL-IHTIMALAT:* the reckoning, computation or calculation of
degrees of probability, both positively and negatively.

*IHTIMAL ( pl. ihtimalat*) : probability; something possible or likely
to happen.

*IHTIMAL QABLI:* antecedent or prior possibility, that is, prior to the
investigation of the probability of a thing by the inductive method.

*IJTTHAD:* effort; specifically, considered personal opinion arrived at
through to effort of inference, induction or analogy.

*'ILLAH:* cause; a technical term used in Aristotelian philosophy; cf.
ma'lul.

*IMAMAH:* leadership; generally used to describe the leader, imam, in
prayer; also a religious head of community. Technically, the term refers
to the authority or leadership of the imams, descendants and successors
of the Prophet.

*IMKAN:* possibility; used philosophically, the term refers to the
possibility or potentiality in the thing itself as well as an external
power which can bring a thing into being or which effects a major change
in it.

*ISTIDLAL:* to use an argument or proof in establishing a point or
hypothesis.

*ISTIHALAH:* Impossibility; the opposite of *imkan* (possibility).

*ISTINBAT:* to delve into or penetrate a matter with the view of
inferring a new idea or 'principle.

JUZ': part or part of a whole; used also philosophically to refer to
particulars, in contrast with universals, *cf. kull*

*KATHRAH:* multiplicity or variety; opposite of *wahdah* ( unity).

*KHILAFAH:* representation of succession; more technically, the term is
used to refer to the temporal authority of the Prophet's successors,
caliphs.

*KULL:* lit., all; philosophically used to mean 'whole' or universals,
in contrast with *juz*' (particulars).

*MA\`AD:* lit., return; the return of the soul to God who is its source
of being *(mabda');* generally, the Day of Resurrection.

*MA'LUL:* effect; a philosophical term used to signify the effect of a
cause; cf. *'illah. ,*

*MANTIQ:* lit., speech; philosophically used to mean logic.

*AL-MANTIQ AS-SURI ASH-SHAKLI:* formal logic.

*NASS*: text transmitted or dictated, or statement establishing a
principle; specifically, the appointment of the *imams* by the Prophet.

*SHARI\`AH:* lit., highway; it is the way to follow as stipulated by
sacred law of Islam.

*SUNNAH ( pl. sunan ) : trodden* path, way or example, when referring to
the *sunnah* of the Prophet; custom, when referring to cultural
patterns; universal law when referring to natural phenomena.

*TA'AKHKHUR:* posteriority or . that which succeeds something else;
specifically, the posteriority of the effect to the cause; opposite of
*taqaddum* (priority).

*TAHRIF:* deviation or alteration; specifically, alteration of the
earlier scriptures.

*TAQADDUM:* priority or something proceeding something else;
specifically, priority of the cause to the effect; opposite of
*ta'akhkhur* (posteriority).

*TARAKKUB:* compositeness; opposite of simplicity, specifically used to
distinguish the composite temporal from the simple eternal being.

*TAWHID:* Divine Oneness; specifically, the profession of the Oneness of
God.

*WAHDAH:* unity; specifically of being or the universe, being the source
of *kathrah ( multiplicity),* which is its opposite.

WIJDAN: feeling, sentiment or conscience; the source of the unconscious
reactions of a human being to his environment.

*WUJUD:* existence or being, signifying being not as an abstract
principle, but a dynamic force or presence; opposite of *'adam*
(non-being)


