Abstract
========

A brief review of some of the major proposals for the project of Islamic
social sciences are given. It is observed that in all of these
proposals, interpretation and understanding are crucial. Hermeneutics is
introduced in the broad sense of the study of interpretation and
understanding, and a brief review of its developments is given, with an
emphasis on the work of Gadamer. Some of the problems of the application
of hermenteutics are discussed along with suggestions about the rational
evaluation of competing views that may be formulated in initially
incommensurable languages.

The idea of religious hermeneutics is next developed with reference to
the positions that have been taken by Bultmann, Plantinga, and Nasr; and
on this basis three grades of religious hermeneutics are distinguished.
An attempt is made to overcome some problems for an Islamic hermeneutics
with reference to proposals by William Chittick and Leo Strauss.
Problems with the application of an Islamic hermeneutics are reviewed
and solutions offered.

The view that the objectivity of science precludes religious science is
rejected in favor of the view that objectivity does not depend on
neutrality but on articulation, the process of making assumptions and
presuppositions explicit and to formulate them with ever greater
precision (where this is appropriate).

Complications that arise for the application of an Islamic hermeneutics
for the social sciences are surveyed, and it is proposed that the
application of an Islamic hermeneutics for the social sciences must be
developed in a dialectical relationship to the scientific traditions
whose secularity gave rise to the calls for sacred science, and in
particular for Islamized social sciences.

Keywords: hermeneutics, sacred science, Islamized science,
interpretation, understanding, philosophy of the social sciences,
Bultmann, Gadamer, Nasr, Plantinga.


