2. Hermeneutics
===============

To begin with, we need a working understanding of hermeneutics, and this
is itself a rather contentious issue, for the term is used both for a
discipline and for a school of thought. In ancient Greece, the term was
used in a general way for problems of interpretation and
understanding.[^1] In the Middle Ages, the term was used for Biblical
exegesis. It is generally agreed that hermeneutics remained tied to the
issue of textual exegesis until the 19th century and the work of
Schleiermacher (1768-1834) and Dilthey (1833-1911).

Following the Romantics' idea that all understanding is interpretive,
Schleiermacher and Dilthey (especially the latter) expanded the notion
of hermeneutics. Schleiermacher, for the first time, offered a general
hermeneutics for the interpretation of any text, not just the Bible and
ancient texts. Dilthey takes us beyond the understanding of texts, to
the interpretation of history and society.

Both Schleiermacher and Dilthey bring philosophical reflection to
hermeneutics. Dilthey, however, also limited the range of hermeneutics
by making a sharp distinction between the natural sciences and the human
sciences or Geijtejwijjenjchaften, and between explanation and
understanding. He held that the natural sciences explain nature, while
the human sciences seek to provide understanding (Verjtehen) of
historical life. The goal of hermeneutics, according to Dilthey, is
understanding, not explanation.

Although Dilthey's firm distinction between the natural sciences and the
social and other human sciences became entrenched in most subsequent
discussions of hermeneutics, we can ignore this controversy, since our
concern here is with the social sciences. Suffice it to say that there
is a growing recognition that the natural sciences depend on
interpretive assumptions no less than the humanities, and that the
relation of explanation and understanding is closer than Dilthey
imagined. It is through explanations that one gains understanding, and
the ability to explain requires understanding.

With the publication of Heidegger's Sein und Zeit in 1927, hermeneutics
takes what is called an ontological turn. Heidegger considers human
existence, Dajein, to be essentially interpretive. In earlier thinkers
the "hermeneutic circle" was understood as the mutual dependence of the
understanding of the whole of a text and its parts, and also the mutual
dependence of the understanding of a tradition and the texts that
constitute it. In Heidegger, another form of hermeneutic circle arises
in the recognition of the mutual dependence of an understanding of the
world and self-understanding.

*.[B]ecause Dasein is fundamentally embedded in the world, we simply
cannot understand ourselves without the detour through the world, and
the world cannot be understood without reference to Dasein's way of
life. This, however, is a perpetual process. Hence, what is precarious
here is not, as in the earlier hermeneutic tradition, the moment when we
are able to leave the hermeneutic circle, where our interpretative
endeavors culminate in a lucid, clear, and indubitable grasp of the
meaning of the text. What matters, Heidegger claims, is the attempt to
enter the circle in the right way, with a willingness to realize that
the investigation into the ontological conditions of my life ought to
work back on the way in which my life is led.*

*With this turn towards ontology, the problems of philology become
secondary. Hermeneutics now deals with the meaning-or lack of meaning-of
human life: it is turned into an existential task.*[^2]

As Ramberg and Gjesdal go on to explain, after Heidegger, the most
important development of hermeneutic theory comes with Gadamer's
Wahrheit und Methode (1960). Gadamer accepts Heidegger's ontological
view of hermeneutics, but delves further into how hermeneutics may serve
as a basis for the Geijtejwijjenjchaften. For Gadamer, the reader and
the text are in a mutually dependent relationship that is his version of
the hermeneutic circle.

Through the dialogical interrelation between the reader and a textual
tradition, a "fusion of horizons" may be achieved through which
understanding takes place. In order to explain how an effective
engagement with texts is possible, Gadamer refers to Aristotle's views
of practical reasoning (phronesis), and Kant's theory of judgment. There
is no set method that can be applied to every text, but rather the
reader must develop sensitivity and appreciation of the texts that are
to be engaged.

Gadamer's theory has given rise to much criticism. Some have argued in
favor of a more classical approach to texts, as in the tradition of
Schleiermacher. Others, like Habermas, have argued that Gadamer's theory
gives too much authority to tradition. However, the greatest criticism
of Gadamer's hermeneutics is the charge of relativism. Gadamer has
responded to the charge, as have others on his behalf, and these
responses have elicited further criticism. It is not my purpose to
review the debate, although I will say that the criticism seems more
fittingly applied to certain interpretations of Gadamer's work, like
Rorty's, than to Gadamer's own views.

A number of further developments in hermeneutic theories are also not
directly relevant to the purpose of our inquiries, such as the debate
over communicative ethics, and the relation between hermeneutics and
genealogy. Gadamer retains Dilthey's distinction between the natural
sciences and the Geijtejwijjenjchaften, while a number of more recent
hermeneutical studies have convincingly argued that the natural sciences
are as much involved in interpretation as the social sciences.[^3] What
is relevant to the project of Islamic social sciences and the more
general sacralization of the sciences, is the application of
hermeneutics to the social sciences.

Just as the project of the Islamization of the sciences is contentious
because it is associated with rival ideological positions among Muslim
thinkers, so, too, hermeneutics is contentious because of the rival
political and broadly philosophical positions taken by its advocates. It
is my purpose to try to bracket such issues as much as possible in order
to consider how what Al- Attas called "elements and key concepts" of
Islam may form a basis for interpretation to be employed in the social
sciences. So, I will use the term hermeneutics in the very general sense
of the study of interpretation, whether or not this study conforms to
the views of Schleiermacher, Gadamer, Ricoeur, or anyone else.
Furthermore, the thinking of the major contributors to hermeneutic
theory is also a matter of some controversy, especially in the case of
Gadamer. I will assume in what follows that various points made by
Gadamer in the development of his hermeneutic theory may be accepted
without accepting the pernicious forms of relativism that have been
attributed to him.

[^1]: This is suggested by Aristotle's work, Ilepl 'EpÂµ1vsim; or Peri
Hermeneias, known by its Latin name, De Interpretatione.

[^2]: Ramberg and Gjesdal (2009).

[^3]: See Ihde (1999).


