5. Applied Islamic Hermeneutics
===============================

For Bultmann and van Fraassen, there is no ultimate contradiction
between science and religion because science is objectifying inquiry
while religion speaks to the attitude one takes toward one's existence
in all its subjectivity. On this view, it would be a mistake to try to
apply a religious hermeneutics to the social sciences, for the social
sciences, as sciences, are a part of objectifying inquiry while
religious hermeneutics requires us to take a stance toward social
phenomena that falls outside the realm of science. In dealing with
historical phenomena, however, Bultmann insists that we cannot limit
ourselves to objectifying inquiry. Hence, there will be a specifically
religious understanding of social phenomena, but no specifically
religious social sciences, although there is a specifically religious
hermeneutics of social phenomena.

For Plantinga, on the other hand,

*It would be excessively naïve to think that contemporary science is
religiously and theologically neutral.. Perhaps parts of science are
like that: the size and shape of the earth and its distance from the
sun, the periodic table of elements, the proof of the Pythagorean
Theorem- these are all in a sensible sense religiously neutral. But many
other areas of science are very different; they are obviously and deeply
involved in this clash between opposed worldviews. There is no neat
recipe for telling which parts of science are neutral with respect to
this contest and which are not, and of course what we have here is a
continuum rather than a simple distinction. But here is a rough rule of*
*thumb: the relevance of a bit of science to this contest depends upon
how closely that bit is involved in the attempt to come to understand
ourselves as human beings.*[^1]

For Nasr, there will certainly be a sacred form of hermeneutics that is
informed by the principles of perennial philosophy. Everything is to be
understood in terms of a grand perennial system of principles. Our
understanding of all phenomena and texts is to be governed by and
integrated into the Traditionalist worldview.

For Bultmann, Plantinga, and Nasr, the application of a religious
hermeneutics will require considerable work. It is not a matter of
simply taking note of religious assumptions and cosmic principles and
carrying on from there.

The work that these thinkers require for a religious hermeneutics may be
compared with what Paul Ricoeur called "the hermeneutics of suspicion".
Ricoeur used this term for the ways in which Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche
understood (or misunderstood) religion.[^2] While hermeneutics in the
tradition from Schleiermacher through Gadamer has sought to understand
the other in a sympathetic way, trying to understand, to the extant
possible, how the other looks at issues, gives reasons, and offers
justifications, Freud, Marx and Nietzsche sought to find reasons for
religious views and behavior of which those who display them are
unaware. If we ask the religious person why he or she believes in God,
answers may be given in terms of religious experience, intuitions, or
proofs for the existence of God. To the contrary, Freud, Marx and
Nietzsche argue that what lies behind religious belief is a projection
of the idea of the father, or propaganda to keep the working classes
from revolting, or a tendency for the weak and sheepish to deny to
themselves the power of their own wills. This sort of attempt to rely on
a psychological, sociological or economic analysis to ferret out
underlying causes of thought and behavior of which agents are not
consciously aware is also called genealogy.[^3]

Thomas Nagel has suggested that the genealogical method might be applied
not only to find the underlying reasons for religious phenomena, but
also to discover the underlying factors behind atheism.[^4] This would
provide for a hermeneutics of suspicion in reverse, as it were. Indeed,
the suspicion that the effects of sin are behind what on the surface
seem to be reasons for heretical beliefs may be found in various
religious traditions. In Calvinism, reason itself becomes an object of
suspicion.[^5]

Ricoeur proposes a hermeneutics of recollection to enable the researcher
who has passed through the gauntlet of the hermeneutics of suspicion to
emerge with a more profound understanding of the original intent of the
religious texts to be examined. This approach has been criticized as
being apologetic. D. Z. Phillips has proposed a hermeneutics of
contemplation in order to avoid interpretive programs with fixed
ends-either the undermining or defense of religion.[^6]

The hermeneutics of contemplation shares some affinity with the ideal of
the philosophical life championed by Leo Strauss, a life of free
intellectual inquiry into the truth of things. Phillips, like Strauss,
is also more concerned with the task of understanding religious texts,
texts that offer theological or philosophical discussions of religious
beliefs, and other religious phenomena, rather than with the task of
understanding from a religious point of view.

The religious point of view is explored in Westphal's study of the
hermeneutics of suspicion.[^7] Westphal's aim is to show how religious
thinkers might benefit from the insights of atheists without accepting
the atheism on which their thought is based. He uses religious language
to reinterpret Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche, not as they intended to be
understood, but as exposing how religion can be falsified when used to
satisfy projections of our own needs, or to placate those who are
exploited, or to allow the weak willed to feel self-righteous.

In calling Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche the great secular theologians of
original sin I have suggested that the hermeneutics of suspicion belongs
to our understanding of human sinfulness. The self- deceptions they seek
to expose, like those exposed by Jesus and the prophets, are sins and
signs of our fallenness.[^8]

Westphal's work suggests how a hermeneutic of suspicion may be
transformed into a religious hermeneutics. The hermeneutics of suspicion
operates by observing that the reasons that inform the
self-understanding of religious agents may be rationalizations that
serve to hide baser motives. Westphal transforms this into a religious
hermeneutics through the observation that the reasons that appear to
support religious behavior may hide a perversion of religion. The
recognition of this phenomenon is also suggested in the following surah
of the Qur'an (n. 107):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.***

> أَرَأَيْتَ الَّذِي يُكَذِّبُ بِالدِّينِ {1}

***1. Did you seen him who denies the Retribution?***

> فَذَٰلِكَ الَّذِي يَدُعُّ الْيَتِيمَ {2}

***2. that is the one who drives away the orphan,***

> وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ {3}

***3. and does not urge the feeding of the needy,***

> فَوَيْلٌ لِلْمُصَلِّينَ {4}

***4. so, woe to those who pray,***

> الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ صَلَاتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ {5}

***5. -those who are heedless of their prayers,***

> الَّذِينَ هُمْ يُرَاءُونَ {6}

***6. those who show off***

> وَيَمْنَعُونَ الْمَاعُونَ {7}

***7. but deny aid.***

Here we find a clear example of an apparently religious phenomenon,
prayer, that hides a non-religious motive, showing off. The criterion
that shows that the prayer is not genuine is the denial of aid. This
hardly constitutes a hermeneutics of suspicion, however, since it does
not presume that apparently religious phenomena are always caused by
hidden factors, but only that under circumstances of sinfulness, they
can be.

The application of an Islamic hermeneutics cannot take the route of
suspicion, recovery, or contemplation as a general rule for all cases,
if these are taken to mean suspicion with respect to apparent motives,
recovery of the original message given in a text or phenomenon, or a
philosophical neutrality with regard to these issues. Instead, good
judgment needs to be applied to each case, keeping in mind that it may
be necessary to posit multiple levels of meaning in order to provide the
best religious interpretation of the object of inquiry.

[^1]: Plantinga (1996), 178.

[^2]: See Ricoeur (1970).

[^3]: From Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morals. For a critical analysis, see
MacIntyre (1990); also see Westphal (1998), and Leiter (2004).

[^4]: See Nagel (1998) and the review: Legenhausen (2003).

[^5]: See Wainwright (1995).

[^6]: Phillips (2004).

[^7]: Westphal (1998).

[^8]: Westphal (1998), 288.


