6. Islamic Social Sciences
==========================

The task of applying an Islamic hermeneutics to the social sciences is
complicated by several factors. First, there is the old question about
whether there can even be such a thing as social science.

If science is objectifying inquiry, and the interpretation of social
phenomena cannot be an objectifying inquiry, it would seem that any
social science would be impossible, and, hence that there could be no
Islamic social science. Our suggestion is that the objectivity of
interpretive inquiry can be preserved through the articulation of the
assumptions upon which one's interpretation is based.

The idea that any hermeneutics must begin from one's own perspective
does not imply that this perspective cannot itself be articulated and
subject to critical examination. Second, if we grant that there can be
social sciences, and that hermeneutics will play a significant role in
them, would a religious hermeneutics not compromise the scientific
nature of the sciences?

The hermeneutical foundations of the social sciences, however, will not
be any more scientific for being value neutral or free from religious
ideas as long as the values and religious principles that inform the
hermeneutics are confessed from the outset. It must be admitted that all
of the factors that determine judgment in interpretation may not be
transparent to the interpreter; but efforts can be made to set out these
factors to the extent possible, develop greater awareness of them, and
to examine them critically. This can take place gradually through a
dialectical process in which inquiry and interpretation are undertaken.

Further complications arise because of the history of the relations
between theology and the social sciences in the past. Although this
history is about the attitudes taken by Christian theologians to the
social sciences as well as the attitudes prevalent in the nascent social
sciences toward Christianity, and a concept of religion generalized from
Christianity, it is essential for Muslims to become aware of how the
topic of religion and the social sciences has played out in the West if
they are to effectively advance a study of the social sciences in
accordance with Islam that is able to avoid some of the foibles that
continue to occur in other contexts.

Richard H. Roberts outlines five strategies employed by Christian
theologians to develop relations between theology and the social
sciences.

*First, the fundamentalist option involves the repudiation of modernity
and concomitant patterns of regression; second, theology can tend
towards reductive absorption into the social scientific perspective
(Ernst Troeltsch); third, the theologian may draw upon and use
sociological categories as part of his or her essentially theological
project (Dietrich Bonhoeffer, H. R. Niebuhr); fourth, theological and
sociological categories can be regarded as coinherent aspects of an
integral 'form of life', 'life-world' or 'phenomenology of tradition'
(Edward Farley) which subsists at a remove from the question of
modernity; fifth, the theologian may repudiate sociology as heretical
secular thought and posit the persuasive option of commitment to the
Christian cultural-linguistic practice ( JohnMilbank).*[^1]

After a survey of the five mentioned types, Roberts observes that
Christian theology's engagement with modern sociology has been marked by
discontinuity, if not incoherence. To the five views mentioned, we might
also add Roberts' own view, although he describes it as closest to that
of Bonheoffer, which emphasizes that the social sciences should be
counted among the human sciences, and as such are to be engaged in by
the theologian with the aim seeking a "new and active fusion of the
human sciences together with the articulation and admission of the human
right, following the example of Bonhoeffer, to express a
self-transcending identity."[^2]

The project of developing Islamic social sciences cannot succeed unless
it is understood that this project will have at least as much of an
effect on Islamic theology as it will on the social sciences. Roberts
writes:

*The fact that theology or metaphysical philosophy may once have
provided the basis of coherent identity and legitimation does not now
sanction regressions into a mythic past or the invocation of a utopian
futurity when we are faced with the challenge of secularisation and
modernity. On the contrary, other means have to be found through* *which
tradition(s), Enlightenment and critical reflexivity may be creatively
coordinated anew.*[^3]

There are various dangers associated with the project of the
Islamization or sacralization of the sciences, only some of which are
suggested by Roberts' discussion. If beginnings are made toward Islamic
social sciences, regardless of how exactly such sciences are understood,
these beginnings will be followed with the erroneous idea that it is
these new Islamic social sciences that should be studied in the
universities of the Muslim world and not the secular atheistic social
sciences of the corrupt West.

This would be a grave error because it will be essential for any Islamic
or sacred science to stand in a dialectical relationship with the
secular sciences. Islamic social science will not be able to flourish
without the study of secular social science any more than Islamic
philosophy would have been able to flourish without the study of the
Greeks. By relying on an Islamic hermeneutics as sketched above,
however, it may be hoped that a suitable foundation for Islamic social
sciences may be nurtured that will contribute to a sacred science that
has sufficient confidence to engage with the modern sciences in fruitful
dialogue.

[^1]: Roberts (2001), 194-195.

[^2]: Roberts (2001), 211.

[^3]: Roberts (2001), 210-211.


