7. Concluding Reflections
=========================

A number of Muslim writers have suggested that the modern sciences or
modern scientism are incompatible with Islam. This claim is more
plausibly made about scientism than about the sciences themselves,
although it must be admitted that the distinction is sometimes blurred,
as when researchers present theories interwoven with presumptions
contrary to religious belief. It has been suggested that there should be
a revival of "sacred science" or an Islamization of the sciences. This
project requires the undertaking of scientific research and theorization
within a religious or Islamic conceptual framework. The need to carry
out this project is felt especially urgently with regard to the social
sciences, in which values and worldview play a particularly prominent
role.

Hermeneutics is the study of interpretation and understanding. Although,
unfortunately, this study has sometimes been associated with
perniciously relativistic views, there is nothing about hermeneutics in
the general sense outlined here that requires this. The project of
nurturing sacred or Islamized sciences is essentially a hermeneutical
project, for it requires the reinterpretation and renewed understanding
of the sciences from a religious or Islamic perspective.

The idea of an Islamized science will face the objection that the
introduction of religious and metaphysical principles and values is
incompatible with science. Science is objectifying inquiry, it will be
argued, and this requires science to be free from the interference of
religion, metaphysics, and value judgments. To this objection, there are
two replies.

First, even the natural sciences are not as neutral as they are
advertised to be. Secondly, objectivity does not require neutrality, but
only a commitment to the ongoing task of making assumptions explicit.

In this paper, I have suggested three grades of religious hermeneutics
that may be employed to cultivate sacred sciences: (I) religious
understanding at the subjective level; (II) a rejection of
methodological naturalism with regard to (a) the description of
phenomena, (b) the evaluation of theories, and (c) theory construction;
(III) the positive integration of successful theories into a coherent
religious worldview.

Muslim scholars can only hope to develop religious hermeneutics along
the lines suggested here through the recovery of the Islamic
intellectual sciences, the conscious rejection of the scientistic
worldview, and an engagement with the sciences aimed at wisdom. For the
wisdom thus sought to have depth, it is essential for researchers to
consider the multiple layers of meaning to be found in the texts and
other phenomena that serve as objects of inquiry.

A hierarchical stratification of levels of meaning that begins with the
exterior/interior (zahir/batin) division will take shape, in sha' Allah,
through dialogue with the secular sciences as researchers draw on the
Islamic intellectual traditions to elaborate hermeneutical foundations
for Islamic social sciences.


