3. the Divine Permanent Guardianship On the System of Destiny and Fate in the Universe 5. “distinguishing Allah’s Formative Will From His Legislative Will”
===========================================================================================================================================================

If Allah the Sublime may never be disobeyed against His will then
disobedience may only take place by His permission, determination and
will. This is a fact we must conclude; then we may ask: How come that
Allah wants the people to disobey Allah, while He orders them not to do
so, never accepting or willing it? This is a complex at which the
historical debate between (Al Asha'irah) and (Al Mutazilah) used to come
to a stand still.

Ibn AL Khayat says: Husham bin Abdul Malik (the Caliph) on hearing
(Ghailan Al Damashqui)’s thesis of free choice sent for him and said to
him: Woe for you Ghailan! People keep talking about you, so tell us what
you really think, if it is right we shall adhere to you. Then Husham
asked the presence of (Maymoon bin Marwan) to discuss with Ghailan his
opinion. Ghailan asked him. Did Allah mean to be disobeyed? Maymoon
answered by asking him Was He disobeyed against his will? Ghailan was
stunned and could not answer, so Husham bin AbdulMalik dismembered
him.([^19])

It is also said that (Ghailan AL Damashqui) who used to believe in
man’s free choice came one day to (Rabiah AlRaii) who used to believe in
determinism of destiny and fate, addressing him thus: “Are you the one
who claims that Allah likes to be disobeyed?

(Rabiah) said: Are you the one who claims that Allah is disobeyed
against His will?([^20])

This incredible complex may be solved by distinguishing the formative
will from the legislative will, an attitude which the Progeny(A.S.)
adopted to solve this problem, perhaps for the first time during the
reasonable history of Islam. Then and only then, Ghailan’s answer to
Maymoon bin Marwan or to (Rabiah Al Raii) could be clear, He would not
have meditated long before giving the decisive answer to this strange
question.

The answer is:

Allah is never disobeyed by force against His will, if force and
obligation is meant to signify the (formative will) rather Allah the
Sublime is disobeyed by His own will without obligation or force as we
have already clearly exposed. If force and obligation is meant to
signify (the legislative will),

Allah then might be disobeyed though He dislikes disobedience for
people who often disobey Allah the Sublime, a thing which He dislikes
and abhors, and which brings about His wrath upon them, yet these
disobediences take place by His own will and permission under His reign
and dominion and by means of the potency and power that He had given to
the people.

The difference between both wills (to give leave or not to give)
connote no contradiction, if we thoroughly distinguish the formative
will from the legislative will. We do not know for sure whether such a
distinction between both wills was handy then or not.

It goes beyond suspicion that such distinction was not handy then, else
(Ghailan Al Damashqui) would have answered (Maymoon) or (Rabiah Al Raii)
if that narration happens to be correct.

Anyway, let us ponder over the texts that distinguish these wills
related by the Progeny (A.S.):

Al Kulainy narrates from Abi Abdullah(A.S.): I heard him says: (Allah
has issued his command but He did not want; in other cases He wanted but
did not issue His command.

He ordered Satan (Iblies) to prostrate before Adam, though He did not
want him to prostrate; ever he did, Satan would have prostrated. He also
ordered Adam not to eat from the tree, but He wanted him to eat from it;
ever He did not really want that; Adam would never have eaten).([^21])

The late Al Kulainy also relates from Ali bin Ibrahiem who relates from
(Al Mukhtar bin Muhammad AL Hamdany) and (Muhammad bin Al Hassan), from
(Abdullah bin Al Hassan Al Alawy), all these relate from (Al Fateh bin
Yazeed AL Jurgany) who relates from (Abi AL Hassan) (A.S.) who said:

(Allah has two wills and two wishes, a will of determinism and a will
of intention, He disapproves of something, yet He wishes it, other where
He commands man to do something yet He does not wish it, do not you see
that He has prevented Adam and his wife from eating the fruit of the
tree yet He did want them to eat; if ever He did not really want them to
eat, they would not have violated Allah the Sublime’s wish.

Other where, He ordered (Ibrahiem) to slay his son (Ismail), yet He did
not really want him to slay his son, if ever did he want that;
Ibrahiem’s will would have never exceeded the will of Allah the
Sublime).([^22])


**6. Man’s freedom of choice within the determinate circuit of destiny
and fate**

This point in particular is the major complex of the research, if ever
it is solved and clarified every thing prior or postal to it will be
clarified too.

Man – as his conscience and the Holy Quran reveal – owns his absolute
freedom to choose and act, his hesitation to make a choice proves his
free choice; furthermore his responsibility for his deeds, his remorse
or relief in choosing what is right or wrong certify his freedom of
choice. Conscience is a strong evidence that authenticates this fact.

At a previous place of this research we saw that Al Quran in a great
number of verses states man’s free choice, we are not concerned here to
prove this fact further. Man’s choice often or always brings him at a
cross way, and any way he chooses gains its decisiveness and finality
within the circuit of destiny and fate that is powerfully designed which
we have already explained.

Man has no way to get away from the circuit of destiny and fate, or to
get rid of its punctual predetermined grip. Man is doomed to live, move,
act and choose within this circuit as we have already stated. But he
always (or frequently) has an absolute freedom to choose either of the
various ways laid in front of him, and his decision is made with
definite knowledge and consciousness.

If an ill man really cares for his illness, referring himself to a
physician, taking the right medication, he will gain recovery; if he
neglects his disease, it will turn worse. If a student makes his best he
will pass successfully, and if he turns lazy neglecting his lessons he
will fail, if a worker moves himself doing his best in the bazaar, Allah
will enrich him, if he gives up searching for a job he will turn poor.
Man too, in keeping company with the corrupted will only attain their
corruption.

All these results are connected to destiny and unavoidable fate that
can not be suspected, for a man who does his best seeking knowledge will
necessarily turn knowledgeable, he is destined to this, the knowledge he
attains will be connected to the field in which he has worked regardless
of other fields; here, it is (destiny) that has decided; the amounts of
efforts he has exerted, the amount of study he has made are his
(fate).

Man’s free choice always concerns the dogmas, the factual statutes
(which we have dedicated to destiny and fate) show themselves in the
results.

Those dogmas always absolutely lead to these results there is no way
for man to avoid these decisive results, though he was absolutely free
to avoid one or more of these ways at the very beginning. Perhaps the
following gracious verse from surah (Ar’Rad) is not that far from this
meaning.

[Allah will not change the good and the bestowed condition of a people
until they change what is in themselves from good to evil] Surah ArRa'd
v. 11.

This way we see that Allah the Sublime has enabled man to make his free
choice amid destiny and fate, both in social life and in the universe,
thus his free choice will not inflect damage on the inevitability of
destiny and fate neither will destiny and fate effect man’s free choice
at all.

Ameerul Mumenien’s (A.S.) speech to the old man who asked him about
their campaign on (Al Sham) after ending the battle of (Safeen) refers
to this accurate meaning. We had already introduced this speech in the
first point of these. At the beginning of his speech the Imam(A.S.) says
(Aye, Aye old man! You may never climb a hill or descend into a valley
only by the destiny and fate of Allah.

This clearly states that in going to (Safeen) and fighting (Muawiah)
and return to (Al Kufah) they were only moving within the circuit of
destiny and fate never leaving it at all. When the old man concluded
from the Imam’s speech that they, during all this long period of time
had had no choice he said: “O, Ameerul Mumenien! Allah then will pay
back for my efforts); the Imam (A.S.) clarified for him that
misunderstanding by saying:

“Now, do you think it was an inevitable destiny and a compelling fate?
If it were so, Allah’s reward, punishment, command and prohibition would
have been meaningless… Allah the Sublime has assigned to the people
their tasks optionally, warning them just to keep them alert”.

Destiny and fate should be inevitably predestined and accurately
calculated, but that who has had a free choice at the beginning will
necessarily have freedom of choice at the stage of results, for results
are determined by the beginnings. If Allah enables man to succeed at the
beginnings, He will also enable him to pass the results, even though
those results might maintain their inevitable predestined nature in
compliance with their conditions and circumstances, and this is the
meaning of the Imam’s (A.S.) answer to the old man (Now, do you think it
was an inevitable destiny and a compelling fate? If it were so, Allah’s
reward would have been meaningless).

Al Quran expression of this alternation between man’s free choice of a
certain act and the inevitability of the results that follow, is an
accurate one, the Sublime says:

[All men will be held in pledge for their deeds] Al Muddathir 38.

Man, making a certain deed, gains this deed by his own free choice, but
he cannot get rid of the decisive results brought about by this deed,
thus he remains subject to it.

Then man, though living amid an accurate fixed system, yet he can shift
position from one destiny to another and from one fate to another.

Al Assbagh bin Nabatah narrated that Ameerul Mumenien(A.S.) who was
walking aside a leaning wall moved to walk aside another, somebody told
him; O Ameerul Mumenien, are you running away from the destiny of
Allah?

He (A.S.) said, “I am running away from the destiny of Allah to refuge
to the fate of Allah the Great and Almighty”.([^23])

AsSadouqu also related from Abi AlHassan Ali bin Musa Al Redha(A.S.)
who narrated from his father relating from his grand fathers and from
Ali bin Abi Taleb(A.S.) saying: The Messenger of Allah(S.A.) said: (The
destiny of Allah is only a free choice for the believers).([^24])

AsSadoque also narrated in (Al Etequadat).

As Sadiqu (A.S.) has been asked whether charms change destiny?


He (A.S.) answered: “They are part of destiny”.

The Messenger of Allah(S.A.) too was asked whether charms and medicines
change and alter destiny.

He (s.a) answered:

(Charms and medicines are part of Allah’s destiny).([^25])


**Allah is too merciful to torment people for a thing he had obliged
them to do**

This point in particular has been the center of dispute and struggle
with (Al Ashairah) who used to emphasize the inevitability of man’s
behaviour, confiscating his will and freedom of choice; hence the texts
of the progeny(A.S.) emphasized it so often, emphasizing, at the same
time – the other opposite point of view (i.e. rejecting man’s
independence and authorization that (Al Mutazilah) claimed, which is the
third point we have already discussed).

(Al Kulainy) in (Al Kafi) related; as well as (AL Sadouqu) who narrated
in (Al Tawheed) from (Yunus bin Abdul Rahmuan), from more than one who
narrated from (Abi Jaffar) and (Abi Abdullah) (A.S.) both said: (Allah
is too Merciful to oblige people to commit sins, thereafter to torture
them for these sins, and Allah is too dignified to demand something that
will never come to be existent).([^26])

Al Kulainy narrated from Hammad bin Ottoman from Abi Bassier from Abi
Abdullah (A.S.) saying:

(That who claims “Allah orders the people to commit misdeeds is lying
in his narration about Allah, and that who claims that good and evil are
due to him is lying to Allah).([^27])

The first point is a reference to the belief in determinism which was
adopted by (Al Ashairah) who used to dedicate man’s misdeeds directly to
Allah the Sublime.

The second point is a reference to (Al Mufawidha’s) dogma in dedicating
the destiny of good and the destiny of evil to man directly.

The progeny (A.S.) have so many texts in this respect.


