Chapter One : Historical Inevitability, Universal Inevitability
===============================================================

In the course of the philosophical history of reason we come across two
theories that set out from inevitability as a start point.

The first of which; concerns man’s behaviour, in particular, individual
and social behaviour.

The other pertains to the universal system as a whole. The first theory
tends to believe in the inevitability of man’s behaviour retarding his
will and negating its role ever in his behaviour.

The second theory tends to assert inevitability in the universal system
as a whole, claiming that the entire universe moves within an accurate
system according to the law of casualty. This system runs within a
serial chain, each one of its links is connected to the prior and the
following one within some inevitable system that does not change or drop
behind, and nobody’s will ever may interfere to shift it.

If we presume that we have found the key links in this series of the
general universal system, succeeding to read the cardinal order of these
links that keep the system in hold; then we shall be able to foretell
all events in the universe right to its last day.

Both theories run through each of the two eminent trends of thought,
the divine doctrine and the material one.

Some of those who believe that inevitability controls man’s behaviour
and history, do believe in Allah the Sublime, and they attribute this
inevitability to Him.

Others who belong to the opposite direction (the material trend) reach
to the same conclusion on the grounds of casualty law, or the
dialectical system of thought.

Thus both trends assert that both, mans behaviour and his history are
inevitable.

The second inevitability (the universal) in its turn does not concern
this party or that exclusively; it is quite possible that both
materialists and religious may adhere to it.

The Jews are one of the religious groups that tend to follow the trend
of the universal inevitability. The Sublime said:

[The Jews said: Allah’s hand is fettered. Be their hands fettered and
they be cursed for what they uttered] Al Maidah v. 64.

A wide sect of Muslims that is called (Al Ashairah) as well tends to
believe that man’s behaviour is inevitable.

The Marxists as a sect from the materialists believe that this
inevitability governs man’s history, (calling it – by their terminology
– the universal necessity. Translator)


**The Negative Results of These Two Inevitabilities**

These two inevitabilities lead to negative results in man’s history of
thought, they also lead to negative results in man’s political history,
for they will necessarily lead to the presumption that there is a
compulsory system in the universe; a system that can never be adjusted
changed or shifted. And interpretation as such connotes retarding the
potency of the will of Allah the Sublime, expelling the domination of
His sovereignty over the universal system. This applies to the universal
inevitability respectively.

The definite result that the inevitability in man’s behaviour and
history brings about is the belief in suspending man’s will.

Both these dangerous results are necessarily produced by these two
inevitabilities.

The Political Misuse of the Historical Inevitability:

The rulers and regimes have widely politically exploited both
inevitabilities.

Adhering to behavioural and historical inevitability suspends man’s
active role and will to change his circumstances of living and his
political history, turning him from an active impressive element who can
influence the movement of history and change his social circumstances of
living into a character floating in the current of history and life,
running wherever this current runs.

Such a kind of thinking usually serves the ends of oppressive political
regimes. For, in a social media that thus adheres to fatalism,
inevitability and determinism, any apparent opposition for the political
regime may hardly show.

Therefore the theory of historical inevitability often meets approval
and support from the politically oppressive regimes. The rulers
encourage such thought tendencies towards destiny and fate to keep on
the safe side from people’s rage, rebellion and objections. For there is
no way for rage, rebellion and objections as long as all oppression and
blood shed are predestined and designed by Allah, and no man has any
power or right to change and adjust them!

**(Benou Aumyah), Behavioral and Historical Inevitability**

It became well known that (Benou Aumyah) used to adopt the doctrine of
determinism to interpret history and man’s behaviour, instructing people
that their injustice, oppression, suppression, Muslim’s treasury
looting… etc, are predestined by Allah the Sublime’s inevitable destiny
which nobody may protest against and none may resist.

(Al Hassan Al Bassry) had a tendency to contradict them in the matter
of (destiny) believing that people are free to decide their destiny and
Allah the Sublime does note inevitably impose their destiny on them; (Al
Hassan Al Bassry) sometimes used to propagate this opinion of his, so
some people frightened him of the authority (Al Sultan).

Ibn Sa’ad in (Al Tabaquat) quotes (Ayoob):

(Several times I discussed destiny with (Al Hassan), then I threatened
him by the authorities, so he said: I shall never say anything about
that again.)

At the age of (Al Hassan Al Bassry) the authority that reigned was
(Benou Aumyah). A fact that inspires us to conclude, they used to
consolidate the theory of behavioral and historical inevitability
extending it to the extremes of terrorism and suppression.

Strange enough, the advocates of polytheism used to justify their
polytheism and idolatry by this inevitability!

The Sublime – mouthpiecing them – says:

[And these pagans have said: if it had not been the will of ArRahman we
would not worship these idols they say these out of ignorance; they say
nothing but lies.] Az Zukhruf v. 20.


