2. “al Quran Denies Authorization and Man’s Independence”
=========================================================

The way Al Quran rejects inevitability in man’s social and individual
behaviour, it also absolutely denies man’s independent behaviour off
Allah’s reign, being completely authorized from Allah the Sublime in his
affairs and movement (the way AlMufawidah – a sect of Al Mutazilah –
claim).

We survey hereafter nine categories of verses taken from the Book of
Allah that openly deny the principle of man’s independence and
authorization to act.

**First Category:**

Verses that affirm man’s continuous need to Allah the Sublime:

1. [O men! You are all in need of Allah and Allah is the praiseworthy
Independent.] Fater v. 15.

**Second category:**

Verses that confirm Allah the Sublime’s absolute reign over man with no
restriction or exception.

The Sublime Says:

2. [And had Allah willed, He would have taken a way by thunder and
lightning their faculties of hearing and seeing, truly Allah is powerful
over all things] Al Baquarah 20.

3. [And if Allah should let you (O, Man!) be touched by any harm none
can remove that affliction but Allah and if Allah should let any good
happens to you, (Nothing can deprive you from it), verily Allah is
powerful over all (things)] Al Anam v. 17.

4. [When Allah opens the gate of His grace to a nation, no one can
close it, and the gate of His grace that He closes against a nation,
none can open besides Him; and He is the supreme power Sovereign].
revised by translator. Surrah Fater v. 2.

5. [Say (O, messenger!) I have no power to harm or benefit myself, save
what Allah wills.] Yunus v. 49.

6. [If We will, we can remove their eyes] Yasin v. 66.

7. [And if We will We can nail them in their places] Yasin v. 67.

**Third category:**

Verses demonstrating that faith may only be attained or achieved in
people’s life by Allah’s permission and will.

8. [And it is not possible for any (disbelieving) person to believe
except by Allah’s will] Yunus. V. 100.

**Fourth category:**

Verses that condition harm to Allah’s permission, including what the
devils had taught people of the magic that angel Harut and angel Marut
learned in Babylon, a magic which the wicked used to employ to divorce a
man from his wife, furthermore to inflict harm on people.

Al Quran states that they would not have been able to inflict harm by
means of that magic on anybody except by Allah’s leave.

9. [Though they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah’s leave] Al
Baquarah v. 102.

**Fifth Category:**

Verses Demonstrating that Allah the Sublime can stop them, preventing
what they intend to do:

10. [And if Allah had willed they would not have done so.] Al Ana'm v.
137.

11. [And had Allah so willed, they would not have fought, but Allah
does whatever He wills.] Al Baquarah v. 253.

**Sixth category:**

Verses that confirm victory and defeat as elements, which may never be
attained, but for Allah’s leave.

12. [How often a small group overcame a big host by Allah’s command.]
Al Baquarah v. 249.

13. [Following (their prayer) they defeated them by Allah’s leave.] Al
Baquarah v. 251.

**Seventh Category:**

Verses that signify man’s decision are Allah’s decision; man decides by
means of Allah decision.

14. [And you mankind do not decide something unless Allah decides so,
verily, Allah is the Knowing Decreer]. Al Insan v. 30.

15. [And you will not wish the truth and will not be in search of the
straight path unless it be the will of Allah the Creator of the worlds.]
Revised by translator. AL Takwir v. 29.

**Eighth category:**

Verses that command man to lay his will, decision and deeds on Allah
the Sublime’s decision.

16. [And do not say (O, Messenger!) of any things, surely I shall do
such and such tomorrow without adding “IF Allah wills”.] Revised by
translator. Al Kahf v. 23 – 24.

**Ninth Category:**

Verses that command man to depend in all his works, affairs, qualities
on the decision of Allah the Sublime.

17. [And if Allah wills, you will find out that I am of the righteous.]
Revised by translator. AL Qussas v. 27.

18. [You will find me by Allah’s will one of the patients.] As Saffat
v. 102.

19. [You all will enter the Sacred Mosque, by Allah’s will feeling
secured inside and with shaved heads and nails cut short.] Al Fateh. V.
27.

These are nine categories of verses selected from the Book of Allah
clearly signifying the denial of man’s independence in his deeds and
will, denying at the same time that he is authorized by Allah to do
whatever he likes; they are clearly forthright, the way the first group
of verses was clear in denying inevitability and determinism in man’s
behaviour.

People in all their affairs are wanting and urgently in need of Allah,
and whoever that is wanting in all his affairs and needs, can never be
independent from Allah the Sublime in his deeds, thus he is subject to
Allah the Sublime’s dominion and authority, and it is up to Allah to
take or transform him, or to deprive him from his faculty of hearing or
seeing, or close his eyes if He wills; man without the support of the
Sublime can not do himself any good or evil, so how can he be
independent of Allah who maintains such a vast Divine domination over
his life, deeds, senses and faculties?!

Nobody may believe except by Allah’s leave.

And nobody may hurt anybody only by Allah’s leave.

And nobody may fight anybody except by Allah’s leave.

And a victorious may never attain victory except by Alllah’s leave.

And nobody may defeat anybody only be Allah’s leave.

Rather, nobody may will anything without the will of Allah.

It will be quite irrelevant if we intend to do something without
reliance on Allah’s will and leave; and the patents may never attain
patience, and the successful may never attain success, and the good may
never attain righteousness without Allah’s permission (according to
every verse of the Holy Quran).

With this strange emphasis that AL Quran puts on the fact that man in
every respect is subject to Allah the Sublime, how come that somebody
claims Allah the Sublime has created man the way He willed bestowing on
him what ever talents He chose, authorizing him thereafter to do what
ever he likes by granting him an absolute permission to manage his
affairs?

Whoever reads the verses of the Holy Quran quoted above will be sure
that Al Quran does not approve of such independence and authorization.


