Chapter Three : the Principle of the Progeny of Muhammad(a.s.)
==============================================================

We do not need so much thinking and mediation to conclude that the
Quranic principle about this sensitive and dangerous matter in man’s
life is neither the first principle nor the second; Quranic verses we
have already surveyed are enough evidence to prove this fact.

Hence, the principle AL Quran chooses is a third one midway between
both.

This third principle is the one chosen by the Progeny(A.S.) who
attributed it to the Holy Book later on to be known as (A case inbetween
two concerns) i.e. midway between both doctrines.

True, it is a third principle inbetween two fanatic conflicting dogmas
that have reigned over for a certain era during Islamic history of
reason. The progeny of Muhammad (A.S.) are the pioneer advocates to this
Quranic principle, being the first to demonstrate it to people.
“Interpretation of the Principle (a case inbetween two concern)”

Strange enough, this midway interpretation of AlQuran principle
pertaining to man’s needs and behavior, though clear, has remained
concealed during the first ages of Islam, hidden from the reasonable
debate taking place then among Islamic scholars respectively about AL
Quran attitude towards this matter.

And even though the Progeny (A.S.) have been propagating this principle
so that it became one of their well know teachings, yet, it remained
unknown in the reasonable debate taking place then (during the Abbasi
reign and afterwards), which actually stimulates questions. How did the
scholars (who do not follow the school of the Progeny(A.S.)), become two
parties, each committed to one of these two doctrines, although alQuran
frankly and clearly has rejected both?

**The reason which diverged the scholars attention from (A case in
between two concerns)**

The reason for that – as it were – was that (Al Mutazilah) by means of
emphasizing man’s independence of choice and will meant to get ride of
putting the responsibility of the injustice committed by mankind on
behalf of Allah the Sublime, deeming Him far above any injustice made by
man.

This was the reason that made (Al Mutazilah) differ with (Al
Asha'irah), thus attributing the deed to man himself never attributing
it to Allah the Sublime, for the same reason they emphasized man’s
independence of choice denying that Allah the Sublime possesses any will
or choice or authority over man’s choice and deed, but He the Sublime
created man bestowing on him the talents which enable him to make a
choice, leaving him thereafter to his own option and will.

Man’s independence of choice does not contradict creation and
innovation for (according to this theory), the dispensable only needs
the Indispensable at the stage of occurrence exclusively; if ever it
takes place it will become independent from the Indispensable, thus it
will be independent in its deed and free choice from Allah the
Sublime,

(AlMutazilah) think that if ever we deprive man of his freedom of
choice, making his choice and will as an extension to Allah’s, giving –
at the same time – Allah the Sublime a reign over man’s deed and free
choice, we shall face the same problem which previously faced (Al
Ashairah), namely attributing injustice and villainies to Allah the
Sublime.

On the other hand, when man becomes completely independent in his will
and deed from Allah the Sublime, none of his deeds will be attributed to
Him the Sublime.

Thus (Al Mutazilah) try to maintain the (Devine Justice), but – Knowing
it or not – they confiscate thus Allah the Sublime’s permanent reign and
his continuous will over mankind, which is a sensitive point that
touches Monotheism itself.

If Alasha'irah’s principle touches Allah’s Justice the Mutazilah’s
principle clearly and frankly touches Monotheism of Allah; and through
the previous Quranic texts we have surveyed we found that its emphasis
over Allah’s permanent reign on mankind and its denied of man’s
independence in affairs is by no means less than its emphasis on man’s
free choice.

This complex – as it were – was the reason that made Muslim scholars
from schools other than the progeny’s (A.S.) refuge to adopt one of both
perils; without such an explanation we shall not find enough reason for
people’s ignorance of all the Quranic verses we have listed previously
with all their forthright significance that rejects determinism and
authorization and man’s independence of will and deed.


**“Free Choice is Not Equal to Independence”**

Before moving to tackle the style by means of which the scholars of the
Progeny’s doctrine could avoid attributing injustice to Allah the
Sublime never – at the same time – disregarding His domination and
continuous influence on man’s deed and free choice, we must attract the
reader’s attention to the fact that (free choice is not equal to
independence).

The reason that made the scholars of schools other than the progeny’s
dismiss the principle of (a case inbetween two concerns) was not their
belief that free choice means independence, and that the principle of (a
case inbetween two concerns) confiscates man’s independence and free
choice leading once again to the dogma of inevitability which we tried
to got rid of its consequences;

we say that such a doubt does not deserve prolonged discussion, for
free choice does not necessitate that potency should be inclined to
another choice or deed, possibly enough, one deed may fall under the
free choice of two parties who maintain separately their own free
choices and deeds, thus none of which can keep a choice and a deed but
for the choice and the deed of the other; or the choice and deed of the
second may become conditioned to the choice and deed of the first (and
never vice-versa).

Therefore, we do not need to embark longer at this point so as to prove
that free choice does not mean independence. Back to the origin of the
matter.

The interpretation given by the progeny’s school scholars to the
principle of (A case inbetween two concerns

Let us try now to understand how did the scholars of the progeny’s
school get rid of this problem taking into their consideration what (Al
Quran) frankly states of Allah’s domination and sovereignty over the
choice and deed of mankind and of deeming Allah the Sublime far above
every evil and injustice; and we have seen before that (Al Ashairah)
adopted the first principle neglecting the second; (Al Mutazilah) on the
other hand adopted the second neglecting the first.

Philosophical theorization of man’s relation to Allah The Sublime in
respect to (man’s origination and continuation)

Previously, we spoke of the Quranic principle of man’s relation with
Allah, the continuation of this connection and man’s permanent need and
wanting (at the stage of origination and in his continuation) to Allah;
and we have seen that (Al Quran) removes every suspicion, proving
absolutely that man remains wanting Allah the Sublime in all his
affairs, needs and at all stages; Allah’s sovereignty, domination, will
and reign over man’s choice and deed never cease (not even for a single
moment). Now, we shall elaborate on the philosophical theorization of
this matter.

The continuous need of every effect to its cause in both stages
(origination and continuation):

(Al Mufawidah) – who believe that man is authorized and owns a free
choice – establish their opinion about man’s independence from Allah the
Sublime in his free choice and deed on the philosophical notion that
(the effect) dispenses with (the cause) at the stage of continuation, it
only needs (the cause) when it is originated.

Some theologists adhere to this opinion which relies on some
non-scientific observations like the continuation of movement in a
moving body after separating the dynamic energy from it; the heat – as
another example – is preserved in a certain body that has absorbed it
from a resource even after the removal of it.

The building continues to stand after the departure of the mason; and
so on and so forth.

Al Shaikh (Ibn Siena) in his (Isharat) refers to this opinion (They may
say; if something is originated, the need for its maker will be over,
and even if the maker is dismissed the effect may remain, the way we see
a building standing without the presence of its mason; to the degree
that some of them would not hesitate to say: If it may be possible that
the Sublime Creator to create and originate it, then it became a maker
itself; and if it was made and brought into existence from nothingness,
how should it move from existence into nothingness (so it might require
a maker again?)([^1])

According to this philosophical theorization (Al Mufawdhah) claim that
man gains his independence from Allah the Sublime after being created by
Him, therefore he is totally independent in his deed and free choice.

This is a worthless idea that cannot stand to the accurate reasonable
proofs which state that (effect) requires the (cause) not only during
the making; rather it needs it during the making and continuation all
along, and if ever the (cause) vanishes the (effect) will vanish
completely, for the (effect) only exists by means of the (cause), being
removed, the (effect) will disappear, the (effect) has no independent
existence other that that is bestowed on it by the (cause) (Which is the
essence of the relation between cause and effect), whenever this
relation comes to an end, the cause would no more bestow existence on
effect, which – in turn – will vanish naturally.

The conclusions we derive from the first simple look signify that the
(effect) maintains its existence even though the (cause) is removed and
dismissed. But these are only naive primitive observations that are not
connected to (cause) and (effect) and (casualty law).

We shall not embark longer on this matter; anybody who seeks
elaboration is advised to study philosophical researches that deal with
this matter from a reasonable point of view.

**Scholastic Approach to the Progeny’s (A.S.) Interpretation or a (Case
Inbetween Two Concerns)**

In the light of what have been said, there is no doubt anymore that the
theory of authorization which Al-Mutazilah adopted has been Quranicly
and reasonably nullified.

Now what is the way to demonstrate the theory of (a case inbetween two
concerns) which denies inevitability in mans behaviour; meanwhile it
denies his independence of decision and full authority over his
affairs?

Denying man’s independence and mastery over his decisions will lead us
– after some accurate scrutiny – to adhere to the idea of attributing
injustice and other wicked deeds to Allah the Sublime; matter which AL
Mutazilah tried seriously to avoid.

It is not difficult for those scholars to admit that the principle of
(a case inbetween two concerns) is correct, (especially that Al Quran
affirmed it); rather, what is difficult for them is to search through
this Quranic theory advocated by the Progeny (A.S.) for a way that saves
them from the problematic attribution of injustice to Allah the Sublime,
the way they are saved from falling under the accusation of
polytheism.

This is what those scholars tried to conclude from the texts related by
the Progeny of Muhammad (A.S.) which interpreted, stated, and
established this theory.

We have a number of approaches at hand, we shall choose the clearest
and most famous from them; hereafter is an elaboration on this
approach:

**Demonstration and Interpretation of the theory (a case inbetween two
concerns)**

The well-known interpretation, which the progeny’s doctrine scholars
adopt, relies on the origin we have already explained. It advocates that
existence as a whole is continuously and successively connected with
Allah the Sublime; man too in this universe is connected with Allah the
Sublime by his need and wanting to Him; furthermore, man is connected
with Allah by this (flow of existence) which He the Sublime has bestowed
on him; a flow that became the cause for his existence in this world.
This flow is continuous and successive, and if ever it ceases – even for
one moment – man and his property will come to an end (part of this
property of course is his will and deed).

But for this incessant flow, man will never be, neither does, nor will
anything; but man himself is the one who wills and chooses; if not,
Allah would not have imposed a law on him. Yes, it is true that if Allah
blocks this flow of existence, potency, determination, reason,
consciousness, insight, will, choice; man will not be able to choose or
do anything; but after all he is the one who chooses and does things, so
it is improper to attribute his deeds to somebody else; he himself is
responsible for them.

[And had Allah willed, He would have taken away (by thunder and
lightening) their faculties of hearing and seeing] AL Baquarah v. 20.

[And if Allah had willed they would not have done so.] Al Ana'm v.
137.

Suppose that the engineer in charge of the center that produces
electric energy turned on electric current for a house keeping it
running so the household will make use of it; now if the house owner
misused it, or committed suicide, or killed or harmed somebody by means
of it; such an act will be attributed to him exclusively (even though he
would not have been able to do none of these deeds if ever the engineer
in charge of the electric energy center would have turned off the
current),

yet the house owner remains the only one to whom the act is attributed,
and he himself will be responsible for it. If ever the house owner
commits suicide, nobody will say that “the engineer in charge has killed
the house owner”, thus the engineer in charge of the center will not be
held responsible for the other’s suicide.

Perhaps the best and most scientifically accurate example in this
respect is the one given by the late Ayatollah Aludma Authority Syaied
Al Khoua'y.


