The Example Which the Authority Scholar Sayied Al Khouay Employed To Declare the Matter
=======================================================================================

Suppose that somebody’s hand has been paralyzed, so he can not move it
himself; the physician succeeded in moving it temporarily by electric
power, so that the man could move it himself whenever the doctor
connects electricity wire to it; in case the wire is disconnected the
man would not be able to move it.

Now, if the doctor connects the wire – let us say for the sake of
experiment – and the man started to move his hand doing his things by
it; the doctor every now and then supplies him with the necessary power
he needs; no doubt then that the man’s movement of his hand in this case
is (a case inbetween two concerns),

for it can not be attributed to him alone because he needs somebody to
pass the power to his hand; and it can not be attributed the physician
either, for the man – by his own will – has moved his hand; he – as a
doer – was not obliged to act, he has acted willingly, yet he has not
been authorized to act independently by all means of the word, somebody
else must support him. All acts produced by willing doers fall under
this jargon.

The act is man’s product; man – as a servant of Allah – can only will
by Allah’s will; all Quranic verses refer to this purpose; they deny
determinism - which most (Sunnies) advocate-, for they (the verses
concerned) affirm man’s free choice. These verses too deny absolute
authorization – which some sects advocate- proving the opposite by
attributing the act to Allah.

(Later on – if Allah the Sublime wishes – we shall tackle this matter
elaborately, invalidating both opinions by means of the verses
concerned).

The matter we have already stated is driver from the instructions of
the progeny(A.S.).([^2])

**“Al Shaikh Al Mufeed’s Opinion”**

The late Al Shaikh Al Mufeed Abi Abdullah Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Al
Newman’s opinion agrees with this approach in explaining (a case
inbetween two concerns).

We might summarize his opinion into two fundamental points that lay at
the core of the (a case inbetween two concerns) namely:

**1. Repudiating the opinion of attributing man’s deeds to Allah
**
First point: All people’s deeds are attributed to them themselves and
never they are Allah’s creation.

This is the point of disagreement between the school of the progeny of
Muhammad (A.S.) and the school of determinism.

Members of the school of determinism used to believe that all men’s
deeds are in fact Allah the Sublime’s acts that are created for man, he
is a mere container for these deeds and nothing more; they used to
emphasize this dogma so as to maintain the origin of (monotheism)
repudiating the presence of several resources for things and deeds in
the universe. This school does not repudiate the origin of casualty
directly, but they consider Allah the Sublime as the only cause in the
universe, thus everything and deed is attributed directly to Him, the
late AL Mufeed violently confronts this opinion answering it
ruthlessly.

Al Shaikh AL Mufeed’s citation of the text narrated by the Progeny of
Muhammad to invalidate the approach that attributes all acts to Allah It
has been narrated that abu Al Hassan the third (Imam Al Hadi) (A.S.) had
been asked about man’s deeds, whether they are created by Allah the
Sublime? He (A.S.) said: “If He was the creator of these acts He would
not have renounced them; for He said in His book:

“Allah and His messenger renounce the polytheists” translator. Al
Taubah v. 3.

Allah by this verse did not mean to renounce creating them, rather He
renounced their polytheism and ugly deeds.”

(Abu Hanifah) asked (Abu Al Hassan Musa bin Jaffar (A.S.) ) about the
source of man’s deeds?

Abu Al Hassan (A.S.) said “Man’s deeds never miss three possibilities:
(either they are Allah the Sublime’s creation, or they are Allah’s and
man’s creation together, or they are man’s creation).([^3]) If they were
exclusively from Allah the Sublime; He will deserve praise for their
good part and reproach for their bad (and praise or reproach will be
exclusively dedicated for Him).

And if they were from Allah and man together, both will deserve praise
and reproach.

If both possibilities were dismissed, these deeds no doubt will be
people’s acts, if Allah punished them for their sins – it is up to Him –
and if He forgives them it will be His choice, for He is the source of
forgiveness and piety.

Similar to this, we have a long list:

Sl Shaikh AL Mufeed’s citation of Al Quran to prove the invalidity of
the theory that attributes man’s deeds to Allah

Al Shaikh Al Mufeed deduces that Quranic verses repudiate the idea of
attributing men’s deeds to Allah.

The late Shaikh says:

“The book of Allah is more authenticated than narration and speeches
(Hadieth), people measure their validity to it, and whatever it approves
will be exclusively correct.”

Allah the Sublime said:

[Allah is the One who gives the best perfection to all of His
creations; He first created Adam from clay.] As Sajdah v. 7.

(He told us that whatever creation He has made, is good and beautiful
(never bad and ugly), so if the ugly deeds and things were His creation,
He would not have told us that they are beautiful. This evidence which
Allah the Sublime provides disproves and invalidates the evidence of
those who claim that Allah has created ugly things).

The late Sayyed Hibatuldeen Al Shahrestany comments on Al Shaikh AL
Mufeed’s speech saying:

This verse is not the only evidence that authenticates attributing
peoples deed’s to themselves; rather, every other verse that deems Allah
far above creating wicked deeds and wrong doings asserts it. ([^4])

Discussing the Inference They Deduce from Quranic Verses to Validate
Their Theory of Attributing Man’s Deeds to Allah

Al Shaikh Al Mufeed wide opens the door to discuss the evidence of
those who refuge to the Quran anticipating to authenticate their theory
that attributes people’s deeds to Allah the Sublime.

One of their conclusions relies on the verse:

[And whomever Allah wills to guide, He will expand his breast for
Islam, and whomever He wills to leave in his error, He makes his breast
closed and narrow.] Revised by translator. AL Ana'm v. 125.

From which they inferred that Allah the Sublime deludes man. The other
verse they cite is:

[And if your Creator and Nurturer had willed, verily all those who are
on the earth would have believed] Yunus v. 99.

Inferring from it that we may attribute non-believer’s delusion to
Allah the Sublime, for if he willed, all of them would have believed.

AL Shaikh Al Mufeed elaborately discussed these evidences; here are
examples of his discussions:

The late Shaikh says:

(Concerning the evidence they deduce from the verse:

[And whomever Allah wills to guide, He will expands his breast for
Islam, and whomever He wills to leave in his error, He makes his breast
closed and narrow] Al Ana'm v. 125;

They can not use it as a pretext to prove their theory, for its meaning
is (That whom Allah the Sublime means to reward in response to his
obedience, He will expand his breast for Islam by means of the graces He
bestows on Him, which may enable him to continue fulfilling his acts of
obedience, guidance here means rewards. 3.

Allah the Sublime, relating about the people of paradise said:

[All thanks giving and adoration (for the worshipers) is due to Allah
who had guided us to this] AL Araf. V. 43.

Guided here means (rewarded us), in the following verse delusion (Al
Dhalal) means torment:

[Verily, the sinners will be in delusion and fire.] Revised by
translator Al Quamar v. 47.

Thus Allah employed the word (delusion) meaning (torment) and
(guidance) meaning (reward), the original usage for such terminology is
the (delusion) means (oblivion) and (Guidance) means (survival and
safety).

Allah the Sublime mouth piecing the Arabs said:

[And the disbelievers said: Is it possible to regain life after we died
and became lost in the earth of our graves?] Revised by translator As
Sajdah v. 10.

The phrase (lost in the earth) means if we perished.

The meaning of the verse:

[And whomever Allah wills to guide] Al Ana'm v. 125

is what we have already stated; as well as the meaning of (delude) in
the phrase that follows the verse mentioned above. The meaning of the
verse (He makes his breast closed and narrow) is that Allah will deprive
him from success as a punishment for his disobedience, and He will block
away His grace from him as an answer for his wrongdoing, making the
breast wide open (which is parallel to success) is the reward for
obedience; making it closed and narrow (added to it, prevention of
success), is the punishment for disobedience.

There is no doubt about the meaning of this verse which may support the
pretext of those who claim that Allah the Sublime deludes people from
faith and prevents them from becoming Muslims (i.e. He seeks disbelief
and wants delusion).

Allah the Sublime says: (And if your Creator and Nurturer had willed,
verily, all those who are on the earth would have believed] Yunus v. 99,
meaning to tell of His potency declaring that if he wants to make them
believe by force and compulsion, he is quite capable of it, but (He the
Sublime) wanted them to believe willingly. The last phrase of the verse
signifies the meaning we have mentioned.

[Can you (O, Messenger!) compel people against their wish to become
believers?] Yunus v. 99.

Meaning that He can oblige them to believe, but He does not, although
it would have been easy for Him.

All similar verses to which they cling in an attempt to confirm their
theory have similar meanings and connotation that pertain to the things
we have stated above.

The advocates of determinism may avoid a forthright claim that Allah
wants to be disobeyed, He wants the people not to believe in Him, He
wants His messengers to be killed, and his beloved to be damned; thus
they refuge to say that he wants to see, find and meet whatever he had
known in the way He had known (foreseen) it; meaning to show that
disobediences are bad deeds which he forbids the people to commit.

This round about way to which the advocates of determinism refuge leads
them to the trap from which they are trying to escape. For, if Allah
finds the ugly and bad deeds – that which He had foreseen – are
identical to His knowledge, and He Himself meant them to be so; this
will signify that He wants these bad and ugly deeds i.e. He wanted to be
bad and ugly Himself.

This is quite senseless, for why should they run from something to the
same thing? And why should they avoid a meaning by refuting to something
identical to it? How should they deal with the reasonable people? They
behave similar to a man who says: I do not curse Zayed, rather? I curse
Abi Amrou (and Abu Amrou is another name for Zayed). Or, similar to the
Jews who sarcastically said:

(We do not disbelieve in Muhammad (S.A.), rather we disbelieve in Ahmad
(which is another name for the prophet(S.A.)).

This is arrogance and ignorance from those who adhere to it; and
malfunctioning and impotence from those who rely on it; end of AL Shaikh
AL Mufeed’s discussion.


