Ways of Influence
=================

The impact of Muslims on Medieval Europe is so undeniable that any
assessment of the history of this era without analysis of the role that
Muslims played is incomplete.  From around the eleventh century Medieval
Europe gradually became familiar with some aspects of Islamic
civilization and through Muslims with some of Greek heritages.

In general, one can say that the Islamic culture and sciences found
their ways to Medieval Europe in four ways:  1) European intermingle
with Muslims, 2) Scholarly works such as studying and translation, 3)
Crusade wars, and finally 4) commerce.

1. European Intermingle with Muslims
------------------------------------

From its very first centuries Islam expanded to some parts of the
Europe.  Up to 715 some Greek Islands, north Italy (Sicily), and many
cities of Spain were under the domain of Islamic rule. Narbonne in the
north of France was for a while under Muslim control. Spain and Sicily
were among regions in which the Islamic culture and civilization
flourished. Establishment of schools, scientific centers, houses of
translations and emergence of prominent scholars in various fields were
some of the results of this civilization. The City of Toledo was the
center of cultural and scientific activities and had a rich library.
Sicily was a center from which books were sent to different important
European universities and effected the development of knowledge in
Europe.

Muslims, Christians and Jews used to live together peacefully and
exchange their knowledge and experiences. Muslims carried a reach
culture and civilization and Europeans were eager to obtain it. Muslims
in Europe had more cultural and scientific presence than political and
military ruling, so that long after their political and military
presences were over these cultural and scientific influences continued
to be present. This mingling brought a dramatic change in all areas of
life in regions Muslims dominated. Following this, agriculture,
technology, for example paper industry, exploring minerals, art such as
music and architecture, life style, urban development, philosophy,
sciences and literature were unprecedentedly developed. As an example,
Muslims brought irrigation systems to Spain after which various kinds of
agricultural products such as different types of grains, fruits and
vegetables flourished in Spain.

In addition to this, political relationships between some European and
Islamic governments helped the transmission of the Islamic culture and
civilization.  Montgomery Watt says: “Charlemagne was in diplomatic
relations with the caliph of Baghdad, Harun ar-Rashid, as well as with
the latter’s enemy, the Umayyad emir of Spain; and by this channel some
knowledge of the vastness and power of the Islamic world might have
reached Europe.”

[2. Crusades]
-------------

2. One of the tragic events in the relation between Muslims and
Europeans were the Crusades. The Crusade wars started around 1095 and
continued up to 1291. Despite the fact that this long war had
devastating losses and many casualties, by entering Europeans in the
Islamic world and their close connection with Muslims they became
acquainted with various aspects of Islamic culture and civilization and
tried to adopt it and import it to Europe.

As an example, when Fredrick II conquered Jerusalem, he was astonished
by Islamic architecture. In his court there were many Muslim
mathematicians and philosophers. He learned Arabic and employed
translators to translate Islamic works. He himself was interested in
Islamic sciences. It is well known that he sent some philosophical
questions to Ibn Sabin de Murci, a Muslim philosopher of Spain, and
received the answers, which is known as Sicilian Questions.

3. Trade
--------

Another way of Islamic cultural impact on Europe was through trade. Both
Muslim and European merchants who imported goods to Europe from the
Islamic world were effective in this issue. Muslim merchants in
different parts of the world especially in East Asia played an important
role in the expansion of Islam. As Watt says, Islamic culture did not
developed in Europe only through Muslim presence, but the export of
goods which were produced in Muslim lands was also effective in this
regard.  It is notable that Jewish merchants were also active in this
area. They were familiar with different languages and played the role of
medium between Islamic and Christian cultures.

Among the skills related to trade that developed in Europe were
shipbuilding and seafaring. Seafaring was advanced among Muslims. From
Kilwa in east Africa through Malaka Strait in Malaysia was covered by
Muslim seafarers. In the second half of twelve century, Spanish and
Portuguese shipbuilders more than others learned from Muslim experiences
in this area. One of the Muslim contributions in this regard was the
mariner’s compass. Watt says:”The main steps in the development of the
mariner’s compass seem to have been shared between the Arabs and
Europeans.”

Another significant contribution of Muslims in advancing seafaring
skills was providing nautical charts. One of the evidences in this
regard is the presence of many Arabic words in European languages in
this field. According to many historians, Europeans barrowed the science
of Geography from Muslims.  One of the influential scientists in this
regard is Idrisi (1100).
