Some Areas of Impact
====================

4. Translation
--------------

A great number of European scholars traveled to the Islamic world and
studied Arabic and Islamic sciences. They translated many books from
Arabic and wrote some books in which they elaborated what they learned
from Muslims. They also spread these sciences by teaching them in
Europe. According to some sources in Medieval Europe, more than 1400
Arabic books in various fields of sciences were translated.

Translated works are in three categories:

First are Greek works which were translated from Arabic into Latin.
Although some Greek works had already been translated into Latin,
however there is no doubt that many important Greek works including some
of Aristotle’s works were translated from Arabic. In the middle of the
twelve century, a translation center was established in Toledo in which,
according to the advice of the Archbishop Raymond, many Greek books were
translated from Arabic into Latin. Among these works were some books of
Aristotle, the translation of the Book of Causes, which was a selection
of Proclus’ Elements of Theology and the famous Theologia which was
mainly taken from a book of Plotinus.

The second group of books that were translated from Arabic into Latin
was Muslim’s interpretations of Greek philosophy and sciences, and the
third group belonged to independent Muslim works. In this regard Russell
writes:

“Their learned men read Greek, and wrote commentaries. Aristotle’s
reputation is mainly due to them…Their importance, for us, is that they,
and not the Christians, were the immediate inheritors of those parts of
the Greek tradition which only the Eastern Empire had kept alive.
Contact with the Mohammedans [he means Muslims], in Spain, and to the
lesser extent in Sicily, made the West aware of Aristotle; also of
Arabic numerals, algebra, and chemistry. It was this contact that began
the revival of learning in the eleventh century, leading to Scholastic
philosophy…if the Arabs had not preserved the tradition, the men of
Renaissance might not have suspected how much was to gained by the
revival of classical learning.”

From among the long list of scholars who contributed in the transmission
of Islamic sciences to Europe here I mention only few names.

Gerber (938-1002), who later became pope, after three years studying
Islam in Spain translated some Arabic books and also wrote some books
such as Geometria and Liber de Astrolbia in which he elaborated some
aspects of Islamic sciences.

Constantine the African (1015-1087) traveled to some Islamic lands and
studied some Islamic sciences such as medicine and became familiar with
some Greek works in Arabic such as those of Galen and Hippocrates. When
later he became the assistant of Giscard he took the advantage of his
position in spreading Islamic sciences.

Adelhard of England also traveled to some Islamic lands and became an
influential figure in introducing Europe to some Islamic sciences.

Gundisalvi (1151) translated some works of Aristotle including his
Metaphysics from Arabic. He, along with some others, translated some
parts of ash –Shifa of Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Maghasid al-falasifa of
Ghazali (Algazel) and De Scientias of Farabi. He is also the author of
some books such as The Division of Philosophy  and The Immortality of
Soul.

Jean of the Spain also translated some works of Ibn Sina and Ghazali.

Gherado de Ceremona (1114-1187) from Italy after learning Arabic and
some Islamic sciences translated many books such as Megale Syntaxes of
Ptolemy (Almagest) and works of Ibn Hazm.

Avenduth (Ibn Davoud), Alfred Anglicus, Daniel de Morley, Michel Scot,
Adam de Bocfeld, Herman of the German are some other names in this list.

Philosophy
----------

Since seventh century Muslims started translating Greek Philosophy and
sciences from Greek and Syriac into Arabic. The movement for translation
was accelerated since the middle of the eighth century in Baghdad. The
first works that were translated were on medicine and then other
sciences and philosophy. Later some neo-Platonic works were translated.
In addition to this, some works from other languages such as Persian
were also translated into Arabic.

Muslims welcomed Greek philosophy because they thought that it was in
harmony with Islamic teachings that encourage thinking and reflection on
the world and its phenomena. Therefore, first they translated Greek
philosophy, then interpreted and completed it, and finally they created
their own philosophical system on the basis of Greek philosophy, Islamic
teachings and what they have learned from other cultures especially
Persian.

The first famous Muslim philosopher was Yaqub al-Kindi (801-873). More
than 265 works are attributed to him in different sciences.

The second prominent Muslim philosopher was Abu Nasr Farabi (870-950).
He is considered as the founder (muassis) of Islamic philosophy
especially political philosophy.

An influential group of scholars called themselves Ikhwan as-Safa
(Brothers of Purity). They established their secret group in 983 in
Basra. Their treatises include 51 parts which covers various sciences.

### Ibn Sina

###

One of the greatest Muslim philosophers is Ibn Sina/Avicenna (980-1037).
His book as-Sifa is an encyclopedia of all sciences of his time.. It
contains logic, metaphysics, mathematics and physics. Mathematics
includes arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and music. Physics includes
different branches of natural sciences, biology and psychology. This
book was translated into Latin and was known as Sufficientiae.

Ibn Sina’s thought was well known and respected both in Islamic world
and in medieval Europe. Copleston says: “When portions of writings of
Avicenna were translated into Latin in the twelfth century, the
Christian world found itself faced for the first time with a closely
knit system which was bound to exercise a strong attraction on certain
minds.” For example, Gondysalvi both in psychology and cosmogony refers
to Ibn Sina and tries to harmonize the latters’ ideas with Christianity.
Ibn Sina was not only a commentator of Aristotle, but, in addition to
this, he had his own independent philosophical system in which he refers
both to Greek philosophy and Islamic belief system. As Copleston says,
“…however much he borrowed from former philosophers, Avicenna had
thought out his system carefully and independently and had welded it
into a system of a peculiar stamp.”

Islamic view of human knowledge and illumination, distinction between
essence and existence, and argument for necessary being from contingent
being were among the ideas that via Ibn Sina came into medieval
philosophy. One of the contributions of Muslim philosophers was to show
how and to what extent one can combine between Greek philosophy and
religious beliefs. The connection of physics and metaphysics which was
developed in the thought of Thomas Aquinas was largely inspired by
Islamic philosophy particularly that of Ibn Sina.

Another hotly debated idea in medieval philosophy that has its origin in
Ibn Sina, is the idea of intentions. Ibn Sina distinguished between
first and second intentions. First intentions are universal concepts
that are applicable on objective realities, such as the concept of human
and horse. Second intentions are abstract universals which are only in
the mind. These are logical concepts, such as subject, predicate, and
proposition. The medieval philosophers such as Aquinas and William of
Ockham paid serious attention to this discussion. However, a third type
of universal concepts was recognized in Islamic philosophy which did not
attract serious attention in the West was philosophical concepts, i.e.,
abstract concepts which have no referent in reality, but at the same
time related to reality and describe it, such as concepts of causality,
unity and contingency.

Ibn Sina’s influence was not limited to one group or trend; rather it
was so comprehensive that hardly one can see a philosopher who is not in
a way influenced by him. Gundisalvi who studied Ibn Sina and Ghazali was
the originator of a movement that Etienne Gilson calls it
Augustinian-Avicennian Movement?  His discussion on knowledge and wisdom
is particularly inspired by Islamic philosophy.

It must be noted that some ideas of Ibn Sina are misinterpreted in the
West. For instance, it is said that since according to Ibn Sina the
creation is necessary, therefore God has no free will, or God has no
knowledge of particulars, or His power is limited. These
misunderstandings can be seen even in the works of some contemporary
philosophers such as Capleston. It seems that Ghazali is responsible for
some of these misunderstandings. On the basis of these misunderstandings
and under the influence of Ghazali some theologians like William of
Auvergne (1249) claimed that Ibn Sina’s philosophy is against religious
beliefs.

Some Europeans accepted some ideas of Idn Sina and rejected some others,
such as Alexander of Hales, John of Rochelle and Albert the Great
(1260-1280). They accepted Ibn Sina’s theories of abstraction and the
necessity of illumination but did not accept his theory of active
intellect. His critics, such as Aquinas, are also influenced by him. It
is interesting that both Augustinian Bonaventura and Aristotelian
Aquinas, both Italian and critics of each other, were influenced by Ibn
Sina.

About the relation between Albert the Great and Aquinas, Brehier says
that they both studied in Italy in an environment where studying the
Islamic sciences were encouraged by Fredrick II. Albert was a student in
Padua around 1223 and Thomas studied in Naples under an Averroesian
professor before 1243.

After Ibn Sina many great philosophers appeared in Islamic world such as
Tusi, Suhravardi, and Mulla Sadra Shirazi each of whom had his own
system of philosophy and this tradition continued up to our time.
However, this latter development of Islamic philosophy was not known by
western scholars and thus did not have much impact on Europe.

### Ghazali

###

Mohammad Ghazali/Algazel (1058-1111) is a Muslim theologian and Sufi who
has been an influential figure in both Islamic world as well as in
Medieval Europe. In his famous book The Incoherence of Philosophers, he
rejected and condemned philosophers especially Farabi and Ibn Sina. In
his view, many elements in philosophy are against religious beliefs. The
impact of this book was beyond measure so that since then philosophy in
Sunni world has never survived. Ghazali’s works were also translated in
Latin and grasped some European attentions. Ghazali anticipated David
Hume in rejecting the causal relations in material world, but he
interprets the succession of two phenomena to be according to God’s
will.

### Ibn Rushd

###

Islamic Spain had also some famous philosophers among whom are Ibn
Masarra (931), Ibn Baja (1138), Ibn Tufayl (1100-1185), and finally, the
most influential of them, Ibn Rushd/ Averroes (1126-1198). Ibn Rushd is
best known as the commentator par excellence of Aristotle philosophy.
Aristotelianism in medieval Europe is due more than anyone else to the
works of Ibn Rushd. He interprets and defends Aristotle philosophy
against critics such as Ghazali. Ibn Rushd wrote Tahafut al-Tahafut/The
incoherence of the Incoherence in response to Ghazali’s The Incoherence
of Philosophers.

The most famous translators of Ibn Rushd were Michel Scot and Hermann of
German. One of the famous Averroisian theologians and the founder of
Latin Averroists is Siger Brabant. From 1266 to 1277 he taught
Aristotelian philosophy and the thought of Ibn Rushd in Paris
University. Among the fourteenth century Averroesians is Jean de
Baconthrop. Ibn Rushd was so influential that his impact led to a
movement around the beginning of the Renaissance in Padua in the north
of Italy.

Ibn Rushd was also sometimes misinterpreted in the West. For example,
one of the ideas that are attributed to him is the idea of “double
truth,” which means that it is possible that a statement be true in
philosophy and false in religion or vice versa. Whereas according to Ibn
Rushd, philosophy and religion or reason and the scripture (i.e., the
Quran) never contradict each other. Whenever such incoherence is seen
one should know that this incoherency is only at the surface; therefore,
the scripture must be interpreted symbolically and metaphorically so
that does not contradict the reason.

The church condemned Averroesians in 1270. The famous Averroesian Siger
of Brabant was condemned in 219 statements and put into prison.

The influence of Muslim philosophers on the West is an undeniable fact.
Copleston writes: “the influence, positive or negative, of Islamic
philosophy on that of Christendom is now a matter of common knowledge
among historians.”  Elsewhere he states:

“The translation of works of Aristotle and his commentators, as well as
the Arabian thinkers, provided the Latin Scholastics with a great wealth
of intellectual material. In particular they were provided with the
knowledge of philosophical systems which were methodologically
independent of theology and which were presented as the human reflection
on the universe. The systems of Aristotle, of Avicenna, of Averroes,
opened up a wide vista of the scope of the human reason and it was clear
to the medieval that the truth attained in them must have been
independent of Christian revelation…In this way the new translations
helped to clarify in the minds of the medieval the relation between
philosophy and theology…”

According to Copleston, the philosophy of Muslim philosophers had
superiority over the philosophy of Christian philosophers in medieval
Europe, therefore they studied Muslim philosophy and respect it.

It is noteworthy that one of the ways that Islamic philosophy was
introduced to medieval Europe was through Jewish philosophers.  They
knew Arabic and Islamic philosophy. One of these philosophers was Ibn
Gabirol (1021-1069) who lived in Spain. He was the author of Yanbu’
al-Hayat (the Spring of Life), that was translated into Latin. Saint
Bonaventura was influenced by his thought.

The most famous Jewish philosopher is Ibn Maymun/Maimonides. He was
borne in Cordova in 1135 and died in Cairo in 1204. in His book, Delalat
al-Haeirin (Guidance for Perplexed) explains Aristotelian rational
philosophy. He interprets Holy Scriptures by reason. In his view, where
religious text is not in harmony with rational thinking it must be
interpreted allegorically. He disagrees with Aristotle in the idea of
the eternity of the world. Maimonides is influenced by Farabi and Ibn
Sina in arguing for the existence of God and had impact on Christian
theologians.

The development of mystical thought in the Spain was not irrelevant to
the Islamic influence either. In addition to some works of Ibn Sina and
Ghazali, we should mention Sirr al-Asrar/ Secretes secretornum from an
unknown Muslim author. This book that combines Aristotelian philosophy
with neo-Platonic thoughts was translated into Latin and known to the
scholars.

Finally, I should mention Dante’s Divine Comedy. According to scholars
like Bruno Nardi and Asin Palacios, Dante in his major philosophical
concepts is in debt to Muslim philosophers. These concepts include:
Divine light, intellects, the effects of spheres on human destiny, the
idea of illumination and that only the intellectual dimension of the
human is created.

The impact of Islamic thought on Europe was so vast that Watt writes:
“All strands of European thought had to take cognizance of the
translations from Arabic, nor merely the Averroes’s and their opponents,
the party of St Thomas Aquinas, but also conservative Platonists like
Bonaventura and Roger Bacon. The whole range of subsequent European
philosophy was deeply indebted to the Arabic writers.”

In another passage he writes: “When one becomes aware of the full extent
of Arab experimenting, Arab thinking and Arab writing, one sees that
without the Arabs European science and philosophy would not have
developed when they did. The Arabs were no mere transmitters of Greek
thought, but genuine bearers, who both kept alive the disciplines they
had been taught and extended their range.”    ”

Here I will mention in brief the impact of Muslims in Medieval Europe in
some scientific fields.

Mathematics
-----------

Since seventh century, Muslims paid serious attention to mathematics.
They found out that the growth of philosophy and sciences depends on
mathematics. Therefore, they translated mathematical books from
different languages such as Indian, Syriac, and Greek into Arabic. They
learned Indian numerals and eagerly developed mathematics.

Mohammad Ibn Musa Khwarizmi (847) known as Algorisms, put together
Indian and Greek mathematical thought and got new valuable achievements.
By bringing sifr (zero) into numerals he brought remarkable changes in
mathematics. He also founded the science of algebra.

Al-Kindy, Ibn Sina, Banu Musa, Thabit Ibn Ghurra, Jamshid Kashani,
Abulwafa Buzajani, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Khayyam Nishaburi and Nasir al-Din
Tusi are among the great Muslim mathematicians each of whom had a
remarkable contribution in the advancement of mathematics. Among the
Muslim mathematicians of Spain we can name Maslama al-Majriti (1007) and
his pupil Amr Kirmani (1066).

Jabir Ibn Sanan al-Battani/Albategnius (929) established trigonometry,
and Buzjani and Tusi developed it. Establishment of observatories and
attempts in precision in astronomical calculation helped the development
of mathematics.

The Europeans in Spain and then in Sicily got familiar with the works
and ideas of Muslim Mathematicians. The French Gerber, who later became
the pope, was the first European scholar who studied mathematics in
Islamic Spain and later spread mathematical sciences especially the
Arabic numerals in Europe.

The translation of the Islamic mathematical works into Latin caused a
significant impact on the development of mathematics in Europe. Through
the works of Algorisms algebra became known in Europe and was considered
as the basic for mathematical studies till the time of F. Viete
(1540-1603), the French mathematician. Through these works Indian
numerals, algorism as the method of calculation, and zero were adopted
and the Gerber calculating table gave its place to Algorisms’ numeral
system.  Since the tenth century, Arab numerical system was employed in
Italy and then in other parts of Europe. This impact continued by
translation of other mathematical works.

Some important Greek sources such as The Euclidean Principles and
Almagest of Ptolemy (Megale Syntaxes) became known to Europeans by
Muslims and through Arabic translations.

The Great Italian mathematician Leonardo Fibonacci in his childhood
traveled with his father, who was a merchant, to the different Islamic
countries and studied mathematics and taught and spread it when he
returned to Italy.  His works had an enormous impact on mathematical
thought in Europe.

Astronomy
---------

Muslims paid especial attention to astronomy particularly for religious
reasons. Determining the direction of Mecca (qibla), the times of
sunrise and sunset for times of prayer, eclipse for its prayer, and new
moon for fast and the time of pilgrimage (hajj) and other rituals are
some reasons that make necessary for Muslims to study astronomy. In
addition, the Quran in many verses invites people to reflect on the
heaven and earth, day and night in order to know the glory and majesty
of the Creator. Moreover, finding the ways in traveling in the deserts
was another reason for Muslims’ interest in astronomy. One can also
mention that the interest of some rulers in astrology was also a
motivation for some in studying the status of stars.

Therefore, Muslims from the very beginning had seriously welcomed this
science so that hundreds of great scholars emerged in this filed. They
translated books such as Send Hind from Indian and The Prince’s
Astronomical Table (Zij-e Shahryari) from Pahlavi and Almagest from
Greek.

Al-Battani presented the most precise observations in his book so that
Medieval Latin thinkers used to praise him more than anyone else.

Muslims studied Ptolemy’s ideas, reflect on it for centuries, purified
and improved it and then questioned it and made serious criticism of
it.  For example, the criticisms of al-Bitruji (1204) in Spain on
Ptolemy’s ideas had a significant influence on the Astronomers of
Renaissance such as Roger Bacon, and Robert Grosseteste. Tusi and Qutb
Shirazi also seriously criticized Ptolemy’s system and took new steps in
astronomy.

One of the great steps in Islamic astronomy was the establishment of the
observatory which was initiated in seventh century A. H. Observatories
were made in Damascus, Bagdad, Cairo, Maraghe, Samarqand, Istanbul and
other cities. Astronomical instruments such as astrolabe were innovated.
In the western part of the Islamic world, such as Seville, Toledo, and
Cordova also observatories were established and astronomical advances
took place which were transmitted to Europe. Alfonso the tenth the king
of Castile in establishing the most important observatory of Medieval
Europe got help from Muslim scholars. Later European observatories also
followed the example of Muslim’s observatories and were similar to them.
One of the consequences of using observatories which had impact on the
development of astronomy was the arrangement of astronomical tables
(zij). All Islamic astronomical instruments were transmitted to Europe
via Spain or Crusades which was instrumental in the development of
astronomy, whereas before contact with Muslims they were not familiar
with these instruments.

In shifting from Ptolemy’s system to Copernican and Galilean ideas one
cannot neglect the role that Muslim astronomers such as Tusi played. The
works of Muslim scholars were translated and were well known in Medieval
Europe. Battani’s (Albategnius) mathematical method in astronomical
calculations was adopted by European Astronomers such as Copernicus,
Kepler, Tycho Brahe and Galileo Galilei. The Astronomical table (zij) of
Zarqali in twelfth century was translated and for centuries was used by
European astronomers. As Philip Hitti says, even the works of Raymond of
Marcel (1140) to a large extent was based on astronomical principles of
Zarqali, as Copernicus in his The Movements of Heavenly Sphere,
benefited from Zarqali and Battani.

One of the traces of Islamic astronomy in Europe is the presence of many
Arabic astronomical terms in European languages which are mentioned in
the relevant sources.

Medicine
--------

Medicine was also one of the sciences that Muslims had especial
attention to it and physicians have always been respected in Muslim
society. Thus medicine was developed and some encyclopedias about
physicians were written, such as Tabaqat al-atibba of Ibn Usaybiah.

Muslims learned from Persian medicine which was developed in Gondishapur
University and translated works from Indian and Greek sources. From
these sources and Islamic teachings on health, they created a new
Islamic medicine.

From among Muslim physicians zakariyya Razi (Razes) and Ibn Sina gained
more fame in medieval Europe.  Razi wrote about 220 books most of which
related to medicine. His most famous medical book is Al-Hawi/the
Comprehensive. This book which was translated into Latin was one of the
main text books in Europe up to seventeen century. Razi was the first
who described blister and typhoid.

Ibn Sina who was a philosopher and scientist was also a genius in
medicine. He practiced medicine since he was sixteen years old. He has
many discoveries and inventions in this science. His book Qanun (The
Canon), which as Meirhof says is a master peace in the world of
medicine, was translated into Latin and for centuries was the main
reference in medicine.

In Spain also medicine improved and great physicians such as Abulqasim
Zahravi, Ibn Zuhar Andolusi, and Ibn Rushd (Averroes) had important
contributions. Gerard Cremona translated some medical books including
Qanun of Ibn Sina. In fifteenth century Qanun was reprinted sixteen
times and in sixteenth century more than twenty times. According to
Meirhof, no book ever has been read like this.  Up to more than six
centuries this book was a reliable reference in Europe.

In 1279 Faraj Ibn Salim translated Razi’s al-Hawi. This book too, was a
textbook and a reference source in Europe and only in 1542 was reprinted
five times.

According to some historians Salerno School in Italy, which had
significant impact on the advancement of medicine in Europe, was
established by Muslims. Philip Hitti also thinks that Muslims
participated in establishing this school.  Its most famous physician,
Constantine the African studied Arabic and medicine in Islamic lands and
transmitted it into this school.  He taught Islamic medicine in this
school and translated some works from Islamic medicine.

One of the traces of Muslims impact in medicine is the presence of many
Arabic words in different branches of medical sciences and pharmacology.
As Watt writes:

“In the works of Ferrari da Grado, for example, Avicenna is cited more
than three thousand times, Rhazes and Galen thousand times each, and
Hippocrates only a hundred times… European medicine in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries was still little more than an extension of Arab
medicine.”

Chemistry
---------

The first famous Muslim chemist is Jabir Ibn Hayyan (Geber) who was a
student of Imam Sadiq. More than seventeen books in chemistry are known
from him. In medieval Europe he was known as the father of chemistry.
Meirhof says that Geber had a long shadow on the sciences in the Middle
Ages.  Acid sulfuric, acid nitric and some more are of his discoveries.

Zakariyya Razi founded the new chemistry. Before him chemistry had more
metaphysical and spiritual character.  More than twelve books in
chemistry are related to him. He was the first who suggested chemical
treatment. And he discovered alcohol. Other figures in chemistry are Ibn
Wahshiyya, Abu Rayhan Biruni, and Ibn Sina. Muslim chemists had many
laboratories and innovations that are mentioned in sources on the
history of sciences. Many of these books were translated into Latin.
Kalin Ronan says that chemistry was a gift of Arabs for the west.
According to Gustavus Le Bon, without Muslims laboratories, Lavoisier
was not able to take a step.

Physics
-------

In the science of physics too many great scientists emerged in the
Islamic world. Al-Kindi wrote a book on the light which was several
times translated into Latin. But the most brilliant Muslim physicist was
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen). His al-Manadir (optics) was repeatedly
translated into Latin and since its translation many scientists even
Johannes Kepler and Roger Bacon were influenced by it. Will Durant says
that without Alhazen, Bacon could not do anything.  According to
Brehier, Alhazen’s studying of light and the science of optics had
enormous impact on the Latina scholars of the twelve century. One of his
contribution is the analysis of visual perception which is classic and
still is respected so that Witelo adopted it.

Universities and Research Centers
---------------------------------

Scientific centers have a long history in the Islamic world. The city of
Medina in the time of the Imam Sadiq in the seventh century was a
scientific center. He had about four thousand students. The House of
Wisdom (bayt al-hikma), in the eight century, was an important center
for translation and research. In this period many schools were
established in various regions. Teaching and learning became predominant
and scholars were highly respected regardless of their religion and
ethnicity. Libraries were built and jobs and skills related to education
such as transcription and paper technology, translation and writing
became prevalent.

The first university in its modern sense was al-Azhar which was
established in 359 A.H. and gradually developed. This university has all
facilities that students and professors needed for living and studying
such as rooms, kitchen, classes and library. Its curriculum included all
sciences of that time such as philosophy, mathematics, natural sciences,
medicine, and Islamic studies.

A similar university was Nedamiyya in Baghdad which was made in 458 A.H.
Following these examples, many schools and research centers were built
in different cities such as Damascus, Nishabur, Isfahan, Samarqand and
Balkh. One of the famous schools was al-Mustansiriyah of Bagdad which
was opened in 640 A.H. Similar centers were established in Spain
especially in Cordova, and Granada.

According to Philip Hitti, these universities became examples for
Europeans in building universities, such as University of Paris, Oxford,
and Naples all of which were established in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. Their curricula, texts, and regulations and even their
architectures were influenced by Islamic universities. For instance, the
style of architecture of building of Cambridge University College is the
same as Al-Azhar University.
