The Fruits of Fasting for the Servants of Allah
===============================================

Ramadhan has come. Muslims all over the world are fasting from dawn
until sunset.

The philosophy of the fast is well-known: It gives the servants of Allah
a training in discipline, self-control, unquestioned obedience to God.
It cultivates self-denial in Man so that he may be able to understand
the problems facing the community and society.

Islam is a religion, compact and well-balanced. It is not just a
collection of some unrelated ideologies and traditions. There is good
reason behind every enjoinment, every tenet and every precept.

So compact is the whole Islamic system, in fact, that you cannot believe
in it piece-meal; you have either to take it in its entirety or leave it
in total; you cannot select from it.

Take, for example, the lunar system of the Islamic calendar. Though
Islam recognises the solar year for the purpose of Zakat and Khums
(agricultural taxes etc.), it insists on following the lunar system, in
other matters, like fast and pilgrimage.

Why this double standard? The reason is simple enough. Islam is an
universal religion; and the fast and pilgrimage are intended for the
whole mankind, wherever they may be living.

And, the fact is one cannot pinpoint a single minute in a whole year
which is equally convenient for the whole world.  
 Season and climate in the northern hemisphere are poles apart,
literally, from those of the southern hemisphere.

Distance from the equator creates great differences between the climates
of the lands situated in the same hemisphere.

Altitude belies all the theoretical calculations of geographers (the
people of Europe did not believe, at first, that there was a snow-capped
mountain — Kilimanjaro — near the Equator).

Directions of the mountains make two nearby lands radically opposed to
each other in climate (had the Himalayas been created North-South,
instead of East West, the cold winds of North would have made the
Indo-Pakistan sub-continent a second Tibet). The distance from the sea;
the path of the sea-currents; direction of seasonal winds ----all these
things have profound effect upon the climate and seasons of a given
land.  
 For example, the Gulf Street, being a hot current, makes countries warm
even in Arctic Circle; and Dar es Salaam, being on the sea shore,
experiences less temperature changes than the interior regions.

I have described some of the factors which have effect upon the climates
and seasons of a particular land. These factors have made the world a
museum in which every conceivable kind of climate can be found in one or
another corner at every given moment of the year.

Thus, it is just impossible to select a time of the year which can be
equally suitable and acceptable to the whole world, for such rules as
fasting and pilgrimage.

Had Islam accepted solar calendar for such religious functions it would
have done a great injustice to a greater part of the world.  
 What would have been suitable, for instance, to India, could have been
most inconvenient for Africa and/or America.

So, Allah selected a lunar calendar. about ten days than the solar
calendar, cycle becomes complete in about 33 years.

As this system is shorter by the seasons rotate in it, and the

Thus a man of about 48 years of age, anywhere in the world, experiences
every facility-and every hardship which the climate of his land can
offer during Ramadhan.

Thus, nobody is favoured; and nobody is discriminated against.

Likewise, in pilgrimage: If a certain period of solar year would have
been fixed, majority of the Muslims would have found themselves unable
to go to Mecca. A farmer, in whose region it would have been cultivating
or harvesting time, could never go to Hajj. Neither could a civil
servant whose holidays did not coincide with the pilgrimage period. But,
in a lunar system, the farmer can wait until the rotation of the seasons
brings the Hajj in his off-season; and the civil servant can wait until
it falls in his holiday time.

It is just one example of what I had said earlier — Islam is a compact
unit in which every part has the utmost significance for other parts.

Pilgrimage, fast, lunar calendar, universality of Islam, equality of its
followers in every respect in the eyes of God— these things may seem
unrelated to each other to a layman. But, in fact, they are closely knit
together and none of them can be neglected or torn without destroying
the whole fabric.

During Ramadhan, Muslims abstain from eating and drinking, sexual
relations and such things. A Shia Ithna-Asheri has to abstain, in
addition, from putting his head in water and from speaking a lie,
however immaterial, about God, prophets, Imams and Bibi Fatima, the
daughter of the Holy Prophet.  
 But it is only the external part of the fast. The soul and spirit of
fast is something deeper. This aspect of the fast can very easily be
explained in the words of our sixth Imam, Ja´far as-Sadiq (a. s.).

He said: "Your fast day should not be like ordinary days. When you fast,
all your senses —. eyes, ears, tongue, hands and feet — must fast with
you. " How can these organs fast?

Eyes: Keep your eyes off unlawful things and objects; spend this most
precious gift of God in good causes and pious acts; read the Qur'an,
Duas, and books of knowledge.

Ears: Abstain from hearing unlawful gossip, lies, false statements,
music and obscene topics; pay attention towards sermons and topics of
learning.

Tongue: Do not tell lies or useless tales, do not spread rumours, and do
not indulge in damaging gossip about other persons; keep aloof from
falsity. Use the power of speech in spreading the word of God, in
creating good will in the society.

Hands: Do not inflict injury upon others by your actions; instead strive
to help them as far as possible.

Feet: Do not go towards, forbidden places, like bars and cinemas. Do not
run between people creating strife. Go towards those places where God is
remembered; and where you can find the means to purify your soul. And,
above all, your heart and your mind must be with you in fasting. Because
fast, in its real sense, will remain incomplete unless your thoughts,
your emotions, your actions — in short, all aspects of your life —
become pure, clean and free from blemish.

Thus, the fast should create in us an instinctive obedience to the Law
of God.

I have heard about some people thinking that the fast of Ramadhan was
not meant for the 20th century; or that the factory workers should be
exempted from this obligation.

I think such big-headed persons are really in need of fasting more than
anybody else. I mean, if a Muslim is unruly enough to disobey the
commands of God, he should be made to fast so that he can acquire the
habit of unquestioned obedience to God.

Such persons are the fittest candidates for fasting. They must read the
commandments of Qur'an,

***"O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you. .*** ***. . . .that
ye may (learn) self-restraint ..."*** (Qur'an, 2:183).

Self-restraint, piety, sympathy and purity of soul; these are the fruits
of fasting. Let us strive to achieve as much benefit as we can from this
Holy Month of God.


