Eid-Ul-Fitr; a Unique Festival Time of Joy for Muslims
======================================================

Eid -ul -Fitr is a unique festival. It has no connection with any
historical event nor is it related to the changes of seasons or cycles
of agriculture. It is not a festival related in any way to worldly
affairs.

Its significance is purely spiritual. It is the day when the Muslims
thank Allah for having given them the will, the strength and the
endurance to observe fast and obey His commandment during the holy month
of Ramadhan.

This day, in Muslim world, brings rejoicing and happiness. The rejoicing
is not, however, at the departure of the month of Ramadhan; it is the
happiness which man feels after successfully completing an important
task.

So far as the passing away of the month of Ramadhan is concerned, Muslim
religious leaders of the early days of Islam always felt profound sorrow
when it came to an end, as they felt that they were being deprived of
the spiritual blessings which were associated with the month of fasting.

To show the original Islamic feeling at the end of Ramadhan, I am
quoting some of the sentences from an invocation by Imam Zainul-Abedeen.
He says:-

**"O Lord, Thou hast ordained Ramadhan to be one of the most chosen**  
**.. .. ; and Thou hast distinguished it from all other months, and
chosen it out of all other seasons and periods; and given it preference
to all the times of the year, by having sent the** **Qur'an and the
light of guidance in it, and by having increased the faith, and by
having enjoined the observance of fast in it, and by encouraging us to
stand up for prayer at night, and by placing in it the glorious 'Night
of Qadr'** **which is better than a thousand months.**

**"Therefore, in accordance with Thy command, we kept fast in its days,
and with Thy help, we stood up for prayers in its nights; presenting
ourselves, by means of its fasts and prayers, for Thy Mercy which Thou
dist offer to us.**  
**"And, verily, this month of Ramadhan stayed amongst us a welcome stay;
and gave us a righteous company; bestowing upon us the most excellent
benefits in the universe. Now, it departs from us at the completion of
its time.**  
**"Therefore, we bid it farewell as we did good-bye to one whose
departure is hard upon us and makes us sad; and whose parting away makes
us feel lonely."**

Then he turns towards the month of Ramadhan, speaking in an endearing
tone:-

**"How much did we long for thee yesterday; and how intense will be our
eagerness for thee tomorrow. Peace be on thee and thy excellence of
which we have been deprived, and thy blessings which will no longer be
with us."**

These few words are the mirror which show the true Islamic feeling
towards the month of Ramadhan and its blessings and spiritual benefits.

Eid-ul -Fitr is related to such a month of blessings, because it is on
this day that the strict restrictions of the preceding month are lifted.
Unfortunately, in some places, this resumption of the normal activities
is misinterpreted as a licence to indulge in activities prohibited in
Islam, like gambling, etc.

Fortunately, such trends are not common yet; but such people should be
made to understand the significance of Eid -ul-Fitr. Religious
observances of the Eid-ul-Fitr are designed to offer thanks to Allah
that He helped us in accomplishing the aim of Ramadhan.

Surely, it would be an affront to Allah if anybody, after thanking Him
for completing that spiritual training, goes right away sinning against
Him!

Had such person known the meaning and purpose of Eid-ul -Fitr, he could
not have indulged in such un-Islamic activities. Eid-ul-Fitr can be
interpreted as a three-fold blessing:  
 First it provides one more occasion for the Muslims to thank God and
remember His blessings.

Secondly, it affords an opportunity of spiritual stock-taking, after the
month of Ramadhan. A Muslim can now ponder over the strength (or
weakness) of his will power; he can see, in the mirror of Ramadhan, what
were the strong (or weak) points of his character, because under the
stress of fasting, the hidden qualities (or evils) of human character
come to surface in such clear way which is, perhaps, not possible
otherwise.  
 Thus a man gets a chance of self-diagnosis of the traits of his
character, which probably no one else may ever detect.

Thirdly, it enjoins the well-to -do persons to share a portion of what
they have with their poor brethren. On the eve of Eid-ul-Fitr, a Muslim
is obliged to give to the needy food-stuff at the rate of a prescribed
weight, on behalf of himself and of every member of his family,
including servants and guests who were sheltered under his roof on that
night. It would certainly be pleasing to God if we did not forget these
lessons after Eid-ul-Fitr.

Incidentally, here the difference between religious and materialistic
outlooks becomes sharper. Religion exhorts a man to give, by his own
free will, a share of his wealth to those who are less fortunate, and to
give it for obtaining the blessings of God. Materialism teaches him to
snatch from others whatever they have got without any regard to the
moral or ethical questions involved.

Thus, the religion tries to strengthen the highest qualities of the
human character; materialism strives to make him the slave of the lowest
animal instincts degrading him to the level of the beasts.

On this day, special prayers are held the world over, between sunrise
and noon, when the Muslims assemble, in large congregations, wearing
their best dresses standing shoulder to shoulder, demonstrating for
everyone the universal brotherhood which is another distinguishing
feature of Islam --- the religion of God.

In East Africa, special Eid barazas. are held in which the Muslims, as
well as the non-Muslims, participate whole-heartedly. Thus, it provides
the country-men with a chance to strengthen the ties of brotherly love
and a national unity.

Let us re-dedicate our life to the cause of humanity, which is the best
way to demonstrate our love of God. Let us resolve that our energies, in
the coming year, will be directed towards strengthening a society based
on mutual respect, brotherly love, and universal understanding.

Let us decide that, in the coming year, we will build a social order
which would bring not only the material benefits, but also the spiritual
satisfaction.

And, in the end, let us pray to God in these words:  
 "O Lord, make us clean from our errors by the close of the month of
Ramadhan, and take us out of our sins when our fast comes to end. And
bless us on this Eid day, the day of our festival and our break-fast;
and let it be the best day, which passed over us, and forgive us our
sins known and unknown."


