Saint Barnabas Saint Barnabass
==============================

According to the Gospel of Matthew, and to be exact Ch. 10, verse 4,
the list of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ is as follows: Simon
(or Peter), Andrew (Peter's brother), James (son of Zebedee), John
(James' brother), Philip, Batholomew, Thomas, Matthew (the tax
collector), James (son of Alphaeus), Thaddaeus, another Simon who is
said to be “a member of \`The Zealots,' a subversive political party,”
and Judas Iscariot. Why is the name of Saint Barnabas not among them,
and how did he come to write his own Gospel, the only one accepted by
Muslims as the true Bible?

With all their prejudices, speculations, sectarian motivations, it is
unwise to accept what today's or yesterday's Christians tell us about
Saint Barnabas and his Bible, or about the other disciples. The
Encyclopedia Britannica III, for example, describes those who believed
that Christ was human and not divine as heretics, and so do many
Christian writers and theologians.

An independent research, therefore, will yield better results, that is
for sure. One such research has been undertaken by M.A. Yusseff who
published his findings in a very interesting book titled The Dead Sea
Scrolls, the Gospel of Barnabas, and the New Testament which was
published in 1405 A.H./1985 A.D. by the American Trust Publications of
Indianapolis, Indiana.[^1] Saint Barnabas was originally called Joseph
the Levite or Joses the Levite and is better known as Matthai or
Matthias. In the Christian document known as Recognitions, Matthias

[^1] For the benefit of our reader, the full address of the said
Publisher is: ATP, 10900 W. Washington Street, Indianapolis, IN 46231,
U.S.A. I think this book ought to be in every personal and public
library. May the Almighty bless and reward its author and publisher,
Allahomma Aameen.

(69)

is identified as another name for Apostle Barnabas, which is correct.
In another document known as Homilies, Barnabas is said to be a personal
Apostle of Jesus, “a strict servant of the Law,” and, hence, one of the
original twelve Disciples (or Apostles) of Jesus Christ. The Jews, too,
list his name among not twelve but five apostles, the remaining four
being: Naki, Nester, Buni, and Todah. But we find the name “Lebbacus”
among these disciples in Matthew 10:13, that of “Judas son of James” in
Luke 6:16 and Acts 1:13, both contradicting other Biblical accounts; so,
which one is correct and which one is not?!

Saint Barnabas was born in Cyprus in the first century A.D. Other
references to him are recorded in the Bible in Acts 11:19 and 15:41. He
is said as having joined the Jerusalem church “after the alleged
crucifixion of Jesus[^1],” which is not true, sold his property, and gave
the proceeds as a donation to his community. He founded the church in
Antioch (Turkish Antakya), where he preached. Inviting Paul of Tarsus
(Turkey) to be his assistant, he undertook missionary activity and then
went to Jerusalem. Shortly after 48 A.D., a conflict separated both men,
and Barnabas sailed home to Cyprus.

Where did he write his Gospel and when? Nobody seems to know. How did
he die? Nobody seems to know, yet he is called a martyr... We are also
told that he knew St. Mark. In 488 A.D., his grave was discovered near
the Monastery of St. Barnabas in the Cypriot city of Salamis. A copy of
his Gospel was found buried with him[^2]. The accurate list of the twelve
disciples of Jesus exists in the Gospel of St. Barnabas himself who
records the following:

Jesus, having returned to the region of Jerusalem, was found again of
the people with exceedingly great joy, and they implored him to abide
with them, for his words were not as those of the scribes, but were with
power; for they touched the heart.

[^1] This misleading statement exists in Vol. One of the world renown
Encyclopedia Britannica III. How many other errors exist in this
Encyclopedia?! [^2]That copy was later deposited at the Imperial Library
at Vienna. It was at a much later date translated into English and
edited by Lonsdale and Laura Ragg.

(70)

Jesus, seeing that great was the multitude of them that returned to
their heart for to walk in the law of God, went up into the mountain,
and abode all night in prayer. When the day came he descended from the
mountain and chose twelve whom he called apostles, among whom is Judas,
who was slain upon the cross[^1]. Their names are: Andrew and Peter his
brother, fishermen; Barnabas, who wrote this, with Matthew the publican,
who sat at the receipt of custom; John and James, son of Zebedee;
Thaddaeus and Judas[^2]; Bartholomew and Philip; James, and Judas
Iscariot the traitor. To these he always revealed the divine secrets. He
made Iscariot Judas his dispenser of that which was given in alms, but
he stole the tenth part of everything. (The Gospel of Barnabas 14)

The Gospel of St. Barnabas is the one that contains the true teachings
of Jesus Christ; it will be discussed later how it refers to Prophet
Muhammed as the “Paraclete,” a Greek word meaning “Messenger” and
“Comforter,” in Arabic al-Amin... Even if you set aside the Gospel of
St. Barnabas, a good Greek translation of the original text of John
14:16 will read as follows: “And I will Pray the Patera, and he shall
give you another Paraclete, so that he may abide with you forever.” The
Greek word Patera is erroneously translated as “the Father,” a reference
to the Almighty, in a “modern” version of the Bible which gives the
following text for John 14:16-17: “And I will ask the Father, and he
will give you another Counselor to be with you forever\_\_the Spirit of
Truth.”[^3] No man of righteousness has earned the title of “the Spirit
of Truth” (in Arabic al-Sadiq) more than Prophet Muhammed. A

[^1] This statement, among many others in the Gospel of St. Barnabas,
agrees with what we, Muslims, have in the Holy Qur’an. Jesus Christ was
not crucified. Indeed, it was Judas Iscariot who was crucified. Let the
Christians of the world stand corrected. But they will never accept this
correction simply because it means undermining the very foundation of
their present day's creed.

[^2] The reader can easily see that there were two men among the
disciples of Jesus named Judas; one of them was crucified, so he was
rewarded in heaven, and the other was not, so he was rewarded by the
Romans for his treachery. The latter is Judas Iscariot.

[^3] The Great News: The New Testament (Colorado Springs, Colorado:
International Bible Society, 1984).

(71)

good scholar of Greek will do better than that; he will translate
Patera into “Nourisher” or “Sustainer,” and Paraclete into “Comforter,”
al-Amin in Arabic, a title given to Prophet Muhammed even before he had
started his prophetic mission. The translation of what John has in
14:16-17 should instead run as follows:

And I will request the Nourisher (God) to send you another Messenger,
so that he may be (your) guide always, the inspired, the Truthful, whom
the world at large will not welcome because it will not comprehend or
appreciate him, but you (believers) will recognize him. He will dwell
with you and (his message) will find a place in your hearts.

A testimony to the truth of the statement saying “... and (his message)
will find a place in your hearts” is that most converts to Islam used to
follow one sect of Christianity or another. Upon acceptance of Islam,
such converts do not abandon Christ; they simply rediscover him and get
to know the real Christ whose message has been and is still being
distorted. The best Christians in the world are the Muslims. Muslims
wholeheartedly honour Jesus Christ and his true and pristine message
presented by Prophet Muhammed; read the following verses of the Holy
Qur'an and see for yourself how such message is described:

Allah said: O Jesus! I am going to terminate the period of your stay
(on earth) and cause you to ascend unto Me and purify you of those who
disbelieve and make those who follow you above those who disbelieve to
the Day of Resurrection... (Qur’an, 3:55)

Carefully examine the above verse especially this portion: “... and
make those who follow you above those who disbelieve to the Day of
Resurrection” and see how the Almighty raises the status of those who
follow Jesus above those who disbelieve in him till the Day of Judgment.
Those who believe in Jesus Christ and who follow his pristine message
are none other than the Muslims, whereas the rest may be divided into
two groups: 1) those who have distorted the message of Jesus Christ and
lied about it one generation after another and are still doing so, and
2) the Jews who disbelieved in him and in his message and disbelieved in
his virgin birth. Although the Jews now

(72)

are the masters of the world, thanks to the West in general and to the
U.S. in particular, but such power they will not keep forever. They will
eventually weaken because the promise of the Almighty is true and
irreversible; they will be exposed for what they really are: the
anti-Christ, the Dajjal, the disseminator of falsehood through their
absolute control over the news and information media.

Let us go back to the argument about the Paraclete. This is not the
first time such an argument is raised. \`Allama al-Majlisi records an
incident narrated by al-Hasan ibn Muhammed al-Nawfali involving Imam Ali
ibn Mousa al-Rida debating with a Catholic about the authenticity of the
existing four Gospels comprising the Bible. It went on as follows:

The Imam asked the Catholic, “O Christian! Are you familiar with a
statement in the Bible wherein Jesus says, \`I am going to my Lord and
your Lord, and the Paraclete is coming who shall testify to my truth
just as I testified for him, and he shall explain everything to you, and
he shall be the one to expose all the sins of nations, and he shall be
the one to smash the pillar of apostasy'?”[^1] The Catholic said, “We
admit all what you have just quoted of the Bible.” The Imam asked him,
“Do you testify that such a statement is actually fixed in the Bible?”
“Yes,” said the Catholic. Imam al-Rida said,

“O Catholic! Could you tell me about the first Bible, how you lost it
then found it, and who put your existing Bible together?” The Catholic
said, “We did not lose the Bible except for one single day then we found
it fresh; John and Matthew brought it back to us.” Imam al-Rida said,
“How little your knowledge of the Bible and its scholars is! If such is
your claim, then why do you dispute with one another about the Bible?
Rather, controversy has always revolved around the Bible which is in

[^1] This is a rough translation of the original Arabic text. A thorough
research of the Bible may yield better results and reveal the exact
Biblical verse to which the Imam was referring. Unfortunately, the Imam
did not specify which of the four Gospels he was quoting. Consulting a
Bible in Arabic may also produce the same anticipated result: the number
of the exact verse and the name of the Gospel which the Imam had in
mind.

(73)

your hands today. Had it been the same as the first one was, you would
not have thus disputed (with one another) about it, but I shall inform
you of such controversy myself.”

The Imam went on to state the following:

“Be informed that when the first Bible was lost, the Christians
gathered around their scholars and said to them, \`Jesus son of Mary has
been killed, and we do not know where the Bible is. You are the
scholars; so, what do you have with you?' Luke and Mark said to them,
\`We have learned the Bible by heart; so, do not grieve in its regard,
and do not forsake the churches, for we shall recite to you one Gospel
after another on each Sunday till we put it all together.' Luke, Mark,
John and Matthew sat together, and they put this Bible of yours for you
after you had lost the first (original) one. These four men were
students of the early disciples; are you aware of that?!” The Catholic
answered, “This I did not know and now I do. It is also now clear to me
how much you know about the Bible, and I have heard from you things with
which I was familiar and to which my heart testifies to be the truth.

I have, therefore, gained a better understanding.” Imam al-Rida then
said to him, “How do you, then, find the testimony of these men?”
“Accurate,” said the Catholic, “since they are the scholars of the
Bible, and everything to which they testified is the truth.” Imam
al-Rida then turned to al-Mamoon and his company and said, “Bear witness
to what he has just said.” They said, “We testify.” Then the Imam turned
to the Catholic and said, “I challenge you to swear by the son and his
mother whether you know if Matthew had said, \`The Messiah is David son
of Abraham son of Isaac son of Jacob son of Yehuda son of Khadrun', and
that Mark said about the lineage of Jesus son of Mary that he was \`The
word of God which He placed in the human body, so it became human', and
that Luke said, \`Jesus son of Mary and his mother were humans of flesh
and blood, so the Holy Spirit entered into them'. Then you testify that
Jesus had himself said the following about his creation, \`I tell you
the truth: None ascends the heavens except that he

(74)

descends therefrom except the man who rides the camel, the seal of the
prophets, for he shall ascend to the heavens then shall he descend;' so,
what do you say about that?” The Catholic said, “This is the speech of
Jesus, and we do not deny it.” Imam al-Rida said, “If so, what do you
say about the testimony of Luke, Mark, and Matthew with regard to Jesus
and what they had attributed to him?” The Catholic said, “They lied
about Jesus...” Imam al-Rida turned to the audience and said, “O people!
Has he not (a moment ago) testified to their truthfulness and said that
they were the scholars of the Bible and what they said is the truth?!”
The Catholic said to the Imam, “O scholar of the Muslims!

I would like you to excuse me from having to discuss these men.” After
a while, the Imam turned to that Catholic high-ranking cleric, an
archbishop, and said, “In the Bible, it is written: \`The son of the
virtuous woman is departing, and the Paraclete is coming after him, and
he shall lighten the burdens and explain everything to you, and he shall
testify for me as I have testified to you. I have brought you the
parables, and he shall bring you the interpretation.' Do you believe
that such a text exists in the Bible?” The Catholic answered in the
affirmative. [^1]

The Holy Qur'an, moreover, tells us in Surat al-Saff (Ch. 61) that
“Jesus son of Mary said: O Children of Israel! I am the prophet of Allah
to you testifying to that which is before me of the Torah and giving the
glad tidings of a Prophet who will come after me; his name is Ahmed; but
when he came to them with clear arguments, they said: This is clear
magic” (Qur'an, 61:6). Compare this Qur'anic verse with the following
text in the Gospel of St. Barnabas:

Thereupon said the disciples, “O master, it is thus written in the book
of Moses, that in Isaac was the promise made.”

[^1] al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 14, pp. 331-333. Again, since this
text is my translation from the Arabic original, the Imam's quotations
may not be exact. Consulting a Bible written in Arabic will be
worthwhile and will provide the numbers of the chapters and verses to
which the Imam here refers. Unfortunately, I do not at the moment have a
copy of the Bible in Arabic.

(75)

Jesus answered with a groan, “It is so written, but Moses wrote it not,
nor Joshua, but rather our rabbins, who fear not God. Verily, I say to
you that if you consider the words of the angel Gabriel, you shall
discover the malice of our scribes and doctors. For the angel said:
\`Abraham, all the world shall know how God loves you, but how shall the
world know the love that you bear to God? Assuredly it is necessary that
you do something for the love of God.' Abraham answered, \`Behold the
servant of God, ready to do all that which God shall will.'

“Then spoke God, saying to Abraham, \`Take your son, your firstborn
Ishmael, and come up the mountain to sacrifice him.' How is Isaac
firstborn, if when Isaac was born Ishmael was seven years old?”

Then answered Jesus, “Verily I say to you that Satan ever seeks to
annul the laws of God. Therefore he with his followers, hypocrites and
evildoers, the former with false doctrine, the latter with lewd living,
today have contaminated almost all things, so that scarcely is the truth
found. Woe to the hypocrites, for the praises of this world shall turn
for them into insults and torments in hell.

“I therefore say to you that the messenger of God is a splendor that
shall give gladness to nearly all that God has made, for he is adorned
with the spirit of understanding and of counsel, the spirit of wisdom
and might, the spirit of fear and love (of God), the spirit of prudence
and temperance. He is adorned with the spirit of charity and mercy, the
spirit of justice and piety, the spirit of gentleness and patience,
which he has received from God three times more than He has given to all
his creatures. O blessed time, when he shall come to the world. Believe
me that I have seen him and have done him reverence, even as every
prophet has seen him. Seeing that of his spirit God gives to them
prophecy. And when I saw him my soul was filled with consolation,
saying, O Muhammed, God be with you, and may he make me worthy to untie
your shoe

(76)

latchet, for obtaining this I shall be a great prophet and holy one of
God.” (The Gospel of Barnabas 44)

“... unworthy to untie your latchet” above brings to memory what St.
Mark said in 1:7: “And this was his message: \`After me will come one
more powerful than I, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to
stoop down and untie.” The speaker is undoubtedly Jesus and the one
whose coming he is predicting is none other than Prophet Muhammed. But
people look at things and make them appear as they would like them to.
Such is the truth which all other disciples, with the exception of
Barnabas, had deliberately hidden.

The reader is encouraged to obtain a copy of the Gospel of Saint
Barnabas[^1] and compare it with other existing Bibles, be they those
accepted by the Catholics or those endorsed by the Protestants and judge
for himself as to how much distortion the message of Christ has suffered
and is still suffering...

Al-Dahhak has said that the disciples (in Arabic hawariyyun) were
called so due to their pure hearts. Apparently he gave them more credit
than they deserve, seeing how much distortion they inflicted on the
message of Jesus even as early as the very first century. As a matter of
fact, one very famous Christian writer, George Bernard Shaw, described
these disciples very well when he said the following on p. 72 of The
Adventures of a Black Girl in Her Search for God: “Jesus could be
reproached for having chosen his disciples very unwisely if we could
believe that he had any real choice.

There are moments when one is tempted to say that there was not one
Christian among them and that Judas was the only one who showed any
gleams of common sense.” Imagine! Abdullah ibn al-Mubarak has said that
they were called so because their faces were shining with the mark of
adoration, its glow and whiteness. The Arabic root word, hur, means:
intense whiteness. Al-Hasan has said that it means “supporters” or
“helpers,” while Qatadah thinks that it means “the ones most fit to be
successors of their master.”

[^1] Since there is no copyright on The Gospel of Barnabas, the copy of
it which I consulted for the writing of this book does not contain the
Publisher's name or the place or date of publication.

(77)

Did those disciples or apostles deserve all these compliments? Let us
examine how they dealt with their master:

The night preceding the “imprisonment” of Jesus Christ was truly a
testing night for the faith of those disciples. On that night, those
disciples joined him in his concealment. Jesus knew perfectly well what
they were; so, he recommended them to devote themselves to prayer so
that they might not fail the test. On that occasion, they made a great
profession of faith and integrity. One said, “I will shed my blood where
a drop of your perspiration falls.

” Another said, “I will die before anyone hurts a hair of your body.”
Despite all these protests and professions, they could not keep even the
night's vigil along with Jesus. Jesus said to them, “Stay here with me
keeping the night's vigil along with me...” Then he came to the
disciples and saw them fallen asleep. He then said to Peter, “Can you
not keep even a moment's vigil with me? Keep vigil and keep yourself
engaged in prayers lest you should fail the test...” Then, coming out
again, he saw them sleeping the second time, and their eyes were heavy
with sleep..., and he saw them the third time sleeping. If you have a
copy of The New Testament in Today's English Version (third edition, New
York), turn to p. 73 and see for yourself.

Ibn \`Abbas has said that they were fishermen. Some of them were. Jesus
passed by them once and asked them what they were doing. “Fishing,” said
they. He asked them, “Would you like to come with me so we may fish for
people?” They asked him, “How can that be?!” He said, “We invite them to
the way of Allah.” They asked him who he was, and he answered them that
he was Jesus son of Mary, a servant and messenger of Allah. “Is there
any other prophet whose status is higher than yours?” they asked him.
“Yes,” he answered, “the Arabian Prophet,” so they followed him,
believed in him, and joined his march.

This is what we, Muslims, would like to think of these disciples, but
how do Christians look at us? Contrary to what we, Muslims, are taught
by our Islamic code of ethics, Christians do not recognize our religion
or any other religion besides theirs. To them, anyone who does not
recognize Jesus as the “son of God,” His “only begotten son,” and who is
not baptized, can have no place in heaven.

(78)

Adherents of all religions in the world, and those who have no
religion, have the right to wishful thinking. Compare this with the
tolerance Islam demonstrates in the following verse of Surat al-Baqara
and judge for yourself:

Surely those who believe (Muslims), and those who are Jews, and the
Christians, and the Sabeans[^1] (Sabians), whoever believes in God and in
the Last Day and does good, they shall have their reward from their
Lord, and there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve. (2:62) Such
is the tolerance of Islam, and such is the perfect code of Islamic
ethics.

[^1] Some Arab writers say that the Sabeans were a certain sect of
unbelievers who worshipped the stars secretly and openly professed to be
Christians. According to others, they are followers of the religion of
Sabi' son of Seth son of Adam, which is more accurate, for the Holy
Qur’an includes them in the above quoted verse among the believers.
Other writers say that their religion is pretty much what Christianity
teaches except that their qibla was towards the south. Still others say
that they followed the religion of Prophet Noah, and surely Allah knows
best.


