The Holy Spirit
===============

Among the signs of the prophethood of Jesus is that he was assisted by
the Holy Spirit. The Almighty has said, “We gave Jesus son of Mary clear
arguments and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit” (Qur'an, 2:87);
“Allah will say: O Jesus son of Mary! Remember My favor on you and on
your mother when I strengthened you with the Holy Spirit” (Qur'an,
5:110).

Scholars have differed regarding the Holy Spirit (al ruh al qudus).
Al-Rabee\` ibn Anas has said that it is the spirit that blew the breath
of life into him, and that Allah attached it to His own Name as an act
of honoring. The qudus is Allah Almighty according to the verse, “...
and a spirit from Him” (Qur'an, 4:171), and also, “... so We breathed
into her of Our ruh “ (Qur'an, 21:91). Other scholars have said that
what is meant by the qudus is purity, hence al ruh al qudus means “the
pure spirit.” Jesus is also called ruh,.

for the simple reason that he was not carried in men's loins, nor was
he carried by the wombs of married women; rather, he was an order
decreed by the Almighty. Al-Suddi says that al ruh al qudus, the Holy
Spirit, is Gabriel, and that this phrase means: “supporting Jesus
through Gabriel,” peace be upon both of them, since he was his
companion, friend, and guard, walking with him wherever he walked till
he ascended to heavens. Sa\`eed ibn Jubayr and \`Ubayd ibn \`Umayr say
that it is Allah's Greatest Name, and through it did he (Jesus) bring
the dead back to life and perform those miracles to people.


