Miracles of Jesus
=================

Al-Suddi has said that when Jesus was at his class, he used to tell his
fellows what their parents were doing. He would tell one of them, “Go
home and see that your family has eaten such-and-such food,” or “they
have left such-and-such for you,” so he would go home and ask his
parents to let him have it. The family would in turn ask him how he came
to know about it, and he would say that Jesus had told him. For this
reason, the parents prohibited their children from having anything to do
with Jesus, telling them that he was a sorcerer.

They once gathered them all together at a house, and Jesus came and
wanted to see them. When he asked who were confined inside the house, it
was maliciously said to him, “Pigs.” He said, “So shall they be,”
whereupon the door of the house was opened and indeed pigs came out of
the house, and the news of the incident became widespread.

The Children of Israel felt fed up with Jesus. They wanted to get rid
of him. When his mother sensed the danger, she conveyed him on a donkey
and went out to Egypt[^1].

When Jesus and his mother, peace be upon both of them, came out
wandering about in the land, they left the Children of Israel behind and
came to a villager who hosted them and was very kind to them. The

[^1] The discreet reader realizes that reference to Egypt does not mean
today's Egypt. We are talking not about now but about two thousand years
ago. At that time, Egypt was a “superpower” that had extended its
domination to a large part of its contemporary world. This statement
means: “Mary conveyed Jesus on a donkey and went out to the lands under
Egypt's control.” Mary was avoiding the brutality of the Romans and
those who worked for them. Some parts of Palestine (Greater Syria) at
that time fell under Egypt's control.

(81)

king during that time was a stubborn oppressor, so their host one day
came back home looking very depressed. He entered his house while Mary
was in his wife's company. Mary asked his wife why her husband looked so
depressed, whereupon she said to her, “Our king compels every man to
take care of feeding him and his soldiers and serve them wine; anyone
who refused would be penalized. Today is our turn to host him, and we
are not able to handle such a burden.”

Mary asked her to tell her husband not to worry, since he was kind to
her and to her son, and that she would ask her son to invoke Allah on
his behalf, and that his invocation would alone be sufficient. Then Mary
told Jesus of it, whereupon he said that if he were to do so, there
would be some mischief [due to wine drinking]. “It does not matter,”
Mary said, “for he has surely been very kind to us.” Then Jesus told his
host to have his pots and containers filled with water, then to inform
him once they were all full.

The man did so, whereupon Jesus invoked his Lord and the water in the
pots turned into meat and gravy, while the water in the containers
turned into wine[^1]. People had never tasted anything like it before.
When the king came, he and his men ate, and when he drank of that wine,
he asked his host where he had obtained it from. When the man told the
king where he had obtained it from, the king said to him, “The wine I am
served at my palace is brought to me from that land, and it surely does
not taste like this one.”

The host had to change his story, but the king pressured him to tell
him the truth. Finally, the man gave up and said, “The truth is that
there is, at my house, a child who is granted by Allah the answer to any
of his pleas, and he is the one who invoked Him to turn the water into
wine.”

It so happened that that king had a son whom he very much wished to
succeed him as monarch, but that son had died only a few days ago. He
loved him more than anyone else. The king said, “A man who invokes Allah
to turn water into wine and Allah answers his plea is surely capable of
bringing my son back to life.” Jesus was brought to

[^1] This incident can be found in the Bible. Some Christians find no
harm in wine drinking, basing their argument on Jesus turning water into
wine, but little do they consider the fact that Jesus never drank that
particular wine at that particular time nor at any other time and we,
Muslims, challenge them to prove otherwise. Prophets of God are not wine
drinkers; sinners are.

(82)

him, and he discussed the matter with him. Jesus said to him, “Do not
do that, for if he is brought back to life, a great deal of evil shall
take place.” The king said, “I am not concerned about that after seeing
him again.” Jesus asked him, “If I bring him back to life, are you all
going to leave me and my mother to go wherever we want?” The king said,
“Yes.” Jesus, therefore, invoked Allah Who did, indeed, bring that son
back to life. When the king's subjects saw him, they rushed to grab
their weapons and said, “This king has plundered our wealth and now
wants to appoint his son as his successor over us so that he, too, will
do what his father has been doing...” They fought among themselves.
Jesus and his mother left them and continued their journey.

Another of his miracles is that he created out of clay birds, as Allah
Almighty tells us in the Holy Qur'an, 3:49: “... I have come to you with
a sign from your Lord, that I determine for you out of mud like the form
of a bird, then I breathe into it and it becomes a bird with Allah's
permission,” and in 5:110: “... and when you determined out of mud a
thing like the form of a bird by My permission, then you breathed into
it and it became a bird by My permission.”

Among his other miracles was his curing the leprous and those born
blind, as Allah Almighty has said, “... and you healed the [born] blind
and the leprous by My permission” (Qur'an, 5:110). The reason why these
two ailments were particularly mentioned is due to the fact that nobody
among the physicians of the time could find any cure for them. Jesus
lived during a time when medicine was considered the most prominent
branch of knowledge, so he was able to demonstrate to them miracles in
it which nobody else could.

Still another of his miracles was his bringing the dead back to life by
the Permission of Allah Who says, “... and when you brought forth the
dead [back to life] by My permission” (Qur'an, 5:110). Among the dead
whom he brought back to life was Lazarus (as he is called in Latin, a
word which means “one helped by God,” or Eleazar in Hebrew), a friend of
his. He, his sisters Martha and Mary were friends of Jesus. His sister
Mary sent Jesus a message saying that her brother had died three days
ago. Some people suggested to her to escort them to his grave. She did,
and it was inside a closed vault. Jesus supplicated to his Lord saying,
“Lord! Creator of the seven heavens and the seven earths! You have sent
me to the Children of Israel to

(83)

invite them to Your creed, and I have told them that I can bring the
dead back to life with Your permission; therefore, do bring Eleazar back
to life, O Lord!” Lazarus came back to life and got out of his grave on
his own. He lived and even fathered a number of children. References to
this incident exist in three of modern day's versions of the Gospels[^1]:
Matthew, John, and Luke.

The son of an old woman was another. This story says that while touring
the land in the company of his disciples, Jesus passed by a city and
said, “This city has a treasure; who among you would like to go and take
it out?” They said, “O Ruhullah (spirit of Allah)! No stranger enters
this town without being murdered by its people.” Jesus said, “Stay here,
all of you, till I come back.” He went and entered it. He came to the
door of a house and said, “Assalamo \`Alaikum, O residents of the house!
This is a stranger asking you to feed him!” An old woman said to him,
“Are you not satisfied with the fact that I do not go to the governor
and tell him about you, yet you have the courage to ask for food?!

” While Jesus was thus standing at the door, her young son joined them.
Jesus said to him, “Please do host me tonight!” The young man repeated
what his old mother had said. Jesus then said to him, “But if you do
host me, I will enable you to marry the king's daughter.” The young man
said, “You must be either a mad man or Jesus son of Mary!” Jesus said,
“I am Jesus,” whereupon he agreed to host him. He offered to let him
stay there for the night.

The next morning, he said to his host, “Go to the king's palace and
tell him that you had come to ask for his daughter's hand. He will order
to have you

[^1] These Gospels have continuously been undergoing changes, editings,
distortions, additions, deletions, linguistic variations,
mis-translations, etc. due to errors in translation, sectarian biases
and prejudices and other factors. The only Gospel accepted by Muslims as
accurate is that of St. Barnabas, a Cypriot companion of St. Paul
(originally Saul), which was not canonized by the Council of Nicaea of
325 A.D. That Council was called for by the Byzantine emperor
Constantine I (288 - 337 A.D.), or Constantine the Great, who built the
Turkish city Constantinople in 330 A.D. to dedicate it to Jesus' mother,
Virgin Mary. Constantine's objective behind holding the Nicaea
Conference was to settle the disputes among various Christian sects as
to what constituted Christianity, but the said Conference created more
problems than it solved. It was also boycotted by a number of Christian
sects who did not endorse its decisions.

(84)

beaten and kicked out.” The youth stood before the king and told him
that he wished to ask him for his daughter's hand. The king ordered him
to be beaten; he was beaten and kicked out.

The youth came back and told Jesus what had happened, whereupon Jesus
said to him, “Tomorrow, go back and ask for his daughter's hand; what
will happen to you will be different from what has happened to you
today.” The youth did as he was told, and he was given a beating worse
than the one he had received the day before. He told Jesus about what
had happened to him, and Jesus said to him, “Go one more time back to
him, for he will tell you that he will marry her to you on his own
terms, and that his terms will be a gold and silver mansion with
everything in it made of gold, silver and chrysolite.

Tell him that you will do that. If he sends someone with you, you will
find your quest, and do not say anything about it to him.” The youth
entered the king's palace for the third time and again approached the
king regarding his marriage to his daughter. The king asked him, “Do you
accept to pay her dowry if I decide it?” He asked him what the dowry
was, and the king told him what Jesus had already told him to expect. He
said, “Yes, I do; so send someone to see it.”

The king sent a number of men with him, and he did, indeed, show them
what he had promised to, and people were quite impressed. The king
married him to his daughter, and the youth found it hard to believe that
he finally married into the royal family. He said to Jesus , “O
Ruhullah! How can you do all of this while you yourself look in such a
(shabby) condition?!” Jesus said, “I have preferred what will last to
what will perish.” The youth said to him,

“I, too, am willing to abandon what perishes, and I desire to accompany
you.” He actually renounced this vanishing world and became a follower
of Jesus who took him by the hand and introduced him to his disciples.
“This,” said Jesus, “is the treasure I had told you about!” The son of
that old woman remained in the company of Jesus till he died. Jesus
passed by and saw his corpse lying in state on a bed, so he invoked
Allah and the dead man came back to life and sat on the edge of the bed.
He was carried by other men from the bed and given clothes to wear. He
put the carrier on his shoulders then went back home. He remained with
his family and fathered a number of children.

(85)

Another miracle of Jesus: He brought Sam son of Noah back to life.
Jesus was once describing the ark of Noah to his disciples when the
latter asked him, “Is it possible that you bring to life one of those
who were aboard it so that he may describe it for us?” Jesus stood up
and went to a hill, took a handful of its soil and said, “This is the
grave of Sam son of Noah. If you wish, I can bring him back to life for
you.” They welcomed the idea, so he invoked Allah by His Greatest Name,
struck the hill with his staff then said, “Come back to life by the Will
of Allah,” whereupon Sam came out of his grave with half of his hair
looking gray.

Immediately Sam asked, “Has the Day of Judgment come?” Jesus said, “No,
but I have called upon you in Allah's Greatest Name.” During the time of
Noah, old age never changed the color of people's hair; only during the
time of Abraham did all of that start to change. Sam lived five hundred
years maintaining his youthful look. He told them about the story of the
ark. After that Jesus ordered him to die, and Sam responded with, “On
one condition! That Allah spares me the agony of death!” Jesus invoked
Allah and included Sam's wish in his invocation, and Allah responded
favorably to his plea.

Another of the miracles of Jesus was his walking on water. Jesus once
went out on one of his trips accompanied by a short and faithful
follower of his. When Jesus reached the sea[^1], he said, “Bismillah, in
health, and in conviction,” then he started walking on the water. The
man was quite amazed and said to himself, “This is Jesus, the spirit of
Allah, walking on the water's surface!” Having inaudibly said so, he
fell into the water. Fearing drowning, he sought help from Jesus who
took hold of him and pulled him out.

Jesus said to him, “O Shortie![^2] What did you say to yourself?!” He
told him about it, whereupon Jesus said, “You placed yourself in a
position in which Allah did not place you; therefore, Allah despised you
for having said what you said; so, do regret and repent.” The man
regretted and repented, so he went [^1] Most likely, this is the Sea of
Galilee, or Tiberias (in Arabic Bahr Tabariyyah) in northeast Palestine.
During the lifetime of Jesus Christ, nine cities were flourishing on its
shores. Some of the disciples of Christ, the fishermen, were from that
area.

[^2] Jesus Christ had a most beautiful and attractive conduct and a
brilliant sense of humour. This quotation testifies to this fact.

(86)

back to the status with which Allah had blessed him. Thus did Jesus
provide us with a lesson in piety and admonish us not to envy one
another.

Another tale says that Jesus passed once by a man who used to sit quite
often by a grave. He saw him doing so quite often; therefore, he decided
to find out why. Jesus came to him and said, “O servant of Allah! I see
that you spend a lot of time sitting by this grave.” The man said, “O
Ruhullah! This grave contains my wife's corpse, a woman of beauty and
affinity, and I have a trust with her.” He asked him, “Do you like that
I pray Allah and He brings her back to life for you?” The man warmly
welcomed the suggestion. Jesus made his ablution and offered two
prostrations, then he invoked Allah Almighty to bring the person inside
that grave back to life. A coal-black man came out of the grave looking
like a burnt stump of a tree.

He asked him who he was, so he answered him by saying, “O Ruhullah! I
am a man being tormented for the past forty years, and at this hour, it
was said to me to respond to your call, so I did,” adding, “O messenger
of Allah! I have seen so much torment that if Allah ever returned me to
this world, I would grant Him my covenant that I shall never disobey Him
in anything; so, please do pray Allah on my behalf.” Jesus felt sorry
for him, and he invoked Allah Almighty on his behalf, then he told him
to go away, and he did.

The man who used to frequently sit by the grave then said, “O messenger
of Allah! I have made a mistake about identifying this grave! Her grave
is over there!” Jesus invoked Allah again, and a very beautiful young
woman came out of the grave. Jesus asked him, “Do you know her?” “Do I
know her?!” the man retorted adding, “Of course I do! She is my wife.”
Jesus invoked Allah to reunite her with her husband, and the latter took
her by the hand till they came to a tree under which he slept, putting
his head on her lap. The son of the king happened to pass by, and he
looked at her and she looked at him, and they instantly admired each
other.

He beckoned to her, so she moved her husband's head away from her lap
and followed the prince. Later, her husband woke up. He looked for her
and could not find her, so he went out looking for her till he was able
to get hold of her. He held her and said that she was his wife, while
the prince kept saying that she was his bondmaid. As they argued thus,
Jesus happened to pass by. The husband said to the prince that that man
was

(87)

Jesus. Having heard the husband tell his story, Jesus asked the woman,
“What do you have to say?” She said, “I am the bondmaid of this man, and
I do not know the other.” Jesus said to her, “Give us back what we have
given you.” She said, “I have done so,” falling dead. Jesus retorted,
“Have you seen anything more strange than this?! A man whom Allah caused
to die as a disbeliever is brought back to life to believe, and a woman
whom Allah caused to die as a believer, then He brought life back to
her, chose to disbelieve!”


