The Table of Viands
===================

Allah Almighty has said,

The disciples said: O Jesus son of Mary! Will your Lord consent to send
down to us food from heavens? He said: Be careful of (your duty to)
Allah if you are believers. (5:112)

What was that table all about? How was it sent down and what did it
contain? These questions are answered differently by different people,
each according to the extent of his knowledge or depth of his
imagination! Qatadah has quoted Jabir quoting \`Ammar ibn Yasir citing
the Messenger of Allah saying, “The table was sent down with bread and
meat on it because they had asked Jesus for food to eat, and that it
would not be exhausted. He said to them, \`I shall do so, and it shall
always come to you as long as you do not become malicious or betray
(me), for in the latter case, you will be tormented.' It was only one
day after its descent upon them that they became malicious, and they
betrayed (Jesus).”

Ata ibn Abu Rabah[^1] is quoted as citing Salman al-Farisi (the Persian)
saying that Jesus never committed any wrong deed, nor did he rebuke an
orphan, nor did he burst laughing, nor did he drive flies away from his
face[^2]... When the disciples asked him to bring them tables of viands,
he said, “Lord! Do send down to us food from heavens to be for us an
ever-recurring happiness, to the first of us and to the last, and

[^1] Ata ibn Abu Rabah (d. 114 A.H./732 A.D.) was a renown tabi\`i who
learned from the sahaba and reported hadith from them. He was once the
mufti of Mecca.

[^2] This is a figure of speech which means: “He never hurt anyone.”

(89)

a sign from You, and grant us means of subsistence, and You are the
best of Providers” (Qur'an, 5:114). A red table between two clouds, one
above it and one underneath it, came descending upon them as they looked
at it till it settled on the ground before them. Jesus wept and said,
“Lord! I implore You to count me among those who are grateful to You!
Lord! Make it a sign of mercy from You rather than one of penalty!” When
they saw it, they found it something which they had never seen before,
and similar to its fragrance they had never inhaled. Jesus said to them,
“Whoever is most righteous in deeds among you should uncover it and
mention the Name of Allah over it then eat of it.”

Shemon (Simon) al-Safa said, “You are more fit to do so than any of
us.” Jesus stood up, made his ablution, offered lengthy prayers and kept
weeping for quite some time. Then he removed the sheet that had covered
it saying, Bismillah (in the Name of Allah), the best of sustainers.” It
was a roasted fish the scales and the bones of which had already been
removed. So fat it was that it seemed as if it was floating over oil. At
its head there was salt, and at its tail there was vinegar, and it was
surrounded by many types of vegetables with the exception of leek. There
were five loaves of bread on it. On the first of them there were olives.
On the second there was honey. On the third there was oil, and on the
fourth there was jerked meat. On the fifth there was cheese.

Simon said, “O Ruhullah! Is this earthly, or is it from the food of the
afterlife?” Jesus said, “What you see is neither the food of the life of
this world nor of that of the Hereafter. Rater, it is something which
Allah has innovated through His overwhelming Might; so, eat of what you
have asked for, and He will provide you with an increase of His favors.”
They said, “O Ruhullah! Could you please show us a miracle derived from
this one?” Jesus said, “O fish!

Come back to life by the permission of Allah!” The fish shook and its
scales and bones came back to it, whereupon the disciples were
frightened of it. Jesus asked them, “What is the matter with you that
you ask for things which, when granted, you dislike?” Then he added,
“How worried I am about you that you should ever be chastised! O fish!
Go back to your former state by the permission of Allah!” The fish
resumed its former state, a roasted fish, just as they had seen it
before. They said, “O Ruhullah! Be the first to eat of it, then we will
eat after you.” Jesus said, “God

(90)

forbid that I should eat of it; rather, those who asked for it shall
eat of it.” But they were apprehensive of eating of it; so, Jesus
invited the indigent, the sick, the leprous, and those afflicted with
other ailments to come and eat of it. He said to them, “Eat of the
sustenance of your Lord! Yours shall be the joy, and affliction shall be
others' lot!” So they ate of it. As many as one thousand and three
hundred men and women from among the poor, the sick, the handicapped,
and those afflicted with ailments ate of it to their fill. Then Jesus
looked at the fish, and it appeared just as it had come the first time
from the heavens.

The table after that ascended as they looked on and disappeared. All
those who were sick and ate of it were healed, and so were all those
with permanent handicaps, and Allah enriched of His favor the poor who
partook of it till their death. The disciples regretted having missed
the opportunity to eat of it, and so did those who could not. Whenever
it descended, the young and the old, the men and the women, would crowd
around it. It kept coming to them for forty days in the late morning and
before noon.

It would remain with them till they all had enough, then it would fly
away before their very eyes. It used to come one day and skip another,
just as the she-camel of the people of Thamu-d. Allah Almighty inspired
Jesus to “Make My table and sustenance for the benefit of the poor
rather than the rich,” so the rich were very displeased about that, so
much so that they complained about it and they started casting doubt
about the table, saying, “Do you believe that a table can really come
down from the heavens?!” Jesus said to them, “Prepare yourselves, then,
to receive the penalty of Allah.”

Allah Almighty inspired Jesus: “I have made two provisions regarding
those who belie it. Those who disbelieve after I have sent it down will
be tormented a torment with which I will not torment anyone else from
among the people of the world.” Jesus, thereupon, said, as the Holy
Qur'an tells us, “If You chastise them, surely they are Your servants,
and if You forgive them, surely You are the Mighty,

the Wise” (Qur'an, 5:118). He, therefore, turned three hundred men from
among them, who had spent their night in bed with their wives, into pigs
running in the alleys and frequenting the places where garbage is
collected, eating filth. When people saw that, they were alarmed, and
they came to Jesus son of Mary horrified. They wept over those of

(91)

their families who were turned into pigs. When the pigs saw Jesus, they
wept and kept turning around him. Jesus called them by their names, and
they came, one by one, crying and nodding with their heads as he called
out their names, unable to speak. They lived for three days, then they
perished.


