The Almighty Admonishes Jesus
=============================

Abu Busayr quotes Abu Abdullah, Imam Ja\`fer al-Sadiq, saying that the
Almighty, Glory and Exaltation are His, admonished Jesus son of Mary
thus:

O Jesus! You are the Messiah by My command; you bring the dead back to
life by My Word, so let your desire be My Pleasure, and be fearful of
Me, for you shall find no refuge from Me except with Me. O Jesus! I
admonish you as one Who is Compassionate to you: Seek My mercy though I
granted you authority, and seek whatever pleases Me, for blessed you are
as a grown-up, and blessed you are as a child, wherever you may be. I
testify that you are My servant and the son of My bondmaid. O Jesus! Let
My status with you be your ultimate concern, and remember Me so that
such remembrance will be treasured when you return to Me. Seek nearness
to Me through optional (nafl) acts of worship; rely upon Me so that I
may make you independent of others; do not rely on others else My Wrath
should overtake you.

O Jesus! Be patient when tried, and be contented with your lot. Be as I
would like you to be, and I would like to be pleased with you, for My
pleasure is that I am obeyed and never disobeyed. O Jesus! Let your
tongue ever mention My Name, and let your heart ever be filled with love
for Me. O Jesus! Be aware in the times of heedlessness, and judge with
beautiful wisdom seeking My Pleasure. O Jesus! Desire My Pleasure, fear
My wrath, and kill your heart with fear of Me. O Jesus!

(93)

Observe the night as means to seeking My Pleasure, and deprive yourself
of water during your day seeking to treasure it for the Day when you
will very much be in need of Me. O Jesus! Compete with others in the
paths of goodness as much as you can so that you will be identified with
goodness wherever you go. O Jesus! Judge among My servants as I have
advised you, and effect My justice among them, for I have revealed to
you that which heals the hearts from Satan's ailments.

O Jesus! Do not sit with one who is tried with tribulations. O Jesus!
What I say is the truth: No creature truly believes in Me except that he
humbles himself to Me, and no creature feels awe of Me except that he is
hopeful of My rewards. I, therefore, testify to you that such a person
is secure against My punishment so long as you do not alter My way. O
Jesus son of the righteous Virgin! Weep over your soul like one who bids
his family farewell, who has no desire for this life, who leaves life
for those who seek it, desiring only what is with Allah.

O Jesus! Be, moreover, kind in speech, disseminating the greeting,
awake when the eyes of the doers of good are asleep, being apprehensive
of the Hereafter, of the tremendous quakes, of the horrors of the Day of
Judgment when no family nor offspring nor wealth will be of any avail. O
Jesus! Decorate your eyes with grief when the idle ones laugh.

O Jesus! Be submissive and persevering, for congratulations to you when
you obtain what those who persevere shall receive. O Jesus! Live your
life day by day, and taste what lost its taste, for the truth is what I
say: You have only your hour and your moment, so derive lessons from the
passage of time, and let what is coarse (of clothes) and what is most
simple (of food) suffice you, for you have seen what your final destiny
shall be, and that whatever you take and whatever you consume is already
preordained. O Jesus! You shall be questioned, so have mercy on the weak
just as I have been Merciful unto you, and do not cause any grief to the
orphan.

(94)

O Jesus! Mourn your own soul when you perform your prayers, and let
your feet take you to the places where prayers are held, and let Me hear
the sweetness of your mentioning My Name, for I have treated you
beautifully. O Jesus! How many nation have I caused to perish on account
of a sin from which I protected you? O Jesus! Be kind to the weak, and
raise your exhausted eyes to the sky and supplicate to Me, for I am near
to you, and do not supplicate to Me except when you are pleading to Me,
having one and only concern, for whenever you thus call upon Me, so
shall I answer your call. O Jesus! I never wanted the life in this world
to be the reward of those who preceded you nor a penalty to those
against whom I sought revenge.

O Jesus! You shall perish, whereas I shall always remain; from Me comes
your sustenance, and with Me is the time of your death, and to Me is
your return, and upon Me is your judgment; so, plead to Me and to none
else so that your plea may be good, and so that I will be the One to
answer it.

O Jesus! How numerous are people, yet how few are those who persevere!
Trees are many, yet those that bear tasty fruit from among them are few;
so do not let the beauty of a tree allure you till you taste of its
fruit. O Jesus! Do not be allured by one who is rebellious against My
wish; he eats My sustenance while worshipping someone else other than
Me, then he calls upon Me at the moment of affliction, and I still
respond to his call, then he goes back to what he used to do!

Is it against Me that he rebels, or is he challenging My wrath? By My
own Self do I swear that I shall take him in a way from which he shall
have no recourse, nor shall he have any refuge. Where shall he flee?
From My sky, or from My earth?! O Jesus! Tell the unjust ones from among
the Children of Israel: Do not supplicate to Me as long as you harbour
usury and the idols are at your homes, for I have sworn never to answer
the prayer of anyone who thus prays to Me, and that I shall make My
answer to their prayers a curse upon them till they disperse. O Jesus!
How beautiful is My patience and how

(95)

beautiful is what I seek, yet people are heedless, returning not to Me!
Words come out of their mouths without their hearts comprehending them
till they become the object of My contempt, and till they try to please
the believers seeking My pleasure.

O Jesus! Be merciful seeking mercy for others, and treat the servants
as you wish them to treat you, and quite often remember death and
separation from the family. Do not be distracted, for distraction
corrupts, and do not be heedless, for the heedless are distant from Me,
and remember Me with good deeds so that I may likewise remember you.

O Jesus! Seek My forgiveness after you commit any sin, and remind those
who often return to Me of Me. Believe in Me, and seek nearness to Me by
being near to those who believe in Me. Enjoin them to join you in
supplicating to Me, and beware of the supplication of the oppressed one,
for I took upon Myself to open for it a gate in the heavens, and that I
shall answer his call even if it may be after a while. O Jesus! Be
informed that the wrongdoer entices others, and that befriending the
evildoer hurls one into the pit; so, know who your friend is before you
befriend him, and choose for your own company brethren from among the
believers. O Jesus! Repent to Me, for there is no sin too great for My
forgiveness, and I am the most Merciful of those who have mercy.

O Jesus! Perform acts of righteousness for your soul as long as you
live and before time comes when none else can do so on your behalf, and
worship Me for the sake of a Day as lengthy as a thousand years of your
own reckoning, for I reward a good deed with ten-fold, and the sin
stains the sinner. Compete with others in the doing of good deeds, for
how many meeting adjourned with a safeguard from the fire!

O Jesus! Keep away from that which shall perish and cease to be, and
visit the ruins of those who were before you: call upon them and ask
them to respond to you; can you feel the presence of any of them at all?
So seek wisdom from them,

(96)

and be informed that you shall soon join their company together with
those who soon will.

O Jesus! Tell whoever rebels and revolts and deceives to await My
punishment and to expect My annihilation; he shall be burnt among those
who shall perish. Congratulations to you, O son of Mary, and many
congratulations if you emulate the manners of your Lord Who, out of His
Mercy, is Compassionate unto you, Who starts the giving out of His
generosity, Who is always there for you during your each and every
calamity. Do not disobey Him, O Jesus, for it is not lawful for you to
disobey Him. I have taken a covenant from you just as I had taken it
from those before you, and I am for that a Witness.

O Jesus! I have never granted My creation anything better than My
religion, nor have I blessed them with anything better than My Mercy! O
Jesus! Wash with water that which appears of your parts, and heal with
good deeds those that do not, for to Me you shall surely return. O
Jesus! I have granted you of My blessings an abundance without
dreariness, and I have sought of you a loan for the goodness of your own
soul, but you were too miser to do so, hence you may be one of those who
perish. O Jesus! Decorate yourself with the decoration of faith, with
love for the needy, and walk on earth gently, and perform your prayers
on all the tracts of the earth, for they are all clean.

O Jesus! Be prepared, for whatever comes is near, and recite My Book
when you are pure, and let Me hear you reciting it in a somber voice. O
Jesus! There is no good in a pleasure which does not last, nor in life
that will depart. O son of Mary! Had your eyes only seen what I have
prepared for My good friends, your heart would have dissolved and your
soul would have come out of your body in anxiety for it, for there is no
home like the Hereafter where the righteous are neighbours of one
another; angels near to Me visit them, and they are secure from the
horrors of the Day of Judgment, a home wherein happiness never changes,
nor does it ever depart from its people. O son

(97)

of Mary! Compete for its sake with those who compete, for it is the
desire of those who have a desire; it pleases those who see it.
Congratulation to you, O son of Mary, if you are among those who work
for it from among those who do so in the company of your fathers: Adam
and Abraham, in the Gardens and felicity with which you do not wish to
trade anything else at all and from which you never desire to be
diverted; thus do I deal with the pious. O Jesus! Flee to Me with those
who flee from a fire with flames,

a fire with chains and torment; no rest shall there ever enter it, nor
any of its torments shall be diminished; it is as though it were pieces
of pitched darkness. Whoever is saved from it is a winner, and none will
be spared from it if he is written down among those who shall perish; it
is the abode of the tyrants and oppressors and everyone who is rude and
haughty, conceited and arrogant. O Jesus! Evil is the abode of those who
feel comfortable with it, and evil, indeed, is the abode of the
wrongdoers. I warn you against your own soul; so, take admonishment from
Me.

O Jesus! Wherever you may be, you should be on your guard concerning
Me, and testify that I created you, and you are My servant; I shaped you
and to the earth sent you. O Jesus! No mouth can have two tongues, nor
one chest can have two hearts, and such are the minds, too. O Jesus! Do
not wake up in disobedience, and do not come to your senses finding
yourself heedless, and wean yourself from desires that cause you to sin.
Any desire that distances you from Me you should abandon, and be
informed that you are to Me as a trusted messenger; so, be forewarned of
Me, and be informed that your life shall in the end bring you back to
Me, and that I shall take you with My knowledge. Be humble whenever My
Name is mentioned, submissive of heart whenever you yourself mention Me,
awake when the heedless sleep. O Jesus! This is My advice to you and My
admonishment; so, take it from Me, for I am the Lord of the Worlds.[^1]

[^1] al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 14, pp. 289-293. There is a lot
more text of

(98)

If you discern these exhortations, and if you compare them with what
the Almighty admonished His prophet and messenger Moses or His Prophet
and Messenger Muhammed, or any of His prophets and messengers, you will
find a great deal of similarity between them. The Almighty is One and
the same, and so is His Wisdom and Creed. His speech, too, is one and
the same, praise be to Him. Very few, however, realize this simple and
pristine fact. the same, but the lack of space does not allow me to
provide the reader with more.


