Invocations By Jesus
====================

Muhammed, the Messenger of Allah, is quoted as saying that Jesus son of
Mary was the first person to speak as an infant. He glorified Allah a
good deal in a way no ear had ever heard before, leaving no sun, nor
moon, nor mountain, nor spring, without including it in his
glorification. He said,

You are the One Who is near despite Your Sublimity, High in nearness,
Above everything You have created. You are the One Who created seven
[heavens] in the space by Your Words in complete level formations; in
awe of You did they respond to Your call even when they were mere smoke,
so they came in obedience to Your Command. In them are angels glorifying
Your Holiness. And You made in them a light despite the blackness of the
dark, and a light from the light of the sun during daytime.

You made in them the thunder that glorifies Your praise; so, it is
through Your Might that it came to shatter the darkness which You
created. You made in them [stars as] lanterns whereby one seeks guidance
when puzzled and lost. So Blessed be You, Lord, in the way You have
raised the heavens, in the way You spread the earth, causing it to float
above the water, holding it against the torrent of overwhelming sea
waves, bringing all things to submit to You as they appeared. Their
stiffness became softened through submission to You; their affairs
submitted to Your Command; their waves surrendered to Your Greatness.
You caused rivers following seas to gush forth, then You made small
rivulets succeeded by

(100)

brimful springs, then You brought out of the rivers and trees fruits,
then You placed on the surface of the earth the mountains as pegs even
above the water, and their stones and rocks submitted to You. So blessed
be You, Lord! Who can ever be called as You are called, or who can ever
reach Your status? You spread the clouds, free those in bondage, and
affect equity, and You are the best of those who judge.

There is no god but You; You ordered us to seek Your forgiveness for
each and every sin of ours; there is no god but You; You have veiled the
heavens from the (vision of the) people; there is no god but You; the
wise among Your servants are the ones who fear You; we bear witness that
You are not a god whom we invented, nor one whose worship comes to an
end, nor is there any partner with You to call upon while forsaking You,
nor to help You in creating anyone so that we might suspect Your having
created us. We testify that You are the One and Only One, on Whom all
depend, the One Who does not beget, nor is He begotten, and none at all
is like Him.


