Was Jesus Crucified?
====================

Sa\`eed ibn Jubayr is quoted as having cited Ibn \`Abbas as saying that
when Allah wanted to raise Jesus to heaven, Jesus went out to meet his
followers at a house where all his twelve disciples assembled. He went
out to them from a well in the house and his hair was dripping with
water. He said, “Among you are those who will disbelieve in me twelve
times even after having believed in me.”

Then he added, “Which one of you agrees to look like me and be killed
in my place and enjoy the status reserved for me with my Lord?” Their
youngest stood up, but Jesus told him to sit down. He repeated the
question to them, and the same young man stood up again, whereupon Jesus
said, “Then you shall be the one.” He immediately was made to look just
like Jesus, then Jesus was raised to heaven. The Jews[^1] came and took
the disciple who looked just like Jesus, killed him, then crucified him;
thus, some of them disbelieved in him twelve times after having believed
in him, and they were divided into three sects: One of the sects said
that God was among them, then He ascended to heaven.

[^1] According to the distorted story of Jesus, soldiers of the Roman
empire (which then ruled Palestine) crucified Jesus. Muslims believe
that: 1) the Jews, not the Romans, crucified a man thinking that he was
Jesus, that the plot against him was not politically but religiously
motivated; 2) the real Jesus was not crucified but was raised to heaven
and is still alive. He will come back near the end of the life on this
planet to fight those who distorted his message. There are millions of
Christians who believe in this second coming of Jesus, but they, as
usual, differ among themselves as to how it will be. Some claim that
Jesus will not come back in person but there will be a revival of his
faith...

(103)

These are the Jacobites[^1]. The other sect said that “the son of God”
stayed with them as long as God willed, then God raised him up to Him,
and they are called the Nestorians[^2]. The third sect said that “the
servant of Allah[^3] and His messenger” remained among them for as long
as Allah willed, then Allah raised him up to Him, and these are the
Muslims. Both previous sects collaborated against the Muslim one, wiping
the latter out. Islam, hence, remained hidden, obscure, forgotten, till
Allah sent Prophet Muhammed to revive it.

Allah Almighty has said,

“Such is Jesus son of Mary; (this is) the saying of truth about which
they dispute[^4]. It does not befit Allah to take to Himself a\`

[^1] Named after Jacob Baradaeus, this sect of Christianity spread in
the 6th. century throughout Syria, Iraq, and India. Its views sharply
contradict those held by Roman Catholics and by the Orthodox. Its head
is the patriarch of Antioch (at Syrian Homs), and it uses Syriac as its
sacred language. Christ spoke (Northwest Semitic) Aramaic. Syriac is an
Aramaic language, a dialect of the Semitic subfamily of Afro-Asiatic
languages. Some Syrian Christians still speak Aramaic even today. The
first and authentic Bible was written in Jesus' mother tongue, Aramaic,
but it was lost... Greater Syria, by the way, used to be called the land
of Aram, hence Aramaic means “the language spoken in Aram.” It is named
after Aram, a descendant of Nahor, grandfather of Prophet Abraham
(Ibrahim), peace be upon him. Its capital Damascus is one of the most
ancient cities in the world. It dates back to 3000 B.C., hence it is now
about five thousand years old.

[^2] They are named after Nestorius, 5th century patriarch of
Constantinople. Followers of this Church reject the labeling of Virgin
Mary, mother of Christ, as “the Mother of God,” saying that she bore
Jesus as a man. It flourished in Syria and ancient Persia, and one of
its adherents, Nestor (which could either be his first name or a
reference to his being Nestorian), met young Prophet Muhammed when he
was in the company of his uncle Abu Talib who was then on a business
trip. Salman al-Farisi, one of Prophet Muhammed's early disciples and
traditionists, had converted from Zoroastrianism to Nestorianism then to
Islam.

[^3] Notice that I did not use the word “Allah” for the previous sects.
This is due to the fact that those sects did not have the correct
concept of the Almighty. The word “Allah” here refers to the complete
and perfect concept of God. [^4] Christians have been disputing with one
another about Jesus Christ and will continue doing so till the end of
time. Some of them went as far in their

(104)

son; Glory to Him; when He decrees a matter, He only says to it: \`Be!'
and it is. And surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord; therefore; worship
Him; this is the right path. But parties from among them disagreed with
one another, so woe unto those who disbelieve because of their presence
on a great Day” (Qur'an, 19:34-37).

Abu Salih, Shu\`ayb ibn Muhammed al-Bayhaqi, through his chain of
narrators, has informed us that the Messenger of Allah had said,
“Prophets are brothers of one another: their mothers may be different,
but their creed is one (and the same). I am the most worthy of Jesus son
of Mary, peace be upon them, because there is no prophet separating me
from him (chronologically). The son of Mary is about to be sent to you
as a just judge, and he shall come to my nation and be my khalifa over
them; so, if you see him, you will find him square of face, his
complexion is reddish white, his hair is straight as though it drips
although it is not wet.

He shall come down between two scepters to smash the cross, kill the
pig, enforce the jizya (protection tax), receive the funds (religious
taxes) and make the pilgrimage or the \`umra or both, and he will fight
people in the defense of Islam, so much so that all creeds will be
vanquished except Islam, and everyone will prostrate to Allah, the Lord
of the World, and Allah will annihilate during his time the lying
anti-Christ. Security shall prevail over the earth to the extent that
lambs will graze side by side with lions, tigers with cattle, and wolves
with sheep. Children will play with snakes, and neither will harm the
other. After that, he shall remain on earth for forty years. He shall
marry and have children, then he shall die and the Muslims shall perform
the funeral prayers for him and bury him in Medina.”

Al-Husain ibn Ah,.med ibn Muh,.ammed ibn \`Ali, through his chain of
narrators, quotes Ibn \`Abbas citing the Messenger of Allah saying, “How
shall Allah annihilate a nation in whose vanguard is myself, and among
whose last generation is Jesus, while al-Mehdi is in its midst?”
apostasy as charging him of being homosexual..., Astaghfirullah (I seek
refuge with Allah). Some Christian “churches” in the United States and
other Western countries have been solemnizing “marriages” wherein men
marry men or women marry women... What will they do next?!


