After Jesus : the “son of God” and “the Trinity”
================================================

Jesus Christ never claimed to be the “son of God,” nor did he ever say
that he was God. The concept of the Trinity (God the father, God the
son, and the Holy Spirit) was foreign to Christianity for about three
hundred years. Anyone who conducts a research to find out how this
concept crept into the Christian faith will conclude that it is one of
several Pagan concepts that somehow found their way to Christianity, the
faith not of Christ but of his disciples barring St. Barnabas. A small
number of Biblical scholars testify to this fact. Let us read what one
of them says:

There is ample evidence in the Bible that the Israelites had always
regarded Yahweh (Jahovah) as the Creator of all. Another original
characteristic of the Israelite God was that He stood alone, without any
family connections, whether consort, son or daughter.[^1]

Such “Israelites” include the apostles of Jesus. Another scholar, Col.
J. Garnier, clearly points out to the fact that Pagan gods have
incorporated three deities in one god. So is the concept of the
Trinity.

It is of importance to notice first that all the various gods and
goddesses of the ancients, though known by many names and different
characteristics, can yet all be resolved into one of the persons of a
Trinity composed of a father, mother and son; and that this fact was
well known to the initiated. It should also be observed that the
father

[^1] William F. Albright, From the Stone Age to Christianity, Doubleday
& Co., Inc., Garden City, New York, 1957, p. 261.

(106)

and the son constantly melt into one; the reason being that there was
also a fabled incarnation of the son who, although identified with him,
was yet to be his own son by the goddess.[^1]

We will not discuss the Trinity here but will instead concentrate on
the concept of Jesus as the “son of God,” a concept more emphasized by
St. John than any other disciple, that is to say, if we regard these
authors of the Gospels as disciples of Jesus Christ. St. John's Gospel
has since the dawn of Christianity been the subject of controversy,
debate, and discussion, and it still stands out as quite different from
all other Gospels. The credibility of what St. John wrote in his Gospel
is doubted by numerous scholars of the Bible in the past and in the
present:

I do not think the writer [St. John] distinguished in his own
consciousness between what he remembered (or had derived from the
reminiscences of others) and what he felt must have been true, and I
greatly doubt whether we can distinguish often in that Gospel what is
derived from tradition and what is derived from imagination.

In the Pagan theology of the fertility cult, that is, of agricultural
propagation, the god is said to be incarnated as his own son to walk
upon the earth in human form and be slain and resurrected as the
personification of the harvest and plant life. This same Pagan theme
occurs in John 1:14 where we read the following: “And the Word became
flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the father), full of grace and truth.”

This clearly reflects the fact that St. John was fully knowledgeable of
Pagan doctrines to the extent that he sometimes borrowed his themes from
them. We can go on and on highlighting the sharp differences between the
Gospel of St. John and those of the other Saints, but this will be an
undertaking that will surely be laborious and exhaustive. Let us,
instead, read the following from the only true though “unofficial”
Gospel:

[^1] Col. J. Garnier, The Worship of the Dead, Chapman & Hall, Ltd.,
1904, p. 12.

[^2] History of Christianity in the Light of modern Knowledge, A
Collective Work, p. 209.

(107)

Jesus departed from Jerusalem after the Passover, and entered into the
borders of Caesarea Philippi[^1]. There the angel Gabriel having told him
of the sedition which was beginning among the common people, he asked
his disciples, saying, “What do men say of me?” They said, “Some say you
are Elijah, others Jeremiah, and others one of the old prophets.”

Jesus asked, “And you, what do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “You
are Messiah, Son of God.” Then Jesus was angry and rebuked him, saying,
“Begone and depart from me, because you are the Devil and seek to cause
me offence!” And he threatened the eleven, saying, “Woe to you if you
believe this, for I have won from God a great curse against those who
believe this.” And he was ready to cast away Peter, but the eleven
besought Jesus for him, who did not cast him away, but again rebuked
him, saying, Beware that you never again say such words, because God
would reprobate you.”

Peter wept and said, “Sir, I have spoken foolishly. Beseech God that He
pardons me.”

Then said Jesus, “If our God willed not to show himself to Moses His
servant, nor to Elijah whom he also loved, nor to any prophet, do you
think that God should show Himself to this faithless generation? But
know you not that God has created all things of nothing with one single
word, and all men have had their origin out of a piece of clay? Now, how
shall God have a likeness to man? Woe to those who suffer themselves to
be deceived of Satan!”

And having said this, Jesus besought God for Peter, the eleven and
Peter weeping, and saying, “So be it. O blessed Lord our God.”

Afterward Jesus departed and went into Galilee in order that this vain
opinion which the common folk began to hold

[^1] Caesarea Philippi is an area in north Palestine at the foot of Mt.
Hermon built by Philip the Tetrarch.

(108)

concerning him might be extinguished. (The Gospel of Barnabas 70)

This agrees with what we, Muslims, have in our Holy Qur'an where Christ
will on the Day of Judgment deny having required people to worship him
and his mother besides the One and Only God:
Allah will say (on the Day of Judgment): O Jesus son of Mary! Did you
say to men: Take me and my mother for two gods besides God? He will say:
Glory to You! It did not befit me to say what I had no right to say; had
I said it, You would indeed have known it; You know what is in my mind,
and I do not know what is in Your mind; surely You are the great One Who
knows the unseen. (5:116)

In fact, the Holy Qur'an strongly condemns those who attribute godhead
to Jesus or call him “the son of God,” labelling them as apostates,
disbelievers in Him:

Certainly they disbelieve those who say: Surely God is the Messiah son
of Mary, and the Messiah (himself) said: O Children of Israel! I worship
God, my Lord and your Lord. Surely whoever associates (others) with God,
then God has forbidden him from (entering) the garden, and his abode is
the fire, and there shall be no helpers for the unjust. Certainly they
disbelieve those who say: Surely God is the third (person) of the
three[^1]; and there is no god but the One God, and if they do not desist
from what they say, a painful chastisement shall befall those among them
who disbelieve. Will they not then turn to God and His forgiveness? And
God is Forgiving, Merciful. The Messiah son of Mary is but a prophet;
prophets before him have indeed passed away, and his mother was a
truthful woman; they both used to eat food. See how We make the Signs
clear to them, then behold how they are turned away (from the right
track)! (5:72-75)

[^1] This is the Almighty's reference to the concept of the Trinity.
Advocates of the Trinity claim that the God exists in three persons:
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

(109)

Allah Almighty has also said the following Qur'anic verses in this
regard:

The Jews say: Uzair[^1] is the son of Allah, and the Christians say: The
Messiah is the son of Allah; these are the words of their mouths; they
imitate the saying of those who disbelieved before; may Allah destroy
them; how they are turned away! (9:30)

O People of the Book! Do not exceed the limits in your religion, and do
not speak (lies) against Allah, but (speak) the truth; the Messiah son
of Mary is only a prophet of Allah and His Word which He communicated to
Mary and a spirit from Him; believe, therefore, in Allah and in His
prophets, and do not say Three. Desist, it is better for you; Allah is
only One God: far be it from His Glory that He should have a son;
whatever in the heavens and in the earth is His, and Allah is sufficient
for a Protector. The Messiah does by no means disdain that he should be
a servant of Allah, nor do the angels who are near to Him, and whoever
disdains His service and is proud, He will gather them all together to
Him.

As for those who believe and do good deeds, He will pay them fully
their rewards and give them more out of His Grace; as for those who
disdain and are proud, He will chastise them with a painful
chastisement. And they shall not find for themselves besides Allah a
guardian or a helper. (4:171-173)

[^1] Uzair is Arabic for Hebrew Ezra. This is the only verse in the Holy
Qur’an where such a reference is made. Who is this alleged Jewish “son
of God”? After the Babylonian conquest of Jerusalem at the hands of
Nebuchadnessar, the Torah was lost. Since there was none who remembered
the law when the Jews returned from captivity, God raised up Ezra from
the dead a hundred years after his death. When the Jews saw him thus
raised from the dead, they said he must be the son of God. This is the
contested view of some scholars.

This raising from the dead is confused with another incident which
actually took place to someone else and which is narrated in the Holy
Qur’an in 2:261. It involves Bal\`am (Balam) ibn Ba\`u,-r, a learned
Israelite, who passed by a dead town (some say Antioch or one of its
suburbs) and wondered how God would bring it back to life. The Almighty
caused him to die then raised him back to life to see for himself that
He can do anything at all.

(110)

Surely the likeness of Jesus is with Allah as the likeness of Adam: He
created him from dust then said to him: Be! and he was. (3:59)

All praise is due to Allah Who revealed the Book to His servant
(Muh,.ammed) and did not make in it any crookedness, rightly directing,
so that he might give warning of a severe punishment from Him and give
glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds that they shall have a
goodly reward (Paradise), staying in it forever. And warn those who say:
Allah has taken a son. They have no knowledge of it, nor had their
fathers; a grievous word it is that comes out of their mouths; they
speak nothing but a lie. (18:1-5)

They say: Allah has taken a son! Glory to Him; He is the
self-Sufficient; His is whatever in the heavens and in the earth; you
have no authority for this; do you say against Allah what you do not
know? Say: Those who forge a lie against Allah shall not be successful.
(It is only) a provision in this world, then to Us shall be their
return, then shall We make them taste a severe punishment because they
disbelieved. (10:68-70)

And they planned and Allah (also) planned, and Allah is surely the best
of planners. And Allah said: O Jesus! I am going to terminate the period
of your stay (on earth) and cause you to ascend unto Me and purify you
of (the charges of) those who disbelieve and make those who follow you
above those who disbelieve till the Day of Resurrection; then to Me
shall be your return, so I shall decide between you concerning that in
which you differed. (3:54-55)

In the following verses, the Almighty starts by chastising the Jews
then the Christians:

Therefore, for the breaking of their covenant and their disbelief in
the Signs of Allah and their killing the prophets wrongfully and their
saying: Our hearts are covered. Nay! Allah set a seal upon them because
of their disbelief, so they shall not believe except a few. And for
their disbelief, and for

(111)

their having uttered against Mary a grievous calumny. And (for) their
saying: Surely we have killed the Messiah Jesus son of Mary, the prophet
of Allah, and they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but it
appeared to them so, and most surely those who differ therein are only
in a doubt about it; they have no knowledge in its regard but only
follow conjecture, and surely they did not kill him at all. Nay! Allah
took him up to Him, and Allah is Mighty, Wise. And there is not one of
the People of the Book but most certainly believes in this before his
death, and on the Day of Resurrection he (Jesus) shall be a witness
against them. (4:155-159)

When Qur'anic texts such as these agree with what St. Barnabas had
written in his Gospel, the truth will shine, but how many sincere
seekers of the truth are there in our world?


