Finally, Is It Christianity Or Paganism?
========================================

Is Today's form of Christianity really the creed revealed by the
Almighty to Jesus son of Mary, or is it a revival of ancient Paganism?
This question may raise some eyebrows, and it may wake up a drowsy
reader, but it is a question quite valid and relevant. If one traces
pagan doctrines, he will be struck with similarities between what the
pagans used to practice (and some still do) and what today's Christians
practice at their churches.

The traces of paganism in Christianity can be seen in: 1) the concept
of Christ as the “son of God,” 2) the Trinity, 3) the Incarnate Saviour,
4) the Second Advent, 4) the Virgin Birth, 5) the Sacraments, and 6) the
Communion of Saints. You can also add to this list the organized order
of saints, the choir (an offspring of the pagan chorus), the singing and
dancing..., etc. All these are very well known practices of paganism in
various parts of the world and by various cultures. Were we to discuss
each one of them, we would need not one but many volumes; so, let us be
contented with discussing the most important of all of them: the concept
of Jesus Christ as the “son of God.”

This concept is directly linked to the pagan “sun god,” or god of the
sun, hence Sunday[^1], the day when the sun god, in his various names

[^1] According to The Columbia Viking Desk Encyclopedia, early
Christians observed the first day of the week (Monday) as their Sabbath
“in commemoration of the Resurrection.” Some sects, such as Seventh-Day
Baptists, have reverted to Saturday. “Monday,” by the way, was the
Babylonian day when the moon\_\_hence moon-day, Monday\_\_was
worshipped.

(113)

and attributes, is worshipped. If we study these sun gods, we will see
the link between their worship and the concept of Jesus Christ as the
“son of God.”[^1]

When Jesus Christ came to this world, sun worship was a religion that
prevailed throughout the world. Well known sun gods whose worship had
been popular throughout the Mediterranean countries at one time or
another are: Attis of Phrygia (central Asia Minor), Adonis of Syria,
Dionysius or Bacchus of Greece, Bel (or Baal) of Babylon, Osiris and
Horus of Egypt, and Ithras or Mithra of Persia. Here is a brief account
of these sun gods, one from which the reader can see the link between
these “sun gods” and the “son of God” concept introduced into the
Christian faith and officially endorsed at the Nicaea Conference
referred to above:

Attis

He was born of a virgin named Nana and was regarded as the “only
begotten son” and “saviour”. He was bled to death on March 24th at the
foot of a pine tree and his votaries believed that his blood had renewed
the fertility of the earth and thus brought a new life to humanity. He,
however, rose from the dead, and his resurrection along with his death
was celebrated by his votaries. Every year on the 24th day of March,
they would first fasten his image to a pine tree and then lay it in a
tomb with wailing mourning. On the next day, they would find the tomb
empty and celebrate the resurrection with great rejoicing. Sacramental
meal and baptism of blood were special features of his “church.” Adonis
or Tammuz

Adonis was a young man loved by the goddess Aphrodite. When he was
killed by a wild boar, goes on the legend, Aphrodite persuaded the gods
to let him live for six months of each year. His death and resurrection,
hence, were celebrated in midsummer festival in Adonia, Saturday was
“Saturn's day,” the day when Saturn, god of the harvest, was to be
worshipped. This is another proof of the pagan roots in Christianity.

[^1] In the text to follow, I have benefitted from Fazlul-Rahman
Ansari's book Islam and Christianity in the Modern World.

(114)

Greece, symbolizing yearly growth and decay. He was the virgin-born
“saviour” of Syria. He suffered death for the redemption of mankind but
rose again in the Spring. His resurrection was commemorated by a great
annual festival. The Old Testament, in Izekiel, viii:14, refers to the
weeping and wailing of women over his idol. On p. 113, Vol. 2, of
Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Rev. Sir G.W. Cox calls him the
crucified Tao (that is, divine love personified). In his Hebrew Lexicon,
Dr. Parkhust remarks: “I find myself obliged to refer Tammuz to that
class of idols which were originally designed to represent the promised
Saviour [meaning Jesus], the desire of all nations.”

Dionysius or Bacchus

God of wine, he was the “only begotten son” of Jupiter and was born of
a virgin named Demeter (or Semele) on December 25th... Christians
celebrate Christmas, the supposed birth of Christ, on December 25th. He
was a “redeemer, liberator and saviour.” “It is I,” says Bacchus to
mankind, “who guide you; it is I who protect you and who save you; I am
Alpha and Omega.”[^1] Wine had an important place in the festivals of his
cult. It is today in the Christian theology, representing “the blood of
Jesus.” Imagine one drinking the blood of...! He was slain for redeeming
humanity and was called “the slain one,” “the sin-bearer,” “the
redeemer.” Notice the striking similarity between these words and what
Christians preach.

Is it a coincident? We do not think so. Bacchus's passion play was
celebrated every year representing his death, descent into hell and
resurrection. Passion plays used to be part of the Christian festivals
during the Middle Ages. The main surviving Passion Play is that of
Oberammergau, Bavaria.

Osiris

God of the underworld, he was born on December 29th of a virgin called
by the Egyptians the “virgin of the world.” He preached the gospel of
gentleness and peace. Wine and corn were regarded as his celebrated
discoveries. He was betrayed by Typhen, slain and dismembered. He was
interred but came again to life after remaining in hell for two or three
days and three nights. After his death, it was the custom of his
votaries to keep his image in a box and bring out the

[^1] Godfrey Higgins, Anacalypsis, Vol. 1, p. 322.

(115)

image at the time of worship with the cries of “Osiris is risen!”

“The sufferings and death of Osiris,” says Rawlingson in a footnote on
p. 260, Vol. 3, of Herodotus, “were the great mystery of the Egyptian
religion. His being the divine goodness, and the abstract idea of
\`good', his manifestation upon earth (like an Indian god), his death
and resurrection, and his office as judge of the dead in a future life,
look like the early revelation of a future manifestation of the deity
converted into a mythological fable.” Needless to say, “the early
revelation of a future manifestation of the deity” in this quotation is
a reference to the alleged incarnation of God in Jesus.

“Belief in the god-man in the form of Osiris,” says Sir Richard Gregory
on p. 54 of his book Religion in Science and Civilisation, “became the
chief element in Egyptian religion, and remained for thousands of years
the faith of the people through the tangled skein of religious life in
Egypt until Osiris passed into the form of the god-man Jesus Christ.”

Mithras or Mithra

His name in ancient Persian means “friend,” and he was an ancient
cultic god of Persia and India who became in the 5th century B.C. the
chief Persian god. His cult extended into Mesopotamia and Armenia, thus
becoming a world-wide religion. He was the virgin-born sun god of the
Persians, the perfect prototype of Jesus Christ and the founder of an
international Church, Mithraism, in which Christmas and Easter the most
important festivals. “This divine saviour came into the world as an
infant.

His first worshippers were shepherds; and the day of his nativity was
December 25th. His followers preached a severe and rigid morality, chief
among their virtues being temperance, chastity, renunciation and
self-control. They kept the seventh day holy, and the middle day of each
month was a special feast of Mithra, which symbolised this function of
Mediator. They had seven sacraments of which the most important were
baptism, confirmation, and Eucharistic supper, at which the communicants
partook of the divine nature of Mithra under the species of bread and
wine.”[^1]

[^1] The Nineteenth Century, September 1905, p. 496.

(116)

Bel or Baal: Striking Similarities Between the Babylonian and the
Christian Passion Plays

Bel (or Baal) in the Old Testament is a term used for god or gods of
Canaan. He is symbolized by the sun, and he was gradually promoted to
become the chief deity, the source of life and fertility. His worship
extended beyond Babylon; Baalbek (the city of Baal, Lebanon) was devoted
to his worship, hence it is called in Greek Heliopolis, the city of the
sun, or of the sun god. The story of his life is extremely astonishing:
his passion play has a very close resemblance with the Christian passion
story even in details. The Jews had passed a long time in captivity in
Babylon during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar[^1] II

[^1] Nebuchadnezzar (reigned 605-562 B.C.) was a king of Babylon during
whose long and eventful reign the Neo-Babylonian Empire attained its
peak and the city of Babylon its greatest glory. Nebuchadnezzar - more
properly Nebuchadrezzar - is the biblical form of the name
Nabukudur-utsur (which means "Nabu has set the boundary", Nabu being the
Babylonian god of wisdom and writing). He was the son of Nabopolassar, a
Chaldean chief who in 626 B.C. led a revolt against Assyria, proclaimed
himself king of Babylon, and, in alliance with the Medes and the nomadic
Scythians in Babylonia and Assyria, succeeded in overthrowing the vast
Assyrian Empire and destroying Nineveh in 612 B.C.

Nebuchadnezzar, as crown prince, was given command of the Babylonian
army harrying the remainder of the Assyrians in northern Syria. Early in
605 B.C., he met Necho, then pharaoh of Egypt, in battle and defeated
him at Carchemish, an ancient Hittite and Assyrian city on the Euphrates
River in present-day southern Turkey. Necho is better known as Necho II
(or sometimes Nekau), and he was a king of the Twenty-sixth dynasty of
the pharaos of Egypt. A few months later, Nabopolassar died, and
Nebuchadnezzar hastened home to claim his throne.

He soon returned to the west in order to secure the loyalty of Syria
and Palestine and to collect tribute; among those who submitted were the
rulers of Damascus, Tyre, Sidon, and Judah. In 601 B.C., Nebuchadnezzar
attempted the invasion of Egypt but was repulsed with heavy losses.
Judah rebelled, but Jerusalem fell in March 597 B.C., and the ruler,
Jehoiakim, and his court were deported to Babylon. Eight years later
another Jewish rebellion broke out; this time Jerusalem was razed and
the population carried into captivity. Expeditions against the Arabs in
582 B.C. and another attempt at invading Egypt in 568 B.C. receive brief
mention in Nebuchadnezzar's later records.

Nebuchadnezzar built temples in many of the cities of his kingdom, but
the main achievement of his reign was the rebuilding of Babylon, on a
scale and with magnificence never before envisaged. The city covered
some 500 acres and was protected by massive

(117)

(630 – 562 B.C.), and this accounts for the close resemblance. Here is
the proof for such striking similarities:

Modern archaeological researches have brought to light very bewildering
facts which go to prove that Babylonian mythology played a very
important role in the early stages of Christianity. In 1903-4, German
excavators at Kala Shergat (the site of Assur, the ancient Assyrian city
whose surrounding areas are also called Nimrud and is located in today's
Iraq) discovered two cuneiform documents. When deciphered, they were
found to contain the narrative of the Passion Play of Baal. An English
journal, namely The Adventures of a Black Girl in Her Search for God,
published its translation along with the story of the Christian Passion
Play. In its text, he is referred to as Bel; so, henceforth we will keep
referring to him as such. On the next two pages is an exact reproduction
of what page 72 of that journal had included; this is not our text but
that of the said journal:

The Babylonian Passion Play

1. Bel is taken prisoner.
2. Bel is tried in the House on the Mount (the Hall of Justice).
3. Bel is smitten (wounded).

4. Bel is led away to the Mount.
5. Together with Bel a malefactor is led away and put to death.
Another, who is also charged as a malefactor, is

The Christian Passion Play

1. Jesus is taken prisoner.
2. Jesus is tried in the House of the High Priest and the Hall of
Pilate.
3. Jesus is scourged.
4. Jesus is led away to crucifixion in Golgotha.
5. Together with Jesus, two malefactors are led away water and blood
(John). Mary Magdalene was put to death.

double fortifications. The Euphrates River, which bisected it, was
spanned by a bridge. In the great palace, built to replace
Nabopolassar's, he created the terraced cloister known to the Greeks as
the Hanging Gardens of Babylon (remains of which can still be seen in
Hilla, metropolis of today's Babylon governorate) and reckoned among the
Seven Wonders of the World. It was said that he built it to please his
mountain-born wife, Amytis, daughter of Cyaxares, the Median king.

[^1] In the following text, I have utilized Fazlul Rahman Ansari's
excellent book Islam and Christianity in the Modern World, pp. 70-72.

(118)

released, thus not taken away with Bel.

6. After Bel had gone to the Mount, the city breaks out into tumult,
and fighting takes place in it.

7. Bel's clothes are carried away.

8. A woman wipes away the heart's blood of Bel flowing from a drawn-out
weapon.

9. Bel goes down into the Mount away from sun and light, disappears
from life and is held fast in the Mount as in a prison.

10. Guards watch Bel imprisoned in the stronghold of the Mount.

11. A goddess sits with Bel; she comes to tend to him.

12. They seek for Bel where he is held fast. In particular, a weeping
woman seeks for him at the “Gate of Burial.” When he is being carried
away, the same lamented: “O my brother! O my brother!”

13. Bel is again brought back to life (as the sun of spring); he

Another (Barnabas) is released to the people and thus not taken away
with Jesus.

6. At the death of Jesus, the veil in the temple is rent (Synopt.), the
rocks are rent asunder, the graves are opened and the dead come forth
into the holy city. (Matthew)

7. Jesus' robe is divided among the soldiers. (Synopt., John Cp. Ps.
XXII, 18)

8. The lance-thrust in Jesus' side and outflow of two other women busy
themselves with the (washing and) embalming of the body. (Mark, Luke)

9. Jesus, in the grave, in the rock tomb (Synopt.), goes down into the
realm of the dead (1 Pet. III, XII, 40; Acts, II, 24; Rom. X, 17; “the
descent into hell” dogma).

10. Guards are set over the tomb of Jesus. (Matthew) 11. Mary Magdalene
and the other Mary sit before the tomb. (Matt., Mark)

12. Women, in particular Mary Magdalene, come to the tomb to seek Jesus
where he is behind the door of the tomb. Mary stands weeping before the
empty tomb because they have taken her Lord away. (John)

13. Jesus' restoration to life, his rising from the grave (on a

(119)

comes again out of the Mount.

14. His chief feast, the Babylonian New Year's festival in March at the
spring equinox, is celebrated also as his triumph over the powers of
darkness.

Sunday morning).

14. His festival approximately at the spring equinox is also celebrated
as his triumph over the powers of darkness (Cp., e.g., Col. II, 15).

Having stated all the above, it really leaves no room for doubt that
Christianity has suffered so much distortion and alteration, it
definitely is no longer the faith of Jesus Christ. Even if you set aside
all the theological controversies with which the Church is rife, a look
at the conduct of average Christians today, especially in the West, will
make wonder whether Jesus Christ can ever be proud of those who claim to
be his followers. Fornication and adultery, boyfriend and girlfriend,
are quite commonly the practices of the day. Abortions take place daily
and, thus, thousands of babies are being killed.

Promoters of homosexuality are not ashamed but are “proud” of their
abnormality and are vocal in demanding “their rights”... Family ties are
very loose, children hardly respect their parents, wives hardly respect
their husbands, students hardly respect their teachers. Those who have
money can do anything at all with their wealth, including buying
government positions. The “legal system” is bought, sold, and traded.
The news media creates demons and angels. Pornography is so widespread,
it is sickening... All these immoralities and injustices are quite
common and widespread, yet the Church “officials” stand spectators and,
much worse, sometimes get themselves involved in many of them. Is this
the product of a healthy creed? We do not think so. Is this the faith
which Jesus Christ introduced to the world? It certainly is not. True
and authentic Christianity or Judaism is nothing but Islam, rest
assured.

Jesus son of Mary is mentioned by name in the Holy Qur'an thirty-six
times; twenty-five of which as Jesus, and eleven times as the Messiah,
the Maseeh, the anointed one. The name of his mother occurs in the Holy
Qur'an thirty four times, and surely Allah knows best.


