Introduction
============

Before we go into a detailed discussion of Jesus Christ, peace be upon
him and his virtuous virgin mother, let us highlight the major
differences between Christianity and Islam. In the next chapter, these
differences will be itemized and discussed.

The Church has taught that Jesus is the Messiah whom the Jews were
expecting but whom they rejected, accusing him of being born of
fornication:

“You dishonour me. Yet I do not seek my own glory; there is One who
seeks it and He will be the judge.” (John 8:49-50).

In 4:155-156, the Holy Qur'an condemns and curses all those who
blasphemed the honour of Mary. Islam accepts Jesus son of Mary as the
Masih, advocating the prophecy of Christ and recognizing his virgin
birth as one of his miracles, even calling him the “Word of Allah.” It
defends his mission and reproaches all those who rejected it, endorsing
the original Bible[^1] as a revelation from the Almighty to him. Islam
does not preach that Jesus was crucified or killed but did ascend to
heaven.[^2] Many Christians regard Jesus as a deity and worship him

[^1] “Bible” is a Greek word which means “books.” The original Bible,
which was written in Aramaic, mother tongue of Jesus Christ, was lost.
John, Mark, Matthew and Luke rewrote it from memory, putting a great
deal of their own personal views in it, thus altering the original
pristine message brought by Jesus.

[^2] Jesus is not the only one who is believed to be alive and living in
heaven. Enoch (Idris) is also believed to be alive. Both al-Khidr and
Imam al-Mehdi, peace be upon both of them, are believed to be alive and
living on earth.

(38)

as a god, addressing him as “Lord,” a title fit only for the Almighty
God. But they differ a great deal among themselves with regard to his
deification, yet they all certainly regard him as much more than a human
being. They call him “the son of God, part of the Trinity.” The
Unitarian Church[^1] stresses the Unity of God (what Muslims call
Tawhid), and the fact that Jesus was a human being. For this reason, it
is not considered “Christian” and is not a member of the Federal Council
of Churches, nor is it a member of any church federation. Islam
repudiates in the strongest of terms the divinity or deity of Jesus
Christ and the concept of the Trinity. The Christian doctrine preaches
that Jesus died voluntarily, nailed to the cross, in order to atone for
mankind's sins. Jesus is believed as having offered himself as an
atoning sacrifice in order that mankind might earn salvation.

Islam unequivocally rejects the notion that sins can be transferred
from some to others by any means, holding each and every individual
accountable for his or her actions. The Almighty, Islam teaches,
forgives the sinners who repent and make amends. Repentance, then, in
addition to prayers, fast, and charity can atone for one's sins. God
does not overburden any of us; He fully knows our weaknesses and
limitations. Christianity considers Jesus as a mediator between man and
God. Christians pray “in the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ,” appealing
to God through him.

Islam recognizes no mediator between man and God: everyone can be in
direct contact with God and actually does so when he performs his
prayers. Intercession, however, is permitted by [^1] Beliefs of the
Unitarian Church are referred to as Unitarianism. This branch of
Christianity began in Reformation under leaders such as Michael Servetus
(1511 - 1553 A.D.), a Spanish theologian and physician who is known in
Spanish as Miguel Serveto, and Fausto Sozzini (1539 - 1604), nephew of
Laelius Socinus (or Lelio Sozini), an Italian religious reformer.

Both men organized this anti-Trinitarianism movement because of which
they were subjected to a great deal of persecution by other Christians.
In order to escape the merciless Catholic Court of Inquisition, Servetus
had to flee to Lyons where he edited Ptolemy's geography works, and to
Paris, where he studied medicine. He was jailed by orders of the
Inquisition but escaped and made for Italy where he was seized on orders
issued by John Calvin, tried then burnt alive at the stake. The
religious belief of this Church (or Christian sect) is based on the
concept that God is one person, thus contrasting that of the one in
three persons, or Trinitarianism.

(39)

the Almighty Who grants it to individuals whom He chooses and who will
intercede, with His permission, on behalf of their friends. As a matter
of fact, the Almighty's mercy will reach on the Day of Judgment the
ultimate limit when God permits ordinary people with whom He is pleased
or whom He forgives to intercede on behalf of others. Such is His
mercy...

There are many other Christian beliefs and practices which we cannot
discuss here due to the limitation of space and which include the belief
in the reincarnation, the cremation of the dead, a tradition which the
Christians learned from Hindus and Buddhists, the singing and dancing at
their churches, the choir (an adaptation from the pagan chorus), the
appointment of women as top church “officials,” the endorsement of
homosexuality and the appointment of gay and lesbian “ordained”
ministers...


