Birth of Jesus Son of Mary
==========================

Allah Almighty has said,

And mention Mary in the Book when she drew aside from her family to an
eastern place; so she took a veil (to screen herself) from them; then We
sent her Our spirit, and he appeared to her as a perfectly ordinary man.
She said: Surely I seek refuge against you with the Beneficent God, if
you are God-fearing. He said: I am only a messenger of your Lord to give
you [the glad tiding of] a pure boy.” She said, “How can I have a boy
while no mortal has yet touched me, nor have I been unchaste?” He said.
“Even so; your Lord says: It is easy for Me, and so that We may make him
a sign to men and a mercy from Us, and it is a matter already
decreed.”

So she conceived him [Jesus], then withdrew with him to a remote place.
And the throes (of childbirth) compelled her to betake herself to the
trunk of a palm tree. She said: Oh, would that I had died before this
and had been a thing quite forgotten! Then (the newly-born) called out
to her from beneath her: Do not grieve! Surely your Lord has made a
stream flow beneath you, and shake towards you the trunk of the palm
tree; it will drop on you fresh ripe dates; so eat and drink and refresh
the eye. Then if you see any mortal, say: Surely I have vowed a fast to
the Beneficent God, so I shall not speak to any human today. And she
came to her people carrying him. They said: O Mary! Surely you have done
a strange thing! O sister of Aaron! Your father was not a bad man, nor
was your mother unchaste! But she pointed to him. They said: How should
we speak to one


(52)


who is a child in the cradle? He [Jesus] said: Surely I am a servant of
Allah; He has given me the Book and made me a prophet, and He has made
me blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined on me prayers and
zakat as long as I live, and dutiful to my mother, and He has not made
me insolent, unblessed. And peace be on me the day I was born, the day I
die, and the day I am raised (back) to life. Such is Jesus son of Mary;
(this is) the saying of truth about which they dispute. (19:16-34)


Prophets' biographers have said that when three days had passed since
Mary was pregnant with Jesus, she was either thirteen or fifteen years
old. One of those dedicated for the service of the temple with her was
her above-mentioned cousin Joseph the carpenter. He was a thoughtful man
who used to offer charity from his earnings. Joseph and Mary used to
take turns in serving the temple. When they ran out of water, each would
take the pitcher and go to the cave to obtain water then return to the
temple. The day that she met Gabriel was the longest and the hottest day
of the year. She had run out of water, so she asked her cousin, “Shall
we go together, O Joseph, to obtain water?” He said, “I have some water
left which will suffice me for today.” She said, “But I, by Allah, am
out of water!” She took her pitcher and went out alone till she came to
the cave where she met Gabriel whom Allah made to appear to her as an
ordinary man. He told her that Allah had sent him to grant her a pure
boy. She said, “Surely I seek refuge from you with the Beneficent God if
you are God-fearing” (Qur'an, 19:18),

that is, a pious, obedient to his Lord. Imam \`Ali has said, “I have
come to know that a pious person is one who has compassion for others
and is merciful, and she thought that he (Gabriel) was a man, a human.”
\`Ikrimah has said, “Gabriel appeared to her in the form of a young
beardless man with curly hair, and in perfect form.” Wise men have said
that Allah Almighty sent him in human form so that Mary would be able to
remain self-composed and listen to his speech. Had he appeared in his
normal form, she would have been frightened by him and would have
shunned him. When Mary sought refuge with Allah against him, he said to
her, “I am only a messenger of your Lord to give you (the glad tiding
of) a pure boy. She said: How can I have a boy while no mortal has yet
touched me, nor have I been unchaste? He

(53)

said: Even so; your Lord says: It is easy for Me, and so that We may
make him a sign to men and a mercy from Us, and it is a matter already
decreed” (Qur'an, 19:19-21). Having heard his statement, she submitted
to Allah's decree, whereupon Gabriel blew in the pocket of her loose
outer garment. By then, she had taken it off. Once he had left, Mary
filled her pitcher with water, put her outer garment on, instantly and
unconsciously conceiving of Jesus, then went back to the temple.

Another story of how Mary conceived is narrated, or say suggested, by
al-Suddi and \`Ikrimah who have said that Mary used to remain in the
temple as long as she was clean. Once she started her period, she would
go to her aunt's house till she became clean again and would then
return. While Mary was bathing after her period was over, having chosen
a sunny spot because it was then winter and that day was the shortest
day of the year and placed a curtain between her and the rest of the
house residents, arch-angel Gabriel appeared. He gave her the glad
tiding of Jesus, then he blew in the pocket of her outer loose garment.
Al-Hasan says that the Nazarenes had taken the east as their qibla
because Mary had taken a place facing the east [prior to her
conception]. When she was big with Jesus,

her cousin Joseph the carpenter was in her company, and they were both
going to the temple one day near Mount Zion. That temple was their
greatest. They used to repair it, heat it, and sweep it, and nobody knew
anyone more diligent or dedicated that both of them. The first person
who found it objectionable that she should be pregnant was this same
cousin and fellow servant of the temple, Joseph the carpenter. When he
saw what had happened to her, he thought it was monstrous and horrible,
and he did not know what to do or what to say to her. Whenever he
contemplated upon charging her, he remembered her uprightness,
adoration, and innocence and the fact that she was never out of his
sight even for one hour. If he desired to think of her as innocent, he
saw the signs of her pregnancy. When he could not keep it to himself any
longer, he decided to discuss it with her.

The first thing he said to her was, “I have noticed something about you
to which I have found myself reacting, and I have been trying to keep it
to myself, but I finally decided that discussing it with you may set my
mind at ease.” She said to him, “Say it nicely.” He asked her, “Tell

(54)

me, Mary, has there been any trees growing without seeds?” She said,
“Yes!” He asked her again, “Then has there been trees growing without
rain?” She said, “Yes!” Then he said, “Can there be children without
parents?” She said, “Yes! Don't you know that Allah Almighty caused all
the trees to grow when He created them without first sowing their seeds,
for seeds come from trees? Have you not come to know that Allah caused
the trees to grow without rain, and through His might He caused the rain
to sustain the species of trees after having created each species
separately? Or do you say that Allah is not able to grow trees without
the help of water and without it He could not have been able to grow
them?!” Joseph said to her, “No, I do not say that, but I say that Allah
Almighty is capable of doing anything;

all He has to do is to say to it, \`Be!' and it is!” Mary then said,
“Don't you know that Allah created Adam and his wife without parents?”
He answered in the affirmative. Her last statement convinced him that
what had happened to her must have been something which Allah Almighty
had decreed, and that it was not fitting for him to ask her about it due
to the secrecy she seemed to maintain in its regard. Then Joseph took
charge of all the maintenance chores needed to be performed at the
temple and spared her having to do anything at all.

Scholars say that when Mary came close to giving birth, Allah Almighty
inspired her that the Jerusalem temple was one of His houses which was
pure and was built so that His Name would be praised therein. “Go to a
place where you can seek seclusion,” the Almighty inspired her. Mary
went to the house of her aunt, the mother of Yahya (John the Baptist).
When the latter stood up to greet her and welcome her, she found herself
in need of Mary to support her to stand up. Then she asked her, “O Mary!
Can you imagine me being pregnant?!” Mary said, “I, too, am pregnant!”
Zakariyya's wife said, “Then I find the one in my womb prostrating to
the one in yours!” To this does the Almighty refer in the verse saying,
“... testifying to a Word from Allah” (Qur'an, 3:39). When she felt
comfortable at her aunt's house, the Almighty inspired her, “If you give
birth among your people, they will taunt you, charge you, and kill both
you and your son; so, get away from them.”

Scholars have differed regarding how long it took Mary to conceive and
deliver. Some say that the duration of her pregnancy was nine

(55)

months like all other women, while others say it was eight, and that
that was another miracle: no new-born who stayed in his mother's womb
for only eight months survived except Jesus. Other scholars say it was
six months, still others say it was three hours, and some even say it
was only one hour. Ibn \`Abbas has said, “It was only conception then
delivery, and the time from the conception to the delivery and the
seclusion she sought was only one hour, for Allah Almighty did not
mention any separation between them when He said, \`So she conceived him
then withdrew with him to a remote place' (19:22), that is, far away
from her people.” Muqatil[^1] has said, “His mother conceived him in one
hour; he was formed in one hour; he was delivered in one hour when the
sun had just set, and she was twenty years old, having had only two
menstrual periods before conceiving Jesus.”

Mujahid[^2] has said, “Mary, peace be upon her, has said, \`Whenever I
sought seclusion, Jesus would speak to me, and I would speak to him. If
a human distracted me from that, he would praise the Almighty while
being in my womb, and I would hear his praising,'” and Allah knows
best.

When the pain of childbirth intensified, she sought to support herself
with the trunk of a tree, and it was a dry palm tree with neither leaves
nor a live trunk but a dead stump. The angels did not like the sight of
that palm tree, and they were surrounding her in rows, and that palm
tree was at a village called Bethlehem[^3]. When her crisis reached its
[^1] He is Abu al-Hasan Muqatil ibn Sulayman al-Balkhi (d. 150 A.H./767
A.D.), a mufassir who moved to Baghdad then to Basra where he died. His
most important work is Al-Tafsir al-Kabir.
[^2]He is Abu Bakr Mujahid ibn Ahmed ibn Mousa (d. 324 A.H./936 A.D.), a
qari, actually the imam of qaris of his time, a traditionist, and a
linguist from Baghdad. All the books he wrote deal with the Holy
Qur’an.
[^3]“Bethlehem” is a Hebrew word with two meanings: 1) the house (Hebrew
beth, Arabic bayt) of bread, or 2) the house of the goddess Lahmu, twin
deity of Lahamu. In Mesopotamian mythology (which spread beyond the
valley of the Tigris and the Euphrates), these were the first gods to be
born from the chaos created by the merging of the watery deep
surrounding the earth and the salt waters. They represent silt, but in
some texts they seem to take the form of serpents. Bethlehem is located
in south Jerusalem. In Genesis 35:16-

(56)

zenith, she said in agony, “Oh! Would that I had died before this and
had been a thing quite forgotten” (Qur'an, 19:23), whereupon she was
addressed, “Grieve not! Surely your Lord has made a stream flow beneath
you, and shake towards you the trunk of the palm tree, it will drop on
you fresh ripe dates” (Qur'an, 19:24-25). The original Arabic text of
the first verse, that is, “Then he called out to her from beneath her”
(Qur'an, 19:24), can be recited in two different ways: min tahtiha, that
is, from under her, connotes a reference to the one who called upon her
from the mountain side, namely Gabriel. Or it can be recited man
tahtaha, the one who was underneath her, that is, Jesus Christ, after
having emerged from his mother's womb. He addressed her by the Will of
Allah.

Allah caused a river to flow for her after she had given birth to
Jesus. Its water would be sweet and cool if she wanted to drink of it,
lukewarm if she wanted to wash herself with it. Ibn \`Abbas has said,
“Jesus, or Gabriel, struck the earth, whereupon water gushed forth, and
the dry tree was brought back to life after its dryness. Its branches
cascaded, and it brought forth its produce and excelled in it. She was
told to shake the trunk of the palm tree to her so that it would cause
fresh dates to fall upon her.” Al-Rabee\` ibn Khaytham has said, “There
is nothing better for a woman in her postnatal period than fresh dates,
nor for any patient better than honey.” Omer ibn Maymoon has said, “I
cannot think of anything better for a woman having difficulty delivering
than fresh dates.”

Wahab has said, “When he [Jesus] was born, all idols were seen falling
on the ground headlong in each and every land, so much so that the
demons were frightened and did not know why. They rushed to Eblis the
accursed who was on a throne which he had made for himself on the
surface of a lake mocking the Almighty's Throne when it was first on the
water. They came to him when six hours of the day had passed. When Eblis
saw their throngs, he felt very upset and alarmed because he had never
seen them assembling like that since he scattered them throughout the
world to do their mischievous deeds. He used to see some of them now and
then but never all of them at the same time. He asked them what had
happened. They told him that something must
20 and 48:7, in 1 Samuel 16:17, and in 2 Samuel 23:13-17, it is
referred to as Ephrath or Ephratah.

(57)

have happened on earth that caused all the idols to be smashed without
any human touching them. Nothing was more instrumental than those idols
in bringing destruction to the descendants of Adam. Now this new event
that has occurred caused humans to think very low of those idols, and
the devils were concerned that humans were not going to worship idols
any more. “Be informed,” they said, “that we have not come to you here
before looking for its cause throughout the world, in the seas, and
everywhere else, but we did not increase but in ignorance regarding what
has happened.” Eblis said to them, “This must have been a momentous
event; so, remain where you are.”

Eblis immediately flew away for three hours during which he passed by
the place where Jesus was born. When he saw the angels gazing at that
spot, he realized that that was the scene of the event. He wanted to
approach it from above, but the heads of the angels and their shoulders
acted as a shield. He wanted to approach it from under the ground, but
he noticed that the angels' feet were planted firmly in it. He then
wanted to penetrate through their ranks, but they forbade him from doing
so as testified to this fact by the statement of the Prophet saying,
“Every human being is hit by Satan on the side upon its birth except
Jesus son of Mary, peace be upon him; Allah Almighty shielded Jesus from
him, so he kept trying [unsuccessfully] to penetrate the shield.'“

Having facilitated the delivery for Mary, Allah Almighty prepared Mary
to meet her people. “Eat, O Mary,” the Almighty inspired her, “of the
fresh dates, and drink of the sweet and cool water; cool your eyes and
be contented. If you see any human, and he asks you about your son, or
makes a serious charge against you in his regard, tell him that you
pledged to abstain (from speaking to anyone) for the sake of achieving
the Pleasure of the Most Merciful One.” The “fast” referred to in
chapter 19 (Surat Maryam),

verse 26, meant abstention from speaking. Fast during that period was
abstention from eating, drinking, and speaking, “... so I shall not
speak to any man today” (Qur'an, 19:26), Mary was instructed to say.
Another reference to abstention from speaking to people is made in the
first verses of the Qur'anic Chapter named after Mary, the same Surat
Maryam referred to above: “He (Zakariyya) said: Lord! Give me a sign
(aya). He said: Your sign is that you will not speak to the people for
three nights though being in sound health” (Qur'an, 19:10). Sometimes
staying away from people

(58)

and remaining in constant contact with the Almighty enables one to
reach a very high spiritual plain. Remember how Prophet Muhammed, prior
to the initiation of his historic mission, used to seek seclusion from
people at the Hira cave of Mount Thawr in order to meditate and to clear
his thoughts.

Mary brought her infant Jesus to her people carrying him.

Al-Kalbi has said, “Joseph the carpenter took Mary and Jesus inside a
cave and kept them there for forty days till she recovered fully from
the pains of childbirth, then he brought her back carrying him, being
forty days old, whereupon Jesus spoke to her on the way saying,
\`Mother! Congratulations! I am the servant of Allah and His Messiah!'
When she came to her family with the infant, all members of her family
were so grieved, they wept. It was a family of righteousness. They said
to her, \`O Mary! You surely have done a strange thing' (19:27), that
is, \`Where did you get this son from?' She beckoned to them to ask
Jesus.

They were now angry and said, \`How can we speak to one who is a child
in the cradle?' (19:29).” Wahab has said that Zakariyya came to her
while she was debating with the Jews about him; he said to Jesus,
\`Speak up and produce your proof if you were indeed ordered to do so.'
Jesus, who was then forty days old, said, \`I am a servant of Allah; He
has given me the Book and made me a prophet, and He has made me blessed
wherever I may be. He has enjoined on me prayer and zakat as long as I
live, and (to be) dutiful to my mother, and He has not made me insolent,
unblessed. And peace be on me the day I was born, the day I die, and the
day I am raised to life'“ (Qur'an, 19:30-33). Thus did Jesus admit his
submission to the Will of Allah at the very beginning of his speech,
belying the claim of the “Christians” and making his argument against
them.

Imam Muhammed ibn \`Ali al-Baqir , is quoted as saying, “When Jesus
[^1] His full name is Muhammed ibn al-Sa'ib al-Kalbi (d. 763 A.D.), a
genealogist, traditionist, linguist, and chronologist from Kufa. He
fought Mis\`ab ibn al-Zubayr then retired and dedicated his entire time
to study Arabic and history. He studied in Kufa and lived for some time
in Basra.
[^2] He is the great grandson of Prophet Mhammed and one of the most
brilliant persons who ever walked on the face of earth, with knowledge
so vast, he was said to “pierce through the knowledge of prophets.” He
was Imam

(59)

was born, in each day he grew up as much as infants would grow in a
month. When he was nine months old, his mother took him by the hand,
brought him to the class and seated him before the teacher. The teacher
asked him to say Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim, which Jesus repeated. The
teacher then required him to repeat the alphabets after him, whereupon
he raised his head and asked him whether he knew what the alphabets
meant. The teacher raised his stick aiming to hit him, but he quickly
said to him, \`Do not hit me, O teacher! If you do not know, ask me, and
I shall explain them to you.' The teacher asked him to explain them to
him, so he stated the following,

Alif أ is derived from La ilaha illa-Allah (there is no god except
Allah);

Ba ب is derived from Behjatullah (the Splendor of Allah);

Jeem ج is derived rom Jalal-Allah (the Greatness of Allah);

Dal د is derived from Din-Allah (the Creed of Allah);

Ha هـ is derived from Hawiya, Hell, the pit;

Waw و is derived from Waylun li ahlin-nar (Woe unto the people of the
Fire!);

Za ز is derived from Zafeeru-Jahannam, the exhalation of Jahannam (or
ge hen Hinnom ), Hell, the eternal Fire;
He is the great grandson of Prophet Mhammed and one of the most
brilliant persons who ever walked on the face of earth, with knowledge
so vast, he was said to “pierce through the knowledge of prophets.” He
was Imam Muhammed son of Imam \`Ali son of Imam al-Husain son of Imam
\`Ali son of Abu Talib, peace and blessings of Allah be upon all of
them.

He was born in Medina on Rajab 1, 57 A.H./May 10, 677 A.D. and was
killed on Thul-Hijjah 7, 114 A.H./January 28, 733 A.D. by a poisoned
saddle given to him as a present by the Umayyad tyrant Hisham ibn Abd
al-Malik.
[^1]“Ge hen Hinnom,” Hebrew for “the valley of the son of Hinnom,” the
Jews believe, is a place near Jerusalem where, according to Jeremiah
19:5, [Gentile] children were burnt in sacrifice to Baal. The latter was
the fertility god of then polytheist Canaanites (Arabs, descendants of
Ken\`an, who inhabited Greater Syria. According to Vol. 1, p. 24 of
Civilization: Past and Present, “'Phoenician' is the name which the
Greeks gave to those Canaanites who dwelt along the Mediterranean coast
of Syria, an area that is today Lebanon.”).

The Greeks, then, were the ones who called those Arabs "Phoenicians".
Ge hen Hinnom is Arabized as “Jahannam.” Before the advent of Islam,
Arabs believed neither in heaven nor in hell. They, therefore, did not
have any concept of the afterlife and had no words for Paradise or hell
in their very rich and extensive vocabulary. “Janna,” by the way, means:
a garden, an orchard, but it really does not describe Paradise fully.
Paradise is a lot more than an orchard or a garden. It is a whole world
by itself. Incidentally, the

(60)

Hutti حطي is derived from Huttatil khataya \`anil mustaghfirin (the
sins have been removed from those who seek His forgiveness);

Kilman كلمن is derived from Kalamullahi ghayr makhlooq wala mubaddila
li kalimatih (the Speech of Allah is not created, and there is no
alteration to it);

Sa\`af صعف is derived from Sa\` bi sa\` wal jaza bil jaza (a measure
for a measure, and a reward for each good deed);

Qirshat قرشت is derived from taqrushuhum heena tahshuruhum (it gathers
them together as it inflicts its pain upon them).'“

The teacher said to Mary, “Woman, take your son away, for he needs no
teacher.”

Al-Husain ibn Muhammed ibn al-Husain, a scholar of exegesis, has
informed us through his chain of narrators which goes back to Abu
Sa\`eed al-Khudri who quotes the Messenger of Allah as saying, “Jesus
was sent by his mother to learn, so the teacher required him to say
Bismillah (in the Name of Allah), whereupon Jesus asked him what that
meant. The teacher told him he did not know, so Jesus explained it to
him. He said, \`The B means Bahaullah (the Splendor of Allah), the sin
[the \`s' in bismillah] means Sanaullah (the Majesty of Allah), and the
mim [the \`m' in Bismillah] means Mamlakatullah (the Kingdom of Allah,
the Exalted, the Sublime),'“ and Allah knows best.
word “Paradise” (firdaws) is also a loan word, some say from Persian,
others from Babylonian.


