The Disciples
=============

Allah Almighty has said, “But when Jesus perceived disbelief on their
part, he said: Who will be my helpers in Allah's way? The disciples
said: We are helpers (in the way) of Allah: We believe in Allah and bear
witness that we submit (to Him in Islam)” (Qur'an, 3:52). The Almighty
has also said, “And when I inspired the disciples saying: Believe in Me
and in My messenger, they said: We believe and (you) bear witness that
we are Muslims (submitters to the will of Allah)” (Qur'an, 5:111), that
is, Allah enabled the disciples to believe in His messenger.

They were the elite from among those who believed in Jesus son of Mary
and who followed him. They were his supporters and viziers, and they
were twelve in number. Their names are: Simon al-Safa who is also called
Peter, his brother Andrews, Jacob son of Zebedee, his brother John,
Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew al-Ashshar (collector of the \`ushr
tax, the tithe[^1]), Jacob son of Halfa, Leah who is also called
Thaddaeus, Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot. Biblical lists of
them, however, differ from this one.

The “saints” who wrote the Gospels named after them are: John, Mark,
Luke, and Matthew. Let us see what Christians tell us about them:[^2]

[^1] It is a tax on agricultural produce, goods, or personal items set
aside as an offering to God. Very few Christians nowadays pay it. Here
in the U.S., taxes collected by federal, state, social security,
insurance, etc. take out about 30% of one's hard earned income, leaving
him in need for charity himself!

[^2] The following text material is excerpted from two sources: The
Columbia Viking Desk Encyclopedia (The Viking Press, New York, 1968),
and the Encyclopedia Britannica III.

(66)

St. Mark was a friend of Saints Peter, Paul, and Luke. He is John Mark;
his mother is believed to be the owner of the house where the Last
Supper (where the Table of Viands, or al-Ma'ida) was held. His Gospel is
the shortest and simplest, the only one which stands out from among all
the other three in context and in spirit. Some Biblical critics are of
the view that it was the first to be composed. It narrates the life of
Jesus from his baptism by John the Baptist to the passion and alleged
“resurrection”.

St. Luke, a man from Antioch[^1], Syria, was said to be a doctor, a
physician, and a friend and companion of Saints Paul and Mark. Christian
tradition, however, says that he was a painter and that he died as a
martyr. He is described as “a disciple of the apostles”[^2] which clearly
means he learned not directly from Jesus but from his twelve apostles.
His Gospel provides an account of the birth of Jesus, tells of his
ministry and ends with the passion and alleged “resurrection”. He is
author of a twelve-volume literary work, the Gospel and the Acts, and is
the most literary of the New Testament writers. The approximate date of
his death or “martyrdom” is given as 66 A.D.

St. Matthew, also named Levi, is said to be a publican (tax collector)
of Capernaum, a city in northeast Palestine on the Sea of Galilee. He
was employed as a tax collector by Herod Antipas, tetrach of Galilee. He
is described as one of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ. He is
author of the first synoptic Gospel which, like the rest, gives an

[^1] The city of Antioch is situated on the banks of the river al-Asi
(Orontes). It was founded about 300 B.C. by Celeucus I (Nicator) who
died in 280 B.C. Celeucus I was a general of Alexander the Great.
Antioch is the city where the followers of Jesus Christ were called
“Christians” (rather than Nazarines) for the first time. It is the seat
of a Melchite, or Maronite, and a Jacobite patriarch. It fell to the
Persians in 538 A.D., to the Arabs in 637 (16 A.H.), to the Byzantians
from 969 - 1084 (358 - 477 A.H.), to Seljuk Turks in 1085 (478 A.H.), to
the Crusaders in 1098 (491 A.H.), to Egyptian Mamlukes in 1268 (666
A.H.), and to Ottoman Turks in 1516 (922 A.H.). It was transferred to
Syria by Western powers in 1920 (1339 A.H.) but restored to Turkey in
1939 (1358 A.H.). This is why the reader sometimes sees Antioch
identified as a Syrian town and sometimes as a Turkish one! What a busy
little town!

[^2] Encyclopedia Britannica II, Vol. 11, p. 178.

(67)

account of the birth of Jesus, tells of his ministry, and ends with the
passion and alleged “resurrection”. The Bible offers scanty and
uncertain information about him. Everything about his character,
conduct, conviction and life is subject to debate and is never
ascertained... He wrote his Gospel, the first of the four, in Hebrew.
His Gospel is also attributed to Matthew who is said to be one of the
twelve apostles or disciples.

St. John is the son of Zebedee, a fisherman from the Galilee, and
Salome. He is the younger brother of St. James the Greater, also one of
the twelve disciples of Jesus. Jesus Christ, we are told, also had a
brother named James...! Ancient Christian tradition claims that John is
the author of all the four Gospels comprising the Bible..., in addition
to three epistles and the Book of Revelation.

Is he really?! This is the subject of debate among Christians; so, let
us leave them debating and arguing till the Day of Judgment! He is
described in Christian books as a “divine,” theologian, and as an
Evangelist, a writer of the four Gospels. No date of his birth or death
is available, and even the place where he died is not known for sure.
Some writers admit that what is written about him is more of a legend
than a fact.

One is tempted to ask: “Why is it that there are four Gospels instead
of one? Why is there so much duplication and difference between one
Gospel and another? Whose Gospel is the right or the more reliable one?
Since they cannot all be right, which one is right? If those Gospels
were all written by St. John, as stated above, why, then, are they
divided into four with each one of them bearing the name of an apostle?
Had they all been written by St. John, why was not the Bible called the
Book of John?” My bet is that if you ask a priest or even the most
learned Christian cleric, he will never give you a straight answer to
any of these legitimate questions.


