Purpose of the Objectors
========================

Some people try hard for proving two issues: one of them is the issue of
unnecessity of Taqlid (following in religious rulings) and the other is
the issue of unnecessity of Khums, and we can see clearly that matter
has gone far from scientific discussions and has formed into brawling
and demagoguism and we know that whenever a discussion goes far from the
scientific form and enters into this kinds of paths, surly there are
some news behind the curtains and other purposes has made that.

Evidences show that this group has began to fight with these two issues
with a calculated plan, because they see that until spiritual leadership
of society is performed by great Islamic scholars and Shiite Maraje’
(pl. of Marja’, person whom others follow him in rulings) and they have
financial independence added to their deep influence in society, they
are not capable of executing their evil plans for destroying the Islamic
beliefs of people and nations, and at this moment they have chosen two
sensitive points:

First point is the issue of Taqlid which according to that each Muslim
should be either Mujahid (Islamic scholar who is engaged in several
Islamic fields of knowledge) or refer to a Mujtahid in matters about
Islamic rulings and follow his orders.

They assumed that if they cut this scientific and spiritual relationship
between people and religious leaders by poisoning in the issue of
Taqlid, they can easily destroy the thoughts of people and until this
relationship is connected penetration of them is very hard.

Therefore, they invite people to disconnect this connection explicitly
in some booklets, while we know that the issue of referring to
knowledgeable persons is from self evident matters in all aspects of
life and any person refers to knowledgeable persons in daily life in
medical, architectural, pharmaceutical and other matters and also
according to this fact if a person cannot understand Islamic matters
from Qur"an and tradition by himself/herself, refers to a scholar.

But they have arisen against this self evident matter for providing
their own profits and invite people to disconnect any scientific
relation with their spiritual leaders.[^1]

Another matter that they have chosen is the issue of Khums and how
calculated and planned they have chosen that.

Because we know that the share of Imam which is half of Khums is the
financial fund of Shiite seminaries and propagation plans and cultural
activities and briefly any religious of scientific activity which needs
money; If oppositions of Shi’aa can prevent people from paying Khums and
share of Imam by their poisoning, then they can reach one of their goals
which is weakening our seminaries or changing their path.

In more clear way, existence of this Islamic order and act of some
Muslims to that caused the complete independence of spiritual seminaries
and scientific and propagating programs, because we know that the first
condition of independence of an organization is its financial
independence and this matter executed well in the world of Shi’aa by
this Islamic order while the society of Sunni scholar has missed its
independence because of ignorance of this order.

Especially, on one great Sunni scholars from Syria who had visited Qom
seminary and also other different religious institutions in other
cities, had been amazed that how the costs of these programs are
provided, and when he noticed to the issue of Khums and share of Imam in
programs of Shi"aa, he impressed so much that in return to his country
one of his advices to his friends was to pay the Khums.

It is wonderful that others wish to execute these programs and achieve
this great privilege which is complete independence in religious
programs by them, but obstinate despiteful persons insist on taking this
privilege from us.

But, they should know that lots of people have informed about this
conspiracy and have known about their evil purposes, and accordingly it
seems so unlikely that they can achieve their goals, and their fiasco
can be predicted by now, and their plan is like a drawing on the water!

[^1]: It has been discussed about the issue of Taqlid and all objections
about it in an individual explained booklet and all points about the
matter have been cleared.


