About the Author
================

Dr. Ali Shariati was born in Mazinan, a suburb of Mashad, Iran. He
completed his elementary and high school in Mashad. In his years at the
Teacher's Training College, he came into contact with youth who were
from the lower economic strata of the society and tasted the poverty and
hardship that existed.

At the age of eighteen, he started as a teacher and ever since had been
a student as well as a teacher. After graduating from college in 1960,
on a scholarship he pursued graduate studies in France. Dr. Shariati, an
honor student, received his doctorate in sociology in 1964.

When he returned to Iran he was arrested at the border and imprisoned on
the pretext that he had participated in political activities while
studying in France. Released in 1965, he began teaching again at Mashad
University. As a Muslim sociologist, he sought to explain the problems
of Muslim societies in the light of Islamic principles - explaining them
and discussing them with his students. Very soon, he gained popularity
with the students and different social classes in Iran. For this reason,
the regime felt obliged to discontinue his courses at the university.

Then he was transferred to Teheran. There, Dr. Shariati continued his
very active and brilliant career. His lectures at Houssein-e-Ershad
Religious Institute attracted not only six thousand students who
registered in his summer classes, but also many thousands of people from
different backgrounds who were fascinated by his teachings.

The first edition of his book ran over sixty thousand copies which were
quickly sold-out, despite the obstructive interferences by the
authorities in Iran. Faced with the outstanding success of Dr.
Shariati's courses, the Iranian police surrounded Houssein-e-Ershad
Institute, arrested many of his followers and thereby put an end to his
activities. For the second time, he underwent an eighteen month prison
term under extremely harsh conditions.

Popular pressure and international protests obliged the Iranian regime
to release Dr. Shariati on March 20, 1975. However, he remained under
close surveillance by the security agents of Iran. This was no freedom
at all since he could neither publish his thoughts nor contact his
students. Under such stifling conditions, according to the teachings of
the Qur’an and the Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad (S), he realized that
he should migrate out of the country. Successful in his attempt, he went
to England but was martyred three weeks later on June 19, 1977.

Dr. Shariati studied and experienced many philosophical, theological and
social schools of thought with an Islamic view. One could say that he
was a Muslim Muhajir who rose from the depth of the ocean of eastern
mysticism, ascended to the heights of the formidable mountains of
western social sciences, yet was not overwhelmed, and he returned to our
midst with all the jewels of this fantastic voyage.

He was neither a reactionary fanatic who opposed anything that was new
without any knowledge nor was he of the so-called westernized
intellectuals who imitated the west without independent judgment.

Knowledgeable about the conditions and forces of his time, he began his
Islamic revival with enlightenment of the masses, particularly the
youth. He believed that if these elements of the society had true faith,
they would totally dedicate themselves and become active and Mujahid
elements who would give everything - including their lives - for their
ideals.

Dr. Shariati constantly fought to create humanitarian values in the
young generation, a generation whose values have been defaced with the
help of the most scientific and technical methods. He vigorously tried
to re-introduce the Qur’an and Islamic history to the youth so that they
may find their true selves in all their human dimensions and fight all
the decadent societal forces.

Dr. Shariati wrote many books. Some of his works are listed at the end
of this book. In all his writings, he tried to present a clear and
genuine picture of Islam. He strongly believed that if the intellectual
and new generation realized the truth of this faith, attempts toward
social change would be successful.

More information about the author could be found in his book "On the
Sociology of Islam" translated by Hamid Algar.


