Ibrahim's Position
==================

After completing the seventh round of circumambulation, the state of
Tawaf ends. Seventh? Yes! It is not simply the sum of six plus one, but
it is a reminder of the seven layers of heaven. Tawaf, your sacrifice
for people, is an eternal movement on the path of people! It is Hajj and
NOT a pilgrimage. Isn't this a genuine demonstration of existence? Isn't
this the actual translation of Tawheed, and its true interpretation?!!

At Ibrahim's position you must read two units of prayers. Where is this
position? It is a piece of stone with Ibrahim's foot prints on it. It
was on this stone that he stood and laid the cornerstone of Kaaba
(Hajar-ul Aswad). He stood there to construct the Kaaba. Do you
understand? Are you not shivering?

Being in Ibrahim's position signifies standing in his place! Who? You!
It is not difficult to realize what Tawheed does to mankind. At one
time, it may humiliate you to nothing, denying you "as you are" and
"flinging mud" at you. At another time, it endows you with the highest
degree of spirituality whereby you are alongside Allah - in His house,
as His relative and on His path! Tawheed is a result of your being hit,
denied, despised and enslaved during Tawaf.

Allah wants you to prostrate to Him. He will then call upon you - Oh
sincere one! Oh friend! My associate, my confidant, my trustee and my
listener! My purpose of creation and my private companion..!

Approximately one hour ago, you were at the bank of this "river"
standing, thinking of yourself, watching the people and not being one of
them; you were a useless particle reprimanded by Allah. You were "mud",
"clay" and "earth"

But now, you are flowing and moving. No longer are you stagnated nor
putrefied. You are roaring, washing away the rocks, breaking the dams
and finding your way to the gardens to grow heaven in the heart of the
salty deserts! You irrigate the fields, the earth, flowers and plants.
In turn you help the cultivation of thousands of seeds from which
thousands of buds are impatient to germinate, to crack above the earth,
exhibit their leaves and rise towards the sky. If you do not move, you
will become like clay - hard and solid; and you will simultaneously bury
and destroy all of these potentials.

***And he indeed is a failure who stunteth it.*** Qur’an 91:10

While the river flows, it gives life to the dead nature as Jesus (as)
did. But if you stay stagnated like dampness in the corner, enjoying
yourself or suffering, you will become petrified. Larva of numerous
parasites will grow in you, your color will change and you will smell
terrible!

Come on - perform Hajj! Join the river of circumambulating people by
circumambulating too! After an hour of swimming in this "stream of
love", you will abandon your "self-centered mortal existence" and adapt
to a new life among the people's "eternal existence" on the "eternal
orbit" of Allah. Now you are like Ibrahim!

Next, from the same point which you started Tawaf, you must step out of
the Tawaf circle. Like life after death, rise from the same point on the
horizon from which you disappeared. The spirit of goodness, the spirit
of Allah, which was in your original state of creation (Mud), is
visible. From where? It appears at the place where you joined the Tawaf
circle - under the right hand of Allah. After denying and killing all of
the previous and false egos, you will discover your "authentic ego".
Dressed in the clean white garb of Ihram, at the House of Allah and
standing in Ibrahim's position, step in his footprints. Face to Face
with ADah, start your prayer.

In the history of mankind, Ibrahim was the great rebel who opposed
idolatry and established monotheism in this world. Although physically
tired of sufferings, the prophet of responsibility and leadership had a
sharp mind. His heart was full of love yet he carried an axe in his
hand! Faith shined from the center of Kofr. A clear fountain of tawheed,
monotheism, emerged from the sewage of polytheism!

The first to fight idolatry, Ibrahim was raised in the house of Azar who
used to make the idols for his tribe. Ibrahim fought not only against
idolatry and Nimrod' but also against ignorance and oppression. The
leader of this movement, he was riotous against abjectness. He was the
source of hope and wishes, the man of faith and the founder of true
unity.

Ibrahim, enter the fire - the fire of oppression and ignorance! Help
prevent the people from being burned by the fire of oppression and
ignorance! The same fire is ignited in the fate and future of every
responsible individual who is indebted to enlightenment and guidance.
For those who behave like Ibrahim, Allah will make a rose garden from
the fire of Nimrods! You will not burn and leave behind your ashes. It
is a symbolic demonstration of how close you get to the "fire" during
your struggle and performance of Jihad. To throw yourself into the fire
in order to save other people is a bitter experience, but even more
painful is the Shahadat.

Ibrahim, sacrifice your son Ismail! Cut his throat with your own hands
to save the people's neck from being cut. Which people? Those who have
been sacrificed at the steps of the palaces of power or near the
plunderer's treasures or inside the temples of hypocrisy and misery! To
get courage to seize the sword from the hand of the executioner, cut
Ismail's throat with a knife! Allah (Ibrahim's God) will pay Ismail's
ransom. You do not kill your son nor lose him! This gesture is a lesson
for the sake of your faith. You must reach the point of your willingness
to sacrifice your most beloved (Ismail) with your own hands.

And More Painful Than "Sacrifice" Is "Shahadat"
-----------------------------------------------

Remember that you just left circumambulation or "tawaf of love" and are
standing in Ibrahim's position. When Ibrahim reached this point, he had
experienced a life full of struggle - fighting with Nimrod, the idols,
facing the tortures, the heap of fire, Satan, the sacrifice of his son
Ismail and ... migration, homelessness, loneliness passing from the
stage of prophecy to the stage of leadership, rejecting "individuality"
and adopting "totality" and from being worker in the house of Azar, the
idol maker, to becoming the builder of Kaaba, the house of unity!

Here Ibrahim stands. Having left many difficult years behind him, all of
his hairs are gray. Yet, at the end of his life, (as old as a history)
he is about to build a house; he is about to lay down the black stone.

Ismail helps him by carrying the stones and handing them to his father.
The house of Allah is being constructed!

It is a surprise! Ismail and Ibrahim are to build the Kaaba. Ismail is
saved from being sacrificed while Ibrahim is saved from the fire. Now
they have a responsibility toward the people. Allah has commanded them
to be the architects of "the oldest temple of unity" on earth, "the
first house of people" in history, "the free house" of freedom and the
Kaaba of love and worship. Haram is a symbol of "True Privacy and
Modesty".

Now you are in Ibrahim's position! It is the highest point to which
Ibrahim could ascend; it is the nearest point to Allah. Ibrahim, builder
of the Kaaba, architect of the house of freedom, founder of tawheed, and
fighter against the idols, was tortured by Nimrod. Leader of the tribe,
struggler against ignorance and Kofr, conscientious of love and
responsibility, Ibrahim escaped the temptations of Satan and the Khannas
(whisperer) who inspires evil suggestions into the hearts of people.

***who whispereth in the heart of mankind.*** Qur’an 114:5

After suffering all the disaster, tortures and dangers, Ibrahim built a
house - NEITHER FOR HIMSELF NOR FOR HIS SON - but a house for the
PEOPLE. It is a shelter for those who are homeless, a shelter for those
who have been forced to leave, a shelter for those who are wounded on
this earth and a shelter for those who are fleeing. This house is to be
a torch amidst a long and dark night. It symbolizes a rebel in the dark
of his oppression!

Everyone is shameful and insecure; the earth has been converted into a
big house for prostitutes where there is respect for nobody. It is a big
slaughter house where nothing but oppression and discrimination
prevails. At last - there is a house which is clean, safe and secure for
all mankind (Allah's family) - the Kaaba!

In Ibrahim's position, you shake hands with Allah. Live the way Ibrahim
did and be the architect of the Kaaba of faith of your time.  
 Save your people; help them step out of the lagoon of a stagnated and
useless life. Awaken them from their deep sleep so they will no longer
suffer oppression and live in the darkness of ignorance. Help them move;
hold their hands and lead them. Call them to Hajj for Tawaf!

Upon returning from tawaf where you assimilated yourself amongst the
people, you are in Ibrahim's position. You are in the house and city of
safety and security, facing Almighty Allah. Therefore, you, the
"confederate" of Allah should:  
 - Make your land safe, as if you are in the Haram area! - Make your
time as the time of Ihram, as if you are always in the state of Ihram! -
Make the earth the Safe-Mosque, as if you are in the Safe-Mosque!  
 All this because the "earth is the mosque of Allah," however you see
that in reality it is not!


