Between Tawaf and Sa'y
======================

When completing the tawaf prayer in Ibrahim's position, you must go to
"Masa" which is the space between the mountains of Safa and Marwa (it
encompasses about 1/4 mile). "Run" between those two mountains seven
times. Start at the top of Safa. Part of the path is at the level of
Kaaba where you should do the "harwala". Next, you walk normally to the
foot of Marwa.

Sa'y is a search. It is a movement with an aim. It is depicted by
running and hurrying. During tawaf (circumambulation) you acted as
Hajar. In Ibrahim's position you acted as Ibrahim and Ismail. Once you
begin "trying" (Sa'y) you are acting as Hajar again.

Here is a true demonstration of oneness. Shapes, patterns, colors,
degrees, personalities, borders, distinctions and distances are
destroyed. Naked man and stripped humanity are on the scene! Nothing but
faith, belief and action are eminent! Here nobody is spoken of; even
Ibrahim, Ismail and Hajar are only names, words and symbols. Whatever
exists is moving constantly, humanity and spirituality and between them
only discipline. Furthermore, this is Hajj, a decision for an eternal
movement in a certain direction. It is also how the whole world moves.

Here in Sa'y you are to play the role of Hajar, woman, a poor, belittled
Ethiopian slave and maid for Sara. These are all of her qualifications
in the human social system - in the system of polytheism, but not in the
system of monotheism! This slave is the addressor of Allah, the mother
of His great prophets (the messengers of Allah) and the representative
of Allah's prettiest and dearest creatures. In this show of Hajj, she is
the first and distinguished character. In the house of Allah, she is the
only woman, a MOTHER!

Allah told Hajar to obey Him and He would provide for her and her son.
Allah would take care of their lives, needs and future. Oh Hajar, the
example of submission and obedience, the great champion of faith and
reliance in love, you will be protected under My umbrella!

Hajar totally submitted to the will of Allah; she left her child in this
valley. This was the command of Allah and the order of love! However,
the model of submission (Hajar) did not "SIT QUIETLY". Soon, she arose
and all alone tried to run from one dry mountain to the other searching
for water! Constantly searching, moving and struggling, she decided to
rely on herself, her feet, her will and her mind.

Hajar was a responsible woman, a mother, in love, all alone, wandering,
searching, enduring pain, disturbed, deprived of support, lacking
shelter, homeless, isolated from her society, classless, race-less and
hopeless; yet despite all these drawbacks, she was HOPEFUL! A lonely
slave, a victim, a stranger, exiled and disgusted, rejected from the
capitalistic-aristocratic system, hated by the nations, hated by the
classes and races, hated by the family - this black maid was all alone
with her child in her arms! She was far away from her town and country
of a more privileged race. Wandering in this strange desert, she was
like a prisoner in these mountains. All alone, she was restless but
hopeful and determined in her search for water, going from one area to
the other.  
 All alone ... Running on her feet to the top of these mountains (NOT
SITTING AND CRYING HELPLESSLY!) in search of water.

This is the promoter of Ibrahim's tradition - not a god but a slave
(Hajar), not seeking the mercy of "fire" but of "water". Water? Yes
water! Not unseen not metaphysical, not love, not submission, not
obedience, not soul, not a Philosophical view of life. Not in heaven,
not in the hereafter. No, no, no ... In this world and it is drinking
water! From a fountain on this earth, it is purely material. This same
liquid which flows on earth (water) is that which life is so thirsty
for. The body requires it since it becomes blood in your vessels. It is
the milk in the mother's breast which satisfies the child's thirst.
Searching for water symbolizes searching for material life on this
earth. It is genuine need which shows the relation of mankind to nature.
It is the way of finding heaven in this world and enjoying its fruit on
this earth.

Sa'y is physical work. It means exerting your efforts and running after
water and bread in order to satisfy your thirst and feed your hungry
children. It is a way to achieve a better life. Your son is thirsty and
awaiting you in this dry desert; it is your duty to find a fountain to
bring him some water. Sa'y is the struggle and search for your needs out
of the heart of nature; it is the attempt to get water out of the stone.

Sa'y: purely material; a material need; a material aim and material act!
Economy: nature and work! Needs: material and human!  
 Surprisingly, in terms of distance, there are only a few steps or few
moments from Tawaf to Sa'y.

Nevertheless, a great difference exists between the two:  
 Tawaf: Absolute love! Sa'y: Absolute wisdom! Tawaf: All "Him". Sa'y:All
"You"! Tawaf: Almighty's will only! Sa'y: Your will only! Tawaf: As a
butterfly who encircles the candle until it burns; and its ashes are
gone with the wind - disappearing in love and dying in light! Sa'y: As
an eagle who flies above these black mountains with the support of its
strong wings to find its food and seize his bait in the midst of stones.
It conquers both the earth and the sky. The wind blows the earth and the
sky. The wind blows so softly against the eagle's wings. Flying freely
above the sky, heaven signifies its ambition. Under its wings, the earth
is so despised. The earth is also conquered by the eagle's sharp and
prudent look! Tawaf is: Mankind in love with the "truth". Sa'y is:
Mankind self-supported by the "facts". Tawaf is: The exalted man. Sa'y
is: The powerful man.

Tawaf: Love, worship, spirit, morality, beauty, goodness, holiness,
values, truth, faith, righteousness, suffering, sacrifice, devotion,
humility, slavery, perception, enlightenment, submission, Allah's might
and will, metaphysics, the unseen, for others, for the hereafter, and
... for Allah! And ... whatever the easterner's spirit is motivated by
and in love with. Sa'y: Wisdom, logic, needs, living, facts, objectives,
earth, material, nature, privileges, thinking, science, industry,
policy, benefit, joy, economy, civilization, body, freedom, will-power,
mastery, in this world - for the self. And ... whatever the westerners
struggle for.

Tawaf: Allah only! Sa'y: Mankind only! Tawaf: Soul and nothing else.
Sa'y: Body alone. Tawaf: Pains of "being" and worrying about the
"hereafter". Sa'y: Joys of "living" and convenience of "this world".
Tawaf: Searching for "thirst"! Sa'y: Searching for "water"! Tawaf: The
butterfly. Sa'y: The eagle.

Hajj is the combination of Tawaf and Sa'y. It resolves the
contradictions that have confused mankind throughout history:

Materialism or idealism? Rationalism or enlightenment? This world of the
hereafter? Epicureanism or asceticism? The will of Allah or the will of
man? To rely on Him or the will of man? To rely on Him or rely on oneâ€™s
self?

Allah (Ibrahim's God) will teach you the answer - Both! A lesson not by
words, perception, science nor philosophy but by showing you an example
of a human. This example from whom all the worldly philosophers,
scientists and great thinkers who are searching for faith and facts are
to learn the great lesson of Allah is again a woman, a black Ethiopian
slave and a mother. It is Hajar!  
 To the command of "love", she submits herself to His absolute will.
Leaving her town and country, she brings her child far, far away and
leaves him in this dry and lonely valley (Mecca). She relies absolutely
on Allah and His love. With the power of faith, she denies all the
logics and rationales. This is Tawaf!

But, unlike many of the so-called righteous people or worshippers, she
does not sit quietly beside her son. She does not wait for a miracle to
occur or for an invisible hand to bring some fruits from heaven or to
flow a river to quench their thirst. Nay! She leaves her son in the
hands of "love" and immediately arises to run - having decided to search
for water and try her best. And now in the uncivilized and dry mountains
of Mecca, a woman - alone, thirsty, responsible, a stranger - wanders in
a fruitless search for "water"! Oh Allah, are we talking of "Hajar" or
"mankind"?

Hajar's efforts are useless; she returns desperately to her son. To her
astonishment, the child who was left under the umbrella of "love" in a
state of thirst and restlessness, has dug under the sands with his
heels. At that moment of maximum desperation and from an unexpected
place, suddenly there appears:  
*by miracle, by the power of needs and the mercy of Allah - "a humming",
"the sound of water"!*  
 It is Zam-Zam, a sweet and life-giving fountain of water flowing from
stone! This lesson: to find water by "love" not by effort but "after the
effort".  
 Though you cannot approach Him by working hard, Oh my heart you should
try your best.  
 Oh in love, try, try your best - You, the absolute faith and absolute
reliance!  
 Try seven times which is the same number of times you circumambulated
during Tawaf! But, this time, do not pursue a circular path that finally
leads you no place except where you originally started (i.e. Zero). Do
not travel in an empty circle, reaching nowhere, gaining nothing and
moving aimlessly!, working to fill the stomach and filling the stomach
in order to be prepared to work. Finally, continue on until the time of
death!

Tawaf: Living not for the sake of living but for the cause of Allah.
Sa'y: Trying your best not just for yourself but for the people. Here
your path is straight and not a circle! You do not move in circles but
walk ahead. It is a migration, beginning at one point and reaching your
destiny; it is going from Safa to Marwa.

During Sa'y you repeat a back and forth action seven times. The figure
(7) is "odd" not "even" so that your Sa'y ends up in Safa and not at the
point where you began! Seven times! Seven, a symbolic figure represents
always, all your life to ... Marwa! Start at Safa which means pure love
for others. Your destination is Marwa which means the ideal of manhood a
sense of honor, generosity and forgiveness toward others! Who are the
others? Those who are trying with you!

What do I know? This is only my understanding and not all that it
signifies. It means annihilating and drawing yourself into this ocean of
love; coming out clean and sinless; and stepping in Ibrahim's position.
From there - Oh man, a stranger, homeless and exiled from the earth, a
sense of responsibility urges you to search for water in the mirage. Go
to the top of Safa as Hajar did. See the white flood of people trying.
Running down from Safa restlessly and in a state of thirst, they search
for water in this hot and dry desert they continue to the top of Marwa
where they find no water. With dry lips, empty hands and sad looks, they
return to Safa and Start their search again. This procedure is repeated
seven times, yet water is not found nor is their thirst quenched! But,
they do reach Marwa!

And you, Oh a drop, from the top of Safa join this White-river of
wandering, struggling and thirst! Draw yourself into this flood of
people. Try your best (to Sa'y) with the others. In the middle of your
Sa'y at the level of Kaaba, "hurry up" along with the others.


