The Greater Pilgrimage
======================

It is the ninth day of Zul-Hijjah and the greater pilgrimage has
started. Where are you? It does, not matter! Wherever you may be - at
Masjid-ul-Haram near Kaaba, in your hotel or on the street - now you
must depart for the greater pilgrimage. Wear your Ihram attire and leave
Mecca. How surprising, to leave Mecca behind you! Was not Qibla, here in
Mecca? Yes it was, but the greater pilgrimage commences by leaving the
Kaaba!!!

Were you not supposed to depart from your families, homes, lands and
etc, in order to come to Mecca and face the Qibla? Yes, you were;
however, that was during the lesser Hajj (Umrah). And, why should you
leave Kaaba now? Because you are going to start the greater Hajj!

Deciding to go to Mecca is not the total actualization of Hajj nor are
Kaaba or Qibla the goals of Hajj. These are misunderstandings on your
part. The leader of monotheism (Ibrahim) teaches you that Hajj does not
end in Kaaba, but begins the moment you leave the Kaaba. It is not your
destination but the point from which you start!

Until now (at Kaaba), you were to become assimilated, ignore your
personal interests, overcome your self-centeredness and your limitations
and discover "yourself". Oh "immigrant" who is going to see "Him"
(Allah), from here on you will be pursuing a different path and entering
a new land. For Umra and in Miqat you were to leave "your house", but
here for Hajj you must leave the "house of Allah"!

At the verge of complete submission and the peak of your freedom, when
you have discovered "yourself' - you are now qualified to obey this
command: "Leave the Kaaba; and now you are closer to Me than Kaaba!"
Visiting Kaaba during the lesser pilgrimage helped you to achieve
self-discovery. Now you are going to approach Allah, not to visit the
"house" but to see the "owner"!

***Unto Allah is the journeying.*** Qurâ€™an 25:42 & 35:18

Kaaba is only the "direction and not the "destination". You started off
by coming "to Kaaba" but you are not to remain "in Kaaba". Anywhere you
stop, you will be lost and dead.  
 - Oh Hajj who is starting this journey, who is always trying to
approach Him,  
 - Oh man, the spirit of Allah,  
 - Oh the good deed,  
 - You came to Mecca,  
 - Do not stay here.  
 - Do not stop in the Haram.

To give you direction so that you would not be misled by other Qiblas,
Kaaba was your Qibla. However, in Mecca, the Qibla is someplace else.
You must decide to go there and start a greater journey than coming to
Mecca (i.e. the greater pilgrimage)

So, on the day of departure (ninth of Zul-Hijjah), regardless of where
you are, put on your Ihram, turn your back to Mecca and move on ...!
What place is holier and more respectful than Mecca? Continue on; you
will see ...!


