Arafat
======

Upon wearing your Ihram garments and leaving Mecca, you will start
traveling toward the east (Arafat) where you must remain until the
sunset of the ninth day. On your way back you will make a brief stop in
Mashar and then in Mina. Why? We will know shortly!

In contrast to what you were told previously - that is, to go gradually
and in a step-by-step manner - now you are to go restlessly and
thirstily, like a true lover, all the way to Arafat without a pause!
From the morning of the tenth day until the twelfth day (or thirteenth
day if you wish) you must remain in Mina.

There are no signs to distinguish these three areas from each other. A
narrow pass about fifteen miles long joins the valley of Mecca. Along
this strait, there are no natural, historical or religious monuments nor
indicators which separate one area from the other The borders are only
hypothetical stages of your actions.

Another important factor is the emphasis placed upon "staying" at these
three "stages". The reason for this recommendation is beyond a simple
pause in Arafat on all of the ninth day or remaining in Mashar only to
collect seventy pebbles!

You must stay at Mina on the eleventh and twelfth days; these are the
two days following the day of sacrifice (the tenth day). Even though you
are almost finished by noon time of the tenth day after offering your
sacrifice followed by the stoning of Satan (Ramy: to throw or cast), yet
you are to stay at Mina.

As you can see, it is not to remain to reside but it is a short stop on
your way traveling with the caravan. Along this pass, you stop when they
stop and you start to move when they go from one stage to the other. At
every stage you enter, stop for a short period and then move one stage!
Since Mina is the last stage you will stay there for 3 days. Remember,
it is NOT the destination! When do you finish this journey? Where is the
caravan's destination? Never! And, nowhere! So, where are you going? The
answer is to eternity, toward Allah! Allah is the Absolute; He is "the
eternal". Therefore, your journey is a movement toward the absolute
beauty, the absolute knowledge, the absolute power, eternity and
perfection! It is a restless and eternal movement.

On this journey, Allah is not the "destination", but He is the
"direction". For man, everything is temporary, changing, perishing and
dying; yet, this eternal movement is continuous and the direction is
always there!

***Everything will perish save His countenance.*** Qur’an 29: 88

You started from Mecca and came directly to Arafat. Now you move from
stage to stage back to "Kaaba".

***Lo we are Allah's and Lo' unto Him we are returning.*** Qur’an 2: 56

All that is discussed is "movement", a going movement (turn) and a
coming movement (return). There is always a movement "toward" something
and not "in" something! This is why Hajj is an absolute move. It is not
a journey since every journey comes to an end. Hajj is an absolute goal
and external movement toward that goal. Therefore, it is not a
destination that one may reach, but a goal that one tries to approach!
This is why on your return from Arafat you are left in Mina behind the
wall of Kaaba and not inside the Kaaba. This is what "to approach" not
"to reach" means.

In returning to Allah, there are three stages (Arafat, Mashar, and Mina)
through which you must pass. They are NOT three places that you visit.
It is important to be aware of the emphasis placed upon the periods of
stopping at each stage as well as the decision to pursue these stages.
What do these three stages signify? Allah Himself has already given them
their heavenly names:  
 Arafat means: "Knowledge" and "science"! Mashar means: "Consciousness"
and "understanding"! Mina means: "love" and "faith"!

Go from Mecca to Arafat (Lo' we are Allah's) and then return from Arafat
to Kaaba (Lo' unto Him we are returning). Arafat represents the
beginning of man's creation. In the story of Adam (creation of mankind
on earth), it is said: After Adam's descent onto earth, he met Eve at
Arafat, it was there that they were acquainted with each other". The
descent was when Adam was instructed to leave heaven (after he
rebelled). That heaven was not the one which is promised for the
hereafter (paradise). It was the heaven on earth as well as Adam's
birthplace. Covered with shrubbery and trees, Adam ate drank, enjoyed
himself, lived without any responsibilities and had no Job obligations.
He was quite satisfied until Eblis, the angel who also rebelled by not
prostrating to mankind, started to inspire evil suggestions to him. Man
inspired by Allah, both the righteous and debauched, was persuaded by
Eblis to transgress his "limitations", to rebel and eat "the forbidden
fruit". Eblis told man that by doing so he would live a longer and more
enlightened life.

"Wisdom" alone did not affect man; Adam refused to, eat the forbidden
fruit. Satan met with Eve who symbolized "love!" And then, Adam agreed
to eat "the forbidden fruit". Both "wisdom and love" influenced the
Angel and converted him into "Adam" !

Adam was the only Angel who could commit "sin" and then "repent". He
could "rebel" or "obey". In this case to "rebel" meant to have freedom,
it included the ability to make decisions contrary to Allah's will.
Concomitant with this liberty to decide was the notion of
"responsibility" and "consciousness”. As a result, Adam's state of
satisfaction, joy and comfort was replaced by the land of "needs, greed
and pains ... or DESCENT.

It was the beginning of a new life for the conscious, rebellious and
responsible individual (Adam) who was the victim of pains, needs and
greed. An exile and feeling lonely, he was in the prison of this earth.
Experiencing apprehension over the separation, Adam expressed his
complaints in the language of faith, knowledge Gnosticism, art,
literature ... and life! He accepted the burden of rebelling, the
"natural apprehension of sin and the "instinctive desire for repentance"
... How does Hajj relate to this? It is a living example of man's
creation or his repentance. It encompasses self consciousness which
includes the feeling of being a stranger and exiled. Consequently, what
emerges is a decision to "return"!

The conversion of the "Adam in heaven" to the Adam on this earth"
exemplified the character and behavior of mankind today. It was a
portrayal of the rebellious, aggressive and sinful man who was swayed by
Satan and Eve. Although he was expelled from heaven, exiled onto earth
and subdued by nature, Adam nevertheless ate from the fruit of "the
forbidden tree" What was the outcome? Adam acquired the wisdom,
consciousness and insight of a rebel! Opening his eyes and finding
himself naked, Adam entered the state of "knowing" himself.

As was said previously, the descent from "Kaaba" to "Arafat" represents
the beginning of Man's creation. The time of man's creation was
simultaneous to the creation of "knowledge"! The first spark of love
emitted during the meeting of Adam and Eve promoted their mutual
understanding of one another. It was the first sign of knowledge! Adam
knew his wife of the opposite sex who was of the same origin and nature
that he was from.

Consequently, from a philosophical point of view, man's existence was
contemporaneous with the existence of knowledge; from a scientific point
of view, man's history started with knowledge!  
 How strange! During Hajj, the first move is initiated from "Arafat".
The "stop at Arafat" occurs in the daytime beginning at noon of the
ninth day when the sun is shining at its most. This time is designated
so that you may gain consciousness, insight, freedom, knowledge and love
in the sunlight! At sunset, the stop at Arafat is over. Nothing can be
seen in the dark. As a result, neither acquaintances nor knowledge
prevail! With the setting of the sun in the plain of Arafat, people
migrate to the west along with the sun. They continue on until they
reach Mashar, the land of consciousness". They stop there too.

The stage following "knowledge" is that of "consciousness". How strange,
first "knowledge" and then "consciousness"?? People take it for granted
that consciousness precedes knowledge; but the creator of these two
states of mind demonstrates the opposite sequence! Adam met Eve (who was
of the opposite sex). They shared their views, communicated their
thoughts and attained mutual understanding. Their "individual" life was
terminated by the establishment of a family (which introduced social
life) and the creation of a "conscious love"! Furthermore, the unity of
two human beings began with knowledge; the evolution of knowledge
contributed to man's consciousness. This gave birth to science which
increased the understanding and in turn, enhanced man's consciousness.
Where did this lead? To more scientific progress!

When "objectivity" and the relation of an "idea" to the external world
is based on "reality", then wisdom will grow comprehension will improve
and man's spiritual power will flourish Mina (love)!  
 - It would have been theological and metaphysical idealism had Arafat
(knowledge) been preceded by Mashar (consciousness)!  
 - It would have been a materialistic and scientific life but idle with
a spiritless civilization and aimless progress had Arafat (knowledge)
been the only stage!  
 - And, it would have meant the lack of our present understanding of our
faith had it been only Mashar (consciousness) and Mina (love) without
Arafat (knowledge)!!!

But in this religion of Islam, man. a creature who was made of the
meanest material of earth and who came to power by being the trustee of
Allah, commenced his actions with knowledge. He comprehended the facts
of this world by an objective method. Following this, he gained his
consciousness. During the last stage, he created love. These stages are
enacted by going from Arafat to Mashar and from there ascending to the
peak of human qualities and perfection (i.e. to Mina) or to ... Allah!

Realism? Yes, but as the principle not the aim! It is a foundation from
which you strive for the ideal and metaphysical! Since according to the
Islamic concept man is made partly from mud and partly from the spirit
of Allah, YOUR will and decision help you to migrate from "mud" to the
"spirit of Allah". This is what you will exercise when you pass the
three stages of Arafat, Mashar and Mina!  
 In light of the concept which was just discussed, the meaning and
beauty of the following words may be expressed:

Faith: Way! Knowledge: Awareness! Prophecy: Guidance! Umma: A decided
group! Imam: Leader and guide! Shaheed and Shahid): The traffic signs!
Ibadat: Acts of devotion or to pound and smooth the way! Righteousness:
To train yourself as a responsible rebel, to avoid things that remind
you of yourself and the causes of your stagnation! The way of Allah: The
way to sacrifice yourself and your world for the people! Prayer: To
present yourself to Allah, to call Him, to ask Him, to tell Him your
needs, wishes, loves and hates, to suggest to yourself and the others
Dikr: To bear in mind, to think Hajj: To decide!

You have arrived at Arafat which is the farthest distance from Mecca. It
is a dry plain all covered by smooth sands. In its center you can view
the small rocky hill of Jabal-al-Rahmah from which the prophet Muhammad
(S) gave his last message (farewell speech) to his followers during his
final journey to Mecca. Arafat is a wonderful city which you visit for
one day; it is gone with the wind after sunset prayers. There you will
encounter a society of all the races so united as one nation without
borders. It is as if the whole world is gathered at this plain under the
white tents that extend from one horizon to the other - where
distinctions are minimum, aristocracy is too mean and manmade beauties
are ugly!

You ask yourself - What am I supposed to see here? What am I supposed to
see here? What work is to be done? The answer - NOTHING! You are free to
do whatever you want! You may spend the day swimming in this great ocean
of mankind or you may even sleep all day! But "remember" that you are at
Arafat! There is nothing to "see" here. As Andre Gide' has said, "The
glory should be in your look and not in what you are looking at". Let
your instincts and nature blossom under the clear sun of Arafat. Lastly,
in contrast to what man has done throughout history, do not run away
from the sunshine, the light, the freedom and the crowd. Always appear
with the people ...

In the past, you lived under oppression and were kept ignorant as moss
in stagnated waters ...! Now, Oh "man", come out of your tent, draw
yourself into this deep ocean of people and let your "ego" burn under
the glowing sun of Arafat! Only for one day, Oh "man ', be as a candle,
burning and illuminating the hearts of these people! Do not be like wax
and melt in the hands of the oppressors. Do not be a puppet.

In any case, you are entitled to spend this day as you wish. What you
are requested to do is only to stop and then leave the plain (Arafat) at
sunset!


