Mina
====

At Mina, the longest and last pause occurs! It signifies hope,
aspiration, and idealism and ... love! Love is the last stage it follows
knowledge and consciousness (sense). Adhering to eastern Gnosticism,
Dante, in his book Divine Comedy ..., recognizes only two stages -
wisdom (Virgil) and love (Beatrice). However, during the "Divine Drama"
of Hajj, three stages, knowledge, consciousness and love, exist!

The greatest moment of Hajj, the tenth day on which the 'Id of sacrifice
falls, has arrived. The light of the rising sun in Mashar awakens the
people from their slumber. Gradually, the clusters of soldiers from
various corners join together and merge into a huge river. Having
established a solid army, they prepare to leave Mashar and go on to
their next stop in Mina.

The army of Tawheed has spent the entire night gathering arms,
communicating with Allah and waiting for the sun to rise. These
"worshippers" of Mashar are transformed into the "lions" of Mina!
Wholeheartedly in love and overflowing with anger they rush toward Mina.

Prophet (S)  
*Enemies of the unbelievers and brothers among yourselves.*

The army maneuvers toward the west to Mina, the land of Allah and Satan.
The smile of the 'Id's sun has made everyone restless. As the soldiers
pass through the strait of Mohassar, a very narrow strait, the lines
become more solid.

As the Commander in Chief, the sun orders the soldiers to "act", to
"run" with "small and swift steps", to "stay together" and to "hurry"!
Those who were in the state of intuition and tranquility in Mashar
suddenly become nimble and restless, dashing to Mina. Abruptly, they
halt as if they have encountered a huge non-penetrating dam! They sit
back as if they can no longer proceed further. There are only a few
movements at the very end of the crowd. What has happened??? Which dam
in the world has such power as this roaring river??? Who can give such
an absolute order to "stop" here??? The Sunrise!!! The Sun is the
Commander.

Now, the army is in front of Mina. Millions of freedom-fighters who
refuse to obey any power except Allah crowd the long lines. An imaginary
line beyond which no one dares to step exists; this invisible wall
separates Mashar from Mina. No one and no power can break through the
secure wall, not even Ibrahim (as) or Muhammad (S). Such a restriction
is not a "rule" or a "contract", but a "tradition" It is the order of
that same system which governs the entire universe (Allah).

***And there will be no alteration or assimilation in his Tradition.***
Qur’an 35: 43

As the natural force of gravity prevails, as life and death are
realities, here the sun is the Commander! Let it rise! It will penetrate
the wall with its delicate beams and make way for the army to pass as
simply as when a shadow disappears by light. The concrete wall which has
halted the army will soon be destroyed by the "smile of the morning"!
Behind the invisible wall the restless and well-armed soldiers have
waited all night for the sun to rise and the command to pass! Although
the night has terminated and sparks of light are scattered all over,
there are still a few moments before the sun will appear in the east.
Nowhere on this earth, at no given time and upon no nation has the
"sunrise" had such authority!

In a state of very deep and exciting silence, millions of eyes and
hearts wait to receive the command (to see the sunrise). Some hear it
sooner because of their desperation and restlessness! Why??? It is an
order to the army which symbolizes the power of Tawheed on earth. Here
you will find the only army in history that is governed by the sun and
the only nation that has agreed to be ruled by the sun and by the
morning!!

At Arafat, the sun is rising and coming up behind the mountains. The
dawn has already demolished the tent of the evil of the darkness and
splashed the blood of all those who were martyred by the oppressors or
unbelievers in "the face of the 'Id". At this point, the sun is ordering
the army of tawheed to revenge by attacking the roots of the three
oppressors of history.

Such wonderful moments! The sun by its light, twilight by its piercing
beams and morning by its breeze have made everyone restless. These "holy
signs of Allah" which characterize happiness, hope and faith are
appearing to give the order to fight and the good tidings of victory.
They are here to command you to destroy the idols. Today, Satan's
largest base on earth will be annihilated today, polytheism will be
killed. Today, tawheed, love and devotion will reveal their glorious
faces; in other words, they will manifest their true essence!

Suddenly, the sunrise illuminates the straight and the soldiers are
ordered to pass. The clamor of happiness, the sun beams and the flood of
people will unite and flow into the Strait of Mina. The crowd no longer
consists of "the white birds of peace" but instead “the armed
freedom-fighters". This is why the orders must be followed and
discipline must be implemented.  
 "Stay in Mashar all night"! "Enter Mina on the tenth day"!  
 At dawn, you should be at the border of Mina. To join and pass this
boundary, you must view the sun of the tenth day. Mina is toward the
west while Arafat is toward the east. The army faces Mina; the sun rises
behind the soldiers; the sun passes the mountains of Arafat; and the sun
enters the Strait of Mina. THEREFORE, THE SUN IS ALSO PERFORMING HAJJ;
IT RISES IN ARAFAT, PASSES FROM MASHAR AND ENTERS MINA.

The army of love is ready for Jihad. Those freedom fighters who came
from Arafat, spent the night in Mashar, collected their arms and
strengthened their faith have to wait at the gate of Mina. Where? At the
border of a city that is the center of martyrdom and simultaneously the
battlefield! Wait and obey the sun! How?  
 - Prepare yourself  
 - collect your arms at night!  
 - Do not enter Mina before sunrise since the night it the appointed
time for the pause in Mashar.  
 - Do not remain in Mashar after sunrise since the daytime is the prime
time to be in Mina.  
 - Start your attack at sunrise.  
 - The rise of which sun? That of the tenth day of Zul-Hijja.  
 - When it is time to attack, the order of the "sun" is the order of
"time".  
 - Obey this order.  
 - Listen only to the sun.  
 - And look for the sun of the tenth day, the sun of 'Id.

Oh Allah! There is quite a distance from the border of Mina to the bases
of the Satans. The battlefield is far from the entrance of Mina.
Nevertheless, naturally the 'Id should be celebrated after you have
defeated the devils by shooting them and achieving victory. But ... look
at the nation of Tawheed and its tradition the 'Id has been celebrated
even before the battle commences.  
 This means: You are victorious once you "make your decision"! This
means: You have won the battle once you enter the border of Mina!

And ... What is being said? Oh God! How difficult it is to understand
this simple nation? How complicated are these easy-going people?!  
 This means: You will be victorious if it is the time. When is the time?
If you come from Arafat. "If" you have stayed in Mashar - contemplating
and gathering the weapons for the morning of the 'Id ...  
 No, No! The most important "ifs" have not been mentioned! Hajj is like
nature; it is a genuine portrait of Islam - Islam not in "words" but in
"action"! It is a "symbol". The deeper you dive in this sea, the farther
you are from the end; it is endless! It means as much as "you
understand". Only one can claim that he understands it all, he who
understands none!

The most important "ifs" have been omitted:  
 - If you come during the Hajj season.  
 - If you have gone to Miqat.  
 - If you are dressed in Ihram.  
 What is being said?  
 Who are YOU? Who am I?  
 "One can do nothing"! The holy Qur’an speaks of "people" not "one"
person. What a beautiful word, "people", is used. It is plural and has
no singular form!  
 Allah's hand supports the Community.

Movement, perfection, representation of Allah in this world, victory and
... are all written in the "fate of the people". Allah's constant
tradition is to help the community and the society at large. The "fate
of history" is toward the confirmation of Allah's tradition in the
creation of mankind. What "you" and "I" can do is to discover this
tradition and make the right selection from the written fate, the fate
of history, the will of God at a given time, the outcome of man's life
and the end of the continuous revolution for universal peace!  
 Since this is the Allah of Ibrahim and the Creator of Mankind who says
in the Holy Qur’an, 21: 105:  
***My righteous slaves will inherit the earth.***  
 And He is the one who promises:

***And we desired to show favor unto those who were oppressed on earth
and to make them examples and to make them inheritors.*** Qur’an 28: 5

"Defenselessness", which includes whatever weakens and alienates
mankind, will destroy all human morals and physical powers. This is the
word that describes all of the ways and means employed by the enemies of
mankind, colonialism, exploitation, banishment or any other term which
may be used in the future. Let them say what pleases them! Regardless,
Allah promises that He will rescue and liberate the victims of
oppression.

Furthermore, He renders the pledge of the future leadership of human
society. The class of people who were always and everywhere deprived of
their human right will inherit the palaces of power, the treasuries of
wealth and the fortunes of education! What a similarity between the
words ("the oppressed people of the world") and ("the wretched of the
earth")' which is the title of a book by Frantz Fanon. "On the day of
judgment, God's officials will divide people into two groups - those
saved who will go to heaven and those damned who will go to hell". Even
in this world those commissioned by Satan have separated people into two
groups - the heavenly ones and the tormented ones. As Sartre says in the
beginning of his book, From Two Billion Population of the Earth,
colonialists believe that five-hundred million people are "human" while
one and a half billion are "natives" or the under privileged people who
constitute the third world!

But what difference does it make if the fate of history and Allah's
determination grant victory to the "victims of oppression", "the
helpless ones of the earth" or "the children of Abel" ?!! Allah's
determination will not be altered; this is the fate of history!

***Allah created phenomena and He also set forth the orientation.***
(Qur’an 35: 43)

And you, as a "phenomenon", are to discover this fate and choose your
fate! Just as nature and history have their own destiny, you have a
destiny!  
 "You" are an inmate in the big four "prisons" of "nature", "history",
"society" and "yourself". Consciously, you should discover the fate of
nature by learning the sciences and accordingly free yourself from its
prison. Consciously, you should discover history (by learning philosophy
and historical sciences) and accordingly change your history.
Consciously, you should discover your society (by learning sociology)
and become acquainted with how to apply its rules in order to free
yourself. To escape these three prisons you need "knowledge".  
 But, what about the fourth one, the prison of human instincts??? It is
internal and carried by you! Science is unable to liberate you from this
jail since it is inside you. It is in your knowledgeable self! You
require a special knowledge to introduce "you" to "yourself" and to help
you discover yourself. You require a certain power to enable you to
overcome your weaknesses and to rebel against yourself.

You require a strong hand to help you and to change you. In this case,
knowledge is not a remedy; rather, it is a prisoner of the learned by
itself. However, wisdom, consciousness and faith (the lights that were
kindled on earth by the prophets) are the types of knowledge that will
facilitate your self-discovery and identification of your internal
prisoner. The power that will release you from self-centeredness is not
the "servant of science" but is the "art of love"! It will enable you to
yield your "life" by Shahadat if you feel it is your prisoner. And, with
your own hands, you will sacrifice your Ismail, something beyond
Shahadat, if you think he is in your way. It may be concluded that you
can free yourself from the fourth jail through "love"! This knowledge
endows you with such a degree of consciousness and creativity that
allows you to build yourself up to the will of Allah and not to be
merely a servant of nature!

Man is a creature who descended upon this earth and was left alone.
Therefore, you are only an existing phenomenon and must construct your
own nature. You are a Zero or a nothing who may become everything! You
are a "doubt" or a "possibility" who may acquire the shape of a man. If
you choose to be human and consciously discover your nature (faith), you
will be able to liberate yourself. You will be able to find the fate of
history and realize that history is the fate of man through the ages as
well as an evolution from zero toward Allah. From one nothing you begin
to know man and his values and so you adopt humanity. This is an
everlasting "river"; it is an eternal current. The sovereignty of the
night of Mash’ar and the oppression of the three oppressors in Mina will
not change or divert the progressive course of this fate. This is the
"fate" of Allah!

THE TEXT OF YOUR FATE WILL BE WRITTEN BY OTHERS IF YOU "DO NOT KNOW";
BUT YOU WILL WRITE IT IF YOU "KNOW"!!! And you, Oh "Zero", who are now
"conscious" and "free", if you come to Miqat on time and know and follow
your natural way (fate of Adam), you will be on the right path (i.e.
going from home to Kaaba) or from "mud" to "Allah")!  
 The world is under the authority of "Allah's will" and ruled by
scientific determination. Standing at the bank of this "river" you are
free and entitled to decide either to remain in the bank and die OR to
enter the river of people and move! (Now, one may realize what Imam
Sadegh said, "It is neither free-will nor predestination but in between
the two or a combination of both". It is a freedom to choose the fate.
"Submission + Obedience = Islam.")

This flood of people overflows the border of Mina and conquers the land
of Eblis. While Satan is defeated, the sun of the tenth day raises the
flag of victory. With its first smile, the sun gives the signal to pass.
It renders the order to begin the battle and attack; simultaneously, the
sun announces the victory and the completion of the task!

This is the fate of history and Allah's will for the people - all in the
hands of mankind and being left up to you! So - what is the most
important "If"??? That you be victorious "if you have joined this flood
of people". The people who have decided to approach Allah! The nation!
The everlasting and moving society! The roaring river that will
penetrate through any rock or dam and inevitably reach the sea ...! Yes,
if you do not stop on your way to Mina from Mashar, if you do not go the
wrong way nor your way but join the people, you will reach Mina, defeat
the Satans and sacrifice your Ismail. This is the clear order of Allah
to all those who go to Hajj.

***When you participate in the multitude from Arafat, remember Allah by
the sacred monument. Remember Him since He has guided you, although
before you were of those astray.*** Qur’an 2:198

Fully armed and determined, the army of Tawheed enters the valley of
Mina, Mina the battlefield.


