The Dialogue between Father and Son
===================================

In Mina, in a quiet corner, Ibrahim talked to his son! The father
gray-haired and bearded, lived a century, while Ismail was just growing
into a young man. The sky of the Arabian peninsula, no, the world, could
not tolerate such a sight! History had never before recorded a similar
dialogue between a father and a son. No one had ever thought of this
conversation, a very friendly, but fearful one!

At first, Ibrahim was unable to open his mouth to repeat the story to
his son - "I am here to sacrifice you with my hands". Finally, he put
himself in God's trust and said, "Ismail, I had a dream I was
slaughtering you"! He said these words quickly so he would not hear them
himself. Then he remained silent. Fearful and pale, he could not bear
looking into Ismail's eyes. Ismail realized what his father was going
through and he tried to console him. He said, "Father be obedient and do
not hesitate to fulfill the order of Almighty God. You will find that I
am also obedient and with God's help can tolerate it".

Ibrahim put all his trust in God and became more fearful. He made his
decision, stood up, picked the knife and tried to sharpen it with a
p1ece of stone. Could he do this to the son he so loved? Ismail, the
brave man who accepted Allah's will, was so relaxed and quiet, as if
nothing was going to happen. Ibrahim, the true lover of Allah, first
destroyed his selfish feelings and relied only on Him. Then he took the
young victim to the place of sacrifice, asked him to lie on the ground,
held his legs, grabbed his hair and held his head back in order to see
his carotid artery.

In the name of God, he put the knife to Ismail's throat and tried to cut
it as quickly as possible. The old man tried to finish in a moment. But,
oh this knife! The knife would not cut! It hurts me; what a torture it
is! Angrily, he threw the knife away! Ibrahim was roaring like a wounded
lion. Full of fear, he asked, "Am I not his father"? Hurriedly, he
picked up the knife to try again. Ismail remained quiet and calm during
this time; he did not even move. Before Ibrahim touched him again, a
sheep suddenly appeared with a message - "Oh Ibrahim, God does not want
you to sacrifice Ismail. This sheep is sent to you as his ransom. You
have carried out the order! God is great"!!

A lesson was taught by the Almighty God - from now on there would be no
more sacrifice of man for God ... That was a tradition and form of
worshipping God! In Ibrahim's religion, sheep are sacrificed and not
man! Another great lesson is that Ibrahim's God, in contrast to other
gods, is not blood-thirsty; those other gods are hungry, hungry for
meat! The most meaningful lesson is that God did not want Ismail to be
sacrificed, but wanted Ibrahim to sacrifice Ismail and he did it
bravely! Ismail was honored to have been chosen for the sacrifice and he
patiently persevered. But then, there was no need to kill him. God, the
Almighty, is not needy; we human beings have all kinds of needs!

This was the will of Almighty God, the most kind and most merciful to
man. He honored and promoted Ibrahim to the point where he was ready to
sacrifice Ismail without actually killing him. God also honored Ismail
by being His sacrifice, yet he was not hurt at all!

This is Ibrahim's faith (Islam) and not the story of blood thirsty gods,
masochists or human torturers. It is a story of man's perfection and his
freedom from selfishness and animalistic desires. It is man's ascension
to a higher spirit and love, to a strong will that frees him from
anything that may hinder his responsibility as a conscious man, to make
him ready to sacrifice himself as Ismail, to become a martyr and
finally, something not found in the dictionary - "to be like Ibrahim"!
The story ends with the sacrifice of a sheep. This is what Almighty God
requested at the end of this greatest human tragedy - to sacrifice a
sheep to feed a few hungry people.

Like Ibrahim, you should select and bring your Ismail to Mina who is
your Ismail? You should know; there is no need for others to know! May
be your wife, job, talent, sex, power, rank, position ... etc. I don't
know which one it is, but it should be whatever is so dear as Ismail was
to Ibrahim! Some of the signs of your Ismail are whatever takes away
your freedom and stops you from performing your duties, whatever joy
entertains you, whatever keeps you from hearing and knowing the truth,
whatever persuades you to rationalize rather than accept responsibility
and whoever supports you only to receive your support in the future. You
must search and find it in your life. If you are going to approach
Almighty God, you should sacrifice your Ismail in Mina.

Do not choose the sheep (ransom) yourself; let the Almighty help and
present it to you as a gift. This is how he accepts the sheep as a
sacrifice. To offer a sheep instead of Ismail is a "sacrifice", but to
sacrifice a sheep just for the sake of sacrifice is "butchery"!


