The Three Idols
===============

Recall that the three idols in Mina represent Satan who tried to tempt
Ibrahim. Is it not true that man has to experience three stages in order
to liberate himself from any type of slavery? He must not be selfish,
overcome the state of animalism which is characterized by
self-centeredness' and ascend to Ibrahim's position (i.e. do everything
for the sake of Allah. Are not the three idols the antithesis of the
three stages of the Major Hajj?  
 The First Idol: The enemy of Arafat  
 The Second Idol: The enemy of Mashr  
 The Third Idol: The enemy of Mina

Do not these idols represent the powerful satanic forces that lie in
ambush in the way of mankind to prevent him from performing his
Ibrahimic prophecy? What are they doing; what is their exact role? They
change and negate the message!

In the process of man's evolution and the fulfillment of his
responsibilities, the evil forces disable man by attacking his
weaknesses! Another sign that promotes a better recognition of the three
idols is the fact that though they are independent and each has its own
identity, they are good "friends" and work collectively against man. In
other words, the three individual idols represent one Satan! What exists
is one entity with three faces or three entities with one origin; this
is exactly what the "trinity" means! The following examples demonstrate
this concept.

In Judaism: The three Uqnum as described by Philo. In Christianity: The
Father, Son and Holy Ghost in Hinduism: The Meno in three parts - the
head, trunk and hand. In Persia: Ahoura Mazda and the three fires called
Gashnosp, Estakhr and Barzinmehr (the saviour, shadow of God and sign of
God).

What is polytheism? It is faith based on worldly matters according to
the scientific philosophy of history, polytheism is a system based on
materialism with a sub-structure compatible with this structure. Its
purpose is to corrupt man's self-consciousness. is theory Is applicable
to polytheism but not to monotheism. The two concepts of polytheism and
monotheism are completely opposite each other; therefore, it is
impossible that they have a common origin and similar functions.
Throughout history there have been fights between the two faiths
(monotheism against polytheism). However, in terms of their social
application, the two concepts are mixed whereby, unfortunately,
polytheism is masked by monotheism and lasts longer!

Originally, the trinity of Christianity was monotheistic as was that of
Vishnu and Ahoura Mazda ...; all referred to only one God. It may be
contended that monotheism is the root of all faiths but history and the
influence of various social systems transformed the first and unique
common society into different races, classes and nations; it was the
conversion of monotheism into polytheism.

Adam left two sons, Abel and Cain behind Abel, the poor herder, was
killed by his wealthy, landlord brother Cain. As yet, no one has heard
of Cain's death. So, Adam was succeeded by Cain who was a non-believer,
usurper, greedy, a murderer, and a son not worthy of his father.
Throughout history, the children of Cain have been the rulers of
mankind.

Societies changed as they grew bigger and systems became more
complicated. As divisions, specializations and classifications came into
existence Cain, the ruler, also altered his face! In modern societies,
he hid his visage behind politics, economics and religion while he
maintained his strong and Special Forces in these three bases! Cain
created the three major powers of oppression, wealth and hypocrisy which
then gave birth to despotism, exploitation and brain-washing techniques!
These three powers are best described in monotheism as follows:  
 Pharoah : The symbol of oppression. Croesus (Korah): The symbol of
capital and capitalism. Balam : The symbol of hypocrisy.

And, polytheism explains these three positions in a three dimensional
system (trinity) as the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost)! They are calling
you to worship them instead of Almighty God. do not forget that you are
in Ibrahim's position! They want you to love your "Ismail" so that they
can cheat you, rob you, confuse you, change your values and views and
lead you astray!

Oh Hajj, now that you are in Mina, shoot! You have brought your Ismail
to the place of sacrifice.  
 As Ibrahim, shoot the three idols and knock them down! Oh follower of
Ibrahim and soldier of Tawheed, destroy the three idols! When the sun
rises on the tenth of Zul-Hijjah, along with the rest of the army and
dressed in Ihram, wake-up in Mashar, pass the border of Mina and during
your first attack, shoot the last idol! Who is the last one which must
be shot first?  
 - Pharaoh  
 - Croesus or  
 - Balam  
 These three figures represent the three powers of Cain the three faces
of Satan and the symbol of the Trinity.  
 - Shoot Pharoah who said: only to God belongs the judgment.  
 - Shoot Korah who said: only to God belongs the wealth.  
 - Shoot Balam who said: only to God belong the faiths.  
 Be aware that people are the representatives of Allah, that is Allah's
family on this earth. Only the righteous ones will be heirs to this
world.

***Lo! the noblest of you, in the sight of Allah, is the best in
conduct.*** Qur’an 69:13

In other words, according to monotheism, the Canonical Court is run by
the people. Everyone is responsible not only for his own deeds but also
the deeds of others!  
 You may ask yourself which of the idols represents Pharoah, the symbol
of oppression? Which one is Korah the symbol of capital and capitalism?
And which one is Balam, the symbol of hypocrisy? Any person with an
Ibrahimian mind, depending upon his personal views, his suggested
methods for social change, his responsibilities, and the socio-
political system of the community he lives in may consider the last idol
(Satan) as:  
 PHAROAH: By those who are concerned with politics and live under
despotism, militarism and fascism.  
 CROESUS: By those who are concerned with economics and view it as the
structure around which the society is built.  
 BALAM: By those intellectuals who believe that no social change will
occur unless there is a genuine struggle against ignorance,
feeble-mindedness and any condition that may cause people to adhere to
polytheism under the cover of monotheism.  
 During my first two trips to Mecca (Hajj), I considered the last idol
as BALAM. My bullet was shot with this intention, especially when I
found this to be in agreement with what the Qur’an says.

***They have taken as lords beside Allah their rabbis and their monks
and the Messiah son of Mary ...*** Qur’an 9: 31

Allah condemns oppression, ignorance, and hypocrisy. He criticizes some
so called spiritual leaders who consciously or unconsciously mislead
people instead of guiding them. Allah is angry with them and says:  
***Their likeness is of the ass carrying books*****.** Qur’an 62: 5

***His likeness is as the likeness of a dog: if thou attackest him, he
panteth with his tongue out.*** Qur’an 7: 176

Another proof for my hypothesis is the powerful words of Allah written
in the last chapter of the Qur’an (Sura CXIV). Allah addresses the
Prophet (S) who has the greatest responsibility of leadership and
freedom of mankind. Allah tells the prophet that there is a danger from
which he is not protected therefore; he should seek "refuge" in Allah.
In that sura, the following attributes are given to Allah:  
 The Master. The Ruler. The God.  
 They are the same three traits that Satan constantly tries to allocate
to himself. And, here we find that they belong ONLY to Almighty Allah.
And, a person like the Prophet (S) is advised to seek refuge in the
Master, the Ruler and the Leader. What is he to be protected from? The
danger of the "Khannas"! Who is the Khannas ?

***From the evil of the sneaking whisperer who whispereth in the heart
of mankind.*** Qur’an 115: 4,5

In Mina where Ibrahim was tempted by Satan, the last idol represented
the "Khannas". The "Khannas" is a spiritual leader who uses his faith to
achieve wealth and a scientist who sells his knowledge or a treacherous
intellectual! The Holy Qur’an perceives the actions of this group of
people as the most destructive, disunifying, misleading and
discriminating in the history of mankind who once lived as a peaceful
and collective society. That same group claimed the responsibility of
being the judges of spiritual leaders of the people while they were
consciously jealous of others, violators and cruel.

***Mankind was one community and Allah sent (unto them) prophets as
bearers of good tidings and as warners and reveals with the scripture
...*** Qur’an 2: 213

But ... Hajj has much more significance than what my mind can
comprehend! Each time I went to Hajj, I felt I had learned a lot and
that my next trip to Hajj would be repetitious but to my surprise, my
prediction was incorrect! And ... you, dear reader, never think that
what I have said is all you will learn from the experience of Hajj nor
during the period of Hajj! No, No, No! This is not a book whose purpose
is to describe the ceremonies of Hajj; it is only a catalyst to make you
think. This book is the product of my limited capacity to analyze and
summarize a miraculous and symbolic show in which the stage-manager is
the manager of the world. Apparently, I have attempted to pour a sea
into a pot?!

Every time I went to Hajj, I tried to correct some of my previous
undertakings, that is, to complete my interpretations; but I discovered
new codes and considerations. During my last Hajj asked myself, "Why
should I specify something which not even the stage-manager has
specified?!?" Had it been necessary to identify each idol, the stage
manager would have done it! The absence of any identification is
identification within itself.

Is it not true that the three idols represent one while each
individually represents the others?  
 Distinction of the three idols defines the three powers which are
inter-related. The lack of an identity indicates that one is hidden
among the other two. Therefore, when you shoot one idol, intend to shoot
the others.

After all, it is only in our simple minds and among the educated people
(based on their fields of interest) that classifications such as
Sociology, Philosophy, History, and Psychology ... are made. The creator
of Hajj knows that in any culture or civilization, any period of time,
any social system, any social structure, any social class or any social
relationship, one of the three powers is the governing body while the
other two support it. By shooting one, you will open the gate of victory
and begin to celebrate the 'Id. Therefore, upon arriving in Mina, with
your bullet, you should first attack and kill the last idol.

Regardless of whether the person performing Hajj comes from a
well-developed capitalistic society, an under-developed society with a
social system of the middle-ages or a fascistic, dictatorial and
monarchist society, all shoot at the same idol but with different
intentions! The last idol supports the other two - Pharaoh legalizes
Croesus' robbery; Croesus supports Balam with his money Pharaoh supports
Balam with his power; and Balam relates Pharaoh’s power to the
Almighty's super-power just as we hold each other's hands to support
ourselves while also supporting one another! So, where you come from and
to what system you belong is not important since you are to assume the
Ibrahimian responsibility. With the intention of hitting all three
idols, shoot the last one so that you may defeat Satan's base and negate
his temptations!

So - did you shoot the last one?  
 - In its face?  
 - In its head?  
 - Did the bullets strike it?  
 - Seven bullets? Seven times symbolizes the number of days of creation,
the Seven Heavens and the number of days in a week (i.e. an everlasting
struggle which started with the beginning of creation and continues on
into the hereafter; a battle without a ceasefire and the absence of a
peaceful relationship with any idol. Think as if you are always in Mina
and must fight with the idols.)

Oh Ibrahim, when the last idol falls, Satan is disabled and killed under
the shower of your bullets! Oh man, the representative of Allah on this
earth, you have expelled Satan as Allah did! You have defeated the only
angel who refused to prostrate to mankind. Now you are a free man like
Ibrahim; you will hear the message and recognize the truth. After
shooting the last idol, sacrifice your Ismail. For the sake of truth and
out of love, anything can be sacrificed. With a heart full of love,
march toward the place of sacrifice to take the steps of Ibrahim.

In one hand, hold Ismail (whatever and whoever is to you as Ismail was
to Ibrahim) and in the other an hold the "sword of your faith" with
which your Ismail will be beheaded before you. Consciously aware of what
you are doing, you will ignore everything and seek the help of Allah. Oh
man, for the love of truth, sacrifice your Ismail and sacrifice a sheep
in Mina. Almighty Allah is not blood-thirsty and does not need your
Ismail. He will send you the sheep as a ransom. You were brought from
the corner of your house to the lake of blood in Mina's slaughter house
to ignore and kill the symbols of Satan by making a sacrifice. Once you
are ready to sacrifice your Ismail in the way of Allah, you will have
defeated Satan. Ismail is saved and standing proudly by you.

How surprising! Such great lessons taught to man on these mountains! You
have done what Ibrahim (as) did. Your Ismail is with you. What you
sacrificed was his love (by which Satan tempted you). Ismail is a "Gift
of Allah"; Allah loves him and will pay is ransom! When you return from
Mina, remember to fulfill your e to act as Ibrahim and accept the
responsibility of propagating the message. Go to your people! Call upon
them to establish a "safe land", to live in a "safe community" and to
build "house" as a symbol of security, peace, freedom, equality and love
for mankind!


