The Delay in Mina
=================

There is a two day stay over in Mina to think about your ideology and
what you have done. On the 'Id day and after the sacrifice, the
ceremonies are over. You must stay two more days or even three more
days, if you can, in Mina. You are not supposed to leave Mina in these
days - not even to return to Mecca! Why? Satan is defeated, sacrifice is
offered, Ihram is removed and 'Id is celebrated! Why should more than a
million people remain in this valley for two or three more days! This
time allows them to think about Hajj and understand what they have done.
They can discuss their problems with people from other parts of the
world who have the same faith, love, needs and ideology.

Muslim thinkers and intellectuals who gather here and freedom-fighters
who fight colonialism, oppression, poverty, ignorance and corruption in
their homelands, get to know each other, discuss their problems, find
solutions and ask for each other's help. Muslims from all over are
supposed to study the dangers and conspiracies of the super-powers and
their agents who have infiltrated Muslim nations. They should make
resolutions to fight against brainwashing, propaganda, disunity, heresy,
false religions ... and many other diseases threatening the "unity" of
Muslim nations. They should offer a common and worldwide struggle to
introduce Islamic facts and support the cause of freedom for colonized
nations and those Muslim minorities who are under the torture of fascist
regimes as well as prejudiced political groups. Through a system of
cooperation and understanding and an exchange of views and feelings, the
Muslim communities would be strengthened in their struggle against their
common enemy. A better understanding of true Islamic doctrine can be
brought about by solving some of the theological differences that exist
among Muslim religious groups!

More than a million Muslims from all over the world remain three more
days in Mina, the arid valley, where there is no place of interest to
see, nothing to do, nowhere to shop and not even a park to walk in! It
is so uninhabitable that the prophet (PBUH) said "not to build a
building in Mina". At this moment, through the training of Hajj,
everyone is free from all dependencies and gains the strong will and
personality of Ibrahim.

All fears, needs and greeds are defeated at the peak of one's willpower
and sense of responsibility. Hearts are filled with victory in Miqat,
Tawaf, Sa'y, Arafat, Mashar and Mina - shooting, sacrificing and
celebrating 'Id with great sincerity. Yes, at this time and in this
land, more than a million Muslims do not end their Hajj to disperse and
continue their individual lives. NO THEY HAVE TO SIT DOWN AND DISCUSS
THEIR PROBLEMS!

Hajj is to come here on time and perform these actions with people.
Otherwise, you may go to Miqat, from there to Mina, Arafat Mashar and
Mina at any other time or without anyone else. That is not Hajj; it is a
useless action or it may be considered a tour. This is the time that you
are surrounded by a spiritual atmosphere tomorrow when everybody leaves;
Mina is like any other land with the exception of being dry and
uninhabitable.

You are here to learn that without people, searching for heaven
(paradise) is the ugly selfish attitude of a monk. A PROMISED (ON
CREDIT) MATERIALISM IS WORSE THAN THE ONE NOW AVAILABLE! This greedy
attitude postpones its gluttony and enjoyment to the hereafter. In other
words, it is like a bourgeoisie who prefers credit to cash! A devotee is
as selfish as a materialist; the latter chooses the technique as a tool
while the former uses the faith! A materialist uses science to enjoy his
life and a devotee uses God for this purpose. Both are searching for the
same goal, but one for the present and the other for the hereafter! The
Islam of Ibrahim and the prophet Muhammad (S) teaches us that Almighty
Allah hates these selfish devotees.

Prophet Muhammad (S)

*If one has ended the day and hasn't thought of the welfare of his
society or not made any attempt, he is not a Muslim.*

It is true that you performed Hajj and ascended to Ibrahim's position by
sacrificing your Ismail, but this is not the end of it; rather, it is
the beginning of your duty. All these ceremonies were for you to ignore
"self-service" and begin "to serve others", and not to buy fame but to
do it for God's sake! This is why you are asked to come during the Hajj
season while everyone else is there. To come here alone is not
considered a Hajj.

Now at the end of this performance, all those who have defeated Satan as
Ibrahim did, sacrifice their selfishness and celebrate their victory.
Before returning to Mecca for a farewell, they have to fulfill two other
duties - to establish a scientific and theological seminary where anyone
may attend and to establish an international social convention. The two
extra days are to summarize the Hajj in these conventions. The
conventions are not held behind locked doors and in illuminated halls
but in the open air of this valley. They are not held in low ceiling
rooms but under the blue sky where there are no walls, no doors, no
barriers, no guards and no ceremonies...!

These conventions are not assembled by heads of states or their
representatives, diplomats or political leaders, members of parliament,
cabinets, senators, university professors, scientists, intellectuals or
spiritual leaders. No! No!

***And proclaim unto mankind the Hajj, they will come unto thee on foot
and on every lean camel. They will come from every deep ravine.***
Qur’an 24: 27

As Aime Cesaire says, "No one has the right to be the guardian of
others." Professor Shandel said, "In the absence of the people to talk
about them is a lie; it is a shame since only Almighty God has the right
to decide for the people because the people are His representative on
this earth!" This is the reason for the convention in Mina where God
Almighty is the director of the people who have gathered by His
invitation.

After defeating Satan and returning from the place of sacrifice Allah
requests everyone to attend this meeting to renew their promise with
Ibrahim, to have God as their witness that they will do their best to
strengthen the faith of monotheism, to destroy all existing idols in the
world and to establish a peaceful and secure society. Like the true
followers of the prophet Muhammad (S) who made conscious and
intellectual people responsible for carrying his message, they are to
establish an "exemplary society" based on monotheism and to support the
cause of knowledge, leadership and justice in human life.

Mina is the land of love, struggle, and martyrdom. It is the land where
people make their promises to God. As a united community they promise to
participate in good deeds and to fight the evils of man s life. They
promise to respond to the calls of the prophet Muhammad (S), the prophet
who had the Holy Book in one hand and the sword in the other and to make
the right decision in confronting "stubborn enemies" and dealing with
friends.

In this yearly convention, assembled far from the borders of blood
shedding countries, Muslims from all spheres of the world and different
political systems are invited by the Guardian the King and the God of
the people to gather under the sky of these mountains to have a free
talk to help overcome their problems ...

And a scientific convention, but not in the auditoriums of academicians,
the assembly of university professors or the meeting of scientists and
super-specialists. No, rather it is a two-day theological and
ideological seminar where every literate or illiterate, professor or
factory worker, famous spiritual leader or simple farmer can participate
and has the right to speak openly. All ranks, positions degrees and
colors are left behind in Miqat. Here all represent ONE - Man and all
have the same degree - Hajj. That is all!

There is no higher rank for mankind than reaching Ibrahim's position and
here everyone has been asked to play his role. At the of these
ceremonies, before you return to your homelands, you must stay two more
days after the 'Id ? to sit down and ask yourselves this unanimous
question of all ages -- "What should we do for the community?" And to
find the answer. Just sit down and think about what you have done during
Hajj!

Summary
-------

Let us sum up what these codes are. We must realize the essence of what
was done during Hajj.

Sufism : Starts in Mina and remains there forever without going through
Arafat and Mashar.  
 Philosophy: Comes to Mashar but does not reach Mina.  
 Civilization: Remains in Arafat not going to Mashar and Mina.

Islam: Starts from Arafat and goes to Mashar (a passage full of
responsibility and movement), reaches Mina(the stage of ideals and love,
and surprisingly meets with Allah and Satan!

Here they are talking about "you" and your fate and not about worldly
matters. To God belongs whatever exists in this world. Here they are
talking about "man" in whom Allah and Satan exist together. This duality
is within man and not in nature. Mina is the land of love, faith and
future. It is there where Allah and Satan are struggling within you for
your Ismail. Mina is the land of all your hopes and needs.

Even to your surprise, the day of "victory" is the "bloody 'Id" Instead
of a "birthday party" there is a "sacrifice party" for the son; "The 'Id
of Sacrifice"  
 Look at this nation's tradition, history and honors! It does not care
about its blood relations or homeland, but about its faith and freedom.
The nation of monotheism the people who have the responsibility of the
freedom of mankind from Adam ' to the hereafter, the freedom-fighters
who even fight their own natures, those who have extended the "battle
front “from Badr to Mina - these are the slaves who have so deeply
realized the meaning of "freedom". They free themselves not only from
the Pharaoh, but their Ismail too and not only their enemies, but their
relatives too!


