Conclusion
==========

The time for staying in Mina is over and the ceremonies end near the
border of Mecca. There is one more Tawaf and Sa'y that you can do
anytime toward the end of Zul-Hijjah and if necessary you can do it
before leaving for Arafat. Hajj ceremonies are over and this is all you
are supposed to do.  
 Oh Hajj who is leaving Mina, the last stage of Hajj - you accepted
Ibrahim's invitation. You escaped the vicious cycle of your individual
life. You came on time to Miqat; you listened to the revelation; you
took off your clothing and put on the white Kafan. You left your home
and homeland and came as a guest to the house of God and the land of
Jihad. You made a promise to God by shaking his right hand.

You entered the Tawaf circle and were lost amongst the people of Taef.
You denied self- centeredness. You purified yourself. You tried your
best to search for "water" on top of the mountains. Then you descended
to Arafat from Mecca and from stage after stage (going to Mashar and
Mina), you returned to Allah (returned to Mecca).

You gained "consciousness" in the sunshine of Arafat. You collected your
arms in the darkness of Mashar. Simultaneously, with others you passed
the border of Mina. Satan was defeated by your first attack. You became
free and saved the land of faith and love. You held the position of
Ibrahim and ascended to the peak of honor - the stage beyond Shahadat.

Finally, you sacrificed a sheep at the end of this effort!  
 Where do you arrive at the end of this greatest holy trip and highest
degree of human ascension after going through the most dangerous and
fearful passages of creation - Tawheed (unity), Ithar, Jihad (struggle),
Shahadat (martyrdom), fighting with Eblis (Satan) and conquering the
land of love? What do you do? Sacrifice: kill a "lamb"! Why? What is its
philosophy? What is the mystery? What does killing a lamb at the end of
Hajj mean? I cannot say! Let Allah himself answer this question:

***Eat thereof and feed the beggar and the suppliant***. Qur’an 22: 36

He repeats again:

***Then eat thereof and feed there with the unfortunate poor (i.e. To
fight with poverty. At the end of this trip, give a piece of what you
eat to relieve a hungry man and help an oppressed person. That's
all!)*** Qur’an 28: 28

Oh Hajj - where are you going now? Back home to your life and to your
world? Are you returning from Hajj the same way you came? Never! Never!
You played the "role of Ibrahim" in this symbolic show! A good actor is
he whose personality is fully impressed by the character of the
individual who is playing his role. If he does well, the show will be
over but his work is not done yet. There have been many actors who did
not survive the act they played and died!

You played the role of Ibrahim, not just to play but to worship and to
love. Do not return to play your role after playing the role of Ibrahim!
Do not leave the house of people. Do not isolate yourself. Do not
replace your Ihram with your previous clothing. Leave Mina for Mecca and
take your Ismail with you!

You are like Ibrahim who in the history of mankind was a great fighter
against idolatry. He was the founder of unity in this world and had the
responsibility of leading his people. He was a rebellious leader whose
soul was suffering, whose heart was loving, whose thoughts were
enlightening and ...  
 The axe was in his hand! Faith was raised in the hearts of the Kofr and
monotheism flourished in the midst of polytheism. Ibrahim, the fighter
of idolatry, came out of the house of "Azar", the idol-maker of his
tribe.

He broke the idols; he broke Nimrood. He fought against ignorance,
oppression and passiveness. He rebelled against the tranquility of
suffering and the security established by persecution. He was a guide
for his tribe and the founder of his movement, life, direction, hope,
goal and faith of unity.

You are like Ibrahim! Fight the fire, the fire of oppression and
ignorance so that you may save your people. The fire is in the fate of
every responsible individual; it is your duty to guide and save. But ...
Allah makes the fireplace of Nimrod and his followers a rose garden for
Ibrahim and his followers. You will not burn or turn into ashes. This
teaches you to be ready to jump into the fire for Jihad (Struggle)! And

... To teach, let yourself into the fire in order to prevent the people
from burning. ... To the more painful stage of Shahadat.

You are like Ibrahim! Sacrifice your Ismail. Put the knife to his throat
with your hands...Save the throat of the people from being cut-the
people are always sacrificed at the doors of palaces of power, and
temples of torture. PUT THE BLADE AT YOUR SON'S THROAT SO THAT YOU MAY
TAKE THE BLADE FROM THE EXECUTIONER'S HAND!

But ... Allah will pay the ransom of your Ismail. You do not kill and do
not lose your Ismail. THIS IS TO TEACH YOU THAT YOU SHOULD BE READY TO
SACRIFICE YOUR ISMAIL (LOVE) IN YOUR OWN HANDS FOR THE SAKE OF YOUR
FAITH!..."to the more painful stage of Shahadat"! And now, Oh Hajj who
is returning from circumambulating love, you are in the position of
Ibrahim. You have reached the point where he did.

Ibrahim's life was filled with struggle when he reached this point-
braking the idols, fighting with Nimrod, tolerating his fire, struggling
with Eblis, sacrificing his Ismail, migration, homelessness, loneliness
torture, passage from the stage of prophecy to the stage of leadership
(Imamat), going from "individuality" to "collectivity" and being from
"the house of "Azar" to being "the builder of the house of unity"
(Kaaba)!

At the end of his life, gray-haired and old, Ibrahim built the house of
Allah and laid down the black stone. His helper Ismail carried the rocks
and handed them to his father. How wonderful! Ibrahim and Ismail built
the Kaaba. Ibrahim and Ismail, one was saved from the fire and one saved
from being sacrificed. Both were representatives of Allah and were
responsible to the people. They were the architects of the oldest temple
of "unity" on this earth, and the first house of the people." The "free
house," the house of love and worship (Haram), is a symbol of "heavenly
privacy".

You are in "Ibrahim's position" - right where he stood. The very last
step of his ascension, in Miraj, is the shortest distance toward
Allah.  
 You, the builder of Kaaba, the architect of the "house of freedom", the
founder of unity, the enemy of idolatry, the tribal leader, the fighter
against oppression, ignorance and disbelief - now you build a house, not
for yourself, not even a shelter for your son, not a house for "the
people". It is a shelter for those homeless people who are wounded,
tortured or victims of oppression and have no place to go. Nimrod is
following them everywhere ... The Harem becomes a torch in the middle of
this dark night and a cry amidst this damn oppression! It is secure,
clean and free for mankind, the family of God. Everywhere else is
insecure and shameful. The earth has become a huge polluted house of
prostitution.

It is a slaughterhouse where everything but aggression and
discrimination are forbidden.  
 Now that you are standing in Ibrahim's position and are going to play
his role, live like him, be the architect of the Kaaba of your faith.
Rescue your people from the lagoon of their life. Re-breathe life into
their bodies that are numb and dead from the suffering of oppression and
the darkness of ignorance. Encourage them to stand on their feet and
give them direction. Call upon them to come to Hajj, to Tawaf
(circumambulating). After entering Tawaf, denying selfishness and
purifying yourself to adopt the characteristics of Ibrahim, you have
promised God to follow his path. Allah is your witness.  
 - Make your land a secure land, since you are in a safe area.  
 - Change your time to a respectful time, as if you are always in the
state of Ihram.  
 - Make the earth a sacred mosque, since you are in the holy mosque. -
Since the earth is the "mosque of Allah".  
 - And you see "that it is not"!


