A More Important Lesson
=======================

The fact that Imam Hussein left Mecca for Karbala where he was martyred
before completing his Hajj duties taught us a more important lesson than
Shahadat.  
 Hajj was a duty that all his ancestors struggled for. Blood was shed to
vitalize this tradition. He did not finish the ceremonies and decided to
leave and become a Shaheed!

He did not complete his Hajj in order to teach the Hajj makers those who
pray and have faith in Ibrahim's tradition, that if there is no Imamate
and there is not true leadership, if there is no goal, if "Hussein" is
not there and "Yazid" is there, making Tawaf (Circumambulating) around
the house of Allah is equal to making Tawaf around the idol-house. The
people who continued their Tawaf while he went to Karbala were no better
than those who were circumambulating around the green palace of
Muawiyah.

"Hajj", the tradition of the idol-fighter Ibrahim, in "God's house" or
the "house of the people"-what is the difference? What is happening this
year? A warm whirlpool of people is busy circumambulating. All the faces
are eager with interest. All the hearts are burning with love. All the
people are answering Allah's invitation. The love of faith, the glory of
Islam, the fear of God and punishment of the Day of Judgment and the
desire for worship are pushing the chosen people of the community to
circumambulate around the Kaaba.

Among these faces were: the companions of the Prophet (PBUH), some very
early Muslims, the heroes of the Jihads, the conquerors of the lands of
the unbelievers, those who destroyed the houses of idols on the earth,
whose who lived by the Qurâ€™an and followed the tradition and spiritual
leaders. They were all discarding all worldly matters. Fully in love
with God, they saw paradise dancing in front of their eyes, houris
twinkling at their righteous faces and angels calling upon them from the
sky. While Gabriel had his wings under their feet, they were busy
circumambulating!

Who is the man who so decisively and angrily comes out of the crowded
whirlpool of Muslims and leaves behind the city of "holiness, security
and love"? Now that all the Muslims are facing toward the Kaaba, where
is he going? Why does he not turn around to see this moving circle where
people are circumambulating the house of Ibrahim to the music of Nimrod
and running between Safa and Marwa as a show of their useless efforts.
From Arafat, which is the beginning of history, the stage of the first
visit of Adam and Eve on earth, they are taken to Mashar in the
darkness. In this land of consciousness where these slaves of ignorance
should not be, they are asked to sleep all night and by dawn they are
moved like the flock of a beast to the land of Mina. The three evils of
trinity are located here. As a joke with Ibrahim and a trick to Allah,
they throw a few tiny pebbles to the well made-up faces of the three
Gods whom they have been worshipping all their lives. They kill the
sheep as a symbol of their miserable fate.

They are like beasts and these three gods, taking advantage of the meat,
skin mild and wool of this animal, have come to power and decorated
their table! These poor people have always been sacrificed upon the
demand of these gods and their red blood is shed and poured into the
vessels of the green palace, the Zarar Mosque, and the commonwealth of
Croesus. At the end, to show their obedience to these gods they should
shave their heads!

Oppressors use ignorance as their tools. These are the conservative
people whose hands lie soaked in the blood of facts. In the "absence of
these people", in any generation and at anytime there will be ground for
"man's martyrdom". Evil is hiding itself behind the masks of holiness
and righteousness. These are the same Hajj performers who whispered by
the idols and sacrificed Ismail in front of Nimrod with their own hands.
Then they celebrated the day of "human sacrifice" or "the sacrifice of
the Ismail of their time." They turn their backs to the Kaaba and face
Qibla of their miserable life, saying to them "to hell with this world",
let's work for the "paradise of the hereafter"! Feeling happy with the
joy of the life after death, they are sound asleep on the warm ashes of
the master's kitchen floor and enjoy the leftovers of the plunderer's
table!!!


