Epilogue - Poem by Naser Khosrow
================================

The pilgrims returned with reverence. They were thankful to the Merciful
God.  
 On their way to Mecca from Arafat, They repeatedly said "Labbaika" with
great respect.  
 While tired of experiencing the hardships of the desert of the rejoiced
that they are saved from the torture and the fire.

They have performed the Hajj and completed the Umra. Now, they safely
return to their homelands.  
 I took time to go and welcome them back, although men of my class did
not normally do this. But among the crowd of this caravan, I had a dear
and very sincere friend.

I asked him how he accomplished this very difficult and fearful trip?  
 I informed him that since he had departed and left me alone all I could
feel was regret and sadness.  
 Now, I am happy that you performed the Hajj, and you are the only Hajji
in our homeland.

Now, tell me, how was your performance? How did you respect that holy
territory?  
 When you were about to remove your clothes and wear the Ihram what was
your "intention" during those exciting moments?

Did you absolutely avoid all the things that must be avoided and
whatever is inferior to Almighty Allah?  
 He replied NO!

I asked him: If he said "labbaika" With full knowledge and great
respect? If he heard the command of Allah? Or, if he obeyed as Ibrahim
did?  
 He replied NO!

I asked him: While he was in Arafat, while he stood so close to Almighty
God, Did he have a chance to know Him? Was he not eager to learn a bit
of the knowledge?  
 He replied NO!

I asked him: When he entered the Kaaba As the family of "Kahf and
Raquim" had done, did he deny his self-centeredness? Did he fear the
punishment of the hereafter?  
 He replied NO!

I asked him: When he shot the idols, did he think of them as evil? Did
he then avoid wrong deeds?  
 He replied NO!

I asked him: When he offered the sacrifice, to feed a hungry person or
an orphan, did he first think of Allah? And, did he then kill his
selfishness?  
 He replied NO!

I asked him: When he stood in Ibrahim's position, did he rely absolutely
on God? Sincerely and with strong faith?  
 He said NO!

I asked him: While he circumambulated, When he made the Tawaf of Kaaba,
Was he reminded of all the angels, Who constantly circumambulate this
world?  
 He said No!

I asked him: During his Sa'y, While he was running between Safa and
Marwa. Was he sanctified and purified?  
 He said NO!

I asked him: Now that he had returned from Mecca, and felt home-sick for
the Kaaba, dd he bury his "self" there? Was he impatient to go back?  
 He said NO!

"Of whatever you have asked me so far, I have understood nothing!!!"  
 I said: Oh friend, you have not performed the Hajj! And, you have not
obeyed God!  
 You went to Mecca and visited the Kaaba! You spent your money to buy
the hardships of the desert!

If you do decide to go to Hajj again, try to perform it as I have
instructed you!


