Introduction
============

What has the experience of Hajj taught me? First one must ask - what
does Hajj mean? In essence, Hajj is man's evolution toward Allah. It is
a symbolic demonstration of the philosophy of Creation of Adam. To
further illustrate this, it may be stated that the performance of Hajj
is a simultaneous show of many things; it is a "show of creation", a
"show of history", a "show of unity", a "show of the Islamic ideology"
and a show of the Ummah.

The following conditions prevail in this "show". Allah (God) is the
stage manager. The theme portrayed is the actions of the people
involved. Adam, Ibrahim, Hajar, and Satan are the main characters. The
scenes are Masjid-ul Haram, the Haram area, Masa, Arafat, Mashars and
Mina. Important symbols are the Kaaba, Safa, Marwa, day, night,
sunshine, sunset, idols and ritual of sacrifice. The clothing and make
up are Ihram, Halgh and Taqseer. Lastly, the player of the roles in this
"show" is only one; and that is YOU!

Regardless of whether you are a man or a woman, young or old, black or
white, you are the main feature of the performance. The role of Adam,
Ibrahim and Hajar in the confrontation between "Allah and Satan" is
played by you. As a result, you, individually, are the hero of the
"show".

Annually, Muslims from all over the world are encouraged to participate
in this great "show" (Hajj). Everyone is considered equal. No
discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or social status is made. In
accordance to the teachings of Islam, ALL ARE ONE AND ONE IS ALL.  
 The one who restores somebody's life, has restored the life of all and
the one who kills one, has killed all.

Yet the enemies of Islam continue to deliberately wage a campaign
against Islam. They attack it by denying that Islam recognizes the human
being as an individual endowed with special rights and values. In terms
of the concept of Hajj, it is relegated to the status of a duty which
has very little significance. As Imam Ali, the son of Kaaba says:

As if Islam is a lamb fur-coat that is put on inside out.

What have I personally learned from Hajj-me being so "little" and Hajj
being so "great" in meaning? How far and what could I see from this
experience? The following pages are the product of my humble efforts to
answer these questions. My purpose is not to inform the reader what must
be done during Hajj. This can be attained by referring to the book of
rituals. Instead, I want to share with you my perceptions of the
significance of Hajj. They should help you to understand why it is
incumbent upon Muslims to perform this duty, or at least motivate you to
think about Hajj.

Dr. Ali Shariati


