Rejecting an Empty Philosophy
=============================

Life today (not life as it should be carried on) is an idle cyclical
action a movement with no goal! A meaningless pendulum action starts
with the day only to end at night and night starts only to disappear at
dawn. In the mean time, man is busy watching the play of these black and
white "rats" who chew the strings of our life until we die.

Life (as we live it) is like a theater. Man watches these aimless nights
and days. Indeed, what foolish play is conducted! When you are in need,
you hope and struggle to overcome your needs. Yet once you achieve this,
you view your past efforts humorously. What a senseless philosophy to
live by!

Living on a day to day basis, the person lacks direction. His aim is
only to live. What exists is a dead spirit in a living body. However,
the Hajj experience alters this unhealthy condition!  
 Once you decide to perform Hajj and take the necessary steps, you are
on the road to the actualization of Hajj. Before going to Hajj you
reside in your home calm and reposed. Upon entering the state of mind
for Hajj, you arise and move away from your routine environment.

Hajj is the antithesis of aimlessness. It is the rebellion against a
damned fate guided by evil forces. The fulfillment of Hajj will enable
you to escape from the complex network of puzzles. This revolutionary
act will reveal to you the clear horizon and free way to migration to
eternity toward the Almighty Allah.

Depart from your home. and visit "Allah's house", or the "house of the
people"! You, whoever you are, you are a man, Adam's son, and a
representative of Allah on earth! You are a relative of Allah, Allah's
trustee, His master of nature and a student of God. Allah taught you the
names. He made you from His spirit and endowed you with special
qualities. You were praised by Him; His angels even prostrated to you.
This earth and everything in it was made available to man. God became
your "home mate", with you at all times and watching all of your
actions. Are you living up to His expectation?

Prophet (S):  
 Allah is in the hearts of the believers

***Thus Allah knoweth those who are sincere, and knoweth those who
feign*****.** Qur’an 29:3

***And that Allah may know him who helpeth Him and His messenger, though
unseen.*** Qur’an 57: 25

***Lo! We have placed all that is in the earth as an ornament thereof
that we may try them: which of them is best in conduct.*** Qur’an 17: 7

***Who hath created life and death that He may try you, which of you is
best in conduct; and he is the Mighty, the Forgiving,*** Qur’an 67: 2

With the passage of time and the influence of various forces of the
social system which disregard human rights and duties, your character
has been changed. The vicissitudes of life have affected you to the
degree that you became alienated and neglectful. Originally, with
Allah's spirit in your heart, you were supposed to shoulder the
responsibility of being Allah's trustee on earth. You were granted time
as a means for fulfilling this task but you failed because the gift was
used carelessly!

***By the declining day, Lo! man is in a state of loss,*** Qur’an 103:
2-3

This is what is called life! But realistically speaking what has been
accomplished? What constructive contributions have you made? What have
you gained? So many precious years have been lost, yet who are you?

Oh trustee and vicegerent of Allah on earth, you have turned to money,
sex, greed, aggression, and dishonesty. You have regressed to the
inferior status that you occupied before almighty Allah blew His spirit
into you. Where is the spirit of Allah now? Oh man, rise out of this
decadent situation! Divorce yourself from this gradual death.

Leave your surroundings and go to the pure land. There you may face
Almighty Allah under the inspiring sky of Mashar. The estrangement which
you have experienced will be overcome. At last, you will find yourself!


