Reaching Toward Allah
=====================

Hajj occurs during the highly respected month of Zul-Hijjah'. The land
of Makkah (Mecca) is tranquil and peaceful. Instead of fear, hatred, and
war, the desert is characterized by security and peace. An atmosphere
for worship where people are free to face Almighty God is prevalent.  
 Do you not hear Ibrahim's command:

***And call upon the people for Hajj. They will come to you on their
bare feet or riding any weak camel and they come to you from every far
desert.*** Qur’an 22:27

You, oh Mud, search for and follow the spirit of Allah! Accept his
invitation; leave your home in order to "see" Him. He is waiting for
You!

Human existence is frivolous unless one's aim is to approach the spirit
of Allah. Separate yourself from all those needs and greed which
distract you from Allah. Therefore, join the eternal human migration to
Hajj. "See" Almighty Allah!

Before departing to perform Hajj, all of your debts should be paid. Your
hates and angers toward relatives or friends must disappear. A will must
be drawn. All of these gestures are an exercise in the preparation for
death (which will overtake everyone some day). These acts guarantee your
personal and financial clearance. The last moments of farewell and the
future of man are symbolized.

Now you are free to join eternity. On the day of resurrection, when "you
can do nothing" in Allah's court, where "your eyes, ears, and heart are
the best witnesses of what you have done,"

***You and every organ of your body are responsible for your deeds.
While you are in this "house of correction" get ready for the "house of
justice". Exercise death before you die-go to Hajj!*** Qur’an 17: 36

Hajj represents your return to Allah, the absolute, who has no
limitations and none is like Him. To return to Him signifies a definite
movement toward perfection, goodness, beauty, power knowledge, value,
and facts. On your way toward the eternal, you will NEVER approach
Allah. He is to guide you in the right direction and not to be your
destination!

Islam is different from Sufism. A Sufi lives "in the name of Allah", and
dies "for the sake of Allah". But, a Muslim strives to approach Almighty
God  
***To Allah we belong and to Him is our return.***

***All affairs tend toward Allah.*** Qur’an 2:156 & 42:53

Our goal is not to "perish", but to "bloom". This is done not "for
Allah" but rather to bring us "toward Him". Allah is not so far away
from you; therefore, try to reach Him! Allah is closer to you than
yourself!

***We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.*** Qur’an 50:16  
 On the other hand, everyone beside Allah is too far to be reached! Oh
man, all the angels prostrated to you; yet, through the passage of time
and societal influence you have changed greatly. You have not abided by
your promise to worship none but Almighty Allah. Instead, you have
become a slave to idols, some of which are man-made.

***In an assembly of truth, in the presence of a sovereign omnipotent***
Qur’an 55: 54  
***.***  
 Your nature is characterized by loyalty to other individuals,
self-devotion, cruelty, and ignorance, a lack of direction, fearfulness,
and greediness! This life has caused you to acquire animalistic traits.
Now you are like a "wolf", "fox", "rat", or "sheep".

Oh man, return to your origin. Go to Hajj and visit your best friend who
created you as the best creature. He is waiting to see you! Leave the
palaces of power, the treasures of wealth and the misleading temples.
Dismember yourself from the flock of those animals whose shepherd is the
wolf. Join the flock at Miad who is going to see the house of Allah or
the house of the people.


