Entering Miqat and Becoming One
===============================

The show begins at Miqat. At this point, the actor (mankind) must change
his clothes. Why? Because one's attire covers the person as well as his
character. In other words, an individual doesn't wear clothes, but
rather, the clothes cover him!

Clothes symbolize, pattern, preference, status, and distinction. They
create superficial "borders" which cause "separation" between people. In
most cases, "separation" between people, gives birth to
"discrimination". Furthermore the concept of "I" not "we" emerges! "I"
is used in the context of my race, my class, my clan, my group, my
position, my family, my values, and not "I" as a human being.

So many "borders" have been created in our lives. The descendants of
Cain, the executioners and the cruel split Adam's family and mankind's
unity into many parts and factions. What resulted were the following
relationships:

*master and servant, oppressor and oppressed, colonialist and
colonialized, exploiter and exploited, strong and weak, rich and poor,
nourished and malnourished, honored and dishonored, happy and unhappy,
noble persons and lay persons, civilized and uncivilized, Eastern and
Western, Arab and Ajam and etc.*

Humanity is divided into races, nations, classes, subclasses, groups,
and families. Each one has its own distinct status and values, names and
honors. And-for what? All this just to show "ones-self-but under so much
"make-up"!

Now take off your clothes. Leave them at Miqat. Wear the Kafan which
consists of plain white material. You will be dressed like everyone
else. See the uniformity appear! Be a particle and join the mass; as a
drop, enter the ocean.

*Don't be proud, you are not here to see somebody, but be humble. You
will be seeing Allah. Be the one who realizes his mortality or a mortal
who feels his existence.*

At Miqat, regardless of your race or tribe, you must doff all the covers
you wore in your daily life as:

- a wolf (symbolizing fierceness and oppression),  
 - a rat (symbolizing slyness),  
 - a fox (symbolizing craftiness),  
 - or a sheep (symbolizing slavery).  
 Leave all these in Miqat and assume your original shape as a "man" -
just one "Adam" as you will be at the end, as one "dead"!

Wrap yourself in two pieces of cloth. One covers your shoulders and the
other goes around your waist. No special style or material is used. It
is made of very plain and simple fabric. Everyone is wearing the same
outfit (Ihram). No distinctions in appearance are visible.  
 The caravans from all over the world which are traveling to Hajj will
congregate at Miqat. They will meet at the same time and at the same
place!  
 On his way to Allah, man is not just "to be" but he is "to become" what
he should be!

***And unto Allah is the journeying.*** Qur’an 24:42

How wonderful! Everything is moving - evolution, death and life, life
and death, contradiction, change, and direction.

***Everything will perish save His countenance.*** Qur’an 28:88

And Allah is the "absolute" - being, perfect, and eternal!

***Every day He exerciseth (universal) power.*** Qur’an 55:29

Hajj is also a movement. Man decides to return toward Allah. All of his
egos and selfish tendencies are buried at Miqat (Zu-halifa). He
witnesses his own dead body and visits his own grave. Man is reminded of
the final goal of his life. He experiences death at Miqat and
resurrection after which he must continue his mission in the desert
between Miqat and Miad.

The scene is like the Day of Judgment. From one horizon to the other, a
"flood of whites" appears. All the people are wearing the Kafan. No one
can be recognized. The bodies were left in Miqat and the souls are
motivated here. Names, races, nor social status make a difference in
this great combination. An atmosphere of genuine unity prevails. It is a
human show of Allah's unity.

Fear and pleasure, excitement and charm, perplexity and rapture all
appear as minute particles in a magnetic field. Allah is in its center
(qibla')! Only man shows himself. He is situated in one direction which
is toward Allah. In this desert all the nations and groups merge into
one tribe. They face one Kaaba.

Once you remove your clothes and all the signs which distinguish "you"
as an individual, you may enter into the heart of the crowd. In the
state of Ihram', try to forget the things that remind you of your life.

Everyone "melts" himself and assumes a new form as a "mankind". The egos
and individual traits are buried. The group becomes a "people" or an
"Umma". All the I's have died in Miqat; what has evolved is "We".  
 By the time you leave Mina you should have integrated into the Umma.
This is what Ibrahim did. You are also supposed to act like Ibrahim.

***Lo Abraham was a nation obedient to Allah, by nature upright, and he
was not of the idolaters.*** Qur’an 16:120

At last, one is all and all is one! Everyone is equal. The society of
polytheism is converted into one of monotheism or Tawhid. This is the
Umma or the society which is onto the right path. It should be a society
which is perfect, active and led by Islamic leadership (Imamate).

Everyone performing Hajj has turned away from himself to face Allah. He
has been endowed with the spirit of Allah. You have gone from an exile
to the hereafter. You have been exposed to the absolute facts. You have
overcome ignorance and oppression and have been enlightened by
consciousness and justice. You have rejected polytheism and adopted
monotheism.

Previous to the performance of Hajj, the people neglected their human
quality. They were alienated by power, wealth, family, land, and race.
Their life was only in the context of mere "existence". Finally, the
experience of Hajj allowed them to achieve self-discovery. Now they
perceived each other collectively as "one", and individually as a "man"
NOTHING ELSE!.


