Praying in Miqat
================

When at Miqat and ready to start the Hajj, you are aware of what must be
done and why. In the Ihram attire you will perform the prayer of Ihram,
presenting yourself to the Almighty Allah. Say - Oh Allah, I No More
worship the idols, and No More am I the slave of Nimrod'.

Oh Allah, I am standing in front of you with the gesture of Ibrahim not
as an oppressor (wolf), not as a cheater (fox), not as a hoarder (rat).
Nay, I face you as a "man" wearing the same clothes that I will wear
when I see you in the hereafter. This means that you willingly and
consciously want to obey Allah and become His slave. You will rebel
against anyone and anything beside Allah. Your readiness to exercise
necessary duties is expressed. Such a position is not different from the
regular prayer, but at this time it is like a more intimate talk to
Allah. It is as if Allah's presence can be felt.  
 Say:

***Oh the most gracious and the most merciful, whose glory and mercy go
beyond the limits of friends and enemies, the righteous and the sinful,
the believers and non-believers ... Oh Allah, I worship you since you
are the only one who deserves to be worshipped. I choose no master, but
you, the master and owner of the Day of Judgment*****. Qur’an 1:2-4.**

***Thee (alone) we worship; thee (alone) we ask for help.*** Qur’an 1:5

Oh our only love, Oh our only help! See how we are lost by our
ignorance! See how we are misled by the oppressors! See how we are
limited by our weakness!

***Show us the Straight Path - the path of truth, consciousness, fact,
beauty, perfection, love, and goodness.*** Qur’an 1:6

***The path of those whom thou hast favored, Not (the path) of those who
earn thine anger nor of those who go astray.*** Qur’an 1:7

At Miqat in the white dress of the hereafter, each bow denies and asks
forgiveness for the wrong deeds which were motivated by fear and greed.
They were committed during your life. Each prostration asks forgiveness
for those which were done in the Courts of Powers.  
 The prayer at Miqat is a promise to Allah that there will be no
prostration nor bowing to anyone other than Him!

*Peace be upon you Oh Muhammad, His slave and Messenger Peace by upon
you and those obedient of Allah and the good doers. Peace be upon you
...*

All these are phrases which refer to the "near ... not the far".  
 Allah, Ibrahim, Muhammad, people, heaven, the hereafter, salvation,
freedom, love and etc. are all present at Miqat. Dressed in the
colorless clothes of Ihram, you experience a new birth - a resurrection!
No longer will Satan, who rejected Allah's command, cheat you. No longer
will you feel like a stranger. Shameful and apologetic, you return to
Allah. But now you are free and responsible!


