Who Was Al-sadiq?
=================

Indeed, the writer should give a general idea about the person whom he
writes about before he goes deeper into his writing so the reader does
not misunderstand such a person when he reads each chapter of his life.

Here I would like to mention a group of the viewpoints of the religious
scholars concerning Ja’far al- Sadiq, peace be on him, because such
viewpoints express the ideas of generations about this great figure.
They are as follows:

In (the book) MTzân Al- I’tidal (1:192), mentioning the Imam,
al-Dhahahbi’ [1] said:” Ja’far b. Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al- Husayn al-
Hâshmy Abü Abd Allah was of the great Imams. (He was) righteous,
truthful, and of great importance.”

In (the book) TahdhTb Al- Asma’ wa Al- Lughât (1:149-150), al-Nawawy [2]
said: Mohammed b. Ishâq, Yahya al- Ansâry, Mâlik, the two Sufyanis, b.
JarTh, Shu’ba, Yahyâ al- Qattan, and the like reported from him. They
agreed on his Lmamate, his greatness, and his supremacy. ‘Amru b. Abu
al- Muqdâm said:’ When I looked at Ja’far b. Mohammed, I knew that he
was from the descendants of the Prophets.”’

Ibin Khulakan[3] said: “(He was) among the twelve Imams according to the
doctrine of the Imamis. He was among the masters of the members of the
House (ahl al Bayt). He was surnamed al- Sadiq because his speech was
truthful. And his outstanding merit was more famous than to be
mentioned.” He added :“ His pupil Abu Musa Jabir b. Hayyân al- Sufi
al-Tartusi’[4] wrote a book of one thousand sheets having the studies of
al-Sâdiq, which are five hundred studies”. And added:” He was buried at
aI-BâqI’ in the grave where his father Mohammed al- Bâqir. his
grandfather Zayn al- ‘Abidin, and the uncle of his grandfather al- Hasan
b. ‘Ali, peace be on them. So, what a generous and honorable grave it
is!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   The memorizer (of the Koran) and representative of the science of
Hadith, Shams al-Din Abu Abd Allah Mohammed b. ‘Uthman at- Dimashqy,
born in 673, died in 748.  
2   The memorizer (of the Koran) Abu Zakariya Muhiyy al- DTn b. Sharaf
al- DTn, died 676.  
3   Ahmad b. Mohammed b. Ibrahim b. Abtl Bakr, b. Khu1akan. He was born
at the town of ArbTI near Mousil (in Iraq). He moved to Mousil, traveled
to Elope, entered Egypt. He replaced at- Sakhâwy in judgeship. Then he
became a judge in Shim for ten years. He died in Damascus in 681. His
biography has been written in Tabaqat at-Shafi’iyah: 5/14, Fawat al-
Wafiyat: 1/55, al- Siyflty (Husin al- Muhadara): 1/267, Mu’jam at-
Matb0’at: 1/98, and the like.  
4   In the scientific life of al- Sadiq, we will point to his knowledge
of chemistry and to Jabir’s studying under him and a part of Jabir’s
life.

In (the Book) NOr al- Absar, p.13 [1], al- ShiblanjT said:” His
outstanding traits were many. They are about to exceed the limit of the
counter. And the understanding of the mindful writer is bewildered at
their Kinds” He added:” There is an advantage in (the book) ‘Hayat Al-
Haywan Al-Kubra,” in the Book ‘Adab Al- Katib,’ bin Qutayba said:” Imam
Ja’far al-Sadiq b. Mohammed al- Baqir wrote the book of al- Jafr
(divination). In it, there is all that they need of his knowledge till
the Day of Judgment.” Abtl aI- ‘Ala’ (a poet) pointed to this jafr
(divination) and said:

“Verily, they became astonished at the family

of Mohammed when their knowledge caine to them

written on the skin of a full grown he- goat.”

The mirror of the astrologer, though small (in size),

shows him in every populated and desolate (lands).

In his book ‘Is’af Al- Raghibin’ printed in the footnote of the book
‘Nur Al- Absâr, p.208, Mohammed al- Sabbân[2] said:” And as for Ja’far
al-Sâdiq, he was a noble Imam.” He added:” His supplication was
accepted. If he asked Allah for something, it was between his hands
before he completed his words.”

In (the book) Lawaqih Al- Anwâr, al- Sha’arany[3] said:” If he
(al-Sâdiq), peace be on him, was in need of a thing, he would say: ‘0
Allah, I am in need of so and so.’ That thing was put beside him before
he completed his supplication.”

In his book ‘Tadhkirat Khawfls Al- Umma, p.192, Sibt b. al- Jawzy[4]
said:” The biographists said:’ He was busy worshipping (Allah) instead
of seeking leadership.”’

He added:” Among his noble manners is what al- Zamakhshary, in his book
‘RaM’ Al- Abrâr’, has reported from al- Shaqrany the servant of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: ‘Al- ‘Atta’ went
out during the days of al- Mansflr and I had no intercessor, so I stood
at the door with bewilderment.

Suddenly, Ja’far b. Mohammed came towards me, so I told him about my
need. He entered and came out. Suddenly, my need was in his hand. He
gave it to me and said:’ The good (thing) from anyone is good and from
you is better because of your place from us and the bad thing from
anyone

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  (His name was) Mu’min b. Hasan Mu’min al- Masry. Shiblanj is among
the villages of Egypt. He studied the sciences at at- Azhar Mosque. He
was born at Najaf in 1250. His death has not been mentioned.2  
2  (His name was) Mohammed b. ‘Ali al- ShIfi’r at- Hanafi. He was born
in Egypt. His biography has been mentioned in (the book) Mu’jam Al-
MatbO’at: 2/1194.  
3  (His name was) AbtI at- Mawlhib Abd at- Wahfib b. Ahmad b. ‘Au al-
Ansliry al-Shaii 1 al- Masry called al- Sha’arlny. He entered Cairo in
911 and died there. His biography has been mentioned in Mu’jam Al-
Matbti’At: 1/1126.  
4  (His name was) Abti Muzafar Shams al- DTn Yousif b. Quz’ ‘Ali (the
famous preacher) al- HanaiY. He was born in 582 or 581, and died on Dhi
al- Hijja 21st, 654.

is bad and from you is worse because of your place from us. Indeed
Ja’far said (these words) to al- ShaqrAny because he (the latter) drank
wine. So, among the outstanding traits of Ja’far is that he welcomed him
and met his need though he (Ja’far) was aware of his behavior and
preached with euphemism, and this is among the ethics of the Prophets”.

In (the book) Matâlib Al- Sa’Ul, p.81, Mohammed b. Talha’[1] said:” He
(al- Sâdiq) was among the great figures of ahl al Bayt and their
progeny. He had many sciences, plentiful worshipping, and continuous
parts of the Koran, clear asceticism, and much recitation (of the
Koran).

He understood the meanings of the Holy Koran, took out jewels from its
sea, and concluded its wonders. He divided his times according to the
kinds of obedience, so he punished himself for them. His face reminded
(the person) of the Hereafter, listening to his words put an end to
one’s desire for life, in this world, following his guidance inherits
Paradise, the progeny of the prophethood, and the purity of his acts
disclosed that he was among the progeny of the Prophet. And he said:’ As
for his laudable deeds and qualities, they were about to exceed the
number of the counter. The understanding of the knowing (person) was
perplexed at their kinds, as well as the rules whose causes are not
understood and the sciences whose rules understanding is unable to
encompass are added to him and reported from him, (that is) because of
his many sciences that flew out of his heart due to the competition of
piety.”’

In (the book) Al- Sawa’iq. Ibin Hajar[2] said: And men reported (a lot
of) sciences, and his reputation spread all over the countries.”

In Yanâbi’ Al- Mawada,[3] printed in IslambUl, p.380,:” And among the
Imams of ahl al Bayt was AbU Abd Allah Ja’far al- Sâdiq.” He added :“
And he was among the progeny of ahl al Bat.” And he added:” In (the
Book) Tabaqât Al- Mashaykh Al- Sufiyan, Shaykh AbU ‘Abdurrahinân
al-Sâlimy said:’ Ja’far al- Sâdiq overshadowed all his fellows from ahl
al Bayt. He had abundant knowledge, great asceticism in the world,
perfect piety in desires, and perfect good manners in wisdom.”’

In Hulyat .Al- Awliya 3:192 the memorizer (of the Koran) AbU Na ‘Tm[4]
said:” And among them was the articulate Imam and the first rein Abti
Abd Allah Ja’ far b. Mohammed al- Sâdiq. He devoted himself to
worshipping and obediehce (to Allah), fayored isolation and submission,
and prevented (men) from leadership and parties.” Then he reported his
foregoing words on the authority of ‘Amrfl b. AbO Al- Muqdam. And he
reported from al-2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 (His name was) Kama1tdin the Shafi’T. He died in 654.  
2 (His name was) ShâbutdTn Alimad b. Hajar at- Haythainy. He lived in
Mecca.  
3 By Shaykh Sutaiman b. Ibrahim.known as Khaja KaIan. He completed the
book on Ramadan, 1291.4  
4 (His name was) Ahmad b. Abd Allah al- Asbihany. He died in the year
430 A.H.

Hayâj b. Bastim,[1] who said:” And Ja’far b. Mohammed gave food and left
nothing for his family.”

In Al- FusOl Al- Muhima, Ibin al- Sabbagh al- Mftliky[2] said:” Only he
of his brothers was the caliph of his father and his trustee of
authority and responsible for the Imamate after him. He excelled his
group in favor. He was more famous than they and greater than they in
importance. People reported from him the sciences which the passengers
spread. So, he became famous all over the countries.” At the end of his
words, he said:” The deeds of Abil Abd Allah were laudable, his traits
in. honor were perfect, his dignity throughout the days was running, and
the clubs of glory and honor were full of his glorious deeds.”

In Sabâ’k Al- Dhahab, p.72, al- SiwTdy[3] said:” Only he of his brothers
was the caliph of his father and his trustee of authority, many sciences
have been reported on his authority, and he was an Imani in tradition.”
And he said:” And his good traits were many.”

In ‘Umdat Al- Talib,[4] p.1 84, :“ He was called ‘Amfld al- Sharaf (the
pillar of honor), his good traits are successive among men, famous among
the ShT’a and non- ShT’a, and al- Mansfir al- DawânTqy tried to kill him
several times, but Allah saved him from that.”

In ‘Al- Millal wa Al- Nihal’, al- Shahristany[5] said:” And he had
abundant knowledge of religion and literature, perfection in wisdom,
strong asceticism and perfect piety in desires. He lived in Medina for a
period (of time) to avail the ShT’a who followed him and teach the
supporters the secrets of sciences. Then he entered Iraq and lived there
for a period (of time).

He never had words with the Imamate nor did he disputed with anyone for
the caliphate. Whoever is drowning in the sea of knowledge does not wish
for the river, and whoever goes up the peak of the truth is not afraid
of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Al- TamTmy Al- Hanzaly Al- Harawy. He traveled to Iraq, heard the
scholars of his time. He entered Baghdad and reported traditions in it.
He died in 177. Al- KhadTb al-aaghdady wrote his biography: 14/80.  
2   (His name was) Nuridin ‘Au b. Mohammed al- Sabbagh al- Maliky.  
He was born in 784 and died in 855. Al- Sakhawy wrote his biography in
the books ‘Al- Daw’ Al- Umi’ :5/283.  
He has mentioned his shaykhs and his book ‘Al- Fusül Al- Muhima’.  
3   (His name was) Mohammed Am!n al- Baghdady. The family of at- SiwTdy
are among the eminent families in Baghdad till today. He was among the
great figures of ahe past century. He ended his book in Shawwal, 1
229(A.H.).  
4   By the famous genealogist Jamllidin Ahmad b. ‘Au at- DUwtldy at-
Husayny, who died in the year 828 (A.H.)  
5   (His name was) AbO at- Fath Mohammed b. ANt al- Qlsim. He was a
theologian jurisprudent. He adopted the doctrine of al- Ash’ary, He
entered Baghdad in the year 510 (A.H.), and lived in it for three years.
He was born in Shahristan and died in it in the year 548. His biography
has been written in At- Wafayat, Mu’jam Al- Udabl’, Tabaqfl.t Al- Sabky,
Rawdlt Al- Jinan, Miftah Al- Sa’Ida,i and the like.

him who comes down. And it is said that whoever feels Allah is in no
need of men, and whoever associates with other than Allah, scruple
plunders him.”

In Mir’át Al- Jinân (1:304), concerning those who died in the year 148
(A.H.), al- Yâfi’y[1] said:” In it (the year 148) died the great Sayyid
Imam, the descendant of the Prophet and the jewel of generosity, Abü Abd
Allah Ja’far al- Sadiq.

And he was buried at at- BaqT’ in the grave where his father Mohammed
al- Baqir, his grandfather Zayn al- Abidin, and the uncle of his
grandfather al- Hasan b. ‘Au, may Allah be pleased with them all, (were
buried). How generous that grave is! And how generous those noblemen
with good traits are! He was surnamed al- Sâdiq because of his
truthfulness in his saying. He had valuable speech about the sciences of
monotheism (Tawhid).

And his student Jâbir b. Hayyân al- Süfy wrote a book of one thousand
sheets on his studies, which are five hundred studies.”

In his Amaly, Majlis no.42, al- Sâduq [2], may his grave be fragrant,
reported from Sulayman b. Dawfld al- Manqary [3] on the authority of
Hafs b. Ghayyâth [4] , that if he told us about Ja’far b. Mohammed,
peace be on him, he said:” The best of the Ja’farTs has told me.”

In Majlis no 32, also he reported on the authority of Mohammed b. Zyâd
al- Azdy,[5] who said:” I have heard Malik b. Anas saying:’ I came to
al-Sadiq Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace be on him, so he handed me pillow and
respected me. He was not free from one of three traits- he was either
fasting

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   (His name was) Abu Mohammed Abd Allah b. Sa’eed b. ‘Au b. Sulaiman
‘Afifutdin at- Yafi’y at- Yamflny.  
He lived at the two scared sanctuaries. He died in 768 (A.H.).  
2   (His name was) Mohammed b. ‘Ati b. Bâbawayh al- Qmmy.  
He was a great traditionalist. He wrote about three hundred valuable
books. He entered Baghdad in the year 352 (A.H.). The shaykh of the sect
(the ShT’a), heard from him though he was young.  
He died in Ray in the year 381 (A.H.).  
3   He was known as b. al- Shathktiny. He reported from at- Sadiq and
his reporters. He was among the trustworthy reporters.  
4   Al- Kufi At- Qady (the judge). He will be mentioned in the chapter:
The Famous Reliable Reporters of al- Sadiq, peace be on him. Apparently,
he was among the Sunnis.  
5   He was known as b. Abu ‘Umayr. He met al- Kazim, at- Rids, and al-
Jawal, peace be on them. Al- RashTd imprisoned him to assume judgeship
and, it was said, show hini the places of the Shi’a and the Companions
of al- Kazim. It was said that he was whipped and hurt. But he did not
admit. He reported the books of a hundred men of the Companions of al-
Sadiq, peace be on him. He has many books. He was among those who did
not report but from a reliable person. All Companions accepted his
reports.  
The two parties (the ShT’a and the SunnTs) have agreed on his reliance
and high rank.  
And it was said:” They accepted his reports because he buried his books
before he was imprisoned. So he reported what he had in his mind. He
died in the year 217 (A.H.).

or praying or remembering (Allah). He was among the great worshippers
and devotees who feared Allah, the Glorified and Almighty. His talks
were many. His sitting was good. His advantages were many. If he said:”
The Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, said sometimes
he became green and sometimes became yellow. So, whoever knew him became
ignorant of him. One year I went with him to perform the hajj. When his
camel arrived at the Haram, the voice ceased in his throat whenever he
tried (to say) the talbiya [a rite during the hajj by saying labbayka
(here am I 0 Allah)]. He was about to fall off his camel. So, I said to
him:’ Son of the Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
you should say (labbayka Allahumma labbayka).’ So, he said:’ Son of
‘Amir, how dare I (the author) say labbayka Allahumma labbayk, and I am
afraid that (Allah), the Glorified and Almighty, will say:’ Neither
Iabbayk nor Sa’dayk.”

In has book Al- Manaqib fi Ahwâl Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, b.
Shahrâshüb[1] reported on the authority of Malik b. Anas, who said:” No
eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no one has come into man’s mind
better than Ja’far al- Sâdiq in the outstanding merit, knowledge,
worship, and piety.” And in his AmSli, Majlis no. 81, aI- Sâdflq
increased his words:” By Allah, if he said he was truthful.”

Also he said:” In the Musnad of Abu Hanifa,[2] Abu al- Qasim aI- BaghSr
has mentioned that al- Hasan b. Ziyad said: I have heard Abu Hanifa when
he was asked:’ Who is the most knowledgeable (person) you have ever
seen?’ He said:’ Ja’far b. Mohammed.’ When al- Manstlr brought him, he
sent for me and said:’ Abu HanTfa, indeed, men have been charmed by
Ja’far b. Mohammed. So, prepare for him your most difficult questions.
So, I prepared forty question for him. Then he sentfor me Abu Ja’far,
who was at HTra. So, I came to him and greeted him.

He ledme to sitting and I sat down. Then he turned to said:’ Abu Abd
Allah, this is Abu Hanifa.’ He said:’ Yes, I know him.’ Then he turned
to me and said:’ Ask Abu Abd Allah some of your questions.’ So, I began
asking him. He answered me and said:’ You say so and so, the people of
Medina say so and so, and we say so and so. We may agree with your or we
may agree with them or we may disagree with you and them. I asked him
all the forty questions. But he did not commit a breach of them. Then
Abu

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  (His name was) Mohammed b. ‘Ali al- Mazindarany RashTdildrn. He was
among the Shaykhs and jurisprudents of the sect (the ShT’a). He was an
eloquent poet. He has many books, such as Ma’alim Al- ‘Ulama , Ansab At
Abi Tâlib, Manaqib al Abi Thlib. In this book we have reported many
(traditions) from him.2  
2  He was al- Nu’man b. Thabit. He was the Imam of the second doctrine
of the SunnTs. Also he studied under al- Sadiq, peace be on him. The
Hanfy is attributed to him. We will tell you about him in the chapter:
The Companions of Al- Sadiq, peace be on him.

Hanifa said: “Isn’t the most knowledgeable of men most knowledgeable of
them in the difference of men.”’

Al- Manstlr, who was displeased with Abu Abd Allah (peace be on him),
sometimes said the truth when he mentioned or met him:” This suffocation
(of mortification) (i.e. al- Sa7diq) in my throats is the most
knowledgeable of men in his time.[1] And he is among those who want the
Hereafter, not the life in this world.’[1] Certainly, every house of
prophethood has a traditionalist and, today, our traditionalist is
Ja’far b. Mohammed.”[3] “Addressing al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, al-
Mansür said:” We are still dip out from your sea,"[4] we draw near to
you, make (people) aware of blindness (ignorance), and you make the
difficulties clear with your light (knowledge). So, we float on the
clouds of your holiness and the flood of your sea, And he said to his
chamberlain:” And these are among the sons of Fatima. No one ignores
their right but the ignorant who have no luck in the Islamic Law.”[5]

Isma’il b. ‘Ali b. Abd Allah b. al- ‘Abbâs said:” One day, I came to Abu
Ja’far al- MansUr (and saw that) his beard had become wet because of the
tears. He said to me:’ Haven’t you known what has happened to your
family?’ So, I said:’ What has happened, 0 AmTr al- Mu’minin?’ He said:’
Indeed, their chief and scholar and the rest of the good ones of them
passed away.’ So, I said:’ Who is it?’ He said:’ Ja’far b. Mohammed.’

So, I said:’ May Allah make the reward of Amir al- Mu’minin great and
prolong his lasting for us.’

So, he said to me:’ Surely, Ja’far was among those about whom Allah
said:’ Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose
from among Our servants.”[6] He was among those whom Allah chose. And he
was among those who were the first to do good.”[7]

Moreover, the infidels, in spite of their infidelity and enmity towards
Islam and Muslims, honored him and acknowledged his abundant knowledge
and his holy spiritual qualities and talents. Those infidels were b. al-
Muqaffa’, b. Abu aI- ‘Aujá’, al- Daysany, and the like. (For example),
b. al- Muqaffa’ said:” Do you see this creation? And he made a sign with
his own hand to the place of the tawaf (going around the Ka’ba as a
ritual act of the hajj.). No one of them is worthier of the name of
humanity than that sitting Shaykh (i.e. al- Sádiq, peace be on him.).
Ibin Abu al- ‘Auja’ said:” This is not a human being. Though he is
spiritual in this world, he

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Mas’udy, Al- Wasiyah.  
2 Kashif Al- Ghuma: 2/209.  
3 Al- Kafc: 1/475.  
4 Bihar Al- Anwar:47/l99  
5 Ibin Tauws, Muhaj Al- Da’awat, p.1 92. Bihar Al- Anwar: 47/199.  
6 Koran, 35,32.  
7 Tgrtkh Al- Ya’qtlby: 3/117.

becomes incarnate if he wishes and becomes internally spiritual if he
wishes. So, he is this, namely al- Sâdiq, peace be on him.”[1]

When b. Abu al- ‘Auja’ asked one of the Companions of al- Sâdiq, peace
be on him, then the companion brought him the answer after awhile and he
(b. Abu al- ‘Aujâ’) approved it, he said:” This (the answer) has been
brought from Hijaz.”

Al- Daisany adopted the same manner for the Companions of al- Sâdiq
(peace be on him), who brought him his answer.

This is a drop of rain of what the righteous people reported concerning
al- Sadiq, peace be on him, though they lived in different countries and
times, and had different tastes and ideas. I (the author) have mentioned
these ideas before discussing the detailed life of al- Sâdiq to give you
a general picture about this remarkable figure, because these words,
though brief, tell the reader about the outstanding merits and sciences
of al- Sadiq, peace be on him.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Al- Kafi: 1/74.
