The Protection (taqiyajhiding One’s Religion in Times of Danger)
================================================================

No one of the lmams but al- Sadiq, peace be on him, suffered from the
Marwani and the Abbasid dynasties, which waged war against the Islamic
Law and its Owner the Trusty Prophet through obeying lusts and mastering
pleasures.

Then from among those stringed instruments and songsters and that
injustice and dissoluteness appeared the leaders of the heresies and the
schools and the ideas and the desires, setting traps for reputation
because there was no one to punish them and prevent them from doing
that, rather the supreme doctrine of ahl al Bayt and decreased its
supporters.

Abu Abd Allah al- Sadiq, peace be on him, saw that lasting conflict
between religion and the two dynasties, between the truth and the
masters of those heresies.

So, what was the attitude of al- Sadiq towards that disorderly
situation? Was it suitable for him to declare war against the supreme
authority and the heresies while he knew people and their weakness for
the truth?

How many a time he saw and heard about the assassination of an Alawid or
Ahashimi. And that did not concern him if he knew that he would achieve
his aim as Imam Husayn, peace be on him, did because his life was not
more valuable than religion. But he surely knew that he would perish his
life without any advantage for religion or for himself. In the meantime
if he kept silent towards that conflict, he would shoulder a great
responsibility before Allah and the Owner of the Islamic Law. So, he had
to think of a way to save religion from that conflict and protect
himself and his chosen companions from the claws Of those savage lions.

So, al- Sadiq adopted a wise policy to spread sciences, knowledge,
Islamic commandments, wise sayings, and virtues. Meanwhile, he tried to
suppress misguidance through producing evidence in support of his
beliefs. So, he adopted taqiya as a shield to carry out his wise policy.
Therefore, his teachings were a service for the Islamic Law, his
worships were guidance for men, and his debates were war against the
heresies. For this reason, he went on jihad till he passed away.

Now we need to allot a complete chapter for taqiya (protection).

Evidence for Taqiya:
--------------------

(The word) ‘taqiya’ is derived from the word wiqayya (i.e. protection).
So it is a shield you use to repulse fears and dangers. And its source
is the fear (of losing) the valuable, such as life, and the like.

Evidence for taqiya is: the Book, the Sunna, intellect, and the ShT’ite
consensus. As for the Book, it is enough to mention these Words of
Allah, the Exalted,:” Let not the believers take the unbelievers for
friends rather than believers; and whoever does this, he shall have
nothing of (the guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves
against them, guarding carefully; and Allah makes you cautious of
(retribution from) Himself; and to Allah is the eventual coming.”[1] So,
Allah, the Exalted, permits the believers to pretend to be friends of
the unbelievers during protection and fear of their evil (deeds), apart
from this verse, there are some other verses we will mention for you in
the following pages.

As for the Sunna, what has been mentioned on the authority of ahl al
Bayt, and other than they is innumerable. We will mention a part of it
within this chapter. It is enough of the Sunna which the two parties
(the ShT’a and the Sunnis) have reported abou‘Ammar.

Nevertheless, Allah, the Exalted, forgave him when He sent down this
verse concerning him:” He who disbelieves in Allah after his having
believed, not he who is compelled while his heart is at rest on account
of faith.”[2]

As for the ShT’ite consensus the rightfulness and necessity of taqiya is
very clear. So we will not discuss it or mention its sources, because no
two persons differ in opinion about the matter and necessity of taqiya
with the ShT’a and their followers.

As for intellect, it is intuitive that a person should protect himself
and his valuable things as much as he can. In the meantime it prevents
him from casting himself to perdition. Also, the Holy Book prevents him
from doing that. So, Allah, the Exalted, said:” And spend in the way of
Allah and cast not yourselves to perdition with your own hands.”[3] “And
do not kill  yourselves; surely Allah is Merciful to you.“[4]

The line of conduct of the wise men takes place according to this
rational judgment. Rather, the human being practices taqiya by nature.
For example, if you halt at the house of people who disagree with you on
your political doctrine and principle and you are afraid of them knowing
your beliefs, you will by nature keep what you have a secret without
knowing the judgment of intellect and religious law in this connection.

If you study the history of Islam from the beginning, you will find that
taqiya was a necessity people resorted to. For example, the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, concealed his mission till he summoned
BanT Hâshim to believe him. Then Allah, the Glorified, ordered him to
declare it. The early Muslims kept their faith a secret before the
appearance

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Umran :28.  
2 Al- Nahi: 106.  
3 Al- Baqara: 195.  
4 Al- Nisâ: 94.

and spread of Islam. AbIl Tfihib concealed his Islam to protect the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and avoid the accusation of
his protection for the Prophet.

But when Islam spread, the unbelievers in Mecca and Medina pretended to
be Muslims while the concealed unbelief.

The Beginning of Taqiya and its Justifications:
-----------------------------------------------

The taqiya of the ShVa did not begin at the time of al- Sfldiq, peace be
on him. Rather it began at the time of the Commander of the Faithful
(AmTr al-Mu’minrn), because he himself used taqiya many times during his
days. For instance, he used it when the caliphate was taken from him. He
and some men knew that the caliphate was his own right. But he kept
silent because he had no supporters.

If he had had forty resolute persons, as he stated, he would have waged
war against those people. Men, even those who opposed him, knew his
viewpoint towards those people (who took the caliphate from him). And
during the consultation, the people in session decided to pay him
homage, provided that he should follow the policy of the two previous
caliphs, but he refused that and insisted on following the Book of Allah
and the Sunna of His Prophet.

The Commander of the Faithful went on using taqiya after he had taken
the reins of authority because he knew that some people were ready to
oppose him if he told them about everything he had.

The evidence for this was that many of his followers mutinied against
him (at the Battles of Al- Jamal and Siffin). So, if he had stated all
what he knew and thought, all over the country would have revolted
against him.

Though Kufa was dominated by the ShT’a and was the capital of the
authority of the Commander of the Faithful, he was not able to change
what they had learned from the previous caliphs and was not able to
declare what he knew but very little while he was the Owner of the two
authorities: the spiritual and the temporal authorities. Just imagine
how much more the state was when he had no supporter and the power was
against his sons!

The Imams used taqiya as a shield because they knew what that
declaration would cause for them and their followers. Moreover, the
Commander of the Faithful had used it before his sons. In this
connection, in his book ‘Al- Ihtijlj’, al- Tibrisy’[1] has reported what
AmTr Al- Mu’minin said about taqiya:” And I order you to use taqiya in
your religion.

With that you may keep those who were known of our followers and
brothers. Indeed, (to use) that is better than to subject yourself to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 (His name was) Ahmad b. ‘Au b. Abu ThIib. He was among the scholars
and  
shaykhs of the Sh!’a.  
His book Al- Ihtijaj is of many advantages and great importance.

destruction with which you cease an action in the religion and
righteousness of your believing brothers. And be careful not to leave
taqiya which I have ordered you (to use) because you will shed your
blood and the blood of your brothers, subject yourself and their selves
to vanishing, abase them with the hands of the enemies of religion while
Allah orders you to honor you. Then if you disobey my commandment, your
harm against your brothers and yourself will be more than that of those
who show enmity toward us and disbelieve in us.”

Shiism and the ShT’a appeared during the days of the Commander of the
Faithful (AmTr al- Mu’minln) because he was the Imani then. So, the
enemies of the ShT’a knew them throughout the countries.

For this reason, what happened to them after his ruling had been
undermined.

Mu’.awiya waged war against the ShI’a using all means, such as abusing
Abu al- Hasan (Imam ‘Ali), killing their famous figures, and appointing
Zyyad over Kufa and Basrah where the ShVa lived. Concerning Zyyad,
al-Madâ’iny said:” So, he killed them under every stone and mud (every
where), terrorized them, cut off their hands and legs, knocked out their
eyes, hanged them on the trunks of the date- palms, dismissed and
banished them from Iraq. So, there was no famous figure in it.”’[1]

But those who were unable to escape, because they were famous in the
country, or escaped but were captured, faced horrible death. Among them
were Hajr b. ‘Ady and hia companions, ‘Amru b. al- Hamq and the like.

In his book ‘al- Tarikh’, p.87, al- Tabary said:” Mu’awiya spread spies
against the ShT’a of ‘Ali, so he killed them wherever he found them.”

On mentioning the disasters that hit him and his followers, al- Sadiq,
peace be on him, said:” The greatest (disasters) were during the time of
Mu’awiya after the death of al- Husayn, peace be on him, so our ShT’a
(followers) were killed in every country, the hands and the legs were
cut off for the doubt, and whoever loved us and devoted himself for us
was imprisoned, his property was plundered, and his house was
demolished.”[2]

Mu’awiya was afraid of al- Hasan, peace be on him, because people waited
for his rise. He made peace with Mu’awiya provided that the latter
should give him the Caliphate after his death. So, he poisoned him and
mistreated his followers.

When YazTd became caliph, b. Zyyad became stronger than he was before.
So, he killed Muslim, Hany, RashTd al- Hajary, Maytham al-Tammar, and
the young men of the ShVa and their prominent figures.

In his prisons were twelve thousand people of the Shi’a. Then he
committed the massacre of al- Taf (Karbala).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Sharh Al-Naj :3/15.  
2 Sharh Al- Nahj: 3/15.

People were still remembering those crimes and disasters. Nevertheless,
al- Hajjaj came to complete that cruel role. Now, let us listen to our
Imam Mohammed al- Baqir, peace be on him, tell us about that terrorist
role he himself witnessed. He says:” Then al- Hajjaj came and committed
various kinds of crime against them (i.e. the ShT’a), and punished them
for every doubt or accusation. So, the person preferred to be called
Zandiq (duelist) or Kâfir (unbeliever) to be called the ShT’a of ‘Ali,
peace be on him.”’[1]

Also the Abbasid dynasty adopted the terrorist policy of the Omayyads
against the Alawids and their followers. We have told you about their
enmity and cruelty toward ahl al Bayt.

After those disasters, was it possible for ahl al Bayt or their ShT’a to
declare their anti government attitude?

By your conscience, intelligent man, what would you do when those
disasters hit you and your followers? Would you tell them to declare
their attitude so that they would be liable to killing and torture? Or
would you force thto keep their attitude a secret to avoid killing and
severe torture?

Al- ‘Utra (the Prophet’s family) was one of the thaqalayn (the two most
valuable things the Prophet left- the Koran and ahl al Bayt).

They (the Prophet’s family) protected the religion and its laws. So, if
they had been killed at the battles, who would have continue the way of
Islam?

Therefore, it was impossible for ahl al Bayt to leave taqiya because
they wanted to spread the teachings of the Koran and disclose the
misguidance and ignorance of those heretics.

For this reason, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” The taqiya is my
religion and the religion of my fathers. And whoever has no taqiya has
no religion. And, indeed, whoever discloses our secret is like (the
person who) disbelieves in it.” He, peace be on him, said to a group of
his companions:” Do not discloses our secret and do not tell (anyone)
about it but the appropriate people, because whoever discloses our
secret is more dangerous than our enemy, go away, may Allah have mercy
on you, and do not reveal our secret.”[2]

He, peace be on him said, “ The breath of the person who is sad on
account of the injustice we suffered from is glorification (of
Allah).”[3]

He (al- Sadiq), peace be on him, said to Mudrik b. al- Hazhaz[4]”
Mudrik, it is not only to accept our doctrine but also to safeguard and
keep it a secret from inappropriate people. Send Allah’s peace and mercy
and blessings to our companions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Ibid.  
2 BihEr Al-Anwar: 2/74/42.  
3 Ibjd:2/64/I.  
4 Or b. ANt al- Hazlz al- Nakha’y al- Kuff. He reported from al- S&liq,
peace be on him, And the reliable persons reported from him.

And say to them:’ May Allah have mercy upon the person who makes people
love us and tells them what they know and leaves what they
disprove.””[1]

They were persistent on those commandments for their companions. For
example, Jâbir al- Ja’fa’, a reliable person, said: “I have reported
fifty thousand traditions. No one has heard them from me.” Rather, it
was said that they (the traditions) were seventy. And it was said that
they were ninety from al- Baqir only. And be did not tell anyone of men
about them.”[2]

For this reason, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said to al- Ma’alla b.
Khani:” Do not be captives in the hands of men on account of our
tradition: if they wish to make you safe, they do. And if they wish to
kill you, they do. And he, peace be on him, said:’ Al- Ma’allâ was not
killed but because he disclosed our difficult tradition.”’[3]

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said many traditions to prevent their
followers from revealing their secrets and sayings. He addeal that
whoever disclosed them would kill them intentionally, not by mistake.[4]

So, these traditions and others show you the reason why ahl al Bayt
adopted taqiya. It is as if that they knew people would blame the Shi’a
for taqiya, so they denoted the reason for that.

The Effect of the Taqiya on the Service of Religion:
----------------------------------------------------

No one ignores the effect of taqiya on the service of religion and the
ShT’ite society.

That is because the number of the ShT’a at Kufa decreased during the
days of Zyyad to an extent that there was no famous ShT’ ite figure. And
the sate of the ShT’a during the days of al- Hajjaj became worse than it
was during the days of Zyyad. So, the person asked people to call him
Zandiq (duelist) or Kafir (unbeliever) and not to call him a ShT’ite.

In spite of that cruel policy, the number of the reporters of al- Sadiq,
peace be on him, iiacreased to four thousand or more because they
adopted taqiya and were indifferent to policy. This number has been
mentioned by Ibin ‘Uqda, Shaykh TflsT (may his grave be fragrant) in his
book ‘Al- Rijل7l, al- Tibrisy in A’lgm Al- Wars, al- Hilly in Al-
Mu’tabar.

Most those reporters were from Kufa. Al- Hasan b. ‘Ali al- Washa[5]
said:” If I knew that this tradition was demanded very much in such a
way, I would increase it because I knew, in this mosque, (i.e. the
mosque of Kufa) nine hundred shaykhs. Each of them said:” Ja’far b.
Mohammed,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar Aa- Anwar: 2/77/62.  
2 Ibid: 2/6a/2I-22  
3 Ibid: 21/71/34.  
4 Ibid: 2/74/45.  
5 Al- Bajaly al- Kafi. He was among the prominent figures of the ShT’a.
He was among the companions and reliable reporters of al- Rid[ He has
books such as Mas’il Al- Rida, peace be on him. All biographers have
written about him.

peace be on them, has told me.” Al- Washa’ did not know of that class
but few.

From here, you are able to understand the reason why the reporters of
al-S&iiq were many, why al- Sadiq became the source of sciences,
knowledge, commandments, and judgment, why he became a school for the
SunnTs who reported from him such as Malik, Abfl Hanrfa, the two
Sufa’Anis, Ayyflb al- Sikhtiyany, Shu’ba, b. JarTh, and the like.

That happened because al- Sadiq, peace be on him, was far away from
people who accused him of seeking leadership and caliphate, and because
he spread knowledge and ethics secretly. Because of taqiya the sciences
and the outstanding merits of al- Sadiq appeared, people have known the
importance of ahl al Bayt and the truth of the Koran and the sciences of
the religion, the oppression of the masters of the two dynasties has
become clear. Many of the false sects died and became obvious for the
Muslim jurisprudents and theoaogians, and the Shi’a has become seventy
millions and spread everywhere.[1]

From here, you understand the effect of taqiya on the service of the
religion and the Islamic Law, removing oppression and misguidance,
making people know the facts of faith and the false Suspicions and
heresies.

So, I (the author) think that you, after this explanation, will not
listen to any slander about taqiya or about ascribing the ShT’a to the
Bâtiniyya (the Batanians or assassins) because they hide their beliefs
and doctrine.

We have stated the above- mentioned details to tell the truth to those
who claim that taqiya has unknown good traits because it is like a thick
curtain and there maybe a thousand shortcomings behind the curtain. And
whoever adopts taqiya in his religion, howcan people know what he has
and see the beauty of what he hides? But, is this slander true when we
have told about the advantages of taqiya?

But, today, because of printers, the sciences of the Shi’a and their
beliefs have spread, so where is hiding? And where is taqiya?

Taqiya was only at that time when the Shi’a were few in number, and if
the sword had removed them, ahl al Bayt would have had no remembrance,
knowledge, proof, and report.

But, today, the ShT’a are not afraid of publishing any book. Rather,
their books are everywhere and full of information necessary for every
writer or reader who may claim that the doctrine of the Imamis is hidden
adopting taqiya. They do not know its principles and beliefs, nor its
fundamentals and branches.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 In our book ‘Tarikh Al- ShYaa, We have in detail written about the
ShT’a, their number and their countries.
