Al- Sadiq and the Adversities
=============================

This lasting conflict between the religion and the world, which are
rarely united during a certain time, is a trial for religious people.
This conflict caused taqiya and those adversities which hit ahl al Bayt.

The conflict between ahl al- Bayt and the Omayyads and the Abbâslds was
not new as long as ahl al Bat represented the religion and the latter
represented the life in this world.

The MarwanTs and the Abbaslds knew that al- Sfldiq, peace be on him, was
the leader of this conflict. Although he kept silent and did not wage
war against them with the sword, they did not feel safe from him. Maybe
that silence itself was the means of the conflict or it was the conflict
itself, because silence maybe an answer as they say.

The MarwanTs and the Abbâsids subjected al- Sadiq, peace be on him, to
adversities every time. Though he devoted himself to worshipping and
knowledge, they wcre afraid of him, because such devotion meant war in
their viewpoint. Moreover, the phenomenon of religion would turn
people’s eyes to him. So, his position would be strong. Accordingly the
religion would be strong, the people who love this world would be
defeated.

When the Omayyads were united, they killed al- Sadiq’s fathers. But
whethey began fighting each other, they kept al- Sadiq, peace be on him,
alive. Yes, it is as if they left such a matter to his near cousins:”
And the possessors of relationships are nearer to each other.”[1]

The days of al- Saffah were four years. This time was not enough to
clean the land from the Ommayyads, build the foundation of the supreme
power and strengthen its pillars. Nevertheless, that did not divert him
from al- Sadiq, peace be on him. When he was about to destroy the
Ommayyads and build his authority, he sent for al- Sadiq to leave Medina
for HTra to kill him, but the appointed time (of death) is a guard.

Why was al- Sadiq among the cares of al- Safffih while he (al- Sâdiq)
was his cousin, who was busy worshipping, teaching, and guiding
(people), who told them that they would gain great authority instead of
Bany al-Hasan, who suffered from the Omayyds and were afraid of them?

The reason that led al- SafiTh to do that shameful act was that people
turned their eyes to al- Sadiq because they knew his position. Moreover,
people thought that the caliphate should be temporal and spiritual. They
thought that the caliphate should not be separated from religion. So,
they thought that al- Sadiq had to be the man of the caliphate and
religion.

For this reason, al-Mansur was very careful of al- Sadiq, peace be on
him. Accordingly, he subjected him to various kinds of pains and
adversities. He went on doing that till he killed al- Sadiq with poison.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 AL-Anfal: 75.

No wonder that Abü Abd Allah (al- Sadiq), peace be on him, suffered from
those adversities, because the adversities of the person are according
to his position among people and his ambition for high ranks.

Between the rule of al- Mansür and the death of al- Sadiq, peace be on
him, were twelve years in which al- Sadiq found neither rest nor
tranquillity though they lived apart from each other: al- Sffdiq was in
Hijâz and al- Mansur lived in Iraq.

In the book ‘Muhaj Al- Da’awat (prayers), chapter on Da’awat of
al-Sadiq, Ibin Tauws Abu al- Qasim ‘Ali,’[1] may his grave be fragrant,
said:” Indeed, al-Mansur sent for aI- Sâdiq seven times. Some of them
were in Medina and Rabadha at the time when al-Mansur performed the
hajj, some of them were at Kufa, and some were in Baghdad. Eeach time he
mistreated him and try to kill him.” We will mention these seven
attempts in detail as follow:

The first (attempt): Ibin Tâuws reported on the authority of al- Rabi’,
the chamberlain of al-Mansur, who said: “When al-Mansur[2] performed the
hajj and arrived in Medina, he stayed awake for one night. So, he
summoned me and said: RabT’, at this time, if you want to be by
yourself, then do. Go as quickly as possible to Abu Abd Allah Ja’far b.
Mohammed and say to him: This is your cousin. He has sent you his Salâm
and said to you:’ Even if the house is far away and the condition is
different, but we belong to the womb of yesterday... and he asks you to
come to him at this time.’ If he agrees to come with you, then be soft
.with him. And if disagrees for a certain reason or the like, then leave
the matter for him. And if he carefully orders you (that I should) come
to him, then make easy and do not make difficult, and accept forgiveness
and do not be harsh in neither saying nor act, Al- Rabr’ said:’ Then I
arrived at his door (the door of al-Saqid’s house). I found him in the
house of his isolation. I came into his house without permission. I
found him covering his cheeks with dust, invoking Allah with the palm of
his hands. The dust affected his face and his cheeks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   (His name was) Radiuldrn Abü al- Qasim ‘Ali b. Mflsa al- Hasany al-
Hilly. He was from the family of Tauws. He was a man of many abilities,
such as knowledge, worship, asceticism, poetry, literature, composition,
and eloquence. High miraculous acts are attributed to him. It was said:”
He was the best worshipper and ascetic of the people of his time.” In
some of his permissions, al- ‘Allfmah al- Hilly said:” Radiuldrn ‘Au had
miraculous acts. Some of them have been reported. Also my father has
told me some of them. And he was the best ascetic of the people of his
time.”  
2   al-Mansur performed the hajj during the days of al- Sffdiq, peace be
on him, for three times in the years 140, 144, and 147. Also after the
death of al- Sffdiq, he performed the hajj for two times in the years
152 and 158, but he did not complete the hajj. See Tarikh al- Ya’qtlby,
printed in Najaf. Apparently, al- Mans(lr sent for al-Sadiq, peace be on
him, during the first three years.

So, I considered it great to say anything till he finished his prayers
and supplication. Then he turned to me. So, I said: Assalamu ‘alayka,
Abu Abd Allah.’ He said:’ Wa ‘alayka ssalam, my brother, what has
brought you?’ I said:’ Your cousin sends you his salem, then I told him
all the words. He said:’ Woe unto you, RabI’ (Then he read these
verses): Has not the time yet come for those who believe that their
hearts should be humble for the remembrance of Allah and what has come
down of the truth? And (that) they should not be like those who were
given the Book before, but the time became prolonged to them, so their
hearts hardened, and most of them are transgreSSorS.’[1]

‘Woe unto you, O RabT’:” What! do the people of the towns then feel
secure from Our punishment coming to them by night while they sleep?
What! do the people of the towns feel secure from Our punishment coming
to them in the morning while they play? What! do they then feel secure
from Allah’s plan? But none feels secure from Allah’s plan except the
people who shall perish.’[2]

I sent Amir al- Mu’minin assalâm and the Mercy of Allah and His
blessings. Then he went on praying. So, I said:’ After the Salâm
(greetings), is there any answer?’ He said:’ Yes, say to him:’ Have you
then seen him who turns his BACK? And gives a little and (then) with
holds. Has he the knowledge of the unseen so that he an see? Or, has he
not been informed of what is in the scriptures of Musa? And (of) Ibrahim
who fulfilled (the commandments): That no bearer of burden shall bear
the burden of another; and that man shall have nothing but what he
strives for; and that his striving shall soon be seen.’[3] By Allah,
Amir al- Mu’minin, we feared you and the women whom you know better were
afraid because of fear. And we must explain it[4]: You should refrain
from (us); otherwise we will bring your name before Allah, the Great and
Almighty, five times a day[5]. And you have told us from your father
from your grand- father that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said: Four supplications are not curtained from Allah, the
Exalted: the supplication of a parent for his/her child, the brother for
his brother in the absence, and the faithful....’

al-Rabi’ said: When he had finished his words, the messengers of
al-Mansur came to trace me and know my place. So, I came BACK and told
him about what had happened. So, he wept, then he said: Go BACK and say
to him: As for your meeting with us and your sitting away from us, do as
you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Hadrd:15.  
2 Al A ‘ref: a7-99.  
3 Al- Najm:33- 34. These verses have a reminder, preaching, and threat.
They denote that man is punished according to his acts not according to
others’  
4 I think that he wanted to say that it was necessary to explain the
true state of affairs.  
5 He wanted that he would invoke Allah against him after eacfrprayer.
Such prayers are a part of the supplication of the oppressed person,
which is not curtained.

please! And as for the women whom you have mention, so peace be on them,
surely Allah have made their fear secure and driven their worry away. He
(al- RabP) said:’ So, I came BACK to him (al- Sfidiq) and told him about
what al-Mansur had said.’ So, he (al- Sadiq) said: Say to him: You have
linked blood relations, and you have been rewarded a good (reward).’
Then his eyes were bathed in tears so that some tears fell on his lip.

Then he (al- Sâdiq) said:’ RabT’, indeed, even if this world enjoys
(man) with its splendor and deceives (him) with its embellishment....[1]

So, I said: Abu Abd Allah, I ask you by all rightness between yoand
Allah, the Almighty and Exalted, to let me knOw what you had prayed
humbly to your Lord, the Exalted, and made it as a curtain between you
and your care and fear so that may Allah set a broken- (hearted person)
with your cure and make a poor (person) rich with it, by Allah, I do not
mean anyone but I myself. Al- Rabi’ said: So he (al- sâdiq) raised his
hands and advanced to his praying- place. He was reluctant to recite the
supplication, for forgiveness and did not bring that with intention.’
So, he (al- sadiq) said: Say: 0 Allah, I am asking you, 0 You Who
overtakes the runaway, 0 You Who is the shelter of the afraid....”’[2]

During this attempt, apparently, al-Mansur had no bad intention when he
sent for al- Sadiq, peace be on him. So, what troubled al- Sadiq and
scared his women and made him beseech Allah to stop the evil of
al-Mansiir. Surely, Abu Abd Allah (al- Sadiq) was aware of his people.
Through the following attempts, you will clearly understand the evil
aims of al- Mansur towards al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, when he sent for
him.

The second (attempt): Ibin Tâuws reported on the authority of al- Rabi’,
too. He said: “I performed the hajj with Abu Ja’far al- Mansür. When we
covered distance, al- Mansur said to me:’ RabT’, when I arrive in
Medina, remind me of Ja’far b. Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al- Husayn b. ‘Au,
peace be on them. By Allah, the Almighty, no one will kill him but I.
Beware not to remind me of him.” He (al-Rabi’) said: “When we arrived in
Mecca, he (al-Mansur) said to me: RabT’, had not I commanded you to
remind me of Ja’far b. Mohammed before we entered Medina?”

He (al-Rabi’) said:” So I said:’ My master, Amir al- Mu’minin, I have
forgotten that.”’

So, he said to me:” When we come BACK to Medina, remind me of him. I
should kill him. If you do not do that, I will behead you!” So I said to
him:

Yes, Amir al- Mu’minin.’ Then I said to my companions and my servants:’
Remind me of Ja’far b. Mohammed when we arrive in Medina, Allah
willing.” He (al-Rabi’) said: “ My companions and my servants were still
reminding me of him (al- Sadiq) in every house which we

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 We will mention this saying in the chapter: His chosen Commandments.  
2 We have collected the supplications of al- SEdiq, peace be on him, in
a book of 400 pages. We have called this book Du’a’ Al- Sadiq.

entered and dwelled in till we reached Medina. When we arrived in
Medina, I came to al- Mansür, stood up before him and said:’ Amir
al-Mu’minYh, Ja’far b. Mohammed.” He (al-Rabi’) said: “So he (al-Mansur)
laughed and said: ‘Yes, RabT’, go and bring him before me. And do not
bring him before me unless he is pulled.” He (al- R.abl’) said: “So I
said to him: I hear and obey.” He (al-Rabi’) said: ‘Then I got up while
I was in a weighty state because of doing that.’ He (al-Rabi’) said:’
Then I caine to Imam Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace be on them, while he was
sitting in the middle of his house, so I said to him: my I be your
ransom: Surely, Amir al- Mu’minrn summons you. So he said:’ I hear and
obey. Then he got up and began walking with me. He (al-Rabi’) said:’ So,
I said to him: Son of the Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, he (al-Mansur) has ordered me not to bring you unless you are
pulled.’ He (al-Rabi’) said:’ So al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said: Obey,
RaM’, do what he has ordered you.’ Al- Rabi’ said:’ So I began pulling
him from his sleeve. When I brought him (al- Sâdiq) in. I saw him (aI-
Mansfir) sitting on his bed holding an iron bar in his hand. He wanted
to kill him with it. And I looked at Ja’far b. Mohammed while he was
moving his lips. So, I did not doubt that he (al-Mansur) would kill him.
And I did not understand the words with which Mohammed b, Ja’far moved
his lips, so I stood up to look at them both.’ al-Rabi’ said:’ When
Ja’far b. Mohammed approached him, al-Mansur said to him: Come nearer to
me, cousin, then his face beamed with joy. He (al-Mansur) brought him
(al- Sadiq) to him and seated him with him on the bed, then he (al-
MansOr) said:’ Servant, fetch me the small pot.’ The servant brought him
the small pot. In it (the small pot) there was a cup full of a mixture
of perfume. He (al-Mansure) put a lot of this perfume on him (al-
Sadiq).

He (al-Mansure) ordered (the servant) to give al- Sadiq ten thousand
dirhams and a gar,ment. Then al- Mansür (ordered the servant to bring)
al-Sadiq a mule and ordered him (al- Sâdiq) to go. He (al- Rabi’) said:’
When he (al- Sâdiq) left him (al- Mansur), I accompanied him to his
house.’ (There) I said to him:’ May my father and mother be your ransom,
Son of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, when
you came to al-Mansur, I had no doubt that he would kill you. And I saw
you moving your lips. So, what had you said?’ He said to me:’ Yes, RaM’,
know that I had said: Sufficient unto me is the Lord from those who are
lorded over, sufficient unto me the Creator from the creatures.”’

The third (attempt): about sending for al- Sadiq at al- Rabdha’[1] for
the third time, Ibn Tauws said: “Makhrama al- Kindy said:’ When Abu
Ja’far al- Manstar stopped at al- Rabadha and Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace
be on him, had been there then, he said: Who rids me of Ja’far? He was
hesitating

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 A land between Mecca and Medina. Before he became, Aba Dharr, may
Allah be pleased with him, had lived it. He was banished to it. He died
and was buried at it.

and saying: I will get rid of Mohanimed.’[1] If he wins a victory, the
authority will be for me, or otherwise, I will protect myself. Surely,
by Allah, I will kill him. Then he turned to IbrShim b. Jubla and said:
son of Jubla, go to him (al- SAdiq), put his clothing round his neck,
and pull him till you bring him before me.’ Ibrâhim said:’ So, I went
out and came to his house. But I did not find him. So, I went to Abu
Dahrr Mosque. I found him at the gate of the Mosque.’ He (Ibrahim)
said:’ I felt shame to carry out what I had been ordered to, so I took
him be the sleeve and said: Answer Amir al-Mu’minln (the Commander of
the Faithful). He said:’ To Allah we belong and to him is our return.
Let me say two rika’as.’ Then he wept bitter tears while I was behind
him. Then he said:’ O Allah, you are my reliance in every grief and my
hope in every adversity.’ Then he said:’ Carry out what you have been
ordered to.’ So, I said:’ By Allah, I will carry it out even if I think
that I will be killed. I took him. No, by Allah, I had no doubt, but he
(al-Mansur) shall kill him.’ He (Ibrahim) said:’ When we arrived at Bâb
Al- Sitr, he (al- Sadiq) said:’ 0 lord of Gabriel and Mikâl and Isrâffl
and lord of Abraham and Isaac and Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, in this early morning, take care of my health and do not empower
anyone of your creatures (to do) what I cannot endure.’ Ibrâhim said:’
Then I brought him before al- Mansur. So he sat firmly. Then he repeated
the words for him.’ So he (al-Mansur) said:’ I am hesitating. By Allah,
I will kill you, So he (al- Sadiq) said:’ Amir al-Mu’minin, if you do,
then be lenient toward me because I will rarely be present with you.’ So
Abu Ja’far said to him:’ Go away.’ He (Ibrâhim) said:’ Then he
(al-Mansur) turned to ‘Isa b. ‘Ali[2] and said:’ Abu al- ‘Abbas, run
after him and ask him: Do you mean me or yourself?’ He (Ibrâhim) said:’
So he (‘Isa) went out running quickly till he approached him and said:’
Abu’ Abd Allah, indeed, Amir al-Mu’minin says to you: Do you mean
yourself or him?’ He said:’ myself.’ Abü Ja’far (al- Mansur) said:’ He
has said the truth.’

Ibrâhim b. Jubla said:’ Then I went out. I found him sitting. He was
waiting for me to thank me for my good deed.’ And suddenly, he began
thanking Allah:’ Praisbbrr be to Allah whom I ask, so he answers me even
if I am slow when He asks me.’

The Fourth (attempt): The SharTf b. Tauws said:” In this fourth attempt,
he (al-Mansur) sent for him (al- Sfldiq) to come to Kufa.”

He (fr Tauws) said:” After he had mentioned the authority of the report
to him, al- Fadl b. al-Rabi’ said: Abu al-Rabi’ said: al-Mansur sent
Ibrâhim b. Jubla to Medina to bring Ja’far b. Mohammed. Ahe had brought
Ja’far, Ibrahim told me that when he came to him and told him about Al-
Mansur’s letter, he heard him saying:’ 0 Allah, You are my reliance in
every grief and my hope in every adversity.’ When they brought

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Mohammed b. al- Hasan.  
2 Ibin Abd Allah b. al- ‘AbNts. And he was aI- Manstlr’s uncle.

his camel and he went out to mount it, I heard him saying:’ 0 Allah, I
implore you for the beginning and success.’ He (Ibrahim) said:’ When we
entered Kufa, he (al- Sadiq) dismounted and said two ruk’as. Then he
raised his hands toward the sky and said:’ 0 Allah, Lord of the skies
and what they shade and Lord of the seven earths and what they carry.’
Al-RabT’ said:’ When he (al- Sadiq) became in the presence of al-
Mansilr, I entered and told him about the coming of Ja’far and Ibrâhim.’
So he (al-Mansür) summoned al- Musayyab b. Zuhayr al-Dabby, gave him a
sword and said to him:’ When Ja’far bin Mohammed enter and I address him
and beckon to him, then behead him and do not ask the advice of
(anyone).’ So, I went out to him. And he (al- Sadiq) was the friend whom
I meet and associate with when I perform the hajj. I said:’ Son of the
Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, this tyrant has
given me an order which I hate to meet you with, so if there is anything
in yourself, then tell and recommend about that.’ He said:’ Do not let
that scare you, because if he (al-Mansur) sees me, all that will
finish.’ Then he (al- Sadiq) took hold of Maqam’ al- sitr and said:’
Allah, lord of Gabriel and MIkâ’il and Isrâfit and lord of Abraham and
Isaac and Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, take care of me
in this early morning and do not empower anyone of your creatures (to
do) what I cannot endure.’ Then he entered and moved his lips with a
thing which I did not understand. I looked at al-Mansur and I did not
liken him but to a fire on which water was poured and was extinguished.
Then his anger became calm. So, Ja’far bin Mohammed, peace be on them,
approached him and sat beside him on his bed. Then al-Mansür jumped,
shook hands with him, raised him to his bed, and said to him:’ Abn Abd
Allah, it is difficult for me to make you tired, I sent for you only to
complain to you of your family, who cut off their relations with me,
defamed my religion, and provoked people against me. If a person other
than me tpok the reins of authority, they would hear and obey him ‘ So
Ja’far, peace be on him, said:’ You should follow your righteous
ancestors-Ayub (Job) (peace be on him) was afflicted but was patient,
Yosuf (Joseph) (peace be on him) was oppressed but he forgave, and
Sulaiman (Solomon) was given and he thanked.’ Then al- Mansur said:’ I
have endured, forgiven, and thanked.’

Then he (al-Mansur) said:’ Abu Abd Allah, tell us about the tradition
which I have already heard from you concerning observing and
strengthening the ties of kinship.’ He (al- Sadiq) said:’ Yes, I have
heard my father (reporting) from my grandfather that the Prophet of
Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, said:’ obeying (the parents),
and observing and strengthening the ties of kinship, cultivates the
lands and increase the ages.’ He (al-Mansur) said:’ It is not this
(tradition).’ He (al- Sadiq) said: my father told me from my
grandfather, who said:’ Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family said:’ Whoever wants his death to be

delayed and his body to be healthy, then he should observe and
strengthen the ties of kinship.’ He (al- MansLir) said:’ It is not this
tradition.’ He (al-Sadiq) said:’ Yes, my father told me on the authority
of my grandfather that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: I saw a blood relation clinging to the Throne, complaining
to Allah of those who end their relationship with it. So I (the Prophet)
said: Gabriel, and how many (descendants) were among them?’ He (Gabriel)
said:’ Seven fathers’ He (al-Mansur) said:’ It is not this tradition.’
He (al- Sâdiq) said:’ Yes, my father told me on the authority of my
grandfather, who said: Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him snd his
family, said: A pious man whose neighbor was impious was near to death,
so Allah, the Great and Almighty, said to the angel of death (Azrael):
Angel of death, how many (years) have remained of the age of the impious
(man)? He (the angel of death) said: Thirty years. He (Allah) said: Add
them to the pious (man).”[1] So al-Mansur said:’ Servant, fetch me the
mixture of perfume.’ He (the servant) brought him the perfume. He (al-
Mansur) began perfuming him (al- Sadiq) with his hand. Then he gave him
four thousand dirhams, and ordered (the servant) to bring al- Sadiq’s
camel. He (the servant) brought it. He (al-Mansur) began saying: Advance
(it)! Advance (it)! Then he (the servant) brought it near his bed.

So, Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace be on them, mounted it. And I became
before him. So, I heard him saying:’ Praise be to Allah whom I ask and
He answers me.’ So I said:’ Son of the Apostle of Allah, indeed, this
tyrant subjects me to the sword every time. And he summoned al- Musayyab
bin Zuhair and gave him a sword to behead you. And when you entered, I
saw you moving your lips with a thing which I did not understand.’ So he
(al-Sâdiq) said:’ This is not its (appropriate) situation.’ I went to
him at night. He said:’ Yes, may father told me on the authority of my
grandfather that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
said the following. Words of Allah when the Jews, Fazâra, and Ghatfan
provoked (people) against him:’ When they came upon you from above you
and from below you, and when the eyes turned dull, and the hearts rose
up to the throats, and you began to think diverse thoughts of Allah.
That was the most difficult day for Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family. So, he began coming in, going out, looking at the sky,
and saying:’ Be narrow, you will be wide (He was addressing that
difficult situation).’ Then he went out at some (time) of that night and
said to Hudhayfa:’ Look! Who is that?’ He (Hudhayfa) said:’ That is ‘Ali
b. Abu Tâlib, Allah’s Apostle.’ So Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, said to him (‘Au):’ Abu al- Hasan, are you not afraid
that an eye may discover you?’ He said:’ I have granted myself for Allah
and His Apostle. An I have gone out as a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, was aware of the tradition. But he brought
him some traditions to make him know his attitude towards blood
relations.

guard for the Muslims at this night.’ As soon as their words finished,
Gabriel came down (from the sky). He said:’ Mohammed, Indeed, Allah
gives you assalam and says to you:’ I have seen ‘Ali’s attitude since
this night. And I have bestowed upon him Words of My Hidden Knowledge.
If he says these words near a disobedient Satan or an oppressive ruler
or (during) burn or drowning or demolition or rubble or a wild beast or
a thief, surely Allah will make him secure of that. He should say:’
Allah, guard us with Your Eye which does not sleep....”

The fifth (attempt): In this (attempt), al-Mansur summoned him
(al-Sadiq) (to come) to Baghdad before the killing of Mohammed and
IbrThim, the two Sons of Abd Allah b. al- Hasan.’[1] This was reported
by the Sharif Radiyuldin on his authority from Mohammed b. al-Rabi’ (the
chamberlain), who said:” One day al- Mansur sat down in the green dome
in his palace. Before the killing of Mohammed and Ibrahim, the green
dome had been called al- Hamra’ (the red dome). He devoted a day to sit
in that dome and called that day the day of butchering. He had sent
Ja’far b. Mohammed BACK to Medina. He was still in al- Hamra’ all his
day till night came and most of it finished.’ He said:’ Then he summoned
al-Rabi’ and said to him: RabT’, you know your position with me and that
good is done by me and do not reveal it to the mothers of the boys and
take care of it.’ He (al- RabV) said:’ I said: Amir al- Mu’minin, that
is the favor of Allah for me and the favor of Amir al- Mu’minin. and no
one is better than me in advice.’ He (al-Mansur) said:’ Like this you
are. At thihour, go to Ja’far b. Mohammed b. Fatima. Bring him to me in
the state which you find him in. Do not change anything of his state.’
So I (al-Rabi’) said:’ To Allah we belong and to Him is our return. By
Allah, this is the loss. If I bring him (al- Sâdid), he (al- Mansur)
will kill him because he is full of anger. Accordingly I will lose the
hereafter. And if I disobey his order, he will kill me and my family and
take my properties. I made a comparison between the life in this world
and the hereafter. So, myself inclined to life in this world.’ Mohammed
b. al-Rabi’ said:’ So my father summoned me. And I was the rudest of his
children and the most crude- hearted of them.’ So, he (al- Mansflt) said
to me:” Go to Ja’far b. Mohammed, climb his wall, and do not open his
door so as not to change his state. But, came down suddenly and bring
him with the state in which he is.’ He (al-Rabi’) said:’ I went to him
(al- sadiq) while most of the night finished, so I ordered (my guards)
to lean the ladders against the wall, and I climbed the wall and came
down his house. I found him praying. He was wearing a shirt and a
handkerchief which he wore as a loincloth. When he finished his prayers,
I

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Their killing was in the year 145 (A.H.), while al- Mansilr moved to
Baghdad in the year 146, so their is no manifestation that he summoned
him before their killing. Therefore, either he summoned him to Kufa- in
this case there is a mistake made by the copies or the reporter- or he
summoned him after their killing.

said:’ Answer Amir al- Mu’minin.’ So he said:’ let me supplicate (Allah)
and put one my clothing.’ I said:’ You are not permitted.’ He said to
me:’ Let me enter the bathroom to purify myself.’ I said:’ You are not
permitted, too. Do not busy yourself because I will not allow you to
change anything.’ He (al- Rabi’) said:’ Then I took him out bare- footed
and bare headed in his shirt and handkerchief. He was over seventy years
of age.[1]’ When he covered some of the road, the shaykh (al- Sadlq)
became weak, so I had pity on him and said to him: Mount the mule of
Shakiry, who was with us.’ Then we went to al-Rabi’, I heard him
.saying:’ Woe unto you, RabT’, the man have become slow while you are
forcing him to walk quickly.’ When al-Rabi’ saw Ja’far in that state, he
wept. al-Rabi’ was about to become a ShVite, so Ja’far, peace be on him,
said to him:’ RabT’, I know that you are inclining towards us, so let me
say two ruk’as.’ He (al-Rabi’) said:’ Do as you like.’ He said two
ruk’as quickly but, after them, he said a long supplication which I did
not understand.’ When he finished his toni supplication, al-Rabi’ took
him by the hand and led him to al-Mansur, When he (al- Sâdiq) entered
the yard of the palace, he stopped and moved his lips with a thing which
I did not understand. Then I make him enter and stop before al-Mansur.
When he (al- Mansür) looked at him, he said:’ And you, Ja’far, Insist on
your envy, your aggression and your corruption towards the people of
this house, who belong to banU al- Abbâs. Allah doa\#a not increase you
with that but intense envy and unhappiness..’ So, he (aI’ Sadiq) said to
him:’ By Allah, Amir al- Mu’minin, I have done nothing oV that. I lived
during the Omayyad dynasty. You know that they were most dangerous
enemies of all men for us and you. And they had no right’ to take the
reins of authority. So, by Allah, I did not show enmity towarda them
though they were rude with me. Thus how, Amir al- Mu’minin, can a do
this while you are my cousin, the nearest relative to me, and m3a’
benefactox, so how can I do this.’ al-Mansur thought for a while. He war
sitting on a rug of wool under which there was a sword called Dhul Faqat
which he did not leave when he sat in the dome.’ Then he (al-Mansur\>
said:’ You have told lies and committed sins.’ Then he raised the
cushion and took out a file of letters. He threw the file at him and
(al- Sadiq) said:’a These are your letters which you have written to the
people of Khurasan, in: which you have asked them to break my homage and
pay you homage instead of me.’ He (al- Sadiq) said:’ By Allah, Amir al-
Mu’minin, I have not done that, nor have I regarded that as lawful, nor
have I rearded it of my doctrine. I am among those who believe in your
obedience in all’ circumstances. I have become so old that I have no
ability to do that. And If I want that, then put me in one of your
prisons tilt death comes to me because it is near to me.’ So he (al-
Mansfir) said:’ No! No dignity!’ Then

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Sldiq was not over seventy years of age. That was a guess made by
Mohammed. And I think that he estimated his age over seventy because of
his weak body.

he thought for a while, hit the sword with his hand and drew a span of
the band of it, and took hold of its hilt. So I said:’ We belong to
Allah, by Allah, the man (al- Sadiq) shall be killed’. Then he
(al-Mansur) drew the sword and said:’ Ja’far, do not you feel shame,
though you are an old man and of noble ancestry, of propagating
falsehood and sowing dissension among Muslims. And you want to shed
blood and stir up discord between the subjects and the rulers.’ He (al-
Sadiq) said:’ No, by Allah, I have not done this. These are not my
letters nor is this my writing nor is this my stamp’ So, he (al-Mansur)
drew an arm of the sword. I said:’ We belong to Allah. The man shall be
killed. I (al-Rabi’) decided that if he ordered me to (kill al- Sadiq),
I would disobey him. That was because I thought that he (al-Mansur)
would order me to behead al- Sadiq. So, I said that if al-Mansür ordered
me to behead al- Sadiq I would behead al-Mansur instead of him even
though that would destroy me and my sons. Moreover, I would turn to
Allah, the Great and Almighty, in repentance of what I had intended
before. He (al-Mansur) was still admonishing him and al- Sadiq was
apologizing to him. Then he (al-Mansur) drew all the sword but a small
part of it. So I said:’ We belong to Allah, by Allah, .the man (al-
Sadiq) shall be killed’. Then he (al-Mansur) drew the sword, thought for
a while, raised his head, and said to him:’ I think that, you are
truthful. Rabi’, bring the bag from the dome.’ I brought it. He said:’
Enter your haind in it.’ It (the bag) was full of mixed perfume. He put
some of the perfume on his white beard so that it became black. And he
(al-Mansur) said to me:’ Carry him on one of my brisk camels which I
ride, give him ten thousand dirhams, accompany him with honor to his
house, and make him choose when you bring him to the house whether he
wants to stay with us, so we will honor him or he wants to go to the
city of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family.’ So, we left him (al-Mansur) while I was pleased and happy at
the safety of Ja’far, peace be on him. And I wondered at what al-Mansur
wanted and what he concluded because of al- Sâdiq’s ability and defense.
And there was no wonder at Allah’s decision. When we arrived at the yard
of the palace, I said:’ Son of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, there is no wonder at what this (al- Mansllr) had done
at your door and what Allah helped you to match and defend him-there is
no wonder at the decision of Allah, the Great and Almighty. I heard You
praying to Allah, after the two ruk’as, with a long supplication which I
did not know but it was long. And I saw you moving your lips here, I
mean the yard of the palace, with a thing which I did not know.’ So he
said to me:’ As for the first one is the Dua’ of al- Karb and al-
Shada’id (the Supplication of Grief and Hardships), with which I had not
invoked Allah, against anyone before. I have replaced it with a long
supplication which I had read when I finished my prayers, because I did
not want to leave the Supplication. And as for the thing with which I
moved my lips was the

supplication of the Apostle of Allah at the Battle of al- Ahzab (the
allies). My father told me on the authority of his father on the
authority of his grandfather the Commander of the Faithful (Imam ‘Ali),
the blessing of Allah be onthem, on the authority of the Apostle of
Allah, may Allah bless him, who said: ‘ On the day of the (Battle) of
al- Ahzab (allies), Medina was like the crown of polytheist fighters and
they were as Allah, the Great and Almighty, said:’ When they came upon
you from above you and from below you....”[1]

Then he (al- Sâdiq) mentioned the supplication and said:’ Were it not
for the fear of Amir al- Mu’minin, I would give you this money. But you
had asked me to give you my land in Medina; you paid me ten thousand
dirhams for it, but I did not sell it for you, now I have granted it for
you.’ J (al-Rabi’) said:’ Son of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, I want only the first and the second du’as
(supplications), if you do this, then this is the charity and now I am
in no need of the land.’ So he (al-Sadiq) said to me:’ We, ahl al Bayt,
do not break our favor. We will dictate the supplication to you and gave
you the land. Go with me to the house;” So, I went with him as al-
Mansur had ordered me. He gave me the land and dictated to me the
supplication of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, and he dictated to me the supplication which he said after the
two ruk’as.’ Then he (al-Rabi’) said:’ So, I said: Son of the Apostle of
Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, al- Mansür ordered me to
bring you quickly while you were reading this longsupplicatiotr slowly
as if you were not afraid of him.’ He (al-Rabi’) said:’ So he said to
me: Yes, I read a necessary supplication after the morning prayer. As
for the two rik’as, they were of the early morning. I said them quickly,
then Ia read that supplication after them.’ So I (al-Rabi’) said:’ Were
you not afraid of Abü Ja’far (al-Mansur) while he prepared for you what
he prepared?’ He said:’ What did he prepare? To fear Allah is better
than toi fear him. And Allah, the Great and Almighty, was greater than
he in my chest.’ al-Rabi’ said:’ al-Mansur’s anger with Ja’far was in my
heart’ When he was free from (cares) and was good- hearted, I said:’
Amir al-Mu’minin, I have seen a wonder from you.’ He (al- Mansür) said:’
What is, it?’ I said:’ I have seen your anger with Ja’far while you had
not been angly’ with anyone before. Besides you were about to kill him
with the swor& namely you drew a span of the hand of it then you drew
it. Then yOU admonished him and drew an arm of the sword. Then you
admonished him and drew all of the sword but a small part. So, I had no
doubt that you would kill him. Then all that was over. So, pleasure came
BACK again, and’ you ordered me to blacken his beard with the mixed
perfume which only you used and no one elae such as your son al- Mahdy,
your governors, and your cousins. And you rewarded him, canied him (on
one of your brisk

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ‘Al- Ahzab: 10.

camels), and ordered me to accompany him kindly.’ So he (al- Mansi]r)
said:’ Woe unto you, RabT’, this is not among the thing which you must
speak about, rather, it is better to keep it a secret. And I do not want
the sons of Fatima to hear of that so that they will boast of it. It is
sufficient for us what we live in. But I will tell you about everything.
Go and see who are in the house and put them aside.’ He (al-Rabi’)
said:’ So, I put aside all those who were in the house.’ Then he said to
me:’ Go BACK and leave no one in the house.’ So I did. Then he said:’
There is no one here but I and you. I will tell you something. But if I
hear it from, anyone other than you, I will kill you and all your
family, and take your property.’ He (al- Rabi’) said:’ I said: AmIr al-
Mu’minln, I invoke the protection of Allah upon you!’ He said:’ I was
insisting on killing Ja’far, hearing no word from him, and accepting no
reason from him. When I tried to kilt him in the first (attempt),
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, appeared to me.
Suddenly, he (the Apostle) became as a partition between me and him. He
was stretching out his two palms of the hand and baring his arms. Then
he frowned at me. So I over looked him (al- Sadiq). Then I intended to
(kilt) him in the second (attempt) and I drew longer part of the sword,
but suddenly Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
approached me quickly. If I had killed him (al- Sâdiq), he (the Prophet)
would have killed me. So, I refrained (from killing) him. Then I dared
and said: This is an act ofthejinn. Then I drew the sword in the third
(attempt), but Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
appeared to me. He was stretching out his anus. He got ready for (me),
reddened, and frowned (at me). He was about to put his hand on me. So, I
became afraid (of him). By Allah, If I had killed him (al- Sadiq), he
(the Apostle) would have killed me. So, you had seen my reactions. These
are among the sons of Fatima. No one ignores their right but the
ignorant who have no luck in the Islamic Law, so be careful not to let
anyone hear this from you.’ Mohammed b. al-Rabi’ said:’ So he did not
tell me about that till al- Mahdy, MUsa’[1] and Harun[2] died, and till
Mohammed[3] was killed.

The sixth (attempt): The Sharif RadiuldTn b. Tauws said:” In this
attempt, al-Mansur sent for him (al- Sadiq) to come to Baghdad again
after the killing of Mohammed and Ibrahim the two sons of Abd Allah b.
al-Hasan.[4] He (b. Tauws) reported this attempt on the authority of
Safwan b. Mahiin al- Jammat, who said:’A man from the Quraysh who lived
in Medina from banü Makjizum told Abu Ja’far al- Mansur, after the
latter had killed Mohammed and Ibrahim the two sons of al- Hasan, that
Ja’far b.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al-Hady.  
2 al-Rashid.  
3 al-Amin.  
4 See the footnote of the fifth attempt.

 Mohammed sent his servant al-mu'alla b.Khanis[1] to collect mony from
hos Shi,a (followers) to support Mohammed b. Abd Allah, so al-Mansur was
very angry with Ja’far b. Mohammed, and he wrote (a letter) to his
cousin Dawud b. ‘Ali, who was the Emir of Medina, to send him Ja’far b.
Mohammed as quickly as possible. So, Dawtid sent al-Mansur’s letter to
al- Sadiq and said to him:’ Go to Amir al- Mu’minin tomorrow and do not
be late.’ Safwân said:’ I was in Medina ihen, so I went to Ja’far, peace
be on him. He (al- Sadiq) said to me:” Take care of our camels because
we wilt go to Iraq, Allah wilting, in the aarty morning tomorrow.’
Immediately, he and I went to the Mosque of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family. That was between the first (prayer) and the
afternoon. So, he (al- Sadiq) performed some ruk’as in the mosque. Then
he raised his hands so I memorized then some of his supplication:’ 0 He
Who has no beginning nor an end! 0 He Who has no period nor an end!’

Safwلn said:’ When Abü ‘Abd Allah (al- sadiq) entered upon morning, I
brought the she- camel to him and he headed for Iraq till he arrived in
the city of Abu Ja’far (al-Mansur)[2] . He (al- sâdiq) asked permission
and he was permitted. Safwân said:’ Those who saw him with Abti Ja’far
said: When he (al- Manscir) saw him, he approached him, then he told him
about the story of the man’. In his story, he said:’ Indeed, al- Ma’lta
b. Khanis, the servant of Ja’far b. Mohammed collected money to him from
all countries to support Mohammed b. ‘Abd Allah.’ So, he (al- Mansfir)
gave him the story to read it, then he asked him:’ Ja’far b. Mohammed,
What is this money which al- Ma’ ttâ b. Khanls collected from people to
you?’ Abti Abd Allah (al- Sâhe she- camel to him and he headed for Iraq
till he arrived in the city of Abu Ja’far (al-Mansur) . He (al- sâdiq)
asked permission and he was permitted. Safwân said:’ Those who saw him
with Abti Ja’far said: When he (al- Manscir) saw him, he approached him,
then he told him about the story of the man’. In his story, he said:’
Indeed, al- Ma’lta b. Khanis, the servant of Ja’far b. Mohammed
collected money to him from all countries to support Mohammed b. ‘Abd
Allah.’ So, he (al- Mansfir) gave him the story to read it, then he
asked him:’ Ja’far b. Mohammed, What is this money which al- Ma’ ttâ b.
Khanls collected from people to you?’ Abti Abd Allah (al- Sâe she- camel
to him and he headed for Iraq till he arrived in the city of Abu Ja’far
(al-Mansur) . He (al- sâdiq) asked permission and he was permitted.
Safwân said:’ Those who saw him with Abti Ja’far said: When he (al-
Manscir) saw him, he approached him, then he told him about the story of
the man’. In his story, he said:’ Indeed, al- Ma’lta b. Khanis, the
servant of Ja’far b. Mohammed collected money to him from all countries
to support Mohammed b. ‘Abd Allah.’ So, he (al- Mansfir) gave him the
story to read it, then he asked him:’ Ja’far b. Mohammed, What is this
money which al- Ma’ ttâ b. Khanls collected from people to you?’ Abti
Abd Allah (al- Sâdiq) said:’ I seek refuge with Allah from that, Amir
al-Mu’min!n!’ So, he (al-Mansur) said:’ Do you not swear by divorce and
emancipation that you are innocent of that?’ He (al- Sadiq) said:’ Yes,
I swear by Allah that I have not done that.’ Abu Ja’far said:’ No, you
should swear by divorce and emancipation!’ So Abu Abd Allah, peace be on
him, said: Do you not accept my oath by Allah, with whom there is no god
but He.’ Abu Ja’far said to him:’ Do not be a jurisprudent over me!’ Abu
Abd Allah said:’ I am the master of jurisprudence, AmTh al- Mu’minin.’
He said to him:’ Do not speak of this because, at this hour, I am
gathering between you and this man, who has told us about you.’ So, they
brought the man and asked him in tpresence of Ja’far, peace be on him.
So, he (the man) said:’ Yes, this is right, this is Ja’far b. Mohammed,
and what you have told him is as what I have said.’ So, Abti Abd Allah
said:’ Man’ do you swear by Allah that what you have said is right?’ He
said:’ Yes.’ Then the man began swearing and saying: ‘By Allah, with
Whom there is no god but

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   We will mention him in the chapter: Famous Reliable Reporters of Aba
Abd Allah, peace be on him.  
2   It was Baghdad. It was called so because he built it. He moved to it
in the year 146 (A.H.). Maybe, he summoned al- Stdiq to it in this year.

Him, the Demander, the Prevalent, the Eternal, the Self- Existent’. So
Ja’far, peace be on him, said to him:’ Do not be quick in your swearing,
I want to make you Swear.’ al-Mansur said:’ What do you refuse of this
swear?’ He (al- Sadiq) said:’ Surely, Allah, the Exalted, is Eternal and
Generous. He feels shame of His servant when he praises him, so He
(Allah) of His Might and Power and resort to my might and power, surely
I am truthful and righteous in what I (the author) say.’ So, al-Mansur
said to the Quraishi (man):’ Swear in what AbTi Abd Allah has asked
you.’ The man took this oath. When he was about to complete these words,
he became leprous, fell over the ground and died. So, Abti Ja’far became
afraid of that and began shaking. Thus he said:’ Abu Abd Allah, from
tomorrow, go to the Sacred City (Medina) if you choose to stay with us,
we will spare no effort to entertain you, then, by Allah, henceforth I
will not accept.any word from anyone.”’[1]

The seventh (attempt): In the seventh attempt, al- SharifAbu al- Qasim
mentioned a report on the authority of Mohammed b. Abd Allah
al-Iskandary[2], among the prominent companions of al- Mansur, who
said:” One day, I came to him (al- Mansür) and found him sad. He was
breathing coldly. So, I (Mohammed) said:’ Amir al- Mu’minin, What are
you thinking?’ So, he said to me:’ Mohammed, over one hundred sons of
Fatima’s perished. But their chief and Imam has remained.’[3] So, I said
to him:’ Who is He?’ He said:’ Ja’far b. Mohammed al- Sadiq.’ So I
said:’ Amir al- Mu’minrn, worship has made him weak. He devoted himself
to Allah instead of seeking authority and the caliphate.’ He said:’
Mohammed, I know that you believe in him and his Imamate, but authority
is barren. I have taken it upon myself that I will not enter into this
evening tilt I get rid of him (al- Sadiq).’ Mohammed said:’-By Allah,
the earth became narrow in my eye though it is wide.’

Then he summoned a swordsman and said to him:’ When I bring Abu Abd
Allah aI- Sadiq, make him busy with my words, and put my cap on my head
as a sign between me and you, then behead him.’ Then Aba Abd Allah,
peace be on him, was brought at that hour. I followed him to the palace
while he was moving his lips (Mohammed) with a thing which I did

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Some of the Sunni scholarshave mentioned this miraculous act of Abu
Abd Allah, peace be on him. They are al- Shiblanji in (his book) Nar Al-
Absar, al- Sibt in Al-Tadhkira, Ibin Talha in Matalib Al- Sa’fll, Ibiri
al- Sabbagh in Al- Fusfll, Ibin Hajar in Al- Sawa’q, and the like.  
2   He has no biography in the books of our biographers. We know nothing
about him except this report. According to this report, the later
jurisprudents mentioned him. And this report clearly denotes that he was
a shrte.  
3   I think this story was after the killing of Mohammed and Ibidhim
because the battles in Medina and Bakhimra and the prisons in al-
Hrshimiya destroyed many of the Alawrds Also he killed some of them
through patience. Maybe, be (al-Mansur) sent for him to come to Baghdad,
too.

not know. So, I saw the palace waving like the ship in the depth of the
sea. And I saw Abu Ja’far al-Mansur walking before him while he was
bare-footed and bare- headed. His teeth were chattering and he was
shaking. Sometimes he turned red and sometimes he turned pale. He took
Aba Abd Allah by the arm seated him in the throne of his authority, and
kneeled before him as the stave kneels before his master. Then he said:’
Son of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, what
has brought you at this time?’ He (al- Sadiq) said:’ I have come, Amir
al- Mu’minin, to obey Allah, His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, and Amir aI-Mu’minin, may Allah make his power permanent.’[1]

He (al-Mansur) said:’ I have not summoned you, but itwas a mistake made
by the messenger. Then he said:’ Ask your need.’ He (al- Sadiq) said:’ I
ask you not to summon me without need.’ He (al-Mansur) said:’ That is
for you and other than that.’ Then Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, went
quickly. And I (Mohammed) thanked Allah, the Great and Almighty, very
much. Then Abu Ja’far al- Mansür ordered (his servant) to bring the
dawawij (sleeping) bags.... So he slept and ‘did not wake till midnight.
When he a woke, he saw me sitting near his head. So, he became pleased
and said:’ Do not go out till I (the author) say my past prayers, then I
will tell you about something.’ When he finished his prayers, he came to
Mohammed and told him about the fearful things which he saw when
al-Sadiq came. That was the reason why he did not kill him (al- Sadiq)
and the reason why he respected him and treated him kindly.

Mohammed said:’ I said to him: No wonder, Amir al- Mu’minin! Abü Abd
Allah has inherited the knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and his grandfather was the Commander of the Faithful
(Amir al- Mu’minin, namely Imam ‘Ali), and he has some of the Names (or
the Attributes of Allah). If he read them against night, it (night)
would furnish with lights, and if he read them against day, it (day)
would become dark. And if he read them against the waves in the sea,
they would become calm.’[2]

Mohammed said:’ So I said to him (al-Mansur) after some days: Amir al-
Mu’minin, Would you mind allowing a visit to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq?’ He
accepted and did not refuse. So, I went to him (al- Sadiq), greeted him,
and said to him:’ My master, by your grandfather Mohammed, the Apostle
of the Lord of might, I ask you to teach me the supplication

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  There was no heresy when he said:’ To obey Allah, His Apostle, and
Axnrr al-Mu’minin though al-Mansur had no obedience, because the fear
for the life and the dear forced him to come. So to keep them (i.e. his
life and his dear things) was an incumbent on him while disobedience
meant subjecting his life to danger.  
2  These words show us that Mohammed was a ShT’te as well as
knowledgeable. I wonder: How could he say these words frankly before
al-Mansur. No wonder! Because al-Mansur was more knowledgeable than
Mohammed concerning al- Sadiq, peace be on him.

which you read when you came to AbU Ja’far aI- Mansür.’ He (at- Sadiq)
said:’ All right.’ Then at- Sâdiq began telling Mohammed about the
importance of the supplication. Then he mentioned that long
supplication.’[1]

These attempts were some of the adversities which at- Sadiq, peace be on
him, suffered from. Moreover, b. Tawus, may his grave be fragrant,
mentioned two attempts through which at- Mansür tried to kill at- Sâdiq,
but Allah saved him from at- Mansür’s evil attempts.

Digressing the conditions of at- Sadiq, peace be on him, some authors
have mentioned some of these adversities and how at- Saliq escaped
danger through his supplication. Some of these authors are at- Shiblanjy
in (his book) ‘Nflr Al- Absar’, Al- Sibt in (his book) ‘Al- Tadhkira’,
Ibin Talha in (his book) ‘Matalib Al- Sa’fll’, Ibin at- Sabbagh in (his
book) ‘Al-FusUt Al- Muhima’, Ibin Hajar in (his book) ‘Al- Sawa’q’, al-
Shaykh Sulayman in (his book) ‘Al- Yan’bT’, at- Kulayny in (his book)
‘Al- Kafi’, at- Majtisy in (his book) ‘Al- Bihar’, vol. 1, Ibin Shahr
ashüb in (his book) ‘Al- Manaqib’, and at- Shaykh at- Mufid in (his
book) Al- Irshad, and the like.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 We have collected the supplications of al- Sldiq in a book of four
hundred pages. Still many supplications have escaped us.
