His Scientific Life
===================

His knowledge was Inspiration:
------------------------------

There is no virtue like knowledge. With knowledge nations live, become
happy, progressive, and immortal. With knowledge the person becomes
famous, gets a high position, and purifies himself.

There is no wonder when knowledge is better than worship a hundredfold
because the worshipper is righteous on the way of salvation. He has
saved himself only. But the scholar is the reformer who is able to take
great worlds out of the darkness of misguidance. Also he himself is
righteous. He has opened his eyes for his way. And he has seen the way
through opening his eyes.

There is no virtue like knowledge in reforming people, availing them,
and remaining in existence forever. That is because worship, bravery,
generosity, and the like, avail people as long as their owner exists in
this world. When he dies he will have nothing except the good speech,
while the advantage of the scientists remains as long as his science
remains.

The Sunna has praised science and scientists very much. Also in the
Koran, there are many verses which laud science and scientists This is a
clear matter, so there is no need to produce quotation or evidence for
it.

Yes, the importance of this praise concerns religious knowledge and
scholars or it concerns every science and every scholar. I think that
this praise concerns religious knowledge and scholars. That is because
the Prophetic traditions have denoted that. It is enough to mention the
following Words of Allah, the Exalted, from the book:” Those of His
servants only who are possessed of knowledge fear Allah.”[1] Besides,
perhaps, this praise does not concern non- religious scholars because
they do not fear Allah and some of them do not believe in the Existence
of Allah and His Oneness.

Religious scholars are worthy of this praise because they spare no
effort to do good for men. Everywhere and every time, they are guides
and savers.

Religious knowledge is obtained through two ways. They are: inspiration
and acquisition.

Acquisition may lead the scholar to error or correctness. So, the error
of the scholar lead all the world to the error because people follow the
scholar in Commandments, the lawful, and the unlawful, while Allah, the
Great and Almighty, wants people to act according to His Law and
Commandments. Therefore, the scholar should be infallible to lead men to
Allah’s Law and Commandments. And that does not happen except when the
knowledge of the scholar is inspiration or revelation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Fatir: 28.

From here, the knowledge of the prophets and their trustees of authority
should be inspiration to protect them and their nations from committing
errors.

Allah, the Exalted, has revealed one law, not many laws, one commandment
for every matter, not many commandments. And He appointed one guide for
nations in every time, not many guides. But, today, for every nation,
there are many laws, not one law; many legislators, not one legislator.
We find many commandments for every matter, not one commandment . In
every time, there are many guides not one guide. They oppose each other,
hate each other, accuse each other of unbelief, and deny each other.
This is not what the greatest reformer, Allah’s Apostle (may Allah bless
him and his family), has brought and wanted for his nation. Then, there
is no wonder when intellect judges that it is incumbent on Allah, the
Exalted, to appoint, in every time, the most knowledgeable one to lead
people to the law as it has been revealed and teach them the
commandments as they have revealed. That is not appropriate for anyone
but ‘Ali and his sons. These are their scientific sayings. Then read
them to find guidance through their light. If we had no tradition except
the following traditions of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family,:” I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate.”’[1] “I am
going to leave among you the thaqalayn (the two weighty and most
valuable things): the Book of Allah and my family, the members of my
House.”[2] they would be enough for ahl al Bayt to be the most
knowledgeable ones in the Islamic Law and the Book because they learned
knowledge from its origin and took it from its spring. And if they
learned their knowledge through acquisition, then the Prophet would not
have made them the scholars of the Book forever. And what distinguished
them from men if they had shared the same degree of knowledge with them.

What attracts attention is that people always need their knowledge.
Whenever people refer to them for a certain matter they get its answer
quickly while ahl al Bayt never needed the knowledge of people.

We do not want you to feel this truth with the reports only but also
with acts, because acts are very important for you to understand the
reality. Now consider carefully the knowledge of ahl al Bayt through
these acts: Imam al- Jawâd became Imam while he was seven years of age.
He assumed the Imamate and did as his fathers did such as teaching and
guidance. The scholars learned from him. For example, ‘Ali b. Ja’far,
the Shaykh of the Alawids stood up and kissed the hand of al- Jawad when
he came to him and prepared his slippers when he wanted to go out. He
(‘Au b. Ja’far) was asked about the Imam after al- Ridâ, peace be on
him, he said:” His son

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ThrThh Baghdad: 2/377. Kanzal-’1JmaI: 6/156  
2 Ahmad b. Hanbal, Al- Musnad: 4/366.  
Al- Tirmidhy, Al- Salith: 2/308.

Abu Ja’far.” So, it was said to him:” You are an old man, you have a
high social rank, and your father was Ja’ far b. Mohammed; nevertheless
you say these words concerning this boy!” He said:” I do not see you but
a Satan.” Then he took his beard and said:” My power is useless because
Allah has seen him worthy of that (the Imammate) and has not seen this
white hair worthy of it.”’[1] Worth mentioning, ‘Ali b. Ja’far was the
brother of al-Kâzim, peace be on him, and al- Kazim was the grandfather
of al- Jawftd. In other words, there was a great difference in age among
them. Moreover, ‘All learned from his father al- Sâdiq, his brother al-
Kâzim, and his nephew al- Ridâ. Therefore, if they (ahl al Bayt) got
there knowledge through acquisition, then ‘All would be the more
knowledgeable than they. And if the Imam ate was achieved according to
age, then ‘All was the oldest of all ‘AlawTds.

Besides, al- Jawad parted his father when he (his father) traveled to
Khurasan. And al- Jawad was five years old then. So, if ahl al- Bayt got
their knowledge through teaching and educating, then who taught al-
Jawâd to get that very high position after his father? And why the
teacher or the educator not be the owner oJ the pQsition?

Al- Jawâd died while he was twenty- five years old. And you know that
the person who has such an age does not get anything of knowledge even
if he spends all this age in seeking it. So, how could al- Jawad become
the scholar of the nation and its leader, the teacher of the teachers
and their educator? Furthermore, the ShT’a and their scholars had
consulted him since the death of his father al- Rida, peace be on him.

The same state happened to his son ‘All al- Hady, peace be on him.
Al-Jawad died while his son al- Hady was six or eight years old. So, who
taught him and made him occupy that high social position? How did the
scholars and the ShT’a consult him during that age. Does the person who
has such an age do things well if he gets his knowledge through
acquisition?

Like the other Imams, al- Sadiq did not get his knowledge thacquisition.
He did not learn from men or their schools. And if that happened, then
from whom did he learn and under whom did he study? History does not
tell us that the Imams studied under certain persons even during their
childhood. No one has mentioned that they entered schools during their
childhood like other children. Consequently, the Imam inherited
knowledge from his father from his grandfather from the Prophet from
Gibril from Allah, the Exalted. We will discuss al- Sádiq’s scientific
achievements, his teaching for his students, and the like.

His Scientific School:
----------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ‘Al- Kashy, Al- Rijal: 269-270.

The way of learning from al- Sadiq and discussing for evidence was not
as the way we find today in the Islamic theological centers. Rather, his
students, except some of them, believed in his Imamate. As we have
mentioned earlier, the Imâmis believe that the knowledge of the Imam did
not depend on the idea and ijtihâd (capability for issuing a verdict
according to Islamic Law). So, the Imam was asked about the reference.
Rather, his knowledge was inherited and divine. Yes, he was sometimes
asked about the reason for the rule. Such questions were asked for
learning and advantage, not for discussion.

The non- ImamTs learned from al- Sadic1 because they believed in his
greatness, his excellency, and his Imamate.[1] They regarded their
learning from him as a virtue.[2]

Ibin Abu al- HadTd attributed the knowledge of the four juristic
doctrines to him.[3]

The questioner came to al- Sâdiq to ask him about the difficult matters
he met. Most of al- Sâdiq’s students brought sheets of paper and ink
pots to write what al- Sadiq dictated to them to report it carefully.

If you want to know the degree of al- Sâdiq’s knowledge, then think
about the great number of those who learned from him. Their number was
over four thousand students. Why did they all reported from al- Sadiq
and did not report from other than him though there were many scholars
during his time?

Imam al- Sâdiq, from whose school that great number graduated, did not
teach those sciences for reputation and boasting and honor.

In the mean time, his students learned those sciences to serve religion
and the Islamic Law. Whoever broke these aims, al- Sadiq dismissed him
from his school.

His Teaching for His Students:
------------------------------

Al- Sadiq—had many teachings, lessons, and advice. We will devote
special chapters for them. The following are teachings, lessons, and
advice for the students of knowledge.

Amru b. al- Muqdâm[4] said:” When I came to him for the first time, Abfl
Abd Allah peace be on him, said to me:” Learn truthfulness before the
speech.”[5] I (the author) say: How valuable this advice is!

He (al- Sadiq) advised his followers to adopt truthfulness and to pay
the trust. These things are important for the person to live happily in
this world,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Tahdhib Al- Asma’ wa Al- Lughat. Yanabi Al- Mawada.  
2 Mataljb Al- Sa’Ol.  
3 SharhNahj Al- Balagha.  
4 We will mention him with his famous reporters.  
5 al-Kafi.

to be rich and famous. And people will trust him and accept him for
judgment among them.

As for seeking knowledge, al- Sadiq has many directions. He, peace be on
him, sometimes said:” I like to see the young men of you following two
states: either a scholar or a learner. If he does not do (these two
states), then he wastes (his time); if he wastes, he loses; and if he
wastes, he commits a sin.”[1] And he sometimes said:” Seek knowledge and
with it adorn yourselves with clemency and respect.[2] Al- Sadiq not
only urged his students to seek knowledge, but also urged them to adopt
clemency and gravity.” Concerning humbleness, he, peace be on him,
said:” Be humble for him whom you teach knowledge, be humble for him
from whom you seek knowledge, do not be haughty scholars, so, your
falsehood removes your right.”[3]

I (the author) say: How exact this advice is! And how high for teaching
it is! That is because knowledge does not avail its owner nor people
unless it is accompanied by humbleness, whether the person who has
knowledge is a teacher or a learner. And men abandon the haughty person,
then haughtiness removes his right.

Advising those who seek knowledge, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:”
And do not seek knowledge for three (things): for dissembling, for
boasting, and for disputing. And do not seek it (knowledge) for three
(things): for seeking ignorance, for abstaining from knowledge, and for
feeling shame of people. And preserved knowledge is like the lamp.”[4]

I (the author) say: Indeed, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, wanted seeking
knowledge for knowledge and for advantage of the nation. If the person
seeks knowledge for hypocrisy or boasting or argument, he will not avail
himself nor people. Rather, he will harm himself and people. And if the
person leaves knowledge for ignorance and abstaining from knowledge, he
will show his foolishness. Also there is no need in shamefulness which
leads you to the vice and prevents you from getting the virtue. And
people do not avail themselves with knowledge unless it is spread.

Because knowledge is very dear, al- Sadiq urged people to seek it at any
cost. In this respect, he said:” Seek knowledge even if you sacrifice
your hearts and cover the depth of the sea.”

As knowledge maybe taken from various people, so al- Sâdiq prevented his
students from taking it from inappropriate people. He, peace be on him,
said:” Seek knowledge from the origin of knowledge. And beware of those
who intrude upon knowledge because they prevent you from Allah.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Shaykh al- Sadaq. al- Majalis, Majlis no. 11.  
2 Al- Kaft: 1/36/1.  
3 Shaykh al- Sadllq, Majlis no. 17, Bihar Al- Anwar 2/41/2.  
4 Al- KaiY: 1/35/5.

I (the author) say: We see with our own eyes that the learner adopts the
thoughts of his teacher. So, if the teacher is deviated from what is
right, surely he will mislead his student. And if the teacher is
righteous, he will lead his student to righteousness. That is because
the student imitates his teacher by nature.

Al- Sadiq not only urged his students to seek knowledge, rather he
wanted them to apply it, peace be on him said:” Learn whatever you want
of knowledge, indeed Allah does not avail you with knowledge unless you
apply it, because the concern of scholars is to protect (knowledge)
while the concern of the foolish is to report (it)”’[1] Also he said:”
The knowledge which is not put into practice is like the treasure from
which (nothing) is spent. (The person) makes himself tired through
collecting it (the treasure) while he does not avail himself of it.”[2]
He said:” The person who knows good but does not apply it is like the
lamp which gives light for people while it burns itself.”[3]

He (al- Sâdiq) said:” If the scholar does not put his knowledge into
practice, his preachment slips from the heart as rain slips from the
rock.”[4]

Al- Sâdiq showed his students how to memorize what they learned. He,
peace be on him, said:” Write (what you learn) down because you do not
memorize (it) unless you write (it) down.”[5]

Some of what he said to al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr is:” Write and spread your
knowledge among your brothers. If you are about todie, let your children
inherit your books because the time of commotion will come, when they
will not like to be with anything except their books.”[6]

He said:” Keep your books because you will be in need of them.”

Al-a Sadiq, peace be on him, did not want the virtue of knowledge for
the people of his time only. Rather, he wanted it for every generation
and time. Also \\he advised his students to add all virtues to
knowledge. You will know this through his commandments. Also you will
know this through his following words:” If the man of you becomes pious
in his religion, becomes truthful in his speech, pays the trust, behaves
in a good manner towards people, it will be said that such a person is
Ja’fari. Such qualities of his please me; otherwise displeases me. And
it will be said that these are Ja’far’s manners.”[7]

Indeed, al- Sadiq, his grandfathers, and his children did their best to
urge the Muslim community to adopt virtues and to prevent them it from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ‘Bihar Al- Anwar: 17/270.  
2 Ibid: 2/3/55.  
3 Ibid: 2/38/56.  
4 lbid: 2/39/68.  
5 Al- Kafi 1152/9.  
6 Ibid: 1/52/11.  
7 Ibid: 2/636.

practicing vices with various means. But people refused to follow the
righteous way.

Al- Sadiq urged Muslims to take care of scholars and have pity on them.
So, he, peace be on him said:” Surely, I have mercy on three (persons)
and people should have mercy on them: the dear (person) whom abasement
has hit, the rich (person) whom need has hit, and the scholar whom his
people and the ignorant have scorned.”’[1]

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:” Three (persons) complain to Allah,
the Great and Almighty: the empty mosque where its people do not pray,
the scholar among the ignorant and the hanging Koran on which dust has
fallen, and which no one reads.’[2]

Ishaq b. ‘Ammar al- Sayrafa’[3] said:” I said to al- Sadiq, peace be on
him: What about standing up for the man?’ He, peace be on him, said:’ It
is reprehensible except for the man in the religion.’ And he, peace be
on him, said:’ Whoever respects a Muslim juriseprudent, Allah will be
pleased with him on the Day of Judgment. And whoever insults a Muslim
juriseprudent, Allah will be angry with him on the Day of Judgment.”[4]

The Tradition:
--------------

Over four thousand persons reported traditions from al- Sadiq, peace be
on him. Writing down (traditions) was before him and it (writing down)
became very much during his time. And the traditions which were reported
on his authority were about all sciences.

The ShT’a learned traditions from al- Sadiq as those who learned them
from the Chief of the prophets, may Allah bless him and his family. That
is because the ShT’a thought that al- Sadiq did not create those
traditions. Rather, the Prophet had said them. For this reason, the
ShT’a learned them from him without any doubt or objection. Also, they
asked him about every thing which they needed. So, his reported
traditions have every thing.

If the reporters were over four thousand persons, then what would be the
number of the traditions? The biographers have mentioned that Abân b.
Tâghlub reported thirty thousand traditions from him, Mohammed b. Muslim
reported sixteen thousand traditions from him, and thirty thousand
traditions from al- Baqir, and Jabir al- Ju’fy reported a lot of
traditions from al- Sâdiq. Then can you count the traditions reported on
his authority? Many of these traditions have been lost, and some of them
have been neglected. Still, the traditions which were reported on the
authority of al-Sadiq are very many.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ‘Al- Sadaq, al- Khisal, 87.  
2 Bihar Al- AnwTha: 92/195.  
3 We will mention him in the chapter: The Famous Reliable Reporters of
Al- SHdiq.  
4 Bihar Al- Anwar: 47/44/13.

From the four books Al- Kafi, Man La Yahdarahu Al- FaqTh, Al-Tâhdhlb,
and Al- Istibsar, I have collected a part of those traditions which have
been reported on the authority of al- Sâdiq, his grandfathers, and his
children. These traditions are about etl1iics, manners, and rules only.
Then Mulla Muhsin al- Fayd al- KAshany [1]has collected them in the book
Al-Kafi.

Al- Hur al- ‘Amily[2] found other suitable books for Islamic rules. He
has added their contents to those of the four books mentioned- above.
So, he has written his book called ‘TafsTl Wasâi’l Al- ShT’a’. So, he
has reported eighty tradition books from al- Sâdiq with out means and
seventy tradition books with means.

Finally, al- ‘Allama (the scholar) al- Nflry Mlrza Husayn[3] studied
many books. He found them good for issuing Islamic rules. So, he has
written his book called Mustadrak Al- Wasa’il.

The above- mentioned books have been specialized to Islamic rules.
Ethics and manners have not been collected in the four books except
al-Káfi. Most traditions which have been mentioned in these books are on
the authority of al- Sadiq, peace be on him. And if you want to count
the books on the traditions on the authority of al- Sadiq, his
grandfathers, and his children, you will be tired of counting. For
example, Shaykh al- Sadflq Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. Babawayh has written tens
of books which contain the traditions of ahl al Bayt.

What al- Majlisy has collected in his book Bihar Al- Anwar denotes the
plentiful traditions of Ahl al Bayt.

Although this book has strong and weak traditions as the other bi books
have, you will find their plenty when you read some volumes of it.[1] It
is strange that this comprehensive book does not have all the traditions
of ahl al- Bayt So, the great scholar MTrza Mohammed al- Tehrani
collected many traditions of ahl al- Bayt in his book called ‘Mustdrak
al-Bihar’.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   He has many valuable books. It is said that they are about a hundred
books. Some of them are Al- WIll, Al- SIll, Al- Shall, Al- Mahjja
al-Baydff’, Al- HaqK’iq, MalatTh Al- Sharli’, ‘Ilm al- Yaqeen, and so
on. He died in the year 1091.  
2   His name • was Mohammed b. al- Husayn b.’ ‘Ali al- Hur al- ‘Imily.
His book Al-WasI’il is the most valuable book in classification. He
finished the book on Rajab 15th, in the year 1082 A. H. He has another
book called Ainal Al- EmIl. He was born  
at Mashgham village at Jabal ‘Amil on Rajab 8th in the a 1033 A.H. And
he died in Kurasln on Ramadan 21st, in the year 1104 A.H.  
3   He has many valuable books. He used to collect and write. He died in
the year 1320  
A.H.  
1   He was the Shaykit of Islam. He was Shaykh Mohammed Baqir b. Shaykh
Mohammed Taqy al- Majlisy, may his grave be fragrant. He was an
influential figure during the state of the king Husayn al- Safawy. His
theological center had a thousand Students. He has great books other
than Bihlr Al- Anwlr. He was born in the 3’ear 1037. He died in Asfaan
in the year 1110 or 1111 A.H. people visit his grave there.

Al- SIdiq, peace be on him, encouraged his companions to report the
tradition. In this connection he said to Mu’aâwiya b. Wahab,’[1] the
reporter of the tradition:” Whoever is knowledgeable in the religion is
better than a thousand worshippers who have neither knowledge nor a
report.”

I (the author) say: I do not think that you are astonished at this
preference because Allah, the Exalted, wants His servants to avail each
other and reform each other. The worshipper is righteous. And the
knowledgeable traditionalist is a righteous reformer.

Islamic Jurisprudence:
----------------------

Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) is the knowledge of the branch rules
beginning from tahâra (ritual purity) to diya (blood money). These rules
are taken from the four proofs. The most important one of these four
proofs is the Sunna. The Sunna simply means the traditions of the
Prophet and of the members of his House. Of course, this is a ShT’te
definition for the Sunna. So, the ShVte juristic books are taken from
these four proofs. Al-Sâdiq had more traditions than the members of the
House. So, his traditions helped the Muslim scholars to conclUde most of
the Islamic rules.

Not only the ShT’te jurisprudence depended on al- Sâdiq, but also many
Sunni jurisprudence, who lived during his time, learned jurisprudence
front him. Some of them were Mâlik, Abfl HanTfa, the two Sufyanis,
Ayytlb, and so on. Besides, in his book ‘Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 1,
p. 6, b. AbII al-Hadeed has attributed the jurisprudence of the four
doctrines to al- Sadiq. And in his book ‘Mukhtasar Al- Tuhfa Al- Ithnâ
‘Ashariya, p.8, al- Alttsy says:” And this is Abtl Hanifa, who was among
the Sunnis, boasted and said with the most eloquent tongue:’ Were it not
for the two years, al-Nu’mân (Abü HanTfa) would have perished.’ He meant
the two years which he (Abfl- Hanlfa) spent to learn jurisprudence from
Imam Ja’far al- Sftdiq, peace be on him.”

For this reason, it was natural for Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, to
be the unique jurisprudence in Islam. Many reports and reporters justify
his much jurisprudence. And whoever studies carefully the tradition
books will know al- Sadiq’s many traditions and reporters. Many
jurisprudence lived during al- Sâdiq’s time. But their reporters were
very few. And no one of them reached al- Sadiq’s knowledge and
jurisprudence. So, al- Sadiq was ready to answer any question.

Fiqh (jurisprudence) is the general system for men. Without it, religion
is not known. From here, al- Sâdiq ordered his followers tunderstand
religion deeply. He, peace be on him, said:” The tradition about the
lawful

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Apparently, he was al- Bajali al- Ktlfi. He was a great, reliable
figure. He reported traditions on the authority of al- Sldiq and al-
Kfizim, peace be on them. He had a book. A group of the great figures
has reported the book.

and the unlawful which you learn from a truthful person is better than
this world and the gold and the silver where in”

Also, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:” Seeking your life in this world
should not busy you from seeking your religion. That is because the
person who seeks life in this world may achieve it or it may escape him.
So, he will be perished by what has escaped him of it (life).”

To urge his companions to understand religion carefully, al- Sadiq
said:” Would that the whips were over the heads of my companions to
understand the lawful and the unlawful deeply!”

Also, al- SEldiq, peace be on him, said:” Understand religion deeply.
That is because whoever does not understand it deeply then is I’râbi
(nomad).”’[1]

He (al- Sâdiq) was asked about the word hikma (wisdom) in the following
words of Allah, the Exalted, “And whoever is granted wisdom, he indeed
is given a great good.”[2] So, al- Sâdiq said:” Indeed wisdom is
knowledge and understanding religion deeply.”[3]

Al- Sâdiq thought that the jurisprudent was the person who understood
the tradition deeply. So, he, peace be on him, said:” Know the position
of our ShT’a (followers) through their good reports from us because we
do not regard the jurisprudent of them as a jurisprudent unless he
becomes a traditionalist.”[4]

Ethics:
-------

Ethics was not classified in the beginning. Rather, ethics were derived
from the verses of the Holy Koran,[5] from the traditions of the Chief
of the prophets and trustees of authority, and from their wise children,
peace be on them. The ShT’a beg6n writing books about ethics during the
last years of the second century (A.H.). During those years, Isma’Tl b.
Mahran b. Abe NasTr al- SukUny, a Companion of al- Rida’ s (peace be on
him) and a reliable reporter, wrote a book about ethics. He has called
the book ‘Sifat Al- Mu’min wa Al- Fâjir.’

In the third century (A.H.), great figures wrote books about ethics.
Some of them were Abe Ja’far b. Mohammed b. KJiâlid al- Barquqy. He was
among the reliable reporters. His father Mohammed was among the
companions of al- Ridâ, peace be on him, and among his reliable
reporters. The book of Abu Ja’far was one of the best books. He (Abu Ja’
far) died in Qum in the year 273 or 280 (A.H.). And al- Hasan b. ‘Ali b.
Shu’ba has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 BiharAl-Anwlr: 1/215/19.  
2 Al-Baqara: 269.  
3 Bihar Al- Anwar: 1/215/25.  
4 Ibid: 2/82/1.  
5 I have collected many moral verses and explained them briefly in a
book. I have called the book Al- Koran Ta’llmahu wa Irshldahu.

written a valuable book about ethics. He has called the book ‘Tuhaf
al-‘Uqfll’. The book has wise sayings, preachments, and ethics. Then
writing about ethics spread. So, the reliable person in Islam al-
Kulainy, may his grave be fragrant, spent many years writing a book
about ethics. He has chosen the most correct traditions in this field.
Finally, he was able to write the best book on ethics. He has called the
book ‘al- Kaft’ If you read this book, you will know the Islamic ethics,
the knowledge of al- Sadiq and of ahl at Bayt in this field.

Also if you read this book carefully, you will know that it is the best
reference for ethics after the Holy Book (Koran), and that it has the
words of the very polite Prophet and the words of those who inherited
all knowledge and virtues from him. You will know this truth when you
read the chosen words of al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, in this book.

Exegesis:
---------

There are many sources for exegesis in the words which we have already
mentioned about ahl at Bayt. Some exegetes have mainly depended on
traditions to explain the Holy Koran. If you want to know something
about the words of al- Sadiq, peace be on him, in exegesis, then read
the book, ‘Majma’ Al- Bayan’. Some traditions of al- Sâdiq and the ideas
of ahl at Bayt about, exegesis have been mentioned in this book.

Also, there are several books about the verses of rules. The authors
have commented on them using the traditions of ahl at Bayt. We can
understand the knowledge of ahl at Bayt in the exegesis of the Koran
when we read traditions such as:” I am going to leave among you al-
thaqalayn, the Book of Allah and my family the members of my-House. If
you hold fast to them, you will never go astray after me, because they
will not leave each other till they come to me at the hawd (the river in
Paradise)”. al- Sâdiq himself says:” By Allah, surely I know the Book of
Allah from the beginning to the end as if it were on the palm of my
hand, in it, there is the news of the sky and of the earth, the news of
what had happened, and the news of what will happen, Allah, the Great
and Almighty, said: in it (the Koran) “There is explanation for every
thina.”’[1] Also, al- Sadiq said:” By Allah, we have all knowledge of
the Book.[2]

Definitely, an expert in the Koran should be at every time as the
tradition of al- thaqalayn denotes this truth. That is because the Koran
is a silent Imam. It has clear and difficult verses, abstract and
obvious verses, abrogating and abrogated verses, public and specific
verses, unlimited and limited verses, and other verses which people
cannot understand. Every

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 He wanted to refer to this verse:” And We have revealed the Book to
you explaining clearly every thing.”  
2 Al-Kâfi: 1/229/5.

Muslim sect claims that the Koran is the source of its beliefs and that
it has understood its meanings and objectives. Also, every sect produces
evidence for that. According to the claim of the followers of these
sects, the Koran is the source of the differences among them. Then, who
is the decisive arbitrator whose words are able to answer the claims of
these sects? Worth mentioning, the tradition of althaqatayn has denoted
that the scholars of the Koran were ahl at Bayt.

So, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, was the scholar of the Koran during his
time. Besides, there is no person who claim that there was among ahl at
Bayt more knowledgeable than al- Sâdiq in the exegesis of the Koran and
other sciences during his time.

Theology:
---------

Theology means the science which studies the existence of Allah, His
oneness, and His attributes, in addition to Prophethood, the Imamate,
and the return. All these matters are studied through the rational
proofs based on the correct logical rules. Theology does not mean the
debate through which people have lost their way when they depend on some
illogical ideas. Some people use such ideas to defeat their opponents
when they debate with them. They do not depend on a firm proof nor do
they take knowledge from its real origin.

Some traditions dispraise theologians. However, they do not mean them
all. Rather, they mean those who learn debate for boasting and
overcoming, do not learn knowledge from its original source, and paid no
attention to the corrupt results of their debates. However, such
traditions praise those who learn knowledge from its original source,
build it on right foundations and strong pillars. Also the traditions
describes them as the tongues and guides for the truth and the leaders
and propagandists of belief.

Amir al- Mu’mintn (Imam ‘Ali), peace be on him, was the first to produce
rational and material evidence for the existence of Allah. Those who
ignored or were ignorant at the knowledge of Abu al- Hasan on Allah were
about to doubt his orations about the above- mentioned matters, claiming
that people at that time had no knowledge to prove such matters. But
they forgot that Imam ‘Ali learned his knowledge directly from the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who said:” I am the city of
knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate.”

The children of Imam ‘Ali had the same degree of knowledge about the
existence of Allah. So, they taught people what they wanted about the
existence of Allah. That is because it is illogical for people to
worship the Lord whom they do not know, obey the prophet whothey do not
know, and follow the Imam whose position they do not understand deeply.
So, to know Allah is the first and the best science. al- sSdiq, peace be
on him,

said:” The best worship is to know Allah.”’[1] Hearing is not one of the
rules and fundamentals adopted to know the existence of Allah. That is
because the wise men say it is not right for people to copy others in
the rational matters.

People may use Koranic verses and traditions as evidence for the
existence of Allah. But such verses and traditions guide man to use his
intellect or they indicate the instinct like this verse:” Is there doubt
about Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth?” Such a verse does
not force you to believe in the existence of Allaah. Rather, it draws
your attention to that through showing Allah’s èreatures like the sky
and the earth.[2]

When the Prophet and his family produced evidence for these
fundamentals, they urged man to adopt the judgment of intellect. Now
listen to the following words of al- Sâdiq ,peace be on him, in this
respect:” Intellect is the guide of the believer. The pillar of man is
intellect. He who does not think does not succeed.[3] If you read what
al- Kizim, peace be on him, told Hishâm b. al- Hakam about intellect and
the wise, you will know that (a/il a! Bayt) knew the reality of
intellect. So, they guided and urged men to make use of its light.[4]

Ahl at Bayt produced much evidence for these fundamentals (i.e. the
existence of Allah, His Oneness, etc.). We may find such evidance in
books like ‘Nahj at Batagha’ by Imam ‘Ali, ‘Al- Ihtijaj’ by al- Tubrisy,
‘Islll al-Kâff’, ‘Al- Tawhid’ by al- Sadtiq, the first and the second
volumes of ‘al-Bihar’, and so on.

The following are some brief proofs of al- Sadiq, peace be on him, on
the above- mentioned fundamentals.

Existence and Oneness of Allah:
-------------------------------

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, had many proofs about the existence and
oneness of Allah, the Exalted. Some of them are: Tawhid al- Mufaddal- It
is a group of lessons. Al- Sadiq gave them to al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr
al-Ju’fy al- Kuff, who was among the companions who had both action and
knowledge. His (al- Sadiq’s) message called al- IhlIja which al-
Mufaddal reported, too. Al- Mufaddal learned Tawhld (the Oneness of
Allah) from al- Sadiq orally and the message through writing. Though al-
Tawhid and the message have no strong authority of al- Sadiq, their
style indicates that We can mention them both with brief comments, but
we wilt exceed our

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar Al- Anwar: 21/215.  
2 Ibrahim: 10.  
3 Al-KKtI: 1/26/29.  
4 lbid: 1/13/12.

drawn plan. Nevertheless, we will mention some of them lest this book
should be empty of these precious masterpieces.

TawbTd al- Mufaddat:
--------------------

In the Mosque of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
al-Mufaddal heard b. Abfl al- ‘Awja’ and his friend mentioning the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. They were astonished at his
wisdom and high position. Then they mentioned the existence of Aliah.
Ibin Abu Al- ‘Awja’ refused it (Allah’s existence) and claimed that
things began through negligence. Their views annoyed al- Mufaddal. He
was full of anger. So, he abused b. Abfi al- Awji’. After a debate had
happened between them, al- Mufaddl stood up and went to al- Sadiq, peace
be on him. He was very sad. In the meantime he was thinking about such
atheist ideas from which Islam suffered. When al- Sadiq, peace be on
him, saw his sorrowful sight, he asked him about the matter. Al-
Mufaddal told him about what he had heard from the atheists and about
his debate with them. Then, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” I will
tell you something about the wisdom of the Maker, the Great and Exalted,
in creating the universe, the beasts of prey, livestock, vermins, birds,
every thing with soul of the animals, plants, fruitful and non- fruitful
frees, seeds, eatable and uneatable greens, and all things from which
people take a lesson, in which believers trust, and in which the
atheists become confused, so come to me early in the morning tomorrow.

Indeed, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, told al- Mufaddal things which
enlightened the proof, made the suspicion clear, and removed the doubt.
He showed him words of his wonderful manners and excellent deeds, which
perplexed the wise. And he revealed for him some of his hidden wise
sayings of which the wise were not able to reveal.

Whenever I (the author) tried to choose some of his masterpieces, I was
not able because I have found them all good. I was not able because I
have found them in the same color and fragrance. Therefore, I have
mentioned the first part of every masterpiece. And these masterpieces
are four. They are:

**-1-**

Having mentioned the ignorance of the atheists, the factors of their
doubt, the creation of this world, and the regulation of its parts, al-
Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” Mufaddl, we will start with the creation
of man. Take a lesson from it (man’s creation). First of all, think of
the creation of the fetus in the womb. It is hidden in three darkness:
the darkness of the abdomen, the darkness of the womb, and the darkness
of the placenta,

where it has no ability to seek its food, nor to get rid of the harm,
nor to get an advantage, nor to get rid of damage. Indeed some of the
menstrual blood flow through its body to feed it as water feeds plants.
This continues to be its food. When its creation is perfect, its body
becomes strong, its skin becomes strong enough to face the air, and its
sight becomes strong enough to face the light, its mother labors. This
annoys it (the baby) very much till it is born. When it (the baby) is
born, that blood which feeds it separates from the blood of its mother
and goes to her breast. So, the taste and the color turn into another
kind of food. It is more suitable for the new born baby. It (the food)
comes to it (the baby) when it (the baby) needs it. When if (the baby)
is born, it smacks and moves its lips to seek suckling. It (the baby)
finds the breasts of its mother like the hanging skin bags because it
always needs them. It (the baby) goes on feeding on milk as long as it
has a wet body, thin intestines, and flexible limbs. When it begins
moving and needs a harder food to strengthen its body, its teeth come
out to chew food. It goes on that state till it attains puberty. When he
attains puberty and is a male, hair grows on his face as a mark of the
male and the honor of the man, which distinguishes him from.the boy and
the woman. And if she is a female, her face is without hair so that
beauty and freshness remain to move the males to continue progeny.

Mufaddal, take a lesson from the thing which regulate man during these
various states. Then, do you think that these states happen through
negligence? Do you not think that if blood does not flow through its
body while it (the baby) is in the womb, it will fade and dry as plants
do when they lose water? If labor does not annoys it when it becomes
perfect, will not it stay in the womb just like the dead person in the
ground? If milk does not suite it during its birth, will not it die of
hunger or feeds on the food which does not suite it and its body does
not grow due to it? If teeth do not come out in their limited time, will
chewing food not be difficult for it? Or will it not go on suckling, so
its body does not become strong and is not suitable for any work, then
its mother is busy (suckling) it, paying no attention to other than it
of the children? And if hair does not grow on his face in the limited
time, will he not stay in the shape of boys and women, so you do not see
his loftiness and gravity? So, who is this who takes care of it (the
baby) and supplies it with all these needs? Surely, no one but He who
creates it when it was nothing, then He (Albrah) takes care of it (the
baby) wzzzzhen it becomes a human being. Thus, if negligence creates
such a regulation, then intention and estimation may lead to the error
and impossibility because they are opposite to negligence. And these are
horrible words whose owner is ignorant. That is because negligence does
not create correctness and contradiction does not create orderlines.
Allah is free from the things they ascribe to Him!” I (the author) say:
Indeed, negligence always causes an error as we see with our own eyes.
For

example, do you think that the water will cover the plants when you
direct it for them while you neglect to distribute it equally through
the fields? Do you think that the plants will come out orderly when you
sow the seeds disorderly? And do you think that you are able to make a
chair without an order when you collect pieces of wood and join them
with nails?

Then al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” If the baby was born with
anderstaflding and intellect, then he would deny the world at his
birthday, and would be perplexed when he saw what he did not know, and
come to him of which he did not see such as the different pictures of
animals and birds in the world and the like which he saw an hour after
an hour and a day after a day. We may liken such a baby to a person who
is taken from one country to another while he is intelligent. The person
becomes perplexed and is not read to learn the words and to accept
literature as quickly as the person who is taken while he has no
intellect. Then if the baby was born with intellect, he would find it
defect when he saw himself carried, suckled wrapped with pieces of
cloth, laid out in the cradle. That is because he is in need of all
these things because of the softness and wetness of its body. Then he
would find no sweetness and impression which the (normal) baby finds in
the hearts. So, it (the baby) comes out to this world while it is stupid
and heedless about the things which its family has. Thus, it meets the
things with weak intellect and incomplete knowledge. Then it is still
increasing its knowledge little by little, thing by thing, and condition
by condition, till it gets used to things, practices them, and goes on
them. So, it (the baby) comes out of the limit of scrutiny about them
and fhe perplexity at them to the action and the movement to get its
livelihood with its intelligence and power and to learning a lesson from
them (things), obedience, inattention, heedlessness, and disobedience.
Also, in this, there are other viewpoints: if the baby was born with
perfect intellect and independent on its own self, then the object of
the sweetness of the education of children would be futile, the parents
would have no interest through educating the children, they would get no
charity and kindness from the children due to their education for them.
Then the children would not get used to their parents neither would the
parents get used to their children because the children would be in no
need of the education and care of the parenta. So, they (the children)
would separate themselves from them when they were born. For this
reason, the man would not know his father and mother, and would not
abstain from marrying his mother, his sister, and his blood relatives
because he would not know them. Such a thing is ugly. And the more
uglier thing than it is that when he is born too intelligent to see the
forbidden part of her (mothçr). Consequently, how Was everything of
creation was established very accurately? And how is it empty of the
small and the great error?”

I (the author) say: Some of this wonderful explanation of the Imam about
the phases of the baby is enough, according to the judgment of
intellect, to Indicate that the baby has the Maker who creates it
according to knowledge, wisdom, estimation, and arrangement.

Then al- Sadiq, peace be on him, mentioned the advantages of weeping of
the baby. He mentioned that Such weeping has the ability to dry the
wetness of the brain and that such wetness causes dangers to the
eyesight and the body.

Then al- Sadiq, peace be on him, mentioned the intimate parts. He
denoted that they are suitable for each other. Then he mentioned the
parts of the body. And indicated the reason why they were created in
such a shape. From here, al- Mufaddal said to him:” My master, some
people claim that all these things were created by nature.” So, the man
said to him:” Ask them about this nature: is it a thing with knowledge
and ability to create these things or not? If they claim that it has
such knowledge and an ability, then what prevent them from proving the
Creator? Because this is His attribute. And if they claim that it
creates all these things without knowledge and purpose and its actions
are correct and wise, then they should know that these actions belong to
the Wise Creator and what they call nature is His Law which He has
decided for all His creation.

I (the author) say: Consider carefully the words of the naturalists.
They have adopted the same idea since the time of al- Sadiq, peace be on
him, to the present day, as if they had not understood this decisive
answer for their claims or they had ignored it to insist on stubbornness
and unbelief.

Indeed, the Imam has limited nature between two ideas: either it has
knowledge, wisdom, and ability or otherwise. If they admit the first
idea, then this is what we prove for the Creator. So, there is no
difference between them and us except the name. And if they admit the
second idea, then the acts of nature should be disorderly; there is no
estimation and arrangement in them like the person who has no ability to
understand, see and hear, but we feel that all things in this world are
based on knowledge, wisdom, power, and arrangement. Therefore, these
acts do not belong to blind, deaf nature, and nature is a thing other
than Allah, the Knowing, the Almighty, and the Creator, Besides nature
is Allah’s Law in His creation, not an independent thing from the
Creator of the universe.

Then the main, peace be on him, came BACK to his first speech. Lie spoke
about the arrival of the food to the body and how the purified food
moves from the stomach to the liver through thin veins which join them.
They have been created like the refinery for food. Then the thin veins
make the food blood. Then the blood circulates all around the body
through the veins prepared for that. Then the Imam spoke about the
distribution of the blood all over the body and about the waste
materials as if the Imam were a peerless doctor in medicine and a
skillful scientist who spent his life in surgery. Rather, through this
explanation, the imam has discovered the blood circulation which the
Europeans claim that they have discovered. Indeed, the main discovered
it before them in about twelve centuries.

Then the main spoke about the formation of the bodies and their growth
phase by phase and about the qualities of man, which Allah has given for
him to distinguish him from animals. Then he mentioned the senses which
Allah has given for man and the advantages of their present shapes and

their different functions. Then he spoke about the signal and the double
parts of the body and the reasons why Allah has created them in such
shapes. Then the main spoke about the blessings- like food and
water-which He has created for man and about their various creation, so
they do not resemble each other.

The main, peace be on him, went on speaking to the point: if you saw
man’s statue engraved in a wall and a person said to you: That statue
over there has appeared automatically; no maker has made it, would you
accept his viewpoint? So, why do you refuse his viewpoint about this
statue and accept it about the living man who speaks?”

I (the author) say: How strong this proof is! And how lofty this
explanation is! And every wise person throughout centuries is about to
say: The Imam gave this example for the people of his time and produced
Suitable evidence for it.

**-2-**

Then, on the second day, the Imam told Al- Mufaddal about the second
part. It was about the creation of the animal. So, he, peace be on him,
said:” We will start with the animal to know its formation as you have
known the formation of those things before it. Think of the formation of
the body of the animal and its present shape. It is not as solid as the
stone. If it (the body) was solid, then it would not bend. Nor is it
very soft. If it was so, then it would have no ability to bear (things).
So, it was created from soft meat which has the ability to bend. There
are solid bones among it. Nerves catch it. And veins tie it and bring it
together. Then, there is the skin which covers all the body.

Like the bodies of the animals are these statues which are made of
sticks, wrapped with pieces of cloth, tied with threads, then they are
covered with gum. So, the -sticks represent the bones, the piece of
cloth represent the meat, the threads represent the nerves and the
veins, and the gum represents the skin. So, if it is possible for the
moving animal to happen through negligence, without maker, too. As it is
impossible for the statues to happen in such a way, therefore it is
impossible for the animal to happen in such a way, too.

After this, think of the bodies of the animals. They were created as the
bodies of men were created. They have meat,- bones, and nerves. Also
they have ears and eyes. They were created in such a way to help man get
his needs from them. If they (the animals) were blind and deaf, the man
would not avail himself from them, and they would not behave to achieve
his aims. Then they (the animals) were deprived of intellect to obey
man, (in other words) they obey him when he makes them very tired and
carries a heavy load on them. If a person says:’ Man may have some
slaves who obey him with severe tiredness; still they have intellect.’
The answer is:

Such a class of people is very few, and many people do not obey as the
animals do when the latter carry loads, goods, and the like. Then if
people carry out such work with their own selves, they will not be able
to achieve their other work because they will be in need of my people to
achieve the work of one camel or one mule. So, there will be no people
to achieve other acts. In the meantime they will be very tired when they
try to get their own living.”

Then the Imam, peace be on him, mentioned the qualities of the three
kinds of animal: Man, the carnivorous, and the herbivorous. Also he
spoke about their organs.

The Imam tells you about the reason why the eyes are prominent in the
face of the animal and why some mouths of them are spilt in the lower
part and why their mouths were not created like the mouths of men, and
so on.

The Imam guides you to the cleverness of some animals. For example, the
ibex which eats snakes does not drink water because drinking water kills
it. The Fox lies BACK and swells its abdomen when it becomes hungry to
pretend that it is dead. When the prey- bird lands to eat the fox, the
fox jumps and catches it, and the like. So, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him,
said:” Who has made this trick nature in this animal?”

Then the Imam, peace be on hima-mentioned various kinds of animal and
their qualities to show the undeniable wisdom of the Creator.

**-3-**

Then, early in the morning, on the third day, al- Mufaddal came to
al-Sâdiq, peace be on him. Al- Sâdiq said to him:” Mufaddal, I explained
to you the creation of man, what Allah has regulated in him, the various
phases of his life, and the lessons which maybe taken from his
formation. Also I explained to you the formation of the animal. Now, I
will tell you something about the sky, the sun, the moon, the stars, the
orbit, night, day, warmth, coldness, the wind, rain, rocks, mountains,
clay, stones, minerals, plants, date- palms, trees. Also I will explain
to you the proofs about these creatures and the lessons which man takes
from them.

Think of the color of the sky and the exacregulation in it. Indeed, this
color is the most suitable of all colors in strengthening the sight. For
this reason, the doctors have prescribed it for those whose sight has
been harmed. The doctors advise such persons to look at the color of the
sky frequently. Also the skilled doctors advise those whose sight is
weak to look for a long time at a green container full of water. So,
think of the reason why Allah has given the sky such a color. Without
doubt this color does not harm the eyes of men when they look at the sky
for a long time. Thus, this color, which men have known through reason,
careful consideration, and experiments, has indicated strong wisdom in
creation to

make believers take a lesson from it and to make unbelievers, may Allah
destroy them; how they are turned away, think of it (the color of the
sky).

Mufaddal, think of the rise and the set of the sun to cause day and
night. If the sun did not rise, the regulation of all universe would be
null, for people could not, seek their livelihood and manage their
affairs when the world is dark. Besides they would not feel the pleasure
of life when they lose the pleasure of light and its essence. The
objective of the sun rise is clear; it is in no need of wordiness.
Mufaddal, consider carefully the advantage of the sun set. If the sun
did not set down, people would have no calmness nor tranquillity, though
they are in need of calmness and rest to make their bodies inactive,
their senses silent, and to help the alimentary canal to revive to
digest the food and to carry it to all parts of the body. Moreover,
eagerness (for life in this world) would force them (people) to go on
long working which double damages in their bodies. For there are many
people, if it did not get dark, would have neither calmness nor rest
because of eagerness for earning, collecting, and saving up. Besides the
earth would become hot because of the permanent rise of the sun.
Accordingly, all things on the earth, such as animals and plants, would
not live due to the intense heat. So, Allah has regulated it (the sun)
with His wisdom to rise for a time and to set for a time. It (the sun)
is like the lamp which is raised for a time for the people of the house
to fulfill their needs, then it is put out for the same time to be calm
and to take a rest. So, though light and darkness are contradictory,
they help each other to reform the world.

At the end of this meeting, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:’ Mufaddal,
think of these drugs and their advantages which Allah has created to
cure certain diseases. Some of them- like Shitrij- are applied on the
joints to bring out their secretion. Some of them- like Aftiimon- drains
the bile. Some of them- like Skabinj- expel the wind. Some of them
reduce swellings, and so on. Then who has put these advantages in these
drugs? And who has called the attention of men to them?’

Also al- Sâdiq said:’ Know that the rank of the thing is not according
to its value. Rather they are two different values in two different
markets. The cheap thing in the market of earning maybe expensive in the
market of science. So, do not regard as little the lesson taken from the
thing whose value is low. If chemists know what is in the human
excrement, they will buy it for expensive prices.

**-4-**

Then, early in the morning, on the fourth day, al- Mufaddal went to
al-Sadiq, peace be on him. Al- Sâdiq said to him:” Mufaddal, I explained
to you some proofs about the creation and gave you some examples about
the

exact regulation on purpose in man, the animal, plants, trees, and the
like, from which men may take a lesson. Now, I will tell you about
calamities and catastrophes which may occasionally occur, and which some
ignorant men have used as a pretext to deny the Creator, creatures,
purpose, and regulation. It will take us a long time to answer the
claims of the Mu’attila, the Manicheanists, the naturalists.

Some ignorant men have advanced these calamities and catastrophes-like
the epidemic disease, mildew, cold, grasshoppers- which may occasionally
occur as a pretext to deny creatures, regulation, and the Creator. To
answer that, we may say: If there was no Creator and Regulator, then why
would more and uglier things not occur? For example, the sky falls on
the earth and the earth goes in vain. The sun never rises. Rivers and
springs become so dry that there is no drop of water (to quench the
thirst) of the lip. The winds become so calm that all things become hot
and spoiled. And sea water flow over the earth.

Then, why are these calamities and catastrophes not last for ever and
not spread all over the world? Why do they occur occasionally and do not
take long before they are raised? Do you not see that the world is
preserved and protected from these great events of which one is enough
to destroy it thoroughly? The world is occasionally hit by these simple
catastrophes to punish and to reform people. Then’these catastrophes are
raised from them when there is a despair of them. So, the occurrence of
these catastrophes is a sermon for people and raising these catastrophes
is mercy for them. The Mu’attila, like the Manicheanists, have
criticized these calamities and catastrophes which hit people. They both
say: If the world had a compassionate, merciful creator, these hateful
things would not take place in it. Those who believe in this idea think
that man should live in this world without any disturbance. If this idea
was put into effect man would be so insolent and arrogant that no
religion would reform him. For example those who live in luxury,
greatness, and peace lead such a life. So, they forget that they are
human beings or that they are creatures or that a harm or an adversary
would befall them. Besides, they forget to have mercy upon the weak, to
help the poor, to feel pity for the afflicted, to feel pity for the
weak, and to have affection for the grieved. Accordingly, when the
misfortunes hit such people, they learn a lesson from them and know much
of their ignorance and heedlessness. Those -who dispraise these painful
misfortunes are like the boys who dispraise the ugly, bitter drugs, who
are angry when they are prevented from the harmful food, who hate
education and work, who like to give all their time to playing and
unemployment meanwhile they like to obtain every food and drink. They do
not know the bad education and the bad habits that result from
unemployment. They do not know the harmful diseases that result from the
delicious food.

Therefore, they are not reformed by education, nor are they cured by
drugs, even if some misfortunes mix with that.”

I (the author) say: Al- Shdiq, peace be on him, gave examples about the
claims of the unbelievers concerning catastrophes and produced clear
evidence for that. Then he explained Allah’s regulation toward the
claims of unbelievers. He said:” How has He (Allah) ordered the weak
servant to recognize Him with gentle reason while He does not encompass
him?”

He (al- Sidiq) answered: He (Allah) has ordered men to recognize Him
with what they are able to do- it is to believe inHim, to put His orders
into effect; and to refrain from what He has prohibited. In the meantime
He has not ordered them to encompass His characteristics. He (Allah) is
like the king who does not order his subjects to know whether he is long
ar short, and whether he is white or brown. However, he (the king)
orders them to yield to his authority and to carry out his orders. Do
you not think that the person who stops at the door of the king’s house
and says: show me your self, otherwise I will not hear your words, will
expose himself to punishment? Also the person who does not believe in
Allah unless he recognizes His characteristics shall subject himself to
Allah’s wrath.

I (the author) say: According to these wonderful explanations and plain
proofs, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, finished his lessons which he taught
to al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr. So, he (al- Sâdiq), at the end of his speech,
said: Mufaddal, learn what I have taught you, be among the grateful (to
Allah), be among the praisers of His boons, abe among those who obey His
friends. I have explained to you some proofs concerning the creation and
given you some examples about the accurate regulation and purpose. Then,
consider them carefully and learn a lesson from them.”

Al- Mufaddal said:” I left my master and I have learned what no one had
learned before.”

I (the author) say! It is incumbent on the masters of knowledge to make
use of these great wise sayings as al- Mufaddal did. With these wise
sayings, Abü Abd Allah (al- Sadiq) was able to explain the worldly wise
secrets which men cannot understand.

These lessons have indicated the wisdom of Allah in His creation. Also
they have indicated that al- S&diq, peace be on him, was aquatinted with
the philosophy of the creation. Rather, he was a scientist in the Divine
philosophy, theology, medicine, chemistry, and agriculture. Besides he
was the most knowledgeable of all men in that which is between the earth
and the sky, and he was able to explain the wise secrets in that
creation.

Al- IhIKlja (myrobalan):
------------------------

This kind of Oneness (of Allah) has been called al- IhlTlja (myrobalan),
for al- Sidiq, peace be on him, debated with an Indian doctor in whose

hand there was a niyrobalan (IhlIlja). That was because al- Mufaddal b.
‘Ainr wrote a letter to al- S&diq that some followers of the religion
began to renounce Allah and they produced evidence for that; and he
asked him to answer their claims and to produce evidence for them in the
same maimer he followed to refute the claims of those who were before
them.

So, al- SIdiq wrote a letter to al- Mufaddal. In the letter he denoted
as follows:” I have received your letter, so I have sent you, in my
letter, a debate which I made with some people of the other thoughts,
who have renounced Allah: An Indian doctor came to me frequently. The
doctor debated me. One day, while he was powdering a myrobalan
(Ihlilija) to make a medicine for me, he debated with me. Among his
claims is that the world has been one tree grows and another dies, and
one person is born and another dies. Also he claimed that I have no
evidence for my knowledge which I .have taken from Allah. He claimed
that the later generations took knowledge from the earlier ones, and the
young took it from the old, and the different things, the hannonious
ones, the hidden things, and the apparent ones are all known through the
five senses- sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. Then he led his
thinking according to the origin he established. He (the doctor) sakk’
No one of my senses has fallen on a creator leading my heart to deny
Allah, the Exalted.’

Then he said:’ Tell me, what is your evidence for the recognition of
your Lord whose divinity and power you have described, for the heart
knows all things through the proof (i.e. the senses) I have described to
you?’

I (al- Sâdiq) said:’ Through the reason in my heart and the evidence I
produce for His (Allah’s) recognition’. He said:’ How does what you say
happen, and you know that the heart knows nothing but through the
senses? Have you heard His Words with your ear? Have you smelt him with
your nose? Have you tasted him with your mouth? And have you touched him
with your hand? Have you used all these senses to establish knowledge in
your heart?’

I (the author) said:’ You have renounced Allah, for you have claimed
that you cannot feel him with your senses with which you know things,
while I have believed in him. Then, do you think that one of us is right
and the other is wrong?’ He said:’ No.’ I said:’ Do you worry a bout me
because of ahe things which I uses to make you afraid of the punishment
of Allah?’ ‘No,’ he said. I said:’ Do you think that I will be safe of
Allah’s punishment because I have believed in him, while you will suffer
His punishment because of your unbelief and denial?’ ‘Yes,’ he said. I
said:’ Which of us is worthier of resolution and nearer to safety?’ He
said:’ You, but you claim and doubt about your matter, while I am sure
and confident of mine, for Ida not think that my five senses have
perceived Him, and the thing which my senses do not perceive is not
existent as I think.’ I said:’ When your senses are unable to perceive
Allah, you have denied him, while

I have believed in Him when my senses are unable to perceive Him.’ ‘How
is that;’ he asked. I answered:’ Because every thing which has a form
and the eye attains and the senses perceive is not Allah, for He (Allah)
does not resemble creatures moving through the change and disappearance,
and every thing which resembles the change and disappearance is like
them, and the creature is not like the creator nor is the recent like
the Eternal.’

Then, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ I said to him (the doctor):
Tell me, have you seen all directions and reached their ends?’ ‘No,’ he
said. I (al- S&iiq) said:’ Have you ascended to the sky which you see?
Have descended to the lower part of the earth and wandered about its
regions? Have you waded into the plentiful water of the seas? Have you
penetrated all the directions of the air? do you know that all these
(places) are empty of a wise, knowing, discerning regulator?’ He (the
doctor) said: ‘No.’ I (al-Sadiq) said:’ Then how do you know that there
is no creator? That which pour heart has renounced maybe in some of what
your senses have not perceived and your knowledge has not encompassed?’
He said:’ I do not know, there maybe a regulator in what you have
mentioned, and I do not know that he maybe not in a thing of these
things.’

I (the author) say: People may imagine that the words of al- Sftdiq
denote that there is God with body, for he (al- Sadiq) endorsed that He
(Allah) maybe found in a certain direction, and this is among the
qualities of the body. However, al- Sadiq protested against the doctor
who wanted to conclude non- existence after existence. Also al- Sâdiq
wanted to refute the doctor who claimed that there was no God. So, al-
Sadiq wanted to indicate to the doctor that Allah was possible to be
found in the direction which the doctor did not reach. Accordingly, the
possibility of the existence of Allah in a certain direction is enough
to refute the doctor who claimed that there was no God. This proof
forces the opponent to give up his idea and to refute his proof. Also
this proof denotes that al- Sadiq did not want to prove that Allah was
in a certain direction. Moreover, we have understood that al-Sâdiq
refused the recognition of Allah through the senses. So, the thing which
is found in a certain place is perceived with the senses.

Then, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ I said (to the doctor): As you
have gone out of the idea of denial (of Allah) and come into the idea of
doubt, I hope that you will come out of this idea to recognition (of
Allah).’ He (the doctor) said:’ Doubt has entered (my heart) because of
your question about that which my knowledge has not encompassed.
However, how can I be certain of what my senses have not perceived?’ I
(al- Sadiq) said:’ Through your myrobalan (Ihlllija).’ He said:’
Therefore, this (myrobalan) underlines the proof, for it is among the
medical rules for which I yield.’

Then, al- Sadiq began putting questions before the doctor concerning the
creation of the myrobalan and concerning similar things in the world.

However, the doctor tried to escape from the answer because he did not
want to admit that the creation of the myrobalan indicated the creator.
Al-Sadiq went on putting questions before the doctor till he forced him
to confess that the myrobalan came out of a tree.

Then al- Sadiq said:’ Have you seen the unripe myrobalan? Do you know
that it is water in its calyx? Do you know that it has no pulp nor flesh
nor skin nor color nor taste nor solidity?’ He (the doctor) said:’ Yes.’
Al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ I said to him: If the Creator did not
dilute that thin water which is like the mustard in littleness and
simplicity, did not strengthen it with His power, did not create it with
His wisdom, did not estimate it with His estimation, then do you know
that the water will increase and overflow its calyx?’

He (the doctor) said:’ From thdescription of its (the myrobalan) tree,
its creation, its fruit, its growing parts, and its detailed formation,
you have taught me the clearest proofs about the recognition of the
Creator. Your are right when you have said that the things are created.
However, I do not know. Perhaps, the myrobalan and things have created
themselves.’

Then al- Sadiq, peace be on him, proved to the doctor that the myrobalan
was created because it was precaded by nonexistence, and because its
creation indicated that it had a creator, and so on.

Al- Sadiq went on speaking with the doctor, the axis of their speech was
the myrobalan, till he forced him to confess the One Creator. Then,
al-Sadiq debated upon stars and astrologers with the doctor.

Then, al- Sâdiq went on explaining to the doctor the proofs for that
wise Creator through His creatures, such as the sky, the earth, trees,
plants, animals, and the like.

Then, al- Sâdiq explained Allah’s attributes, such as mercy, knowledge,
power, hearing, sight, compassion, will, and so on.[1]

I (the author) say: I have mentioned the subjects of the letter, not the
letter itself because I wanted to conform to abridgment. Apart from the
strong proof and the good explanation, the letter has various kinds of
knowledge. The axis of the debate in it was the myrobalan, which is the
weakest and the smallest of all creatures in size and importance.

His Brief Proofs on the Existence and Oneness of Allah:
-------------------------------------------------------

The plentiful talents are known through the ability of explanation. Al.
Sadiq sometimes gave detailed proofs, as in ‘Tawhid Al- Mufaddal’,
sometimes giving brief proofs with full meaning. For example, when he
was asked about the evidence for the Creator, he answered:” As long as
men have needs.”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwar, 3/152-170.  
2 Tuhaf al- Uqu1

I (the author) say: What brief this sentence is! And what great proof it
is! That is because men always face many needs. These needs indicate
that they always’ search for an authority to fulfill their needs. And
these needs indicate that this authority is One; otherwise the movement
and regulation of the universe is disorderly.

One day, Hishfim b. al- Hakam asked al- Sadiq:” What is the proof that
Allah is one?” Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, answered:” The united
regulation and the perfect creation.”’[1]

I (the author) say: Indeed, each one of these two phrases is enough to
be a separate proof. That is because the united regulation is evidence
for the oneness of the Regulator, for if there were two or three
regulators in the cosmos, surely they would conflict with each other, so
there would be no connected regulation. Also the Perfect creation is
another proof for the oneness pf the Regulator, for the equal regulators
are not always in agreement on everything as it is in the persons who
run a certain country. When they disagree even for a while, they corrupt
the creatures, then where is the perfect Creation? So, the perfect
creation is a separate proof, too.

Abu Shakir al- Daysani asked al- Sidiq:” What is your proof that you
have a Creator?’ Al- Sfldiq, peace be on him, said:” I have found myself
before two ideas- either I have created it or other than me has created
it. If I had created it, then I would be before two Ideas- either I
created it and it was existent, surely it would be in no need of its
creator because of its existence •or it was nonexistent, surely you know
that the nonexistent cannot create anything. So, the third idea has been
proved, which is that I have a creator, Who is the Lord of the
worlds.”[2]

One day, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, asked b. AbG al- ‘Awja’:” Are you
created or not created?” - Ibin Abfl al- ‘Awja’ said:” I am not
created.” Al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said to him:” Describe to me, If
you were created, how would you be?”

Ibin Abii al- ‘Awja’ lowered his head for a long time. He was not able
to answer. There was a piece of wood in his hand. He began playing with
that piece of wood and saying:” Long, wide, deep, short, moving,
motionless, all these are among the qualities of his creation.” Al-
SSdiq, peace be on him, said to him:” If you do not distinguish the
qualities of the created from the qualities of the non created, then
regard.yourself as created.” Ibin AbO al- ‘Awja’ said:” You have asked
me a question of which no one had asked me before, and no one will ask
me after you.”[3]

I (the author) say: All these qualities indicate that man is created;
therefore the created is in need of a creator. 2 ud,al-Tawhid,243.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- SId Self.  
2 al Tawhid, chapter on Allah cannot be Recognized except through His
Own  
3 al- Slduq, al- Tawhld, Chapter on proving the Occurrence of the World.

Negation of Body:
-----------------

Perhaps, some unbelievers have originated the suspicion of body. Then,
it has crept into the beliefs of some Muslim sects who depend on the
surface meaning of the religion. When those unbelievers were unable to
abolish the religion through spreading unbelief, they have inserted
their atheistic beliefs into the religion, for we have found my answers
to their beliefs at that time, and we have read about them very much
through the questions put before al- Sadiq, peace be on him. Concerning
this misleading idea, he said:” The body has limits, and the form has
limits and an end. What is subject to limit is also subject to growth
and decay, and what is subject to growth and decay must be a created
object.”

The questioner said:” What shall I (the author) say?” Al- Sadiq, peace
be on him, said:” He (Allah) is neither body nor form. He embodies all
bodies and forms all forms. He can neither be analyzed nor limited. He
grows not, nor does he decay. If the fact was as they say, then there
would be no difference between the Creator and the created, the Maker
and the made. However, He is the Creator and the Maker, and He Who makes
distinction and differentiation (between HinU and that to which He has
given body, form and molding, for nothing resembles Him nor does He
resemble anything.”’[1]

I (the author) say: This description is about to flow softness and
gentleness with the strong proof and the firm structure. Its clearness
is in no need of explanation.

Also al- Sâdiq said:” Whoever claims that Allah is in a thing or on a
thing or moves from a thing to a thing or a thing is empty of Him or
thing contains Him, Surely describes Him with the qualities of
creatures, while Allah is the Creator of every thing. Allah is not
measured with the measure nor is he likened to men. There is no place
empty of Him nor does a place contain Him. Allah is near in His farness,
far in His nearness. Such is Allah, our Lord. There is no god but
He.”[2]

I (the author) say: How wonderful this description of al- Sâdiq, peace
be on him, is. How exact the meaning of his words is!” He is near in His
farness, far in His nearness!” To recognize these words need wide mercy
and innate.

In this connection, many traditions have been reported on al- Sádiq’s
authority. However, we have contented ourselves with the above-mentioned
traditions from him. The only thing which we must know is that the
judgment of reason needs negation of body and form from Allah, may His
Entity be hallowed. The theological books have fully explained this
subject. The Prophet and his family underlined it, too. That is because
they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Kafi, Chapter on Negation of Body and Fonn.  
2 Bihar al- Anwlr, 3/287/2.

frequently guided men to the judgment of reason. Many traditions have
been reported on the authority of the master of the apostles (i.e.
Prophet Mohammed), may Allah bless him and his family. These traditions
denote that Allah has no body nor form, no throne nor hand, etc. Also
these traditiOflS have ordered Muslims not to depend on the surface
meaning of some verses which underline that Allah has a throne, a hand,
and so on. Some of these verses are:” The Beneficent God has firmly sat
on the Throne.” This verse should be understood as follows:” The
Beneficent God is in firm power.” Also consider these verses:” The hand
of Allah is above their hands.” (i.e. The power of Allah is above their
power.) “Whither you turn, thither is Allah’s purpose.) Ibin Abbas
said:” A Jew cNa’thal came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and said:’ Mohammed, I want to ask you about something always
sound in my mind. If you answered them, I would be a Muslim.” The
Prophet said:’ Abii ‘Amara, ask.’ The Jew said:’ Mohammed, describe your
Lord to me.’ The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said:’ The
Creator cannot be described except with that which He has described
Himself with. How can the Creator be described, while the senses are
feeble to attain Him, imaginations (are feeble) to get Him, ideas (are
feeble) to limit him, eyes (are feeble) to encompass him. Far be He from
what the they describe. He is far in His nearness; He is near in His
farness. He originated modal existence, but He Himself is without
modality. And He originated space, but He Himself is spaceless. So, He
is One and Self- dependent. He has described Himself. The describers
cannot encompass His attributes.’ He begets not, nor is He begotten. And
none is like Him.”’

The Jew said:” Mohammed, you are right. Inform me about your words:’
Allah is one. Nothing resembles Him. So, His Oneness is like the oneness
of man.”’

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said:’ Allah is one
with one meaning, while man is with dualistic meaning- substance and
accident, body and soul. So, the likening is in meanings only.’ The Jew
said:’ Mohammed, you are right.””[1]

I (the author) say: These words of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, clearly deem Allah for above the qualities of creatures. In
the Koran, Allah says:” Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends
(all) vision.”[2]

The Qualities of Occurrence:
----------------------------

lhere are qualities that need occurrence like space, time, modality,
direction, movement, mobility, and the like. According to the surface

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwar, 3/303/40.  
2 al- An’ajn, 104.

meaning of some verses, some people imagine that these qualities are of
the body. So, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, refuted such claims with his
strong proofs. Also some people think that Allah is body depending on
His Words in His Glorious Book:” Nowhere is there a secret counsel
between three persons but He is the fourth of them, nor (between) five
but He is the sixth of them.”’[1] In respect these Words of Allah, Abu
Abd Allah (al- Sâdiq) said:” Allah is a Unity in His entity, Allah
different from His creatures and so has He described Himself. ‘And Allah
encompasses all things’. Everything is under His full supervision,
control and power.’ ‘From Him is not hidden, the weight of (even) an
atom in the heavens and nor in the earth, nor is there aught less than
this and nor aught greater.’ Allah encompasses all things (and nothing
can be hidden from Him) with His full supervision and knowledge and not
by His entity, since the space (which encompasses everything materially)
is confined to four boundaries. If Allah had encompassed all the things
by His Own entity, He Himself would have been subject to the limits of
the boundaries.”[2]

In another tradition, al- Sadiq (peace be on him) says:” Whoever claims
that Allah is from something4aas determined Him as being originated
(after non- being). Whoever claims that Allah is inside something, has
determined Him as being confined. Whoever claims that Allah is on
something has determined Him as something which can be carried.”[3]

Mohammed b. al- Nu’man asked al- Sâdiq about the following Words of
Allah, the Exalted:” And He is Allah in the heavens and in the
earth.”[4] al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” Such is Allah everywhere.”
Mohammed asked:” With His Entity?” al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:”
Woe unto you! Indeed, places have boundaries. If you say that Allah is
inside a place with His Entity, then you should say that Allah is inside
boundaries and the like, while Allah is totally different from His
creatures. He encompasses what He has created (with) His knowledge,
power, encompassment and authority. His knowledge of that which is in
the earth is not less than (His knowledge) of that which is in the
heavens. Nothing is far from Him. All things are equally known,
controlled, owned, and encompassed by Allah.”[5]

Sulayman b. al- A’mash[6] asked al- Sâdiq:” Is it possible to say that
Allah is inside a place?” Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, answered:” Allah
is far above that. If He was inside a place, he would be originated, for
the thing which is inside a place needs the place. Need is not among the
qualities of the Eternal.”[7]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Mujadala, 7.  
2 al- Kafi, al- Tawhld, Chapter on Movement and Mobility.  
3 al- Kafi, al- Tawhid, Chapter on Movement and Mobility.  
4 al- An’Im: 3.  
5 Bihar al- AnwHr, 3/323/20.  
6 He will be mentioned with the Famous Reliable Narrators.  
7 Al-Saduq, al- Tawhld, Chapter on Negation of Time and Space.

Al- Sadiq said to Abu Basir’[1] :“ Indeed, Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, cannot be described with time, space, movement, and stillness.
Rather, He is the Creator of time, space, movement, and stillness. Allah
is very far above what they say.”[2]

Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said to Abd Allah b. Sanfln[3]:” Allah
cannot be described in terms of any modality, space, and direction. How
can I describe Him in terms of any modality when He Himself has created
modal existence, so that it has come into being and we have known a
modality through the modal existence which He had fixed for us. How can
I describe Him in terms of the space since He Himself had made space, so
that it (the space) has come into being and we have known space through
the space which He had fixed for us. How can I describe Him in terms of
direction when He Himself has made direction, so that it (direction) has
come into being and we have known direction through the direction which
He had fixed ‘for us. Hence, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is inside
every place but is out of every thing. ‘The eyes attain Him not, but He
attains the eyes.”’

I (the author) say: The meaning of modality, space, and direction is a
question or an answer about the possible things which can be measured.

When people ask about the modality and space of Allah, then he will have
a modal existence and space. And when they ask about Allah’s direction,
then He is inside a place. If Allah is such, then eyes attain Him, for
the eyes attain the possessor of the body which is inside a certain
place, white the eyes attain Allah not but He attains the eyes.

During a conversation, b. Abu al- ‘Awja[4] said to al- Sadiq, peace be
on him:” You have mentiQned Allah and (in this way) you have made a
reference to (something) absent and unseen.” Abu Abd Allah (al- Sadiq)
said:” Woe unto you! How strange! How can He, Who is a witness to His
creatures, Who is nearer to them than the jugular vein, Who hears their
talking, sees them in their person and knows their secrets, be absent
and unseen?” Again, b. Abu al- ‘Awja’ asked: “Is Allah at every place?
When He is in the heavens, how can He be on the earth? And when He is in
the earth, how can He be in the heavens?” Abu Abd Allah (al- Sadiq),
peace be on him, answered:” You have kept in your view the attributes of
the created which occupy the space to which they are transferred,
vacating the one they are transferred from, without knowing what
happened to the former space. There is no space without Allah of the
highest eminence and Monarch to be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 He will be mentioned with the Famous Reliable Narrators.  
2 Al- Saduq, al- Tawhld, Chapter on Negation of Time and Space.  
3 al- Kafi, al- Tawhld, Chapter on Forbidding any Attribute of Allah not
Described by I-Jim for Himself.  
4 His name was Abd al- Kartm. In his book al- Amflhi, Sayyied al-
Murtad5 has regarded him as one Qf the famous unbelievers of the Arabs.
Mohammed b. Sulaiman, al. Mansar’s governor over Kufa, killed him for
his unbelief.

obeyed, Whom no space can confine and Who in relation to one place is
not nearer than another.”’[1]

I (the author) say: Many traditions have been mentioned on the authority
of al- Sfldiq. They all indicate that Allah, the Exalted, is far above
the attributes of His creatures. However, I have confined myself to the
above-mentioned ones.

Eyes Attain Him not:
--------------------

Some Muslim sects think thateyes can attain Allah in the hereafter only,
or both in here and in the hereafter. However (ahl a! Bayt), especially
al-S&iiq (peace be on him), did their best to abolish this attribute and
to underline that eyes could not attain Him. The following are some
proofs of al- Sâdiq in this respect.

Hishâm said:” I was with al- Sftdiq, peace be on him, when Mu’Awiya b.
Wahab and Abd al- Malik b. A’yun[2] came to him. Mu’awiya b. Wahab asked
al- Sâdiq:’ Son of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
what is your viewpoint about the tradition which says that Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, had seen his Lord? How did
he see him? And what is your viewpoint about the tradition which says
that the believers will see their Lord in Paradise? How will they see
Him?’ Al-Sadiq, peace be on him, smiled and said:’ Mu’àwiya, it is ugly
that the man who becomes seventy or eight years oa’age, lives in Allah’s
Kingdom, and eats from His boons, but he does not know Allah totally.’
Then, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ Mu’flwiya, Mohammed (may Allah
bless him and his family) had not seen the Lord, the Blessed and
Exalted, through the faculty of sight. Vision is of two kinds: the
vision of the eye, and the vision of the heart. Whoever means the vision
of the heart, then is right. And whoever means the vision of the eye,
disbelieves in Allah and His verses due to the (following) tradition of
the Prophet, my Allah bless him and his family:” Whoever likens Allah to
His creatures disbelieves (in Him).” My father told me on the authority
of his father on the authority of al- Husayn b. ‘Ali, peace be on them,
who said:” The Commander of the Faithful (i.e. Imam ‘Ali) was asked:’
Brother of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, have you
seen your Lord?’ He said:’ How do I worship Him Whom I have not seen,
the eyes have not seen Him with the faculty of sight, but the hearts
have seen Him through the realities of belief.’ If the believer saw his
Lord with the faculty of sight, then everything seen by the eye and
vision is created. So, it is inevitable that the created have a creator.
Therefore, you have made Allah originated and created. Whoever likens
Allah to His creatures adopts a partner with Him. Woe unto them! Have

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Sadiq al- Tawhid, Chapter on Movement and Mobility.  
2 They were among the famous reliable companions of al- Sldiq, peace be
on him.

they not heard the Words of Allah, the Exalted:’ The eyes attain Him not
and He attains (all) eyes,”[1] and His Words:’ You cannot (bear to) see
Me. but look at the mountain, if it remains firm in its place, then you
will set Me; but when his Lord manifested His glory to the mountain He
made ii crumble.[2] Though Allah’s Light was as little as the light
which passes through the eye of the needle, It made the mountain crumble
and Mtisâ fell down in a swoon. ‘Then when he (Musa) recovered, he said:
Glory be to You, I turn to You, and I am the first of the believers.’[3]

Then he (Imam ‘Ali), peace be on him, said:” The best duties imposed on
man are: (man) should know the Lord, and acknowledge that he is the
servant of Allah. The least necessary knowledge of the Lord is that
(man) should know that there is no god but He, He has neither like nor
peer. He (man) should know that Allah is eternal, positive. He is an
entity not annihilate and verily nothing is like Him. He is described
without like. Nothing resembles Him. And He is hearing, seeing. After
Him (Allah), is the knowledge of the Prophet and to acknowledge his
Prophethood and what he has brought such as the Book, the Order, and the
Prohibition are all from Allah, the Great and Almighty. After him (the
Prophet) is the knowledge of the Imam whom you follow through his favor,
attribute, and name during hardship and ease. The least necessary
knowledge of the Imam is that he is like the Prophet except the degree
of the Prophethood. The Imam is the inheritor of the Prophet. To obey
the Imam is to obey Allah and to obey Allah’s Apostle. (Men) should
yield to his orders, to consult him, and to carry out his words.

Then, al- Sadiq mentioned the Imams and their names to Mu’awiya. Then,
he said:” Mu’Awiya I have made an origin to you in this (religion), then
act according to it. If you had died following your beliefs, your
consequence would have been the worst one. So, do not be deceived by the
words of those who say that the eye can attain Allah.

Then, al- Sâdiq mentioned to Mu’awiya the hateful false things which
they have ascribed to prophets in general, the Prophet in private, and
(Imam) ‘Au, peace be on them all.

This is some of what has been mentioned on the authority of al- SAdiq on
the impossibility of seeing Allah by the eye. Also al- Sadiq, peace be
on him, had wa idea in every chapter on the Oneness of Allah and in
every verse of the allegorical verses. What we have mentioned is enough
to explain the subject.

Medicine:
---------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al-Anim, 104.  
2 al-A’rlf, 143.  
3 al- An’am, 104.

Allah, the Exalted, has sent down the Book (the Koran) to explain every
thing. The Book hasa brought medicine together in two words as they say.
They are the following words of Allah, the Exalted:” Eat and drink and
be not extravagant.”’[1] Then no wonder when the scholars of the Koran
become scholars in medicine, too. Their explanations on the natures of
things, moods, advantages, harms, show us that they had this science.
Some of the earlier scholars have collected many of their (the Imams’)
words on this science and called them ‘the Medicine of the Imams’ (Tib
al- A’imma). I think this book is not found today. However, al- Majlisi,
may his grave be fragrant, has reported many things from the book in his
book ‘Bihar al-Anwâr’. Also al- Hur al- ‘Aniili has reported things from
it in his book ‘al-Wasâ’ ii.’

The traditions which have been mentioned in Tawhrd al- Mufaddal on the
advantages of drugs and knowledge of al- Sadiq in the members of the
body indicate that al- Sâdiq had knowledge in medicine. Also, his
debates, which will be mentioned in the following chapters, indicate
that, too. The author is able to write a book on what has been mentioned
on the authority of al- Sâdiq concerning the characteristics of things
and their advantages, the treatment of diseases and aches, and diet and
prevention. They (al-Sadiq’s traditions) are lying about the tradition
books, and the like. Perhaps, no one had discovered these traditions
before contemporary science. For example, fever is treated with cool
water. Some people mentioned toaá1- Sâdiq. So, he said:” We, the members
of the house, treat ourselves with cool water.” Concerning washing
fruits, he said:” Every fruit has poison. When you bring fruit, dip them
into water.”

See ‘al- Wasâ’iI’, 3, 276-311, chapter on Food and Drinks.

Al- Jafr (Divination):
----------------------

In Arabic al- Jafr means a full grown he- goat. Perhaps, in the
beginning, this science was written on the skin of a full grown he-
goat. Divination (al-jafr) is the science of the letters with which the
future events are known. It has been mentioned on the authority of al-
Sâdiq, peace be on him, that they (ahl al Bayt) had divination (al-
jafr). Al- SSdiq explained divination (al- jafr) as a container from
Adam. In it (the container) was the knowledge of the prophets and the
knowledge of the scholars from the children of Israel, who died. Many
traditions have been mentioned on the authority of ahl al Bayt on
divination (al- jafr) which they had. Although we do not know the
meaning of this science thoroughly, we know, through the traditions
which have mentioned it, that it is a good science Allah gave to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al-A’raf, 31.

*<span style="font-size: 16pt">(ahl al Bayt)</span>*. Many traditions
have been mentioned in ‘al- KM’ on divination (al-jafr) which
(ahlalBayt) had.

Some Sunni scholars have mentioned that al- Sadiq, peace be on him,
taught (his companions) divination (al- jafr). For example, al- Shiblanj
has mentioned that in his book ‘NOr al- Absflr’, p.13 1. In his book
‘Adab al-Khtib’, b. Qutayba has said:” Imam Ja’far al- Sadiq b. Mohammed
al-Biqir has written the book of divination (al- jafr). In the book,
there is what they (people) need on this science till the Day of
Judgment. AbO al- ‘Ala’ al- Ma’arri has mentioned divination (al- jafr)
as follows:

It has been mentioned in the book ‘al- Fusül at Muhima’: Some scholars
have mentioned that the book of divination (al- jafr) which is in
Morocco, and which banu (the sons of) Abd al- Mu’min inherited, belongs
to Ja’far al- Sfldiq. The book is regarded as a laudable act and an
outstanding merit for al- Sâdiq.

Chemistry and Jibir bin Hayyan:
-------------------------------

Many authors have mentioned the knowledge of al- Sadiq, peace be on him,
in chemistry. Also they have mentioned that his student Jâbir b. Hayyân
al- 50ff al- TartOsi learned this science from him. Jabir has mentioned
five hundred treatises of one thousand pages on chemistry. These
treatises included the treatises of Ja’far al- Sâdiq, peace be on
him.[1]

The earlier and the contemporary orientatists have said many words
concerning JâbTr. In his book ‘al- Fihrast’, pp. 498-503, b. al- Nadlm
has mentioned Jabir and spoke at great length about him. Also he has
mentioned his books and treatises on various sciences, such as
chemistry, medicine, philosophy, theology, and the like. Of course, no
one, during his normal lifetime, is abld to write such sciences but
those unique ones who are granted sharp wit and cleverness, and who are
absorbed in writing. Also b. al- Nadlm has mentioned that Jabir has
writings on the Shl’te doctrine. Then JaLbir became a ShVte. Perhaps,
Jâbir learned these sciences from al-Sadiq and al- Sadiq depended on his
evidence for Jabir’s Shiism.

The author of the book ‘al- DhatVa’, 2, pp. 45 1-452, when he has
mentioned J&bir’s book called ‘al- I’Dâh’ in chemistry, has regarded
J&bir as one of the ShT’te authors.

When you skim through Jabir’s treatises which have drawn the Oflentals’
attention, you wilt be sure of his Shiim and that he learned these
sciences from al- SOdiq. For he obeyed al- Sfldiq and followed his
ideas, and that yoa will know that Jâbir not only learned chemistry from
a!- S&iiq but also theology and the like.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bin Khilkan, al- Tarikh, 1,105.

Muslim authors have admired J&bir’s rank and regarded him as an object
of pride of Islam because he has written over three thousand books and
studies.

The oriental ists have regarded as great that a Muslim Arab, who
belonged to the people of the second century (A.H.), had such correct
ideas, and his theories have become the general bases on which old and
modern chemistry has stood. So, the orientalists have discussed Jabir’s
books at random. They sometimes doubt his existence, sometimes his time,
sometimes the books which has been ascribed to him, sometimes what he
reported on the authority of his teacher al- Sfidiq (peace be on him),
and sometimes classification plan and style, and so on.

The writer Isma’?1 Muzhir, the Owner of ‘al- ‘Ustir’ Magazine, refuted
the doubts and the claims of those oriental ists. Also Dr. Ahniad Zaky
Satih scientifically refuted their doubts and claims through his
writings in the ‘al-Risâla’ Egyptian Magazine, 8th year, pp. 1204-1206,
1230-1237, 1268-1270, 1299-1302.

JAbir declared his Shiism several times. Generally speaking, Jabir was a
ShVte. He was excellent in many sciences, such as theology, philosophy,
medicine, physics. His ideas have become the general foundations of
chemistry, for he learned this science from its correct origin, namely
Imam al- Sadiq, peace be on him.

Other Sciences:
---------------

We have mentioned some of al- Sadiq’s sciences, and people have learned
these sciences from him. However, this does not mean that al-Sadtq had
only the above- mentioned sciences. Rather, according to the Imami idea
the Imam should know everything, should be the most knowledgeable of all
men in every science, art, and lamiguage as the judgment of reason
needs[1] . When we consider the traditions carefully, without proving
the Divine Imamate to him, we will understand that there was in every
time, a scholar in the Book and the Sunna belonging to the members of
the House (ahl al Bayt) as it in the tradition called al-thaqalayn (the
two valuable ones- the Koran and ahl al Bayt). The scholar in the Book,a
which has been revealed to the Prophet to explain every thing, should be
knowledgeable in every thing. As long as the Book is existent, the
scholar, who belong to (ahl al Bayt), is existent till the day of
Judgment. So, the scholar during the lifetime of al- Sadiq was he
himself, for there was no one from (a/mi al Bayt) more knowledgeable
than him during that period. Also his traditions are strong evidence for
his knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 See al- Shi'a wa al- Imama.

Accordingly, al- Sidiq was the scholar of (a/mi al Bayt) during his
lifetime. Besides, he was the most knowledgeable one in the Book, which
cofltRiflS all sciences and arts. So, we have confined ourselves to the
foregoing examples about al- Sadiq’s knowledge, and there is no need to
mentiofl other examples about his knowledge in the other sciences. Then,
no wonderwhen we read in a tradition that al- Sldiq spoke to the
Persians with their language and other peoples with their language, and
that he debated with the people of every science and art and overcame
them. For examnple, he debated with the doctors, and so on. Many
traditions have underlined that.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*
