His Debates
===========

Abu Abd Allah (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him, had many Strong proofs with
which he revealed the truth and refuted the proofs of others. We will
tell you something about them, for they are a part of his scientific
life full of lessons and sermons which the Muslim must study.

His Debates on Oneness of Allah (al- Tawhid):
---------------------------------------------

We have already mentioned something of the speech of at- Sâdiq, peace be
on him, on Oneness of Allah. Among his speech were some debates. Here,
we wilt mention additional debates.

Some of these debates have been reported on the authority of Hisham b.
at- Hakam, who said:” There was an unbeliever in Egypt. The unbeliever
heard something of Abu Abd Allah (al- Sâdiq), peace be on him. He went
to Medina to debate with Abfl Abd Allah, but he did not find him there.
It was said to him:’ He (Abti Abd Allah) has been in Mecca.’ So, he went
to Mecca. We (Hisham b. at- Hakam) were with Abfl Abd Allah (at- Sadiq),
peace be on him. White we were performing the procession around the
Kaaba, he (the unbeliever) met us by chance. His.name was Abd al- Malik.
His kunya was Abfl Abd Allah. His shoulder hit the shoulder of Abfl Abd
Allah (al- Sadiq), peace be on him. So, he (al- Sadiq) said to him:’
What is your name?’ ‘Abd al- Malik’, answered the unbeliever.” ‘What is
you kunya?’ asked al- Sadiq. ‘Abfl Abd Allah,’ answered the unbeliever.
So, Abfl Abd Allah (al- Sâdiq), peace be on him, said:’ Who is this king
(Matik) whose servant is you? Is he among the kings of the earth or
among the kings of the heavens? Then tell me about your son, is he the
servant of the God of the heavens or the servant of the god of the
earth? Say whatever you like.’

Then at- Sâdiq said to the unbeliever:’ When I have finished the process
ion a round the Kaaba, come to me.’ When Abii Abd Allah (at-Sâdiq),
peace be on him, finished that, the unbeliever came and sat before Abfl
Abd Allah (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him. We (Hisham and His Companions)
were sitting in the presence of at- Sâdiq. Then, AbO Abd Allah (at-
Sâdiq) said to the unbeliever:’ Do you know that the earth has upper
part and tower part?’ ‘Yes,’ said the unbelIever.’ ‘Have you come in its
lower part?’ asked at- Sâdiq. ‘No,’ answered the unbeliever. ‘Do you
know that there is something in its lower part?’ asked at- Sadiq. The
unbeliever answered:’ I do not know. However, I think that there is
nothing in its lower part.’ Abü Abd Allah (at- Sadiq), peace be on him,
said:’ Mere thinking is feebleness. Why aren’t you certain?’ Then, AbO
Abd Allah (at-Sâdiq), peace be on him, said:’ Have you ascended to the
sky?’ ‘No,’ answered the unbeliever. At- Sadiq ask:’ Do you know that it
has

something or not?’ ‘No,’ answered the unbeliever. So, at- Sâdiq said:’
How wonderful! You have not reached the east nor the west, you have not
descended to the tower part of the earth nor have you ascended into the
sky, nor have you gone any further to know what is beyond them. However,
you have denied what they have, then does the wise man deny what he does
not know?’ The unbeliever said to al- Sâdiq:’ No one has told me about
that except you.’

Then, Abti Abd Allah (al- Sadiq), peace be on him, said to the
unbeliever:’ Then you have doubt about that (the Creator). Perhaps, He
is existent, and perhaps He is nonexistent.’ The unbeliever person
said:’ Maybe.’ So, Abü Abd Allah (al- Sâdiq), peace be on him, said:’
The person who does not know has no proof over him who knows. The
ignorant person has no proof. Brother of the people of Egypt, understand
my words: We never doubt Allah. Do you not know that the sun and moon,
day and night come successively, while they do no mistake, nor do they
come BACK? They have been forced to do that. They have no place except
their palaces. If they were able to leave their places, then why do they
come BACK? Besides the one who has forced them to do that is wiser and
greater than them.’ So, the unbeliever said:’ You are right.’

Then Aba Abd Allah (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him, said:’ Brother of the
people of Egypt, you think that the time forces them (the sun and the
moon, day and night) to come successively, then why does the time not
force them to come BACK? And if the time was able to force them to come
BACK, why does it not take them away? Brother of the people of Egypt, if
they are forced (to do that), why is the sky raised? Why is the earth
set? Why does the sky do not slope down the earth? Why does the earth do
not slope down its layers? Why do the sky and the eartfr do not stick
together? Why does what’s on the earth not stick together?’ The
unbeliever aierson said:’ Their Lord and Master has prevented them (the
sky and the earth) from sticking together.’

He (Hisham b. at- Hakam) said:’ So, the unbeliever believed in Allah
with the help of Abü Abd Allah (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him.’ “ Then,
Hamran b. A’yun said:” May I be ransom for you, the unbetievers believed
in Allah with the help of your father, too.” Then the unbeliever who
believed in Allah with the help of AbLi Abd Allah (at- Sâdiq), peace be
on him, said to at- Sâdiq:” Make me among your students.” So, AbU Abd
Allah (at- Sfldiq), peace be on him, said:” Hisham, the teacher of the
people of Sham (Syria) and Egypt, teach him belief.” So, the inner self
of the unbeliever became good. Then AbU Abd Allah (at- Sâdiq), peace be
on him, was satisfied with him.

Another unbeliever came to at- Sadiq and asked him about something. The
following are some extracts of them. The unbeliever asked him:” How do
the creatures worship Allah, while they do not see Him?” Abu Abd

Allah, peace be on him, said:” The hearts have seen Him through the
light of belief. Reason has proven him through its attention as the
faculty of sight. The eyes have seen Him through His good formation and
firm regulation. Then (people have known Allah) through the apostles and
their proofs, the Books and their clear verses. And the scholars have
limited themselves to what they have seen of His Greatness without
seeing Him.” The unbeliever said:” Is He not able to manifest Himself to
people to know Him and to worship Him with conviction?” He (at- Sadiq),
peace be on him, said:” There is no answer to the impossible things.”

I (the author) say: The vision is proven for bodies. As Allah is not
body, then seeing I-Jim is impossible. The impossible thing cannot be
achieved not because there is a defect in power but because of the
defect in the impossible things.

Then, the unbeliever said:” How do you prove (the position of) the
prophets and the Divine messengers?” He (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him,
answered:” As we have proven that there is One Creator for us, Who is
far above us, and also far above all that has been created. And that He
is All-wise, Most High, and the One. who cannot possible be seen or
sensed by His creatures so that there could be any direct relation
between Him and His creatures or His creatures and Him, and so that He
could argue with His creatures (to convince them) and His creatures
could argue with Him (in their turn). It is (therefore) proved that
there are envoys (mab’flthTn) to establish a relation between Him and
His creatures to explain His purpose to His creatures and servants and
to guide them towards what is good and profitable for them, and also
towards that which preserves their existence and which, avhen it is
abandoned, brings annihilation. Thus it has been proven that there are
those among His creatures who command and forbid on behalf of (Allah),
the Alt- knowing, the All- Wise, and who speak on behalf of Him, to whom
belong Might and Majesty. They are the prophets, the selected among His
creatures, the wise who teach wisdom, and who are sent with wisdom (for
His creatures). Although they have their form in common with (other)
creatures, their states they donot share with them. They have been aided
with wise proofs, such as giving life to the dead, healing the blind and
the leprous, by (Allah) the All- Wise, the All-Knowing.”

Then, the unbeliever said:” From which thing has He (Allah) created the
things?” He (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him, said:” From nothing.” He (the
unbeliever) said:” How is the thing created from nothing?” He (at-
Sadiq) said:” Either the things have been created from a thing or from
nothing. If the things were created from a thing, then the thing would
be eternal, and the eternal (thing) would not be originated or changed.
Besides that thing would be one essence and one color, then from where
have these different colors and many essences come in this world? From
where has death come

if the thing from which the things have been created is living? And from
where has life come if that thing is dead?”

I (the author) say: Although this matter is very difficult, the Imam has
clearly explained it according to logical reasons.

Then the unbeliever said:” From where have they (people) believed that
the things are eternal?” He (at- Sâdiq), peace be on him, said:” This is
the thought of the people who denied the Creator of the things, accused
the messengers and their thoughts of lying. They (people) called the
Books of the prophets fables. They put religion for thefliselves
according to their ideas and approval, while the things indicate their
creation, such as the rotation of the orbit and what it has; they are
seven orbits, the movement of the earth and what is on it, the change of
time....”

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, had many debates with b. Abü at- ‘Awjâ’. One
of them is as follows:

One day, b. Abfl at- ‘Awja’ and b. at- Muqaffa’ were in at- Masjid
at-Harâm (the Holy Mosque in Mecca). Bin at- Muqaffa’ said:” Look at
those people, who are performing the procession a round the Kaaba. No
one of them is worthy of the name of humanity except that Shaykh (he
meant Abu Abd Allah Ja’far at- Sâdiq, peace be on him) the rest are mere
rabble and beasts. Bin Abfl at- ‘Awja’ asked him:” Why have you excluded
that Shaykh?” Ibin at- Muqaffa’ answered:” Because he has outstanding
qualities of which none has.” “I must test your words,” bin Abfl at-
‘Awja’ answered. Bin at- Muqaffa’ said to him:” Do not do that, for I am
afraid that he will abrogate your beliefs.” “This is not your purpose.
However, you are afraid that your opinion will be weak with me when I
discover something contrary to his rank which you have described to me.”
Bin a!-Muqaffa’ said:” Do not worry! Go and test him. Beware of giving
free rein to your ideas so as not to overcome you.” Ibin Abü Al- a‘Awjâ’
went to al-Sâdiq. Then he came BACK and said:” Bin at- Muqaffa’, woe
unto you! This is not a human being.” “ What has happened to you?” asked
b. at-Muqaffa’. Bin Abü at- ‘Awja’ answered:” I attended his meeting.
When there was no one there, he said to me: ‘If the matter is according
to what those believe, and it is according to their belief, then they
will be saved, while you wilt be ruined. And if the matter is according
to what you believe, and it is not according to your belief, then you
and they are equal.’I (Bin Abü at- ‘Awjâ’) said: “May Allah have mercy
upon you, what is the difference between their belief and ours? Their
belief and ours is the same.” At- Sadiq said: “How can your belief and
theirs be the same? They believe in Resurrection, the reward, the
punishment. They believe that the sky has God, and it is inhabited,
while you claim that the sky is destruction and has no one.” He (Bin AbD
at- ‘Awja’) said: “So, I seized the opportunity and said to him: ‘If the
matter is according to their belief, then what has prevented Him (Allah)
from manifesting Himself to His creature

to summon them to worship Him a as no two persons are disagreed on Him?
Why has he hidden Himself from them and sent the messengers to them? If
He manifested Himself, people would believe in Him easily.’ “at-Sffdiq
said to me:” Woe unto you! He Who has shown you His power in yoursetfa
how has He hidden Himself from you? He has created you while you were
nothing, made you grow up while you were a child, made you strong while
you were weak. Now, think of your illness after your health, your health
after your illness, your pleasure after your anger, your anger after
your pleasure, your sorrow after your happiness, your happiness after
your sorrow, your love after your hatred, your hatred after your
love.... He (at- Sâdiq) went on mentioning Allah’s favors which are in
myself and which I cannot deny. So, I thought that He (Allah) would
appear between him (al- Sâdiq) and me.”[1]

Abu Shakir at- Daysany, an Arab unbeliever, sometimes debated with
at-Sâdiq, peace be on him, and sometimes with Hishâm b. at- Hakam.
However, Hishâm went to at- Sadiq, peace be on him, when at- Daysany
asked him a certain question. One day, at- Daysâny said to Hishâm:”
There is a verse in the Koran, which is our saying, (that there are two
gods).” Hishâm said:” What is it (the verse)?” Al- Daysâny answered:”
And it is He Who in heaven is God and in earth is God.[2] Hisham said:”
I did not know how to answer him. So, I went to perform the hajj and I
told Abü Abd Allah, peace be on him, about the question.” Al- Sadiq
said:” These are the words of an unbeliever. When you come BACK, ask
him: What is your name in Kufa? Surety, he will say by such and such
name. Then ask him:’ What is your name in Basrah?’ Surety he wilt reply
by such and such name. Then you tell him:’ Such is our Lord, Allah, Who
in heavens is God, in earth is God, in seas is God, in deserts is God.
Thus, He is God at every place.’” Hishâm said:” I came BACK to Kufa and
went to Abü Shâkir and gave him the reply.” So, he said:” These words
have been brought from Hijaz.”[3]

The Outstanding Merit of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abu KlianTs at- Kufi said:” I attended the meeting of at- Sadiq, peace
be on him, and a group of the Christians was in his presence. They (the
Christians) said:’ The outstanding merit of MUsE, ‘Isa, and Mohammed is
the same, for they, peace be on them, are the Owners of the Laws and the
Books.’ At- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ Mohammed is the best and the
most knowledgeable of them, peace be on them. Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, has granted him knowledge of which He has granted none.’ They

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 A1- Kaft, aI- TawhTd.  
2 a1- Zukhruf, 84.  
3 al- KHt’i, Chapter on Movement and Mobility.

(the Christians) said:’ Has any verse of the Koran been revealed in this
respect?’ Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ Yes.’ These verse of Allah,
the Exalted:’ And We ordained for him in the tablets admonition of every
kind.”[1] His words to ‘Isa:’ And that I may make clear to you part of
what you differ in.’[2]

Allah, the Exalted, said to Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, :‘ And We wilt bring you as a witness against these- and We have
revealed the Book to you explaining clearly everything.’[3] ‘So, that He
may know that they have truly delivered the messages of their Lord, and
He encompasses what is with them, and He records the number of all
things.’[4] Then, by Allah, he (Mohammed) is the most knowledgeable of
them. If MUsá and ‘Isa attended in my presence and asked me, I would
answer them, and I asked them, they would not answer.”’[5]

I (the author) say: As the Commander of the Faithful (Imam ‘Ati) is the
gate of the knowledge of the Prophet, and his sons has inherited his
knowledge, then they (his sons) are the most knowledgeable of all men,
the Prophets and the like.

Treating the Women with Justice:
--------------------------------

An unbeliever said to AbU Ja’far at- Ahwat[6]:” Tell me about the
following Words of Allah, the Exalted: Then marry such women as seem
good to you, two and three and four; but if you fear that you wilt not
do justice (between them), then marry only one.’[7] and these Words of
His:’ And you have it not in your power to do justice between wives,
even though you may wish (it), but be not disinclined (from one) with
total disinclination.[8] ‘a There is a difference between these .two
verses.” Abii Ja’far at- Ahwat said:” I had no answer. So, went to
Medina and came to Abü Abd Allah, peace be on him, and asked him about
the difference between the two verses.” At- Sâdiq said:” As for the
verse: But if you fear that you will not do justice (between them), then
marry only one, He (Allah) has meant the expenses. And as for the verse:
And you have it not in your power to do justice between wives, even
though you may wish (it), He (Allah) has meant love, for no one is able
to do justice to two wives in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- A'raf, 145  
2 al- Zukhruf, 63.  
3 al- Nahl, 89.  
4 1- Jinn, 28.  
5 Bihar al- Anwar, 10/215/15.  
6 Mu'min al- Taq. We will mention him with His Reliable Narrators.  
7 a1-Nisl’3.  
8 Ibid, 129.

love.” Then AbEl Ja’far came BACK to the unbeliever caring the answer.
But the unbeliever said:’ You have brought this answer from Hijaz.””[1]

The Mu’tazelites during the Nomination of Mohammed:
---------------------------------------------------

A group of the Mu’tazelites came to at- Sadiq, peace be on him. Among
them were ‘Amru b. ‘Ubayd, Wâsil b. ‘Atâ’, Hafs b. Sâlim, and the like.
They came to at- Sâdiq after at- Wat?d had been killed and the people of
Sham (Syria) differed in opinion. They talked very much. So, at- Sâdiq,
peace be on him, said to them:’ You have talked very much to me, then
entrust your matter to a man of you to speak briefly about your proof.”’
So, they entrusted their matter to ‘Amru b. ‘Ubayd, who spoke at great
length about the matter. Some of his speech is as follows:

“The people of Sham killed their Caliph. Allah has hit some of them with
some of them. So, the have differed in opinion. We had thought of a man
(to lead us), then we have found the man with religion, reason, manhood,
worthiness of the Caliphate. He is Mohammed b. Abd Allah b. at- Hasan.
We want to nominate him, support him, then we declare our matter through
him, and summon people to nominate him. So, whoever nominates him, we
will be with him and be with us. Whoever isolates himself from us, we
will isolate ourselves from him. Whoever shows enmity toward us, we will
fight against him and show enmity toward him due to his enmity and bring
him BACK to the true religion and its people. So, we have decided to
submit this matter to you because we are in need of you, and you have
outstanding merits and many followers(Shi’ a).”

When ‘Amru had finished his speech, AbEl Abd Allah said:” Do you accept
‘Amru’s words?’ ‘Yes, they said, Then, AbEl Abd Allah praised Allah and
lauded Him and asked Allah to bless the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, and then he said:’ Indeed, we become indignant when Allah is
disobeyed and we become pleased when He is obeyed. ‘Amru, tell me: If
the community entrusted its affairs to you and you ruled it Without
fighting nor provisions, then it was said to you: Nominate the ruler
whomever you want over it (the community), whom wilt you nominate?’
‘Amru said:’ I will make it (authority) consultation among the Muslims.’
Al- Sadiq said:’ Among them alt?’ ‘Yes,’ said ‘Amrii. Al- Sadiq said:’
Among their jurists and their good ones?’ ‘Yes,’ ‘Amrfl said. Al-Sadiq
said:’ Quraysh and other than them?’ ‘Arabs and non Arabs,’ ‘AmrTi said:
‘Yes.’ Al- Sadiq said:’ ‘AmrIl, wilt you Support Abil Bakr and ‘Umar or
renounce them?’ ‘I will support them,’ said ‘Amrti. At- Sadiq said:’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- AnwTha, 10/202/6.

‘Amru, if you are man, then renounce them, for it is permitted for you
to disobey them. If you support them, then I disobey them. That is
because ‘Umar nominated AbEl Bakr and did not ask the advice of anyone.
Then, ‘Umar made the Caliphate consultation among six persons. He
excluded the Ansâr and chose those six persons from Quraysh. Then he
gave his orders to men concerning those six person. I think that neither
you nor your companions accept them.’ ‘What did ‘Umar order men to do?’
asked ‘Amru. Al- Sadiq answered:’ ‘Umar ordered Suhayb to lead people in
prayers for three days. Those six persons should ask the advice of each
other. No one should be among them except ‘Umar’s son. They should ask
the advice of ‘Umar’s son but he had no right in the Caliphate. He
ordered the MuhajrTn (immigrants) and Ansârs (the supporters) to behead
those six persons if they did not elect one of them during the three
days. And if four of the six persons held a meeting before the three
days end and two persons absented themselves from the meeting, then the
two persons had to be killed. Do you accept these deeds concerning
consultation which you intend to summon Muslims to?’ ‘No,’ they said.
At- SEldiq said:’ Amrfl, leave this. Suppose that you have nominated
your companion and all Muslim community accepted that, then will you
reach the atheists?’ ‘Yes,’ the said. Al- SEldiq said:’ What will you
do?’ ‘Amrü said:” We will summon them to Islam. When they refuse that,
we will impose pott tax on them.’ At-Sâdiq said:’ What wilt you do when
they are magians, fire and animal worshippers, and are not from the
followers of the Divine Books?’ ‘They are equal,’ ‘Amrfl answered.

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:’ Tell me: Do you reaaJ the Koran?’
“Yes,” ‘AmrU answered. At- Sadiq said:’ Read (this) verse: Fight those
who do not believe in Allah, nor in the latter day, nor do they prohibit
what Allah and His Apostle have prohibited, nor follow the religion of
truth, out of those who have been given the Book, until they pay potl
tax in acknowledgment of superiority and they are in a state of
subjection.”[1] ‘AmrU said:’ Allah, the Great and Almighty, has regarded
them as equal.’ ‘From whom have you learned that?” asked at- Sadiq. ‘I
have heard people say that.’ answered ‘Amru.

Al- Sadiq said:’ Now, leave that. Suppose that they (non- Muslims)
refused to pay poll tax and you fought against them and defeated them,
then how would you divide the booty?” ‘Amrti answered:’ I take out one
fifth (Khoms) and divided four fifths among the fighters.’ Al- Sadiq
aslaed:’ You divide the booty among all the fighters?’ ‘Yes,’ ‘Amrti
answered. Al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said:’ Then you disagree with
Altah’a Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, on his acts and
behavior. Between you and I are the jurists of Medina and their Shaykhs.
Ask them. They are all in agreement that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, made

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Tawba, 29.

peace with the Bedouins (A’rAb) to let them live in their houses and
that they had not to immigrate. However, when his enemies attacked him,
he mobilized them (the Bedouins) and gave them nothing of the booty,
while you say that you divide booty equally among them. So, you are in
disagreement with Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
on his behavior toward the atheists.’

Al- Sfidiq said:’ Now, leave that. What is about alms?’ ‘AmrU read this
verse:’ Alms are only for the poor and the needy, and the officials
(appointed) over it (alms)....”’[1] Al- Sâdiq said:’ Yes, how do you
divide it (alms) among them?’ ‘Amrfl answered:’ I divide it into eight
shares. So, I give each group a share.’ Al- Sadiq, peace be on him,
said:’ If one group is ten thousands people, and one group is one or two
or three people, then you have made the share of the second group as the
share of the first group?’ ‘Yes,’ ‘Amrfl answered. At- Sadiq said:’ Do
you divide alms equally among the people of towns and the people of the
deserts?’ ‘Yes,’ ‘Amrii answered. Al- Sadiq said:’ Then, you are in
disagreement with Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
on his behavior. Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
divided the alms of the deserts, the alms of towns among the people of
the towns. He did not divided alms equally among them. He divided alms
among those who came to him and those whom he saw. Then, if you have
doubt about what I have said, the jurists of the people of Medina and
their Shaykhs are all in agreement that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, did that.’

Then, at- Sadiq turned to ‘Amrii and said:’ ‘AmrU, fear Allah. You,
people, fear Allah, too. That is because my father, who was the best of
the people of the earth and the most knowledgeable of them in Allah’s
Book and the Sunna of His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
has told me:’ Whoever hits people wihis sword and summons them to
himself, and there is (a person) more knowledgeable than him among the
Muslims is astray and pretending.’ ,,[2]

His Debates on Religious Devotion:
----------------------------------

Sufyan at- Thawry came to at- Sadiq, peace be on him. He saw him wearing
clothes as white as the shell of the egg. He said to him:” These clothes
do not suite you.” Al- Sadiq said to him:” Listen to my words. It is
better for you sooner or later when you follow the Sunna and the truth
and do not follow the heresy.”

“I tell you that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
lived during the time of destitution. However, when life is prosperous,
then

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Tawba, 60.  
2 al- Tubrisy, aI- Ihtijaj.

those who are worthy of it are the righteous not the sinners, the
believers not the hypocrites, and the Muslims not the unbelievers. Then
why have you criticized me, Thawri? By Allah, I have adopted what you
see since I became a grown- up. In the meantime, I always carry out
Allah’s orders concerning my property.”

A group of people who affected religious devotion and summoned people to
be like them in renouncing worldly pleasure. They said to him:” Our
companion is unable to express himself and his proofs do not come to his
mind.” Al- Sâdiq said to them:” Give me your proofs.” They said to him:”
Our proofs are from Allah’s Book.” Al- Sâdiq said to them:” Say them,
for they are the best things which we should follow and put into
effect.” They said:” Telling about a group of the companions of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, Allah, the Great and
Almighty, says:” And prefer them before themselves though poverty may
afflict them, and whoever is preserved from the niggardliness of his
soul, these it is that are the successful ones.”[1] So, Allah has lauded
their deeds. In another place, Allah says:” And they give food out of
love for Him (Allah) for the poor and the orphan and the captive.[2]

A man of those who were sitting said:” We have seen that you order
people to refrain from good food, while you order people to pay a share
of their properties to enjoy yourselves with it.” Abü Abd Allah (at-
Sadiq) said to them:” Put aside what does not avail you. Tell me,
people, are you acquainted with the abrogating and abrogated verses of
the Koran, the clear and allegorical verses of it? That is because many
people of this community got ruined due to such kind of verses.” They
said to him:” Some of these verses, not all of them.” Al- Sâdiq, peace
be on him, said to them: From here, you have come. Also you should be
acquainted with the traditions of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family. As for the verses which you ‘have mentioned to us from
the Book of Allah, and which are concerning the people whose deeds Allah
praised, their food was permitted, and Allah did not prohibit them from
that. Also their rewards will be from Allah, the Great and Almighty.
Then Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, prohibited them from that. So, His
order abrogated their (previous) acts. Also His order was as mercy from
Him toward the believers so as not to harm themselves and their families
because they had weak children, old men, and old women. (For example),
If I gave my loaf of bread as alms, while I had no loaf other than it,
then they (my family) would get ruined. For this reason, Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:’ When the person has
five dates or five loaves of bread or dinners or dirhams and he wants to
spend them, then the best persons to be spent on

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Hashr, 9.  
2 al- Dahr, 8.

are his parents, himself and his family, his poor relatives, his poor
neighbors, and in the way of Allah.”’

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said to the Ansfiri,
who released five or six slaves during his death while he had none other
than them and he had little children:” If you had told me about his
deed, I would have not allowed you to bury him with the Muslims. That is
because he has forced his children to ask people for alms.”

Then, al- Sadiq said:” My father has told me on the authority of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said:’ start with those
whom you maintain, the nearest, the nearer, the near.”

Then, at- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” Now, listen to this verse from
the Book, which is regarded as an answer to your words and an imposed
order from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise:’ And they who when they spend,
are neither extravagant nor parsimonious, and (keep) between these the
just men.[1] Do not you see that these Words of Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, are contrary to what you have summoned people to?”

“So, people, conform to the manners which Allah has legislated to the
believers. Confine yourselves to what He has bidden and what He has
forbidden. Leave what you do not know. Learn knowledge from its people
so that Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, shall forgive you and reward
you. Learn the abrogating and abrogated verses, the clear and
allegorical verses, the lawful and unlawful in the Koran. Alt these
things draw you nearer to Allah and make you far from ignorance. Leave
ignorance to its people. That is because the people of ignorance are
many, and the people of knowledge are few. So, Allah, the Great and
Almighty, has said:’ And above every owner of knowledge is the All-
knowing one.”’[2]

His Debate on Truthfulness:
---------------------------

Without doubt people become ignorant and astray when they depend on
their own viewpoints and do not consult the people of true knowledge.
So, the ignorant person goes astray in the methods of ignorance.
However, he thinks that he is knowledgeable in the true religious law.

There was a debate between at- Sadiq, peace be on him, and an ignorant
person who affected knowledge in truthfulness. Al- Sadiq himself has
told us about this debate. He has said:

“Indeed, whoever follows his desire and admires his idea becomes like
that person whom ignorant people regarded as great. I saw a group of
People surrounding him. So, I wanted to meet him. He deceived that group
of people, then he left them. I followed him. Soon, he passed by a
baker. Lie made the baker heedless and took two loaves of bread from his
bakery. I

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 a1- Furqan, 67.  
2 YousIf, 76.  
2 Wasa’iI aI- Shi’a, 2/57.

was astonished at him, then I talked to myself: Perhaps, he is his
customer. Then, I said: Why has he stolen the two loaves of bread? Then,
I went on following him. Soon, he passed by pomegranate seller. He made
him heedless and took two pomegranates. I was astonished at him, and
then I said to myself: Perhaps, he is his customer. Then I said: Why has
be stolen them? Then I went on following him till he passed by a sick
person. He put the two loaves of bread and the two pomegranates before a
sick person.

Then I (at- Sadiq) asked him about his act. He said:’ perhaps, you are
Ja’far b. Mohammed?’ ‘Yes,’ I said. He said to me:’ What does your noblp
origin avail you while you are ignorant?’ ‘Which verse of the Koran am I
ignorant at?’ I asked. He said these Words of Allah, the Great and
Almighty:’ Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, anj
whoever brings and evil deed he shalt be recompensed only with the litae
of it.’[1] ‘When I stole the two loaves of bread, they were two evil
deeds. And When I stole the two pomegranates, they were two evil deeds,
too. Sa these are four evil deeds. When I gave each one of them as alms,
Allah haaa subtracted 4 evil deeds from 40 good deeds. So, I have 36
good deeds.’ L (at- Sâdiq) said:’ May your mother lose you! It is you
who are ignorant at the Book of Allah. Have you not heard that Allah
said:” (Allah) accepts-(deeds) from the pious only.’ When you stole the
two loaves of bread, thoy’, were two evil deeds. And when you stole the
two pomegranates, they weraa two evil deeds, too. And when you gave them
to other than their owner without the permission of their owner, you
have added four evil deeds to’a four evil deeds, and you have not added
four evil deeds to forty good deeds. So, he began looking at me. Then I
left him and went away.”a

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:” They (the ianorant) mislead (people)a
and go astray with this ugly, hateful explanation.[2]

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- An’flm, 160.  
 2 Wasa il al-shi'a,2/57.
