His Life and His Good Manners
=============================

prelude:
--------

The life of a person denotes his inner-self. And his inner-self is
hidden in his life. The seducers of fraud who pretense to conceal what
their hearts have through showing good manners and guidance. Their words
and acts quickly expose their inward thoughts. Indeed, the slips of
their tongue and their acts show what has been hidden in their beans.

The garment of pretense reveals what is under it.

So, if you cover yourself with it, then you are naked.

Good men with knowledge always try to hide their pure innerselves to
avoid enchantment and fame. However, their good deeds spread. And the
glory of their holy souls shines. (As the poet says):

And whatever a quality the person has

even if he thinks that it remains secret for people,

it (the quality) is known.

Yes, perhaps a group of people stands up to protect this deceiving band
because of the party or deception by the surface of those good affairs.
Besides, a group of people may rush to damage the great figures to
follow some persons whom the diseases of envy, spite, ignorance, and
stubbornness have mined, but the clear- headed person does not ignore
the truth. And the sieve cannot cover the sun.

The life of al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, guides us to his qualities and
informs us about his inner- self. He was among the members of the house
(ahl al Bayt), whom Allah drove away uncleanness and purified them
thoroughly. He was among the family whom the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, left among his community to explain the silent Book
of Allah. Besides, his family and Allah’s Book formed ‘the firmest
handle which shall not break off. And whoever holds fast to it shall be
saved from the ways of misguidance.’

Thus,. through his righteous life, at- Sâdiq wanted to bring people out
of misguidance, and ignorance. Also he wanted to make them enter
guidance and knowledge. Mid his inner- self was embodied in the career
of his life. So, we will mention some examples of his life to indicate
his great manners and his holy Alawid soul who spared no effort to lead
people toward guidance and righteousness.

His Social Mannera:
-------------------

Laudable manners maybe psychological instincts and natural habits, such
as generosity, bravery, cheerfulness, and eloquence. Also they maybe

acquisitive, such as worship, religious devotion, knowledge, sciences,
arts, and so on.

Whoever considers carefully the life of Hâshim and of his Sons
understands that they had the natural and the learned manners. Also
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, had those
outstanding manners which suited his Divine office. Then his progeny
adopted the same manners.

Whoever studies carefully the life of AbU Abd Allah (at- Sadiq), peace
be on him, knows that he embraced the outstanding life of his
grandfather (the Chosen one), may Allah bless him and his family. “Then
the person is known through his deeds.” Although at- Sâdiq did not speak
about his life, his deeds have indicated his qualities.

One day, at- Sadiq and his companions went to condole his reaative whose
child died. While al- Sâdiq was walking, the thong of his sandal broke
off. So, al- Sadiq picked up his sandals and walked bare- footed. One of
his companions catted b. AbEl Ya’far’[1] looked at him, and then he took
off his own sandal, cut off its thong and handed it to Abii Abd Allah
(at-Sâdiq), peace be on him. However, at- Sadiq became angry and refused
to take the thong.Then he said:” No, the owner of the misfortune is
worthier than others in enduring it.” Then he went on walking bare-
footed till he entered the house of the person whom he wanted to
condole.

When at- Sadiq spread the table, he urged his companions to eat and made
them enjoy the food. Perhaps, he brought some food after they had become
satisfied. However, they refused to eat. So, he said:” You have eaten
nothing. Indeed, those who love us very much are those who eat very much
with us.” Then he told them some traditions on the authority of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, to encourage them to eat
the food and to appeal to additional food. He used to report the
following words which the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
said to Salman, al- Muqdad, and Abti Dharr:” Those who love us very much
are those who eat much food with us.”

In spite of his importance and old age, at- Sadiq prevented his guests
from fulfilling any need. When he found no one to fulfill their needs,
he himself stood up to serve them, and then he said:” Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, prevented (the Muslims) from putting
the guest into service.”[2]

As at- Sâdiq wanted the guest to stay for a longer time with him, he did
not help him to go as he did with the people of Juhayna. He ordered his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 He will be mentioned with His Famous Reliable Companions.  
2 Bihar al- Anwar, 47/40/48.

servants not to help them to depart. So, they said to him:” Son of
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, you entertained us
in an excellent manner, and you offered us many gifts, then you ordered
your servants not to help us to depart.” So, he, peace be on him, said:”
We, the members of the house (ahl a! Bayt), do not help our guests to
leave us.”[1]

His Liberality:
---------------

Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said to al- Mu’alla b. KhanTs:” Mu’alla,
show love to your brothers (friends) through sending them gifts. Indeed,
Allah, the Most High, has made giving love and preventing hatred. By
Allah, If you ask me (for something) and I give you (that thing) is more
desirable than that you ask me (for something) and I do not give you
(that thing), so you hate me.”[2]

One day, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, gave a poor man four hundred
dirhams. The poor man took them, thanked him for them, and went away.
Al- Sâdiq said to his servant:” bring the poor man BACK.” The poor man
said:” Master, I asked you (for a need), and you have given me (the
need), then what do want to give me?” Al- Sadiq said to him:” Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:’ The best alms is
that which brings about riches. We have not made you rich. So, take this
ring. I wanted to sell it for ten thousand dirhams. When you becomes in
need of it, then sell it at this cost.”[3]

One day, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, was ill. A companion of his called
Ashja’ at- Salami[4] came and asked him about his illness. Al- Sadiq
said to him:” Leave my illness and ask me for your need.” Then, he (al-
Sâdiq) said:” Servant, have you anything?” The servant said:” Four
hundred dirhams.” Al- Sadiq said:” Give them to Ashja’.”[5]

Al- Mufaddal b. Qays b. Rummâna, a reliable narrator of at- Sadiq, came
to at- Sâdiq and told him about his poor condition and ask him to pray
to Allah for him. Al- Sâdiq said:” Female slave, give me the bag which
AbU Ja’far has sent to us.” The female stave brought the bag. Then at-
Sâdiq said:” There are four hundred dinars in this bag. Help yourself
with them.” Ashja’ said: No, may I be ransom for you, by Allah, I do not
want these (dinars), I only want your supplication.” Al- Sadiq said to
him:” I will say the supplication However, do not tell people all about
you, for they will disdain you.”[6]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- SKdilq, al- Majmis, Majlis no. 18.  
2 A1- Thsi, al- AmEli, Majlis no. 11.  
3 Bihfir al- Anwar, 47/61.  
4 a good poet. He loved ahl al Bayt very much.  
5 Bin Shahrlshflb, al- Manlqib, 4/274.  
6 al- Kashy, aI- Rijal, 121.

His Secret Gifts:
-----------------

At night aI- S&liq, peace be on him, carried on his shoulder bag full
bread, meat, and dirhams. He went to the needy people of Medma. divided
those things among them, while they did not know him. After bia death,
they asked about those gifts. So, they knew that Abü Abd Allah (aIa
Sadiq), peace be on him, sent them.[1]

Al- Sadiq’s grandfathers embraced that custom, then his grand soa
adopted it, too.

Al- Sadiq sent secret gifts to the people of Medina. In the mean time
sent such gifts to the Hashimites. He sent them parcels of dinars and
said the messenger:” Say to the Hashimites that these parcels have been
sent you from Iraq. When the messenger came BACK, at- Sädiq asked him
What did they say?” The messenger said:” They said:’ As for you, in
Allah reward you good because you bring gifts to the relatives of Allaai
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. And as for Ja’far (at- Sädi
may Allah judge between us and him.”’ So, Abfl Abd Allah (at- Sädi peace
be on him, sank to the around and said:” Allah, humiliate my n for my
grandfather’s children.[2]

One day, al- Sâdiq gave AbtI Ja’far at- Khth’ami[3] a parcel (of dinars)
aiaj ordered him to send it secretly to a man of the Hashimites. When 
Khth’ami brought the parcel to the man, he (the man) said:” May A1la
reward him (i.e. the sender of the parcel) good. He always send mej
parcel. I live with the parcel till another one comes. However, Ja’far
(4 Sâdiq) sends me no dirham though he has a lot of money.”[4]

Also at- Sadiq, peace be on him, sent secret gifts to those who showaj
enmity toward him. For example, he allotted a sum of money to
atb.al-Aftas.

So, it was said to him (al- Sädiq):” Will you give the man who attackca
you and wanted to kill you with the sword?” Al- Sädiq, peace be on hiua
said:” Woe unto you! Have not read these Words of Allah:’ And those wla
join that which has bidden to be joined and have awe of their Lord and
fea the evil reckoning.’[5] Indeed, Allah has created Paradise and made
a  good.”[6]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  Bihär al- Anwar, 47/38/40.  
2  lbid,  
3  He name was Mohammed b. HakTm. He was among the reliable companions
of aISUdiq.  
4  Bin ShahrLhflb, al- ManEqib, 4/273.  
5  a1- Ra’d, 21.  
6  a1- Tusi, al- Ghayba. Bin ShabrlshUb, al- Manlqib, 4/273.

His CIemency
------------

When at- Sädiq, peace be en him, heard someone defamed him or BACKbited
him or abused him, he prepared himself to prayers. Then, he invoked1
Allah for a long time not to punish the Sinner and to forgive him his
Sins.[1]

Concerning his blood relatives, at- Sâdiq was very clement. So, he
said:” I want Allah to know that I have humiliated my neck for my blood
relatives. And I send gifts to the people of my house before they are in
no need of me.”[2]

Also at- Sädiq was clement with his servants and all people. For
instance, he sent a servant of his to get him a certain need. The
servant was late. So, at- Sädiq went out to look for him. He found the
servant sleeping. At- Sâdiq sat by his head fanning him till he woke.
When the servant woke, at- Sädiq said nothing but:” Servant, why do you
sleep day and night - night is for you, and day is for us.”[3]

One day, at- Sädiq sent a non- Arab servant to bring him a certain need.
When the servant came BACK, al- Sfldiq, peace be on him, questioned him,
but he was unable to answer. Al- Skliq repeated the question several
times, but the servant was still unable to answer. Anyhow, at- Sädiq did
not become angry with him, he mere Looked sharply at him, and then said
to him:” If your tongue is tired, then your heart is not tired.” Then
al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, added:” Indeed, modesty, chastity, and
tiredness (the tiredness of the tongue not of the heart) are acts of
belief, while obscenity, abusiveness, and insolence are acts of
hypocrisy.”[4]

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, prevented the members of his house from
going up to the house. One day a female slave, who looked after his
children, went up to the house carrying a child of his. Suddenly, at-
Sadiq came into the house. When the female slave saw him, she trembled
with fear. So, the child fell down the ground and died. At- Sãdiq turned
pale and went out of the house. When he was asked about the reason why
he had turned pale, he answered:’ I have turned pale because I have
terrified the female slave, not because of the death of the child.’
Moreover, he said to her:” Don’t worry! You are free for Allah!”[5]

Al- Sädfq, peace be on him, was clement with all people. For example, a
man of the pilgrims in Medina slept. The man thought that his bag (of
money) had been stolen. He went out. He saw at- Sädiq praying. He
accused him of stealing, saying to him:” You have taken my bag!” “ What
‘Mushkat alaal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Mushkat al- Anwar, 217.  
2 al-Kafi, 2/156/25.  
3 lbid, 8/87.  
4 BihIr al- Anwar, 47/61.  
5 al- ManKqib, 4/275.

was in your bag?” asked at- Sadiq. “One thousand dinars,” answered the
man. So, at- S&Iiq took the man with him to his house and gave him One
thousand dinars. The man came BACK home and found his bag. Then came
BACK to at- Sädiq, gave him the money, and apologized to him that. Then
the man asked some people about at- Sâdiq. They said:” This Ja’far at-
Sädiq.” “No wonder!” said the man.

Al- Sãdiq, peace be on him, was clement even with his arch When at-
Mansflr permitted at- Sâdiq to leave at- HIra (a town in Iraq), (at-
Sâdiq) left it at night. When he reached the place of the armed mc one
of them said to him:” I will not let you go!” Al- Sädiq begged hiz
several times, but the armed man refused that. Murazim (at- Sâdiq’
companion) and Musâdif (his servant) accompanied at- Sâdiq. Musâdif saj
to him:” May I be ransom for you! This dog (i.e. the armed man) has hi1
you! I think that he wilt bring you BACK. I do not know how Abü Ja’far
Mansflr wilt treat you. So, permit Murâzim and I to behead him and throw
him into the river.” No,’ said at- Sâdiq. Then he went on convii that
armed man till most of night was over. At last, the armed man let’ pass.
So, at- Sâdiq said:” Muräzim, is this better or what you have (Murâzim)
said:” May I be ransom for you, this is better....”’[1]

His Kindness:
-------------

Al- Sädiq, peace be on him, treated Alt people kindly. One day summoned
his servant Musâdif and said to him:” The members of I family have
become many. So, prepare yourself and go with the traders Egypt. When
they reached Egypt, a caravan received them out of. They asked them
about the goods with them and told them that there nothing of those
goods in Egypt. So, the traders from Medina sold t goods a dit)ar for a
dinar. When they took their money, they came BACK Medina. Musâdif came
to Abfl Abd Allah (at- Sadiq), peace be on him,. carrying two bags.
There was a thousand dinar in each bag. Musâdif said to at- Sadiq:” May
I be your ransom, this is the capital and these are the interests.” Al-
Sâdiq said to him:” These interests are many. How did you sell the
goods?” Musâdif told him all about the goods.” So, at- Sâdiq took one of
the two bags and said:” This is my capital. I am in no need of the
interests.” Then he added:” Musãdif, dueling with words is easier th
seeking the lawful.”[2]

Abü HanTfa at- Häjj[3] quarreled with his son- in- law about
inheritance. Suddenly, at- Mufaddle b. ‘Amru, at- Sädiq’s agent in Kufa,
passed by them. When he understood their matter, he ordered them to go
with him to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Rawdat al- Kafi, 7/87/49.  
2 Bihar al- Anwar, 47/59/111.  
3 His name was Sa’eed BayBn. He was a reliable reporter of al- Sadiq.

his home. He made peace between them and gave them four hundred
dirhaflls. When they became pleased with each other, he said to them:”
These four hundred dirhanis are not mine. However, AbU Abd Allah
(atsftdiq), peace be on him, ordered me to settle the quarrel between
two men of our companions with his money. So, these four hundred dirhams
belong  to him.,,[1]

His Patience:
-------------

Ismâ’Tl was the elder son of at- Sâdiq, peace be on him. He had
0atstanding merits, such as virtue, reason, worship, and the like. Al-
Sädiq, peace be on him, loved him very much. So, some people thought
that he would be the Imam after his father at- Sädiq. When Ismä’Tl
became ill, atSadiq became sad. Stil, he invited his companions and
offered them good food. He did not make them feel that he was sad. They
thought that he would be impatient or weep. So, they asked him about his
firm patience. Al- Sädiq said to them:”I should be patient, for the
Prophet said:’I will die as you die.”’

One day a boy of at- Sâdiq’s was walking before him. Suddenly, the boy
died. So, at- Sadiq wept and said:” You (Allah) have taken and left, You
have tried and healed.” Then, he carried the boy to the women. When they
saw him, they cried. So, at- Sâdiq ordered them not to cry. Then he took
him out to bury him and said:” Glory is to Him Who kills our children,
but we love Him very much.” Then when he buried his son, he said:”
Indeed, we are the people who ask Allah for what we love in what we love
so He gives us. If He loves what we hate in what we love, we are
pleased.”[2]’

His Prestige:
-------------

Sometimes the person himself creates prestige through his pride, and
sometimes through his servants family, tribe, soldiers, state, and the
like. This kind of prestige does not belong to certain people. Rather,
it belongs to every one who gets one or more of the affairs. So, we may
call this kind of prestige artificial.

The person may have prestige without anny, servants sates, authority,
pride, and so on. This kind of prestige is not called artificial.
Rather, it is the prestige which Allah, the Exalted, gives to anyone, of
his creatures. The person can create this prestige through humbleness,
good manners, knowledge, and the like. “Whoever wants glory without a
tribe and prestige Without authority, then should come out of the
humiliation of the disobedience of Allah to the glory of his obedience.
Whoever fears Allah,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al-Kafi, 2/209/4.  
2 Bihlr al- Anwar, 47/18/8.

Allah makes everything afraid of him. And whoever does not fear Allah,
Allah makes him afraid of everything.” Indeed, we can call this kind of
prestige genuine.

Al- Mansflr had artificial prestige. Though he had a wide kingdom, and a
big army, he respected Ja’far b. Mohammed at- Sidiq, peace be on him,
when he looked at him.

Al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr said:” At- Mansflr tried to kill Abfl Abd Allah
(atSädiq), peace be on him, several times. However, he respected him
when he looked at him. So, he did not kill him.”’[1]

All people respected AbO Abd Allah (at- SSdiq), peace be on him, whether
they were friends or enemies. For example, Hishäm b. at- Hakam, who was
a Jahami before he became an Imami, said to at- Sâdiq:” Son of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, I respect you, I am shy of
you. My tongue is not able to utter even a word before you.”[2]

Though at- Sâdiq, peace be on him, had such great prestige, he was very
humble in word to his companion and those who sat with him. He sat with
them, ate with them, and talked with them.

His worship:
------------

Al- SSdiq, peace be on him, was the best of alt creatures during his
time in worshipping, such as fasting, prayers, hajj (pilgrimage to
Mecca), and the like.

In Tadhkirat at- Khawas, at- Sibt b. al- Jawzy says:” The biographers
say:’ Al- Sâdiq was busy worshipping. He was indifferent to
leadership.’” In Matälib at- Sa’fll, b. Talha says:” Al- Sadiq had many
sciences. He worshipped (Allah) very much. He read cvntinuos parts of
the Koran. And he divided his time according to the religious duties.”
In Hutyat at- Awlia’, AbU Na’Tm says:” Al- Sãdiq devoted all his time to
worshipping and submission to Allah. He preferred isolation and
humbleness to leadership and parties.” Mâlik b. Anas says:” Ja’far b.
Mohammed had three qualities: he fasted, or .prayed, or remembered
Allah. He was among the greatest scholars of creatures and among the
great devout.” We.have mentioned all these qualities in the topics: Who
was at- Sädiq? and His scientific Life.

His Bravery:
------------

There were no holy battles during the time of at- Sâdiq, peace be on
him, so that people may know his bravery. However, there were many
attitudes which have indicated his firm powers, such as the strong-
heart self-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bin Shahrlshflb,4/238.  
2 al- Manlqib, 4/238.

possessions and the like. You have already read these attitudes in the
topicaHis Attitudes with al- Mansflr.

His Religious Devotion:
-----------------------

“Al- SEdiq wore a thick, short, woolen cloak on his body, and wore silk
garment on it. And he said:’ We wear the cloak for Allah, and the silk
(garments) for you.”’[1]

“Al- Sädiq offered meat to his guest, while he ate vinegar and animal
oil. Then he said:’ This is our food and the food of the Prophets.”’[2]

One day, Sufyan at- Thawry[3] came to at- Sidiq. He. saw him wearing a
silk cloak. So, Sufyan criticized him and said:” Why have you worn this
(cloak), while you are among the family of Prophethood?” At- Sädiq,
peace be on him, said:” You do not know. Insert your hand into here.”
There was a garment of rough hair. Then at- Sädiq said:” Thawry, show me
what is under your cloak.” There was a shirt thinner than the crust of
the egg. So, Sufyän became shy of at- Sädiq. Then at- Sädiq said to
him:” Thawry, do not come to us many times so as not to harm us nor do
we harm you.”[4]

Al- Sadiq said these words before al- Thawry, for the tatter disagreed
with the former on his behavior, knowledge, and act. In the meantime,
the ruler prevented at- Sâdiq from meeting people and preventcd them
from meeting him. So, the person would expose himself and at- Sädiq to
danger when be wanted to meet him, especially if the person was of great
importance among people, such as Sufa’an at- Thawry.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Sha’ranj, Lawaqih al- Anwar, 1/28. Matilib al- Sa’ul.  
2 a1- Kafi’, 6/328/4.  
3 He was Sufyan b. Sa’eed b. Masruq, al- Kufi. He reported traditions on
the authority of al- Sadiq. He was born during the rule of Abd al-
Malik. He died in Basrah in the year, 161 (A.H.).  
4 Lawlqih al- Anwar. Matalib al- Su'ul. Hulyat al- Awliya’, 3/193.
