3- His Commandments
===================

The social importance of the person is embodied through the good he does
for society. Also his personal importance is embodied through his good
deeds. If al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, had nothing but those words which
we have mentioned, then they will be enough evidence for his Divine,
scientific importance and his concern to reform the nation. You have
read some of his sermons. Here, we will mention some of his commandments
for you to read them and to find the efforts of the godly rulers and
guides of the nations, who (godly rulers) guided them (nations) to good
acts, summoned them kindly to their missions, and taught them sincerely.

His Commandment to His Son al- Kftzim:
--------------------------------------

Some of al- Sâdiq ShVa (followers) came to him while he was giving
commandments to his son Mtisâ. Some of them are:

“My son, accept my commandments and memorize my words, for if you
memorize them, you will lead a happy (life) and die a praised (death).
My son, indeed, whoever is content becomes rich, whoever looks at what
in the hand of other than him dies poor, whoever is displeased with what
Allah has predestined for him accuses Allah in His Decree, whoever
regards his own slip as small regards the slip of others as big. My son,
whoever uncovers the veil of others, his defect is uncovered, whoever
draws the sword of disobedience killed with it, whoever digs a well for
his brother falls into it, whoever makes friends with the foolish is
degraded, whoever makes friends with the knowledgeable is respected, and
whoever enters the evil places is accused. My son, say the truth for you
or against you, beware of the slander, for it plants the enmity in the
hearts of men. My son, when you seek generosity, seek it from its places
(i.e. the noble men), for generosity has places, the places have
origins, the origins have branches, the branches have fruit, no fruit is
sought but with a branche, and no firm origin but in a good place. My
son, when visit, visit the good, but do not visit the wicked, for they
are like the solid rock whose water does not gush out, the tree whose
leaves do not get green, and the land whose plants do not appear.”[1]

I (the author) say: Some of these words have been mentioned in Nahj
alBalâgha. No wonder, for they (the Imams) took knowledge from each
other. Perha, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, has mentioned these words as
quotations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Shiblanji, NDr al- Abs’r, 163. AbD Nä’Tm, Hulyat al- Awliya’,
3/135.

His Commandments to His Companions:
-----------------------------------

After the Basmala[1]: Then after this, ask Allah your Lord for
health,cleave to meekness, solemnity, and calmness. Cleave to modesty
and refrain from what the righteous had refrained before you. Fear
Allah, and prevent your tongue (from saying anything) but from the good.
Be careful not to sharpen your tongues with false witness, false
accusation, iniquity, and aggression. Because if you prevent your
tongues from (saying) what Allah hates, this will be better for you with
your Lord than that for which you sharpen your tongues. Because
sharpening the tongue (to utter) what Allah abhors and what He prevents
(you) from causes disobedience for the servant with Allah, and hatred
from Him. So, Allah will bring on him deafness, dumbness, and blindness
on the Day of Judgment.so, you become as Allah has said:” deaf, dumb
(and) blind, so they do not understand.” Namely, they will not utter,
nor will they be allowed to apologize. Keep silent (from everything)
except that which Allah avails you with in your NEXT life and reward you
for. Implore Allah very much, for Allah likes His believing servants to
Implore Him, and He has promised His believing servants to accept (their
supplication), and Allah will turn the du’â’ of the believers into acts
to increase (their rank) in Paradise. So, remember Allah as far as
possible at every hour of the hours of day and night, for Allah has
ordered (you) to remember Him very much, and Allah remembers him who
remembers Him of the believers. Know that anyone of the believing
servants remembers Allah, Allah remembers him with good. So, do your
best to obey Allah. That is because nothing of good is obtained from
Allah but through obeying Him and refraining from what He has prohibited
in the Koran, whether they are open or secret. He said in His Book and
His Words are true:” And abandon open and secret sin.’’2 And know that
Allah has prohibited what He has ordered you to refrain from. Do not
follow your desires and your ideas so that you go astray, for the most
astray one of people in going with Allah is he who follows his desire
and his idea without guidance from Allah. Do good to yourselves as far
as possible, for ‘if you do good, you will do good for your own souls,
and if you do evil, it shall be for them.’ know that Allah does not make
a servant of His servants safe till he (the servant) is pleased with
what Allah has done to him.

‘Attend constantly to prayers and to the middle prayer and stand up
truly obedient to Allah,’ as Allah, in His Book, had ordered the
believer before you.

Beware of might and glory, for glory is the attribute of Allah, the
Great and Almighty. So, whoever shares Allah His attribute, Allah breaks
him and humiliates him on the Day of judgment. Be careful not to wrong
each

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bismifflhur rahmanur rhim= In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most
Merciful.  
2 al-An’äm, 121.

other, for it (wrong) is not among the traits of the righteous, and for
whoever wrongs the (others), Allah makes his wrong against him, the help
of Allah will be to him who is wronged, whomever Allah helps is
victorious and gets victory from Allah. Be careful not to envy each
other, for the source of unbelief was envy. Be careful not to help each
other against the oppressed Muslim, so he invokes Allah against you and
his invocation is accepted against you. That is because our father (i.e.
grandfather) the Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
said:’ Indeed, the supplication of the oppressed Muslim is accepted. So,
you should help each other, for our father the Prophet of Allah, may
Allah bless him and his family, said:’ Indeed, to help the Muslim is
better and greater than to fast and to remain in the scared Mosque.’

Know that Islam (means) submission, and submission (means) Islam. So,
whoever submits to (Allah) becomes Muslim; whoever does not submit to
(Allah) is not Muslim. And whoever wants to do good to himself, then he
should obey Allah. Indeed, whoever obeys Allah does good to himself. Be
careful not to disobey Allah, for whoever disobeys Allah does evil to
himself. Accordingly, there is a great difference between good and evil-
the good people will obtain Paradise from their Lord; the wicked will
obtain fire from their Lord. Therefore, obey Allah and a void disobeying
Him.”

I (the author) say: These commandments are long. So, we have mentioned
some of them. It has been mentioned in the book ‘Roudat alKâfi by al-
Kulayni, may his grave be fragrant. About these commandments, al-
Kulayni said:” Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, sent them to his companions
and ordered them to study these commandments and to put them into
practice. So, they put them in their houses. When the performed their
prayers, they looked at them.aa

Yes we must study these commandments and put them into practice because
they have all good manners.

His Commandments to Abd Allah Bin Jundub:
-----------------------------------------

Abd Allah b. Jundub al- Bajali al- Kuff was the Companion of al- Sâdiq,
al- Kâzim, .and al- Ridâ, peace be on them. He was the agent of al-
Kazim and al- Ridâ. He was a worshipper, and his rank was very important
for the Imams. In his book ‘al- Rijâl’, al- Kashy has mentioned that Abd
Allah b. Jundub said to AbU al- Hasan, peace be on him:” Are you
satisfied with me?” AbO al- Hasan answered:” By Allah, yes. Allah and
His Apostle are satisfied with you, too.”

Al- Sâdiq gave him commandments which have valuable sermons. We have
mentioned some of them. He, peace be on him, said:’ Bin Jundub, he who
depends on his deed perishes, and he who commits sins is not saved with
Allah’s mercy.”’ Bin Jundub said:” Then, who is saved?” Al- Sädiq

said:” Those who are between fear and hope. It is as if that their
hearts were in the claws of the bird because of their eagerness for the
reward and fear of chastisement.”

“Bin Jundub, Whoever is pleased with that Allah will marry him to young
ladies having eyes with a marked contrast between white and black, and
crown him with the light, then must delight his believing brother.”

“Bin Jundub, the Satan has snares with which he catch (people). So,
beware of his snares and nets.” He (Bin Jundub) said:” Son of the
Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, what are his
snares and nets?” He (al- Sadiq) said:” As for his snares, he (the
Satan) prevent (you) from treating the brothers kindly, and as for his
nets, he (orders you) to sleep during the time of the prayers which
Allah has imposed (on you). Indeed, to move the feet to visit the
brothers and to treat them kindly is the best way to worship Allah. Woe
unto those who are heedless from the prayers, who sleep during the time
of the prayers, who mock at Allah and His verses in the Koran, ‘Surely
they shall have no portion in the hereafter, and Allah will not speak to
them, nor will he look at them on the Day of Resurrection nor will He
purify them, and they shall have a painful chastisement.’

“Bin Jundub, whoever runs to fulfill the need of his brother is like him
who runs between Safa and Marwa, and whoever fulfills his need is like
him who sacrifice his blood in the way of Allah on the day of the
(Battle) of Badr and ‘Uhud, and Allah did not punish any nation but when
it disdained the rights of their poor brothers.”

“Bin Jundub, if you wish like to neighbor the Great (Allah) in His House
and dwell Paradise near him, then regard the life in this world as low,
remember death frequently, do not save up (money) for tomorrow, and know
that what you have advanced is for you, and what you have delayed is
against you.”

“Bin Jundub, whoever deprives himself of his earn, indeed, collects to
other than him, whoever obeys his whim, surely, obeys his enemy, and
whoever fears Allah, Allah guarantees what has made him worried in here
and the hereafter and keeps for him what has disappeared from him.
Feeble is he who does not prepare patience for every tribulation,
gratefulness for every blessing, and ease for every hardship. Habituate
yourto every misfortune in child, money and progeny. Indeed, He (Allah)
takes His loan and takes His gift to try with them your patience and
your gratefulness. Hope Allah the hope which does not lead to
disobedience and fear Him the fear which does not dash your hope of his
mercy. Do not be deceived by he words of the ignorant nor with their
praise, for you will be proud, haughty, and conceited with your deeds.
Indeed, the best acts are worship and humbleness. Do not lose your
property, which you will leave after your death, to reform the property
of others, Be satisfied with what Allah has

predestined for you. Do not look but at what you have. Do not wish for
what you cannot obtain, for whoever gets satisfied gets full, and
whoever is dissatisfied is not full. Take your portion from your life in
the hereafter. Do not be ungrateful during riches, nor be impatient
during poverty. Do not be rude that people hate your nearness. Do not be
feeble lest he who knows you should disdain you. Do not dispute with
those who are superior to you. Do not scorn those who are inferior to
you. Do not dispute with the people of authority. Do. not obey the
foolish. Think of every matter before you start to know its beginning
and its end. Regard your self as an enemy to make it good. If you do a
person a favor, do not spoil it with much reminding. Rather, do a better
one than it, for that makes your manner good and achieves your reward in
the hereafter. And cleave to silence to be regarded as meek whether your
are ignorant or knowledgeable. Indeed, silence is good with the
knowledgeable and as a cover for you with the ignorant.”

Al- Sãdiq, peace be on him, quoted here some commandments of ‘Isa
(Jesus), peace be on him, to his companions:” And beware of looking, for
it plant an appetite in the heart. It is an enough trail for its owner.
Blessed is he who puts his sight in his heart and does not put his sight
in his eye. Do not consider the defects of people as masters, and
consider their defects as servants. Indeed, people are inflected and
healthy. So, have mercy on the inflected and thank Allah for health.”

Then he, peace be on him, said:” Bin Jundub, visit him who abandons you,
give him who deprives you (of your right), treat kindly him who
mistreats you, greet him who abuses you, do justice to him who quarrels
with you, and forgive him who wrongs you as you want him to forgive you.
So, take a lesson from Allah’s forgiveness for you. Do you not see that
His sun shines over the chaste and the unchaste and His rain comes down
to the righteous and the sinners.aa

“Bin Jundub, Islam is naked, so its clothe is modesty, its embellishment
is solemnity, its manhood is the good deed, and its pillar is piety.
Every thing has a foundation; the foundation of Islam is our love, we,
the (ahl al Bayt).”’[1]

His Commandments to Abd Allah al- Najâshi in the Same Letter:
-------------------------------------------------------------

Abd Allah b. Sulayman al- Nawfali said:” I was sitting with Ja’far b.
Mohammed al- Sâdiq. Suddenly, the servant of Abd Allah al- Najäshi came
to al- Sâdiq. He greeted him and handed him a letter. Al- Sâdiq opened
the letter and read it. The letter read as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihär al- Anwar, 78/279/1.

“In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful, may Allah prolong
the life of my master, and may He make me ransom for him. I have been
inflected by the State of al- Ahwäz. I want my master to limit a
punishment for me or to give me an example to use it as a proof for what
makes me nearer to Allah, the Great and Almighty, and to His Apostle. I
want him to sum up, in his letter: What does he think for me to put into
effect? In what does he spend it? And in what shall I spend it? Where
should I put my Zakat (alms)? In what shall I spend it? With whom shall
I associate? With whom shall 1 be happy? Whom shall I entrust, believe
in, resort to concerning my secrets? Indeed, you are the Proof of Allah
for his creation and His trustee of authority in His country (i.e. the
earth), may Allah bestow His blessing upon you.”

Abd Allah b. Sulaymân said:” Abui Abd Allah (al- Sãdiq), peace be on
him, answered him.”:

“In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful, may Allah
compliment you with His good deed, be kind to you with His favor, and
guard you with His care. Indeed, He is the Supporter of that. Now then,
your messenger came to me with your letter. I have read it and
understood what you have mentioned and asked about. You have claimed
that you have been inflected by the State of al- Ahwäz. So, that has
delighted me and grieved me. As for my delight at your ruling, I have
said: May Allah help and strengthen with you a grieved (person) from the
supporters of the Family. And as for my grief, I am afraid that you
might mistreat a support of us, so you will not obtain the mercy of the
Holy Being (Allah).

I am going to summarize to you all what you have asked about. If you put
them into effect and do not exceed them, I hope you shall be saved,
Allah willing. My father told me on the authority of his grandfathers on
the authority of ‘Au b. Abü Talib, peace be on them, on the authority of
the Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, who said:’
Whomever his believing brother asks the advice of him but does not show
him sincere advice, Allah deprives him of his intellect. Know that I am
going to advise you. If you put my advice into effect, you will get rid
of what you are afraid of. Know that you are able to accomplish your
rescue and your salvation when you refrain from shedding blood and
harming the supporters of Allah, through treating subjects kindly, with
patience and good friendship, with leniency without weakness and
strength without violence. Complying with the moods of your companion
and his messengers who come to you, and treat your subjects according to
justice and lnqulty, Allah willing.

Beware of slanderers, do not let anyone cleave to you, do not let Allah
see you accepting (their words) absolutely, while you do not do justice
to people. So, Allah will be angry with you and disgrace you. As for him
whom you rely on, satisfied with, and entrust with to carry out your
affairs

should be experienced, clear- sighted trustee, He should agree with you
on your religion, know your subjects, and try the two parties. So, if
you find such a person, then depend on him.

Be careful not to give even a dirham or take off a garment in the manner
that displeases Allah to a poet, a comedian, and a joker, in this
condition you should give the same (sum of many) to Please Allah.

Your prizes, bonuses, and robes of honor should be given to leaders,
messengers, grandsons, postmen, the police, and the collectors of Chomps
(fifth). As for the money which you want to spend in the fields of
righteousness, success, generosity, alms, hajj, drinking water, the
garment you use during / prayers, and the gift which you offer for
Allah, the Great and Almighty and for his Apostle, my Allah bless him
and his family, should be from your most lawful earn.

Abd Allah, spare no effort to avoid hoarding up gold and silver so as
not to be among those about whom Allah, the Great and Almighty, says:’
And (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in
Allah’s way.’

Do not regard as little those remnants of food. Spend them to full the
empty abdomens to clam the anger of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted. Know
that I have heard my father reporting a tradition on the authority of
his grandfathers, on the authority of ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, on the
authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who said:’
Whoever spends his night full, while his neighbor is hungry has not
believed in Allah and the NEXT Day (the hereafter).’ So, we said,
‘Allah’s Apostle, we have been ruined!” He said:’ You can putout the
anger of the Lord with the remnants of your dates, your living, and your
worn- out pieces of cloth.’

Amir al- Mu’minin (Imam ‘Ali) went out of this world while he had no
responsibility for anyone till he met Allah praised- unblamed nor
dispraised. Then the Imams after him followed his example as you have
known. They (the Imams) did not stain themselvewith anything of the
worldly calamities, may Allah bless them all and make their abodes good.

I have sent you the noble deeds of this world and the future one. If you
put my advice into effect, I hope that Allah, the Great and Almighty,
will forgive you all your sins with His power, even if they are as heavy
as the mountains or as the waves of the seas.

Abd Allah, be careful not to scare a believer, for my father Mohammed
told me on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
grandfather ‘Au b. Abü Tâlib, peace be on him, who said:’ Whoever looks
at a believer to scare him, Allah will scare him on that day when there
will be no protection but His protection and gather his flesh, his body,
and all his member in the shape of the small ants till He (Allah) brings
him to his ruin.’

My father told me on the authority of his grandfathers, on the authorit)
of ‘Ali, on the authority of the Prophet, my Allah bless him and his
family, who said:’ Whoever helps a grieved believer, Allah will help him
on that day when there will be no protection but His protection, make
him safe on the Day of the Great Scare, and make him safe from the evil
consequence. Whoever fulfills a need for his believing brother, Allah
fulfills many needs for him, among them is Paradise. Whoever clothes his
believing brother (to cover) his nakedness, Allah will clothe hun from
the sacrament of Paradise and from its brocade and its silk. And he will
go on enjoining himself with the pleasure of Allah as long as there is a
piece of thread on the clothed person. Whoever feeds his brother, Allah
will feed him from the good provisions of Paradise. Whoever waters his
brother, Allah will water him from the sealed nectar. Whoever serves his
brother, Allah will make the Immortal boys to serve him, and dwells him
with His pure friends. Whoever carries his believing brother from the
saddle of his (animal), Allah will carry him on a she- camel of the she-
camels of Paradise and vie him in glory with the close angels on the Day
of judgment. Whoever marries his believing brother to a woman whom he
depends on, who helps him, and with whom he is pleased, Allah will marry
him to one of the pure, beautiful girls (in Paradise), and entertains
him with the truthful ones of his family and his brothers. Also he
(Allah) will entertain hii1a with them. Whoever helps his believing
brother against an oppressive ruler, Allah will help him pass the road
(on the day when) the legs shake (with fear). And whoever visits his
believing brother in his house not for a need, Allah will regard him as
one of the Visitors of (His Scared House), and it will be a must on
Allah to honor His visitors.

Abd Allah, my father told me on the authority of his grandfathers on the
authority of ‘Au b. Abü Tâlib, peace be on him, on the authority of the
Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, that he, one day,
said to his companions:’ Men, whoever curses (people) with his tongue
and does not believe (in Allah) in his heart is not a believer. Do not
look for the defects of the believers, for whoever looks for the defects
of a believer, Allah will look for his defects on the Day ofjudginent
and expose him in his house.

My father told me on the authority of ‘Au, peace be on him, who said:”
Allah had taken a promise from the believer that people do not believe
his words, nor does he take revenge on his enemy, ncr does he quench his
anger but through exposing himself to scandal, for every believer is
controlled, that is for a short purpose and long rest.”

“Allah had taken a promise from the believer (to conform to) things. The
simplest one of them is (that) a believer like him (who) believes in his
thought makes him tired, envies him, and the Satan tempts him (the
second believer) and helps him. The ruler follows his acts (the acts of
the first

believer) and his mistakes. He (the ruler) disbelieves in what he (the
first believer) believes. He (the ruler) thinks that shedding his blood
is a must and violating his sacredness as booty, then is the life of the
believer (important) after these things?”

Abd Allah, my father told me on the authority of his grandfathers, on
the authority of ‘All b. Abu Tâlib, peace be on him, on the authority of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, that he said:’ Gabriel,
peace be on him, came down and said: Mohammed, Allah has sent His
regards to you and said: I have derived a name from My Names for the
believer. I have called him believer. The believer is from Me and I am
from the believer. Whoever disdains a believer, surely, wages war
against me.

Abd Allah, my father told me on the authority of his grandfathers, peace
be on them, on the authority of ‘Au, peace be on him, on the authority
of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who, one day, said:
‘Au, do not debate with a man till you know his inner self. If his inner
self is good, Allah, the Great and Almighty, does not forsake His
supporter. And if his inner self is evil, his counterpart is enough for
him. You are not able (to convince him) even if you do your best to do
(deeds) more than he does, not to disobey Allah, the Great and Almighty.

Abd Allah, my father told me on the authority of his grandfathers on the
authority of ‘Ali, peace be on him, on the authority of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, who said:’ The minimum (degree) of
unbelief is that the person hears a word from his brother, to memorize
it against him so as to expose him with it. Such a person shall have no
Portion (in the hereafter).’

Abd Allah, my father told me on the authority of his fathers on the
authority of ‘Au, peace be on him, who said:’ Whoever says about the
believer what his eyes do not see and his ears do not hear to disgrace
him and to destroy his manhood is among those about him Allah, the Great
and Almighty, says: Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should
circulate respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous
chastisement.’

Abd Allah, my father told on the authority of his grandfathers on the
authority of ‘All, peace be on him, who said:’ Whoever reports a story
about his believing brother to demolish his manhood and to defame him,
Allah will degrade him with-his sin till he brings an excuse for what he
has said and will never bring the excuse. Whoever delights his believing
brother, delights (ahl al Bayt), peace be on them. Whoever delights
(alt? a? Bayt), delights Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family. And whoever delights Allah’s Apostle delights Allah. So, it is a
must on Him to make him enter Paradise

Then I advise you to fear Allah and to hold fast to His religion, for
Whoever holds fast to the religion of Allah is guided to the straight
Path (of Islam). So, fear Allah and do not prefer anyone to His pleasure
and will.

That is because it is the commandment of Allah, the Great and Almighty,
to His creation. He (Allah) does not accept anything from them except it
nor does He regard anything as great but it. Know that the creatures
have not been authorized to do anything greater than to fear Allah. Also
it is our commandment, we, (ahl al Baiyt). If you are able to refrain
from doing the deeds about which you will be asked tomorrow, then do.”

Abd Allah b. Sulayman said:” When al- Najäshy received the letter of al-
Sâdiq, peace be on him, he looked at it and said: By Allah with whom
there is no good but Him, my master (al- Sadiq) is truthful. Whoever
puts into effect what has been written in this letter is saved. So, Abd
Allah went on acting according to this letter throughout his
lifetime.”’[1]

Some of Ills Commandments to His Shi’a:
---------------------------------------

Zayd al- Shahhâifl said: Abfl Abd Allah said to me:” Send my greetings
to those of you who obey me and act according to my words. I advise you
to fear Allah, the Great and Almighty, to cleave to piety in your
religion, to make every effort for Allah, to be truthful in your talks,
to give the trusts, to perform long adoration, and to treat your
neighbors kindly, for Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, came
to put these manners into effect.

Give the trust to hwho entrusts you with them whether he is righteous or
mischievous, for Allah’s Apostle ordered (the Muslims) to pay the piece
of thread and the needle, keep close relations with tribes, attend their
escorting of their deceased, visit their ill ones, give them their
rights, for if the person of you becomes pious in his religion, is
truthful in his talks, gives the trust, and his manners are good,
(people) will say: This is the education of Ja’far. This pleases me.
Otherwise, (people) will say: This is the education of Ja’far. In this
case, the tribulation and the disgrace are attributed to me. By Allah,
my father told me that a follower of ‘All, peace be on him, was in a
certain tribe. There, he was the best one: He gave tlia trust, and gave
the rights. He was the most truthful one in talks. So, he was the
shelter of their wills and trusts. The tribe asked about him and said:
Who is like him? He is the most honest of us in giving the trust. And
the most truthful of us in talking.”[2]

His Commandments to Mu’min al- Tlq:[3]
--------------------------------------

Al- Sädiq, peace be on him said:” Bin al- Nu’mfin, beware of doubt, for
it foils your act. Beware of the argument, for it humiliates you. And
Beware

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwar, 73/271/112.  
2 al-Kafi, 2/636/5.  
3 See His Famous Narrators.

of many quarrels, for they take you away from Allah. Those who were
before you learned silence, while you learn the speech. When anyone of
them wanted to worship, he learned silence ten years before that. If he
had learned it, he would have worshipped; other wise he said: I am not
worthy of what I am seeking. Indeed, saved is he who prolongs silence to
refrain from obscenity and endures harm in the state of falsehood. It is
they who were the highborn, the honest, the true followers, and the
believing. By Allah, if someone of you offers gold as much as the earth,
and then envies a believer, that gold will be of that with which he will
be burnt in the fire.

Bin al- Nu’mân, when someone is asked about knowledge and says: I do not
know. Indeed, he shares knowledge equally with (the knowledgeable). The
believer envies during his sitting, but when he stands up, envy
disappears from him.

Bin al- Nu’mân, if you want the love of your brother to be pure for you,
then do not joke with him, do not argue with him, do not vie in glory
with him, and do not quarrel with him. Do not tell your friend about
your secret except that which does not harm you when the enemy knows it,
for the friend might be an enemy someday.

Bin al- Nu’mân, eloquence is not the sharp ton1gue nor much talk.
Rather, it is giving the meaning or producing evidence.[1]

His Commandments to llamrin Bin A’yun:[2]
-----------------------------------------

Al- Sãdiq, peace be on him, said:” Hamrãn, look at those who are
inferior to you; do not look at those who are superior to you in
ability, for that makes you satisfied with what has been predestined for
you, and it is more appropriate for you to get an addition (in your
reward) from your Lord. Know that a few constant acts with conviction
are better with Allah than many acts without conviction. Know that there
is no piety more useful than refraining from harming the believers and
their BACKbiting, nor is living more comfortable than good manners, nor
is property more useful than satisfaction with the a few profitable
(things), nor is ignorance more harmful than vanity.”[3]

His Commandments to al- Mufaddal Bin ‘Amr:[4]
---------------------------------------------

I advise you and my own self to fear Allah and to obey Him, for from
fearing Allah result obedience, piety, humbleness for Allah,
tranquillity, diligence, putting His orders into effect, faithfulness to
His Apostle,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwar, 78/292.  
2 See His Famous Narrators.  
3 Roudat al- Kill, 8/204/238.  
4 See His Famous Narrators.

hastening toward His pleasure, and refraining from what He has
prohibited. Indeed, whoever fears Allah saves himself from the fire with
the permission of Allah and obtains all good in here and the hereafter.
And whoever orders (people) to fear Allah succeeds in the sermon. May
Allah make us from those who fear Him with His permission.”’[1]

His Commandments to Jamil Bin Darraj:[2]
----------------------------------------

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said to Jamil b. Darrâj:” The good ones of
you are the generous and the bad ones of you are the miserly. Among the
good deeds are to treat the brothers kindly and to fulfill their needs,
for these (acts) force the Satan (to turn away from you) and save you
from the fires and make you enter Paradise. JamTl, tell your honorable
companions about this tradition. He (Jamil) said: I (i.e. Jamil) said to
him:’ May I be your ransom, who are my honorable companions?’ He, peace
be on him, said: Those who treat the brothers with kindness during
poverty and riches.”

He (al- Sadiq) said:” Jamil, this (act) is easy for the doer of the
favor. Allah, the Great and Almighty, has praised the doer of the little
(favor). He (Allah) said:’ And prefer (others) to themselves though
poverty may afflict them, and whoever is preserved from the
niggardliness of his soul, these it is that are the successful
ones.”’[3]

His Commandments to al- Ma’aIlâ Bin Khanis:
-------------------------------------------

When al- Ma’ allâ b, KhanTs wanted to travel, al- Sâdiq, peace be on
him, said to him:” Ma’allâ, be powerful with Allah.” He (al- Ma’allâ)
said:” With What, son of the Apostle of Allah (my Allah bless him and
his family)?” He, peace be on him, said:” Fear Allah, the Exalted. He
makes every thing afraid of you. Ma’allâ, show love to your brothers
through giving them gifts, for Allah, the Exalted, has made the gift
love and prevention hatred. By Allah, if you ask me for (something) and
I give you it is more desirable with me than that you do not ask me for
(a thing) and I do not give yo.u, so you hate me. Whatever Allah, the
Great and Almighty, has given you through my hands, still the laudable
one is Allah, the Exalted. However, do not forget to thank for what
Allah has given you through my hands.”[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Basi’ir al- Darajat, 1, 526.  
2 See His Famous Narrators.  
3 a1- Sidflq, al- KhisaI. al- Hashr, 9.  
4 Shaykh al- Ttisi, al- Majilis, Majlis no., 11.

His Commandments tQ Sufyan al- Thawri:[1]
-----------------------------------------

Syfyan said:” I met the Truthful one, the Son of the Truthful one,
Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace be on them. 1 (i.e. Sufyan) said: Son of the
Apostle of Allah, advise me. He said to me:’ Sufyan, the liar has no
manhood; the tired (person) has no brother, the enviou (Person) has no
rest, and the ill-natured (person) has no rightness.”’

I (sufyan) sai&” Son of the Apostle of Allah Allah bless him and his
family, add more. He said to me:’ Entrust Allah to be a believer. Be
satisfied with what Allah has allotted to You to be rich. Treat your
neighbor with kindness to be Muslim. Do not make friends with the sinner
so as not to teach you from his sin. Concerning your affairs ask the
advice of those who fear Allah.”’

I (sufyän) said:” Son of the Apostle of Allah, add more. He said to me:’
Sufyän, whoever wants glory without a tribe, riches Without money, and
dignity without authority, then should move from the humiliation of the
disobedience of Allah to the strength of His obedience”,[2]

He (i.e. Su1ayan) said once to al- Sädiq:” I do not go till you tell me
(some pieces of advice).” He (al- Sadiq) said to him:’ I will tell you,
for talking with you is good. Sufyän, If Allah bestows a certain
blessing upon you, and if you want this blessing to last, then praise
and laud (Allah) for it very much, for Allah, the Great and Almighty,
has said in His Book: If you are grateful, I would certainly give to you
more.[3] And if you feel that your sustenance is slow, then ask Allah’s
forgivenag5 for much, for Allah, the Great and Almighty, has said in His
Book: Ask forgiveness of your Lord, surely He is the most Forgiving. He
will send down upon you the cloud, pouring down abundance of rain. And
help You with wealth and sons, and make for you gardens, and make for
you rivers.”’[4]

“Sufyän, when the ruler or others cause a Certain matter to sadden you,
say: There is neither might nor power but with Allah, for it is the key
of ease and treasure of the treasures of Paradise, So, Sufyân said:’
What excellent three these are!’ [5]

His Commandments to ‘Inwin al- :[6]
-----------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 See His Famous Narrators.  
2 BiMr al- Anwfir: 6, 192/78.  
3 lbrflhini, 7.  
4 Nuh, 10.  
5 Abu Na’im, Hulyat al- Au1iya,’ 3,193.  
6 He has no biography in the books of our biographers.

‘Inwân al- Basri disagreed with M&lik b. Anas on his ideas. So, he
wanted to learn from al- Sâdiq, peace be on him. When he came to
alSadiq, al- Sadiq said to him:” I am a wanted man. However, I have
parts of tfre Holy Koran at every hour during night and day. So, do not
busy me from these parts.” He (‘Inwلn) said:” I became sad, so I entered
the Mosque of the Prophet of Allah, peace be on him, and greeted him.”
Then I said two ruk’ats and said:” Allah! Allah! I ask You to Make
Ja’far’s knowledge to follow Your straight path.” When my patience was
over, and my heart became narrow, I went to Ja’far. When I reached his
house, I knocked on the door. A servant came out. The servant said:”
What is your need?” I (‘Inwân) said:” peace be on the Sharif.” The
servant said:” He is performing his prayers.” So, I sat at the door.
Immediately, the servant came out and said:” Come in with the blessing
of Allah.” I caine in and greeted him (al- Sadiq). He greeted rue and
said:” Sit down, may Allah forgive you (your sins).” So, 1 sat down. He
bowed his head for a long time. Then he raised his head and said:” What
is your kunya?” “AbQ Abd Allah,” I said:” May Allah fix your kunya and
grant you success. What is your question?” I said to myself:” This du’a’
is very much for me.” Then he raised his head and said:” What is your
question?” I said:” I asked Allah to incline your heart to me and give
me some of your knowledge. I hope that Allah has accepted my
supplication.” He (al- Sâdiq) said:” Abii Abd Allah, knowledge is not
obtained through learning. Rather, It is light falls into the heart of
the person whom Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, Wants to guide. If you
want knowledge, then ask the truth of worship in yourself, seek
knowledge through using it, and ask Allah to make you understand it.” I
said:” Sharif 1” He said:” Do not say sharif, say AbU Abd Allah.” I
said:” What is the truth of worship?” He said:” three things: the
servant should not regard him self asking in what Allah has authorized
him, for the servants have no authority. They think that wealth belong
to Allah. They use it in the fields where He has ordered them to. So,
the servant has no right in this wealth. All he has is that he should
carry out what Allah has ordered him and to refrain from what He has
prohibited. So, when the servant thinks that he has no right in what
Allah has authorized him, spending in the fields where Allah has ordered
him to spend is easy for him. When the servant authorizes his master to
manage him, the misfortunes of this world are easy for him. When the
servant busies himself with what Allah has ordered him to do, while have
no leisure time to argue with people or vie with them in glory. When
Allah honors the servant with these three things, life in this world,
Iblis (the Satan), and the creation are all easy for him. Besides, he
does not request the life in this world to increase (his money) or vie
with (people) in glory nor does he request what people have for power
and the high position and nor does he make his days go in vain. So, this
is the first degree of religious devotion. Allah, the

Blessed and Exalted, said:’ (As for) that future abode, We assign ito
those who have no desire to exalt themselves in the earth nor to make
mischief and the good end is for those who guard (against evil).””[1]

I (‘Inwfin) said:” Aba Abd Allah, advise me.” He said:” I will advise
you (to do) nine things, for they are to those who want to follow the
Straight path of Alla. I ask Allah to grant you success to put them into
effect. Three of them in the spiritual exercise; three of them in
clemency, and three of them in knowledge. Memorize them and be careful
not neglect them.” “Inwlin said:” So, I made my heart empty.” He (al-
S&iiq) said:” As for those concerning the spiritual exercise, be careful
not to eat what you do not feel appetite for, because it brings about
foolishness and stupidity. Do not eat except when you are hungry. When
you eat, eat lawful (food), say: Bismillahr rahmanir rahim, and call to
mind the following tradition of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family:’ The person does not full a container more evil than his
stomach. However, if it is necessary, (follow these portions): third for
food, third for water, and third for breathing.’[2]

As for those concerning clemency, whoever says to you: If you say one
time, I have heard ten times. Say to him: If you say ten times, you have
heard none. Whoever abuses you, say to him: if you are truthful in what
you say, then ask Allah to forgive me. And if you tell lies in what you
say, then I ask Allah to forgive you. Whoever threatens you with obscene
language, give him a piece of advice and take care of him. And as for
those concerning knowledge, ask the knowledgeable about what you do not
know. Be careful not to ask them to confuse or try them. Be careful not
to do anything according to your opinion. Act according to precaution in
all what you cannot find a way to it. Escape from giving a religious
opinion, and do not make your neck as a bridge for people. Now, AbU Abd
Allah, leave me, for I have given you pieces of advice. Do not spoil my
reciting to the parts of the Koran, for I am sticking to them, and peace
be on those who follow guidance.”2

Some of His valuable Commandments:
----------------------------------

His valuable pieces of advice and commandments are many. He followed
every method to advise (people) to follow guidance. He sometimes urges
us to cleave to religious devotion, piety, diligence, long adoration,
and bow (ruku’). He says:” Be propagandists to yourselves without your
tongues, be graceful and do not be disgraceful.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Qasas, 83.  
2 Bihar al- Anwar, 1/224/17.  
3 al- Kafi.

He sometimes urges us to stick to gratefulness, supplication, and
reliance on Allah. He says:” Whomever is given three (things) is not
prevented from three (things)- whomever is given supplication is given
the answer, whomever is given gratefulness is given the addition, and
whomever is given reliance (on Allah) is given the adequacy.” Then he
said:” Have you recited the book of Allah, the Great and Almighty: And
whoever trusts in Allah, He is sufficient for him.”[1] “If you are
grateful I would certainly give to you more.”[2] “Call upon Me, I will
answer you.”[3]

He sometimes guides us to despair from all people. He says:” If someone
of you wants to ask Allah to give him everything, then he should despair
from all people, he should have no hope with any one but with Allah.
When Allah, the Great and Almighty, knows that from his heart, He gives
him all his desires.”[4]

He sometimes encourages us to have noble manners and virtuous qualities.
So, he describes humbleness for us and limits its positions. He says:”
It is an act of humbleness to be satisfied with sitting at the end of
the sitting, to greet him whom you meet, to leave the argument even if
you are right, and do not love to be lauded for religious devotion.”[5]

Al- Sadiq mentioned many qualities to raise the person to a high social
position. He said to his companions:” Hear my words. They are better
than the dark black horses: one of you should not speak about that which
does not concern him, he should leave many words about that which
concerns him to find a subject to them. Perhaps, one may speak about an
inconvenient subject, so he wrongs himself with his words. One of you
should not argue with the clement person nor with the foolish one, for
whoever argues with the clement person, he (the clement person) will
drive him away. And whoever argues with the foolish one, he (the foolish
one) will ruin him. When your brother is away, remember him with best
words with which .you want people to remember you when you are away. And
do the deed of him who knows that he will be rewarded with kindness.”[6]

He described good maimers for us to make us to conform to them. He
said:” Indeed, Allah is satisfied with Islam as religion for you, then
make your relation with it good through generosity and good manners.

He advised his companions to adopt the following:” Visit each other, for
your visit enlivens your hearts and reminds you of our traditions. Our
traditions make you feel compassion for each other. If you put them into

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Talaq, 30.  
2 Ibrahim, 7.  
3 al- Mu’min, 60.  
4 al-Kafi.  
5 al-Kafi.  
6 Shaykh al- Thsi, al- Majfflis, Majlis no. 2.

effect, you will be guided and saved. If you neglect them, you will go
astray and (face) ruin. So, follow them and I guarantee your
salvation.”’[1]

Social Relations:
-----------------

Without doubt, man imitates by nature his friends and relatives. So, he
is good when they are good and is bad when they are bad. For this
reason, our Imam warned people against bad social relations:” Be careful
not to associate with the kings and those who clings to the life in this
world, for that corrupts your religion and causes hypocrisy to you. This
is a bad illness which has no cure, and brings about a hard heart and
deprives you of devoutness. Cleave to ordinary people who match you, for
you find good manner with them. Be careful not to wish for that which is
in the hands of the children of this world. Because whoever wishes for
that, his grief becomes long, does not quench his anger, and regards
Allah’s blessing with him as little. So, his gratefulness is little.
Look at those who are inferior to you, so you are grateful to Allah for
his boons, worthy of His extra (boons), and happy at His liberality.”[2]

Hastening toward Good Things:
-----------------------------

It is not right to lose the good deed, for it is an opportunity.
Perhaps, losing the good deed brings about regret. All affairs of life
are opportunities which we are not able to repeat. However, AbU Abd
Allah, peace be on him, urges us to seize such suitable opportunities.
He said:” if you intend to do a good deed, then do not put it off.
Indeed, Allah, the Great and Almighty, may know that the servant has
some obedience. So, He (Allah) says: By my Greatness and Might, I will
never torture you after it.’”[3] There are many similar traditions in
this regard.

Also al- Sadiq, peace be on him, warns us against evil deeds. He said:”
And if you intend to do an evil deed, then do not do it. Indeed, Allah,
the Great and Almighty, may know that the servant has some disobedience.
So, He (Allah2 says:’ By My Greatness and Might, I will never forgive
you after it.’” Al- Sadiq gave many similar comments in this regard.

Studying Religious Jurisprudence:
---------------------------------

Studying Religious jurisprudence is the way to worship Allah, the
Exalted. Muslims can preserve the Islamic Law with it. Rather, the
Muslim Religion depends on the Muslim jurists who know its rule and
defend it. From here al- Sadiq, peace be on him said many traditions on
religious

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Kafi.  
2 Zayd al- Narsi, al- Kitab.  
3 Wasa’iI al- Shi, 1, 18.

jurisprudence we have mentioned some of them before. Here we will add
other traditions. He, peace be on him, said:” Whoever worships (Allah)
without understanding (the religion) is like him who walks after the
mirage in a desert- the speed of his walking increases him nothing but
distance.” Also he said:” Whoeverbrof our companions does not study
religious jurisprudence, then does not do any good deed.” Also he said:”
People are not able to act till they ask and understand (the
religion).”[1] He, peace be on him, said:” If Allah wants a servant to
do good makes him understand the religion.” Also he said:” All
perfection is in understanding the religion, patience during the
misfortune, and appreciating the living.”[2]

As religious j\\urisprudence plays an important role in the Muslim
religion, he, peace be on him, said:” The death of the religious jurist
is more desirable with (the Satan) than the death of any other
believer.” Also he said:” When the believing jurist dies he makes in
Islam a gap which ncthing fills.”[3]

Gratefulness of Boons:
----------------------

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, advised (Muslims) to preserve boons to make
them last. In this connection he said:” Preserve constant boons. Be
careful not to let them move to other than you. Indeed, when they move
from one person (to another), they rarely come BACK to him.”

Amir al- Mu’minTn said:” When the thing turns away, it rarely comes
BACK.”[4]

He (al- Sâdiq) taught them (Muslims) how to preserve boons. He said to
Sadrr al- Sayrafy:” When the person has many properties, the proof of
Allah against him is great. So, if you are able to change it (Allah’s
proof), then do” He (Sâdfr) said:” Son of Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family, with what?” He, peace be on him, said:” With
fulfilling the needs of your brothers from your properties.” Then he
said:” Receive boons, SâdTr, in a good manner. Thank Him Who bestows
upon you. Bestow upon him who thanks you. Indeed, if you behave in such
a manner. Then the addition from Allah and the advice from your brothers
are a must.” Then he recited these Words of Allah, the Exalted:” If you
are grateful, I would certainly give you more.”[5]

Among the methods of gratefulness is that the servant should show the
boons of Allah, the Glorified. For this reason, AbU Abid Allah (al-
S&liq), peace be on him, guides us to this laudable trait. He said:”
Surely, Allah

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwir: 1/221/61.  
2 a1- Kafi.  
3 Bihar al- Anwar: 1/220/56.  
4 Shaykh Tusi, al- Mbrjalis, Majlis no.9.  
5 Ibid, Majlis no. 11. Ibrahim, 7.

loves beauty and embellishment, and hates misery and showing
misery.Indeed, when Allah bestows a boon upon a person, He loves to see
its effect on him.” It was said:” How?” He, peace be on him, said:” He
(the person) should clean his clothes, perfume himself, sweeps the yards
(of his house), and plasters his house.”

These are some important methods to show gratefulness for Allah’s boons.
They explained this verse “And as for the favor of your Lord, do
announce (it).”

Good Friendship:
----------------

Good friendship is not the matter which comes to you automatically.
Rather, it comes through habituating the self and controlling its
pleasures. That is because good friendship sometimes forces you to
sacrifice your desires and appetites for your friend and to prefer him
to yourself. For this reason, Abti Abd Allah, peace be on him, said:”
Adjust yourself to good friendship to him whom you make friends with.”

As there are many methods to make good friendship, and as the person
does not know which one is the best, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, teaches
us how to make good friendship with our friends. He said:” Make your
manners good, prevent your tongue (from saying obscene words), suppress
your anger, decrease your nonsense, plant your forgiveness, and be
generous.”[1]

Moreover, he wants us to make good friendship as permanent slogan with
our friends. He said:” Shi’a (followers) of the family of Mohammed,
whoever does not control himself during his anger and does not treat his
friend kindly is not one of us.”[2] There are many traditions like this.

When we make friends with someone and when we part from him for a
certain time, al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, makes it incumbent on us to
look for him to know his conditions. So, he said to al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr
when he came BACK from his travel: “Who accompanied you?” “A man of my
brothers,” said al- Mufaddal” “What has he done,” asked al- Sadiq. “I
have not known his place since I arrived,” said al- Mufaddal. “Do you
not know that whoever accompanies a believer for forty steps, Allah will
ask him about the believer on the Day of Judgment.”[3]

Friendship during Travel:
-------------------------

Travel has special manners which are different from those ones during
the normal life. From the first look, you may know it is anbract of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Was’ ‘il, 8/42/2.  
2 Ibid, 8/ 402/3.  
3 Ibid, 8/403/8.

generosity, the noble self, and manhood to spend much money on the food
in the manner that surpasses your friends. However, al- Sadiq, peace be
on him, prevented (Muslims from doing that) during travel, for such kind
of spending costs the friend a lot when he wants to vie in spending with
his other friends or it may humiliate him when he prevents himself from
doing that. It is not an act of politeness or good friendship to cost
your friend or humiliate him. For this reason, al- Sadiq, peace be on
him, said to Shahâb b. ‘Abd Raba’[1] :“ Shahab, do not do that, for if
they spend and you spend (more than them), then you wrong them or
hUmiliate them when they prevent from (spending). So, accompany your
matches, accompany your matches.”

The Imam said these words when Shahâb said to him:” You have known my
condition, my open- hand, and my generosity toward my brothers. I
accompany the person of them to cover the road to Mecca and I become
generous toward him.”[2]

I (the author) say: The person humiliates others when he spends on them.
In the meantime, others humiliate him when they spend on him. So, the
Imam prevented (Muslims) from adopting both cases. He said to Abü
Basir:” I do not want (the person) to humiliate himself, so he should
accompany those who match him.”

The Imam said these words when Abü BasTr asked about the person who
accompanies the rich, while he is inferior to them (in spending). So,
the men take out the expense, while he is not able to take out what they
do.”

When Hisham b. al- Hakam asked the Imam about some cases, the Imam
answered:” Accompany those who are like you.”[3]

Accordingly, the Imam regard the companionship of the match as a rule
for both causes, test the person should humiliate himself or humiliate
the others. This is among his great wisdoms which he adopted to make
people follow good manners.

Good Neighborhood:
------------------

It is an act of the politeness of the person and of his superior
intellect is to adopt good neighborhood. Besides, it is a virtuous act
which the wise summon people to put it into effect. The Arabs vied with
each other for treating their neighbor kindly. Also they did their best
to defend the neighbor. When Islam came it adopted this noble trait,
increased the respect for it, and urged the Muslims to cling to it. The
Prophet, may Allah bless

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   al- Kafi. He was among the companions of al- S&liq, peace be on him,
He was among the reliable narrators. The reliable narrators reported
traditions on his authority.  
2   Wasa’il al- Shi’a, 8/302/1.  
3   Ibid, 8/303/5.

him and his family, gave frequent commandments concerning it. For this
reason, AmTr al- Mu’minln (Imam ‘Au), peace be on him, said:” Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, went on advising us (to
treat) the neighbor (kindly). So, we thought that he would bequeath
him.”

The grandsons of the Prophet followed the same manner in regard with the
neighbor. For example, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” Cleave to
Allah fearingness.... good manners, and good neighborhood.”’[1]

Al- Sadiq repeated these commandments many times. So, he blamed those
who neglected them. In this connection, he, peace be on him, said:” Do
the person of you not feel shame that his neighbor knows his right,
while he does not know his neighbor’s right?”

Moreover, al- Sâdiq excluded those who do not treat their neighbors
kindly. He, peace be on him, said:” Whoever does not treat his neighbor
kindly isnot one of us.”[2]

Accepting Advice:
-----------------

People know that the person has superior intellect when he listens to
advice and conforms to the words of the adviser, for the ignorant person
sticks to fanaticism that he does not listen to the adviser. Besides, he
thinks that the adviser may disclose his defects. However, he forgets
that disclosing, his defects urges him to reform them. For this reason,
al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:” The most desirable one of my brothers
for me is he who gifts me my defects.”[3] He said these words to teach
us, for he is far above defects.

I (the author) say: Of course, such a person is the most desirable one
because he wants to save himself from the vices and adorn it with the
virtue. As this quality is goo, al- Sلdiq, peace be on him, regarded
disclosing the defects as a gift. This was his maximum aim to encourage
the brothers (i.e. friends) to adopt this quality to disclose the
defects of each other to reform them.

Al- Sadiq made it necessary for the believer to accept advice. He, peace
be on him, said:” The believer is in need of three traits: success
granted by Allah, the Great and Almighty, a preacher from his own self,
and accepting advice.”[4]

Consultation:
-------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Wasa’il al-Shi’a, 11/1 56/8.  
2 Ibid, 8/399/4.  
3 Ibid, 8/489/5.  
4 Ibid, 8/413/3.

 

Whoever asks the advice of the wise knows the ways of the entries and of
the outlets and discovers the ways of success. So, he saves himself from
dangers. Abti Abd Allah (al- Sadiq), peace be on him, discovered this
fact for us 1vhen he said:” The person who asks the advice (of others)
does nat perish.”[1] Also he guided us to the consultant when we face
accidental vague things. He said:” When the person of you faces (a
thing) which he has no ability to solve, Way does he not ask the advice
of the wise man with has religion and piety?’[2]

Al- Sadiq increased the conditions of consultation and of the consultant
when he, peace be on him, said: “Consultation does not take place except
within its (limits. So, the advice- seeker should know it with in its
limita otherwise it harms him more than it avails him. Firstly, the
consultant should be wise. Secondly, he should be free and religious.
Thirdly, he should be a close friend, lastly, you should tell him about
your secret tba his knowledge of it is as your knowledge of yourself.
Then he keeps yoIar secret. Indeed, if he (the consultant) is wise, you
make use of his advice. If he is free and religious, he does his best to
advise you. If he is a close friend, he keeps your secret when you tell
him about it. And if you tell him. about your secret that his knowledge
of it is as your knowledge of it, then. consultation is perfect.”[3]

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, warned (Muslims) against disobeying the
consultant when he is fully qualified. He said:” Of men, ask the advice
af the wise, pious (one), for he does not order (you) but (to do) good.
Be careful not to disobey (him), for aisobeying the wise, pious (one)
corrupba religion and the life in this world.”[4]

Also he made it incumbent on the consultant to give his advice ataèa
warned him against the end when he refuses to give his advice. He, pa be
on him, said:” Whoever asks the advice of his brother, but he brother)
does not give him pure advice, Allah, the Great and shall deprive him of
his opinion.[5]

Making Many Brothers:
---------------------

Indeed, the person becomes many with his brother (friend), for he (6
friend) helps him during misfortunes and poverty, entertains him during
loneliness and estrangement, advise him during perplexity, guides him
during the error, remembers him when he is away, and so on. For tha
reason, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, ordered (Muslias) to make ua
brothers. He, peace be on him, said:” Make many friends in this world,
iii they avail (you) in here and the hereafter. In this world, they
fulfill (your)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Ibid, 8/424/4.  
2 Ibid, 8/426/7.  
3 Ibid, 8/426/8.  
4 Ibid, 8/426/8.  
5 Ibid, 8/427/2.

needs. In the hereafter, the paople of the fire will say:’ So we have no
jntcrCeSSOTS, nor a true friend.”’[1]

When al- Sidiq, peace be on him, said that the friend would avail his
friend in the hereafter, he meant that the religious wise one who guides
his friend to good through advising him, so he will save him from the
ruin in the hereafter.

Or he may make use of his supplication for his life in the hereafter, as
atSadiq said in other tradition:” Make many brothers, for every believer
has an accepted supplication.”

Or because he may make use of his intercession in the hereafter, as
a1-Sadiq, peace be on him said: “Make many brothers, for every believer
has intercession.” Also he, peace be on him, saida “Make friends with
the believers, for they have intercession with Allah.’[2]

Besides, the believing friend is worth a collection of all these
qualities in here and the hereafter.

Forgiving Brothers:
-------------------

Not all people are infallible. Most people make mistakes. So, it is
impossible for you to find the friend free from defects. Accordingly,
whoever wants to make many friends should forgive them their mistakes.
From here, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” Where do you find a
prefect brother? Which one of men is perfect?[3]

Also he said:” Whoever does not make friends but with him who has no
defect, his friends are very few.[4]

When the person wants friendship to last he should not look for the
defects of his friena, as al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:” Looking for
(defects) is parting.”[5] Also he said”’ Do not look for (the defects)
of people lest you should be without friend.”[6]

The experienced persons should be satisfied with the little act of his
brother to continue his friendship with him, as al- Sâdiq, peace be on
him, said:” It is not an act of equity to demand the brothers to do
equity, and whoever IS dissatisfied with his brather unless his brother
prefers him to himself his dissatisfaction will last.”[7]

Yes, admonition does not spoil the continuation of friendship. Rather,
it may remove the hatred and hidden spites of the hearts. However,
admonition should not be very much because it brings about negative
results. For this reason, al- S&iiq, peace be on him, said:” He whose

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Ibid, 81407/5.  
2 Ibid, 8/408/7.  
3 Ibid, 8/458/1.  
4 Bihar al-Anwar, 78/278.  
5 Ibid, 78/253/109.  
6 Wasa il al-shia, 8/458/2.  
7 Ibid, 8/458/3.

admonition is much, his friends are very few.” Also he said:” Whoever
admonishes his brother for every mistake, his admonition will last.”[1]

The Rights of Brothers:
-----------------------

Brothers have many rights. It is difficult for us to count them, and we
do not want to search what has been mentioned on them in this connection
However, we will mention only one tradition. The tradition is enough for
the brother to treat his brother kindly when he puts it into effect. Al-
Sâdiq, peace be on him, said to al- Mu’alla b. KhanTs that the brother
has seven rights. They are: The first right: You should love to him what
you love to your self and hate to him what you hate to your self. The
second right: You should avoid making him angry, follow his pleasure,
and obey his orders. The third right: You should help him with your
self, your money, your tongue, .your hand, and your leg. The fourth
right: You should be his eye, his guide, and his mirror. The fifth
right: You should not be full, while he is hungry. You should not quench
your thirst, while he is thirsty. You should not clothe your self, while
he is naked. The sixth right: When you have a servant, and your brother
has no servant, so you should sent him your servant to wash his clothes,
to fix his food, and to prepare his bed. The seventh right: You carry
out his oath, accept his invitation, visit his ill ones, participate in
his funeral procession. When you know that he has a need, you should
hasten to fulfill it. You should not force him to request it (the need)
from you, but you should hasten to (fulfill it) of your own accord. When
you do that, you relaae your friendship to his friendship, and his
friendship toyoa friendship”[2]

Helping the Brothers:
---------------------

In the previous topic the Rights of Brothers, we have mentioned
something about helping the brothers. However, it has been mentioned
separately in the traditions of al- Sadiq, peace be on him. He, pe1ice
be on him, said:” Help your brothers with what you have earned.”[3] Also
he, peace be on him, said:” Come nearer to Allah through helping your
brothers.”[4]

As helping the brothers is very difficult, Abü Abd Allah (al- Sadiq),
peace be on him, said:” Among the strongest things which Allah has
Imposed on his creatures are three: (The believer should) treat his
believing brother with (nametya he should love to him what he loves to
himself helping the believing brother with money, calling to mind
Allah’s name during every attitude- it is not to say Subhana Allah
waaa1- hamdu lillah rather during (doing) what Allah has prohibited him
from.”[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwar: 78/278.  
2 Wasa il al- Shi’a, 8154417.  
3 Ibid 8/415/4.  
4 al-Sudiq,al-Khisal.  
5 Wasa il al- Shi,a, 5/41515.

I (the author) say: Indeed these are among the difficult things for the
person to do, for they Oppose his strongest pleasure such as self- love,
money- love, pride, and so on.

Treating the Brothers Kindly:
-----------------------------

Treating the brothers kindly is a branch of rendering help to them.
AlSâdiq. peace be on him, urged Muslims very much to treat each other
kindly. In his commandments to JamTl b. Darrâj, he said:” It is an act
of pure belief is to treat the brothers kindly and to satisfy their
needs. The Merciful (Allah) loves him who treats his brothers kindly....
Jamil, tell your honorable companions about this tradition. He (Jamil)
said: “May I be ransom for you, who are my honorable companions?” He
said:” Those who treat their brothers kindly during poverty and
riches.”’[1]

In his foregoing commandments to Abid Allah b. Jundub, al- Sadiq said:”
Indeed, to move the feet to visit the brothers and to treat them kindly
is the best way to worship Allah.”

As treating the brothers kindly is great with Allah, the Exalted, the
Satan does his best to prevent man from doing that, In these
commandments he said:” Bin Jundub, the Satan has snares to catch
(people) so, beware of his snares.” He (Bin Jundub) said:” Son of the
Prophet of Allah, what are his snares?” He (the Prophet) said:” As for
his snares, he (the Satan) prevent you from treating your brothers
kindly.”

Truthful Talk and Giving the Trust:
-----------------------------------

Abu Abd Allah (al- Sadiq), peace be on him, advised his companions to be
truthful in their talks and to give trusts to their owners. In this
connection, we have mentioned some information before.

Though these two traits are the best of all traits in themselves, they
have clear effects on the religion. For example, they bring about love
and confidence among people, so riches happens. In this regard, we will
mention the following tradition.

Al-sadiq, peace be on him, said to Abd al- Ra1unan b. Sayyaba:” Do you
not want me to give you a commandment?” Abd al- Rahman said:” Yes, may I
be ransom for you.” Al- Sadiq said:” Cleave to the truthful talk and
giving the trust. So, you Will share people their properties." Abd
al-Rahman said:” I ha will share people their properties.” Abd al
hundred thousand dirhams”a the tradition, so I have earned three hundred
thousand dirhams."[2]

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Wasa’il al- Shi’a.  
2 Bihar al- Anwar: 47/384/107.
