His Children
============

The historians disagreed on the number of his children. But their famous
number is what al- Shaykh al- Mufid, may Allah rest him in peace, has
mentioned in his book al- Irshftd. In this connection he said:” The
children of Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, were ten:

Isma’il, Abd Allah, Urn Farwa. Their mother was Fatima bint (the
daughter of) al- Husayn b. al- Hasan b. ‘Au, peace be on Them. MbI
(peace be on him), Mohammed, (his mother was Urn Hanild), al- Abbfis,
‘Au, AsmA’, Fatima. They belonged to various mothers.

Isma’i1:
--------

Isma’il was the eldest of the children of aI- Sâdiq, peace be on him.
AlSâdiq loved him very much, and was very kind to him, and felt pity for
him.’[1]

Al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said to al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr, one of his
reliable companions, at the time when Abu al- Hasan Mtlsa, peace be on
him, was still young:” This child, namely, Miisa al- Kazim, is the most
blessed one for our followers.” Then he said:” And do not forget
Ismâ’il.”[2]

These words indicate that al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, transferred the
Imamate from Ismâ’il to Miisa. But when al- Sadiq felt that his words
would hurt Ismâ’il’s dignity, he said:” And do not forget Isma’il.”

Also al- Sadiq, peace be on him, said:” Ismâ’il was liable to killing
twice. So, I asked Allah, the Glorified to raise it (death) from him
(Isma’il) and He (Allah) raised it from him.”[3] Besides, al- Sadiq’s
words and actions which indicated his love for Isma’il was great. For
this reason, a group ofthe Shra thought that Ismâ’il would be the Imam
after his father. That is because his father treated him kindly and took
care of him, and because Ismft’fl was the eldest of his brothers. And
the priority in age was among the marks of the Imamate But the death of
Isma’il during the days of his father removed the idea of the Imamate
from the heads of that group of the ShVa.

Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, showed great sadness when Ismâ’i1 died.
After he had died and his face had been covered, al- Sftdiq ordered
those men who were near him to uncover the face of Ismâ’il white he was
laying BACK. Then al- SSdiq kissed his forehead, his chin, and his neck.
Then he ordered the men to uncover his face and he did as he did at the
first time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Shaykh al- Mufid, a’- Irshad, 284.  
2 Al- Kafi: 1/309/8.  
3 Shaykh abu ‘Ali, Al- Rijal

When Isma’Il was washed and shrouded, al- S&liq ordered the men to
uncover his face and kissed in those places for the third time. Then
atSftdiq recited some verses of the Koran and ordered the men to cover
his face.

In other report, al- SSdiq ordered al- Mufaddal b. ‘Amr to collect a
group of his companions. Al- Mufaddal collected thirty of them. Among
thepi were Abu BasTr, Hamran b. A’yun, and Dawtld al- Raqy. Al- SLliq
saida Dawfld:” Dawüd, consider him (Ismâ’Il) carefully, look at him. Is
he living or dead?” DawUd said:” He is dead.” Then al- Sâdiq asked 1a
companions the same question. So, he said:” Allah, bear witness.” T1a he
ordered his companions to wash and shroud Ismi’il. Then he saida”
Mufaddal, uncover his face.” al- Mufaddat did. Then he said:” Is he
living or dead? Alt of you took at him.” They said:” Our mastera be a
dead.” He said:” Have you borne witness? Are you sure of that?” They.
said:” Yes.” They were astonished at his continuous question. He said:”
Allah, bear witness on them.” Then the companions carried IsmI’Tl to hip
grave. When they put him into the grave, al- S&liq said:” Mufadqa
uncover his face.” Al- Mufaddat did. Then he said to his companions:”
Look at him, is he living or dead?” They said:” Friend of Allah, iaeap a
dead.” He said:” Allah, bear witness.” After the companions had buaiqa
3’ Ismâ’il, al- S&liq said to them:” Who is this dead (person) in this
grave’ They said:” Ismâ’il, your son.” He said:” Allah, bear
witness.”[1]

The person maybecome astonished at the insistence of the Iinnmg asking
his companions the same question about the death of Isma’Tl. that to
make people know that Isma’Tl had realty died. Then, there w no
suspicion or doubt about his death. But, there was no wonder! because
the Imam knew that there would be a group of people who believe in his
Lmamate because he was the eldest of his brothers an4 they claimed, that
he would not die.

In other words, the Imam asked his companions the same question the
death of Ismâ’il to make them sure of his death so that they w able to
tell people about that. In the meantime the Imam himself, pcaca on him,
disclosed the secret after Ismâ’il had been buried and made companions
bear witness about his death. In this connection, he said:”a people of
falsehood wilt have doubt. They want to put out the 1 Allah.” Then he
made a sign to MUsA, peace be on him. Whew companions had buried
Ismâ’il, al- Sadiq made them bear witness abo death. Then he took Mflsâ
by the hand and said:” He is the truth truth wilt be with him till Allah
inherits the earth and whatever on it.[2]

Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, was full of sadness when death o Isma’il.
Thus, he knelt with his forehead touching the ground for a long

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar Al- Anwar: 47/254.  
2 Ibid: 1/188.

time. Then he raised his head and looked at IsmE’i1 for a short time and
looked at his face. Again, he knelt with his forehead touching the
ground for a longer time. Then he stood and came into his house and
stayed there for an hour. Then he came out of the house with other
clothes. His sadness disappeared. After he had washed Isma’It, he
ordered one of his companions to bring him the shroud on whose hem they
wrote:” Ismâ’il bears witness that there is no god but Allah.”’[1]

The companions were astonished to see sadness disappear from his face.
So, one of them asked him: “May I be your ransom, we thought that we
would not avail ourselves from you forever when we saw that sadness on
your face.” He (al- Sadiq), peace be on him, said:” We, the members of
the house, become worried e)ccept when the misfortune comes down. If it
comes down, we are patient.”

Then al- Sfldiq offered his companions good food and invited them to eat
and urged them to have food. His companions did not see any mark of
sadness on his face. So, they asked him about that. He answered:” Of
course, I should be as you see me, for I heard the tradition of the most
Truthful of the truthful (i.e. the Prophet), (who said): I wilt die with
you.”

But when the companions carried the liiler of Ismâ’it, al- Sâdiq was in
front of them bare- footed to show his great sadness. In the mean time
he ordered the companions to put the tiiler on the ground and uncover
the face of Isma’Tl to make people sure of his death. He did that
several times till the companions put Ismâ’il into the grave.[2]

When the companions had buried IsmS’il, al- Sadiq sat down and his
companions sat around him. He bowed his head, then he raised it and
said:” 0 men, indeed, this world is the house of parting, and the house
of the change not the house of stability. But the parting of the
familiar (person) has burning which one can not push and pain which one
can not turn away. However, people are good or bad according to good
patience and the good idea. Whoever does not lose his brother, his
brother wilt lose him. And whoever does not advance a child, he will be
advanced instead of the child.” Then he gave the following line of Abu
Kharash al- Hadbty as an example:

And do not think that I have forgoilen his promise

But my patience, Umaym, is good.[3]

When Ismâ’U had died, al- Sadiq, peace be on him, summoned one of his
followers and gave him some dirhams to perform the hajj for him
(Ismâ’T1) and said to him (the follower):” Surety, if you perform the
haj for him

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Some Muslims have wriilen these words on the shrouds of the dead
since that day to follow the a of the Imam Some people of al- Jamfld
have told that they write on the ahroud of the dead:” IsmK’yl bears
witness  
2   A1- Mufid, al- Irshal, 285.  
3   Ikmalul Din: 1/163. Al- Shakh al-Saduq. al- Amali, 237.

(Ismâ’il), you wilt have nine shares of the reward and IsmS’il will have
one.”[1]

Ismâ’il died at al- ‘Arrd.[2] The companions of al- Sfldiq carried him
on their shoulders to Medina[3]. His grave is welt- known there. Ibm
S’Ud demolished his grave as he demolished the graves of his
grandfathers. The S’üdis have not allowed anyone to rebuild the graves
of the Imams since then.

The kind acts of al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, toward his son IsmS’Tl show
us that he loved him, treated him kindly, and had mercy on him.
Meanwhile they show us that Isma’Tl had piety and an outstanding merit.
But there are traditions which defame his position and his holiness.
However, I do not think that these traditions are as equal as those
which praise him. In addition to this there are traditions which unveil
the defaming traditions and denote that their owners issued them for
unknown purposes. Among such traditions is that which the author of al-
Khara’ ij wat iarâ’ ih has reported on the authority of al- Watld b.
SâbTh.[4] who said:” A man came to me and said:’ Come to show you the
son of your Lord’. I went with him. He brought me to some people who
were drinking (wine). Among them was Isma’Tl b. Ja’far. I was full of
sadness. So, I went out and came to the black stone. Suddenly, I found
Ismâ’il leaning against the walls of the House and weeping. He weiled
the walls of the Kaaba with his tears.

I came BACK quickly. I found Ismâ’il siiling with those people (who were
drinking wine). I came BACK (to the black stone). It was him leaning
against the walls of the Kaaba and weeping biiler tears. He said: “I
told Abu Abd Allah, peace be upon, about that.’ He said: “Indeed, my son
was afflicted with a Satan who appears in his shape.”’

Of course, this is the best tradition about the righteousness of
Isma’Tl. Therefore, it is beiler for us to put aside the traditions that
defame Isma’il or we must explain that they have purposes other than the
apparent ones. Moreover, if Ismâ’il had been as the defaming traditions
describe, then alSâdiq, peace be on him, would have not accompanied him
everywhere and every time and would have dismissed him as he dismissed
his son Abd Allah.

After Ismâ’It had died, people believed that he was not the Imam after
his father. But some people believed in his Imamate again, after the
death of his father. Those who believed in his Imamate are called the
Ismâ’itites as we have already mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Bihar al- Anwar: 47/255.  
2   A place in Medina.  
3   Al- Shaykh al- Mufid, al- Irshad, 285.  
4 Abu al- ‘Abbas aI- Kafi. He was a reliable reporter of aI- Sldiq. He
had a book.  
Al- Hasan b. Mahbtlb reported the book.

In his book al- Irshâd, al- Shaykh al- Muffd, may Allah rest him in
peace, has mentioned that those who believed in his life were not among
the followers of his father nor did they were among his reliable
reporters. After the death of al- Sadiq, peace be on him, some of them
believed in the Imamate of Musa, peace be on him. And the rest became
two parties- one party believed in the death of Ismâ’il and believed in
the Imamate of his son Mohammed, for they thought that the Imamate was
for his father, so the son is worthier of the Imamate than the brother.
The other party has insisted on the life of Ismâ’il. Today they are very
few. These two parties are cailed the Isma’Tlites. At the present time,
we know only those who claim that the Imamate after Isma’Tl is for his
grandsons forever.

Abd Allah al- Aftah:
--------------------

Abd Allah al- Aftah was the eldest son of al- Sadiq, peace be on him,
after Isma’il. For this reason a group of people believed in his
Imamate, but they forgot that the eldest son should have no defect,
white Abd Allah was broad- legged (aftah al- rijlayn). So, people called
him al- Aftah (i.e. broad-legged) and those who believed in his Imamate
were called the Aftahiya.

Some people accused him of disagreement with his father on some beliefs.
They said that he associated the Hashawiya and inclined to the doctrine
of the Murajea. So, his father al- Sadiq did not take care of him as he
did with his other sons.[1]

His father al- Sadiq admonished him, blamed him and preached him, but
admonishment, his blame, and his preachment were alt in vain. One day,
al- Sadiq said to him: “What has prevented you from becoming like your
brother. By Allah I see the light on his face.” Abd Allah said: “Why? Is
not my father and his father one? Is not my mother and his mother one?”
Al- Sadiq, peace be oل him, said to him:” He is of my self and you are
my son.[2]

I think that al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, meant Isma’il not Mflsa, for
Ismâ’il and Abd Allah belonged to the same parents. For this reason, Abd
Allah answered him:” Isn’t my father and his father one? Isn’t my mother
and his mother one?”

This tradition is enough to show us that Ismft’It had an outstanding
merit and lofty position with Allah and his father and that Abd Allah
had ignorance and tow position with Allah and his father.

Abd Allah claimed that he was the Imam after his father, for he was the
oldest of his brothers. al- Sadiq had told his son al- Kfizim, peace be
on him, that Abd Allah would claim the Imamate after him. So, he had
ordered

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Shaykh al- Mufid, al- Irshad, 285.  
2 Al-Kafi: 1/310/10.

him not to dispute with Abd Allah. All these things took place as al-
Sadiq predicted.”’[1]

When Abd Allah claimed the Imamate, a group of the followers of aISadiq,
peace be on him, followed him. Most of them refused him and believed in
the Imainate of MOsa al- Kazim, peace be on him, when they knew that he
had a weak proof for his Imamate white Abu al- Hasan, peace be on him,
had a strong proof for it.[2]

Hushâm b. Salim and Mu’min al- Taq came to Abd Allah to ask him about
the rate of Zakat while there were some people gathering around him.
They asked:” What is the rate of Zakat?” He answered:” five per two
hundred (Dirahms).” They asked:” What about one hundred (Dirahms)?” he
answered:” Two and a half Dirahms.” They said to him:” By Allah, this is
what the Murjea says.” Abd Allah raised his hands towards the sky and
said:” No, by Allah, I do not know what the Murjea says.” So, they knew
that he had no knowledge of Zakat. They left him white they were
bewildered. They did not know were to go. Thus they sat at a lane of
Medina, wept, and said:” We do not know where to go. Shall we go to the
Murjea, to the Qadariya (the Fatalists), to the Zaydis, to the
Mu’tazytis, or to the Kharijites?” While they were raising such
questions, Husâm saw an old man whom he did not know. The old man
beckoned Hushâm to follow him. But Husham was afraid of him because he
thought that the old man might be among the spies whom al- Mansflr
spread throughout Medina to discover the followers of Ja’far aI- Sadiq,
peace be on him, to behead them. So, Husham said to Mu’min al- Tâq:” Go
away from me, because I have fear for you and for my own self. He (the
old man) wants me, he does not want you. Go away from me so as not to
help them to kill you.” Abü Ja’far (Mu’min al- Tâq) went not far away.
Husham followed the old man. He was still following him. The old man ted
Hushâm to the door of Abu alHasan (lmam Mflsa), peace be on him. He left
him there and went away. There was a servant at the door. The servant
said to Husham:” Come in, may Allah have mercy on you.” When Husham came
in, Abtl al- Hasan, peace be on •him, said to him:” To me! To me! To me!
Not to the Murjea, not to the Qadaria, not to the Zaydis, not to the
Mu’tazlis, and not to the Kharijites.’ ‘

Husham left al- Kazim, peace be on him. He met Abü Ja’far (Mu’min
ailhq). Mu’min al- Taq said to Husham:” What is behind you?” “The
guidance,” said Hushâm. Then he told him about the story. Then Hushâm
met al- Mufaddat and Abtl BasTr. They alt went to Mtisa, greeted him,
heard his words and believed in his Imamate. Then Hushâm met people in
groups. All these groups visited MUsâ, peace be on him, except one group
such as ‘Ammar al- Sabaty and his companions. So, very few people

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar al- Anwar: 47/ 261/29. Al- Kashy: 165.  
2 Al- Shaykh al- Mufid, al- Irshad, 285. Al- Kasby, al- Rijal, 160.

visited Abd Allah. When Abd Allah knew that Husham prevented people from
visiting him, he ordered some people to hit him (Husham) in Medina.’’
[1]

Nevertheless, Abd Allah claimed that he was the Imam after his father
tilt he died. His days after his father were only seventy. When he had
died, the rest of his followers believed in the Imamate of AbU al-
Hasan, peace be on him, except very few persons of them.[2] It is they
who were cailed the Aftahiya. Theyavere called so because they believed
in the Imamate of Abd Allah al- Aftah (i.e. broad- legged or broad-
headed).[3] This sect finished after that time in a few years. The last
of them were banu (the Sons) of Fudal.

Ishaq:
------

Ishâq was good, righteous, pious. He was aaurisprudent. People reported
traditions from him. Concerning him, b. Kâsib[4] said:” The reliable
(person) al- Rady Ishâq believed in the. Imamate of his brother MUsa,
peace be on him. He reported the textual nomination about his brother
Mflsa, peace be on him, from his father. Also he reported this
nomination from his brother ‘Ali b. Ja’far, who was virtuous and
pious.[5]

Ishaq was among those who ailended the textual nomination which alKazim
peace be on him, made for his son al- Rida, peace be on him, which
proves that he was virtuous and pious. When al- Kazim, peace be on him,
had died, the sons of al- Kazim brought their brother al- Rida before
the judge. al- Abbas b. Mtisa, peace be on him, said:” May Allah make
you righteous and enjoin us with you, indeed, below the wilt, there is a
treasure and jewels, he wants to hide them and take them instead of us,
and our father, may Allah have mercy on him, has given him every thing
and left us dependent. Were it not for that I control my self, I would
tell you something openly.” Ibrahim b. Mohammed[6] said to him:
“Therefore, by Allah, you tell what we do not accept from you and do not
believe you about, then you are blamable and defeated with us. We know
that you were a liar when you were a child and when you are a grown- up.
Your father knew you more than you know yourself if you have good, even
though your

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Al- Kashy, al- Rijal, 165.  
2   Ibid: 165.  
3   Al- Mufid, al- Irshad, 286.  
4   The biographers have mentioned very liille information about him.
These words are ailributed to SufyBn b. ‘TyTna, not to him.  
5   A1- Shaykh al- Mufid, al- Irsbld, 289.  
6   Apparently, be was the son of IsmI’fl the son of al- Sadiq, peace be
on him.

father knew you outside and inside. He was not ready to trust you even
if about two dates. Then his uncle Ishâq b. Ja’far said to him:” Surely,
you are shameless, weak, and foolish, I add this (ailitude) to what is
sued from yesterday (i.e. to your past ailitudes). Alt people (there)
helped him (against Abd Allah).[1]

Apart from b. Kâsib and b. ‘Ayun, other people reported from Ishâq. Some
of them were Bark b. Mohammed a1- Azdy, Yaqflb b. Ja’fary, Abd Allah b.
Ibrahim al- Ja’fary, al- Washa,[2] and the like.

Mohammed:
---------

Mohammed was generous and brave. He fasted on alternate days. His wife,
KhadTja bint (the daughter of) Abd Allah b. al- Hasan.[3] said:”
Mohammed never left us on any day with a cloak without coming BACK after
havina put it (on someone else). Every day he slaughtered a ram for his
guests.[4] He was called al- dibâja (face/visage) because he was
handsome.[5]

Mohammed adopted the idea of Zaydis, which urge people to revolt against
rulers with the sword. So, he revolted a6gainst al- Ma’mfln in Mecca, in
199 (A.H.) The Jartidi Zaydis followed him.[6]

When people recognized Mohammed as caliph, called him Amirul Mu’minln,
and when he summoned them to support him, al- Ridâ, peace be on him,
came to him and said:” Uncle, do not let people accuse your father and
your brother of lying, for this mailer (the caliphate) wilt not last.
Soon, ‘Isa al- Jalfldy came out to fight Mohammed. Mohammed met aI-
JalUdy. But al- JalUdy was able to defeat him. So, Mohammed asked him
for safety. Then he wore black clothes,[7] went up the pulpit, tendered
his resignation,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1    Al- Kafi: 1/318.  
2    Bakr was among those who reported from al- Sadiq, aI- Kazim, and
al- RidE, peace be on them, He was among the reliable reporters.
reported from the reliable reporters. YaqOb reported from lshliq. Al-
Kulayny reported from hun in Chapter on the Birth of Abü al- Hasan al-
KEzim, peace be on him, and in Chapter on Lesbianism in Chapter on
Marriage. This denotes that he was reliable. But the biographers has not
mentioned an independent biography for him. And those who neglected him
were many. He was b. (the son of) Ja’fa.r b. Ibréhim b. Mohammed b. ‘Ali
b. Abd Allah b. Ja’far b. Abtl Talib. Abd Allah was the uncle of the
foregoing Yaqflb. He was Aba Mohammed, the reliable, the truthful. For
al- Washl, He was al- Hasan b. ‘Ali, b. ZyEd. He was among the
companions of al- RidE, peace be on him, and of his reliable
reporters.  
3    Bin ‘Ali b. al- Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abu Tllib, peace be on him.  
4    Al- Mufid, aI- lrshEd, 286.  
5    Books of Biographies.  
6    Al-Mufid, al- hshfld, 286.  
7    Black clothes were the sign of the Abbflsidis. He wanted to copy
their sign. Green clothes were the sign of the Alawids.

and said:” This mailer (i.e. the caliphate) is for al- Ma’mtln and I
have no right in it.”’[1]

When Mohammed wanted to join the army of al- Jatudy, al- Rida summoned
his servant MusEfir and said to him:” Say to him (Mohammed):’ Do not
come out tomorrow. If you come out tomorrow, you will be defeated and
your companions will be kill.

When he says to you: From where have you known that? Say: I have seen it
in sleeping.”’ When he (MusAfir) came and prevented him (Mohammed) from
going out. Mohammed asked him:” From where have you known that?” Musafir
said:” I have seen it in sleeping.” Mohammed said:” The slave slept and
did not wash his anus). So, Mohammed faced what MusAfir told him from
the Imam.[2]

When Mohammed tendered his resignation, al- Jaludy sent him to atM’mfln:
When he came to him, al- M’mUn honored him, made friends with him,
bestowed upon him, and gave him a good reward. Mohammed resided with al-
M’mfln in Khorasan. He and a group of the sons of his uncle visited him.
Al- M’mün suffered from him what no ruler had suffered from his subjects
before.

One day, al- M’mün was astonished to see Mohammed and a group of the
Talibiyln came to visit him because such a group revolted against him in
the year 200 (A.H.). So, the decree came to them and said:” Do not ride
with Mohammed b. Ja’far. Ride with Abd Allah b. al- Husayn. However,
they refused to ride and stayed in their house. For this reason the
decree came:” Ride with whomever you like.” So, when they rode to al-
Ma’mUn, they rode with Mohammed b. Ja’far and then they departed when he
did.[3]

When Mohammed revolted against al- M’mUn, al- Ridâ, peace be on him
turned away from him and said:” I have decided that he and I do not sit
under the roof of a house.” ‘Amr b. Zayd, who was on a visit to Abti
atHasan (peace be on him), said:” I said to myself:’ This is (i.e. al-
Ridâ) orders (people to conform to) charity and relation, and he said
these (words) to his uncle.”’ He looked at me and said:” This is of
charity and of the relation. When he comes to me, people believe him. If
he does not come to me, and I do not go to him, people do not accept his
words.”[4]

Among IJie miracles of Abfl al- Hasan (i.e. al- Rida), peace be an him,
concerning Mohammed was that Mohammed became ill. Some people told al-
Ridâ, peace be on him that Mohammed had tied his chin. So, al- Ridâ and
a group of his companions went to him. They saw him tying his chin.

Also they saw Ishaq, Mohammed’s brother, his sons, and a group of the
family of Abü Tâlib weeping. AbU al- llasan sat by his head. He looked
at

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Bihar Al- Anwar: 47/246/5.-  
2 A1- Mufid, al- IrshEd, 314.  
3 Ibid, 286.  
4 Bihar Al- Anwar: 47/246/4.

his face and smiled. So, those who were siiling became displeased with
Abü al- Hasan. Some of them said:” He (Abtl al- Hasan) smiled to express
his rejoice at the misfortune of Mohammed. When AbO al- Hasan went out
to pray in mosque, his companions said to him:” May we be your ransom,
when you smiled, we heard those people saying some words which we hate
to hear about you.” Abu al- Hasan, peace be on him, said:” I was
astonished to see Ishaq weeping. By Allah, he will die before Mohammed.
And Mohammed will weep over him.” Then Mohammed recovered and Ishaq
died.’[1]

Although Mohammed lived in Khorasan, he did not surrender to the Owner
of the Crown (i.e. al- M’mfln). One day, some people came and told him
that the servants of Dhutri ‘âsatayn[2] (the man with two offices) hit
his servants to take their wood which they had bought. Mohammed wrapped
himself in two cloaks. Then he went out carrying a baton in his hand. He
was saying:” Death is beiler for you than living in abasement.” A group
of people followed him. He hit the servant of Dhulri’asatayn and took
the wood away from them. Some, people told aI- M’mUn about the story.
AlM’mfln sent for Dhulri’âsatayn and said to him:” Go to Mohammed b. Ja’
far, apologize to him for that, and give him power to decide what to do
against your servants.” Dhulri’Asatayn went to Mohammed. Some people
said to Mohammed:” Dhulri ‘asatayn has come.” He said:” He shall not sit
but on the ground.” Mohammed had a mat and a cushion in his house. He
put the mat aside and left the cushion. When Dhulri’asatayn came into
Mohammed’s house, Mohammed asked him to sit on the cushion, but he
refused to sit on it and sat on the ground. Then he apologized to
Mohammed for that and gave him power to decide what to do with his
servant.

Mohammed died in Khorasan. So, al- M’mtin went there to take part in his
funeral. When he arrived at his house, he saw some people carrying the
liiler of Mohammed. He got down and walked till he entered between the
two poles of the liiler. He was stilt walking between the two poles tilt
the liiler of Mohammed was put on the ground. He went forward to say the
prayer over him. Then he helped people carry the liiler till they
reached the grave. Then he entered the grave till people built it. Then
he went out of the grave and stood till the companions buried Mohammed.
So, Abd Allah b. al- Husayn said to him:” Today, you have become tired,
wouldn’t you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   ‘Uyun Akbar Al- Rida: 2/206/7.  
2   His real name was ai- Fadl b. Sahl. He was the Minster of al- M’min.
He was called Dhulri’Isatayn because be had the power of the sword and
of the pen.

prefer to ride (your horse).” Al- M’man said:” Indeed, these are bonds
of kinship which we have cut for two hundred years.

Mohammed borrowed a tot of money from people. So, Ismâ’it b. Mohammed
wanted to seize this opportunity to ask al- M’mUn to pay Mohammed’s
debts. While al- M’mfin was standing at the grave, Ismâ’it said to his
brother, who was standing beside him:” Let’s ask him (atM’mfln) about
the debts of Shaykh (Mohammed).” Before they could uiler a word, al-
M’mfln said:” How much debt did MOhammed leave?” Ismâ’il said to him:”
Twenty- five thousand dinars.” Al- M’mfln said to Ismft’tl:” May Allah
relieve his debts, to whom did he make his will?.” Ismâ’il said to him:”
To his son called Yahya in Medina.” Al- M’mün said:” He is not in
Medina; he is in Egypt.’[1]

We are aware of him being there. However, we are unwilling to let him
know about (our knowledge) of his departure from Medina so that we
should not harm him as a result of his knowledge of our dislike of his
departure from there.”

‘Ali:
-----

‘All b. Ja’far was great and virtuous. al- Sftdiq trusted him very much.
‘Ati reported many traditions from his brother al- Kazim. Concerning
him, in al- irshad, Shaykh al- Mufid, may Allah rest his soul in peace,
said:” And ‘Au b. Ja’far was an important reporter of traditions,
correct in method with intense piety, and great outstanding merit. He
stayed close to his brother Mtisa, peace be on him, and reported many
traditions on his authority. He believed in his textual nomination. He
cleaved to him strongly. He devoted himself to him. And dedicated
himself to him to learn the religious rules from him. He (‘Ati) has
famous mailers. He learned them from him (his brother Müsa). He has some
answers (for some questions). He heard them from him.

Because of his intense piety, ‘Ati recognized those Imams who came after
his brother al- Kazim peace bon him. In spite of his advanced age, his
great power, and his famous outstanding merit, he admiiled the truth and
conform to it.

One day a man asked ‘Ati about his brother al- Klizim. ‘Ali said to the
man:” He (al- Kazim) died:” The man said:” How did you know that? ‘All
answered:” His properties have been divided. His women have been
married. And his deputar has replaced him.” The man asked:” Who was the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Shaykh al- Mufid, al- Irshad, 287.

deputy after him?” ‘Ali answered:” His son.” The man asked:” What did he
do?” ‘Au answered:” He died.” The man asked:” How did you know that he
died?” ‘Ati answered:” His properties have been divided. His woman have
been married. And his deputy has replaced.” The man asked:” Who is the
deputy after him?” ‘Au answered:” His son Abu Ja’far.” The man said to
him:” You are an old man, you have a high social rank, and your father
was Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace be on them. Why have you believed in this
boy?” ‘Ati said to him:” I do not see you but a Satan!” Then ‘Au took
his beard and raised it towards the sky and said:” I have no power, for
Allah has regarded him as worthier of this position than this white
hair.”’[1]

By Allah, this is the piety itself, the submission of the self to the
truth, and non- deception by the affairs of the outstanding merit,
advanced age, and greatness, which may deceive the soul which incites
man to evil.

‘Ali's behavior with AbU Ja’far was as the behavior of the person who
knew the position of the Imam. That ‘Au was the uncle of the father of
Abu Ja’far did not prevent him from adopting that behavior for him.
Moreover, he was ready to sacrifice himself for him. One day Abfl Ja’far
wanted to have his vein opened. The doctor approached him to open the
vein. So, ‘Au b. Ja’far stood and said:” Would that this piece of iron
had opened my vein before yours!” Then when Abfl Ja’far, peace be on him
wanted to go, ‘Ali b. Ja’far prepared his shoes to put them on.[2]

One day Abü Ja’far, peace be on him, entered the Mosque of the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family. When ‘Au b. Ja’far saw him, he ran
bare- footed towards him. Then he kissed his hand. So, Abfl Ja’far said
to him:” Uncle, sit down, may Allah have mercy upon you!” ‘Ati said:” My
master, how can I sit down and you are standing?” When AbO Ja’far came
BACK, the companions of ‘Au began blaming him (‘Au) and saying to him:”
You are the uncle of his father, white you received him in such a
manner!” ‘Au said:” Keep silent! Allah, the Great and Almighty, has
regarded him as worthier of this position than this white hair. Allah
save me from what you are saying. I am his servant.”[3]

This is the holy soul which knew the truth and followed it. The soul
which obeyed the righteous rules of Allah.

‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, was called al- ‘ArTdy, namely he
was ailributed to al- ‘Arid, a place near Medina, where ‘Ati lived and
where Ismâ’il died. ‘Au’s children were called al- ‘Andy, too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Kashy, al- RijW, 429/803.  
2 Ibid 804/804.  
3 Al- Kafi: 1/322/12.

Al- Abbas:
----------

In his book al- Irshâd, Shaykh al- Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him,
said:” Al- Abbas b. Ja’far, may Allah have mercy on him, was virtuous
and noble.”’[1] I (the author) said: “I have found nothing about al-
Abbâs’s life except this note wriilen by Shaykh al- Mufid, my Allah rest
his soul in peace.”

Müsa al- Kizim, peace be on him:
--------------------------------

He was the Imam after his father al- Sadiq, peace be on him, according
to the idea of the Imamis. May Allah help us to write the biography of
Mflsa al- Kazim. Surely, He is the Giver of help and success.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Shaykh al- Mufid, al- Irshad, 287.
