His Released Servants
=====================

Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, had many released servants. However, in
the biography of the following Mu’tib, they were ten servants. He (Aba
AM Allah) said:” There is a traitor among them. So, be ware of him. And
he is saghir.” We do not know the exact spelling of the word ‘Saghir’,
namely if we spelt it in fa’(Safir) or in the neglected ‘ayn (Sa’Tr),
then it is a name, or in the Persian gliayn, it is an adjective. Anyhow,
their number I have found is over ten. Maybe their number was ten
sometime. We will mention the names of those we have found:

1. Al- Mu’alla Bin Khanis:
--------------------------

Al- Mu’alla b. Khanis was among the released servants on whom Abu Abd
Allah, peace be on him, depended to manage his affairs, among the
reliable figures to whom he disclosed his secrets, and among his famous,
reliable narrators as we have already mentioned.

2. Mu’attib:
------------

Mu’attib was among them. The biographers regarded him as one of the
companions of al- Sadiq and al- Kazim, peace be on them. It was reported
on the authority of al- Sadiq that his released servants were ten, and
that the best of them was Mu’attib. He (al- Sâdiq) said:” And there is a
traitor among them. So, be ware of him. And he is Saghir.” In other
tradition, he, peace be on him, said:” My released servants are ten. The
best of them is Mu’attib. And Mu’attib does not think except that I am
the worthiest (of the Imainate) of all people.” The famous, reliable
narrators such as YUnus b. Ya’qCb, al- Mu’alla b. KhanTs, Ishaq b.
‘Ammflr, and the like reported traditions on the authority of Mu’attib.
From this and the like, you know that he was among the virtuous,
knowledgeable, and reliable people. In at-Khulâsa, al- ‘Allama certified
him without doubt or hesitation.

3. Muslim:
----------

Among them was Muslim. It was reported on the authority of Abu al-Hasan,
peace be on him, that Muslim was from Sind. Ja’far al- Sadiq, peace be
on him, said to Muslim:” I hope that you have been granted success to
this name.” Also he, peace be on him, said:” Muslim was taught the Koran
in sleeping. When he got up, he knew it.” A tradition with the same
meaning was reported on the authority of al- Rida, peace be on him. Some

traditions indicate that he servd the Imam and was among the people of
his secrets.

4. Mnsadif:
-----------

Among them was Musidif. The biographers regarded him as one of the
companions of al- Sidiq and al- KIzim, peace be on them. Some prominent,
reliable narrators such as al- Hasan b. MahbGb, ‘Ali b. Ri’ab, and the
like reported traditions on the authority of Musâdif. This is evidence
for his honesty and his knowledge of traditions and the Imamate.

Al- Sadiq, peace be on him, sent Mus&lif to Egypt to sell goods
estimated at a thousand dinars. When he came BACK, he stated that the
interest of the goods was a thousand dinars.

Al- Sadiq regarded the interest as too many. So, Musadif told him that
there was nothing of the goods they sent to Egypt. Accordingly they
swore to sell the goods at a dinar for a dinar. Al- SAdiq, peace be on
him, disowned that oath and that interest, and regarded them as
Islamically prohibited. Then al- Sâdiq took the original sum of money
and left the interest. And he said to Musâdif:” Musâdif, a duel of
swords is easier than seeking the lawful.” We have mention this
tradition in His kindness.

He and Murazim accompanied al- Sadiq, peace be on him, when al-Mansflr
summoned him to come to HTra. When al- MansUr allowed him to return to
Medina, he went out at night. While he was covering the road to Medina,
a man called ‘Ashir hindered his way and prevented him from going there.
Musadif and Murazim tried to kill ‘Ashir. However, the Imam prevented
them from doing that. The Imam did his best to convince ‘Ashir to let
them go. At that ‘Ashir became satisfied with the Imam’s words and
permitted him to go while most night passed. For this reason, al- Sadiq
said:” Murazim, is this better or what you said?” We have mentioned this
tradition in His clemency and in Murâzim.

5. Sa’id al- Rumi:
------------------

Among them was Sa’Td al- RCmi. The Shakh (i.e. al- Ttisi), may his grave
be fragrant, regarded him as one of the companions of aS&iiq, peace be
on him. Ibn Muskan, Aban, and Hammad reported traditions on the
authority of Sa’Td al- Rumi. They, as we have mentioned in their
biographies, were among those reliable narrators. The Sect (i.e. the
Shra) has a greed on the correctness of the traditions reported on their
authorities and acknowledged their ability in jurisprudence. This is
clear evidence for his honesty in the report, -the reliance of these
great figures on him, his knowledge of the tradition the rule, and his
learning from the Imam.

6. Sabah:
---------

Among them was Sabâh. He was regarded as one of the companions of al-
Sadiq, peace be on him. This indicates that he reported traditions on
the authority of the Imam, that he had a chance to learn from him, and
that he knew him. These things were enough to achieve his success and
happiness. A part from this, he served the lmam and fulfilled his needs.

7. Tihar:
---------

Among them was Tahir. In his biography, the only things has been
mentioned is that he was among the companions that learned from his
master al- Sadiq and that he reported traditions on his authority. This
was success and happiness for him and evidence for his knowledge.

Apparently, it was Tâhir, the servant of al- Sadiq, who reported that
the Imam blamed his son Abd Allah al- Aftah when he behaved in the
manner which displeased him.

8. Abbas Bin Zayd:
------------------

Abbas b. Zayd was among them. He was from Medina. He was regarded as one
of the companions of al- Sâdiq, peace be on him. He reported tradition
on the authority of the Imam. More than this has not been mentioned on
him.

Serving the Imam was a great favor, looking at his holy face every time
was a good luck, learning from him was among the best acts. If the
person did all these things through awareness, knowledge, purpose, and
will, he would achieve a great position and would thank Allah for this
abundant blessing.

9. Al- Fudayl:
--------------

Al- Fuday1 was among them. Also he is considered among the companions of
al- Sadiq, peace be on him. Al- Sadflq has mentioned him in chapter:
Rare Commandments. Nothing more than this has been mentioned on him.

10. Al- Maghira:
----------------

Al- Maghira was among them. The biographers regarded him among the
companions of al- Sâdiq, peace be on him. Also he reported traditions on
his authority. This is all what has been mentioned on him.

11. Musa:
---------

Musa was among them. He was regarded as one of the companions of
al-Sadiq, peace be on him. This is all what has been mentioned on him.
And this is, as you know, good luck, and great success Allah, the Great
and Almighty, grants to whoever He will.

12. Nasr Bin Sa’id:
-------------------

Nasr b. Sa’id was among them. The biographers have mentioned that he
reported traditions on the authority of Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him,
he was, like Mflsa, among those who found dignity and success.

13. Salima:
-----------

Salima was among them. The Shaykh (i.e. al- Tflsi) regarded her as among
the companions of al- Sadiq, peace be on him. It was she who reported
that she was near Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, when death came to
him, and he fainted. When he recovered he said:” Give al- Hasan al-
Aftas seventy dinar....” She said:” Do you want to give the man who
attacked you with the sword and wanted to kill you?” He said:” Do you
want that I will not be among those concerning whom Allah, the Great and
Almighty said:’ And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be
joined and have awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning.””[1] We
have mentioned this tradition in His Secret Gifts and in His Condition
during Death.

This tradition indicates that Salima was a close companion to the Imam,
peace be on him. He listened to her words and answered her kindly.

This is the last thing to which Allah granted me success to write on the
character of Abe Abd Allah, peace be on him. I ask Allah, the Great and
Almighty, to accept it all for His Holy Face, forgive me the slips of my
pen, and forgive me what has mixed with my purpose in it.

Also I ask my master Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, to overflow me with
his favors when he’ accept this little gift which I offer to his holy
character, for gifts are according to their givers.

Praise be to Allah. Blessing and peace be upon the best One of His
creation, Mohammed the Chosen, and upon his good, glorious family.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Koran. 13,21.
