Preface
=======

As understanding the life of this lmam needs studying the affairs of the
Omayyad and the Abbasid dynasties when Abü Abd Allah, peace be on him,
lived, the attitude of these two powers towards the members of the House
(ahl al- Bayt), the number of ahl at Bayt, the religious sects and
schools during his lifetime, and the opinions of people about the
lmamate, it is necessary for us to mention these subjects in the
preface, because through them we are able to understand his political,
scientific and social life, and the reason for . which he published
sciences and knowledge, he summoned Muslims to adopt ethics and merits,
and urged them to spread virtues secretly and keep their attribution to
(ahl al - Bayt) secret. Also he prevented his followers from showing
their support for them and going frequently to them openly. This is what
we call dissimulation (taqiyah).

So, through this preface, the reader is aware of the lifetime of this
lmani before he studies its details.  
  

##### IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE BENEFICENT, THE MERCIFUL

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. The Beneficent, the
Merciful. Master of the Day of Judgment. Thee do we serve and Thee do we
beseech for help. Keep us on the right path. The path of those upon whom
Thou hast bestowed favors. Not (the path) of those upon whom Thy wrath
is brought down, nor of those who go astray. Surely Allah and His angels
bless the Prophet; O you who believe! Call for (Divine) blessings on him
and salute him with a (becoming) Salutation. peace be upon Al Yasin.  
  

##### In The Name Of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful

Praise be to Allah, the lord of the Worlds. Peace and blessings be upon
our master Mohammed and his Household.

The rank and position of fmam Aba Abd Allah Ja. far b. Mohammed
al-Sâdiq, peace and blessings be upon him, is not hidden. All Muslims,
the pioneers of science, and the like, know that he was the torch of
guidance and the lamp of the religion that spread during his lifetime
and whose lights radiated all over the world. In the meantime the
transmitters of traditions, the representatives of the science of Hadith
(tradition), and the theologians of Shi. a and non- Shi. a graduated
from his schools. As we are not able to know every thing about this
great Islamic figure, then we will take a glance at his lifetime.

For this reason, the Foundation has printed the book of the scholar, the
researcher Shaykh Mohammed al- Husayn Muzaffar, because he has briefly
studied many achievements of Imam al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, such as
his scientific schools, his debates, his sermons, his sayings, and those
who have narrated ahadeeth on his authority from among Shiaas and
non-Sha. as.

We implore Allah, the Exalted, to grant us success to publish Islamic
books and offer them to the pioneers of knowledge and the theological
schools, verily He is the Lord of success.
