Ahl Al. Bayt (the Members of the House)
=======================================

Â 

Who were Ahl at- Bayt?
----------------------

The Holy Book tells us about the Words of Allah, the Great and Almighty,
concerning them:. Allah only desires to keep away uncleanness from you,
O members of the House! and to purify you a (thorough purification)..[1]
a It is a virtue for them. No one of all people has this virtue.

There is no dignity more precious than keeping away uncleanness from
them and purifying them from all defects, that is the purifying which
the Most kind (Allah) likes for them with His care, and it is not
limited to a certain uncleanness or from a certain thing. So, it implies
general purifying from every defect and sin.

From this holy verse, we conclude the infallibility of the members of
the Prophetic House (. aM al Bayt,), because every sin is uncleanness
and committing sins does not agfee with their keeping away from them and
their purification from them, so, they are, according to this verse
purified from uncleanness and sins. Is infallibility a thing behind
this?

Yes, all importance is in the concerned persons with this virtue which
no one of the community had, except them.

Does this virtue concern those who were in the House when the
above-mentioned Holy Verse came down or does it concern every one who
belonged to the most purified Prophet because of a certain affinity or
ancestry? If the second question is accepted, then the reality opposes
it, because some of the Prophet. s wives disobeyed him, and no
uncleanness is greater than this disobedience. So, certainly his wives
are not concerned with this virtue. Also some of those who belonged to
the Prophet because of ancestry committed grave sins and crimes, and it
is not right that Allah, the Almighty, wants to do a thing by the
creation will,[2] but the thing does not happen. As it is impossible
that Allah wants to create a thing and the thing does not happen, so all
the Prophet. s wives and all the Hashimites are not included in the
foregoing verse, because the women and the Hashimites might con-unit
what conflicts with purification, besides no one has said that all his
wives and all the Hashimites were infallible.

And if the intended meaning in the verse was the legal will, then no
sense would the will of purification concerning the members of the House
(ahl al Bayt) have because Allah, the Exalted, wants it from all people.

As the verse concerns the outstanding merit of Ahl al Bayt, it indicates
that the creation will is confined to them. Then the legislation will is
related

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Ahzab: 33.  
2 The creation will is related to the Act of the wilier (Allah) Himself;
legislation will is related to the acts of human beings, it concens the
religious obligations.

to the acts of creatures, while the verse concerns the act of Allah.
Therefore, if the verse was related to the legislation will, He (Allah)
would say:. Go and purify yourself..

So, there is no doubt that the concerned persons in the verse are those
who have been mentioned in the first question, namely the intended
meaning of the verse refers to certain people, and they were those who
were in the House of our master Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, where he covered them and himself with his cloak (kisa. ). So,
the verse was sent down to them and concerning them. They were . Ali,
Fatima, and their sons, peace be on them. Moreover the correct
traditions of the two parties (ShVa and Sunna) affirm that.

And if there was no religious text that denotes that the verse concerns
them (ahl al Bayt), ththeir behavior would be the greatest evidence for
the relation between them and the verse, because their actions and
sayings force us to admit their honesty.

This plain truth has been well known for the clear- headed persons since
the revelation of this clear verse till today. They certainly know that
the members of the House (ahl al Bayt) were the people of the cloak
(kisa. ), who had countless noble qualities of which were purification
from defects and taking away uncleanness and sins.

Yes, maybe, some of the Hashimites made use of the general sense of the
word (ahl al Bayt) to achieve their aims and to reach the throne, so all
the Hashimites used this verse to convince people to follow them.

Also the word . Shi. ism. (tashayy. ) maybe used to refer to . Ali and
(the members of the) House (ahl al Bayt) in the general sense, not the
members of the cloak (kisa. ) and the lmams from the sons of al- Husayn,
peace be on them, but the persons whom the floods of the rabble do not
deviate them from the truth. People knew that Shi. ism (tashayy. ) was
limited to those certain lmams when silence spread over them after the
first one- third of the Abbasid dynasty when the revolts of the Alawids
were over.

Our evidence is that the Abbasid were able to destroy the Marwani
dynasty and to take the reins of government by using the words (ahl al
Bayt). The Abbasid used these words to make the hearts of ShT. a incline
to them and to make them a bridge to build an entity for their authority
and to destroy the entity of the Omayyad dynasty that resisted the
members of the House (ahl al Bayt) and their followers throughout its.
days and colored the surface of the ground with their shed blood.

Thus the Abbasids achieved their ambition through the members of the and
their the followers House (. ahl al Bayt,l. They used them both as a
bridge to achieve their goals. Generally speaking they made use of all
parties: the Abbasid, the Talibis, the Alawids, the Ja. farids, the .
Aqilis, the Hassanis, and Husaynis.

Then every Hashimite used the same manner to summon people to support
his rising. For example, Abd Allah b. Mu. awiya b. Abd Allah b. Ja. far
revolted against Abu Muslim in Kufa then in Persia because they had the
followers of the members of the House (ahl al Bag), but Abu Muslim was
able to kill Abd Allah when his followers abandoned him. Besides Zaid
and his son, and the two brothers Mohammed and Ibrahim rose to take the
authority from the enemies of the members of the House (ahl al Bayt).

After that, people realized that the Abbasids did not belong to the
members of the House (ahl al Bayt) because they pulled out the sword of
aggression against the members of the House (ahl al Bayt), who were the
kinship of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Moreover,
people knew that the Abbasids wanted to achieve their aims when they
summoned them to overthrow the Omayyad dynasty under the pretext of
avenging the blood of those who were killed in (the Battle of) al- Taf
and the crucifixion of Kanasah and Jawzjan and the like. That was
because the Abbasids had built their authority on the skulls of those
who loved the members of the House (ahl al Bayt). In other words, they
showed the spite of their chests and their evil inner most thoughts to
ward ahl aI Bayt and their followers. Besides, Mohammed and lbrahim
disappeared when al-Safah took the reins of government because they were
aware of his intentions toward the close relatives of the Prophet.

There are many proofs for their pressure against the members of the
House (ahl al Bayt). Inside this book you will read convincing proofs.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*
