The Omayyads
============

Who were the Omayyads?
----------------------

The Holy Koran clearly says:. And We did not make the vision which We
showed ya but a trial for men and the cursed tree in the Koran as
well..[1] About the cause of the revelation of this verse, the books of
Interpretation tell us that the Prophet dreamt that he saw some monkeys,
meaning the Omayyadsa controlling the authority and go up on his pulpit.
So, it was the Omayvads who were the cursed tree. Thus the Pro Allah
bless him and his family, did not smile till he died.[2 ]

Aphet, may Apart from this verse, there are many verse that dispraise
and slander the Omayyads. See (the Book of) al- I-Iakim, the tradition
about . All in the Words of Allah:. Have you not seen those who have
changed Allah. s favor for ungratefulness and made their people alight
into the abode of perdition;. [3]

He (al- Hakim) said:. They are the two dissolute (tribesj from
Quraysh-l3anu Oniayyah (the sons of Omayyah/ the Omayyads) and banu
al-Maghirah (the Sons of al- Maghirah). (See also) the Tafsir
(interpretation) of b. Jarir concerning the Word of Allah:. And Strive
hard in (the way of) Allah.. [4]

He said (b. Jarir)i. Surely, those with whom (Allah), the Exalted,
ordered (the Muslims) to strive were Makhzum and Omayyah. [5]

Then the Truthful Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said as
the Glorious Koran did:. Allah, curse all bani Omayyah!. There are
similar traditions concerning Abu- Sufyan and his two Sons Yazid and Mu.
awiya. Do not forget what has beenieported from him about Al Abi al-. As
especially about aI- Hakam and his son Marwan.[6]

I (the author) wonder; why does the Clear Book praise the members of the
House (ahl al Bayt) and curse the Omayyads?

Does Allah, the Exalted, praise Ahl al Bayt randomly and curse the
Omayyads aggressively? Exalted be Allah from that in high exaltation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  Bani lsra. il: 60.  
2  Majma' al- Bayyan: 3/424 Sharh al- Nahj: 3/488 and 2/466 and 467. In
his Tafsir, al- Shawkany said:. They - are aI Abi Al. as (the Sons of
Abi A1. as).  
3  Abrahim: 28.  
4  Al- Hajj: 78.  
5  Tafsir al- Tibari: 17/142.  
6  The expert in this (subject) does not need references because they
are many, and I wanted to understand something of that, so see b. Abj
al- Hadeed in the previous foot note (No. 2) and 1/361. 2/ 106 and 410,
and 4/148. See also al- 1sti. ab by b. Abd al-Bir on Marwan, al- Hakim
from Abu- Hurayrah on Al Abi A1. as, Marwan, his father, his Sons, and
so on.

Yes, surely, it is obedience that approaches mankind to the Creator, and
stirely, it is disobedience that distances the slave from the Creator;
however Allah treats the obedient slave of his slaves with affection,
kindness, and mercy, and punishes the disaoedient one of them in the
same manner-verily He enters the person who obeys Him into Paradise even
if he is a Negro from at- Habasha (Abyssina), and enters the person who
disobeys Him into Hell even if he is a Sayyid from Quraysh.

The members of the House (ahl al Bayt) approached the Holy Presence,
they feared Him and obeyed His orders, so He (Allah) granted them that
most high position of which no human being has, while the Omayyads went
far away from the Court of Mercy, they disobeyed Allah, and went on
disobeying Him, so He (Allah) has described them as the cursed tree in
the Koran, besides the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has
cursed them.

And if history has not told us about that degree of obedience which the
members of the House t. ahl al Bayt,a achieved, and the degree of
disobedience on which the Omayyads went on, the sanctification from
Allah in His Book for the members of the House (ahl al Bayt) will be
enough for us to know their obedience and the disobedience of the
Omayyads.

You may understand this conclusion without deep thinking when you read
the Koranic texts and the Prophetic traditions. Yes, if you study
thoroughly the Omayyad history before Islam and after the end of their
dynasty, you will know that Allah, the Almighty, and His Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, have shown in the Book and the Sunna
their past history and inward thoughts and told us about the following
Qmayyads.

Their behavior was not vague for people; nevertheless the Koranic verse
and the Prophetic traditions have come to put an end to the pretexts of
their friends and to refute the stubbornness of their followers. In
spite of these clear verses and traditions, the Omayyads still have
friends, followers, and defenders.

To make the hearts sure of this truth, we will mention brief extracts
from the reliable history about the practices of the Omayyads.

Abd al- Munaf died and left some sons, of them were Hashim, at-Muttalib,
Nawfal, and . Abd al- Shams. Hashim was the cleverest and most
meritorious of all his brothers, so Quraysh decided to give him the
responsibility of watering and feeding pilgrims, his father Abd at-
Munaf, had practiced these two jobs before him, so Hashim was as Qdraysh
thought; moreover he increased the honor of this father when he decided
on two (trading) journeys- the winter journey was to the Yemen; the
summer journey was to Sham. The Holy Book (the Koran) has mentioned
these two journeys. Hashim. s intention from those two journeys was to
increase the

money of Quraysh, then they would be able to feed pilgrims. This was a
high virtue which Hashim wanted to achieve for his people. And that was
the custom of the great men who lead their people to great achievements
and an honorable lofty position.

Then he preceded his people in feeding pilgrims to be an example for
them. He was open-handed, so pilgrims became rich because of his
generosity. Then his poet said famous lines of poetry. Among them is;

Amru, the very high, broke up the porridge for his people

And the men of Mecca were hungry

' Amru with prestige broke up (hashamma)

Bread for his people

While the people of Mecca were needy and skinny.

For this reason he was called LThshim; this new name replaced his old
name . Amru..[1] . So, generosity was one of Hashim. s virtues that made
him master over Quraysh, the masters of Arabs. Then his brothers
divided. Al-Muttalib stood by him, while Nawfal stood by Abd al- Shams.

They competed with him and tried to match him with his good traits, but
they were unable to achieve that, so Hashim became the matchless master
of al- Battha. because of his generous acts and good qualities.

When Abd al- Shams died, Omayyah appeared. He tried to occupy Hashim. s
high rank because his father was unable to occupy it before, but there
was a great difference between him and Hashim in age and importance.
Hashim became a master because he was full of virtues, while Omayyah had
nothing to be a master except money and sons; they were not enough to
help him to be a master without supreme qualities.

One day Omayyah sought to vie in nobility with Hashim. He accepted that,
but we do not know why he was satisfied at that measure while he was the
master of al- Battha. and the Shaykh of Quraysh, the only thing we know
is that he knew that he would win the round to hinder Omayyah. s
ambition and to humiliate his ambitious soul, so Hashim won the round
and exiled Omayyah out of Medina for ten years. In the meantime Omayyah
was satisfied that Hashim would beat him, but he wanted people to honor
him when they said that he vied in nobility with Hashim.

When . Abd al- Muttalib appeared after his father Hashim and his uncle
al- Mattalib, he got a higher rank and higher merits than that of his
people and his ancestors, so the water of Zamzam gushed out for him,
while no one of Quraysh had won this honor before him, so Quraysh felt
envy toward him and tried to share in this honor of watering the
pilgrims, but he refused, so they asked his priest Hudhayl in Sham to
judge him. When they saw his miracles on their way to Sham, they
refrained from his trial and gave him Zamzam and the watering of
pilgrims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
Sharh al- Nahj 3/457.

It was he HisMm who warned Abraha, the leader of the Abyssians and the
Emir of the Yemen, when the latter came from the Yemen with great army
to destroy the House (the Kaaba) to force the Arabs to visit the House
he built in the Yemen. Besides Abd aI-Muttalib did not go out of the
House as Quraysh did when they escaped because of the power of the
AbyssinianS, but the end of the Abyssinias was destruction as the
Glorious Book has mentioned,.[1] so their end happened according to the
warning of the master of Al- Abattha..

For this reason Quraysh felt envy toward Abd al- Muttalib for his
miracles, and the owner of the virtue is envied.

Omayyah was dissatisfied with what he had found as a result of his
competition with Hashim, so he tried to compete with Abd al- Muttalib.
Then OmayYah forced Abd al- Muttalib to compete with him, but Abd
al-Muttalib beat him and exiled him for ten years. Also Harb b. Omayyah
vied in money and people with Abd al- Muttalib.

He (Omayyah) thought that he would get a high position with these
things, not with virtue and good deeds. He tried to compete with Abd
al-Muttalib for his high rank because of envy and selfadmiration. Al-
Nafir was astonished at llarb. s competition with Shaykh al- Battha. ,
so he said to him:

Your father is a prostitute- lover and his father is chaste

And drove the elephant away from the Holy country.

This line of poetry denotes that Abd al- Muttalib and his ancestors had
two famous qualities; Harb and his ancestors had two famous qualities,
too.

So, the prominent figures of Quraysh judged for Abd al- Muttalib in
every competition.

Do not forget the Alliance (hilf) of al- Fudool. It was the best
alliance Quraysh or all Arabs made to punish the oppressor and support
the oppressed. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, entered
it before Islam. After that he said about it:. if I was invited to a
similar one, I would accept.. That was the Alliance with which al-
Husayn threatened Mu. awiyah, It looked for the usurping tyrants. How
many plundered money and usurped honor it returned.

Al- Zubayr b. Abd al- Muttalib founded the Alliance of al- Fudool. The
Nawfalis and the . Hashirnites did not enter it. The person has the
right to ask about the reason why these people refrained from entering
it: Was it because the Hashimtes founded it Or because it was a supreme
virtue Or what?

These are the attitudes of the Omayyads if you digress some of them
before the rise of the sun of Islam. Then if you study their attitudes
after the rise of the bright sun of Islam, you will be sure that this
tree is worthy of revealing that Holy verse, because faith diçl not
enter their hearts, they used

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Fit Chapter.

every means to put out that bright light, and they did the acts which
justice and manhood refuse, and honor and virtue hate.

And does any one forget what Abu Sufyan did? He harmed the Prophet
before, the Emigration and inciad people against him after the
Emigration. The Battles of Uhid and al- Ahzab (the allies), (the
expedition to) al-Hudaybiyya and similar events, which history has
immortalized, tell you about his attitude (toward the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family). He (Abu Sufyan) and the Omayyads, the
Hashimtes, were the owners of the caravans (of camels) and the parties.
How does the son of Islam forget those events while history always
reminds him of them? Abü Sufyan and his son Mu. âwyyah did not enter
Islam till it seized them by the neck, and they found no escape from it.
After the Conquest (al- faith), the Wise Prophet habituated them (to
Islam) with plentiful giving from the booty (of the Battle of) Hunayn,
so greed helped fear with that affection, but their hearts were still
containing ancient paganism, envy, spite. They did their best to seize
the opportunity to declare mutiny to take the heritage of the children
and the uncles and the grand- fathers, whose jugular veins the sharp
swords of Is lam cut.

Nevertheless, Abu Sufyan was not able to keep those psychological
spites, so they appeared in the slips of his tongue, and most of them
appeared during the days of . Uthman,.[1] because he (Abu Sufyan) felt
that he was safe of punishment, and whoever feels safe of punishment
misbehaves. Of course, he felt safe because the authority was in the
hands of his boys as he said when he kicked the tomb of Hamzah b. Abd
al- Muttalib with his foot.

As for his son Mu. âwiya,[2] when he knew that Islam spread, its roots
entwined, and its branches were high, he used it as a means to uproot
it. Mu. awyyah controlled the country while Islam was still fresh and
new, so he broke aU its laws and opposed all its rules, but he did not
apparently take off the noose of Islam. Of course, he did not take it
off because it was the means that helped him to obtain that wide supreme
authority; the authority which neither Sakhar b. Harb nor Omayyah had
dreamt about before. No harm him because of that phenomenon because the
pretext was to hit get his vast ambitions and to destroy the lofty bases
of Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
1 Al- Aghani: 6/ 90-96.  
2 about Ma. awyyiah Many traditions has been reported from the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family. For example, . Am. mar, the
oppressive group will kill you in Siffin..  
Al- SyyfltT has regarded this tradition as ensured by many lines of
transmission. And . Verily, . All will wage ware against the mutineers
(at- QasitIn), and they will be Mu. awiya and his soldiers.. See also
the following volumes of Sharh at- Nahj: 1/347,463,372,361,355,373, and
113,2/102 and 363,3/443 and 463 and 15, 4/192. See also Al- lsti. Kb
about Mu. awiva.

It is sufficient that Mu. awiya waged war against the Master of prophets
when he waged war against the Commander of the Faithful (Amir at-Mu.
miflin), peace be on him, about whom the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, said:. Your peace is my peace and your war is my war.[1]
After me, you will wage war against the oath breakers of allegiance (at-
Nâkithin), the unjust (at- Qasitln), and the Renegades (at-Mariqin).[2]
If Mu. awiya waged war against Abu at- Hasan (Imam . Ali), peace be on
him, to punish those who killed . Uthman, then why did he forgive them
when he became caliph? I (the author) do not know why Mu. awiyah was the
guardian of . Uthman while at- Murtada (Imam . Ati) was the Commander of
the Faithful and their Guardian.

By Allah, the aim of Mu. awiya, was not so vague that we should produce
evidence for it. If he was not an enemy for Islam and its Prophet, he
would not have sharpened the blade to destroy the family of the Prophet
while the Koran has summoned Muslims to love and respect them, and the
Prophet has also summoned Muslims to support and cleave to them.

They (ahl al Bayt) committed no crime against Mu. awiya but because they
were the family of the Prophet, and the caretakers of the religion and
its propagandists. If he (Mu. awiya) had shaken hands with them and
forgiven them, he would have not obtained the authority for which he
waged war against the Prophet and his law.[3]

Before Mu. awiyah perished, he felt that he did not achieve his desires
through waging war against the Prophet and his message, so he authorized
his son Yazid to fulfill them after his death, but Yazid had not the
cunning of his father, namely he was not able to put poison into honey
to plot against Islam, then his intentions clearly appeared on the pages
of his acts. As soon as he became Caliph, he began attacking aI- Husayn,
the grandson of the Prophet the master of the young men of Paradise.
Also he began attacking the family of the Prophet, the best of all men
in righteousness and virtue. Then he did what he wished in the country
of Emigration (Dar at-Hijra) and against the rest of the companions (of
the Prophet). The religion, manhood, and chastity did not prevent him
from doing that. Moreover, he ordered his fighters to siege the sacred
House (the Kaaba) and throw stones at it in the manner that killed its
inhabitants and archers.

Which family defended Islam and protected its achievements more then at-
Husayn and his family? Which country followed Islam more than (the
country of) the two Holy Mosques (at- Haramayn)? Did b. Maysün (the son

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  Musnad Ahmmad b. Hambal: 2/442 and Asad at- GMbah: 3/11.  
2  Ma ani al- Akhbar, 204. Sunan b. Majah, 8,3950.  
3  Sharh at- Nahj 1/463. Murflj at- Dhahab: 1/341. In these two books,
there are reports denote that al- MaghTra b. Shu. ba regarded Mu. awias
disbelieve while he himself was a disbeliever, then how was Mu. awiya?
Woe to whom at- Namrud regarded as disbeliever.

of Maysun) leave anything to wage war against Islam, the Prophet- may
Allah bless him and his family, and his companions? If we try to count
the acts of the Omayyads, with which they resisted Islam and its
truthful Owner, we will not be able to because they are many, meanwhile
we will be out of our purpose. Yes, there is no harm when we mention
extracts to which at- MaqrtzT, the Owner of the plans, has referred in
his study. Al-Nizâ. Wa at- Takhasum. and at- Jahiz in his study in which
he has given an example about the boasting between the Omayyads and the
Hashimtes, some of what they have mentioned is as follow:. Indeed, bani
Omayya (the sons of Omayyalthe Omayyads) stamped the necks of the
companions and dappled the hands of Muslims as a mark to enslave them,
made the Prophet below the Caliph, had sexual intercourse with Muslim
women in Muslim countries (Dar al- Islam), delayed the prayer pretending
to be busy delivering a sermon, ate and drank on the pulpit of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.. [1]

This is some of the forbidden things and breaking of the Islamic law
which the above- mentioned authors have written. I wonder; were they not
aware of the religion and its punishments and its regulations and its
entries? It is sufficient for them that they waged violent war against
the Prophet. s mission. Furthermore, they regarded the mission as a
supreme authority with which the Hashimites played. They made the Book a
target for their arrows. They did their best to transfer the ritual
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, then to the mosque which they built in
Damascus. And they used mangonels to throw stones at the Sacred House
(the Kaaba).

Do not ask about what the pure family of the Prophet faced, starting
from the crucified persons of Kanasa and Jozjan, namely Zaid and his son
Yahya, to the persons killed with poison, such as at- Hasan, at- Sajad,
at-Baqir, peace be on them, Abfl Hashim b. at- Hanafiyyah, Ibrahim b.
Mohammed- the brother of at- Saflah-, and the like. That is except those
who were made homeless in the horizons, and those who were hidden in the
prisons.

. Amr b. Abd at- Aziz was the best of the Omayyads.

He knew that people hated his family. So, he tried to change their
opinions about them.

No wonder! People accepted the government of the Omayyads because .
birds of a feather flock together.. Surely, the religion has ordered
people to conform to piety secretly and openly, just behavior towards
close relatives and the common people, refraining from hidden and open
lewdness, abstaining from aggression during satisfaction and anger. How
far people

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Sharh at- Nahj: 3146g-470.

still are from what the religion commands!.[1] In other words, the
person who follow his self- (most surely (man. s) self wants to command
(him to do) evil)- is not able to follow the religion even if it
prevents him from the ways of appetites and forbids him from oppression
and aggression. If people had wanted guidance, the guardians would have
not hidden the masters of justice and truth and faith and truthfullness,
and those guardians would have accepted nothing from them but these
noble manners. Indeed, people go far away from these Alawid virtues as
the wild animal goes far away from the angels and as the earth is for
from the stars of the sky.

If you study the conditions of people thoroughly, you will be sure of
these Prophetic words:.

. However you are, (a governor) is appointed over you.. [2]

Does the scholar accept the ignorant person to rule him? Does the just
person accept the corrupt person to lead him?

The guardians of ignorance and oppression and corruption found that
their matches supported them and kept silent for their acts, so their
selves followed desires and appetites. In the meantime, their selves
sought to lower the dignity of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, declare war on his mission, and waged war against his family.

Studying the selves and acts of those people thoroughly show you
faithlessness and treason and partiality for misguidance against
guidance, for falsehood against the truth. Also you are about to wonder
how the religion and the great figures of guidance has not become
obliterated yet as long as the supporters of the truth are very few
every where and everytime. . And very few of my servants are
grateful..[3]

Where do you disappear from this truth, white one look at our present
time shows you how the competition between the truth and falsehood take
place, and how the second (falsehood) and its supporters has overcome
the first (the truth)? No wonder, but the wonder is that the masters of
the truth sometimes obtain victory, and falsehood is abandoned. If Abu
at- Hasan (Imam . Ali) and at- Hasan had obtained victory over Mu.
awyya, and at-Husayn over Yazid, then it would have been something new
in history.

For the victory of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
after those bloody battles was to prove this verse:. That he who would
perish

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  In his book at- Manqip wa at- Mathfflib, the Egyptian judge Abe
HanTfa at- Nu. man has fully mentioned the virtues of the Hashmites and
the defects of the Omayyads. If you read this book, you will know the
ugly acts of the Omayyads. If we want to search more, we will mention
books more than those we have mentioned here. But what we have mentioned
is enough to achieve our aim. The above- mentioned book is still hand
written. It has not printed yet. I have seen a copies of it in some
libraries of Najaf.  
2  Ahmad b. Hambal. s Musnad: 4/437.  
3  Saba: 13.

might perish by clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear
proof.”[1] If the unbelief overcame Islam, its light was not completed,
and the proof was not established.

Indeed, the Trusty Prophet brought all men virtues, happiness, and good
manners. Still, they hindered him his mission though his mission was for
their good and happiness. They refused those virtues because they did
not match their behavior and inward thoughts like other people in every
time. Moreover, they accepted that happiness when the sword came over
their heads and the whip hit their noses. Nevertheless, they quickly
turned BACK upon their heels when the Prophet passed away retreating
from the laws of the religion when they found escape to that: “And
Mohammed is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already passed
away before him; if then he dies or is killed, will you turn BACK upon
your heels? And whoever turns BACK upon his heels, he wilt by no means
do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward the grateful.”[2 ]

But there were great figures among the Omayyads. Their hearts were full
of belief. They stood by the truth against falsehood. No wonder, because
Allah, the Exalted, says:” He brings forth the living from the dead.”[3]
There is no doubt that the curse does not include them because the Holy
Book says:” O you who believe! take care of your souls; he who errs
cannot hurt you when you are on the way.”[4]” And no soul earns (evil)
but against itself and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of
another.”[5]

“Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it is
against it.”[6]

“There is no way (to blame) against the doers of good.”[7]

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Anml: 42.  
2 Al ‘Umren: 143.  
3 ‘Al-An’am: 144.  
4 a Al- Ma’ida: 105.  
5 a Al- An’am: 164.  
6 Fussilat: 46.  
7 At-Tawba: 91.
