The Religious Schools and Sects
===============================

The days of abu Abd Allah at- Sadiq, peace be on him, were the days of
religious schools, sects, ideas, desires, theology, research,
misguidance, suspicion, and doubts. Now, we will mention the origin of
those groupings and schools in a brief manner, following the methods
that we have adopted in this book because the enlargement upon the
research will take us out of the plan of the book, and in the books on
the religious schools and sects are many details.

The Origin of the Islamic Groupings:
------------------------------------

Indeed, the Muslim nation divided into seventy- three groupings. That
was what our Truthful Trusty Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: “My nation will divide into seventy- three groupings.“[1]

In this chapter, we want to study the well- known groupings in the time
of at- Sadiq. We will devote our research to the origins of those
groupings. We may refer to sub- groupings after we have mentioned the
origins. Of course, this will suit our purpose and plan.

All Muslim sects belong to four groupings: the Murjeia, the Mu’tazila,
the ShT’a, and the Khârijites.[2] So every Muslim sect belongs to one of
these origins. Also at- Ghulät, though the other sects have regarded
them as unbelievers, is a subdivision of the above mentioned origins.
These four origins are as follow:

1. The Murjeia:
---------------

We may say: Indeed, the Murjeia means today the Ash’arrs only, and they
are the Sunnls in general according to the belief in this time, because
there is no one who follows the school of the Mu’tazila in these times.

Before at- Ash’ary, the Murjeia were many s&ts, and those sets were
subdivisions of the SunnTs equivalent to the ShT’a and the Kharijites.
But when at- Ash’ry’s school of thought appeared, the Murjeia became
another title for die SunnTs or for at- Ash’ry’s school in general. In
(his book) atMilal and at- Nihal, al- Shahristäny said:” And it is said
(that) at- lrja’ (delaying) (means) the delaying of ‘Au, peace be on
him, from the first degree to the fourth (degree).” As you see, this is
the thought of the SunnTs in general.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Sunan b. Majah: 2/1321.  
2 The sects of ShT’a by Abn Mohammed al- Hasan al- Nobakhty: 17. In al-
Fasl: 2/88,  
b. Hazm has mentioned that they are five because he regards the Sunnis
as a grouping equivalent to the Murjeia and the Mu’tazila.

It is not our purpose to research the gathering of these names in the
Schools of at- Ash’ary or their departing from, rather our first purpose
is to know the situation of al- Murjeia on that day. There is no doubt
that the Murjeia in that time were sets and schools. They were gathered
together by their opinion that said: it is enough (to show) faith with
words even if there is no act, and even if the person who claims belief
commits every atrocity still he is a believer and follows the faith of
Jibrâ’il and Mika’il, and they delayed forgiveness for those who commit
great sins, maybe, they were called the Murjeia for this reason or
because Allah has delayed their punishment. (it is derived from the word
at- irjâ’ meaning delay) or because they delayed ‘Au, peace be on him,
from the first degree to the fourth degree as at- Shahristãny has
mentioned.

What we have mentioned is the common idea among the groups of the
Murjeia. This what the books of the two parties have reported, which has
mentioned the meeting of the parties and departing of the religious
sects.

Were abu Hanifa and his fellower from the Mâsiryya Murjeia,’[1] who
lived in Iraq? Were at- Shäfi’y, Málik b. Anas, b. abu Layla, Shurayk b.
Abd Allah, and their fellower from the Murjeia who were called atShukkäk
or at- Batariya, and they were the people of at- HashLi and the great
majority who were called at- Hashawiya?

We can not decide this, because the books of the sects are different
about that ancestry. Also they did not depend on reliable references
that may help us to understand the correct viewpoints. Besides the
fanaticism of those authors for their sects and schools made the other
sect a goal for them. Moreover, the men of the secular authorities in
those times helped this crime to happen, because they propagated a sect
and waged war against the other. To achieve this purpose, they hired,
orators to preach and for them, so the person who has no knowledge or
studies may miss the truth.

Maybe, those books have thrown many writers into snares of confusion. In
short, it is not easy for us to depend on those books to understand the
correct ancestry. So, the only sect which has correctly related to the
Murjeia is at- Jahamyya, who were the followers of Jaham b. Safwân,
because they frankly believed in what we have mentioned, and the authors
have agreed on that. Also they (the authors) have reported (traditions)
from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, which have cursed
them, while we are innocent of their responsibility. One of these
traditions is:

“The Murjeia had been cursed by the tongues of seventy prophets. It was
said to him: Who are the Murjeia? He said: Those who said: Belief is
speech.”[2]

In summary: There is no doubt who the Murjeia were at that time. Also
they were a group of sects. We have mentioned their thoughts earlier.
Their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 al- Miial Wa al- Nihal, 1/147.  
2 Al- Farq Bayna ai- Firaq: p. 190.

thoughts, which brought them together, was that words are enough to
achieve belief even if there is no action to match these words, rather
even if the action is contrary to the words. We are in no need to study
thoroughly their subdivisions and their characteristics lest we should
miss our aim and make mistakes. We ask Allah, the Exalted, to protect us
from mistakes.

2. The Mu’tazila
----------------

We have no doubt that at- I’tizäl (isolation) was born at the time of
atSadiq, peace be on him, and at that time it spread. That was when
‘Amru b. Ubaid, Wash b. ‘Attä’, and the like isolated themselves from
the theological school of at- Hasan at- Basry, so they called them with
this name (i.e. the Mu’tazila or the isolated.) It is not correct that
at- I’tizal (isolation) was born during the time of AmTr at- Mu’minTn
(the Commander of the Faithful) when Sa’ad b. Abu Waqäs, b. ‘Amr, and
Usâm b. Zayd isolated themselves from the battles of AmTr at- Mu’minrn,
because that isolation was not due to an idea or suspicion in relation,
rather it was deviation from (the right leadership) of AmTr at-
Mu’minTn, peacebe on him. Moreover, at- I’tizal was not know at that
time, they were not called at- Mu’tazila (the isolated) on that day, and
the Mu’tazila did not belong to their school

After the Mu’tazila had agreed with each other on at- I’tizäl, they
divided into many sects, and in our present time, there is no one, as I
think, belonging to this school. The author of the book’ Al- Farq bayna
Al- Firaq’ ,p.94, has reported from the Essays of at- Ka’by:

" Indeed, the Mu’tazila had unanimously agreed that Allah, the Great and
Almighty, is a thing not like things, He is the Creator of bodies and
spirits, He has created what He created out of nothing, and men do their
acts with the fate ,which Allah, the Glorified and Exalted, has created
in them.” He said:” And they had unanimously agreed that Allah does not
forgive him who commits great sins without repentance.’’

This is what at- Ka’by has reported about the common thought of the
Mu’tazila. We are satisfied with the above- mentioned text about their
beliefs, and we are not concerning a thorough examination to put these
words in the scales of criticism to know the correctness of what the
author of the above- mentioned book has regarded as right towards this
claim. Also this reason has summoned us to pass over what b. Harm,
atShahristany, and the author of ‘Al- Farq bayan at- Firaq’ have
attributed to them. Worth mentioning, they have said many ideas about
them.

After this, we do not want to treat exhaustively the sects of that
grouping and their peculiar beliefs, because the enlargement in such a
matter will take us out of the limited plan and we may make mistakes.

Are the fatalists the Mu’tazila? Or are they the Ash’ris themselves?
This is an object of doubt, because if we regard the fatalists as those
who say:” the acts of men are created for them, and they (the acts) are
done and estimated by them, and Allah only creates power and ability
with which men do their acts,” then they are the Mu’tazila according to
the earlier common thought which has been reported from them. And
according to this, they are not the Ash’aris themselves, because the
Ash’aris are contrary to this; they think that all acts are created and
estimated by Allah, the Exalted, not by man.

If we mean the fatalists are those who say that the good and the evil of
fate are from Allah, the Exalted, then they are surely the Ash’aris.

From the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, al- Shahrystany
has reported: “The fatalists are the Magians of this nation.” “The
fatalists are the opponents of Allah in fate.”[1]

3. The ShI’a:
-------------

Al- Tashayy’ ‘(shiism) was at the time of the Holder of the Honorable
Mission, and some of the companions had been called Shi’a since that
day.Some of them were Salman, abu Dharr, ‘Ammar, Hudhayfa,
Khuzayma,Jâbir, abu Sa’Td al- Khidry, Abti Ayyflb, Khälid b. Sa’id b.
al- ‘As, Qays b.Sa’ad, and the like.[2]

In Arabic, the word ‘ShT’a’ means al- atbâ’ (followers), at- Ansär
(supporters), and at- A’wán (helpers). It was derived from the word
‘alMushaya’a which means al- Mutãwa’a (obedience), and al- Mutâba’a
(agreement). But this word is related to those who follow ‘Au and his
family, may Allah bless him and his family.[3]

The first to utter the word ‘ShT’ea’; meaning those who follow ‘Au and
the Imams, was the Owner of the Islamic law, the master of the prophets,
may Allah bless him and his family, in this connection, many traditions
have been mentioned from him.[4]

The sects of the ShT’a were many. The books on the religious schools and
sects have mentioned more than we know about them. They have mentioned
many sects and many men to whom those sects were related, for

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 See Al- Milal wa Al- Nihal: 1/50-5 1.  
2 Ibin abu al- Haddeed, Sharih Nahj al- Balagha, 4, 225. Mohammed Kurd
‘All,  
Khutat al- Sham, 5, 25 1-256.  
3 Al- Qamfls, Lislin al- ‘Arab, Al- Nahayya by b. al- AthTr, Al-
Muqadama by b. Khaldfln: p.138, and many others.  
4 See al- Sawa’iq after verse eight and verse ten of the verses
concerning the outstanding merits of the members of the House (a/il al
Bayt). Also See al- NaMya by bin al- Athlr in Qamh, and Al- Dun Al-
Manthtlr by al- Syytlty about the Words of Allah, the Exalted: “(As for)
those Who believe and do good, surely they are the best of men.”

example, al- Hfishmiya (the Hfishymis) attributed to HisMm b. al- Hakam,
al- Zarariya (the Zaräris) ascribed to Zarara b. A’yun,

Al- ShaytfifliY a (the Shaytfinis) related to Mu’min al- Tiq, Mohammed
b. at- Nu’man b. al- Ahwal, al- Ytlnisiy a (the Yunisls) attributed to
Ytlnis b. Abd al- Rabmafl, and so on. In fact, we follow the members of
the House (ahil al Bayt). And ahl al Bayt knew who were m the House. We
know neither kinds nor traces of those sects, nor the heresies which
have been ascribed to the above- mentioned men.

Whoever sees the books of traditions and the books of men by the ShT’a,
will know that these men were among the chOsen companions of the Imams,
namely the Imams depended on them and the Sht’a refer to them. So if
they had ideas and schools contrary to those of the Imams, then the
Imams would have been angry with them and dismissed them. Whoever
understands thoroughly these writings about the men who created
heresies, will know that the foregoing men were innocent of what they
have attributed to them. They disowned b. Saba’, cursed him, and warned
men against his heresies. They disowned al- Bâqir, peace be on him, and
claimed the falsehood. Also at- Sâdiq, peace be on him, disowned Abü
atKhattäb and his company, and abu al- Järüdy. Concerning banü Fudäl, he
said: “Take what they have reported, and leave what they have seen”, and
so on.[1] If such a choice had followed this misguidance which has been
related to them, the Imams would have treated them as they treated those
who went astray, namely they would have disowned, dispraised, and cursed
them.

Yes, the ShT’a had sects before and after the time of at- Sâdiq, peace
be on him. They have become bygone but three sects. They are:

1. The Imâmis- they believe in the Imamate of the twelve (Imams), the
birth of the twelve (Imams). They believe that the twelfth Imam is still
living now, and they look forward to his coming.

2. The ZaydTs- they believe in the Imamate of Zayd and of the sons of
Fatima, who rose with the sword and had outstanding merits.

3. The Isma’ilTs- they believe that the Imam after al- Sadiq, peace be
on him, was his son Ismâ’il, not Müsâ and his sons, peace be on them.

The above- mentioned sects are the only sects that have lasted till now.
In his book, ‘Firaq at- ShT’a’, at- Nobakhty has studied those sects who
were in the past. They all perished, except what we have mentioned
above.

Here, we want to discuss the sects which were during the days of
alSâdiq, peace be on him, even if there is no one of them at present.

The Kayslnis:[2]
----------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  See al- Ghayba by al- Shaykh al- TtIsy, may Allah be pleased with
him.  
2  concerning the information about the KaysanTs, we have very much
depended on the books: Firaq al- ShVa, Al- Milal wa Al- Nihal, and Al-
Farq Bayna al- Firaq.

During the time of al- Sädiq, peace be on him, among the sects of the
ShT’a were the KaysänTs, who adopted the Imamate of Mohammed b.
alHanafiya. The authors differ about the reason why they are called the
Kaysanrs. And they (the Kaysãnis) belonged to sects:

A sect said: “Mohammed is al- Mahdy. He is the trustee (wasp of AmTr at-
Mo’minTn (the Commander of the Faithful), and no one of his family has
the right to disobey him. Al- Hasan, peace be on him, made peace with
Mu’âwiya with his permission. Al- Husayn, peace be on him, revolted
(against Ya.zid) with his permission. And at- Mukhtâr revolted to
revenge the blood (of al- Husayn) with his permission, too.” A sect
said:” He (Mohammed b. al- Hanafiya) was the Imam after his two brothers
alHasan and al- Husayn, peace be on them. He is al- Mahdy and his father
called him with that (name). He never dies and (his death) is
impossible. But he has disappeared and no one knows where he is. He will
return and rule the earth. And there has been no Imam sine his
disappearance till his return. “They (this sect) were the companions of
b. Karb and they are called the Karbis.

A sect said:” He (Mohammed b. al- Hanafiya) lives among Radwâ Mountains
between Mecca and Medina. And he is the awaited Imam (atImam at-
Muntazar).”

A sect said:” He died. The Imam after him was his son Abd Allah. His
kunya (the latter) (i.e. the name by which an Arab is usually referred
to and which refers to him as the father of someone, usually his eldest
son) was Abu Hishâm. He was the eldest of his sons. He was the trustee
(wasi) of his father.” This sect was called the Hashimites as
attribution to Abü Háshim. This sect has mentioned about him as the
first sects have mentioned about his father:” He is al- Mahdy. He is
still living. And he enlivens the dead. But when Abü Hâshim died, his
companions subdivided.”

Some famous intelligent men belonged to the Kaysãnis. Among them was
Kuthayr ‘Azzah whose poetry is always reported.

The famous sayyid Ismfl’il al- Hymyary was one of them. Also his poetry
supplies evidence for what they attributed to him. But he changed his
mind and believed in the Imamate of al- Sâdiq, peace be on him when al-
Sädiq debated with him and overcame him. He has famous poetry concerning
his refraining from his sect and his believing in the Imamate of al-
Sâdiq.

Among them was Hayyän al- Sarräj. One day he came to al- Sad iq, peace
be on him. So abu Abd Allah (al- Sadiq) said to him:” Hayyan, What do
your companions say concerning Mohammed b. al- Hanafiya?” He said:” They
say:’ He is still living.” So, al- Sädiq, peace be on him, said: “My
father, peace be on him, said to me: ‘I was among those who visited him
during his illness, and among those who shut his eyes, entered him his
bit

(grave), married his wives (to other men), and divided his heritage
(among his children). So he said:” Abe Abd Allah, Mohammed in this
nation is like ‘isa b. Maryam, men became uncertain to him, his
followers or his enemies?” He said:” Rather, his enemies.” So he, peace
be on him, said:” Do you think that abu Ja’far Mohammed b. ‘Ali, peace
be on them is the enemy of his uncle Mohammed b. al- Hnafiya?” So he
said:” No.” Then at- Sâdiq, peace be on him, said:” Hayyän , you have
turned away from the Verses of Allah while He, the Blessed and Exalted,
said: “We will reward those who turn away from Our communications with
an evil chastisement because they turned away.”[1]

BarTd al- ‘Ajali[2] said: “I came to al- Sâdiq, peace be on him, and he
said to me: ‘If you had come a little bit earlier, you would have met
Hayyân atsarraj’, and he pointed to a place in the house. Then he said:
“He was sitting. over here. He mentioned Mohammed b. al- Hanafiya and
his life. And he praised him. So I said to him:” Hayyãn, do you not
claim and they claim, and you report and they report: this nation has
the same things the children of Isrâ’U (banfl Isrâ’il) had? So he
said:”Yes.” Then he said:‘Have you or they seen, you or they heard that
a scholar died before men, his wives have been married (to others), and
his properties have been divided (among his children), while he is
living and never dies?” So, he stood up and did not answer any thing.[3]

The KaysânTs are among the extinct sects, today, we do not know people
who belong to them.

The Zaydis:
-----------

The Zaydis are among the groupings which are ascribed to the SliT’ a.
They belonged to Zaid b. ‘Ali b. at- Husayn, peace be on them, because
they believed in his Imamate.

Zayd, peace be on him, did not claim the Imamate for himself, rather men
claimed it for him. Nothing summoned him to rise but that he wanted to
support the truth and wage war against the falsehood. Zaid was far above
asking what was not for him.

If he had overcome (his enemies), he would have known the place where to
put iC Some traditions were attributed to him showing that he requested
the Imamate for himself. But the reason in them is very clear, because
alSadiq, peace be on him, was afraid the authority of the Omayyads would
relate Zaid’s revolt to him, so they would punish him, his family, and
his followers (ShT’a) for that crime. So he drove away that danger with
that attribution, and if Zayd had been as those traditions mentioned,
then his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  ‘Al- Sadoq, Ikmrn Al- Din, 22. Al- Kashy, Al- Rijal, 203. Koran, aI-
An’am, 157.  
2  One of the famous reliable companions of al- S&liq.  
3  Al- Kashy, Al- Rijäl, Hayyan, 202.

two grandfathers al- Mustafa and al- Murtadä, peace be on them and their
families, would not have wept over him before he was created, and the
memories of what would happen to him would not have brought about that
great sadness and depression for them. Similarly, his ancestors had
suffered from the sad memories when they remembered his killing and what
happened to him after that.

It is enough that his revolt and innocence were far above what was
attributed to him that al- Sadiq, peace be on him, wept over him and
divided the properties among the families of those who were killed with
him. Also, he blamed those who did not support him. And he called those
who stood by him believers, and those who waged war against him
unbelievers.

How he requested the Imamate for himself while al- Sádiq, peace be on
him, said:” May Allah have mercy on him. Truly, he was believing,
knowing, knowledgeable, and truthful. Verily, if he had won a victory
(over his enemies), he would have fulfilled (his promise). Indeed, if he
had had authority, he would have known how to put it.,,[1] And he said:”
Do not say that Zayd deviated. Surely, Zayd was knowledgeable and
truthful. He did not summon you for himself. Rather, he summoned you for
al- Ridã from the family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family. If he had overcome (his opponents), he would have fulfilled what
he had summoned you for. He only revolted against the supreme authority
of a group to change it.”[2]

Al- Rida, peace be on him, said to al- Ma’mUn:” Do not compare my
brother Zayd with Zayd b. ‘ali, peace be on them, for Mohammed, may
Allah bless him and his family. He became angry for Allah, the Great and
Almighty. So, he waged holy war against His enemies till he was killed
for Him. Indeed, Zayd b. ‘Ali, peace be on him, did not request what he
had no right to. He was more devout than that to Allah. He said:” I
summon you to al- Ride from the family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him
and his family.”[3]

Al- Ridâ said these words frankly during the time of the AbbâssTds. His
son Yahyâ said:” May Allah have mercy on my father. He was among the
worshipers. He prayed at night and fasted at day. He strove for Allah
sincerely.” So, Umayr b. at- Mutawakil al- Balakhy said: “So, I said:”
Son (i.e. grandson) of the Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, is this the manner and quality of the Imam?” So, he said:” Abü
Abd Allah, surely, my father was not an Imam. But he was among the noble
master and their ascetics, and he was among the mujhahidin for Allah. I
said:” son of the Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
surely, your

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Al- Kashy, al- Rijrn, 184.  
2 A1-Wfffl, 1,141.  
3 ‘Ibid.

father requested the Imamate for himself and waged holy war for Allah,
and it has been mentioned from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, that whoever claims the Imamate is a liar.” So, he said:”
Slowly! Slowly! Abu Abd Allah, indeed, my father was more intelligent
than to claim what he had no right to. However, he said:” I summon to
al- Ridâ from the family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family.” He meant my cousin Ja’far, peace be on him. He said:” I said:’
So, today, he has knowledge.” He said:” Yes, he is the most
knowledgeable of Banfl Häshim.”[1]

This tradition has shown the high position of Zayd in religion and
virtue and denoted that what they attributed to him is baseless. Also
the tradition has proven that Yahyâ had a high position in piety,
science, and knowledge.

There are many traditions which show that Zayd was more sublime than
that summons. He was more pious, and purer than to corrupt himself with
the summons to the Imamate. But after his death, some people claimed
that the Imamate wasfor Zayd, so they were called the Zaydls for that
claim.

The Zaydis have many sects. The following opinion brings them together:
The Imamate is exclusive for the sons of Fatima, peace be on her. They
have not permitted the sureness of the Imamate in other than they. But
they have permitted every Fatimid, whether he is of the sons of alHasan,
peace be on him, or of the sons of al- Husayn, peace be on him, to be an
Imam with obligatory obedience, provided that he should be a scholar
ascetic, brave, generous, waged holy war with the sword. Then a sect of
them professed the Imamate of Mohammed and Ibrähim, the two sons of Abd
Allah b. al- Hasan, peace be on him.[2] I think that they have made the
Imamate exclusive for the sons of Fatima for those who maybe Imams after
Zayd, because some sects of them professed the sureness of the Imamate
for the two Shaykhs as you will know.

The Batariya:
-------------

The Batariya were among the sects of the Zaydis. They were the
companions of KathTr al- Nawä, al- Hasan b. Sä!im b. Abu Hafsa, alHakam
b. ‘Ayyina, Salama b. Kuhai!, and al- Miqdäm Thabit al Hadid. They (the
Batariya) summoned (people) to the Imamate of ‘ali, peace be on him,
then they mixed ‘ali’s Imamate with that of abu- Bakr and ‘Umar, and
proved the Imamate for them. They dispraised ‘UthmIn, Talha, alZubayr,
and ‘A’isha. It is said:” They were called the Batariya when they
mentioned their beliefs before Zayd b. ‘ali, so he said to them: ‘You
have cut off our instruction when you have left Allah.” And it is said:”
They

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Kiffiyat Al- Athar, 304.  
2 Al- Milal wa A1-Nihal, 1,159.

were called the Batarls because they were attributed to Kathlr al- Nawä
whose hand was amputated.”[1]

If this attribution was right, then they would be called al- ‘Abtariya,
not al- Batariya.

The Sulayminis:
---------------

Among the ZaydTs were the Su!aymanis, who belonged to Sulaymän b. Jarir.
They believed in the Imamate of the two Shaykhs (Abtl Bakr and ‘Umar),
but they dispraised ‘Uthman, Talha, al- Zubar, and ‘A’ isha.

They ascribed these persons to unbelief. They think that the Imamate is
made with consultation (Shflrâ), and it is concluded through a contract
between two of the good men of the nation. They allowed the Imamate of
the mafdül (less excellent) with the existence of the afdal (the most
excellent), and they claimed that the nation left the most excellent
during the homage when they recognized Abü Bakr and ‘Umar as caliphs,
and they left ‘Ali, peace be on him, though he was worthier of Imamate
than they. But the mistake that took place during their homage did not
entail unbelief nor transgression.[2]

Consequently, we understand that the claim ascribed to the Zaydis, which
says that the Imamate is not proved for other than the sons of Fatima,
only concerns those who came after Zayd and who rose with the sword.

Also we do not know the reason why these two sects are regarded as
shVtes.

The Jaruldiya:
--------------

The Jârudiya was a sect of the Zaydis. They belonged to Ziyâd b.
alMundhir abu al- Jartld. They may also be called the Sarhtlbiyya. And
it is said:” Indeed, the Sarhub is the name of a blind Satan, who lives
in the sea, so AbU at- Jârüd was called with his name. abu al- Jarfld
was among the Companions of al- Bâqir and al- Sadiq, peace be on them.
When Zayd revolted, he changed his mind.”

It has been reported that al- Sädiq, peace be on him, called him a liar
and an unbeliever. With him were Kathlr al- Nawã and Salim b. Abu
Hafsah. Also it has been mentioned about him:” (He was called) ‘Ama al-
Basar (blind- sighted) and ‘Ama al- Qalb (blind- art’[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ‘Al- Shaykh abu ‘Ali al- Ha’ry, Manhaj al- Maqal Fi al- Alqab.  
2 Al- Farq Bayna Al- Firaq, 23. Al- Milal’ala Al- Fasl, 1,164.  
3 See his life in the books of al- Rijal.

The Jirfidiya think that men were ncglectflil when they did not try to
research to know the Imam, because they were able to know him, rather
they disbelieved when they paid homage to Abü Bakr. So, they (the
jarildiya) do not believe in the Imamate of the three caliphs, rather
they believe in their unbelief because they requested the Imamate and
did not pay homage to ‘ali, peace be on him.’[1]

The Salihiya:
-------------

It is said: Surely, among them (the Zaydis) were the Silihiya. They are
ascribed to al- Hasan b. Sftlih. You have known that they were a group
of the Batariya, because al- Hasan was among the men of the Batariya.
So, there is no reason to regard them as an independent sect. Yes, there
are small differences between him and KathTr al- Naw&, the first man of
the Batariya.

Thus there is no need to part his sect from the Batariya.

In his book ‘Firaq Al- ShT’a’, al- Nobakhty has mentioned the Zaydis in
another manner and increased it. But we think that what we have written
is nearer to what the books of al- Mi!al and al- Nihal have mentioned.
So see them if you want more explanation.

The Ismâ’ilis:
--------------

Among the sects of the Shi’a are the Ismâ’ilis. The view concerning the
Imamate of Ismâ’il started during the days of al- Sâdiq, peace be on
him.Some of the Ismâ’T!Ts thought that the Imamate should be for the
eldest(son) and Ismâ’il was the eldest of his brothers, and he had
outstanding merit. When he died during the days of his father, they knew
their mistake.

As for those who insisted on the Imamate of Ismâ’il, they divided into
sects. Some of them denied his death during the lifetime of his father,
peace be on him. So, they said: “His father has hidden him from men
because he is worried about him.” They claimed that Isma’il would not
die till he rules the earth and assumes the affairs of men. (They
thought that) he would be the one who will rise (qa’ im), because his
father designated him as Imam after his death. But when his death
appeared, we knew that he (his father) was truthful and that the one who
would rise(qâ’im) would not die.

And some of them said that he died and that the Imamate was given to his
son Mohammed, because the Imamate is not but for children, and it (the
Imamate) is not for brothers except al- Hasan and al- Husayii, peace be
on them. So, when Ism&’U died, it was obligatory that the Imam after
Ja’far, peace be on him, had to be Mohammed b. Ismâ’il, and it was not

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 ‘Al- Farq Bayna al- Firaq, 22. Al- Milal ‘ala Hmnish Al- Fasl,1,163.

permissible for any of the brothers of Isma’il to be the Imam. Also
Mohammed b. al- Hanafiya had no right with ‘All b. al- Husayn, peace be
on them. The followers of this view were called the Mubaraka. They were
named after their leader al- Mubarak (the blessed).

As for the Khattabiya, the companions of abu al- Khattflb Mohammed b.Abu
Zaynab al- Asady al- Ajda’, they joined the sect that believed in the
Imamate of Mohammed b. Isma’il after the killing of Abti al-
Khattab.They were among the extreme groups. Then they divided into
sects. The Qaramita were among them.’[1]

Abu al- Khattab was a companion of al- Sftdiq’s, peace be on him. But
when al- Sadiq knew that he told him lies, he (al- Sadiq) dismissed him,
disowned him, and cursed him.

Then Abti al- Khattâb claimed that he was a prophet and Mohammed b.
Ja’far, peace be on him, was a god and that he was his messenger.
Besides, he and his group issued heresies, desires, and permission (for
unlawful things).

‘Isa b. MUsa, the governor of al- Manstlr over Kufa, heard about the
manners of Abii al- Khattab and his group, who were seventy men. While
they were holding a meeting in the Mosque of Kufa, he (the governor)
attacked them. No one was able to escape. He killed all but two persons,
one of them was badly wounded.

He was regarded as among the killed, so he was able to escape. And the
other was Abti al- Khttâb him- self. He was captured and killed by ‘Isa
b. Mflsa on the bank of the Euphrates. ‘Isa b. Miisa cut off their heads
and burned their bodies. Then he sent their heads to al- MansUr, who
hung them on the gate of Baghdad for three days, then they were
burnt.[2]

The Imflmys:
------------

Among the sects of the ShI’a are the Imamis. Also they are called the
Ja’fariya because they are ascribed to Ja’far b. Mohammed, peace be on
him, who became a school. (In the following pages you will know) how he
has become a school out of the rest of the Imams while they were all a
school in the rules.

The Imamis have believed in the Imamate of the twelve (Imams): ‘Ali, al-
Hasan, al- Husayn, ‘All b. al- Husayn, Mohammed b. ‘All, Ja’far b.
Mohammed, Mflsa b. Ja’far, ‘Ali b. Müsâ Mohammed b. ‘Ali, ‘Ali b.
Mohammed, al- Haaan b. ‘All, and his son al- Mahdy, the hidden, to whose
coming they look forward the blessings of Allah be on them all.

The Imâmis believe that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
had decided the Imamate of the above- mentioned Imams with the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Firaq Al- ShT’a, 67 and 76.  
2 Firaq Al- Sht’a, 69.

clear public nomination from Allah, the Great and Almighty, and that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, nominated the Imamate and
Caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful (Amir al- Mu’mintn) and he
nominated him as his brother and testamentary trustee. The textual
nomination (nass) by the Prophet was on several occasions, for example,
the Day of al- Ghadlr. Also the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, told (people) about the Caliphs and the Imams who would rule one
by one after the Commander of the Faithful (AmTr al- Mu’minln) peace be
on him, as we have mentioned their names earlier. Then the Imams handed
down that textual nomination (nass) from one to another. So, ‘All
nominated al- Hasan, al- Hasan nominated al- Husayn, al- Husayn
nominated his son ‘Au, In this manner the father nominated his son till
the textual nomination ended at b. al- Hasan, (who called) al- Munta.zar
(the awaited one). Besides, the ImâmTs believe that al- Muntazar has
been alive since he was born on the night of 15th of Sha’ban in the year
255 (A. H.) (869), and that he has been away from view because of the
unjust rulers of his time, and that he is al- Mahdi (the most guided
one), who will fill the earth with justice and fairness as it was filled
with oppression and tyranny.’[1]

Also the Imâmis believe that these Imams are protected from the sin, the
mistake, forgetfulness, and heedlessness as it is in our Prophet and all
the prophets, peace be on them, and that their knowledge is
notacquisitive, rather it is inspiration and inheritance from the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. The son inherited it from
his father and the brother from his brother as it is in al- Hasan and
al- Husayn.

As the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was the Inheritor of
the knowledge of Prophets and Apostles and had the knowledge of the past
people and of the last people, so the Commander of the Faithful (AmTr
al-Mu’minin) had all that knowledge, because the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, said: “I am the city of knowledge and ‘All is
its gate.” Apart from this tradition, there are many traditions and
verses of the Book (the Koran).[2]

Also, concerning the Imams, the ImâmTs believe that they were the
servants of Allah, the Glorified, created by Him, provided with the
means of subsistence by Him, and that they did not deal conclusively
with the affairs of mankind, such as life, death, giving, forbidding,
and the like but

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  Many Sunnis mentioned Imani al- Mahdi b. al- Hasan al- ‘Askary. They
have admitted his existence and that he is al- Mau’nd (the promised one)
See: Matlhib al-Sa’til, Al- Hjja by b. ‘Arab, Lawaqih Al- Anwar, Al-
Tadhkira, Sharh Al- Dfi’ira, Al. FusfII Al- Muhima, Fara’id Al- Simtayn,
and the like. Rather, some of them claimed that they had seen and met
him.  
2  I have written a study about ‘hadyth Al- Thaqalayn’, which proves
that the Imams are Infallible and they know every thing. This study has
been printed. Also I have a Study about the Knowledge of the Imam and
its quality. May Allah grant us success to print it.

with the permission from Allah, the Exalted, just as the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, did in connection with men. About ‘Tsfi,
peace on him, the Book (the Koran) reports:” That I determine for you
out of dust like the from of a bird, then I breathe into it and it
becomes a bird with Allah’s permission.”[1]

The Imflnits have concluded that with the intellectual proofs,
traditions, and reports. Some of these maybe mentioned in this book.

Also the Imamis have concluded the textual nomination concerning the
lmams with the traditions of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family.

These traditions have been reported by the two parties (i.e., the SunnTs
and the ShT’a). Among them is:” The Imams are from Quraysh, they are
twelve,[2] they are from the sons of ‘Ali and Fatima, and their
nomination is with their names one by one.”[3]

Moreover, the ImamTs produced Allah’s favor (Iutf) as evidence for the
Imamate when he confined it to them (the Imams), then if there was an
Imam, (people) should follow his Imamate, obey and know him.

The Imâmis refer to these lmams to know the commandments of religion, so
every commandment which has been proved by the Prophet or by them, they
adopt it. But if the traditions are differ about a certain commandment,
they apply the rules of equilibrium and preference according to the
established fundamentals of Islamic jurisprudence.

Concerning Islamic commandments, apart from the Book (the Koran) and the
Sunna (the traditions and acts of the Prophet or Infallible Imâms), the
ImamTs adopt the unanimous resolution and the irrefutable commandment of
intellect. When these four sources are not able to give them the Islamic
commandment, they refer to their practical fundamentals according to
what situations require, which are general juridical rules proven with
evidences.

The Imfimis think that the traditions which have been reported (by men)
from the Imams are some of the sunna, because they knew the knowledge of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, by heart, and protected
his law (Sharl’a), so what they had was from the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, not from their own independent reasoning and
ideas.

The sunna is one of the four sources which are used to deduce practical
laws of Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1   Al ‘Umrfln, 48.  
2   Muslim, a part of the authentic tradition (reported by) Jabir.
Ahmad, Musnad, 5/89,  
2/29 and 129. Bin Hajar, Al- Sawa’iq, chapter I, Part I, Al- Syyflty,
TarTkh Al-KltulafI’, and the like.  
3   Al- Qindflzy, YanibT’ Al- Mawada, 427 an430 and 442.  
Kiflyat Al- Athar, Al- Muqtadab, Al- Kanz, and the like.

These four sources, as we have mentioned are: The Book (Koran), the
Sunna (the traditions and acts of the Prophet or infallible
Imâms),consensus (ijma’), and intellect (‘aql). The explanation of
evidence of these sources and how to refer to them have been mentioned
in the books of the fundamentals of Islamic jurisprudence.

As for their belief in Allah, the most Exalted, the Imâmis believe that
He, the Glorified, is a thing but He is not similar to other things. He
has no body or physical form, and Cannot be seen by eyes in this world
or the Hereafter.”

Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (all) vision. His
Attributes are the same as His self. He, the Exalted, is just, and He
does not oppress anyone of His servants, because oppression is indecent
by a sane mind, and He created all things out of nothing.

As for their belief in our Prophet Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, the Imâmls believe that he was infallible from the error, the
slip, forgetfulness, heedlessness, mortal and venial sins, that he did
not commit any of them before or after his prophethood, and that he was
sent for all the world. This is their belief in the infallibility of
apostles and prophets

The Imâmis believe that the Imamate is among the fundamentals (of
Islam), which should be proved with the rational evidence in addition to
the narrated texts, and of the rational evidence is the rule of Allah’s
favor (qa’ idat al- Lutt7).

Concerning ma’ad (the Return), the ImimTs believe that Allah, the
Glorified, will return men for resurrection with those bodies which were
in the world, and they are (the bodies) which will be rewarded and will
live eternally in Paradise (janân) or will be punished and live
eternally in hell (nlran).

As for the acts of men, the ImfimTs believe that they are a matter
between two matters; neither compulsion nor authorization. Namely,
Allah, the Glorified, does not force men to achieve their action so as
not to oppress them when He will punish them for their sins, rather they
have the ability and option in what they do. Nor Allah has authorized
them to act freely with the creation of their actions, then He has no
ability to control His servants, rather He has the decision and the
order, and He is able to do everything and encompasses His servants.

Also, He may hold BACK him from the factors of disobedience and
misguidance as a favor from Him for His servant, and this is what we
call tawfiq (Allah’s blessing on someone for doing good actions).

These are some beliefs of the ImamTs about the existence and the Oneness
of Allah, the attributes of Allah, prophethood, the Imhniatc, the
hereafter, and the actions of men.

We have briefly mentioned the beliefs of the ImamTs. But they have been
explained in detail in the books of theology and beliefs.

Today, the Imârnis constitute the great majority of the ShT’a all over
the Islamic countries. Since the first day of the beginning of writing,
their books about all sciences have been spread among nations. The
urban, the Bedouin, the ignorant, and the scholar read their books.

At the present time, their is no obvious well known sect except that
were during the time of al- Sadiq, peace on him, so we have neglected
those sects that took place after him, peace on him, such as the
Fatahiya, the Nâwflsiya, and the WAqifiya.

4. The Kharijites:
------------------

This sect appeared on the day of (the Battle of) Sifffn due to the trick
of b. a1- ‘As when he advised Mu’Awiya, who was feeble, to continue
fighting to raise copies of the Koran and to summon (Imam ‘Au’s Army) to
resort to them. When they (Ma’âwiyya’s Army) raised the copies of the
Koran, a group of the companions of the Commander of the Faithful (Amir
al-Mu’minin), peace be on him, mutinied against him saying that they
(Mu’awiya’s Army) were summoning them to the Book of Allah while he was
summoning them to the sword. So, he blamed them for that , tried to hold
them BACK from being deceived by that trick, and said to them:” Woe unto
you! I am the most knowledgeable in the Book of Allah.” But his blame,
his deterrence, and his evidence were all useless. Moreover; they said
to him:” Prevent Malik from fighting the Muslims; otherwise we will do
against you as we had done against ‘Uthmân.” So, he was forced to order
Malik to come BACK while he was about to defeat Mu’âwiya’s Army and the
latter was about to escape. Then they (the Kharijites) forced him (Imam
‘Au) to accept the arbitration. Thus, he wanted to send Abd Allah b.
Abbâs, but they ordered him to send Abtl Masa al- Ash’ary. When the
arbitration took place, the Khrijities said:” Why did you appoint the
men as arbitrators in the religion of Allah? There is no rule but for
Allah.” From here, they were called al- Muhakjma. The Commander of the
faithful came BACK from (the Battle of) Siffin while they were insisting
on their deviation and disobedience Then they gathered at Harawra’ near
Kufa, so they were called the Harawriyya

The Commander of the Faithful (AmTr al- Mu’minTn) opposed with argument
all their claims, but they caused mischief in the land, killed Khabâb-
one of the good Companions- and cut open the bellies of the pregnant
women. So, the Commander of the Faithful was forced to kill those who.
insisted on their deviation at (the Battle of) Nahrwan. But that battle
was not able to destroy their opinions, rather there were still people
who adopted their ideas and deviation. Such people annoyed the kings and

the governors during those times. Whenever a group of them perished
another group appeared. People were in a state of terror because they
suffered from their quick assassination, ugly actions, cruelty, and
violation of the forbidden. They waged war against the kings and the
governors out of belief and tranquillity. They fought bravely, SO men
were not able to stand before them even if they were more than they
because the men had no belief to resist that belief. But if they (the
followers of the Kharijites) felt that they were weak, they attacked
people at night and ran away. For this reason, no place was safe from
their evil actions.

They (the Kharijites) had external devotion and worship, they were still
attracting the rabble with those righteous aspects, the propagation for
disobeying the false supreme ruler, and the propagation for acting
according to the Book and the Sunna, even if they contradicted those
aspects and propagation through using oppression and causing mischief.
But the simple of men might be deceived by that phenomenon of devotion
and righteousness. Also some of the followers of the Divine Books (the
Jews, the Christians, and the Magians), and those who did not believe in
the correctness of the religion of Islam were deceived by those
attractive phenomena, so they added them to their fighters and boasted
of them.

After that the strength of the Kharijites became weak and their evil
acts became calm, and people lived in peace for a period of time, but
their importance appeared again during the days of al- Sâdiq, peace be
on him, when one of their leaders Abd Allah b. Yahyâ al- Kindy called
Tâlib al-Haq rose in Hadramout after he had asked the advice of
AbAdiya.. who were in Basrah. They made the rise incumbent on him. Among
them were Abü Hamza a1- MukIitar b. ‘Auf al- Azdy and Balakh b. ‘Aqaba
al- Mas’udy. Then two thousand men paid him homage. So, with their
support, he appeared.

When his army became big, he wrote letters to the Kharijites in Sana,
then he headed for it. So, battles took place between him and the
governor of Sana. Abd Allah defeated the governor and controlled the
treasuries of properties. Then he dominated Yemen. When the time of hajj
(pilgrimage) came, he formed an army of a thousand fighters under the
leadership of Abn Ilamza. Among them were Balakh and Abraha b. al-
Sabbagh. He ordered him to stay at Mecca when people came BACK from it
and send Balakh to Shim (Syria). So, they entered Mecca on the 8th day
of Dhu- Al.. Hijja. At that time ‘Abd al- Wâhid b. Sulayman b. Abd a1-
Malik was the governor of Marwan al- Himar over Mecca and Medina. So,
Abd al- Wâhid hated to fight them so as not to make people afraid of
them. For this reason he wrote them some letters. He asked them not to
prevent people from Performing their hajj. Besides he assured them that
they would be safe till people finished the third day of immolation.
When that day was over, Abd al- Wahjd left Mecca and allowed abu Hamza
to enter it without fighting.

Entering Medina, Abd al- Wâhid prepared an army to fight Abü Hamza. The
two armies met at Qadid. abu Hamza defeated Abd at- Wahid. He killed
2230 men from the people of Medina. Then Balakh entered Medina without
fighting. Abd at- Wahid left for Sham. So, Marwân formed an army of four
thousand men, who were the horsemen and the great figures of his camp.
He provided them with whatever they needed. The army was under the
leadership of Abd at- Malik b. ‘Atiya at- Sâ’idy.

When the Khârij ites heard about the movement of the Army of Sham, they
quickly constituted an army of six hundred fighters headed by Balakh b.
‘Aqaba at- Mas’Udy. The two armies met at Wady al- Qurâ on some days of
Jamadi at- ‘Lila in the year 130 (A.H.). The Army of Sham defeated the
Army of the Kharijites All were killed except thirty people. They
escaped to Medina. Al- Mufaddal at- Azdy was the governor of Medina. So,
‘Amr b. Abd at- Rahmân b. Zayd b. at- Khattab summoned people to fight
the Kharijites in Medina but no one answered him. Any how, the Berbers,
the ngroes, and common people supported him to fight the Kharijites. So,
he killed al- Mufaddal and most of his companions and the rest ran away.
Then b. ‘Atiya came to Medina and stayed there for a month. Then he went
to Mecca. There a fierce battle took place between him and Abii Hamza.
Many of the Kharijites were killed. Four hundred of them were captured
and killed. And b. ‘Atiya hanged AbU Hamza, Ibrahima and ‘Ali b.
at-Husayn on the Mountains of at- KhTf. When the Abbasids took the reins
of authority, they were brought down during the days of al- Saffah. Then
b. ‘Atiya went to Tâ’if. When Abd Allah b. Yahya Thlib at- Haq, who was
in Sana, heard about the killing of AbU Hamza and his group, he headed
for b. ‘Atiya to wage war against him. So, b. ‘Atiya advanced towards
him. When they met, a large group of the two parties was killed. Abd
Allah and a thousand fighters dismounted.

They fought until they were all killed. Abd Allah was killed, too. Bin
‘Atiya sent his head to Marwân. After he had defeated the Kharijites, b.
‘Atiya stayed at Hadramout. A letter from Marwân came to him to go
quickly to Mecca to lead people during the hajj. B. ‘Atiya with nineteen
horsemen went there quickly. But Marwân regretted and said:” I have
killed b. ‘Atiya. He will leave Yemen quickly to reach Mecca at the time
of Hajj. So, the Kharijites will kill him.” It was as he said. A
disguised group of the and others met him by chance. The Kharijites knew
him and they attacked and killed him.[1]

After that, the Kharij ites were nothing but belief and idea. They had
no strength to wage war against the kings. Till today, some of them have
insisted on that deviation. And some of them are in Uman. But they have
neither importance nor strength.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  See Sharh Al- Nahj:1/455-463. In this book, you will find the details
of what we have briefly mentioned.

The Kharijites are deviated people. About them, the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, told the Commander of the Faithful that he
would wage war against them and defeat them.

The Kharijites were many sects. They agreed on the belief that ‘All,
‘Uthman, the two arbitrators, the Companions of the Camel, and all those
who were satisfied with the arbitration of the two arbitrators were alt
unbelievers. They accused those who commit sins of unbelief. They made
it obligatory to disobey the oppressive Imam, as it has been mentioned
from at- Ka’bT in the (book) At- Farq bayna At- Firaq, p.55.

But it has been reported on the authority of Abü at- Hasan at- Ash’ary
that they denied their agreement on accusing those who commit sins of
unbelief.

About that, many details have been mentioned on their authority. Many
sectS af the Kharijites have become bygone. Moreover, those who are in
Uman today belong to the Abâdiyya according to their beliefs.

The Extremists and Those who have disagreed with Islam on some Beliefs:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

In the beginning of this chapter, we have mentioned that the origins of
the Islamic sects were four groupings.

From them, alt sects branched. The sects of the extremists belonged to
the branches of those origins. So, every origin had extreme branches.

Such a matter is applied to those who adopt certain beliefs, for
example, transmigration of souls, incarnation, and assimilation- which
are regarded as unbelief by Muslim sects. But it is not easy to attack
them with unbelief because of the belief which is ascribed to them.
Whoever has little knowledge of religion should not accuse those who
confess the Shahâdatayn (the two testimonies by a Muslim- Ashhadu an la
Itâha iltattâh and Ash- haddü anna Mohammedar Rasulutlâh) of unbelief.
So, he should depend on a strong idea. As long as we are in no need of
that, we will not discuss this matter and throw ourselves down a
tremendous height, then look for a safe escape, especially those sects
which are accused of disagreement with Islam because of their false
beliefs have become bygone. Nothing has remained of them except small
ones of no importance among the children of Islam, and no one is afraid
of their corrupt beliefs. In the meantime, they have kept their beliefs
secret because they know that the children of religion have the ability
to overcome such beliefs with arguments and proofs and charge them with
disbelief and deviation from Islam.

The carefulness of spreading these corrupt beliefs to the ignorant is
more important than that of the past people who resisted those heresies
and misguidance with every means. But, today, we are safe from the
misleading

ideas of their present sects. Just imagine how much less heresies of
those dead sects are!

The Suspicions of Atheists:
---------------------------

Today, it is very important to take care of spreading suspicions of
atheists whose selves try to get ride of the commandments of religion.
While they have forgotten that these commandments put man in the classes
of angels and the spiritual, takes him out of awful savageness and
lethal desires, protects him from those who show enmity towards his most
valuable aims in this life: his life, his reputation, and his property.
Also these Islamic commandments guard the above- mentioned valuable aims
against any aggression. This is the freedom which they look for. With
this freedom they have drawn away from the people of intellect and
chastity and followed the people of cruelty, dissoluteness, and
prostitution. This freedom has deceived some young men and made them
fall into these snares, because young men quickly follow their desires
and break the claimed shackles without resorting to their mind and using
their intellect before they are deceived.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*
