Them Imamate
============

Muslims have unanimously agreed on the necessity of the Imamate. But
they have different beliefs about it, because the Imam leads the Muslim
community, guards it against misguidance, enforces the Islamic law, and
spreads the teachings of Islam.

A part of the policy of the Owner of the religious law and the marvelous
things of his rule is that he ordered (Muslims) to know the Imam, so he
said:” Whoever dies and does not know the Imam of his time dies for
jâhiliya (pre Islamic paganism age).”[1] Namely, he dies as if he did
not adopt Islam.

If the Muslims act according to this religious duty and carry out what
this obligation ordains, to know the Imam and listen to his words after
they have known him, they will be one army and their leader is the Imam.
Then no Muslim ignores the commandments of the religion or he knows them
but he does not act according to them. Moreover, the flags of Islam will
wage all over the world.

The caliphate and Imamate was a race course, no one takes its reins but
the person who wins the race even if with blood shed and violating the
forbidden, rather even if the caliph himse!f, after taking the reins of
authority, is impudent and dissolute paying no attention to what he
does.

But the Imâmi Shia, since the first era, have not attached importance to
such an Imamate and not acknowledged such an Imamate. Rather they think
that the caliph or the Imam should have all the qualities of perfection,
free from all the traits of defect, carrying out the commandments of the
Islamic Law secretly and openly, refraining from the outside and the
inside forbidden things, and prevent people from doing them. He should
be appointed according to the textual nomination by the Owner of the
Islamic Law or by the Imam before him, to carry out the order of Allah,
the Glorified because He, the Exalted, is more than his servants in
choosing the most righteous person for this sensitive position.

The ‘main is not he who leads people, rather the main is the person whom
the evidences support, even if people do not follow him or prevent him
from carrying out the obligations of his Imamate and the duties of his
leadership.

The resistance and apposition of people against the main does not
decrease his ability to assume the obligations of the Imainate, rather
they miss their chance and lose a way of guidance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1  In this manner the tradition has been mentioned in the origin of the
book. We have not found it in the available books. What we have found is
this text:” Whoever dies without an Imaxn dies the death ofjlhiliya.”
Kanz Al- ‘UmIl: 1/103.

So, the main, according to the Imâmi viewpoint, is the person who is
responsible for the obligations of the Imainate whether he rises or not,
pronounces it or keeps silence, and advances for the race or falls
behind, because his Imaniate is not achieved through the borrowed
clothing. Namely he become an Imam when he takes this clothing from the
others and is out of the Imaniate when the others take this clothing
from him.

The Imam is the serious evidence, so he should inform people about his
Imainate and provide evidences for it when there is a necessary need.
Also people should know him and obey him when they know him.

As for providing evidences for the Imamate of the main, he should
declare or hint it.

Enough for evidences that he should state his outstanding merits and
miracles and show the knowledge which people are not able to show,
except, when the swords prevent him from showing that; yet his acts and
habits denote his position even if his tongue is silent.

The Imamate has been one of the researches which raise argument and
dispute among Muslims since the first day of the Owner of the mission
(the Prophet).

The argument and the disputes have taken place through the pen, the
tongue, the sword, and the spearhead.

Today, the foundations of the Imamate is built on the ruins of the .
Also today and tomorrow it is the difference among the sects as it was
yesterday, though the Muslim have agreed on the Prophet, the Book, and
the qibla (the Ka’bah). Today and yesterday, among the sects are the
owners of preferable intellect and correct ideas, who have the ability
to unify these sects under one banner, tell them about the reasons which
have led the Imamate to BACKwardness and disunity, inform them about the
advantages of unity, warn them against the evil of disunity, and make
them feel the disasters, the destruction, and the discord from which
Islam has suffered because of that dispute and argument. As the Imamate
is the crossways, so this disunity should gather at it.

If people knew today the reality of the Imamate and who the main is,
they, even if some of them, would move quickly to form a unity to
include all the sects at this critical hour when anarchy and discord
prevailes.

I (the anuthor) will try to point to some qualities the Imam should
have, even if my word is in vain, to attract the attention of the
heedless person and move the mindful one. This does not irritate me as
long as the intention is right and the purpose is valuable, and it is to
seek the pleasure of Allah, the Glorified.

I (the author) say: Indeed, the regime which the Last of the prophets
has brought brings two maimers together; the manner of the person with
the Creator and his manner with the created, and whoever brings such a
regime should be able to enforce and carry it out to spread his law all
over the

world. So, when the Prophet enforced and carried out his law, he had two
temporal and spiritual powers. When he passed away, the community led
eventually to the necessity which summoned him to conclude the Imamate
during his lifetime.

The community thought that it was obligatory to carry out the functions
of the owner of the mission, and no one would assume them but an main
who had a general leadership over all the Muslim nation, and he had to
have the two powers which the truthful Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, had; otherwise the regime which ensured the two happy places
(in this world and the hereafter) would be without execution. In the
meantime all those efforts from which the Owner of the mission suffered
would be useless.

As the Imamate is incumbent on the Muslim community on the account of
necessity, then who is the worthiest of this great function? I wonder:
Is the worthiest one who was like the Owner of the mission in knowledge
and act, guided in himself and guides others, provided evidence for his
ideas and no weakness comes upon his evidence? If people asked him for a
miracle, acts in words and he would bring it easily and without
hesitation, convinced easily the stubborn; knew all that which the Owner
of the mission brought and acted upon it, knew the revelation and
interpretation of the Koran, full of good qualities, rather the best of
all men in every quality, had no bad quality, generally speaking the
model of the Prophet in all his outstanding merits?

Or is the worthiest of it he who does not know the above- mentioned
qualities and they do not know him or has some of them and empty of the
others? Without doubt, you will say: the first person is worthier of the
Imamate than the second person is.

But I (the author) think that you will say: Indeed, all the importance
is to prove two matters in this respect: the first matter it is
obligatory to appoint an Iinam aécording to the above- mentioned
qualities. The second matter is that he is in the Muslim community and
he has all these qualities. If it is proved that the main should have
these qualities and he is in the Muslim Community, then to refuse his
Imainate and orders is stubbornness which the possessor of religion and
intellect does not accept.

I will prove these two matters for you hoping that you will hear and
understand.

As for the first evidence, it maybe summarized as follows: Surely, the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was aware of what he
declared. He was not ignorant of what he was asked. His law is one.
There is no disunity in it. It is immortal till the Day of Judgment. The
law of Mohammed is lawful till the Day of Resurrection and what he
declared unlawful is unlawful till the Day of Resurrection. If he had
given a free hand to the Muslim community to choose the Imain to carry
out his

obligations, we would have found the Muslim community ignorant about the
commandments of the law, and not distinguish between the lawful and the
unlawful, because the Muslim community had no sound judgment about the
science of law to refer to it, nor did it have a just ruler who had the
ability to enforce the punishments to obey him. For this reason, the
Muslims divided into schools and sects. Each sect provided evidence for
their ideas and beliefs. Then the people chose one among themselves as a
caliph and main for themselves. They chose the caliphs who did not know
all what the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, brought, and
had no knowledge of what they were asked about. As those caliphs became,
after they had been elected, the just ruler, and as people did not find
their purpose concerning the government and the commandments, every sect
began showing its beliefs and ideas. But no sect had assorted arguments
and clear evidence to refute the suspicions of those schools and the
doubts of those ideas. The sects opposed each other. Each sect
attributed their beliefs to the Islamic Law and religion though the
lawful and the unlawful are unchangeable till the last hour of this
existence and the islamic law is one and immortal throughout history.
Nevertheless, after the Prophet of Islam, legislators, laws, beliefs,
and schools have entered Islam.

This change and deviation was created by men because they had elected
those who had little knowledge of the Islamic Law to be the scholar and
ruler. At the same time they refuted sometimes the proofs of men with
evidence and sometimes with the sword to force people to obey him and
his beliefs. So it is incumbent upon the Muslim community to choose the
main who is knowledgeable of what has come in the Prophetic Law, follows
the acts of the Prophet, has knowledge of what he is asked, and has the
evidence to remove doubts, falsehood, ignorance and misguidance so that
the Islamic Law will last forever according to the orders of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and the lawful and the
unlawful of the Prophet are unchangeable throughout life, otherwise,
there will be no laws, no legislators, no schools, and no beliefs.

But how can the Muslim community choose such a ruler? From where can it
know him?

If they knew him, how would they agree on him because people have
different trends and purposes?

So, it is incumbent on Allah, the Exalted, to appoint an main for the
Muslim community and nominate that just successor and model scholar
through the Prophet because Allah, the Glorified, knows the advantage of
his servants and knows the person who is worthy of this sensitive
function and great position.

Therefore, if the nomination of the main is incumbent on Allah, the
Exalted, then it is impossible, according to the wise men, for Him, the
Glorified, to neglect the incumbent that sets right his servants and
guides

his creation. It is also impossible for the Prophet to neglect Allah’s
nomination concerning this main. Then if it was possible for the Prophet
to neglect such as an incumbent, it was possible for him to neglect
other than that incumbent.

Consequently, as the Prophet is an incumbent, the Imam is an incumbent,
too. As Allah sends a prophet, He appoints an main. So, there is no
Prophet without an Imam and no law without explanation and execution.

As for the evidence for the second; which is the existence of this Imam,
it is easy to prove it after what we have mentioned above, because if we
believe that the appointment of the ‘maui according to the outstanding
merits is obligatory, and that Allah, the Exalted, appoints him for His
creation, we will believe that Allah does not make the name and ancestry
of the main unknown, and that it difficult for the Muslim nation to know
him. We know that there is no Imam in the Muslim Community for whom that
incumbent is attributed and who claimed such an incumbent is attributed
but ‘Au and his sons, peace be on them. If they themselves were not the
Imarns, the Imamate and that incumbent would be nonsense.

Therefore, we have to know that they were scholars who had no ignorance,
the just persons who did not wrong people. As for justice, no one of
them had the opportunity to apply it but the Commander of the Faithful
.(ArnTr al- Mu’minln), and his-matter is in no need of explanation. And
as for their knowledge, their sayings and traditions denote it. So,
study their knowledge and you will find that what has been reported
about them is true. And this book, which is between your hands, is an
extract of that abundant a ‘wledge.’[1]

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you want to know much more about the Imainate, then see our printed
study ‘Al-ShT’a wa Al- Imania.’
