The Black Reign
===============

After the perdition of Mu’awiyah, the Islamic Ummah was pervaded by a
violent, terrorist reign, which did not submit to a tradition or law or
respond to any human emotion. Finally, it betook oppression and
despotism as its slogan.

This is the very depiction of Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah’s reign, which
persecuted Muslims so harshly.

During this reign, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) suffered the most difficult
misfortunes and adversities, and the Prophet’s family had to encounter
extreme eradication. They were slain, and the Umayyad soldiers cut their
limbs and violated their dead bodies so inhumanely. Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
saw these excruciating views with her own eyes; therefore, sadness and
sorrows cut through her heart and she could not stop against her tears
and cries of mourning. That was not all; she, altogether with the
Prophet’s harem, then was taken as captive and shown around the
provinces of the Umayyad State. They once were taken to Ubaydullah ibn
Ziyad, son of the ill-famed Marjanah, and then to Yazid, grandson of the
ill-famed Hind.[^165]

In any case, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) suffered the cruelest adversities during
the black reign of Yazid, the sinful tyrant who was an inexperienced,
lecherous young and had known nothing about leadership, policy, or
management. He could not even manage or control himself; he submitted
completely to his whims and his one and only lust was bloodshed.

When his cursed father died in Damascus, Yazid was on a journey.[^166]
He received a message informing about his father’s perdition and his
becoming the caliph of the Islamic Ummah. He thus hurried to the capital
accompanied by his immoral faction. From that moment, people began to
criticize him for irresponsible behaviors.[^167]

The first thing he did in Damascus was that he declared his
determination to wage a destructive war against people of Iraq. People
of Syria, however, welcomed this determination and declared their
readiness to plunge themselves into such a war.[^168]

Yazid’s most malicious opposition was in Medina; they were Imam
al-Husain (a.s.) and Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr. He therefore issued the
emphatic decision that al-Walid, the governor of Medina, must coerce
these two persons to pledge themselves as submissive to the leadership
of Yazid, but if they, or any other individual, refuse to pay homage to
the new caliph, the governor must behead them.[^169]

When he received these resounding instructions al-Walid panicked because
it was not easy to behead such personalities.[^170] Even Mu’awiyah who
enjoyed terrible diplomatic capabilities could not dare assassinate Imam
al-Husain (a.s.). How is it then possible for an ordinary governor like
al-Wafid to do it?

Al-Walid then sought the opinion of Marwan ibn al-Hakam, the chief of
the Umayyad family, who suggested that those two personalities would be
compulsorily summoned at that very moment and asked to show compliance
with the new leadership of Yazid otherwise they would be beheaded.[^171]

This opinion did not appeal to al-Walid, but he had to respond to
Marwan.[^172]

Refusal of Yazid’s Leadership
-----------------------------

It was midnight when al-Walid ordered Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Usmaan to
summon Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr. The Messenger
found them both in the Prophet’s Masjid and asked them to attend at the
governor. They answered affirmatively. Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr turned his
face to Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and wondered, “What do you think the
matter for which he summoned us in such time”[^173]

The Imam (a.s.) answered,*“I think that their tyrant ruler i.e.
Mu’awiyah died and they summoned us to pay homage to the new one before
the spread of the news.”* [^174]

The Imam (a.s.) then gathered his companions and directed towards the
governor’s center. He first asked why he was summoned in such time. He
was answered that he should pay homage to the leadership of Yazid.

Asking for postponement, the Imam (a.s.) said,*“I do not pay homage
secretly. When you ask all people to pay homage, you then may ask me so
that people and I will share the same situation.”*

This means that the Imam (a.s.) intended to declare his refusal of
swearing allegiance to the leadership of Yazid openly, but Marwan
understood it. He therefore shouted at al-Walid, “If he leaves you at
this instant without paying homage, you will never be able to oblige him
to pay it at any other time unless many victims from both sides will
numerously fall. Detain him now. He must pay homage or be beheaded.”

The Imam (a.s.) turned to Marwan and shouted in his face,*“Son of
al-Zarqa, is it you or he who will kill me? By Allah (s.w.t.) I swear
you have meanly lied.”* [^175]

The Imam (a.s.) then turned to al-Walid to declare his determination to
reject the matter completely:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيُّهَا الْأَمِيْرُ إِنَّا أَهْلُ بَيْتِ النُّبُوَّةِ وَ مَعْدِنُ
الرِّسَالَةِ وَ مُخْتَلَفُ الْمَلَائِكَةِ وَ مَحِلُّ الرَّحْمَةِ. بِنَا
فَتَحَ اللَّهُ وَ بِنَا خَتَمَ. وَ يَزِيدُ رَجُلٌ فَاسِقٌ شَارِبُ
الْخَمْرِ قَاتِلُ النَّفْسِ الْمُحَرَّمَةِ مُعْلِنٌ بِالْفِسْقِ وَ
مِثْلِي لَا يُبَايِعُ مِثْلَهٗ . وَ لٰكِنْ نُصْبِحُ وَ تُصْبِحُوْنَ وَ
نَنْظُرُ وَ تَنْظُرُوْنَ أَيُّنَا أَحَقُّ بِا لْخِلَافَةِوَ الْبَيْعَةِ.
</p>

*“O Governor, we are the Household of prophesy, the core of the (divine)
message, frequently visited by the Angels, and (we are) the center of
mercy. Allah (s.w.t.) has commenced with us and shall seal with us.
Yazid is a lecherous, intoxicating man who kills the respectful soul and
promulgates his acts of immorality. My like should never pay homage to
him or his likes. Wait for us until next morning and you will see who is
the worthiest of leadership (of the Islamic Ummah) and being paid
homage.”[^176]*

That was the first declaration of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) refusal of
Yazid’s illegal leadership.

Marwan blamed al-Walid for not adopting his suggestion. Al-Walid,
however, reproached Marwan and declared that he would never kill Imam
al-Husain (a.s.), because his killer would certainly be the fuel of
Hell.[^177]

The next morning, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) decided to leave Medina for
Mecca. Before so, he visited the tomb of his grandfather, Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), and complained to Almighty Allah (s.w.t.) against
the adversities that surrounded him, saying:

*O Allah!This is the tomb of Your prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him
and his family, and I am the son of Your Prophet Muhammad’s daughter. I
have been inflicted with the matter that You know. O Allah! I do like
all that which is good and I forbid all that which is evil. Hence, I now
beseech to You, O Lord of Majesty and Honor, to choose for me that which
draws Your pleasure and the pleasure of Your Prophet.[^178]*

In the darkest hour of night, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) directed towards the
hidden tomb of his mother, Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.), and then turned to
the tomb of his brother, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), where he revived the
happy moments he spent with them.

In Mecca
--------

When Imam al-Husain (a.s.) decided to leave for Mecca, he summoned his
sister, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), informed her about what he had decided to
do, and asked her to take part in his ordeal. In view of her deep-rooted
faith, she did not hesitate to respond to her brother’s call. Moreover,
she determined to participate and wind up his revolution. Like Lady
Zaynab (a.s.),Imamal-Husain (a.s.)’swives,sons,brothers,and cousins
agreed to join his revolution against the oppressors.

The next mornings, everybody was ready to begin the journey. Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) was so upset though her brother, al-Abbas (a.s.), was beside her;
taking care of her and regarding her attentively. People of Medina, too,
were so dismayed because they watched the Prophet’s family leaving them,
perhaps, forever. Throughout the journey, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) was
reciting repeatedly Almighty Allah’s saying:

*“My Lord, Deliver me from the unjust people.”*

By reciting this Holy Verse, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) likened his journey
to that of Prophet Moses (a.s.) who revolted against the tyrant of his
time.[^179]

He took the public way to Mecca declaring his challenge to the ruling
authorities and making little of death, which, inevitably, shall inflict
man in any land and at any moment.[^180] He had full confidence in
Almighty Allah Who dominates everything thoroughly completely.

This journey was the second for Lady Zaynab (a.s.); the first was with
her father when he left Medina to settle in Kufa that he betook as the
capital of his state. On that journey, she was in a great caravan that
contained her father, her brothers, her husband, and her honorable
cousins. The back journey after Imam al-Hasan(a.s.)’s truce with
Mu’awiyah was also great and surrounded by honor and dignity. Yet, the
third journey would be so sorrowful and dreary, since it was the enemies
who led the caravan.

On Tuesday night,[^181] Imam al-Husain (a.s.) arrived in Mecca and
resided in the house of Al-Abbas ibn Abd-al-Muttalib.[^182] People of
Mecca visited him so frequently and used to ask him questions about the
Islamic laws and others about his opinion of the ruling regime. When the
season of the Hajj occurred, Hajjis and Mo’tamirs[^183] surrounded the
Imam (a.s.) and listened to his opinions and instructions. From that
moment, he began to promulgate his revolution, and the public began to
understand the aim of his being in Mecca.

Owing to such activities, the ruling authorities there Mecca panicked
and anticipated that he would betake Mecca as the center of his
revolution against the oppressive regime of Yazid. The governor of Mecca
came to the Imam (a.s.) and asked the reason beyond his residence there.
The Imam answered that he had come for seeking the refuge of Almighty
Allah and the Holy House.[^184] As a result, the governor sent a missive
to Yazid informing him about Imam al-Husain’s arrival and the publics’
surrounding him, attending his sessions, and listening to him.

These news confused Yazid who, immediately, sent a missive to Abdullah
ibn Abbas asking him that he would pardon the Imam (a.s.) provided that
he would pay homage to him -Yazid- lest he would punish. Answering
Yazid’s missive, Abdullah ibn Abbas told that the Imam (a.s.) left
Medina because the ruling authorities there bothered him. He also
promised that he would meet the Imam (a.s.) and see the matter.

In Iraq, there was a general rebel and refusal of paying homage to
Yazid, because they regarded him as the inheritor of those mortal
enemies of Islam.[^185] The Shiite chiefs in Kufa held a meeting in the
house of Sulayman ibn Saad al-Khuza’i during which they delivered
speeches showing the sins of the Umayyad individuals and calling to
swear allegiance to Imam al-Husain (a.s.) as the true leader of the
Islamic Ummah.[^186] All the attendants shouted that they would
certainly support and defend the Imam and would send him messages asking
him to lead their revolution against the Umayyad rulers.

So, many delegations met him and thousands of messages were sent to him
by ordinary people and chiefs, such as Shibth ibn Rabi’, Hajjar ibn
Abjur al Ujali, and Amr ibn al-Hajjaj.[^187] As a result, Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) decided to respond to them and send his cousin, Muslim ibn Aqil,
to see the real situation.[^188]

Muslim Ibn Aqil In Al-Kufah
---------------------------

Muslim left for Kufa and resided there in the house of al-Mukhtar
al-Saqafi, one of the most celebrated faithful personalities[^189] who
called everybody to visit Muslim; therefore, everybody came to listen to
the message of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) that Muslim carried. At least,
forty thousand individuals from Kufa acknowledged Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
as their leader whom they must defend and support.[^190]

Because of this huge number of supporters, Muslim’s confidence and trust
in the expected success of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) revolution increased.
He therefore sent a message to the Imam (a.s.) asking him to hurry his
coming to Kufa,[^191] and, as a result, the Imam (a.s.) prepared to
leave.

Yazid’s agents in Kufa reported this news to him, and he, out of fear,
sought the advice of Sirjawn, the Roman, who was his father’s best
secretary. This cunning man had thought for quite a while before he
suggested to Yazid to assign Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad as the new governor of
Kufa.[^192] Although Yazid was angry with Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, he had
to appoint him as the new governor of Kufa besides Basra.[^193] Thus,
ibn Ziyad became the ruler of the entire Iraq. In addition, Yazid sent
him a message asking him to capture, exile, or even kill Muslim ibn
Aqil,[^194] and then followed it with another asking him to even fly to
Kufa if he would be able.[^195]

Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad in Kufa
----------------------------

Throughout his way from Basra to Kufa,Ubaydullah, accompanied by five
hundred men did not stop for fear that Imam al-Husain (a.s.) would
precede him. He disguised himself with black clothes so that people
would take him for the Imam. He entered the city and hurried towards the
Qasr al-Imarah Governorate Mansion in fear and resentment because people
welcomed him warmly as they really took him for Imam al-Husain
(a.s.).[^196]

As he reached there and knocked the door, the governor of Kufa,
al-No’man ibn Bashir, who also thought of him as the Imam (a.s.) shouted
from the balcony,*“Son of Allah’s Messenger, I will not fulfill my
pledge to you and I do not want to fight you...”* [^197]

“Open the door,” shouted Ubaydullah, “You will suffer long
nighttime!”[^198]

Some of the crowded people who walked behind him knew his reality; they
therefore shouted, “This is indeed son of Marjanah.”

Thus, they ran away with their hearts filled in with terror. Ubaydullah
went towards the mansion and seized the weapons and fortune. He was
gathered around by the agents of the Umayyad dynasty, such as Umar ibn
Sa’d, Shimr ibn Dhi’l-Jawshan, Muhammad ibn al-Ash’as, and other famous
names among the hypocrites of Kufa. They began discussing the matters of
the expected revolution and its chiefs, and went on plotting for
eradicating it.[^199]

Next morning, Ubaydullah gathered the people in the Grand Masjid of Kufa
to declare his being the new governor. He promised the obedient with big
prizes and threatened the disobedient with persecution and themutineers
with harsh punishment.[^200] He then showed items of horror by putting
to death some individuals before he had interrogated them.[^201] He also
filled the prisons with innocent people. All these means were purposed
for controlling the country completely.

Once he knew about Ubaydullah’s arrival, Muslim changed his residential
place. He moved to the house of Hani’ ibn Urwah, one of the most
celebrated personalities of Kufa, who welcomed him hospitably and
received his partisans to plan for the revolution.

The success that Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad achieved in the political fields
is ascribed to the series of plans that he made. The introductory step
was spying on the movements of Muslim to circulate his activities and
realize his points of power and weakness. Ubaydullah chose his servant,
Mi’qal, for this mission. He gave him some money and ordered him to
contact with the significant members of the revolution by claiming that
he shows loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and that he had come to Kufa
because he heard the call of Imam al-Husain (a.s.).

Mi’qal could first reach Muslim ibn Awsajah and shows him false loyalty
and, unfortunately, the latter was deceived; he therefore showed Mi’qal
the residential place of Muslim ibn Aqil. Thus, Mi’qal frequented about
the place and could comprehend everything about the expected revolt and
report to his master, son of Marjanah.[^202]

The second and most dangerous process was arresting Hani ibn Urwah who
was chief of the tribes of Midhhaj, the great majority of the
inhabitants of Kufa. This procedure spread a big wave of horror among
people and sent a destructive strike to the expected revolution.

Before Ubaydullah, Hani denied the accusation; hence, they summoned
Mi’qal, the spy, to testify of the truth. However, Hani refused to give
up his guest to the authorities.[^203] But the tyrant ordered his
servants to draw Hani near him and went on beating him on the face with
a bar he had in the hand. He then ordered to detain him in one of the
rooms of the mansion.

This procedure shook the feelings of his kinsmen who, under the
leadership of the traitor Amr ibn al-Hajjaj, pushed themselves towards
the mansion. Amr shouted, so as to make Ubaydullah hear him “I am Amr
and these are the celebrities and chiefs of Midhhaj. Yet, we are not
denouncing our loyalty to you nor are we mutinying against you.”
Furthermore, Amr said words of surrender and humility for which
Ubaydullah did not care. He then asked Shurayh, the judge, to see Hani
and then tell his tribe about his state. The judge entered the cell of
Hani who shouted: “How strange this is! Have my people all died? If only
ten persons from my tribe come to me they will certainly save me.

When Shurayh left him, he said to his kinsmen, “I have seen your chief.
He is alive. He has ordered you to go home.” Amr shouted, “Well, he has
not been killed, Thanks to Allah (s.w.t.)!”

As if they have been granted the one and only opportunity to escape a
lightless jail, people of Midhhaj turned their faces back and ran away.
It seems that there had been a secret agreement between the chiefs of
Midhhaj and Ubaydullah on killing Hani, otherwise they would have
attacked the mansion and saved their chief.

Muslim ibn Aqil knew about the situation of Hani who was an important
member of the expected revolution; therefore, he declared openly the
revolution against Ubaydullah. Thus, about four or forty thousand
warriors joined him.[^204] Ubaydullah was delivering a speech when he
heard the noise of the revolters whose numbers were increasing and were
directing towards the Governorate Mansion. Like a dirty dog, Ubaydullah
hurried towards the mansion.[^205] He had only thirty policemen; he
therefore used the meanest means that would save him war of nerves.
Because he knew people of Kufa very well, he ordered their traitorous
chiefs to slip among the troops of Muslim and spread the rumors that the
armies of Syria would soon punish those who joined Muslim’s army, the
government would deprive them of their salaries, and that martial laws
would be applied to them. These rumors acted as bombs on the heads of
the people most of who declared, “We should not engage ourselves in
questions of policy!”[^206]

Before long, most of them left Muslim who led the rest to the Masjid for
prayer. Even during the prayer, the others left, and Muslim, as he
finished the prayer, found him alone![^207] That night, he could not
find a house to settle in. He therefore had to wander alone in the
streets of Kufa, Only a noble lady called Taw’ah had the courage to let
Muslim in. As she served him food, Muslim refused to eat or drink
because he was thinking of the fate that Imam al-Husain (a.s.) would
face after the betrayal of those people. Son of Taw’ah knew the whole
story and with the first sparks of that morning, he hurried to inform
the ruling authorities about the matter, even though he had given his
mother binding oaths that he would not tell anybody.

Three hundred horsemen, led by Muhammad ibn al-Ash’as, attacked the
house of Taw’ah, but Muslim faced them with such an unprecedented
courage that he inherited from his fathers.[^208] He alone could defeat
those horsemen and kill a great number of them. The mean ones however
began to throw stones and fireballs on him, but he too overcame.[^209]

When Muhammad ibn al-Ash’as returned to Ubaydullah and asked for more
troops and weapons, the latter said with astonishment, “I have sent you
to capture one man! But he did this to your troops!” He answered, “Do
you think you have sent me to bring an ordinary man from Kufa or the
neighboring? You have sent me to capture a courageous lion and a hero
from the family of the best men in whose hands cutting swords are held
fast.”[^210]

Ubaydullah supplied him with more troops and weapons, but Muslim, the
hero, kept on fighting against them so bravely. This facing took a long
time during which Muslim suffered thirst and the troops of the ruling
authorities were increasing around him, though they were too terrified
to attack him. Finally, they stabbed him with their lances until they
could capture him. After they had let him down, people of Kufa crowded
to see how he was taken to the Mansion.

Muslim courageously refused submitting to the tyrant who, as a result,
ordered Bukayr ibn Hamran to take him to the surface of the mansion and
behead him. He also ordered Hani to be killed before the individuals of
his tribe.

The dead bodies of Muslim and Hani were trailed on the ground in the
streets as a sign of terrorism and scorning their adherents.[^211]

Leaving For Iraq
----------------

Before she left for Iraq in the company of her brother, Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) had asked permission of her husband. And before Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) left for Iraq, Abdullah ibn Abbas, his cousin, had tried to
change his mind, but the Imam (a.s.) refused. Hence, ibn Abbas asked him
not to accompany his harem and family members, but the Imam (a.s.)
answered,*“These are the trusts of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.),
and I cannot trust anyone with them.”*

Then, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) said to ibn Abbas with tearful eyes,*“Son of
Abbas, do you suggest to our leader to leave us here and go alone? No,
by Allah (s.w.t.), we either live with him or die with him. We have
nothing left except him.”* [^212]

Abdullah ibn Abbas could not control himself when he broke into tears
and said, “It is truly difficult for me to leave you, cousin.”

One of the most excellent plans of Imam al-Husain’s revolution was
accompanying his harem and family members with him, especially Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) who had the leading role in the process of the
revolution’s perpetuity. As he anticipated the coming events, he planned
for his sister her honorable role in perfecting his uprising, showing
his sacrifice that the Umayyad tyrants attempted to cover up, and
putting into circulation his principles and aims. As a matter of fact,
the Imam’s harem contributed actively in the renaissance of the Muslim
society and the overthrowing of the Umayyad regime’s false prestige.
Through their enthusiastic speeches, the Imam’s harem commenced the
revolutions against the regime and shook the entity of their illegal
state.

In this regard, Muhammad Husain Kashif al-Ghita says:

“Does anyone doubt the fact that if those ladies -of the Prophet’s
family had not challenged the ruling regime through their situations and
addresses, the blood of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and his sons would have
gone for nothing and none would have demanded with the punishment of
those killers and, accordingly, his revolution would have been useless?
On this account, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) had already planned for this step
and had full knowledge that none would be able to accomplish this
mission so perfectly except those ladies. As a result, he asked them to
accompany him for adding another item to the oppression that they would
encounter (when these ladies would be taken as captives). In addition,
the Imam’s purpose behind accompanying them was deep and political. He
wanted them to accomplish his revolution and overthrow the illegal
regime of the Umayyad rulers before they would eradicate Islam and take
people back to the pre-Islamic customs and traditions.”[^213]

Dr. Ahmad Mahmud Subhi says:

“Al-Husain insisted on accompanying his harem and family members with
him in order that people would testify of the inexcusable and inhumane
crimes that their enemies would do to them. Thanks to this procedure,
the issue for which al-Husain(a.s.) fought and revolted has not been
lost in the desert with his blood. Without the existence of his family
members and harem, all the incidents that occurred with al-Husain(a.s.)
and his enemies would have been completely forged and distorted, and all
true testimonies would have been unavailable.”

Dr. A’ishah Bint al-Shati says:

“Zaynab (a.s.), al-Husain’s sister, caused Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad and the
Umayyad dynasty to lose the elation of victory as she poured drops of
deadly poison in their cups. All the events that took place after that,
such as the rebel of al-Mukhtar and the revolution of Abdullah ibn
al-Zubayr, and resulted in the decline of the Umayyad regime, the
Abbasid dynasty’s coming to power, and the inveteracy of Shiism; all
these events were the result of Zaynab(a.s.)’sformation.”[^214]

To sum it up, without Lady Zaynab (a.s.), the tragic story of Karbala
would have been recorded from the viewpoint of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.)
enemies only, and the pure blood of the Imam (a.s.), his relatives, and
his companions, which was shed wrongly there, would have been lost in
the desert.

At any rate, before he left Mecca, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) called for a
general meeting during which he delivered an address:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ وَ مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ وَ لَا حَوْلَ وَ لَا قُوَّةَ
إِلَّا بِاللَّهِ وَ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلٰى رَسُولِه وَ سَلَّمَ خُطَّ
الْمَوْتُ عَلٰى وُلْدِ آدَمَ مَخَطَّ الْقِلَادَةِ عَلٰى جِيْدِ
الْفَتَاةِ وَ مَا أَوْلَهَنِي إِلٰى أَسْلَافِي اشْتِيَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ
إِلٰى يُوسُفَ وَ خُيِّرَ لِي مَصْرَعٌ أَنَا لَاقِيْهِ كَأَنِّي
بِأَوْصَالِيْ تُقَطِّعُهَا عُسْلَانُ الْفَلَوَاتِ بَيْنَ النَّوَاوِيْسِ
وَ كَرْبَلَاءَ فَيَمْلَأَنَّ مِنِّي أَكْرَاشًا جُوفًا وَ أَجْرِبَةُ
سُغْبًا لَا مَحِيْصَ عَنْ يَوْمٍ خُطَّ بِالْقَلَمِ.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
رِضَا اللَّهِ رِضَانَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ نَصْبِرُ عَلٰى بَلَائِه وَ
يُوَفِّيْنَا أُجُوْرَ الصَّابِرِيْنَ لَنْ تَشُذَّ عَنْ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
((صلی الله علیه و آله و سلم) ) لَحْمَتُهٗ وَ هِيَ مَجْمُوعَةٌ لَهٗ فِي
حَضِيْرَةِ الْقُدْسِ تَقَرُّ بِهِمْ عَيْنُهٗ وَ يُنْجِزُ بِهِمْ
وَعْدَِهٗ . مَنْ كَانَ بَاذِلًا مُهْجَتَهٗ مُوَطِّنًا عَلٰى لِقَاءِ
اللَّهِ نَفْسَهٗ فَلْيَرْحَلْ مَعَنَا فَإِنِّي رَاحِلٌ مُصْبِحًا إِنْ
شَاءَ اللَّهُ تَعَالٰي.
</p>

*All praise is due to Allah (s.w.t.), only that which Allah (s.w.t.)
wants will come to pass, there is no strength save in Allah (s.w.t.),
and mercy and Blessings of Allah (s.w.t.) be upon His Messenger. Death
is mapped out on every human being in the same way as a necklace leaves
a mark on a girl’s neck. For me, my eagerness to join my late fathers,
the martyrs, is as same as Prophet Jacob’s eagerness to see (his absent
son) Joseph.*

*I will unavoidably encounter the demise that has been chosen for me: I
foresee that my limbs and organs will be severed by the wolves of
deserts[^215] in a place between al-Nawawis and Karbala where they will
fill their hungry bellies with me. No one can escape that which has been
recorded with the Pen.[^216]*

*Only that which pleases Allah (s.w.t.) will please usthe Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.); we behave steadfastly against His tests (that He presents in
forms of misfortunes) and He shall certainly pay us the rewards of the
steadfast ones in full. The flesh of the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his family, shall not go astray from his way and shall join
him in the Sacred Position to delight him and fulfill the promise, which
was made to him.*

*Hence, he who sacrifices his soul for us and determines to meet Allah
(s.w.t.) may accompany me in this journey. Tomorrow morning, I will
leave, if Allah (s.w.t.), the Exalted, wills it.”[^217]*

In his last moments in Mecca, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) went towards the
Holy House (Kaaba) and offered the Zhuhrnoon- Prayer there. On the
eighth of Zul-Hijjah, 60 A.H., he left Mecca whose people saw him off
with tearful eyes and depressing hearts. Throughout his journey, he used
to tell the story of the martyrdom of Prophet John.

In a place called al-Sifah, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) met al-Farazdaq, the
famous poet, and told him that the ruling authorities had plotted to
assassinate him in Mecca.[^218] The Imam (a.s.) asked him about the
reality of people of Kufa that he had come from, and al-Farazdaq said,
“Their hearts are with you, but their swords are against you.”[^219] He
agreed to these words, but continued his journey so steadfastly.

In a place called Zat-Irq, the Imam (a.s.) met Abu Hirrah who asked him
why he had left Mecca. The Imam (a.s.) answered:

*“Woe to you, Abu Hirrah! When the Umayyads usurped my properties, I
treated it patiently, when they insulted my honor, I also treated it
patiently, and when they attempted to shed my blood, I escaped By Allah
(s.w.t.) I swear that because the oppressive party will kill me, Allah
(s.w.t.) shall dress them with comprehensive humiliation and shall cause
cutting swords to severe them. Allah (s.w.t.) shall also give a free
hand to rulers who will humiliate them to the degree that they will be
more humble than people of Sheba; a woman ruled them and had full hand
on their properties and souls.”*

TheImam (a.s.) thenleftthismanwhocouldnot
understandthemeaningofsupportingtherightand defending Islam.

In a place called al-Khuzaymiyyah, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) approached the
Imam (a.s.) and asked about their fate. He answered that she would have
to face terrible difficulties and adversities. He said, “Sister, all
that which is going to be is going to be.”[^220]

In a place called Zarud, the caravan of the Imam (a.s.) received a very
bad news; Muslim ibn Aqil was martyred in Kufa. The caravan burst into
tears, and the Imam (a.s.) turned towards the family of the martyr and
asked, “Muslim has been martyred. What do you now see?”

They answered so firmly, “We will not go back unless we revenge for him
or join him.” These words showed the determination of those heroes and
made the Imam (a.s.) trust his issue more.

That noon, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) took a siesta and saw a horrible dream.
He woke up in terror, and his son, Ali al-Akbar (a.s.), hurried and
asked about that terror. The Imam (a.s.) told his son that he had seen
in sleep a horseman saying, “You are mending your paces while your
deaths are taking you hurriedly to Paradise.” Explaining this dream, the
Imam (a.s.) told that they would be killed.

The son asked, “Are we not the right party?”

“Of course, we are. I swear it by Him to Whom all creatures shall
return,” answered the Imam (a.s.) confidently.

The son concluded, “O father, we then shall never care about death.”

This statement relieved the Imam (a.s.) who expressed his gratitude for
such a situation.[^221]

As they reached a place called Shuraf, the Imam (a.s.) gave the orders
of fetching as much water as possible from the springs there. A few
steps after these springs, one of the companions saw something like
date-palm trees and shouted to make the others notice. Some of those who
had full knowledge of that area realized that it was nothing but
arrowheads and ears of horses. Imam al-Husain (a.s.) too realized that
these were the vanguards of the Umayyad army. He therefore asked his
companions whether they knew a near place to hide in. some referred to
Mount Zu-Husam to the left.

As the Imam’s caravan directed towards that mountain, the massive troops
of about more than one thousand horsemen as some historians have
confirmed under the commandment of al-Hurr ibn Yazid al-Riyahi whom
Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad commissioned to wander through the desert until he
would meet and capture the caravan of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), approached.
It was midday and al-Hurr’s troops were too thirsty to continue their
march. Seeing this, the Imam (a.s.) felt pity for them and ordered his
companions to give them from the water they had with them. Even the
horses were given water.

After that, the Imam (a.s.) delivered an articulate sermon to the troops
of that army:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اِنَّهَا مَعْذِرَةٌ اِلَي اللهِ وَ اِلَيْكُمْ. إِنِّي
لَمْ آتِكُمْ حَتّٰى أَتَتْنِيْ كُتُبُكُمْ وَ قَدِمَتْ عَلَيَّ رُسُلُكُمْ
أَنْ اَقْدِمْ عَلَيْنَا فَاِنَّهٗ لَيْسَ لَنَا إِمَامٌ لَعَلَّ اللَّهَ
أَنْ يَجْمَعَنَا بِكَ عَلَى الْهُدٰى. فَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ عَلٰى ذٰلِكَ
فَقَدْ جِئْتُكُمْ فَأَعْطُوْنِيْ مَا أَطْمَئِنُّ بِه مِنْ عُهُودِكُمْ وَ
مَوَاثِيْقِكُمْ وَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لِمَقْدَمِي كَارِهِيْنَ انْصَرَفْتُ
عَنْكُمْ إِلَى الْمَكَانِ الَّذِي جِئْتُ مِنْهُ إِلَيْكُمْ.
</p>

*People: This is only an argument intended to release me from the
responsibility that lies on me with regard to Allah (s.w.t.) and you. I
came to you only after I had received your missives and your messengers
who asked me to come to you since you had no leader and since you
desired to be guided to the right guidance through my leadership to you.
If you are still bearing this very tendency, then here I am. Show me
pledges and covenants due to which I will be sure of your intentions.
But if you dislike my coming to you, I will leave you and return to the
place from which I came.[^222]*

Because most of the individuals of that army were among those who sent
missives and asked the Imam (a.s.) to come to them and paid homage to
him via his representative Muslim ibn Aqil, they could not answer him.

As time of the Zhuhr Prayer fell, the Imam (a.s.) ordered the
muezzin[^223] to declare it. He then turned his face to al-Hurr and
asked whether he would lead the collective prayer for his companions.
“We will follow you in prayer,” answered al-Hurr politely. When they
performed the Asr afternoon Prayer, the Imam (a.s.) delivered another
sermon:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّكُمْ إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَ تَعْرِفُوْا
الْحَقَّ وَأَهْلَهٗ يَكُنْ أَرْضٰى لِلَّهِ. وَ نَحْنُ أَهْلَالْبَيْتِ
أَوْلٰى بِهٰذَا الْأَمْرِ مِنْ هٰؤُلَاءِ الْمُدَّعِينَ مَا لَيْسَ لَهُمْ
وَ السَّائِرِيْنَ فِيكُمْ بِالْجَوْرِ وَ الْعُدْوَانِ‏وَ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ
إِلَّا كَرِهْتُمُوْنَا وَ جَهِلْتُمْ حَقَّنَا وَ كَانَ رَأْيُكُمُ الْآنَ
عَلٰي غَيْرِ مَا أَتَتْنِي بِه كُتُبُكُمُ انْصَرَفْتُ عَنْكُمْ.
</p>

*People: if you fear Allah (s.w.t.) and recognize the people of the
right, this will surely please Him more than anything else. We the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.) is worthier of holding the position of leadership than
those who claimed it falsely and governed you by means of wrong and
oppression. If you will dislike us and ignore our right and change your
minds that you had expressed in your missives you sent to me, I will
surely leave you...[^224]*

As he knew nothing about these missives, al-Hurr asked the Imam (a.s.),
“What are these missives you are mentioning?”

The Imam (a.s.), thus, ordered one of his companions to fetch them and
show to al-Hurr who, as soon as saw them, was shocked. He then said, “We
are not among those who wrote these missives.”

Afterwards, the Imam (a.s.) wanted to leave that place and return home,
but al-Hurr prevented him and said, “I will not leave you until I lead
you to Kufa to be present before Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad.”

“Death is nearer to you than doing so,” the Imam (a.s.) answered and
ordered his companions to ride and direct towards Medina. But al-Hurr
prevented them. The Imam (a.s.) said to him, “What do you want from us?”

“I want to lead you to Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad,” answered al-Hurr.

“I will not follow you” said the Imam (a.s.).

“And I will not leave you” answered al-Hurr.

War was about to break out, but al-Hurr could save the situation by
saying, “I was not ordered to fight you. I was only ordered not to leave
you before I lead you to Kufa. If you refuse, you may take a way that
takes you neither to Kufa nor Medina so that I will write a report to
Ubaydullah and hope Allah (s.w.t.) will save me from fighting you.”

Hence, the Imam’s caravan took another way southward; between al-Udhayb
and al-Qadisiyyah,[^225] and al-Hurr’s army watched them.

In a place called al-Bayda, the Imam (a.s.) delivered a sermon:

<p dir="rtl">
اَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اِنَّ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ(صلی الله علیه و آله و سلم)
قَالَ:   مَنْ رَأَى سُلْطَانًا جَائِرًا مُسْتَحِلًّا لِحُرُمِ اللَّهِ-
نَاكِثًا لِعَهْدِ اللَّهِ مُخَالِفًا لِسُنَّةِ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ(صلی الله
علیه و آله و سلم) يَعْمَلُ فِي عِبَادِ اللَّهِ بِالْإِثْمِ وَ
الْعُدْوَانِ فَلَمْ يُغَيِّرْ عَلَيْهِ بِفِعْلٍ وَ لَاقَوْلٍ كَانَ
حَقًّا عَلَى اللَّهِ أَنْ يُدْخِلَهٗ مُدْخَلَهٗ اَلَا وَ اِ نَّ
هٰؤُلَاءِ قَدْ لَزِمُوا طَاعَةَ الشَّيْطَانِوَ تَرَكُوْا طَاعَةَ
الرَّحْمَنِ وَ أَظْهَرُوا الْفَسَادَوَ عَطَّلُوْا الْحُدُودَ وَ
اسْتَأْثَرُوا بِالْفَيْ‏ءِ،وَ أَحَلُّوْا حَرَامَ اللَّهِ وَ حَرَّمُوْا
حَلَالَهٗ وَ اَنَا أَحَقُّ مِمَّنْ غَيْرَ
</p>

*People: the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, “For anyone who knows
an unjust ruler that is violating Allah’s sanctities, breaking the
pledge of Allah (s.w.t.), going against the Sunnah of the Prophet, and
treating the servants of Allah (s.w.t.) with means of sin and
oppression, and avoids denying so by a deed or a word, it will be
incumbent upon Allah (s.w.t.) to take him to the place he deserves (i.e.
Hell).” Those individuals (the Umayyad rulers) have adhered to the
obedience to the Shaitan, deserted the obedience to the All-beneficent
(Lord), made public sinfulness, defied the doctrinal provisions,
dedicated the treasuries to themselves, deemed lawful things that Allah
(s.w.t.) has decided unlawful, and deemed unlawful things that Allah
(s.w.t.) has decided lawful. I am worthier of holding this position than
those who distorted (the principles of Islam).*

<p dir="rtl">
وَ قَدْ أَتَتْنِي كُتُبُكُمْ وَ قَدِمَتْ عَلَيَّ رُسُلُكُمْ
بِبَيْعَتِكُمْأَنَّكُمْ لَا تُسَلِّمُونِي وَ لَا تَخْذُلُونِي فَإِنْ
اَقَمْتُمْعَلٰي بَيْعَتِكُمْ تُصِيْبُوْا رُشْدَكُمْ. فَاَنَاالْحُسَيْنُ
بْنُ عَلِيٍّ وَ ابْنُ فَاطِمَةَ بِنْتِ رَسُوْلِ اللهِ(صلی الله علیه و
آله و سلم) نَفْسِي مَعَ أَنْفُسِكُمْ وَ أَهْلِي مَعَ أَهَالِيْكُمْ
فَلَكُمْ فِيْ أُسْوَةٌوَ إِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلُوا وَ نَقَضْتُمْ عَهْدَكُمْ
وَ خَلَعْتُمْ بَيْعَتِيْ مِنْ اَعْنَاقِكُمْ فَلَعَمْرِيْ مَا هِيَ لَكُمْ
بِنُكْرٍ لَقَدْ فَعَلْتُمُوهَا بِأَبِي وَ أَخِيوَ ابْنِ عَمِّي مُسْلِمٍ.
وَ الْمَغْرُورُ مَنِ اغْتَرَّ بِكُمْفَحَظَّكُمْ أَخْطَأْتُمْ وَ
نَصِيبَكُمْ ضَيَّعْتُمْ. فَمَنْ نَكَثَ فَإِنَّما يَنْكُثُ عَلٰى‏ نَفْسِه
وَ سَيُغْنِي اللَّهُ عَنْكُمْ وَ السَّلَامُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ رَحْمَةُ
اللهِ وَ بَرَكَاتُهٗ . ‏
</p>

*I have received your missives and your Messengers who reported to me
that you paid homage to me and that you would neither let me down nor
disappoint me. If you keep your homage, you will certainly do the right
thing. I am al-Husain son of Ali and Fatimah (a.s.); daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). My soul will be with yours and my harem
will be with yours. (They will face the same fate that you will face.) I
however am the example that should be followed. But if you break your
homage and pledge, this is in fact not strange from you. You have
already done it with my father, brother, and Cousin Muslim (ibn Aqil).
He who believes you is surely deceived. Anyhow, you have only missed
your opportunity of success and neglected your chance of safety. He who
breaches is only doing ill to himself. Allah (s.w.t.) will surely find
me a substitution. Peace, Allah’s mercy, and His Blessings are upon
you.[^226]*

After this sermon, al-Hurr said to the Imam (a.s.), “I only want to
advise you. I am sure that you will be killed if you fight. I swear it.”

The Imam (a.s.) answered,*“Do you threaten me with death? Will
misfortunes depart you if you kill me? I really do not know what to say
to you. But, I will copy the slaying of that man from the (tribe of) Aws
whose cousin threatened with death while he was going to defend the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.).* He poetized:[^227]

*I will go on, and death is not shameful for the hero*

*Who intends good and fights for his Islam*

*And sacrifices his soul for the righteous men*

*And defies the perished ones and departs the wrong ones*

*If I live, I will not regret, and if I die, I will not be blamed*

*It is certainly sufficient humility to live in humbleness.*

As he heard these words, al-Hurr left the Imam and realized that he had
decided to sacrifice his soul for sake of saving the Muslims from the
oppression and wrong of the Umayyad rulers.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.), too, recognized that her brother, by saying these
words, had decided to sacrifice himself and attain martyrdom. She
therefore felt very sad and supplicated to Almighty Allah to give
victory to him.

Al-Tarimmah led the Imam’s (a.s.) caravan because he knew the area
better.[^228] The caravan however went on and the troops of al-Hurr were
preventing it from directing towards the desert and trying to push it
towards Kufa. Meanwhile, a rider appeared. It was a man carrying a
message from Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad to al-Hurr: “As soon as you receive
this message, lead al-Husain to a derelict place in the desert where
there is no shelter or water. I have also ordered this Messenger to
haunt you until you carry out this order.”[^229]


