In Karbala
==========

Imam al-Husain (a.s.) wanted to reside in a place near a spring or a
shelter, but al-Hurr prevented him and recited Ubaydullah’s message. As
the situation attained its climax, Zuhayr ibn al-Qayn, one of the
sincere companions of the Imam, suggested that they would fight against
al-Hurr and his troops, but the Imam (a.s.) rejected saying, “I will
never begin fighting.”[^230]

Al-Hurr then obliged the Imam (a.s.) to reside in a place, and the Imam
(a.s.) had to respond.

“What is this place called,”.asked the Imam (a.s.).

“This is Karbala,” answered one of the companions.

*“O Allah: I seek Your protection against agony and ordeal,”*
supplicated the Imam (a.s.) with teary eyes.[^231]

He then turned towards his companions and said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَرْضُ كَرْبٍ وَ بَلَاءٍ. هَا هُنَا مُنَاخُ رِكَابِنَا وَ مَحَطُّ
رِحَالِنَا وَ سَفْكُ دِمَائِنَا.
</p>

*This is the place of agony and ordeal. This is the place where we, as
well as our riding animals, will reside and our blood will be shed.*

Al-Abbas (a.s.), accompanied by the heroes of the Prophet’s Household
and the Imam’s companions, hurried to pitch tents for the harem, headed
by Lady Zaynab (a.s.), who were reigned by horror as they imagined the
coming events on this land.

The Imam (a.s.) then raised his hands upward for supplicating to Allah
(s.w.t.) and said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ إِنَّا عِتْرَةُ نَبِيِّكَ مُحَمَّدٍ(صلی الله علیه و آله و
سلم) وَ قَدْ أُخْرِجْنَا وَ طُرِدْنَا وَ أُزْعِجْنَا عَنْ حَرَمِ
جَدِّنَا وَ تَعَدَّتْ بَنُو أُمَيَّةَ عَلَيْنَا اَللّٰهُمَّ فَخُذْ لَنَا
بِحَقِّنَا وَ انْصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِيْنَ‏.
</p>

*O Allah! We, the Household of Your Prophet Muhammad, have been banished
away from the sanctum of our grandfather and have been oppressed by the
Umayyads. O Allah! Take vengeance upon those who oppressed us and
support us against the wrongdoers.[^232]*

He then turned his face towards his Household and companions and said:

<p dir="rtl">
اِنَّ هٰذِهِ الدُّنْيَا قَدْ تَغَيَّرَتْ وَ تَنَكَّرَتْ وَ أَدْبَرَ
مَعْرُوْفُهَا فَلَمْ يَبْقَ مِنْهَا إِلَّا صَبَابَةٌ كَصَبَابَةِ
الْإِنَاءِ وَ خَسِيْسُ عَيْشٍ كَالْمَرْعَى الْوَبِيْلِ أَ لَا تَرَوْنَ
أَنَّ الْحَقَّ لَا يُعْمَلُ بِه وَ أَنَّ الْبَاطِلَ لَا يُتَنَاهٰى
عَنْهُ؟ لِيَرْغَبِ الْمُؤْمِنُ فِي لِقَاءِ اللَّهِ مُحِقًّا فَإِنِّي لَا
أَرَى الْمَوْتَ إِلَّا سَعَادَةً وَ لَا الْحَيَاةَ مَعَ الظَّالِمِيْنَ
إِلَّا بَرَمًا إِنَّ النَّاسَ عَبِيْدُ الدُّنْيَا وَ الدِّيْنُ لَعِقٌ
عَلٰى أَلْسِنَتِهِمْ يَحُوْطُوْنَهٗ مَا دَرَّتْ مَعَايِشُهُمْ فَإِذَا
مُحِّصُوا بِالْبَلَاءِ قَلَّ الدَّيَّانُوْنَ.
</p>

*This world has changed, snubbed, and its good has turned tail. Nothing
has remained from it except a thing that is as scanty as the leftover of
a cup and a mean life that is like a noxious grazing. Have you not
noticed that the right is ignored and the evil is not forbidden? This is
sufficient for making the believer’s desire for meeting Allah (s.w.t.)
rightfully. I do not see death but as happiness and do not consider life
with the wrongdoers but as boredom. People are certainly slaves of this
world. The Religion is only a slaver on their tongues. They turn it
wherever their livelihood demands. If they are examined by misfortunes,
the religious will be very little.[^233]*

By these words, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) informed his Household and
companions about the coming ordeals they would face, and declared his
readiness to fight against the wrongful party to the last spark of his
life. As they heard his words, those unmatched individuals who paved the
way of freedom to humankind through their unparalleled situations spoke
before their leader to show him their readiness to participate and
continue the way whatever the sacrifices would be. The first companion
to speak was Zuhayr ibn al-Qayn:

*“Son of Allah’s Messenger: We have understood your words. We may stop
supporting you if we understand that this world will perpetuate for us
for good... etc.”*

Another hero, namely Burayr ibn Khudayr, said similar words. The other
heroes declared their situations of perseverance on their principles and
readiness to sacrifice their souls for their leader. The Imam (a.s.)
thanked them for their feelings and blessed them.

In Kufa, Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad felt happy when he was informed that the
vanguards of his army seized Imam al-Husain (a.s.). He therefore began
to plan for the next step; whom should he choose for the commandment of
the army to kill the Prophet’s dearest one? As he reviewed the names of
the candidates, he could not realize any individual meaner and more
vicious than Umar ibn Sa’d. At first, Umar refused to fight against the
Imam (a.s.), but Ubaydullah threatened he would dismiss him from the
governorship of Ray currently Tehran. Thus, he accepted and began his
campaign towards Karbala with four thousand horsemen who joined the army
of al-Hurr there, Umar ibn Sa’d was chosen for the most horrible crime
and he showed no blemish when he led armies to fight against the
divinely selected Imam. He surrounded the Imam (a.s.) from every side
laid siege to him and blocked all the ways in order to prevent anybody
from joining or supporting him.

In Kufa again, Ubaydullah gathered people and spoke: “O People: As you
tried the descendants of Abu Sufyan, you have found them as exactly as
you like. You have also known your leader, Yazid, as good and
praiseworthy man. He treats his subjects kindly, gives everybody his
deserved share of the public treasury, and honors people out of his
wealth. He has ordered me to give each of you one hundred dirhams
monthly as an addition to your fixed shares of the public treasury. He
has also ordered me to call you to participate in the campaign against
his enemy al-Husain (a.s.). Hence, you should listen to and obey
him...”[^234]

Unfortunately, most of them carried out these orders and composed a huge
army against the Imam (a.s.) small group. Afterwards, they traveled to
Karbala and occupied the two banks, as well as all the branches, of the
River Euphrates.

Some historians, however, have mentioned that three days before the
encounter, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) was deprivedof water.[^235] This in
fact was the most horrible misfortune he had to face. The strange thing
is that the band of the Umayyad army took pride in this criminal act
that challenged all humanitarian values. One of them, for instance,
shouted at Imam al-Husain (a.s.), “Husain (a.s.): you can see water flow
like reptiles. You will not taste it before you die...”[^236]

Expressing his joy at this situation, Amr ibn al-Hajjaj addressed,
“Husain (a.s.), this is the Euphrates. Dogs, donkeys, and even pegs are
licking its water. But we shall prevent you from having a single drop
from it...”[^237]

No single law or code on this earth allows any person, under any
circumstances, to deprive women and children of water except the laws of
the Umayyad dynasty whose individuals, from the first spark of Islam,
advised each other to prevent the Prophet’s Household from holding any
position of leadership.

Facing this ordeal of the scarcity of water, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
undertook the difficult mission of gathering the thirsty children and
women and trying to comfort them and promise with water. Her heart
melted away as she saw those children and babies cry out of thirst while
she had nothing to give.

Imam al-Husain (a.s.) then asked Umar ibn Sa’d to meet him individually.
The criminal came with his son and servant to the Imam (a.s.) who asked
his brother al-Abbas (a.s.) and his son Ali al-Akbar (a.s.) to attend
that meeting. The Imam (a.s.) then asked Umar to think about the matter
more seriously and to anticipate the inescapable misfortunes that he
would certainly face in this world and the world to come if he would
fight against him. Umar however tried to tender his excuses, but the
Imam (a.s.) proved all them worthless.

Finally, the Imam (a.s.) recognized that Umar would never change his
mind, therefore he said to him,*“What is the matter with you? May Allah
(s.w.t.) kill you on your bed! May Allah (s.w.t.) never forgive you on
the day when you will be resurrected! I foresee that you, if you do it,
will not even be able to satisfy your appetite from the wheat of Iraq.”*

Mockingly, Umar answered, “It will be enough for me to have from its
barley!”[^238]

Indeed, Almighty Allah (s.w.t.) responded to the supplications of Imam
al-Husain(a.s.) concerning Umar: the soldiers of al-Mukhtar slew him in
his bed.

In the land of Karbala, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) faced the progression of
calamities with the weapon of patience and steadfastness. At the night
of the ninth of Muharram, the Umayyad armies advanced towards Imam
al-Husain’s (a.s.) small group. The Imam (a.s.) was about to take a nap
when his sister, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), hurried to him with horror after
she had heard the sounds of the foes coming towards them. She wakes him
up saying,*“Brother, the enemies are approaching us.”* He answered,*“I
have just seen the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), my father Ali (a.s.),
my mother Fatimah (a.s.), and my brother al-Hasan (a.s.) in sleep and
they told that I will join them very soon.”* These words acted as a
thunderbolt on Lady Zaynab (a.s.) and tore her sensitive, tortured
heart. She therefore had nothing to do but slapping her face,
shouting,*“Alas for this!”* The Imam (a.s.) tried to relieve her by
saying,*“Alas is not yours, sister. Please, be quiet. May the
All-beneficent have mercy upon you.”* [^239]

Al-Abbas (a.s.), who did not leave his brother for a single moment,
turned his face to him and said, “They have come to you.” The Imam
(a.s.) asked him to identify their intents. He said to him, “May I
sacrifice myself for you, brother! Ride on and meet them to ask about
their intentions.”

With twenty horsemen, al-Abbas (a.s.) hurried towards that army and
asked what they wanted.

“The governor has ordered us to call you to submit to his orders,
otherwise we will fight you,” answered they.[^240]

Al-Abbas (a.s.) turned back to tell his brother about their intention.
Meanwhile, Habib ibn Muzhahir delivered a sermon to that army; he
admonished and warned them against the divine punishment they would face
if they fight against the family of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). However,
some of them answered him impudently.

When he heard the words of his brother, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) said to
him,*“Go back to them and try your best to delay them until tomorrow
morning so that we, on this night, will have time to pray to our Lord
Who knows that I love praying to Him, reciting His Book, and
supplicating to Him.”*

Al-Abbas (a.s.) conveyed these words to the Umayyad army. Umar ibn Sa’d,
because he feared that others would report his situation to the
governor, offered the suggestion to Shimr who was his only competitor.
He did not say anything, but Amr ibn al-Hajjaj intruded, “How strange
this is! Even if they are from the non-Arabs, we will respond to their
demand!”

In fact, Amr did not want to confess that their adversary party was the
beloved grandson of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the Chief of the Youth of
Paradise. This is because he anticipated that others would report any
single word he would say to the ruling authorities.

Because many others supported Amr’s opinion, Umar Ibn Sa’d accepted to
postpone waging war against the camp of the Imam (a.s.). He ordered one
of his soldiers to approach the camp of the Imam (a.s.) and declare that
the fighting would be postponed to the next day.

Thus, the fighting was postponed for a night and Umar ibn Sa’ds army
waited whether the Imam (a.s.) would respond to them or fight.

The Imam gathered all of his followers and gave a sermon:

<p dir="rtl">
أُثْنِي عَلَى اللَّهِ أَحْسَنَ الثَّنَاءِ وَ أَحْمَدُهٗ عَلَى
السَّرَّاءِ وَ الضَّرَّاءِ اَللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَحْمَدُكَ عَلٰى أَنْ
أَكْرَمْتَنَا بِالنُّبُوَّةِ وَ عَلَّمْتَنَا الْقُرْآنَ وَ فَهَّمْتَنَا
فِي الدِّينِ وَ جَعَلْتَ لَنَا أَسْمَاعًا وَ أَفْئِدَةً وَ لَمْ
تَجْعَلْنَا مِنَ المُشْرِكِيْنَ.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أَمَّا بَعْدُ فَإِنِّي لَا أَعْلَمُ أَصْحَابًا أَوْفٰى وَ لَا خَيْرًا
مِنْ أَصْحَابِي وَ لَا أَهْلَ بَيْتٍ أَبَرَّ وَ لَا أَوْصَلَ مِنْ أَهْلِ
بَيْتِي فَجَزَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِّي خَيْرًا أَلَا وَ إِنِّي لَأَظُنُّ
اَنَّهٗ آخِرُ يَوْمٍ لَنَا مِنْ هٰؤُلَاءِ. اَلَا وَ اِنِّيْ قَدْ
اَذِنْتُ لَكُمْ فَانْطَلِقُوْا جَمِيْعًا فِيْ حَلٍّ لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ
مِنِّيْ ذِمَامٌ. هٰذَا اللَّيْلُ قَدْ غَشِيَكُمْ فَاتَّخَذُو ْهُ
جَمَلًا. وَ لْيَاخُذْ كُلُّ رَجُلٍ مِنْكُمْ بِيَدِ رَجُلٍ مِنْ اَهْلِ
بَيْتِيْ وَ تَفَرَّقُوْا فِيْ سَوَادِ هٰذَا اللَّيْلِ وَ ذَرُوْنِيْ وَ
هٰؤُلَاءِ الْقَوْمَ فَاِنَّهُمْ لَا يُرِيْدُوْنَ غَيْرِيْ.
</p>

*I praise Allah (s.w.t.) with the best words of praise and thank Him for
good times and bad times. O Allah! I do praise You for You have honored
us with prophecy, have taught us the Qur’an, have given us understanding
of the Religion, have conferred upon us with ears and hearts, and have
not made us idol worshippers.*

*Indeed, I do not know any followers better than my followers nor any
family better than my family. May Allah (s.w.t.) reward you all. Indeed,
I think tomorrow will be the decisive day with these people. I have
allowed you all to leave me alone and go on your own way. During this
night, any one of you may leave. Any of you may take one of my family
and leave and you may scatter in the murk of this night. Indeed, I am
the one they want. When they get me, they will not go after anyone
else.[^241]*

As soon as the Imam (a.s.) finished his words, Abul-Fazl Al-Abbas
(a.s.), representing the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), said to his brother: “Why
should we do so? Is it for that we will live after you? No! We
supplicate to the Lord to forbid it.”[^242]

The same situation was shown from the sons of Aqil, and the other
companions who showed their readiness to sacrifice their souls for their
Imam (a.s.). Hence, everybody spent that night with worship and acts of
obedience to Allah (s.w.t.). They were waiting for the dawn of that day
on which they would obtain their highest goal in this life; martyrdom.

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sPanic
------------------------

Imam Ali ibn al-Husain Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.), the only survivor of the
tragedy of Karbala, later on reported:

My aunt Zaynab was nursing me on that night (the night before the tenth
of Muharram) when my father isolated himself in a tent. Only Juwayn, the
servant of Abu Zarrr, was with him mending his sword. The Imam (a.s.)
then cited (the following poetic verses):

*O days, fie upon you! How bad mates you are!*

*Too many those who, in morns and eves, are*

*Dead or alone in isolation*

*Days never change and never alternation*

*Every mortal shall take a way to termination*

*The inevitable shall imminently occur*

*All matters to the Most High recur.*

He repeated these words twice or thrice until I understood his purpose.
Hence, I could not control my tears. However, I tried my best to stop
weeping and keep silence. I understood that we would suffer horrifying
ordeals after him. My aunt Zaynab (a.s.), like other women who are
prevailed by tenderheartedness, could not control herself. She ran
towards him with uncovered head and shouted before him:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاثُكْلَاهُ! وَا حُزْنَاهُ! لَيْتَ الْمَوْتَ اَعْدَمَنِيَ الْحَيَاةَ!
يَا حُسَيْنَاهُ! يَا سَيِّدَاهُ! يَا بَقِيَّةَ اَهْلِ بَيْتَاهُ!
اَسْتَسْلَمْتَ لِلْمَوْتِ وَ يَئِسْتَ مِنَ الْحَيَاةِ؟ الْيَوْمَ مَاتَ
جَدِّيْ رَسُوْلَ اللهِ ، الْيَوْمَ مَاتَتْ اُمِّيْ فَاطِمَةُ
الزَّهْرَاءُ وَ اَبِيْ عَلِيٌّ الْمُرْتَضٰي وَ اَخِيْ الْحَسَنُ
الزَّكِيُّ. يَا خَلِيْفَةَ الْمَاضِيْنَ وَ ثِمَالَ الْبَاقَيْنَ.
</p>

*O, for my losing you! O, for my grief for you! May demise deprive me of
life! Oh, for al-Husain (a.s.) ! Oh, for my master! Oh, for the only
remaining one of my family members! Is it true that you have submitted
to death and despaired of life? Only this day have my grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), my mother, Fatemah al-Zahra (s.a), my
father, Ali al-Murtada (a.s.) (the Pleased One), and my brother,
al-Hasan al-Zaki (the Pure) died. You are the successor of the bygone
ones and the lasting of the survivors.”*

Hearing these words from his beloved sister, Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
looked at her and said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا اُخْتَاهُ، لَا يَذْهَبَنَّ بِحِلْمِكَ الشَّيْطَانُ.
</p>

*O dear sister!Do not let Shaitan seize your toleration.*

The Imam’s eyes overflowed with tears and added,*“After they had made me
revolt, they wronged me.”*

She then shouted:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا وَيْلَتَاهُ! اَتَغْتَصِبُ نَفْسَكَ اغْتِصَابًا؟ فَذَاكَ اَقْرَحُ
لِقَلْبِيْ وَ اَشَدُّ عَلٰي نَفْسِيْ.
</p>

*Oh, woe! Do you take your soul by force? This is indeed more painful
and more difficult for me to tolerate.*

She then slapped her face, tore her cloth,and fell to the ground losing
consciousness. The Imam (a.s.) hurried to pour water on her face. When
she regained consciousness, he consoled her with the following words:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أُخْتَاهُ! اِتَّقِيْ اللَّهَ وَ تَعَزّٰيْ بِعَزَاءِ اللَّهِ وَ
اعْلَمِيْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْأَرْضِ يَمُوْتُوْنَ وَ أَهْلَ السَّمَاءِ لَا
يَبْقَوْنَ وَ أَنَّ كُلَّ شَيْ‏ءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَ اللَّهِ الَّذِي
خَلَقَ الْخَلْقَ بِقُدْرَتِه وَ اِلَيْهِ يَعُوْدُوْنَ وَ هُوَ فَرْدٌ
وَاحِدٌ. وَ اِنْ  أَبِي خَيْرٌ مِنِّي وَ أَخِي خَيْرٌ مِنِّي وَ لِكُلِّ
مُسْلِمٍ بِرَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أُخْتَاهُ إِنِّي أَقْسَمْتُ عَلَيْكِ فَأَبِرِّي قَسَمِيْ: لَا
تَشُقِّي عَلَيَّ جَيْبًا وَ لَا تَخْمِشِي عَلَيَّ وَجْهًا وَ لَا
تَدْعٰيْ عَلَيَّ بِالْوَيْلِ وَ الثُّبُورِ إِذَا أَنَا هَلَكْتُ.
</p>

*O dear sister: Fear Allah (s.w.t.), consoles yourself with the
consolation of Allah (s.w.t.), and knows that inhabitants of this earth
shall inexorably die and the inhabitants of the heavens shall not
survive forever. Also, be it known to you that everything shall perish
except Almighty Allah Who has created all the creatures out of His
omnipotence and they all shall return to Him. He is Single and One. My
father is better than I am and my brother is better than I am, and every
Muslim must take an example from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).*

*O dear sister: I put you under this oath and please you not to break
it: never tear a piece of your cloth (as a sign of your sadness for me),
never slap your face (for mourning at my death), and never invoke woe
and perdition when I will be slain.*

Imam al-Husain (a.s.), then, accompanied her to my tent.

To the companions of the Imam (a.s.), that night was the brightest in
their lives; they could not wait for the dawn of the next day on which
they would join the heavens and settle in the endless bliss. Habib ibn
Muzhahir, for instance, was so cheerful, and when he was asked why he
answered, “It is only a few hours and those tyrants attack us with their
swords to make us embrace the women of Paradise. This time then is the
worthiest of cheer.” Similar words were said by the other companions who
were full of deep-rooted and unshakable faith.[^243]

At that night, too, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) took a nap, and when he woke
up, he told his family members and companions about his dream:

“I dreamt that dogs attacked me so savagely that they bit me. The most
savage among them was a spotted one. As much as I understand from this
dream, I foresee that I will be slain by a leprous man. I then saw, in
dream too, my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), with a
group of his companions addressing to me: You are the shahid of
Muhammad’s family (p.b.u.t). The inhabitants of the heavens, especially
the elevated ones, are glad because they anticipate that you will join
them very soon. Tonight, be my guest. Please, hurry up and do not be
slow.[^244]

At that night, too, clouds of panic and terror covered the harem
totally. They did not see a single moment of ease as each one of them
imagined the horrifying future after the demise of their lord, Imam
al-Husain (a.s.), and their protector, Abul-Fazl Al-Abbas (a.s.), as
well as their family men. They had no weapon other than weeping and
praying to Almighty Allah.

The most grievous one among them was their chiefess, Lady Zaynab (a.s.),
who watched all the events so attentively and already knew that all the
responsibility would be hers. She also anticipated that none of her
family men would survive after tomorrow; the black tomorrow.

Owing to her great concern about her brother, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), on
that night, watched the tents of the companions and the Hashemites so
that she would be aware of their real situations and, hence, how would
they behave tomorrow. She first went slowly near the tent of her
brother, Abul-Fazl al-Abbas (a.s.), to listen to him while he was
delivering instructions to the Hashemite warriors:

Al-Abbas (a.s.) asked, “Brothers, nephews, and cousins: what are you
going to do in the morning?”

“You decide, and we carry out,” they said.

Courageously, al-Abbas (a.s.) said, “Our companions and supporters are
not our relatives. And a heavy burden must be carried by its own people.
Next morning, we will be the first to fight and will precede our
companions to death so that people will not blame us.”

Before he finished, they all shouted in one voice, “We all agree to this
opinion.”

This conversation gave some hope to Lady Zaynab (a.s.) who, then,
directed towards the tent of the companions to listen to them. They were
gathering in the tent of their head, Habib ibn Muzhahir, who asked them,
“O companions: what are you going to do in the morning?”

“You decide, and we carry out,” they said.

Habib spoke, “Next morning, we will be the first to fight and will
precede the Hashemites to death. We should never see a Hashemite person
stained with blood. Otherwise, people will blame us and say that we made
them fight before us so that we would save our souls.”

All the companions shouted in one voice, “We all agree to this opinion,
Habib.”

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) hence understood that the companions would never let
Imam al-Husain (a.s.) down and would defend him to the last spark of
their lives. She therefore directed towards the tent of the leader, Imam
al-Husain (a.s.), to report these news to him. The Imam (a.s.) thanked
for them these situations and told his sister that those individuals
were the choice of the Almighty Allah.[^245]


