Day Of Ashura
=============

Day of Ashura; the tenth of Muharram, was unique in its tragedies,
misfortunes and disasters. On that day, the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) had to
suffer the ever most horrible adversity of this world. Hence, it is
certainly the day of griefs.

From early morning, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) left his tent and saw in front
of him innumerable warriors and horses fill up the desert and unsheathe
their swords for shedding his blood. Thus, he asked for a copy of the
Holy Qur’an to put it on the head and raised his hands upward for
supplicating to his Lord for seeking His refuge, saying:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ أَنْتَ ثِقَتِيْ فِي كُلِّ كَرْبٍ وَ رَجَائِي فِي كُلِّ
شِدَّةٍ وَ أَنْتَ لِي فِي كُلِّ أَمْرٍ نَزَلَ بِي ثِقَةٌ وَ عِدَّةٌ.
كَمْ مِنْ هَمٍّ يَضْعُفُ فِيهِ الْفُؤَادُ وَ تَقِلُّ فِيهِ الْحِيلَةُ وَ
يَخْذُلُ فِيْهِ الصَّدِيْقُ وَ يَشْمَتُ فِيْهِ الْعَدُوُّ أَنْزَلْتُهٗ
بِكَ وَ شَكَوْتُهٗ إِلَيْكَ رَغْبَةً مِنِّي إِلَيْكَ عَمَّنْ سِوَاكَ
فَفَرَّجْتَهٗ وَ كَشَفْتَهٗ فَأَنْتَ وَلِيُّ كُلِّ نِعْمَةٍ وَ صَاحِبُ
كُلِّ حَسَنَةٍ وَ مُنْتَهٰى كُلِّ رَغْبَةٍ
</p>

*O Allah! I trust in You in hard times and confide in you hopefully in
tribulations, and in You lay my faith and hope in every misfortune that
inflicts me. Many were the griefs that crinkled my heart, were hardly
curable, caused my friends to disappoint me, and made my enemies rejoice
(over my helplessness); but when I relegated them i.e. the griefs to You
and complained about them to You, because I heartily intended You, no
one else, You relieved them and helped. You are certainly the source of
all graces, the cause of all favors, and the only intention of
aspirations.[^246]*

He then decided to deliver a speech before those troops so that they
would be full acquainted with the reality of the situation. He rode on,
went towards them, and raised his voice with the finest words of wisdom
so that most of them, at least, would hear him. He said:[^247]

<p dir="rtl">
أَمَّا بَعْدُ فَتَبًّا لَكُمْ أَيَّتُهَا الْجَمَاعَةُ وَ تَرْحًا حِينَ
اسْتَصْرَخْتُمُوْنَا وَالِهِيْنَ فَأَصْرَخْنَاكُمْ مُوْجِفِيْنَ
سَلَلْتُمْ عَلَيْنَا سَيْفًا كَانَ فِي أَيْمَانـِنَا وَ حَشَشْتُمْ
عَلَيْنَا نَارًا اقْتَدَحْنَاهَا عَلٰى عَدُوِّنَا وَ عَدُوِّكُمْ
فَأَصْبَحْتُمْ إِلْبًاعَلٰى أَوْلِيَائِكُمْ وَ يَدًا لِأَعْدَائِكُمْ
بِغَيْرِ عَدْلٍ أَفْشَوْهُ فِيكُمْوَ لَا لِأَمَلٍ أَصْبَحَ لَكُمْ
فِيهِمْ وَ عَنْ غَيْرِ حَدَثٍ كَانَ مِنَّا وَ لَا رَأْيٍ تَفَيَّلَ
عَنَّا فَهَلَّا - لَكُمُ الْوَيْلَاتُ - تَرَكْتُمُوْنَا وَ السَّيْفُ
مَشِيْمٌ وَ الْجَأْشُ طَامِنٌ وَ الرَّأْيُ لَمْ يُسْتَحْصَفْ. وَ لٰكِنِ
اسْتَسْرَعْتُمْ إِلَيْهَا كَتَطَائِرِ الدِّبَا وَ تَدَاعَيْتُمْ عَنْهَا
كَتَدَاعِي الْفَرَاشِ. فَسُحْقًا وَ بُعْدًا لِطَوَاغِيْتِ الْأُمَّةِ وَ
شِذَّاذِ الْأَحْزَابِ وَ نَبَذَةِ الْكِتَابِ وَ نَفَثَةِ الشَّيْطَانِ وَ
مُحَرِّفِي الْكـَلَامِ وَ مُطْفِئِي السُّنَنِ وَ مُلْحِقِي الْعَهَرَةِ
بِالنَّسَبِ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِيْنَ الَّذِيْنَ جَعَلُوْا الْقُرْآنَ
عِضِيْنَ.
</p>

*So then, fie and grief be on you, O group. When you appealed for our
help grievously and we hurried for your help exhaustingly, you
unsheathed against us a sword that had been in our right hands and
ignited against us the fire that we had struck against your and our
enemy. You therefore formed groups surrounding your allies and became
the support of your enemies although they did not spread justice among
you and you lost any hope in them. In addition, you noticed no heresy or
new opinion come out of us. Why did you -woe to you- not leave us when
swords were sheathed, malice was hidden, and the decision was not taken?
But, you hurried to the sedition like locusts and fell on it like the
falling of butterflies (in fire). Damn and away with the idols of the
Ummah, irregulars of the parties, deserters of the Book, expectorants of
Shaitan, distorters of the meanings, extinguishers of the traditions,
avowers of the bastards, and the mockers who divided the Qur’an
believing in some parts and rejecting others.*

<p dir="rtl">
أَ هٰؤُلَاءِ تَعْضُدُوْنَ وَ عَنَّا تَتَخَاذَلُوْنَ؟ أَجَلْ وَ اللَّهِ
اِنَّهٗ لَ خَذْلٌ فِيْكُمْ مَعْرُوْفٌ،قَدْ وَشَجَتْ عَلَيْهِ
عُرُوْقُكُمْ وَ تَوَارَتْ عَلَيْهِ اُصُوْلُكُمْ فَكُنْتُمْ أَخْبَثَ
ثَمَرَةٍ شَجًا لِلنَّاظِرِ وَ أُكْلَةً لِلْغَاصِبِ. أَلا فَلَعْنَةُ
اللَّهِ عَلَى النَّاكِثِيْنَ الَّذِيْنَ يَنْقُضُوْنَ الْأَيْمَانَ بَعْدَ
تَوْكِيْدِهَا وَ قَدْ جَعَلُوْا اللَّهَ عَلَيْهِمْ كَفِيْلًا أَلَا وَ
إِنَّ الدَّعِيَّ ابْنَ الدَّعِيِّ قَدْ رَكَـزَ مِنَّابَيْنَ اثْنَتَيْنِ
بَيْنَ السَّلَّةِ وَ الذَّلَّةِ، وَ هَيْهَاتَ مِنَّا الذَّلَّةِ: يَأبٰي
اللهُ لَنَا ذٰلِكَ وَ رَسُوْلُهٗ وَ الْمُؤْمِنُوْنَ وَ حُجُوْرٌ طَابَتْ
وَ اُتُوْفٌ حَمِيَّةٌ وَ نُفُوْسٌ اَبِيَّةٌ اَنْ تُؤْثِرَ طَاعَةَ
اللَّئَامِ عَلٰي مَصَارِعِ الْكِرَامِ. وَ اِنِّيْ زَاحِفٌ اِلَيْهِمْ
بِهٰذِهِ الْاُسْرَةِ عَلٰي كـَلَبِ الْعَدُوِّ وَ كَثْرَةِ الْعَدَدِ وَ
خِذْلَةِ النَّاصِرِ.
</p>

*How is it that you are supporting those ones and disappointing us? Yes,
why not? By Allah (s.w.t.) I swear your disloyalty is expected because
it is entwined with your arteries and it recurred in your origins. You
therefore are the bitterest fruit that causes its caretaker to choke and
gives good taste for its usurper. Allah (s.w.t.) curses the disloyal
ones who disregard their firm oaths after they have already appointed
Allah (s.w.t.) as their Guarantor. The bastard, son of the bastard, has
forced me to choose one of two things either unsheathing of swords or
ignominy. Ignominy is impossible for us. Allah (s.w.t.), His Apostle,
the (faithful) believers, chaste laps, jealous noses (individuals), and
noble souls (personalities) refuse for us to prefer obedience to the
mean to the death of the honorable. I am advancing to them with this
family despite the alliance of the enemies, their great numbers, and the
betrayal of the supporters.*

He then recited poetic verses:[^248]

*If we defeat, then we’ve been always triumphant*

*If we’re defeated, we’ve not wonted to impairment*

*Cowardice is not our manner, but it’s our*

*Time of death, and others’ time in power*

*If death is postponed for some, not all*

*It shall certainly on others fall*

*It has hence seized my people’s celebrities*

*As it had terminated the ancient humanities*

*If kings had remained forever, we’d have too remained*

*If chiefs had been maintained, we’d have too been maintained*

*Then say to the gloaters over our grief: wait*

*You shall for sure encounter the same fate!*

<p dir="rtl">
اَمَا وَاللهِ لَا يَلْبَثُوْنَ اِلاَّ كَرَيْثِ مَا يُرْكَبُ الْفَرَسُ
حَتّٰي تَدُوْرَ رَحَا الْحَرْبِ وَ تُعَلَّقَ النُّحُوْرُ. عَهْدٌ
عَهِدَهٗ اِلَيَّ اَبِيْ عَنْ جَدِّيْ، (صلی الله علیه و آله و سلم).
فَاَجْمِعُوْا اَمْرَكُمْ ثُمَّ كِيْدُوْنِ فَلَا تُنْظِرُوْنِ، إِنِّي
تَوَكـَّلْتُ عَلَى اللَّهِ رَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ مَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ إِلَّا
هُوَ آخِذٌ بِنَاصِيَتِهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلٰى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيْمٍ.
</p>

*By Allah (s.w.t.) I swear it, you shall not be respite very long; very
soon, horses will be ridden, days will revolve around you like
millstones, war will flare up, and necks will be decapitated. My father,
on the authority of my grandfather, foretold me of it. So, plan against
me without delay.**I trust Allah (s.w.t.) Who is my Lord as well as
yours. It is Allah (s.w.t.) Who controls the destiny of all living
creatures. It is my Lord Who knows the right path.***

Imam al-Husain (a.s.) then raised his two hands towards the heavens and
invoked Allah’s curse upon them, saying:[^249]

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ احْبِسْ عَنْهُمْ قَطْرَ السَّمَاءِ وَ ابْعَثْ عَلَيْهِمْ
سِنِيْنَ كَسِنِي يُوسُفَ وَ سَلِّطْ عَلَيْهِمْ غُلَامَ ثَقِيفٍ
يَسُوْمُهُمْ كَأْساً مُصَبَّرَةً فَإِنَّهُمْ كَذَّبُونَا وَ خَذَلُونَا
وَ أَنْتَ رَبُّنَا عَلَيْكَ تَوَكَّلْنا وَ إِلَيْكَ أَنَبْنا وَ إِلَيْكَ
الْمَصِيرُ.
</p>

*O Allah! deprive them of the drops of the heavens, and inflict them
with years like those (which occurred in the time) of Prophet Joseph,
and set up upon them the man of the (tribe of) Saqif[^250] as absolute
ruler to subject them to the bitterest torture, for they have belied and
disappointed us. You are our Lord on Whom we depend, to Whom we trust,
and under Whose control everything lies.*

The harem could hear some of these words; they therefore wept and cried,
but the Imam (a.s.) asked his brother Al-Abbas (a.s.) and his son Ali
al-Akbar (a.s.) to order them to stop it. He then continued with such
bright words that should have led every deviant to the right path.
However, the Umayyad army could not understand the Imam’s words because
they were too ignorant to understand anything other than criminality.
Rather, they could not say a single word as an answer.

The Imam (a.s.) then addressed to some of them particularly and reminded
them of the messages they had sent to him, but they denied the whole
matter!

Qays ibn al-Ash’as then asked the Imam (a.s.) to surrender and submit to
the Umayyad government, but the Imam (a.s.), courageously and
steadfastly, refused and declaring his unchangeable situation:

<p dir="rtl">
لاَ و اللهِ! لا أُعْطِيْكُمْ بِيَدِي إِعْطَاءَ الذَّلِيْلِ وَلاَ اُقِرُّ
لَكُمْ اِقْرَارَ العَبِيْدِ.
</p>

*No, by Allah (s.w.t.) I will never extend my hands to you like the
abject do, and I will never submit to you like slaves do.[^251]*

The Imam’s companions, then, spoke similar words before the Umayyad
army, but uselessly.

Finally, the Imam (a.s.) decided to advise them again so that none of
them would excuse he had not known the matter clearly.

At these moments, the conscience of al-Hurr ibn Yazid woke up. He began
to think of his destiny if he would fight against Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
who represented the right party and the true religion of Allah (s.w.t.).
Finally, he decided to join him. He went to ‘Umar and said, “Do you
really want to fight against this man?”

“Yes I do,” answered Umar, “I want to as intensely as possible.”

“Why do you not respond to his calls and accept one of the options he
had offered?” asked al-Hurr.

“I would do if it was my right to choose. But the matter is not mine. It
is your governor’s,” answered Umar.

Only then al-Hurr realized that Umar was fully ready to fight Imam
al-Husain (a.s.); therefore, he directed towards the Imam (a.s.) and
proceeded as he felt sorry for his past deeds against him.

When the Imam (a.s.) conferred upon him with pardon,[^252] al-Hurr
turned the face towards the troops of Umar ibn saad and went on
addressing words of reproach and blame for disappointing the Imam
(a.s.). Anyhow, his words did not find any place in their hearts.

The War
-------

Because Umar ibn Sa’d anticipated that other commanders would copy
al-Hurr, he hurried towards the Imam’s camp and threw an arrow shouting,
“Be the witnesses. I am the first to throw at al-Husain (a.s.)!”

This was the opening to hundreds of arrows thrown towards the Imam’s
camp. Seeing the situation, the Imam (a.s.) turned to his companions and
said, “Stand up, generous people. These arrows are your enemy’s
Messengers to you.[^253]

Hence, thirty-two horsemen and forty warriors had to encounter ten
thousands. However, this little party could stop against those huge
well-equipped numbers and show unprecedented scenes of courage and
bravery. Then Umar gave the orders of waging a wide campaign during
which all the detachments of the Umayyad army fought. Although half of
the Imam’s companions were killed during that campaign, they combated
extremely courageously and could cause great losses to the Umayyad army.

After this general campaign, the other companions began to wage
individual campaigns. In fact their unparalleled heroism frightened the
whole camp of the Umayyad army and caused it great losses; therefore,
Amr ibn al-Hajjaj cried at them, “Do you know against whom you are
fighting? You are fighting against the most courageous horsemen of this
country. They will keep killing anyone of you who intends to face them.
By Allah (s.w.t.) I swear, if you only throw at them stones, you will
kill them.”[^254]

Umar agreed on Amr’s opinion and ordered his forces to leave facing
those heroes. He then gave the orders of waging a general attack against
them. Nevertheless, the companions caused great losses to the attacking
forces to the degree that Urwah ibn Qays asked the commander in chief to
supply him with more men and weapons.

Umar then had to call al-Husain ibn Numayr and supply him with five
hundred bowmen who could wound the riding animals of the Imam’s
companions. Thus, all the companions, including al-Hurr ibn Yazid, had
to fight against their enemies on feet. This fighting which was
described by historians as the fieriest all over history continued to
midday. In the midst of that horrible scene, Abu Sumamah al-Sa’idi; one
of the Imam’s companions, raised his head to the sky and told the Imam
about the time of the Zhuhr prayer. The Imam (a.s.) asked his companions
to demand with cease fighting so that they would offer the prayer. They
responded to this demand, but as soon as the Imam (a.s.) and his
companions stood erect for the prayer, the Umayyad army began throwing
darts at them. Sa’id al-Hanafi made his body as the armor that protected
the Imam (a.s.) while he was praying. When the Imam (a.s.) finished his
prayer, Sa’id was heavily wounded that he fell dead.

The other companions continued fighting for sake of their Imam (a.s.)
courageously until they all were killed.

After the companions, it was the turn of the youths of the Prophet’s
Household. Like attacking lions they rushed themselves to the
battlefield and began to bid farewell each other with teary eyes for the
loneliness of their Imam (a.s.) who would very soon be helpless.

The first to advance was the eighteen year-old[^255] young man and the
most similar to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in form, morals, and
personality. This was Ali al-Akbar (a.s.) son of Imam al-Husain (a.s.).
The Imam felt greatly sad when he knew for certain that his son would
proceed for fighting. He therefore raised his beard towards the heavens
and complained to the Lord against the gang who fought against him and
would be ready to kill his dearest one. He, as well as the harem of the
Prophet’s Household, saw Ali al-Akbar (a.s.) off with tears, cries, and
moaning. He then put his hand under his beard, raised it towards the
heavens, and prayed:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ اشْهَدْ عَلٰي هٰؤُلاَءِ القَوْمِ، فَقَدْ بَرَزَ اِلَيْهِمْ
غُلامٌ اَشْبَهُ النَّاسِ خَلْقًا وَ خُلْقًا وَ مَنْطِقًا بِرَسُوْلِكَ،
وَ كُنَّا اِذَا اشْتَقْنَا اِلٰي نَبِيِّكَ نَظَرْنَا اِلٰي وَجْهِه.
اللّٰهُمَّ امْنَعْهُمْ بَرَكَاتِ الاَرْضِ، وَ فَرِّقْهُمْ تَفْرِيْقًا،
وَ مَزِّقْهُمْ تَمْزِيْقًا، وَاجْعَلْهُمْ طَرَائِقَ قِدَدًا، وَلاَ
تُرْضِ الوُلاةَ عَنْهُمْ اَبَدًا فَاِنَّهُمْ دَعَوْنَا لِيَنْصُرُوْنَا
ثُمَّ عَدَوْا عَلَيْنَا يُقَاتِلُوْ نَنَا.
</p>

*O Allah! be the witness on those people! A youth who is the most
similar to Your Prophet in form, morals, and personality is now facing
them in the battlefield. We used to look at his face whenever we missed
the Prophet. O Allah! deprive those people of the blessings of the
earth, scatter them thoroughly, strew about them scatteringly, break
them up in sundry paths, and never make their rulers pleased with them,
for they are fighting us aggressively after they promised they would
support us.*

The Imam (a.s.) then turned to Umar and shouted, “What is the matter
with you? I (invoke Allah (s.w.t.) against you and) implore to Him to
terminate your kinship, unless your deeds, and give a free hand to
someone who will slay you in your bed, because you have terminated my
kinship andviolated my relation to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).”

Imam al-Husain (a.s.) then recited Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفٰى آدَمَ وَنُوْحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيْمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِيْنَ. ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِنْ بَعْضٍ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ سَمِيْعٌ عَلِيْمٌ.
</p>

***Surely, Allah (s.w.t.) chose Adam and Nuh (Noah) and the descendants
of Ibrahim (Abraham) andthe descendants of Imran above the nations.
Offspring one of the other; and Allah (s.w.t.) is all hearing,
Knowing.***

The young proceeded declaring the principles for which he was fighting
and his tremendous determination to protect the religion of Allah
(s.w.t.) even if this would cost him his life. He then encountered the
enemies and showed indescribable courage and heroism to the degree that
historians have described his fighting by saying, “Ali al-Akbar’s (a.s.)
fighting reminded the enemies of the attacks of his grandfather Amir
al-Mu’mineen (a.s.).”

In the midst of the fighting, Ali (a.s.) was seriously thirsty because
the enemies deprived them of water. He therefore had to return to his
father and ask for some water, but the father (a.s.) had nothing to do.
He had no single drop of water to give to his son. Painfully, he
apologized and promised that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) would very soon give
a drink of water that would save from thirst forever.

The young then returned to the battlefield and fought courageously
despite the many wounds he had in the body. The whole camp of the
Umayyad army complained about the great losses that the young son of
Imam al-Husain (a.s.) caused to them; therefore, Murrah ibn Munqiz
decided to kill him. So he stabbed him with a spear from the back and
struck him with his sword so heavily on the head. Ali (a.s.) held fast
on his horse’s neck thinking the horse would take him towards his
father’s camp. Unfortunately, the horse took him towards the enemies.
They encircled him and cut his body into pieces. The air carried the
son’s cries to his father who hurried to him and found him in the last
sparks of life. He put his cheek on his son’s severed body and shed
tears for him, saying:

<p dir="rtl">
قَتَلَ اللهُ قَوْمًا قَتَلُوكَ يَا بُنَيَّ، مَا اَجْرَاَهُمْ عَلٰي اللهِ
وَ عَلٰي انْتِهَاكِ حُرْمَةِ الرَّسُوْلِ عَلٰي الدُّنْيَا بَعْدَكَ
العَفَا.
</p>

*May Allah (s.w.t.) kill those who killed you son! They are so reckless
that they have regarded neither Allah (s.w.t.) nor the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) to whom you belong. After you, let dust cover this
(meaningless) world.[^256]*

As soon as the news of Ali al-Akbar’s (a.s.) martyrdom reached her, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) could not control her feelings. She hurried to the severed
body shouting, “Oh, for my dear one! Oh, for my nephew![^257] Oh, for
the light of my eyes! Oh, for the fruit of my heart![^258] She threw
herself on the dead body, stained it with her ceaseless tears, and
moaned for the martyred Ali al-Akbar (a.s.). Imam al-Husain (a.s.) had
nothing to do but trying to console. He then held on her sister’s hand
and took her back to the tent.[^259]

After that, the young descendants of Aqil ibn Abu Talib rushed for jihad
intending to sacrifice their souls for their leader. They fought
courageously and caused great losses to the Umayyad army. However, they
were all martyred.

Then the turn of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)’sdescendants came. They also
pushed themselves for protecting their uncle and defending their
religion. Among them was al-Qasim (a.s.) whom historians have described
as bright as moon. Before he fought against the enemies, he had
declared, “As long as I am alive, my uncle al-Husain (a.s.) shall not be
killed.” The Imam (a.s.) however did not permit al-Qasim (a.s.) to
fight, but he insisted importunately, kissed his uncle’s hands and feet,
and begged him to let him fight. The Imam (a.s.) then had to permit him
with weeping eyes and burning heart. Like the other heroes of the
Hashemite’s, al-Qasim (a.s.) fought bravely and killed numbers of the
Umayyad army. In the midst of the fighting, the heel of his slipper was
cut. As he nodded down for repairing it out of his disdain, one of the
Umayyad soldiers seized that opportunity and struck him on the head. He
fell down and cried at his uncle who hurried towards him and killed his
killer. He then carried the dead body of his nephew and lined it beside
the other martyrs. He looked at the dead bodies for a while and then
cursed their killers.

Awn ibn Abdullah ibn Ja’far, son of Lady Zaynab (a.s.), proceeded for
fighting, though he was too young to fight. Like the other courageous
youths, Awn fought so bravely until he was martyred. His mother received
his dead body with steadfastness and offered him for Allah (s.w.t.),
anticipating His limitless reward.

At any rate, that scene was not strange for her; before her son, she had
received a rank of moonlike, yet killed youths. It was nothing but her
unshakable faith which provided her with endurance and ability to keep
steadfast before such scenes.

Thus, all the Hashemite warriors were martyred and none remained except
the guardian of the Prophet’s harem and the right hand of Imam al-Husain
(a.s.), namely the hero Abul-Fazl al-Abbas (a.s.).

Al-Abbas (a.s.) watched all these crises and misfortunes patiently, and
waited for the proper opportunity to begin fighting against the enemies
and take revenge upon them. After the martyrdom of the youths of the
Prophet’s Household (s.a.w.a.), he directed towards his full brothers
and said to them, “Brothers, proceed for fighting so that I will be sure
that you have done sincerely for sake of Allah (s.w.t.) and His
Messenger(s.a.w.a.) and I will surely avenge your blood. You have no
children.” Allhis full brethren welcomed his call and went for fighting
courageously. One by one, they were martyred before their elder brother
al-Abbas (a.s.) who stood near their dead bodies and shed tears for
these bright faces.

Martyrdom Of Al-Abbas (a.s.)
----------------------------

Al-Abbas (a.s.) was the dearest one to Imam al-Husain (a.s.) who brought
him up on nobilities of character and high moral standards. The Imam
also taught him the rulings of the Islamic Shari’ah that he has been
regarded as one of the most virtuous scholars of Islam. Al-Abbas (a.s.)
continually sought the company of his brother and gave comfort to him in
all misfortunes. Brightness was very clear in the lineaments of al-Abbas
(a.s.) face,that he was called moon of the Hashemite’s. Because he was
unmatched hero, al-Abbas (a.s.) was given the leadership of Imam-al
Husain’s army and was the holder of the standard. In addition he was the
guardian of the harem and children. Finally, he had a special
relationship with his sister, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) who took care of him
from early life and loved him tenderly. He, too, loved his sister very
much and undertook the task of guarding her and settling all her needs.

When al-Abbas (a.s.) noticed the loneliness of his brother and the
martyrdom of his companions and Household, he advanced towards him and
asked permission to fight. The Imam (a.s.) did not permit him as he said
with a sad tone, “You are the holder of my standard...” He, in fact,
felt of power and protection so long as al-Abbas (a.s.) was with him.
But Al-Abbas (a.s.) insisted on the permission and said “I can no longer
stand it. I want to take avenge upon those hypocrites.”

As the Imam (a.s.) had nothing to do other than permitting his brother
to fight, he asked him first to try to get water for the harem and
children who were gravely thirsty. Al-Abbas (a.s.) first directed
towards the Umayyad army with words of admonition and warning against
Allah’s torture; he directed his speech to their commander “Umar, this
is al-Husain (a.s.) son of the daughter of Allah’s Messenger(s.a.w.a.).
You have killed his companions and Household. These are now his children
and harem. They are thirsty and I ask you to give them water.
Nevertheless, he is still calling you to let him go to. Rome or India
and leave al-Hijaz and Iraq for you...”

None from the Umayyad army could answer al-Abbas (a.s.) except Shimr who
said to him, “If the whole surface of this earth is being water
controlled by us, we will not give you a single drop of it before you
submit to the leadership of Yazid.”

Hence, al-Abbas (a.s.) had to report this situation to his brother.
Meanwhile, he heard the cries of the children because of thirst and saw
the changes of their faces and the dryness of their lips. Therefore, he
decided to get some water for them. He rode his horse, took a skin of
water with him, and pushed himself towards the River Euphrates. The
Umayyad troops, who were according to some narratives about
four-thousand warriors, flew away and he alone could occupy the bank of
that river. His heart was as hot as fire because of thirst, but when he
extended his hand to the water and tried to drink, he remembered the
thirst of his brother, as well as his children and harem, in these
moments; hence, he threw the water from his hand and declared that he
would not drink a single drop of it so long as his brother and leader,
Imam al-Husain (a.s.), is thirsty.

After this tremendous situation of altruism that exceeded all dimensions
of time and space, al-Abbas (a.s.) filled the skin with water and took
the way back to his brother’s camp. For the meantime, the enemies
surrounded him from every side and tried to prevent him from taking that
water with him. He, fearlessly, fought against them and caused them big
losses. Chased by terror and fear, the enemies were fleeing away from
Al-Abbas (a.s.) who copied his father in courage. However, one of the
filthy hypocrites of Kufa waylaid him behind a date-palm tree, struck
him from the back on his right hand, and cut it. Nevertheless, al-Abbas
(a.s.), the hero did not care and held the standard in his left hand and
went on saying, “Even if you cut my hand, I will keep defending my
religionand leader.” A few moments later, another man hid behind a tree,
struck al-Abbas (a.s.) with a sword on his left hand, and cut it.
Although he was bleeding and suffering these wounds besides thirst,
al-Abbas (a.s.) held the skin of water with his teeth and ran trying to
take it to his brother’s children and harem. Meanwhile, a spear hit that
skin of water and caused it to drop on the ground. Seeing this scene,
al-Abbas (a.s.) stood in sadness and perplexity. He did not know what to
do, A few moments. Later, another man attacked him with an iron-post and
struck on the head. Al-Abbas (a.s.) fell to the ground and shouted
“Peace be upon you, Abu Abdullah!

The air carried these words of farewell to the Imam (a.s.). So, he
hurried toward River al-Alqami where al-Abbas (a.s.) fell. He pushed
himself among the troops of the enemies and threw himself on the body of
his brother. Expressing the grave misfortune he suffered by the
martyrdom of al-Abbas (a.s.), Imam al-Husain (a.s.) shouted;

<p dir="rtl">
الآنَ انْكَسَرَ ظَهْرِي، وَ قَلَّتْ حِيْلَتِيْ، وَ شَمُتَ بِي عَدُوِّي.
</p>

*Only now have I become spineless and hopeless and my enemies are
rejoicing at my misfortune.*

No one can describe the real feelings of the Imam after the martyrdom of
al-Abbas (a.s.). However, historians have mentioned that he, as he was
leaving the dead body of his brother, could hardly move his feet. He
directed towards the camp while he was wiping off his tears. His
daughter Sukaynah (a.s.) received him with the question“Where is my
uncle al-Abbas (a.s.)?”

The Imam (a.s.) wept openly and told her about her uncle’s martyrdom.
The daughter had nothing to do other than moaning aloud. The situation
was more difficult for Lady Zaynab (a.s.); as soon as she heard the
news, she put her hand on her heart and shouted aloud, “Oh, for my
brother! Oh, for al-Abbas (a.s.)! We have certainly lost everything as
we lost you.”

It was surely grave misfortune for Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and the
Prophet’s harem that filled that place with cries and moaning for their
guardian and protector. The Imam also participated with them in weeping
as he shouted, “We have surely lost everything as we lost you, Abul-Fazl
al-Abbas (a.s.).”

Even the Newborn!
-----------------

Abdullah, the six-month old baby of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), was fainted
because of thirst. So, his mother carried him to Lady Zaynab (a.s.) so
that she might do something. Lady Zaynab (a.s.) took the baby to her
brother, Imam al-Husain (a.s.), and pleased him to fetch water for him.
The Imam (a.s.) took the baby, kissed him very often, and carried him
before the Umayyad army hoping their hearts would feel pity for the baby
and give him some water. This situation had nothing to do with those
heartless, inhumane creatures, and instead of sympathizing with the
baby, they threw him with a dart that settled in his neck. Feeling the
heat of that dart, the baby took his two hands away from his swaddle and
began to flutter like a slain bird on his father’s chest. Finally, he
raised his head to the heavens and breathed his last breath before his
father’s eyes.

The Imam (a.s.), so steadfastly, handed the slain baby to Lady Zaynab
(a.s.), raised his two hands, which were full of the baby’s blood,
towards the heavens, and complained to the Creator.

The Grand Adversity
-------------------

With self-possession and unprecedented resoluteness, Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) stood completely lonely in the midst of the battlefield while he
was surrounded, from every side, by his brutal foes some of whom were
surprised at his courage even as the others could not hide their
amazement. Despite everything, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) attacked his
enemies and caused them losses.

He then returned to the tents to bid farewell and give his last
instructions to the harem. He ordered them to depend upon Almighty Allah
by means of patience and steadfastness. He then turned his eyes towards
his sister, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), and instructed her to adhere to patience
and try her best to hide her tears and irritation. He finally ordered
her to be the guardian of the children and harem.

When he was about to leave, his harem surrounded him with teary eyes and
grievous hearts. The extremely ailed, Ali Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.), asked
his aunt, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), to give him a stick and a sword; a stick
to help him stand erectly, and a sword to defend his father. Seeing this
situation, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) asked his sister to prevent Ali (a.s.)
from proceeding to the battlefield, and she did, yet forcibly.

Finally, he gave the last instructions to the harem: dress heavy
loincloth, ready themselves for misfortunes, and submit completely to
Almighty Allah. The Imam’s last words to them were:

<p dir="rtl">
اِسْتَعِدُّوا لِلْبَلاَءِ وَ اَعْلَمُوْا اَنَّ اللهَ حَامِيْكُمْ وَ
حَافِظُكُمْ وَ سَيُنْجِيْكُمْ مِنْ شَرِّ الأعْدَاءِ وَ يَجْعَلُ
عَاقِبَةَ أَمْرِكُمْ اِلٰي خَيْرٍ وَ يُعَذِّبُ عَدُوَّكُمْ بِاَنْوَاعِ
العَذَابِ وَ يُعَوِّضُكُمْ عَنْ هٰذِهِ البَلِيَّةِ بِاَنْوَاعِ النِّعَمِ
وَ الْكَرَامَةِ فَلاَ تَشْكُوا وَلاَ تَقُوْلُوا بِأَلْسِنَتِكُمْ مَا
يُنْقِصُ قَدْرَكُمْ.
</p>

*Prepare yourselves for the imminent misfortunes. You should know that
Allah (s.w.t.) shall guard, protect, and save you from the evils of
those enemies. He shall confer upon you with a good end result, shall
punish your enemies with the most grievous chastisement, and shall award
you for this adversity with the best graces and blessings. You therefore
must not complain and must not say things that discredit you.*

He then supplicated to his Lord and complained to Him against the
misfortunes he had to suffer. He said:

<p dir="rtl">
صَبْرًا عَلٰي قَضَائِكَ يَا رَبُّ، لاَ اِلٰهَ سِوَاكَ، يَا غِيَاثَ
الْمُسْتَغِيْثِيْنَ، مَا لِي رَبٌّ سِوَاكَ وَلاَ مَعْبُوْدٌ غَيْرُكَ
صَبْرًا عَلٰي حَكْمِكَ يَا غِيَاثَ مَنْ لاَ غِيَاثَ لَهٗ ، يَا دَائِمًا
لاَ نَفَادَ لَه ٗ ، يَا مُحْيِيَ ال مَوْتٰي، يضا قَائِمًا عَلٰي كُلِّ
نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ، اَحْكُمْ بَيْنِي وَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَ اَنْتَ خَيْرُ
الْحَاكِـمِيْنَ.
</p>

*O Lord, I take patience over Your providence. There is no god save You.
You are the helper of the succor-seekers. Except You, I have neither
lord nor deity. I take patience over Your rule. You are the helper of
the shelter less. You are the everlasting Subsistent. You are the
Watcher over each and every soul as to what it earns. (I implore to You
to) judge between us, and You are the best to judge.*

From every side, the criminal, filthy gang of the Umayyad army attacked
Imam al-Husain (a.s.); they struck him with swords and stabbed him with
lances.[^260]

When he rested on the ground, no one of them had the courage to put him
to death. He therefore rested there for a long time.

Seeing this situation, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) stood at her tent’s open and
mourned for the Imam (a.s.) so sadly. She shouted, “Oh, for my brother!
Oh, for my master! Oh, for the rest of my Household! Would Allah
(s.w.t.) the heavens had fallen upon the earth! Would Allah (s.w.t.)
mountains had been made to crumble on plains!”

She then shouted at Umar ibn Sa’d, “How do you accept to watch Abu
Abdullah while he is being slain?”

As an answer, the cursed Umar turned his face away from her while his
tears were shedding on his beard.

Because she could no longer see her brother in such a state, Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) had to return to the tents to watch over the children and harem
that would soon be without protection.

Umar ibn Sa’d then ordered the commanders of his army to put the Imam
(a.s.) to death, but none of them agreed except Shimr. He walked towards
the Imam (a.s.) and cut off his head.

The Imam’s horse began to neigh aloud and try to kick the enemies with
its legs. It then smeared its face with the blood of the Imam and
directed towards the tents of the harem.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) ran towards the pure body of Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
and saw, how It was torn by the swords and lances of those ruthless
fiends. Before that body, she stood with perfect dignity and modesty
though the surrounding of the enemies glanced at the heavens, and said
that statement, which has lit up with the purest spirit of faith and
sincerity to Almighty Allah (s.w.t.). She said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا هٰذَا الْقُرْبَانَ.
</p>

*O Allah! accept from us this offering.*

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) received that misfortune with steadfastness because
it was for sake of Almighty Allah and for keeping His Religion as pure
and genuine as it was revealed from the Heavens. By these words, she
showed the real meanings of the Prophetic heritage and the perseverance
on the carrying out of her father’s will.

After they had slain and martyred the Imam (a.s.), the Umayyad army,
according to the orders of their commandment, carried firebrands and
directed towards the tents of the Imam’s camp to put them on fire.

When these tents were put on fire, the children and harem had to leave
them fleeing to nowhere. The ladies of the Prophet’s family had to run
from one tent to another, while the children, descendants of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), were crying and trying to cling to their guardian, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.). Furthermore, some of them ran aimlessly.

These hours were the harshest misfortunes that the Prophet’s family had
ever suffered. Throughout his life Imam Ali Zayn al-Abideen (a.s.) could
not forget these hours: He used to remember them with grief, saying,
“Whenever I look at my aunts and sisters, tears turn in my eyes. I
remember when they were running from a tent to another while the enemies
were shouting: put the houses of the wrongful ones on fire.”

Moreover, the criminals usurped everything these tents included. They
also stroke the ladies of the Prophet’s Household with the lower parts
of their lances while the ladies were resorting to each other for
protection. They also usurped their jewelries.

The criminals attacked the ailed Ali Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.). Shimr
determined to kill him, but another man rebuked and tried to prevent
him. However, Shimr did not heed; he ran towards the ailed to kill him.
Lady Zaynab (a.s.) hurried towards her nephew, held on to him, and said,
“No, you should first kill me before you kill him”[^261] Because of this
situation, the cursed Shimr stopped.

Out of his brutality, Umar, under a promise of awards, asked for
volunteers to drive their horses to run over the chest and back of the
body of Imam al-Husain (a.s.). Ten wicked horsemen stood up, rode their
horses, and trampled upon the body of the Imam (a.s.).

Night came, and it was the cruelest night in the life of the Prophet’s
Household. Despite everything, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) went into her mission
as guardian of her martyred brother’s children and harem; she hurried to
pick up the children in that desolate desert and gathered the all in one
place. She then comforted and solaced them with words of patience while
the dead bodies of their fathers and brothers spread in that area and
the criminals whom were assigned for watching the children and harem
surrounded them.

At that cruel night too, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) gathered her powers, stood
up, and offered a thanksgiving prayer to the Almighty Lord for the
adversities and misfortunes she suffered. She also implored to the Lord
to have these sacrifices in acceptance. She also offered the Night
Prayer, but in the state of sitting because she had no further power to
stand up.[^262]

The next day, the criminals decided to take the children and harem as
captives to Kufa. The ladies however begged the criminals to make them
pass by the dead bodies of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and the other martyrs.
When her eyes fell on the severed, headless body of Imam al-Husain
(a.s.), Lady Zaynab (a.s.) shouted with a grief-stricken voice:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا مُحَمَّدَاهُ! صَلّٰي عَلَيْكَ مَلِيْكُ السَّمَاءِ! هٰذَا حُسَيِّنٌ
مُرَمَّلٌ بِالدِّمَاءِ مُقَطِّعُ الأَعْضَاءِ، وَ بَنَاتُكَ سَبَايَا!
اِلٰي اللهِ الْمُشْتَكَيٰ وَ اِلٰي عَلِيٍّ الْمُرْتَضٰي وَ اِلٰي
فَاطِمَةَ الزَّهْرَاءِ وَ اِلٰي حَمْزَةَ سَيِّدِ الشُّهَدَاءِ هٰذَا
حُسَيْنٌ بِالعَرَاءِ، نَسْفِي عَلَيْهِ الصَّبَا، قَتِيْلَ اَوْلاَدِ
الأدْعِيَاءِ وَاحُزْنَاهُ! وَاكَرْبَاهُ! الْيَوْمَ مَاتَ جَدِّي رَسُوْلُ
اللهِ! يَا اَصْحَابَ مُحَمَّدَاهُ! هٰؤلاءِ ذُرِّيَّةُ الْمُصْطَفٰي
يُسَاقُوْنَ سَوْقَ السَّبَايَا.
</p>

*Oh, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)! May the King of the Heavens bless you, This is
Husain (a.s.)! He is stained with his blood and his limbs are severed!
And these are your daughters! They are taken captives! Complaining
(about this) is only to Allah (s.w.t.), to Ali al-Murtaza (the Pleased
One), to Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.), and to Hamzah the chief of martyrs.
This is Husain (a.s.) in the desert! Winds are blowing his body! He is
being killed by bastards! Oh, for my grief! Oh, for my bereavement! This
day only has my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), died.
Oh, companions of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)! These are the descendants of
al-Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) the Divinely Selected Prophet (s.a.w.a.). They are
pushed like captives.*

The only saved man, Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.), could not control
himself when he saw the dead bodies of his father and the other martyrs
thrown away in the desert. His grief was about to kill him, but Lady
Zaynab (a.s.),noticing his nephew’s behavior, hurried to him and said:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا لِي أَرَاكَ تَجُوْدُ بِنَفْسِكَ- يَا بَقِيَّةَ جَدِّيْ وَ أَبِي وَ
إِخْوَتِيْ؟ لَا يَجْزَعَنَّكَ مَا تَرٰى، فَوَ اللَّهِ إِنَّ ذٰلِكَ
لَعَهْدٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ إِلٰى جَدِّكَ وَ أَبِيْكَ. وَ لَقَدْ أَخَذَ
اللَّهُ مِيْثَاقَ أُنَاسٍ مِنْ هٰذِهِ الْأُمَّةِلَا تَعْرِفُهُمْ
فَرَاعِنَةُ هٰذِهِ الْاُمَّةِ
وَهُمْمَعْرُوْفُوْنَفِيأَهْلِالسَّمَاوَاتِأَنَّهُمْيَجْمَعُوْنَهٰذِهِالْأَعْضَاءَ
الْمُتَفَرِّقَةَوَ هٰذِهِ الْجُسُوْمَ الْمُضَرَّجَةَ فَيُوَارُوْنَهَا وَ
يُنْصِبُوْنَ بِهٰذَا الطَّفِّ عَلَمًا لِقَبْرِ أَبِيْكَ سَيِّدِ
الشُّهَدَاءِ لَا يَدْرُسُ أَثَرُهُوَ لَا يَعْفُوْ رَسْمُهٗ عَلٰى
كُرُوْرِ اللَّيَالِي وَ الْأَيَّامِوَ لَيَجْتَهِدَنَّ أَئِمَّةُ
الْكُفْرِ وَ أَشْيَاعُ الضَّلَالَةِفِي مَحْوِه وَ تَطْمِيسِه فَلَا
يَزْدَادُ أَثَرُهٗ إِلَّا ظُهُوْراً وَ أَمْرُهٗ إِلَّا عُلُوّاً.
</p>

*O the legacy of my grandfather, father, and brothers: what for is it
that I see you plead for death?[^263] Do not be sad for what you see. It
is, by Allah (s.w.t.) I swear it, only the divulgement of Almighty Allah
to your grandfather and father. Allah (s.w.t.) has certainly made a
covenant with some people, whom are not known by the tyrants on this
earth but they are well known by the inhabitants of the Heavens, that
they shall gather these severed organs, and these bloodstained bodies to
bury them. They shall also hoist in this land, al-Taff, and a flag on
the tomb of your father the Master of the Martyrs. Throughout days and
ages, the mark of this tomb shall never be obliterated and its figure
shall not be blotted out. Nevertheless, the heads of atheism and the
spreaders of deviation shall exert all efforts for obliterating it, yet
this shall make it more and more elevated instead.[^264]*

By these words, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) could tranquil her distressed nephew.
She confirmed that these dead bodies would be buried and their tombs
would be signs of perseverance on principles and sacrifice for the
Religion. The tomb of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), in particular, would be a
never-ending cry in the face of every tyrant and would persist forever
despite the very often attempts to obliterate it.

History has proved this fact; the Umayyad and Abbasid kings did their
best to wipe out the tomb of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), but all their
attempts failed, because it has not been only a place of burying a dead,
yet severed, body, but it has been a scream in the face of everyone who
tyrannizes or tries to persecute. It has been evidence on the fate of
the wrong, and the bright endlessness of the right. The earth too has
not accepted to hide its pride in including these severed bodies that
carried unmatched, elevated souls that, in turn, carried the most
honorable principles of humanity. In reality, this earth has never
contained an area more honorable and excellent than that which included
the body of Imam al-Husain (a.s.),father of freedom.

In modern history too, bombs and tanks could not stand against the
elevated, lofty dome of the tomb of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and it was
very natural that those who gave orders to bomb that dome met the same
fate of those who gave orders and mobilized all powers to fight against
the Imam (a.s.).

Humanity too must take pride in the anniversary of Imam al-Husain’s
(a.s.) martyrdom so as to regain its true face and play the very role
that the Creator has chosen for it.


