Lady Zaynab (a.s.) In Captivity
===============================

Bound with ropes and forced to ride on saddleless, lean camels, the
ladies and orphans of the Prophet’s family were taken as captives to
Kufa. Their caravan was very horrible; clarions were blown and flags
were fluttering. Let us listen to the story from an eyewitness:

Muslim, the plasterer, reports:

While I was plastering doors of the Governorate Mansion of Kufa, sounds
of clarions attacked my hearing from every side. “Why is Kufa
clamoring?” I asked one of the servants in that mansion. “The head of a
mutinous that rebelled against Yazid is now entering the city,” answered
the servant. “Who is that mutinous?” asked I. “It is al-Husain ibn Ali
(a.s.),” answered the servant.

This answer acted upon me like a thunderbolt. I slapped my face so
strongly that I feared on my eyes. As hurriedly as possible, I washed my
hands from the plaster and left the mansion. While I stood among people
who were waiting for the caravan of the captives and the cut off heads
forty camels carrying women and children appeared. I saw Ali ibn
al-Husain (a.s.) on a saddleless camel. As both sides of his neck were
bleeding because of chains and he was handcuffed, he was weeping and
saying, “O evil nation! Curse you! You have not regarded us in favor of
our grandfather. What will you say on the Day of Resurrection when Allah
(s.w.t.) will gather us with the Prophet? As if we have not guided you
to the religion, you are, now, taking us on naked camels, by
force.”[^265]

In view of this horrible situation, women of Kufa began to mourn and
cry. One of them approached one of the captured ladies and asked, “To
whom do you belong?”

The lady answered, “We belong to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).”

As she heard this astounding answer, the Kufian lady, with the others
who were next to her, screamed aloud and hurried to her house to bring
any covers she had and throw on the captive ladies so that people would
not look at them. Another lady brought some food and dates and threw at
the captive children who were harshly hungry, but Lady Umme Kulsum
shouted at them, “It is Haram (unallowable) for us, the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.), to have from alms.” Hearing this statement the hungry children
threw the food from their hands and even mouths.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) First Address
--------------------------------

As she saw the crowds blocking all streets of Kufa and surrounding the
caravan, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) decided to deliver a speech aiming at
uniting the public opinion, referring to the grand misfortune that the
Umayyad gang brought to the Islamic Ummah by killing the actual leader,
Imam al-Husain (a.s.), and charging people of Kufa with that crime,
because it was they who breached their promises of supporting the Imam
(a.s.) and protecting him. Nevertheless, they, as if it was not they who
caused that massacre, mourned for the Imam (a.s.) and wept for the
captivity of his harem and children.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) asked everybody to keep silent, and then she, calm,
composed, and courageous, said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ وَ الصَّلَاةُ عَلٰى أَبِيْ مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ
الطَّيِّبِيْنَ الْأَخْيَارِأَمَّا بَعْدُ يَا أَهْلَ الْكُوفَةِ يَا
أَهْلَ الْخَتْلِ وَ الْغَدْرِ أَ تَبْكُوْنَ فَلَا رَقَأَتِ الدَّمْعَةُ
وَ لَا هَدَأَتِ الرَّنَّةُ. إِنَّمَا مَثَلُكُمْ كَمَثَلِ الَّتِيْ
نَقَضَتْ غَزْلَها مِنْ بَعْدِ قُوَّةٍ أَنْكاثاً تَتَّخِذُوْنَ
أَيْمانَكُمْ دَخَلًا بَيْنَكُمْ أَلَا وَ هَلْ فِيْكُمْ إِلَّا الصَّلِفُ
وَ النَّطِفُ وَ مَلَقُ الْإِمَاءِ وَ غَمْزُ الْأَعْدَاءِ أَوْ كَمَرْعًى
عَلٰى دِمْنَةٍ أَوْ كَقِصَّةٍ عَلٰى مَلْحُوْدَةٍ أَلَا سَاءَ مَا
قَدَّمَتْ لَكُمْ أَنْفُسُكُمْ أَنْ سَخِطَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ فِي
الْعَذَابِ أَنْتُمْ خَالِدُوْنَ.
</p>

*All praise is due to Allah. Blessings be upon my father Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) and upon his good and righteous progeny (a.s.). Well now, O
people of Kufa; people of deception and perfidy! Do you weep? May your
tears never cease, and may the resounding of this calamity never stop.
Your similitude is she who unravels her yarn, disintegrating it into
pieces after she has spun it strongly; you make your oaths to be means
of deceit between you. Is there anyone among you who is not a boaster of
what he does not have, a charger of debauchery, a conceited liar, a man
of grudge without any justification, submissive like bondmaids, or
feeble before the enemies, just like a pasture in relics or like a dirty
piece of cloth on a grave? Truly bad is that which your souls have
committed. You have reaped the Wrath of Allah (s.w.t.), remaining in the
chastisement for eternity.*

<p dir="rtl">
أَ تَبْكُوْنَ وَ تَنْتَحِبُوْنَ إِيْ وَ اللَّهِ فَابْكُوْا كَثِيْراً وَ
اضْحَكُوْا قَلِيْلًا فَلَقَدْ ذَهَبْتُمْ بِعَارِهَا وَ شَنَآنِهَا (وَ
شَنَارِهَا) وَ لَنْ تَرْحَضُوْهَا بِغَسْلٍ بَعْدَهَا أَبَداً وَ أَنَّى
تَرْحَضُونَ قَتْلَ سَلِيلِ خَاتَمِ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ وَ سَيِّدِ شَبَابِ
أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ وَ مَلَاذِ خِيَرَتِكُمْ وَ مَفْزَعِ نَازِلَتِكُمْ وَ
مَنَارِ حُجَّتِكُمْ وَ مَدَرَةِ سُنَّتِكُمْ أَلَا سَاءَ مَا تَزِرُونَ وَ
بُعْداً لَكُمْ وَ سُحْقاً فَلَقَدْ خَابَ السَّعْيُ وَ تَبَّتِ الْأَيْدِي
وَ خَسِرَتِ الصَّفْقَةُ وَ بُؤْتُمْ بِغَضَبٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَ ضُرِبَتْ
عَلَيْكُمُ الذِّلَّةُ وَ الْمَسْكَنَةُ
</p>

*Do you really cry and sob? By Allah (s.w.t.), you should then cry a
great deal and laugh very little, for you have earned nothing but shame
and infamy and you shall never be able to wash it away. How could you do
so? The descendant of the bearer of the Last Message, the very essence
of the Message, master of the youths of Paradise, the refuge of the
righteous from among you, the one who saves you from calamity, the
beacon of your guidance, and the keeper of your traditions has been
killed. O how horrible is the sin that you bear!May you be distanced and
crushed. The effort is rendered futile, perdition overtakes the hands,
the deal is lost and you earned nothing but wrath from Allah (s.w.t.)
and His Messenger(s.a.w.a.). You are doomed with servitude and
humiliation.*

<p dir="rtl">
وَيْلَكُمْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكُوفَةِ اَ تَدْرُوْنَ أَيَّ كَبِدٍ لِرَسُولِ
اللَّهِ فَرَيْتُمْ وَ أَيَّ كَرِيمَةٍ لَهٗ أَبْرَزْتُمْ وَ أَيَّ دَمٍ
لَهٗ سَفَكْتُمْ وَ أَيَّ حُرْمَةٍ لَهُ انْتَهَكْتُمْ لَقَدْ جِئْتُمْ
شَيْئًا اِدًّا تَكَادُ السَّمٰوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَ تَنْشَقُّ
الْاَرْضُ وَ تَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدًّا. بِهَا صَلْعَاءَ عَنْقَاءَ
سَوْدَاءَ فَقْمَاءَ (خَرْقَاءَ شَوْهَاءَ كَطِلَاعِ الْأَرْضِ وَ مِلَاءِ
السَّمَاءِ). أَ فَعَجِبْتُمْ أَنْ قَطَرَتِ السَّمَاءُ دَماً وَ لَعَذَابُ
الْآخِرَةِ أَخْزٰى وَ أَنْتُمْ لَا تُنْصَرُونَ. فَلَا يَسْتَخِفَّنَّكُمُ
الْمَهْلُ فَإِنَّهٗ لَا يَحْفِزُهُ الْبِدَارُ وَ لَا يَخَافُ فَوْتُ
الثَّأْرِ وَ إِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ.
</p>

*Woe unto you, O people of Kufa! Do you know whose heart you have
burned, what a feat you have labored, what blood you have shed, and what
sanctity you have violated? You have done a most monstrous deed,
something for which the heavens are about to split asunder and so is the
earth, and for which the mountains crumble. You have done something most
uncanny, most defaced, duskiest, most horrible, as much as the fill of
the earth and of the sky. Do you wonder why the sky rains blood? Surely,
the torment of the Hereafter is a greater chastisement, and you shall
not be helped. Let no respite elate you, for rushing does not speed it
up, nor does it fear the loss of the opportunity for revenge. Your Lord
is waiting in ambush to do so.*

Because he recognized that the situation could no longer stand the words
of his aunt, Imam Zayn al-Abideen (a.s.) interrupted her speech,
saying,*“That is enough, aunt. Thanks to Allah (s.w.t.), you are a
learned lady whom none taught, and you can comprehend without being made
to do so.”*

Echo Of The Speech
------------------

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’seloquent speech, which is compared to Imam
Ali(a.s.)’sspeeches, rebuked people of Kufa so effectively, exposed
their false faith in Islam, falsified their deceitful tears, and
introduced them as the most ignoble criminals as they contributed
strongly in the murder of killing Imam al-Husain (a.s.), his Household,
and his companions.

With the utterance of justice and honesty and the voice of courage and
right, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) hit people of Kufa and pointed to their
lowliness and rotten-heartedness. Their forgery and falsehood could not
deceive her as she reproached them for their crimes and ascribed to them
the meanest characters. Moreover, she commented on their weeping by
saying that they should have wept for the big crime of disappointing the
Imam and letting him down.

Furthermore, this speech made them amazed and perplexed. They put their
hands on their mouths without knowing what to do. An old man, for
instance, approached her with teary eyes, saying, “My father and mother
be sacrificed for you. Your men are the best men, your youths are the
best youths, your women are the best women, and your progeny will never
die away or become low.”[^266]

Then, Lady Fatimah, daughter of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), delivered an
eloquent speech similar to her aunt’s. Because her words were so strong
and had bearings on them, people of Kufa begged her to stop. She
responded, but people could not stop their wailings and weeping.

Then, Lady Umme Kulsum spoke similar words that touched people so deeply
that women began to slap their faced and men to weep incessantly.

Then, Imam Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.) spoke. He proved they were not true
Muslims and that they had a share in the crime of killing the Imam
(a.s.). They therefore said to each other, “We have certainly perished.”
They then asked him to stop, and he did as their cries and wailings
rose.

Before The Governor
-------------------

Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, son of the ill-famed Marjanah, was sitting on his
throne in the Governorate Mansion when the captive ladies and children
of the Prophet’s family were obliged to be before him. They were living
horrible hours in the humility of captivity and under the swords of
those miscreants who were there to congratulate him for his triumph and
narrate to him their crimes in Karbala, while he was listening
arrogantly and joyfully. With a baton he had in the hand, Ubaydullah was
whacking the Holy head of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and expressing his
gloating over him by saying, “I have never seen such a face.”

Before he had finished his malicious statement, Anas ibn Malik, the
companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), said to him, “Yes, he looks
like the Prophet.” This statement silenced Ubaydullah who could not find
a word to answer.

After he had quenched his wicked, thirsty soul from the Prophet’s
family, Ubaydullah turned his face towards the captives. There was a
lady trying to hide herself in a remote side of the session. Dignity and
sublimity were drawn very clearly on her features despite the simple
clothes she dressed. As soon as his eyes fell on her, he asked, “Who is
that lady taking the remotest side of this session.”

The lady did not answer because she despised and slighted him. He
repeated his question more than once until one of the ladies answered,
“This is Zaynab, daughter of Fatimah, and daughter of the Messenger of
Allah (a.s.).” He therefore tried to show his gloating over her
misfortunes by saying, “Thanks Allah (s.w.t.) Who unmasked, killed and
belied your revolution.”

Patterning her courageous fathers and brothers, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
replied him:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي أَكْرَمَنَا بِنَبِيِّه، وَ طَهَّرَنَا مِنَ
الرِّجْسِ تَطْهِيرًا. إِنَّمَا يَفْتَضِحُ الْفَاسِقُ وَ يُكَذِّبُ
الْفَاجِرُ، وَ هُوَ غَيْرُنَا، وَ هُوَ غَيْرُنَا يَا بْنَ مَرْجَانَةَ...
</p>

*“Thanks Allah (s.w.t.) Who honored us with His Prophet and purified us
from uncleanness thoroughly. It is only the lewd whom is unmasked, and
it is only the dissolute whom is belied. We are not any of these two.
Indeed, we are not any of these two, sons of Marjanah![^267] ”*

As he received these shocking words, Ubaydullah had nothing to say. He
therefore spoke a word of wreak as an attempt to cover up his failure
and incapability to answer. He addressed her, “How do you see that which
Allah (s.w.t.) has done to your brother?”

Bravely and steadfastly, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) answered with words of
triumph:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا رَأَيْتُ إِلَّا جَمِيْلًا- هٰؤُلَاءِ قَوْمٌ كَتَبَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْهِمُ الْقَتْلَ فَبَرَزُوْا إِلٰى مَضَاجِعِهِمْ- وَ سَيَجْمَعُ
اللَّهُ بَيْنَكَ وَ بَيْنَهُمْ فَتُحَاجَّ وَ تُخَاصَمُ- فَانْظُرْ لِمَنِ
الْفَلَجُ يَوْمَئِذٍ. ثَكَلَتْكَ أُمُّكَ يَا ابْنَ مَرْجَانَةَ.
</p>

*“It was nothing but good. Those were peoples whom Allah (s.w.t.) knew
they would be killed. They therefore came to the places where they would
be slain. Allah (s.w.t.) will gather you with them for judgment and
sentence. See, who will be the triumphant on that day. Woe shallbe you,
son of Marjanah, then.”*

These words of reproach and despise made the bastard governor lose his
temper to the degree that he stood up to strike Lady Zaynab (a.s.),but
Amr ibn Hurays warned him against so, saying, “She is only a woman, and
women’s words should not be considered.”

Nevertheless, ‘Ubaydullah returned to gloat at the misfortunes of the
Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) by addressing Lady Zaynab (a.s.), “At least, Allah
(s.w.t.) has cured my heart and wreaked myself upon your tyrant master
and the disobedient rebels of your family members.”

These words filled Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sheart with sorrow and grief as she
recollected the images of her protectors. Hence, she said to him:

<p dir="rtl">
لَعَمْرِيْ لَقَدْ قَتَلْتَ كَهْلِيْ وَ قَطَعْتَ فَرْعِيْ وَ اجْتَثَثْتَ
أَصْلِيْ فَإِنْ كَانَ هٰذَا شِفَاؤُكَ فَقَدِ اشْتَفَيْتَ‏
</p>

*“I swear by my life, you have killed my protector, pulled up my
branches, and uprooted my roots. So, if this heals your heart, then you
are indeed healed.”*

Out of his uncontrollable rage, Ubaydullah said, “This one is rhymist.
Her father was rhymist and poet. I swear it.”

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) answered,*“I am too engaged to use rhyme. Women have
nothing to do with rhyme.”*

As he found nothing to say, Ubaydullah turned his face towards Imam Zayn
al-Abidin (a.s.) and asked, “Who are you?”

*“I am Ali son of al-Husain,”* answered the Imam (a.s.).

“But Allah has killed Ali ibn al-Husain,” shouted the filthy criminal.

*“I had a brother called Ali, too. You have killed him, and on the Day
of Resurrection you will be interrogated about this”* replied the Imam
(a.s.) with composure.

“No, it was Allah who killed him” barked Ubaydullah furiously.

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) answered with words of Almighty Allah:

***“Allah takes the souls at the time of their death”[^268]***

***“And a soul will not die but with the permission of Allah the term is
fixed”[^269]***

This answer bewildered the tyrant who did not expect to hear such strong
evidence extracted from the Holy Qur’an, because he forgot that the Holy
Qur’an was revealed in the houses of those individuals and the one to
whom the Holy Qur’an was revealed is their grandfather and origin.
Hence, he showed his arrogance saying, “How dare you answer my words?
How dare you refute my saying?” He then ordered one of his headmen to
cut off Imam Zayn al-Abidin’s (a.s.) head. But Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
hurried to embrace her nephew and address Ubaydullah,*“Son of Ziyad,
suffices you what you have shed of our blood. Have you really spared
anyone other than this? If you want to kill him, kill me with him as
well.”*

Ubaydullah was amazed by such situation of heroism and altruism. He
therefore ordered, “Leave him for her. How strong the tie of kinship is!
She wanted to be killed withhim.”

Thanks to Lady Zaynab (a.s.) Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) was saved from
that tyrant.

In a chamber lying next to the Kufa Masjid, the captive harem and
children of the Prophet’s family were detained and mistreated. Each one
of them received a single loaf of bread for a whole day, and Lady Zaynab
(a.s.), however, used to distribute her share among the children and
abstain from food for the whole day until feebleness attacked her
notably to the degree that she could no longer stand up for prayer.
Noticing this Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) expressed his panic to his aunt
who had to tell him the reason.

In view of Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sremarkable reputation throughout the
Islamic state, the ladies of Kufa competed with each other in having the
honor of visiting her, but she refused completely to receive anyone,
declaring,*“None should ever visit us except bondmaidens, for they have
been captured, and so have we been.”*

The ruling authorities were waiting for the orders of the tyrant Yazid
regarding the captives, and a few days later, they received his orders
of sending them to Damascus.

With the caravan, of the captives, the Holy heads of the martyrs were
carried on spearheads so that like people of Kufa people of Syria would
see them and this would gladden the tyrant.

TheCaptives In Damascus
-----------------------

Tied up with ropes, forced to ride saddleless, lean camels and being in
the utmost state of humiliation, the harem and children of the Prophet’s
family were taken to Syria. Throughout their journey they did not say a
single word and did not ask anything from the drivers of their caravan.
Being close to Syria, the caravan stopped so that enough time would be
given to adorn the city with manifestations of festivity and to gather
people to witness this false victory of their ruler.

The caravan was about four parasangs[^270] away from Syria when its
people received them with joy, carrying drums and trumpets and wearing
their best dressesall this was for showing their delight for the
massacre of the Prophet’s family.

Let us listen to the scene as described by an eyewitness: Sahl ibn Sa’d
al-Sa’idi narrated:

Intending to visit Jerusalem, I passed by Damascus, but it was
different, the city was exaggeratedly adorned with colorful gilding its
people were highly joyful, and their women were playing tambourines and
drums. I thought that people of Damascus had a festivity that we did not
have. Noticing some people talking secretly, I approached them and
asked, “Do you, people of Syria celebrate a festivity that we do not
know?”

“It seems that you are a stranger, are you not?” asked they

“Yes, it is, Sahl ibn Sa’d, I am one of those who met the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.)” answered I.

They said, “Sahl, do you not think that it is very strange that the
heavens are not raining blood and the earth is not sinking with its
inhabitants?”

“What for is that?” asked I.

“All these are expecting the arrival of al-Husain’s (a.s.) (cut off)
head from Kufa,” they revealed.

“How strange this is! The head of al-Husain (a.s.) is being forwarded
while people are crowding cheeringly! From which gate will the head
enter the city?” asked I.

As they pointed at the Gate of al-Sa’at, I hurried there. A queue of
banners began to enter, but my eyes fell on a horseman who had in the
hand a banner without a spearhead on which laid a head most similar to
that of the Holy Prophet(s.a.w.a.). That was the head of al-Husain! On
saddleless, lean camels, the captives appeared. As I reached one of the
captive ladies, I asked about her identity.

“I am Sukaynah daughter of al-Husain (a.s.)” she replied.

“And I am Sahl, the companion of your grandfather the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), ask for anything and I will do it for you” I offered.

Grievously, she asked “Ask the bearer of al-Husain’s (a.s.) head to
precede us for a considerable distance so that people will look at the
head and ignore looking at usthe family of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.).”

So, I ran towards- that horseman, bribed him with four hundred dirhams,
and asked him to hurry forwardly away from the captive ladies, and he
did.

In that situation too, an old Syrian man leaning on a stick who was
gloating at the humility of those captives approached Imam Ali Zayn
al-Abidin (a.s.) and said reek fully, “Praise be to Allah (s.w.t.) who
eradicated you and empowered the emir to triumph over you.”

Out of his keenness and perspicacity, the Imam (a.s.) noticed that the
old man was deceived by the wrong rumors that the ruling authorities
spread against the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). He therefore asked, “Old man,
have you recited the Holy Qur’an?”

This statement shocked the old man who wondered and, thus, answered
affirmatively.

The Imam (a.s.) then asked him whether he had seen the following Quranic
Verses:**“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my
near relatives.”** [^271] **“And give to the near relatives his due.”**
[^272] **“And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for
Allah (s.w.t.) and for the Messenger and for the near relatives.”**
[^273]

Amazingly, the old man answered that he had recited these Verse.

The Imam (a.s.) thus declared,**“Only is it we who are intended in
Allah’s remark the near relatives in these Verses.”**

Furthermore, the Imam (a.s.) asked the old man whether he had recited
Allah’s saying:

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”[^274]***

With astonishment, the old man answered that he had recited this Verse,
too.

The Imam (a.s.) hence said,**“Only is it we who are the People of the
House whom Almighty Allah has purified thoroughly.”**

This fact changed the old man completely and made him feel sorry for the
days on which he could not discern the reality of the Umayyad rulers and
their authorities. Even his tongue was tied up by the new fact; he
therefore said to the Imam falteringly, “Please, tell me by Allah
(s.w.t.)! Is it you truly those ones?”

**“Yes, it is. I swear it by our grandfather the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.)”** replied the Imam (a.s.) confidently.

Feeling sorry for the words that he first showered at the Imam (a.s.),
the old man threw himself on the hands of the Imam (a.s.) to kiss them
heavily as signs of remorse, declaring, “I disavow those who killed
you.”

Yazid’s Gloating
----------------

Yazid, the cursed, was sinking in waves of joy and wreak as he knew
about the arrival of the captives’ caravan. Shimr ibn Dhi’l-Jawshan and
Makhfar ibn Sa’labah presented the head of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) to him
and he permitted all lowly people of Damascus to gather at his palace
and congratulate for this ‘false’ triumph and revenge over the Prophet
and his family (a.s.).

The Holy head was placed before the tyrant who went on beating it with a
stick he had in the hand. He then began to say statements showing his
limitless malice towards the Imam, his people and the Divine Message
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) conveyed to humankindthe message that
humiliated Yazid and his people since they had stopped against it,
sparing no single effort.

Abi Barazah al-Aslami, seeing this horrible scene, could not control
himself; so he addressed Yazid “How dare you beat the mouth of al-Husain
(a.s.) with your stick? I swear I have seen the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
kiss this mouth so frequently. However, on the Day of Resurrection
Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad will be your interceder, while the interceder of
al-Husain (a.s.) will be Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).”[^275]

The filthy policemen of Yazid tied all the captives in one rope
beginning with the neck of Imam Zayn al Abideen (a.s.) to Lady
Zaynab(a.s.)’s, up to the last child. They forced them to walk in such a
manner, and whenever any of them would stumble the policemen would whip
heavily. Moreover, they surrounded them with cries of triumph.

With this humiliative scene, the captives were placed before the tyrant
Yazid. Imam Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.) looked at the tyrant and said*“What
if the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) sees us in such a manner? What will
be his impression?”*

These words affected everybody including the tyrant himself and thus the
attendants wept. As he turned his face towards the captive harem of the
Prophet’s family, Yazid said, “Woe to son of Marjanah! If you related to
him in any tie, he would not do this to you.”

This is completely untrue, because son of Marjanah would not have done
anything unless he had followed the orders and instructions of Yazid the
tyrant.

He then turned his face towards Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.) and said,
“Well, Ali ibn al-Husain (a.s.)! Because your father disregarded my
kinship with him, ignored my right, and attempted to seize my authority,
Allah (s.w.t.) did this to him.”

The Imam’s (a.s.) answer to this false claim was a statement from the
Holy Qur’anthe words of Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا أَصَابَ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ إِلَّا
فِي كِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ نَبْرَأَهَا ۚ إِنَّ ذٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
يَسِيرٌ﴿٢٢﴾لِكَيْلَا تَأْسَوْا عَلَىٰ مَا فَاتَكُمْ وَلَا تَفْرَحُوا
بِمَا آتَاكُمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ مُخْتَالٍ فَخُورٍ
</p>

***“No evil befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is in a
book before We bring it into existence; surely, that is easy to Allah
(s.w.t.). So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be
exultant at what He has given you; and Allah (s.w.t.) does not love any
arrogant boaster.”[^276]***

This answer enraged Yazid who tried to find a suitable reply and, hence,
he recited another Quranic Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ مِنْ مُصِيْبَةٍ فَبِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِيْكُمْ
وَيَعْفُو عَنْ كَثِيْرٍ
</p>

***“And whatever affliction befalls you, it is on account of what your
hands have wrought, and (yet) He pardons most (of your faults).”***

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.), the most knowledgeable of the Holy Qur’an,
said,*“This Verse concerns only those who
wrongothers,anddoesnotconcernthosewhomare wronged.”* [^277]

Lady Zaynab (a.s.)’s Second Address
-----------------------------------

When he recollected these bitter days of his father and grandfather who
led campaigns against al-Husain’s grandfather (s.a.w.a.) and the failure
that chased them even in their own homes, Yazid showed his great
rejoicing at the current situation as the family of the Prophet were
captives between his hands and the heads of the Prophet’s grandsons were
thrown before him. He then quoted poetic verses said during the Battle
of Uhud, with suitable changes, saying:

*I wish my forefathers at Badr[^278] had witnessed*

*How the Khazraj[^279] are by the thorns annoyed,*

*They would have been very much delighted,*

*Then they’d have said, “May your hands, O Yazid, never be paralyzed*

*We have killed the masters of their chiefs*

*And equated it with Badr, and it has been so, indeed*

*The Hashemite’s played with the dominion so indeed,*

*While no news from the Heaven had come, nor was there anything
revealed[^280]*

*I will disavow the Khandaq if I will not seek revenge From
Ahmed’s[^281] children for what he did to us!*

Reacting to these verses, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) up rose against the tyrant
and said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعالَمِيْنَ وَ صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلٰى
رَسُوْلِهمُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِه اَجْمَعِيْنَ صَدَقَ اللَّهُ سُبْحَانَهٗ
كَذٰلِكَ يَقُولُ ثُمَّ كانَ عاقِبَةَ الَّذِينَ أَساؤُا السُّوْاٰى‏ أَنْ
كَذَّبُوْا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَ كَانُوْا بِهَا يَسْتَهْزِؤُنَ أَ ظَنَنْتَ
يَا يَزِيْدُ حِيْنَ أَخَذْتَ عَلَيْنَا أَقْطَارَ الْأَرْضِ وَ آفَاقَ
السَّمَاءِ فَأَصْبَحْنَا نُسَاقُ كَمَا تُسَاقُ الْاِمَاءِ أَنَّ بِنَا
عَلَي اللَّهِ هَوَاناً وَ بِكَ عَلَيْهِ كَرَامَةً وَ أَنَّ ذٰلِكَ
لِعِظَمِ خَطَرِكَ عِنْدَهٗ فَشَمَخْتَ بِأَنْفِكَ وَ نَظَرْتَ فِي
عَطْفِكَجَذْلَانَ مَسْرُوْرًا حِيْنَ رَأَيْتَ الدُّنْيَا لَكَ
مُسْتَوْسِقَةً وَ الْأُمُوْرَ مُتَّسِقَةً وَ حِيْنَ صَفَاَ لَكَ
مُلْكُنَا وَ سُلْطَانُنَا
</p>

*All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds. Allah’s Blessingsbe
upon His Messenger Muhammad and his entire progeny. True are the words
of Allah (s.w.t.) Who says,**“Then the end of those who committed evil
was that they disbelieved in Allah’s Signs and they were ridiculing
them.”** [^282] Do you, Yazid, think that when you blocked all the
avenues of the earth and the horizons of the heavens before us, so we
were driven as captives that we are worthless in the sight of Allah
(s.w.t.) and that you are respectful in His eyes? Or is it because you
enjoy with Him a great status? So, you look down at us and become
arrogant, elated, when you see the world submissive to you and things
are done as you want them, and when our authority and power became all
yours?*

<p dir="rtl">
فَمَهْلًا مَهْلًا أَ نَسِيْتَ قَوْلَ اللَّهِ تَعَالٰي وَ لا يَحْسَبَنَّ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوْا أَنَّما نُمْلِيْ لَهُمْ خَيْرٌ لِأَنْفُسِهِمْ
إِنَّما نُمْلِيْ لَهُمْ لِيَزْدَادُوْا إِثْماً وَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ
مُهِيْنٌ أَ مِنَ الْعَدْلِ يَا ابْنَ الطُّلَقَاءِ تَخْدِيْرُكَ
حَرَائِرَكَ وَ اِمَائَكَ وَ سَوْقُكَ بَنَاتِ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ(صلی الله
علیه و آله و سلم) سَبَايَا قَدْ هَتَكْتَ سُتُوْرَهُنَّ وَ أَبْدَيْتَ
وُجُوْهَهُنَّ يَحْدُوْ بِهِنَّ الْأَعْدَاءُ مِنْ بَلَدٍ إِلٰى بَلَدٍ وَ
يَسْتَشْرِفُهُنَّ أَهْلُ الْمَنَاهِلِ وَ الْمَعَاقِلِ وَ يَتَصَفَّحُ
وُجُوهَهُنَّ الْقَرِيْبُ وَ الْبَعِيْدُ وَ الدَّنِيُّ وَ الشَّرِيفُ
لَيْسَ مَعَهُنَّ مِنْ رِجَالِهِنَّ وَلِيٌّ وَ لَا مِنْ حُمَاتِهِنَّ
حَمِيٌّ
</p>

*But wait! Have you forgotten that Allah (s.w.t.) has said,**“Do not
regard those who disbelieved that we grant them good for themselves? We
only give them a respite so that they may increase their sins, and for
them there is a humiliating torment.”** [^283] Is it fair, O son of the
‘Released ones’, that you keep your ladies and bondmaidens in their
chambers (under protection), and at the same time you drive the
daughters of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) as captives with their
veils removed and faces exposed, taken by their enemies from one land to
another, being viewed by those at watering places as well as those who
man your forts, with their faces exposed to the looks of everyone, near
or distant, lowly or honorable, having none of their men with them nor
any of their protectors?*

<p dir="rtl">
وَ كَيْفَ يُرْتَجٰى مُرَاقَبَةُ مَنْ لَفَظَ فُوْهُ أَكْبَادَ
الْاَزْكِيَاءِ وَ نَبَتَ لَحْمُهٗ م ِنْ دِمَاءِ الشُّهْدَاءِ وَ كَيْفَ
لَا يَسْتَبْطِئُ فِي بُغْضِنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ مَنْ نَظَرَ إِلَيْنَا
بِالشَّنَفِ وَ الشَنَآنِ وَ الاِحْنِوَ الْاَضْغَانِ ثُمَّ تَقُوْلُ
غَيْرَ مُتَاَثَّمٍ وَ لَا مُسْتَعْظِمٍ
</p>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>لَأَهَلُّوْا وَ اسْتَهَلُّوْا فَرَحاً</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>ثُمَّ قَالُوْا يَا يَزِيْدُ لَا تُشَلْ</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p dir="rtl">
مُنْتَحِياً عَلٰى ثَنَايَا أَبِيْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ سَيِّدِ شَبَابِ أَهْلِ
الْجَنَّةِ تَنْكُتُهَا بِمِخْصَرَتِكَ وَ كَيْفَ لَا تَقُوْلُ ذٰلِكَ وَ
قَدْ نَكَأْتَ الْقَرْحَةَ وَ اسْتَأْصَلْتَ الشَّافَةَ بِإِرَاقَتِكَ
دِمَاءَ ذُرِّيَّةِ مُحَمَّدٍ(صلی الله علیه و آله و سلم) وَ نُجُومِ
الْأَرْضِ مِنْ آلِ عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبِ وَ تَهْتِفُ بِأَشْيَاخِكَ وَ
زَعَمْتَ أَنَّكَ تُنَادِيهِمْ فَلَتَرِدَنَّ وَشِيكاً مَوْرِدَهُمْ وَ
لَتَوَدَّنَّ أَنَّكَ شُلِلْتَ وَ بُكِمْتَ وَ لَمْ يَكُنْ قُلْتَ مَا
قُلْتَ وَ فَعَلْتَ مَا فَعَلْتَ.
</p>

*But what can be expected from one descended from those whose mouths
chewed the livers of the purified ones[^284] and whose flesh grows out
of the blood of the martyrs? How can it be expected that one who looks
at us with grudge and animosity, with hatred and malice,would not hate
us the Ahlal-Bayt (a.s.)? Besides, you, without feeling any guilt or
weighing heavily what you say, recite saying,*

*They would have been very much delighted,*

*then they’d have said, “May your hands, O Yazid, never be paralyzed*

*How dare you hit the lips of Abu Abdullah (a.s.), the Master of the
Youths of Paradise? But why should you not do so, since you stirred a
wound that almost healed, and since all mercy is removed from your
heart, having shed the blood of the offspring of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.),
peace and Blessings of Allah (s.w.t.)be upon him and his Progeny (a.s.),
and the stars on earth from among the family of Abdul-Muttalib? Then you
cite your mentors as if you speak to them. Soon shall you be lodged with
them, and soon shall you wish you were paralyzed and muted and never
said what you said nor did what you did.*

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ خُذْ لَنَا بِحَقِّنَا وَ انْتَقِمْ مِمَّنْ ظَلَمَنَا وَ
أحْلُلْ غَضَبَكَ بِمَنْ سَفَكَ دِمَاءَنَا وَ قَتَلَ حُمَاتَنَا فَوَ
اللَّهِ مَا فَرَيْتَ إِلَّا جِلْدَكَ وَ لَا جَزَزْتَ إِلَّا لَحْمَكَ وَ
لَتَرِدَنَّ عَلٰى رَسُوْلِ اللَّهِ(صلی الله علیه و آله و سلم) بِمَا
تَحَمَّلْتَ مِنْ سَفْكِ دِمَاءِ ذُرِّيَّتِه وَ انْتَهَكْتَ مِنْ
حُرْمَتِه فِي عِتْرَتِه وَ لُحْمَتِه حَيْثُ يَجْمَعُ اللَّهُ شَمْلَهُمْ
وَ يَلُمُّ شَعَثَهُمْ وَ يَأْخُذُ بِحَقِّهِمْ وَ لا تَحْسَبَنَّ
الَّذِيْنَ قُتِلُوْا فِي سَبِيْلِ اللَّهِ أَمْواتاً بَلْ أَحْياءٌ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُوْنَ وَ حَسْبُكَ بِاللَّهِ حَاكِماً وَ بِمُحَمَّدٍ
خَصِيْماً وَ بِجَبْرَئِيْلَ ظَهِيْراً وَ سَيَعْلَمُ مَنْ سَوَّلَ لَكَ وَ
مَكَّنَكَ مِنْ رِقَابِ الْمُسْلِمِيْنَ بِئْسَ لِلظَّالِمِيْنَ بَدَلًا وَ
أَيُّكُمْ شَرٌّ مَكَاناً وَ أَضْعَفُ جُنْداً
</p>

*O Allah! take what belongs to us out of his hands, seek revenge against
ail those who oppressed us, and let Your wrath descend upon whoever shed
our blood and killed our protectors! By Allah (s.w.t.), you have burnt
only your own skin, you have cut only your own flesh, and you shall come
face to face with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), peace of Allah
(s.w.t.) be upon him and his progeny, bearing the burdens of the blood
which you have shed, the blood of his offspring, and of his sanctities
which you violated, when Allah (s.w.t.) gathers them together and seeks
equity on their behalf.***“And do not reckon those who are slain in the
way of Allah (s.w.t.) as dead. Nay! They are living with their Lord,
receiving their sustenance.”*** [^285] It is quite sufficient that Allah
(s.w.t.) is your Judge and Muhammad, peace and Blessings of Allah
(s.w.t.) be upon him and his progeny, is your opponent, and (Archangel)
Gabriel as the supporter (of Muhammad). All those who instigated you to
do what you did and all those who put you in charge due to which you are
playing havoc with the lives of the Muslims will know for certain how
evil the end of the oppressors is and which of you shall have the worst
place and will be the least protected?*

<p dir="rtl">
وَ لَئِنْ جَرَتْ عَلَيَّ الدَّوَاهِيْ مُخَاطَبَتَكَ إِنِّي
لَأَسْتَصْغِرُ قَدْرَكَ وَ أَسْتَعْظِمُ تَقْرِيْعَكَ وَ أَسْتَكْبِرُ
تَوْبِيْخَكَ لٰكِنَّ الْعُيُوْنُ عَبْرَى وَ الصُّدُوْرُ حَرّٰى أَلَا
فَالْعَجَبُ كُلُّ الْعَجَبِ لِقَتْلِ حِزْبِ اللَّهِ النُّجَبَاءِ
بِحِزْبِ الشَّيْطَانِ الطُّلَقَاءِ فَهٰذِهِ الْأَيْدِيْ تَنْطِفُ مِنْ
دِمَائِنَا وَ الْأَفْوَاهُ تَتَحَلَّبُ مِنْ لُحُومِنَا وَ تِلْكَ
الْجُثَثُ الطَّوَاهِرُ الزَّوَاكِيْ تَنْتَابُهَا الْعَوَاسِلُ وَ
تُعَفِّرُهَا أُمَّهَاتُ الْفَرَاعِلِ وَ لَئِنِ اتَّخَذْتَنَا مَغْنَماً
لَتَجِدُنَا وَشِيْكاً مُغْرَماً حِيْنَ لَا تَجِدُ إِلَّا مَا قَدَّمْتَ
وَ مَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيْدِ فَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمُشْتَكٰى وَ
عَلَيْهِ الْمُعَوَّلُ.
</p>

*Although calamities have forced me to speak to you, I see you trivial
in my eyes and find your verbal attacks great and I regard your rebuke
too much to bear, but the eyes are tearful, and the chests are filled
with depression. What is even stranger is that the honored Party of
Allah (s.w.t.) is being killed by the Party of the ‘Released ones’ Party
of Shaitan. Such hands are dripping with our blood; such mouths are
feeding on our flesh, while those sacred and pure corpses are offered as
food to the wild beasts of the desert and are dirtied by the brutes. If
you regard us as your booty,you shall soon ding us as your opponents
that will be when you find nothing but what your hands had
committed,**“And your Lord never treats His servants unjustly.”** [^286]
To Allah (s.w.t.) is my complaint, and upon Him do I rely.*

<p dir="rtl">
فَكِدْ كَيْدَكَ وَ اسْعَ سَعْيَكَ وَ نَاصِبْ جُهْدَكَ فَوَ اللَّهِ لَا
تَمْحُوَنَّ ذِكْرَنَا وَ لَا تُمِيْتُ وَحْيَنَا وَ لَا تُدْرِكُ
أَمَدَنَا وَ لَا تَرْحَضُ عَنْكَ عَارَهَا وَ هَلْ رَأْيُكَ إِلَّا فَنَدٌ
وَ أَيَّامُكَ إِلَّا عَدَدٌ وَ جَمْعُكَ إِلَّا بَدَدٌ يَوْمَ يُنَادِ
الْمُنَادِ أَلا لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِيْنَ فَالْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ الَّذِيْ خَتَمَ لِأَوَّلِنَا بِالسَّعَادَةِ
وَ لِآخِرِنَا بِالشَّهَادَةِ وَ الرَّحْمَةِ وَ نَسْأَلُ اللَّهَ أَنْ
يُكْمِلَ لَهُمُ الثَّوَابَ وَ يُوْجِبَ لَهُمُ الْمَزِيْدَ وَ يُحْسِنَ
عَلَيْنَا الْخِلَافَةَ إِنَّهٗ رَحِيْمٌ وَدُوْدٌ وَ حَسْبُنَا اللَّهُ وَ
نِعْمَ الْوَكِيْلُ.
</p>

*So scheme whatever you wish to scheme, and carry out your plots, and
intensify your efforts, for, by Allah (s.w.t.), you shall never be able
to obliterate our mention, nor will you ever be able to kill the
revelation (that was revealed to us), nor will you ever exalt to our
position, nor will your shame ever be washed away. Your view shall be
proven futile, your days limited in number, and your wealth wasted on
the Day when the caller calls out,**“The curse of Allah (s.w.t.) be upon
the oppressors.”** [^287] All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the
Worlds, Who sealed the life of our early ones with happiness and
forgiveness, and that of our last ones with martyrdom and mercy. We
plead to Allah (s.w.t.) to complete His rewards for them, grant them an
increase, and recompense us pleasingly; He is the most Merciful, the
most Compassionate Allah suffices us, and He is the best Guardian.*

Words About The Address
-----------------------

This address has been a completion of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) uprising
and one of the most marvelous revolutionary speeches in Islam. By such
sweeping words, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) smashed the despotism of Yazid and
inflicted disgrace and dishonor on him and on those who caused him to
reach such a position. About this address, Shaykh Muhammad Husain Kashif
al-Ghitta says:

“Can the brash of the best painter or the pen of the most eloquent
writer depict the reality of Yazid’s arrogance, pride and elation for
having the world submissive to him and tasting the pleasure of conquest
in a way better and more effective than that depicted by the words of
Lady Zaynab (a.s.) in this speech? And can anybody refute all the claims
of an opponent in such a way full of expressiveness, substantiation, and
even reproach and censure? Moreover, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), as if all her
words of reprimand were not enough, proved before the tyrant and the
attendants the inescapable abject result of the wrong and the pleasant
end result of the right. Using a courageous, brave language, she showed
Yazid his lowly, mean, ugly, and shameful reality”[^288]

Dr. Tawfiq al-Fukayki says:

“Join me to contemplate on this far-reaching speech that contained all
arts of rhetoric, styles of oratory, manifestations of expressiveness,
significances of enthusiasm, power of allegation, and authority of
defense of freedom and belief in such a forthright way that was sharper
than swords. For Yazid to jump on adders fangs or to be targeted by
pointed spears was easier than hearing these words that slapped his
unashamed face in his own house and in the middle of the capital of his
illegal, despotic state. Throughout ages this historical, sweeping
speech has been spreading the unparalleled intrepidities, the unwonted
courage and the high ideals of Lady Zaynab (a.s.). It is finally a
never-ending literature that screams in the faces of the tyrants
throughout generations.[^289]

Contents Of The Address
-----------------------

The great speech of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) has been an extension of the
uprising of Karbala and a good representation of its values and goals.
Let us now refer to some goals that the speech achieved:

1)    Lady Zaynab (a.s.) referred to the false elation of Yazid who
thought of himself as victorious in that encounter. She uncovered the
truth that his military superiority was transient and that Almighty
Allah let the unbelievers enjoy bliss in this world so that their sins
will increase and, thus, they will have a painful chastisement on the
Day of Resurrection.

2)    She reproached Yazid for taking the harem of the Prophet’s
Household (a.s.) as captives. While it was the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
who freed Yazid and his unbelieving family on the Conquest of Mecca
while they were captives of the Islamic armies. Instead of thanking the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) who saved him from slavery, Yazid rewarded his family
very badly.

3)    Shereferredtothehereditary,educationaland
psychologicalmotivesbeyondYazid’sslayingthe Prophet’s family. She
referred, as an instance, to his grandmother, Hind, who chewed the liver
of Hamzah out of her limitless malice against the Prophet and the
Hashemite’s. She also referred to Yazid’s grandfather Abu Sufyan who was
the leading enemy of Islam and who led campaigns against the Prophet and
his Divine Mission. Not forgetting Yazid’s father, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
referred to Mu’awiyah who slain innocent Muslims and violated all what
Allah (s.w.t.) has deemed respected.

4)    She disapproved of Yazid’s citing poetic verses in which he wished
his forefathers whom were killed at the hands of Imam Ali (a.s.), as
well as Muslim warriors, during their conflicts against the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.)to be witnessing him so that they would take revenge upon the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).She also asserted to Yazid courageously that he
would certainly face the same fate of those cursed forefathers.

5)    She shed lights on an important point; the tyrant, by slaying Imam
Al-Husain (a.s.) and his pure family (a.s.) members and companions, has
in fact slain himself, none else. The souls of the martyrs are pure,
alive, abiding, and covered by auras of glory. Disgrace and loss would
be Yazid’s only.

6)    She mentioned those who paved the way to Yazid to hold such a
position with words of scolding as she added them to Yazid. This point
should be studied carefully.

7)    She referred to her high standing and unreachable honor as another
way of making little of the tyrant. Despite all the misfortunes that
inflicted on her and weakened her, she showed her power and scolded the
tyrant so harshly that he could not find any answer.

8)    She proved that all Yazid’s endeavors to eradicate the immortal
good mention of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) would fail, because they
represent the right, which will inevitably triumph.

Thus, days have proved that Imam al-Husain and his party were the
triumphant, while Yazid and his party have been always the losers. At
any rate, the speech of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) includes tens of lessons not
all of which can be contained in this brief study. It is quite enough to
say that this speech was one of the deathblows that snapped the Umayyad
State.

Having seen the collapse of his pride and arrogance, Yazid could not
find any words to answer except citing a poetic verse not related to the
subject in any extent. Moreover, the political atmospheres were
overclouded against him whose perplexity, owing to the scandalous
situation that Lady Zaynab (a.s.) put him in, disabled him to do
anything. He once tried to find himself excuses for his crime and, at
other times, tried to make a comparison between the Imam and himself.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) And A Syrian Man
-----------------------------------

A Syrian man who attended the session of Yazid looked at Lady Fatimah
daughter of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) in captivity and said to Yazid, “Give
this girl to me to serve me.” As she heard this shocking statement, the
lady trembled and grabbed hold to her aunt’s cloak. Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
shouted at the Syrian man “You the mean one have lied. Neither you nor
can even your leader (i.e. Yazid) do this.” This statement enraged Yazid
who said, “I could if I would.” Lady Zaynab (a.s.) answered, “No, you
cannot do it unless you abandon our religion and take another for
yourself.” As Yazid realized the big insult that Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
targeted at him by these words, he shouted at her, “How dare you say
such words in my face? It was your father and your brother who abandoned
the religion!”

Indifferent to the tyrant’s authority and ability to punish, Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) replied him so confidently saying, “Only by the Religion of Allah
(s.w.t.) and that of my father and grandfather you and your father were
guided, if you are really Muslim.” By these words, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
unmasked the tyrant who claimed Imam al-Husain and his family’s (a.s.)
being apostates. As a result, people of Syria realized that the captives
were the Holy Prophet’s family (a.s.) about whom many Quranic Verses
were revealed from the Almighty Lord, and that Yazid was no more than a
faithless liar. “You have lied, enemy of Allah (s.w.t.)!” these were the
only words that Yazid could find to answer Lady Zaynab (a.s.) whose
answer was, “You are a dominant ruler! You can revile [at anybody]
unjustly and you prevail on anyone through your authority.”

The tyrant’s rage decreased and he had to nod down. Meanwhile, the
Syrian man repeated his request, but Yazid shouted at him, “May Allah
(s.w.t.) inflicts upon you a swift death!”

Hence, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) could control her self-power and self-will
that she inherited from her forefathers to face the tyrant and to
triumph upon him.

An author says:

“Despite her weakness and submission, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) could achieve
the first decisive victory over an authoritative and strong tyrant. More
than once, she confuted Yazid and declared before everybody his
ignorance and irreligiousness, since it is, according to Islamic laws,
not acceptable to regard Muslim women as captives or to be treated as
such in wars.”[^290]

Anyhow, the Syrian man’s request was seemly the opening of a long
articles of criticism and reproach against Yazid and the beginning of
the Syrian people’s realization of the situation. It seems that the
Syrian was not so dull, especially after he had heard the reply of Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) that proved Yazid’s having been excluded from Islam if he
would respond to the Syrian man’s request. This proves that the man only
intended to disgrace Yazid.

Moaning For Imam Al-Husain (a.s.)
---------------------------------

Ladies of the Prophet’s family then asked the tyrant to give them a
house in which they would hold consolation ceremonies for Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) since they were unable to show their grief before the policemen
of Yazid, and if they did, they would be answered by whips and words of
insult. In this regard, Imam Ali Zayn al-Abideen (a.s.) says, “The
policemen’s spears would fall down on the head of anyone of us who would
shed even a single tear.”

Yazid however had to respond to the Ladies request and, hence, all of
them wore in black and moaned for their Imam and the martyrs for seven
days ceaselessly.

Back To Medina
--------------

Having seen the influential results of the addresses of Imam Zayn
al-Abideen (a.s.) and Lady Zaynab (a.s.), Yazid anticipated a rebel or
at least a disorder in the capital of his state. He therefore decided to
send the Prophet’s family away from Damascus to their hometown, Medina.
He gathered them in his palace and poured very much money on a silky
carpet as blood money for the martyrdom of Imam al-Husain, his
Household, and his companions (a.s.). This situation infuriated the
Ladies so terribly that they all spoke. Lady Zaynab (a.s.) said,

*“You are surely shameless and boastful! You kill my brother and family
members, and then you want me to accept money as recompense!” Lady
Sukaynah (a.s.) said, “I have never seen such hard-heartedness, and I
have never seen an infidel and polytheist more vicious than you is...
etc.”*

Hence, the tyrant, who thought that the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) can be
submitted by money or any other transient material, failed to subjugate
the Prophet’s Household since he did not believe that the Almighty
Allah**“only desires to keep away the uncleanness from them and to
purify them a (thorough) purifying.”**

He then ordered al-No’man ibn Bashir to accompany the Prophet’s family
to Medina and to take care of them along this journey.[^291] He also
decided to begin that journey at night so as to evade any expected
disorder or revolt.

Abd al-Malik al-Salami, carrying out the orders of Umar ibn Sa’d,
conveyed the news of Imam al-Husain’s martyrdom to Medina before the
captives’ arrival in there.[^292] As much as this news delighted the
ruler of Medina, it depressed the people who could not control
themselves as their cries and weeping covered the whole city. The ruler
however ascended the minbar of the Prophet’s Masjid and declared his
happiness and schadenfreude over the Imam and his party, Abdullah ibn
al-Sa’ib criticized the ruler, saying, “Had Fatimah been alive, she
would weep for her son.”[^293] But the ruler shouted at him and said
meaningless words.[^294]

For the martyrdom of their chief, the Hashemite’s cried, wailed, and
held ceremonies on that occasion. Abdullah ibn Ja’far, Lady
Zaynab(a.s.)’shusband, held obsequies attended by groups of people to
console him for the misfortune.

Yazid then sent the head of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) to Medina so as to
spread horror and fear among its people. The ruler of Medina denied this
deed, while Marwan ibn al-Hakam welcomed and showed his malice against
the Prophet and his religion.As he looked in the face of the Imam
(a.s.), he remembered his forefathers who were killed at the hands of
the Imam’s father and grandfather. He then turned his eyes towards the
Holy Prophet’s tomb and said, “Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), this is for that day
of [the battle of] Badr.”[^295]

During their way to Medina, the captives of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) asked
the policemen who accompanied them to take a way leading to Karbala, and
they did. Once they arrived in there, the ladies received the tomb of
Imam al-Husain (a.s.) with cries and wails. They spent three days there
during which their tears did not stop shedding.

As Imam Zayn al-Abideen (a.s.) feared for the death of his aunt and the
other ladies out of their excessive grief, he ordered them to get ready
themselves for travel to Medina. They left with teary eyes and hoarse
voices. Medina was dressed in black because of the death of Lady Umme
Salamah, the Prophet’s widow, who died a month after Imam al-Husain’s
martyrdom because of her grief for him.[^296] When the caravan was a few
parasangs near Medina, Imam Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.) resided there for a
while and asked Bishr ibn Hizlim whether he could poetize something so
that he would precede the others to Medina and declare by some poetic
verses, the martyrdom of Imam al-Husain (a.s.). The man entered the city
and stopped near the Prophet’s Masjid to declare, in a sad tone, the
martyrdom of the Imam (a.s.).

The publics hurried towards him for more information about the fate of
the others. Bishr told them about the captivity of Imam Zayn al-Aabideen
(a.s.) and the other Ladies of the Prophet’s Household. They, crying and
weeping, hurried to the suburbs to receive the caravan. As soon as the
Prophet’s Household arrived, people surrounded them with teary eyes, and
that day was similar to the day on which the Holy Prophet died.

In the midst of that horrible gathering, Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a.s.)
delivered a speech in which he touched on his father and the misfortunes
they had suffered. He, accompanied by his aunt and sisters and
surrounded by people, then directed towards the Prophet’s Masjid. Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) took the jambs of the Masjid’s gate and shouted,*“O
Grandfather! I am conveying to you the news of my brother “al-Husain’s
(a.s.) martyrdom.”* [^297]

From that day, Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sone and only deed was weeping for her
martyred people and working to continue the endless message of Imam
al-Husain (a.s.). She used to weep whenever her eyes fell on her nephew,
Imam Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.), until she because as same as dead
body.[^298]


