To The Heaven
=============

The horrible scenes that Lady Zaynab (a.s.) had to witness did not
depart her for even a single moment; her eyes were always teary and her
words were only wailing for her brother and the martyrs. She used to cry
there names of her brothers, sons, and nephews, and then she would be
unconscious. This state turned her into a soulless, feeble body waiting
fordeath, which would be the only relief. She was waiting for death so
as to complain to her grandfather and parents about what she had seen.
Thus, diseases began to attack her and she had to stay in bed for long
time suffering agonies of diseases. Even in her last sparks of life, the
scenes of Karbala and Damascus were present before her eyes. However,
death attacked her while her tongue was glorifying the Almighty Lord Who
will take revenge upon those who wronged her.

She departed this life on Sunday, the fifteenth of Rajab, 62 A.H at the
age of fifty-seven.[^299]

Her Burial Place
----------------

Historians have had various opinions about the burial place of Lady
Zaynab (a.s.); some have defined al-Baqi in Medina. This opinion is not
acceptable, because if she was buried there she would have a special
tomb just like the others who were buried there. It is probable that
she, like her mother, asked to be buried at night so that none would
know about the place of her grave.

A good group of historians have decided that she died in a small village
in Damascus and was buried there. They recorded that she immigrated to
Syria when Medina had befallen by a disastrous famine due to which
Abdullah ibn Ja’far left for Syria.

It seems that the story of this famine is baseless, since most of the
historians and narrators have never referred to such an incident during
that period. Besides, Abdullah ibn Ja’far was so rich that he would not
be influenced by such a famine, and that he was too generous to leave
his people in such a famine and immigrate to the center of his enemies.
At any rate, it is widespread that Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was buried in
Damascus and there is now a handsome shrine pilgrimage by thousands of
people every day, seeking the blessings and mercy of Almighty Allah,
just like the Holy shrine of Imam al-Husain (a.s.).

Another good number of historians have recorded that Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
was buried in Egypt.[^300] For all Egyptians, this is an unquestionable
fact, and her handsome shrine there is one of the most significant signs
Egypt. About Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’simmigration to Egypt, historians have
recorded the following:

In Medina, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) began to rally the public against the
ruling authorities and the unjust Umayyad State. As a result, people of
Medina rebelled and formed armed forces to face the ruling authorities.
As a reply, Yazid sent a heavy army commanded by the criminal Muslim ibn
Aqabah to kill the rebels and civilians so harshly and mercilessly. He
even turned them into slaves for Yazid.

Fearing the activities of Lady Zaynab (a.s.), the ruler of Medina wrote
to Yazid about her danger. The tyrant wrote back that he should banish
her to any country she would choose. First of all, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
refused, but Zaynab daughter of Aqil, her cousin, could convince her to
leave for the good of religion. She hence opted for Egypt. In this
(final) journey, she was accompanied by her nieces Fatimah and Sukaynah
daughters of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), They arrived in Egypt on the last
days of Zul-Hijjah, and were received hospitably by the ruler of Egypt,
Maslamah ibn Mukhallad al-Ansari who offered Lady Zaynab (a.s.) to
reside in his own house in al-Hamra, and she lived there for eleven
months and fifteen days. On Sunday, 15th of Rajab, 62 A.H., Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) departed life and was buried in that house. There is now a
handsome shrine carrying her name and teaching all generations the
meanings of real humanity and defense of freedom and belief.[^301]

In his book entitled*al-Tareekh,* Ibn Asakir records:

“Lady Zaynab (a.s.) resided in Egypt where she died and was buried. The
lady buried in Damascus is her sister, Zaynab al-Wusta.”

The Egyptians as well as the other Muslims throughout the globe
pilgrimage to the Holy shrine everyday especially on the occasion of her
death. They, including scholars and Religious people, crowd around the
shrine seeking the Lord’s blessings and mercy through the intercession
of Lady Zaynab (a.s.). Rulers of Egypt, such as Kafur al-Akhshidi, Ahmad
ibn Tawlawn, and al-Dafir-bi-Nasrillah also had the honor to visit the
Holy shrine. With the beginning of the month of Rajab, people from
everywhere gather around the Holy shrine reciting the Holy Book of Allah
(s.w.t.) and other Du’as some of them, furthermore, reside there to the
half of the month.

A many reconstructions and reformations all over history have been made
to the Holy shrine at the hands of virtuous kings and leaders of Egypt,
such as, Fakhruddin Sa’lab al Ja’fari, Ali Pasha al-Wazir (in 956 A.H),
and Abdul-Rahman Katkhada (in 1174 A.H). In 1212 A.H, Usmaan al-Muradi
reconstructed the shrine, but he had to stop when the French occupied
the country. In 1326 A.H, Yusuf Pasha carried on the reconstructions and
dated his words through some poetic verses written on a tablet of
marble. Anyhow, the final touches were at the hands of Muhammad Ali
Pasha. In 1276 A.H, Sa’id Pasha reconstructed some faces of the shrine,
and in 1294 A.H, Khedive Muhammad Tawfiq Pasha reconstructed other
faces. The operation was completed in 1304 A.H.

Every country or place in which Lady Zaynab (a.s.) resided has all right
to take pride in this Lady who has been the honor of Islam and all
Muslims.

At any rate, Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’splace is the heart of each and every
fact-finder. She has been too great to be contained by any tomb, and
one’s deed depends upon his/her intent.


