Publisher’s Word
================

All praise is due to Almighty Allah Who will reward those who sacrificed
their lives for His sake and declared the word of right fearlessly so as
to extend justice and honesty on this earth and contribute in achieving
the purpose for which He has created the creatures.

Allah’s peace and allBlessings are upon Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)and his
infallible Household (a.s.) who suffered troubles and encountered
horrible adversities; all for taking humankind to the eternal pleasure
and serving Almighty Allah in the best way.

In the history of humankind, one can find many names whose principles
encouraged them to declare the word of right and justice openly in the
faces of the wrongdoers and the unjust. This book deals with a lady who
entered the field of struggle against wrong strongly and said the word
of right and justice in the faces of the wrongdoers and oppressors. The
echoes of this lady’s words are still disturbing every tyrant and still
reminding history of her immortal situations that gave, altogether with
her brother’s revolution, a new birth to Islam after it had been about
to be deformed and vanished at the hands of the illegal rulers who took
over the leadership of the Islamic nation. This lady was Zaynab (a.s.)
daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.).

We must also yield to the fact that Imam al-Husain (a.s.) accompanied
his sister, lady Zaynab (a.s.), with him only after he had found her the
fittest to complete his giant revolution, and she did complete his
revolution after him so perfectly. Besides, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was such
a perfect individual that she understood the duty she would burden about
the revolutionof her brother although the Islamic Shari’ah[^1] has
ordered women to remain at their houses since it is not obligatory upon
them to participate in jihad.[^2] Notwithstanding, lady Zaynab (a.s.),
being the daughter of the Islamic Shari’ah that was revealed in her
house, understood more than anyone else that the advocacy of the right
and the support of the religion were two missions to be undertaken by
her. Hence, she carried out the religious duty as perfect as possible
and could act as an important ring in the series of Islam.

From this cause, we understand that the revolution of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.), granddaughter of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and daughter of
its protector (a.s.) was due to a divine directive.

Everybody knows that Islam could see the light only by virtue of the
wealth of Khadijah (Prophet Muhammad’s (s.a.w.a.)first wife) and the
sword of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.). In the same manner, Islam has
subsisted by virtue of the martyrdom of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and the
revolution of Lady Zaynab (a.s.).

Only through the revolutionary speeches of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) did the
publics recognize the falsity of Mu’awiyah and Yazid and their enmity
against Islam.

The tragedy of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) forms the second half of the
revolution of Imam al-Husain (a.s.). Against those unbearable
misfortunes, she stood with steadfastness and had full custody on the
captives, orphans, and the ailed Imam. She then disputed the wrongdoers
through her speeches and denied the horrendous crushing and violation
against human rights and dignity. She then rallied the publics against
the oppressive gang of the Umayyad rulers and their tails until they
banished her so as to save their state. Nevertheless, their state was
smashed completely in consequence of Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sefforts.

The material of this book has been compiled from the most reliable
reference books of history and biography. However, the books entitled
‘Al-Sayidah Zaynab (a.s.)’ and authored by Sheikh Ja’far al-Naqdi,
‘Al-Sayyidah Zaynab (a.s.)’and authored by Sheikh Baqir Sharif
al-Qarashi have been most depended in the material of this book.

The Ansariyan Publications thus is pleased to introduce this work, which
focuses light, in a brief yet documented way, on the life account,
personality, and struggle of Lady Zaynab (a.s.), to the gentle readers
hoping they will benefit by the unparalleled situations of this great
lady and derive items leading to human perfection.

Finally, we pray to Almighty Allah to make the path of success paved for
us and make our intentions purely proposed to Him. He is most certainly
the source of success and good fortune.

**Ansariyan Publications, 2002**


