The Ahlul-bayt in The Qur’an and Sunnah
=======================================

Introduction: His Eminence Shaykh Musa Muhammad Ali’s al-Sayyidah Zaynab
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^3]

All praises belong to Allah, Lord of the worlds. Peace and Blessings be
upon our master Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), the most honorable of the prophets
and the chief of the Messengers of Allah (a.s.), and upon his Household
(a.s.), companions, and progeny.

Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
رَحْمَتُ اللَّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهٗ عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ ۚ إِنَّهٗ
حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ
</p>

***The mercy of Allah and His Blessings are on you, O people of the
house, surely He is Praised, Glorious.[^4]***

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا‍
</p>

***Allah (s.w.t.) only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^5]***

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
</p>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.[^6]***

In his book entitled al-Sahih, Muslim records the following:

Zayd ibn Arqam narrated: In a place between Mecca and Medina called
‘Khumm’, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) once delivered a speech to
us.

After statements of praising and thanking Almighty Allah, as well as
statements of preach and reminding of Him, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ فَإِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ يُوشِكُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَنِي
رَسُولُ رَبِّي فَأُجِيبَ وَ اَنَا تَارِكٌ فِيكُمْ ثَقَلَيْنِ:
أَوَّلُهُمَا كِتَابُ اللَّهِ فِيهِ الْهُدٰى وَ النُّورُ فَخُذُوا
بِكِتَابِ اللَّهِ وَ اسْتَمْسِكُوا بِه... وَ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي
أَهْلِ بَيْتِي أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي.
</p>

*O people, I am no more than an ordinary person, and the Messenger of my
Lord (i.e. Angel of death) will shortly come to me and then I will
respond. Among you, I have left two weighty things: first, the Book of
Allah (s.w.t.) that includes right guidance and illumination. Preserve
in the Book of Allah (s.w.t.) and hold fast on it. Second, my Household;
remember Allah (s.w.t.) concerning my Household, remember Allah (s.w.t.)
concerning my Household, remember Allah (s.w.t.) concerning my
Household.”*

The first thing one can learn from the previous directive of the
immaculate Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is that one who loves something must
prefer it to himself, lest such love will be false and untrue. To attain
something after serious search is more pleasant and delightful than to
get it without fatigue.

The true love for the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) can be shown through
following his words and deeds, complying with his instructions, avoiding
things that he deemed forbidden, copying ethics, and following him in
his love for his Household (the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)), by showing love for
them.

The Prophet’s households (a.s.) are the real pure ones. It is they whom
Almighty Allah has given His love, bestowed upon with variant miracles,
purified from the natures of souls, and saved from following their own
desires. As a result, all their thoughts have become completely
connected to Almighty Allah.

Thus, love for the Prophet’s Household has become the origin and the
first step in the way towards Allah (s.w.t.). Allmanners and ranks are
only levels of love.

Out of His honoring them, Almighty Allah educated the ignorant among the
Prophet’s family, guided the lost, and strengthened the weak; therefore,
to behave modestly before them is a duty, to seek justice for their
wronged ones is obligatory, and to serve them as much as possible is
regarded as seeking nearness to them.

It is Almighty Allah, the Creator, Who favored, awarded, purified,
chastened, and honored the Prophet’s Household. This is clear in His
saying:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^7]***

Therefore, creatures must bear in their hearts such divine favoring as
response to the Creator’s instruction and carrying out the Prophet’s
call.

Love for the Prophet’s Household (a.s.) can be achieved only by
respecting them in presence and absence; they hence should not be
slandered or disrespected. Finally, it is forbidden to backbite,
especially the Prophet’s Household (a.s.) and the sincere saints of
Allah (s.w.t.).[^8]

As a result, Muslims must beware of such a vicious trait. However, no
one who plunges into such a thing will attain success, because the
saints are as same as the prophets, and to make distinction between them
is to deprive them of their prosperities and ingratitude for their
graces.

Unfortunately, the inattentive and the deceived ones look at the people
of honesty and faithfulness with the eyes of despise, issue wrong
decisions about them, charge them with deviation, and regard them as
ignorant. The clear-sighted ones, on the other hand, are persistently
calm; they can see the unseen with eyes of discernment from beyond soft
screens. Accordingly, misfortunes cannot defeat them and attacks of time
cannot provoke them. In an instant, the flag of ease shall gleam for
them, clouds of obscurity clear away and Almighty Allah eradicate the
intrigues of the conspirators.

On that account, men of perception, sagacity, decency, and observation
hold faithful devotion, perfect constancy, sincere honesty, and abundant
esteem for the Prophet’s Household out of their compliance to the
Creator’s instruction, their honoring the Prophet, and their acceding to
his commandment in the following Hadees:

Al-Tabarani, in his al-Mo’jam al-Kabeer, Abu al-Shaykh, Ibn Habban, in
his al-Sahih, and al-Bayhaqi; all recorded the Prophet’s following
saying:

<p dir="rtl">
لَا يُؤْمِنُ عَبْدٌ حَتَّى أَكُونَ أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ نَفْسِهوَ
تَكُوْنَ عِتْرَتِيْ أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ عِتْرَتِهوَ اَهْلِيْ أَحَبَّ
إِلَيْهِ مِنْ اَهْلِه وَ ذَاتِي أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ ذَاتِه.
</p>

*A servant of Allah (s.w.t.) shall not be faithful believer unless he
loves me more than he loves himself, loves my Household more than he
loves his Household, loves my family more than he loves his family, and
loves my soul more than he loves his soul.[^9]*

Al-Bayhaqi, Abu al-Shaykh, and Ibn Habban, in his al-Sahih all recorded
the following Hadees on the authority of Ali:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) was furious when he came out, sat on
the minbar, thanked and praised Allah (s.w.t.), and then said:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا بَالُ رِجَالٍ يُؤْذُوْنَنِيْ فِيْ اَهْلِ بَيْتِيْ؟ وَ الَّذِيْ
نَفْسِيْ بِيَدِهلَا يُؤْمِنُ عَبْدٌ حَتّٰي يُحِبَّنِيْ، وَ لَا
يُحِبَّنِيْ حَتّٰي يُحِبَّ ذُرِّيَّتِيْ.
</p>

*What is the matter with those who hurt me concerning my Household
(a.s.)? I swear by Him Who grasps my soul in His hand that a servant (of
Allah (s.w.t.)) shall not be faithful believer unless he loves me, and
he shall not love me truly unless he loves my progeny (a.s.).*

For this reason, Abu Bakr said:

“I love to respect the Prophet’s kinship more than to respect mine.”

Out of his honesty and wisdom, the Master of the Creatures (i.e. Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)) who says nothing but truth has said as it is
reported by al-Tirmizi, in his al-Sunan, and al-Hakim, in al-Mustadrak,
on the authority of (Abdullah) IbnAbbas:

<p dir="rtl">
أَحِبُّوا اللَّهَ لِمَا يَغْذُوكُمْ بِه مِنْ نِعَمِه وَ أَحِبُّونِي
لِحُبِّ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ وَ أَحِبُّوْا أَهْلَ بَيْتِيْ لِحُبِّيْ‏
</p>

*“You should love Allah (s.w.t.) on account of the graces that He
bestows upon you ceaselessly, and you should love I on account of your
love for Allah (s.w.t.), and you should Love my Household (a.s.) on
account of your love for me.”2*

As a commentary of the Prophet’s saying, “You should love Allah (s.w.t.)
on account of the graces that He bestows upon you ceaselessly,” the
author of Fayz al-Qadir says:

“This means that you should love Allah (s.w.t.) for the various material
and tangible graces that He confers upon you, such as the facilitation
of food and drink as an example on the material graces and the leading
to success and right guidance, the nomination of figures of knowledge,
the creation of senses, and the dispense of the illuminations of
conviction on hearts in addition to the other tangible graces.”

Ibn Atta-Allah al-Iskandari says:

“In every moment, Almighty Allah confers upon you with graces for which
you should love Him and must thank Him at all times.”

Accordingly, it is impossible to settle the thanking when its time slips
away, since a new thanking must be renewed in every split second. In the
same way, seeking forgiveness and evasion of sins must be renewed in
every moment.

Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
</p>

***And if you would count Allah’s favors, you will not be able to number
them; most surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.[^10]***

Hence, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) intended to say that you must love
Almighty Allah because He is conferring upon you with His endless
graces.

Al-Zamakhshari says in this regard:

“Grace denotes every advantage intended for charity. On this account,
Allah the Exalted has created the whole world as grace. The world is in
fact either animate or inanimate. The inanimate is grace for the
animate, and the animate is grace for liveliness is grace for the
spirited, because without liveliness, the spirited would lose the
ability to benefit by other graces. Thus, anything that can be benefited
is grace.”

As a commentary on the previous notion, al-Fakhr al-Razi says:

“The graces of Allah the Exalted are countless, because everything that
He has given to us, such as advantages, pleasures, limbs and organs that
we use for getting benefits and evading harms, things that He has
created in this universe to reason out the existence of Him as the One
and only Maker, and things that He has brought about so as to restrain
from acts of disobedience; all these are graces. Furthermore, everything
that brings pleasure is grace, and everything that does not bring
pleasure but is used for evading harms is also grace, and everything
that does not bring pleasure and is not used for evading harms is also
grace since it can be used as evidence on the existence of the Maker
and, thus, a means to the recognition of and the obedience to Him. As a
result, all the creatures are graces.”

It is now clear that a servant’s love for Allah (s.w.t.) does not need
for interpretation, while Allah’s love for a servant needs
interpretation.

In this regard, Imam al-Ghazzali says:

“Love for Allah (s.w.t.) is factual, not figurative, because love, as
linguists cite, denotes the soul’s tendency to something expedient and
agreeable, while the excessive tendency is the ardent love. Since Allah
the Exalted is All-Benevolent and pleasing, and tendency to benevolence
and pleasance is naturally satisfying, love for Him has become real. On
the other side, Allah’s love for a servant is a figurative matter that
stems from the Lord’s unveiling the divine screen between a servant and
Him in order that the servant will see the Lord with his heart, and also
stems from the Lord’s enabling the servant to be close to Him.”

The following is excerpted from Sharh al-Mawaqif:[^11]

“Our love for Allah (s.w.t.) is a spiritual manner depending on the
conception of His continual, limitless perfection, and necessitating
perfect attention to His Sacred Presence without languor or whereabouts.
While our love for things other than Him is a manner depending on the
imagination of the perfection of pleasant, humane, or comparable things,
such as the love for one’s beloved or the father’s love for his son.
Moreover, love is satisfaction, will, and avoidance of protest.

In abstract, Allah’s love for others is not real, because the reality of
love denotes will, and wills associate limited things only, and Almighty
Allah has no limits. In other words, a will to do something denotes that
that thing has not been done yet, and the will to avoid something
denotes that that thing can be avoided. On that account, Almighty Allah
is too exalted to will to do or avoid something, because He is the
Everlasting, the eternally besought of all.”

The Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.)saying,*“you should love me on account of your
love for Allah (s.w.t.),”* means that because Allah the Exalted loves
me, He specifies your love for me as an instruction that you must carry
out. This meaning is stated in the following authentically narrated
report:

“When Allah (s.w.t.) loves a servant, Archangel Gabriel declares:**Allah
(s.w.t.) has loved so-and-so, you therefore must love him.** ”

The Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) saying,*“You should love my Household on
account of your love for me,”* means that because I love my Household
(a.s.) for Allah’s love for them, you should then love them.

The Prophet’s saying may also denote an instruction that must be carried
out, because love for the Prophet’s Household is for their love for the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبٰى
</p>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.[^12]***

Al-Fakhr al-Razi records that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and his Household
are equal in five things:

(1)   During the Tashahhud[^13] of the prayers, blessings should be said
to the Prophet and his Household.

(2)   During the Taslim[^14] of the prayers, blessings should be said to
the Prophet and his Household. In the Holy Qur’an, Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
سَلَامٌ عَلٰى إِلْ يَاسِينَ
</p>

***Peace be on the family of Yasin.[^15]***

(3)   In purity; Almighty Allah addresses to Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
by saying, طٰهٰ which means ‘pure.’

(4)   Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ
</p>

***Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you.[^16]***

(5)   Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبٰى
</p>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.[^17]***

The Holy Qur’an, authentic Ahadees, and consensus of Muslim scholars
from different generations; all these refer to the divine obligation of
loving, adoring, esteeming, respecting, and honoring the Household of
Allah’s Messenger(s.a.w.a.). Besides, reason decides this fact according
to the previous proofs on the obligation of gratitude for the
All-benefactor Lord’s graces. Our Prophet (s.a.w.a.), as being the
prophet of mercy, the guide of the Ummah, and the savior of humankind,
must be thanked, appreciated, respected, and honored. To honor and love
the Prophet’s Household is a part of honoring and loving him.

On that account, the four major guidelines of the Islamic Shari’ah,
namely the Holy Qur’an, the Holy sunnah, consensus of the different
generations of the Muslim scholars, and analogy, make incumbent upon
Muslims to love the Prophet’s Household. To refer to all these evidences
is impossible in this brief essay, because it requires big volumes, and
the submission to this fact is an indisputable matter for both ordinary
people and scholars. We have referred to some points of this topic only
in order to enlighten those who love the Prophet’s Household, for
Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفٰى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ عِمْرَانَ
عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
</p>

***Surely, Allah (s.w.t.) chose Adam (a.s.) and Noah (a.s.) and the
descendants of Abraham (a.s.) and the descendants of Imran (a.s.) above
the nations.[^18]***

Undoubtedly, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) belongs to the descendants of
Abraham (a.s.) and, as a result, his Household belongs to the
descendants of Abraham (a.s.). As a conclusion, the Prophet’s Household
(a.s.) is chosen by Allah (s.w.t.).

Regarding Almighty Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^19]***

This is most surely clear-cut evidence on the special rank of the
Prophet’s Household. Furthermore, there are numerous Verses from the
Holy Qur’an and Hadees supporting each other in this regard. The best
example is Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
</p>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.[^20]***

The authenticated frank Ahadees regarding the Prophet’s Household are
too innumerable. Let us refer to some of them:

Al-Tirmizi, in his al-Sunan, and Abu Hatam reported the following Hadees
on the authority of Zayd ibn Arqam:

<p dir="rtl">
أَنَا حَرْبٌ لِمَنْ حَارَبَهُمْ وَ سِلْمٌ لِمَنْ سَالَمَهُم‏
</p>

*I am in war against him whoever is in war against them (the Prophet’s
Household), and in peace with him whoever is in peace with them.*

Al-Tirmizi and Imam Ahmad recorded the following Hadees:

<p dir="rtl">
مَنْ آذٰي قَرَابَتِيْ فَقَدْ آذَانِيْ، وَ مَنْ آذَانِيْ فَقَدْ آذَي
اللهَ.
</p>

*Anyone who hurts my relatives will be hurting me, and whoever hurts me
is surely hurting Allah.*

Imam al-Bukhari, in his al-Sahih, recorded the following on the
authority of Abd-al-Rahman ibn Abu Layla:

Ka’b ibn Ajarah met me and said, “May I present to you a gift that I
have heard from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)?”

“Yes,” I answered, “give it to me.”

He spoke, “We asked the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) how to send blessings on the
Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), and he answered: You should say:

<p dir="rtl">
قُوْلُوْا اَللّٰهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلٰى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ كَمَا
صَلَّيْتَ عَلٰى إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَ آلِ إِبْرَاهِيْمَ إِنَّكَ حَمِيْدٌ
مَجِيْدٌ اَللّٰهُمَّ بَارِكْ عَلٰى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ كَمَا
بَارَكْتَ عَلٰى إِبْرَاهِيْمَ وَ آلِ إِبْرَاهِيْمَ إِنَّكَ حَمِيْدٌ
مَجِيْدٌ
</p>

*Say: O Allah! have mercy upon Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)and upon the family of
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)in the same way as you had mercy upon Abraham and the
family of Abraham (a.s.). You are surely Praised and Glorious. O Allah!
bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)in the same way as
you blessed Abraham and the family of Abraham (a.s.). You are surely
Praised and Glorious.*

Commenting on this Hadees, our master Jabir says:

“I do not believe that my prayers in which I do not send blessings upon
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad; I do not believe such prayers will
be accepted.”

Al-Tirmizi, in his al-Sunan, records the following on the authority of
“Umar ibn Abu Salamah, the Prophet’s stepson:

Regarding the following Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيْدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^21]***

When this Verse was revealed, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was in the house of
UmmeSalamah the Prophet’s righteous wife. He summoned Fatimah, al-Hasan
(a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) and covered them with a cloak which too
covered his back and said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ هٰؤُلَاءِ أَهْلُ بَيْتِيْ فَأَذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْسَ وَ
طَهِّرْهُمْ تَطْهِيْرًا
</p>

*O Allah! these are my Household; therefore (I beseech You to) keep away
the uncleanness from them and purify them a thorough purifying.*

Seeing the situation, Umme Salamah asked, “Am I added to them, O Allah’s
Messenger?”

The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) answered,*“You are in your own position, and you
are on the right.”* [^22]

These are the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) from whom Almighty Allah keeps away the
uncleanness and whom He purified thoroughly. In the previous Hadees, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) shows that this honor (of thorough
purification) is dedicated to them individually and without the
participation of anyone else.

According to the narration, this exclusive position verifies that
UmmeSalamah heard and saw the whole situation and asked the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) to include her to them. As she tried to lift up that cloak
and go under it, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) took the cloak’s edge from her
hand and said,*“You are on your own position, and you are on the
right.”*

Because this exclusive position is dedicated to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
alone, nobody else should be added even Umme Salamah, the virtuous wife
of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and mother of the faithful believers (Allah
(s.w.t.) please all the mothers of the faithful believers)[^23]

If it was permissible or acceptable for anyone else to have a share in
this exclusive position of the Prophet’s Household (a.s.), it would be
permissible for Umme Salamah to be under that cloak as at least response
to her desire, soothing her or appreciation for her faithfulness and
loyalty especially from the one who “has a greater claim on the faithful
(Believers) than they have on themselves,” and is “to the Believers full
of pity and Merciful,”2 and was the kind, the sympathetic, the
magnanimous, the generous, and the honest. Thus, it has become evident
that the Verse is dedicated to those people of the cloak, not anyone
else. This fact is also proved by authentic narrations. Thus, it has
been proved that the Verse intended is dedicate to the Prophet’s
Household (a.s.) who are distinguished by such honorable merits. In
addition, the Holy Sunnah is glittering to brim the Muslims’ world with
the virtues of the Prophet’s Household:

In his (book entitled) al-Sahih, Muslim records the following on the
authority of Yazid ibn Hayyan al-Taymi:

Husain ibn Sabarah, Muslim ibn Zayd, and I went to Zayd ibn Arqam. After
we had sat before him, Husain asked, “Zayd, you have really attained
great benefaction because you saw the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), listened to
his words, participated in his campaigns, and followed him in prayers.
Now, Zayd, please narrate to us what you have heard from the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.).”

Zayd spoke: “O son of my brother, (I swear) by Allah (s.w.t.) I have
become old-aged; my days have become very old and have forgotten some of
these narrations that I used to memorize directly from the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.). You therefore should accept what I will tell you and
should not ask me things over my ability.”

He then added, “One day, in a place between Mecca and Medina called
(Khumm) the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) delivered a speech to us.

After statements of praising and thanking Almighty Allah, as well as
statements of preach and reminding of Him, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ فَإِنَّمَا أَنَا أ بَشَرٌ يُوشِكُ أَنْ
يَأْتِيَنِي رَسُولُ رَبِّي فَأُجِيبَ وَ اَنَا تَارِكٌ فِيكُمْ
ثَقَلَيْنِ: أَوَّلُهُمَا كِتَابُ اللَّهِ فِيهِ الْهُدٰى وَ النُّورُ
فَخُذُوا بِكِتَابِ اللَّهِ وَ اسْتَمْسِكُوا بِه... وَ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي
أَهْلِ بَيْتِي أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي.
</p>

*O people, I am no more than an ordinary person, and the Messenger of my
Lord (i.e. Angel of death) will shortly come to me and then I will
respond. Among you, I have left two weighty things: first, The Book of
Allah (s.w.t.) that includes right guidance and illumination. Preserve
in the Book of Allah (s.w.t.) and hold fast on it. Second, my Household;
remember Allah (s.w.t.) concerning my Household, remember Allah (s.w.t.)
concerning my Household, remember Allah (s.w.t.) concerning my
Household.*

Husain (a.s.) asked again, “Zayd, who are the Prophet’s Household? Are
his wives included with his Household?”

He - Zayd answered: “His wives are included with his Household, but his
Household is those whom are forbidden to receive alms after him.”

Husain (a.s.) asked, “Who are they, then?”

Zayd answered, “They are the family of Ali (a.s.), the family of Aqil,
the family of Ja’far, and the family of Abbas.”

(Abdullah) ibn Abbas narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) had
said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا بَنِيْ عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبِ إِنِّي قَدْ سَأَلْتُ اللَّهَ أَنْ
يُثَبِّتَ قَائِمَكُمْ وَ أَنْ يَهْدِيَ ضَالَّكُمْ وَ أَنْ يُعَلِّمَ
جَاهِلَكُمْ وَ أَنْ يَجْعَلَكُمْ جُوَدَاءَ نُجَدَاءَ رُحَمَاءَ فَلَوْ
أَنَّ رَجُلًا صَفَنَ بَيْنَ الرُّكْنِ وَ الْمَقَامِ فَصَلَّى وَ صَامَ
ثُمَّ لَقِيَ اللَّهَ مُبْغِضًا لِأَهْلِ بَيْتِ مُحَمَّدٍ دَخَلَ
النَّارَ.
</p>

*O sons of Abd-al-Muttalib, I have besought Allah (s.w.t.) to make the
chiefs among you stable (on the right course), guide the straying ones
among you, teach the ignorant ones among you, and make you generous,
noble, and Merciful, A man who lines up his legs between the Rukn and
Maqam[^24] for praying (there) and observes fasting (there) shall most
surely be entered into the fire of Hell if he meets Allah (s.w.t.) (on
the Day of Resurrection) bearing malice against the Household of
Muhammad.*

This Hadees is recorded by al-Hakim (in his book titled al-Mustadrak) on
the criterion of Muslim.[^25]

The Prophet’s Household is the worthiest of the Divine Care and love of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), because they are regarded as security
from people on this earth.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in his al-Musnad, and Abu Amr al-Ghifari have
reported on the authority of Ali (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) had said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلنُّجُوْمُ أَمَانٌ لِأَهْلِ السَّمَاءِ فَإِذَا ذَهَبَتِ النُّجُوْمُ
ذَهَبَ أَهْلُ السَّمَاءِ وَ أَهْلُ بَيْتِيْ أَمَانٌ لِأَهْلِ الْأَرْضِ
فَإِذَا ذَهَبَ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي ذَهَبَ أَهْلُ الْأَرْضِ
</p>

*Stars are acting as security for the inhabitants of the heavens. If
stars vanish, the inhabitants of the heavens will vanish, too. My
Household is acting as security for the inhabitants of the earth. If
they disappear, the inhabitants of the earth will disappear, too.*

Nasr ibn Ali al-Jahdumi relates the following narration to Ali ibn Abu
Talib (a.s.):

The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) took al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) from
the hands and declared:

<p dir="rtl">
مَنْ أَحَبَّنِيْ وَ أَحَبَّ هٰذَيْنِ وَ أَبَاهُمَا وَ أُمَّهُمَا كَانَ
مَعِي فِي دَرَجَتِيْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
</p>

*Anyone who loves these two, their father, their mother, and me shall
certainly be with me in the same position on the Day of Resurrection.*

Sufyan ibn Waki and Abd ibn Hamid reported that Khalid ibn Mukhallad
narrated the following to them on the authority of Usamah ibn Zayd:

One night, I visited the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) who went out embracing two
things that I could not see under a cloak. After I had asked him about
the matter for which I visited him, I asked about the things that he was
embracing. He (s.a.w.a.) uncovered the cloak and they were al-Hasan
(a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) on his hips. He then said:

<p dir="rtl">
هٰذَانِ ابْنَايَ وَ ابْنَا ابْنَتِيْ اَللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّيْ أُحِبُّهُمَا
فَأَحِبَّهُمَا وَ أَحِبَّ مَنْ يُحِبُّهُمَا
</p>

*These two are my sons and my daughter’s (a.s.).O Allah! I do love them
and I beseech to You to love them and to love those who love them.*

Al-Husain ibn Hurays has related that Abu Buraydah said:

Whilst the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was on the Minbar delivering a speech to
usal-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) who were dressing red shirts came
towards him in stumbling steps. Immediately, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) descended from the Minbar carried them both and put them
before him. He then commented:

<p dir="rtl">
صَدَقَ اللَّهُ:’ إِنَّما أَمْوالُكُمْ وَ أَوْلادُكُمْ فِتْنَةٌ‘ نَظَرْتُ
إِلٰى هٰذَيْنِ الصَّبِيَّيْنِ يَمْشِيَانِ وَ يَعْثُرَانِ فَلَمْ أَصْبِرْ
حَتّٰى قَطَعْتُ حَدِيْثِيْ وَ رَفَعْتُهُمَا
</p>

*Truthful are the words of Allah (s.w.t.) Who says:**“Your possessions
and your children are only a trial.”** As I saw these two boys walk
stumblingly, I could not avoid interrupting my speech so as to lift them
up from the ground.*

Almighty Allah too urged to respect the Prophet’s Household (a.s.). In
this regard, al-Bukhari in his al-Sahih records that Abu Bakr narrated
the following saying of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.):

<p dir="rtl">
يَا اَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، اُرْقُبُوْا مُحَمَّدًا فِيْ اَهْلِ بَيْتِه.
</p>

*O people, regard Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) through honoring his Household
(a.s.).*

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his al-Sahih records on the authority of Ali
(a.s.) that the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said to Fatimah (a.s.):

<p dir="rtl">
اِنِّيْ وَ اِيَّاكِ وَ هٰذَيْنِ (يعني حَسَنًا وَ حُسَيْنًا) وَ هٰذَا
الرَّاقِدَ (يعني عَلِيًّا) فِيْ مَكَانٍ وَاحِدٍ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
</p>

*You, these two (i.e. al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) this sleeping
one (i.e. Ali (a.s.) and I shall certainly be in the same position on
the Day of Resurrection).*

Al-Tabarani records on the authority of Ali (a.s.) that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَوَّلُ مَنْ يَرِدُ عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضِ اَهْلُ بَيْتِيْ وَ مَنْ
اَحَبَّنِيْ مِنْ اُمَّتِيْ.
</p>

*My Household and those who love me among the individuals of my Ummah
shall be the first to join me on the Divine Pool.*

Al-Tabarani, in his al-Mo’jam al-Saghir records on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Ja’far that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا بَنِي هَاشِمَ، إِنِّي قَدْ سَأَلْتُ اللَّهَ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ أَنْ
يَجْعَلَكُمْ جُوَدَاءَ نُجَدَاءَ رُحَمَاءَ. وَ سَأَلْتُهٗ اَنْ يَهْدِيَ
ضَالَّكُمْ وَ يُؤْمِنَ خَائِفَكُمْ وَ يُشْبِعَ جَائِعَكُمْ.
</p>

*O sons of Hashim, I have implored to Allah the Exalted to make you
generous noble and Merciful. I have also asked Him to guide the straying
ones among you, secure the fearful ones among you and to supply the
hungry ones among you.*

In his al-Mustadrak, al-Hakim records the following Hadees on the
authority of Anas ibn Malik and decides it as authentically reported:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
رشدني رَبِّيْ فِيْ اَهْلِ بَيْتِيْ مَنْ اَقَرَّ مِنْهُمْ بِالتَّوْحِيْدِ
وَلِيٌّ بِالْبَلَاغِ اَلَا يعذبهم.
</p>

*Concerning my Household my Lord has promised me that He shall not
punish anyone of them who believes in Allah’s oneness and my (divine)
message.*

Al-Tabarani in his al-Mo’jam al-Kabeer, records on the authority of
(Abdullah) Ibn Abbas the following Hadees whose reporters are decided as
trustworthy:

The Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said to Fatimah (a.s.):

<p dir="rtl">
اِنَّ اللهَ غَيْرُ مُعَذِّبِكِ وَ لَا وُلْدِكِ.
</p>

*Most surely, Allah (s.w.t.) shall not punish your sons and you.*

Ahmad, al-Hakim and al-Bayhaqi record on the authority of Abu Saeed
(al-Khudri) that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said while he was on
the minbar:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا بَالُ رِجَالٍ يَقُوْلُوْنَ اَنَّ رَحِمَ رَسُوْلِ اللهِ لَا تَنْفَعُ
قَوْمَهٗ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ؟ بَلٰي وَ اللهِ، اِنَّ رَحِ ـمِيْ
مُوْصِلَةٌ فِيْ الدُّنْيَا وَ الْآخِرَةِ، وَ اِنِّيْ، اَيُّهَا النَّاسُ،
فَرْطٌ لَكُمْ عَلَي الْحَوْضِ.
</p>

*What is the wrong with some individuals who claim that the kinship of
Allah’s Messenger(s.a.w.a.) shall not be helpful on the Day of
Resurrection? This is definitely not correct. By Allah (s.w.t.), I swear
that my kinship is helpful in this world as well as the world to come. O
people, I will precede you to the Divine Pool.*

Al-Bukhari, in his al-Sahih, records the following on the authority of
Abu Bakr:

While the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was delivering a sermon, al-Hasan (a.s.)
came; therefore, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِبْنِيْ هٰذَا سَيِّدٌ وَ لَعَلَّ اللَّهَ يُصْلِحُ بِه فِئَتَيْنِ مِنَ
الْمُسْلِمِيْنَ‏
</p>

*This is my son. He is a chief. Perhaps, Allah (s.w.t.) will reconcile
two Muslim parties through him.*

Ibn Hajar, in Path al-Bari (Commentary and explanations of al-Bukhari’s
al-Sahih), records the following saying of al-Muhallab:

In the previous Hadees, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) relates leadership to
conciliation; therefore, this indicates that none deserves leadership
except those by who people benefit.

Imam Ahmad and al-Tabarani, in his al-Mo’jam al-Kabeer, record that Ali
(a.s.) reported:

As the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) assigned me as the judge of the
Yemen, I said: “Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), you have chosen me while
I am still young and many elderly men are there. Besides, I do not have
full acquaintance with judiciary.”

The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) answered:

<p dir="rtl">
اِنْطَلِقْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ سَيَهْدِيْ قَلْبَكَ وَ يُثَبِّتُ لِسَانَكَ‏
</p>

*Go ahead, for it is Allah (s.w.t.)Who shall guide your heart and
strengthen your tongue.*

Ali (a.s.) then said:*“After this statement, I have never failed.”*

In fact, the authentic Ahadees in this regard are innumerable, for the
six most reliable reference books of Hadees, as well as many others, are
filled up with such narrations of honoring and esteeming the Prophet’s
Household’s exalted rank and unanimous elevated standing. Besides, this
fact is known for everybody, and it is impossible to find a single
faithful believer ignoring the esteem of the family of Allah’s
Messenger(s.a.w.a.).

Abu Bakr al-Bayhaqi (m), the grand scholar, says:

“All these reportsappertained to the virtuesof the Prophet’s Household
are mentioned in the famous books of Hadees in authenticated series of
narration. Refer to these books for the topic intended.”

The Prophet’s households are Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husain
(a.s.), and their descendants and offspring are attached to them.

The Hadees of Mubahalah - invocationof Allah’s curse - isthe evidence on
the fact that only the aforementioned five individuals enjoy the special
rank given to the Prophet’s Household (a.s.).

Exegetes of the Holy Qur’an have confirmed the following incident:

Regarding Almighty Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْۢ بَعْدِ مَا جَائَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَائَنَا وَأَبْنَائَـكُمْ وَنِسَائَنَا
وَنِسَائَـكُمْ وَأَنْفُسَنَا وَأَنْفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ
لَعْنَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكَـاذِبِيْنَ.
</p>

***If any one disputes in this matter with thee, now after (full)
knowledge Hath come to thee, say: “Come! Let us gather together, our
sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves:
Then let us earnestly pray, and invoke the curse of Allah (s.w.t.) on
those who lie!***

When this Verse was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) embraced
al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.), Fatimah (a.s.) walked after them,
and Ali (a.s.) walked after them. He then asked them to say ‘Amen’ when
he would invoke Allah (s.w.t.)... etc.[^26]

On this incident, Jarallah comments:

“This Verse is the strongest evidence on the virtue of the ‘Ashab
al-Kisa’ (owners of the Cloak - The Prophet’s Household.)[^27]

About their descendants’ following them in virtue, the following
Qur’anic Verse proves it:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِيْنَ آمَنُوْا وَاتَّبَعَتْهُمْ ذُرِّيَّتُهُمْ بِإِيْمَانٍ
أَلْحَقْنَا بِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ
</p>

***And (as for) those who believe and their offspring follow them in
faith, We will unite with them their offspring.***

Scholars have confirmed that ‘offspring’ includes the descendance of the
origin up to the Day of Resurrection. On that account, the Prophet’s
Household includes his offspring and descendants up to the Day of
Resurrection. From this point, scholars of Islamic laws have decided
many verdicts, especially in questions of waqfs[^28] and the like. In
this respect too, the question of the belongingness of the Prophet’s
daughter’s descendants to his lineage is very famous, and our great Imam
Abu Hanifah al-No’man ibn Sabit has his clear opinion in this question.

Commenting on the previous Qur’anic Verse, the author of Mahasin
al-Ta‘wil says:

“The Verse refers to those who imitate their ascendants with relation to
faith and righteous deeds. The Verse also shows that those descendants
will be joined to their ascendants in Paradise and (eternal) bliss.
Because the addressees in the Verse are the Prophet’s companions who are
sure of Allah’s promise they receive the good tidings that their
descendants who imitate them righteously will be added to them.”

The other Hashemite’s whom are forbidden to receive anything from the
alms enjoy a rank of honor higher than that of others, but they cannot
attain the characteristics of the ‘Ashab al-Kisa’ and the Prophet’s
progeny in relation to the obligation of loving, respecting, reverencing
and honoring them.

Scholars have had different opinions regarding Almighty Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

***Allah (s.w.t.) only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^29]***

Some scholars have decided that this Verse is dedicated only to the
descendants of Ali and Fatimah (a.s.), while others have included the
families of al-Abbas (a.s.), Ja’far, and Aqil with them.

In his al-Risalah al-Zaynabiyyah, Jalaluddln al-Suyuti has recorded
precious words concerning the identification of the Sharifs. He says:

“In the first age of Islam, the epithet of Sharif was said to anyone who
belonged to the Prophet’s Household (a.s.), whether through al-Hasan
(a.s.) or al-Husain (a.s.) belonged to Ali (a.s.) whether through
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah or any other son, or belonged to Ja’far,
Aqil, or al-Abbas.

Thus, in the biographies mentioned in al-Zahabi’s book of history, you
can find many names such as, ‘Sharif of al-’Abbas’, ‘Sharif of ‘Aqil,’
Sharif of ‘Ja’far,’ or ‘Sharif of Zaynab.’

But, when the Fatimid dynasty ruled Egypt, they dedicated the epithet to
the descendants of our Master’s al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.).
This matter has been followed in Egypt up to now.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) married my Master Abdullah ibn Ja’far, her cousin.
The first of her excellent, pure descendants were Sayyid Ali, the
namesake of his grandfather, Sayyid Awn al-Akbar, Sayyid Abbas, Sayyid
Muhammad, and Lady Umme Kulsum respectively. Lady
Zaynab(a.s.)’sdescendants are now numerous.

They are, according to al-Sabban the scholar, added to the Prophet’s
family and Household (a.s.). This fact is unanimously decided because
the Prophet’s family are the faithful Believers from the Hashemites, son
of Abd-al-Muttalib, his progeny, and his descendants. Sons (and
descendants) of one’s daughter are regarded as his progeny and
descendants, and when such a man records something in his will for his
descendants, the descendants of his daughter must have a share in it.
This meaning however is more specific than the previous.

As it is unanimously decided, it is forbidden for the descendants of
Ja’far to have from the alms, because they belong to the Prophet’s
Household. Even though it is now dedicated to the descendants of
al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.), the epithet of Sharif must be said
to all the individuals who belong to the Prophet’s Household, according
to the old concept of this epithet.

The author of al-Mawahib says that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) had
no descendants except those who came through his daughter Lady Fatemah
al-Zahra (a.s.). Hence, the Prophet’s noble progeny came through the two
grandsons, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and Imam al-Husain (a.s.). Those who
belong to the descendants of the two Imams are called ‘Hasani’ and
‘Husaini.’ Besides, the name ‘Ishaqi’ is added to those who belong to
Ishaq son of Ja’far al-Sadiq son of Muhammad al-Baqir son of Imam Zayn
al-Abidin son of Imam al-Husain (a.s.). He - Ishaq - was the husband of
Lady Nafisah daughter of al-Hasan ibn Zayd ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn
Ali (a.s.).

Al-Sabban says that ‘sharifship’ is of various classes; a general one
includes all the Prophet’s Household, a special one is dedicated to the
Prophet’s progeny and, hence, includes the descendants of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) and all of the Prophet’s daughter’s descendants, and a third
class is restricted to al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) and called
‘sharifship of kinship.’

The evidence of those who claim that the name of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) is
restricted to definite individuals is the following Hadees, which is
related from many authenticated ways of narration:

The Prophet (s.a.w.a.), accompanied by Ali and Fatimah (a.s.), gave his
two hands to al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) and entered. He asked
Ali and Fatimah (a.s.) to come close and sit before him, seated al-Hasan
(a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) on his thighs, covered them with a cloak,
and recited (Allah’s saying):

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.[^30]***

According to another narration, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) then said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ هٰؤُلَاءِ أَهْلُ بَيْتِيْفَاَذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْسَ وَ
طَهِّرْهُمْ تَطْهِيْرًا
</p>

*O Allah! these are my Household; (So, I beseech to You to) Keep away
the uncleanness from them, and purify them a thorough purifying.*

According to a third narration, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) then said:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ هٰؤُلَاءِ آلُ مُحَمَّدٍ فَاجْعَلْ صَلَوَاتِكَ وَ بَرَكَاتِكَ
عَلَى آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ كَمَا جَعَلْتَهَا عَلٰي اِبْرَاهِيْمَ إِنَّكَ
حَمِيْدٌ مَجِيْدٌ
</p>

*O Allah! these are the family of Muhammad; (So, I beseech to You to)
make Your mercy and Blessings on the family of Muhammad in the same way
as You have made it on Abraham. You are certainly Praised, Glorious.*

Supporting those who claim generality of the expression of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.), al-Bayzawi states that particularizing the expression to the
five individuals only does not suit the Verses that precede and antecede
the intended Verse (i.e. Verse of Purification). In addition, the Hadees
has mentioned those individuals particularly so as to refer to the
Prophet’s Household, not anyone else.

On the other hand, the particularization is mentioned for adding the
particular progeny to them, for their special rank. As a result, this
does not oppose the generality of the expression.

It is also credible that the particularization of these four individuals
is intended for a divine commandment. This fact is proved by the Hadees
narrated by Umme Salamah:

Seeing the situation, Umme Salamah lifted an edge of the cloak and tried
to be with them under it. But the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) took the cloak’s
edge from her hand. She then asked, “Am I added to them, Allah’s
Messenger(s.a.w.a.)?”

The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) answered,*“You are in your own position, and you
are on the right.”*

In al-Musnad, Ahmad (ibn Hanbal) and al-Tabarani narrate the following
Hadees on the authority of Abu Saeed al-Khudri:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
نَزَلَتْ هٰذِهِ الْآيَةُ فِي خَمْسَةٍ: فِيَّ، وَ فِي عَلِيٍّ، وَ فِي
حَسَنٍ، وَ حُسَيْنٍ، وَ فَاطِمَةَ
</p>

*ThisVerse(ofPurification)hasintendedfive
individuals;theyareAli,al-Hasan,al-Husain, Fatimah (a.s.), and I.*

Ibn Abu Shaybah, Ahmad, al-Tirmizi, al-Tabarani, and al-Hakim (who
decided the Hadees as authentic); all narrate the following on the
authority of Anas:

Whenever he went out for the Fajr (dawn) Prayer (in the Masjid), the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to pass by the house of Fatimah (a.s.) and
declare:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلصَّلَاةَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ: إِنَّما يُرِيْدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَ يُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيْرًا.
</p>

*Hurry for the prayer, O people of the House (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.).)**“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O
people of the House, and to purify you a thorough purifying.”***

At any rate, some narrations assert the generality of the expression:

Muslim and al-Nesaaei narrate the following on the authority of Zayd ibn
Arqam:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) delivered a speech to us in which he
(s.a.w.a.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِيْ، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي
أَهْلِ بَيْتِيْ، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللَّهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِيْ.
</p>

*Remember Allah (s.w.t.) concerning my Household, remember Allah
(s.w.t.)concerningmyHousehold,remember Allah (s.w.t.) concerning my
Household.”*

He then was asked, “Who are the Prophet’s Household?

Zayd answered, “His households are those whom are forbidden to receive
alms after him.”

He was asked, “Who are they, then?”

Zayd answered, “They are the family of Ali (a.s.), the family of Aqil,
the family of Ja’far, and the family of Abbas.”

To sum it up, the individuals of the Prophet’s pure progeny have been
given exclusively stepped up honoring, covered by great virtue through
Lady Fatimah, dressed with the wear of tribute, and granted more respect
and reverence.


