Introduction
============

Lady Zaynab (a.s.), daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.) and granddaughter of
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), was the first lady in the world of Islam to
form a whole history, erect edifices of right and justice, demolish the
gloomy castles of wrong and oppression, and record, through her
honorable situations, new items of honor and dignity for Islam and
Muslims throughout history. Thus, she has been a ring in the series of
the ideal, human glories that her fathers, brothers, descendants of her
brothers, and their partisans have introduced to humanity.

She contributed actively in constructing the edifices of the Muslim
ideal renaissances and in the propagation for the Religious and
political cognizance in the meanwhile as the ruling authorities and
their tails used all media for overcastting the pure mentalities of
people and forging even the intuitive facts of Islam.

Positively, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) aborted all these forgeries and brought
into view the reality of the Umayyad rulers; the actual enemies of
Islam. She, also, proved to the public’s that the Umayyad rulers were
polluted by crimes and violations against human rights and that their
authority was illegal since they usurped the others’ rights and
appointed themselves as absolute rulers over Muslims without obtaining
their satisfaction or consulting them.

Through her marvelous revolutionary speeches and situations, Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) particularized minutely the reality that was hidden from the
publics, and focused lights on the misdemeanor of the Umayyad rulers’
political plots.

LadyZaynab (a.s.),theProphet’sGranddaughter was characterized by a
personality that joined all the high moral standards and the honorable
tendencies and accordingly, she has been the best exemplary of honor
chastity and dignity in addition to every virtue of human perfection.

From her grandfather and parents, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) inherited perfectly
the highest principles of charity including deep-rooted faith and trust
in Almighty Allah. Historians have recorded remarkable pictures and
situations of incomparable faith and perseverance on principles the
leading roles of which was proudly given to Lady Zaynab (a.s.). At the
night that followed that horrible day of ‘Ashura’[^31] in Karbala, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) offered Thanksgiving Prayer to Almighty Allah for that
tragedy which inflicted not only the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), but also all
human beings in general and Muslims in particular.

Another picture of Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’stremendous faith is that on the
day of “Ashura she stopped near the body of her killed brother, Imam
al-Husain (a.s.), that was cruelly severed by the swords of the criminal
band of the Umayyad army, and uttered her immortal word:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ تَقَبَّلْ هٰذَا الْقُرْبَانَ، وَ اَثِبْهُ عَلٰي عَمَلِه.
</p>

***“O Allah, accept this offering and reward him for his deed.”***

Has humanity ever seen such a scene of faith?

The most destructive adversity that inflicted Islam was taking the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.) away from the political theatre of Islam while everybody,
especially those who contributed directly in the scenario of setting
them aside from their positions, knew for certain the divine decision of
choosing them (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) for the leadership of the
Islamic nation. Historians have recorded unanimously that after the
demise of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), some individuals led a rebellion
against his general decision of succession in the leadershipof the
Islamicnation, claiming that it is unacceptable for the Hashemites[^32]
to have both prophesy and leadership.[^33]

This adversity resulted in handing the leadership and destiny of the
Islamic nation over to unsuitable individuals who were the main reason
beyond the collapse of Muslims.

Thus, the Islamic nation, as a whole, was deprived of the pure source of
the knowledge of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) which was the natural extension
of the divine knowledge of the prophets (a.s.). Imam Ali (a.s.), in
consequence, lived in complete confinement away from the political and
practical life of the Islamic nation all during the reigns of the three
caliphs, and when he was elected, freely for the first time, for the
leadership of the Islamic nation, the capitalists, the greedy, the
deviants, and the ignorant revolted against his just government and
engaged him against many things. By such engagement, the Islamic world
was afflicted with a big loss when Imam Ali (a.s.) did not have enough
time to extend ideal justice and equality all over the Islamic state. As
a matter of fact, the Immaculate Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) faced
the same fate of their grandfather Imam Ali (a.s.) when the Umayyad and
Abbasid rulers prevented them from extending their idealities and
knowledge among people and caused humanity to lose such sources of
wisdom.

Because of the policies of the caliphs of Quraysh[^34] , the mortal
enemies of Islam could come to power, rule Muslims, and change the
Islamic State into kingdom dominated by personal interests and
hereditary dynasty.

Thus,wrongandoppressionbecamethedistinctive features of the ruling
authorities, killing was the fate of men of thought and freedom, people
were deprived of their rights, which became in the hands of a few gang
loyal to the ruling authorities, and corruption found rich pasture in
the Islamic Provinces.

Wrong, oppression and corruption attainted the climax in the reign of
Yazid the dissolute. Historians have unanimously agreed on the fact that
“Yazid was such an unjust, immoral and sinful man that he did not
believe in Allah (s.w.t.) and His Apostle for a single moment.” In
abstract, Yazid’s policies exploded in every matter that violated Islam.

In the midst of these circumstances, nobody had the ability to utter a
single word of right except Imam al-Husain (a.s.) who formulated his
great revolution that paved the way to the standing against every unjust
individual and declare the word of truth openly courageously.

Through its horrible chapters, the revolution of Imam al-Husain (a.s.)
shook the worldwide conscience and carried an intellectual donation and
bright lessons to all peoples who suffer the ordeals of colonialism and
slavery.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) contributed actively and positively in all the
chapters and heroisms of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) revolution. In the
first stage of the revolution, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) stood with her brother
so bravely although she knew the fate that he would face. Her strong
will, fortitude, and determination on supporting her brother in his
revolution were distinctive features of this revolution that changed the
history and supplied the seekers of freedom with factors of renaissance
and development.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) believed in the revolution of her brother,
participated in his struggle against wrong and oppression vigorously,
and adopted the goals of this great revolution. Through her innovative
speeches in the porticoes of the Umayyad ruling center, she signalized
the genuine principles of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) revolution and could
crystallize the public opinion and found an actual cognizance that,
later on resulted in successive popular uprisings against the Umayyad
regime.

She gave matchless examples of willpower, deep-rooted faith, and
steadfastness through her treatment of the horrible situations she had
to encounter. In fact, the example of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) can be found
neither in the Islamic history nor in the history of humankind.

This great lady saw the atrocious adversities that afflicted her family
members and could treat these situations with perseverance and
steadfastness as she submitted totally to Almighty Allah.

She saw the moonlike young men among her sons, nephews and cousins
killed and their organs were severed so horribly on the ground of
Karbala. She also saw even the newborns and the babies of her Household
slaughtered so savagely on the hands of those inhumane criminals.

She saw the ladies of the Prophet’s house harshly exhausted by thirst
while they were wailing for their sons and brethren, but she was trying
to console and order them to be patient and steadfast.

She saw her brother, Chief of the Martyrs surrounded by those wicked
people whose swords, spears and lances were stricken on his body until
they beheaded him so hideously.

She saw those infidel invaders attack the women’s tents and set them on
fire while the Prophet’s harem had to run in the desert out of fear.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) saw all these adversities and faced them with faith,
persistence, and submission to Almighty Allah.

The disaster of Karbala with all of the horrifying, hideous events that
accompanied it, including the capture, humility, and exemplary
punishment against the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), men and women, provokes us
into having a brief view at the political documents and the events that
followed the Prophet’s demise directly because these are the rudimentary
source of the misfortunes of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) in particular and
Muslims in general.

Most certainly, within the most significant factors that resulted in the
absolute domination of the Umayyad dynasty on the Islamic State were the
plot of the Saqifah[^35] and the spurious forgery of the Shura.[^36]
Because of the invention of these two baseless systems, the Umayyad
infidels, though they were humiliated by Islam and decided as slaves and
then were released after they had fought against Islam with all weapons,
could come to power and prevail on Muslims and their destiny.

The ruling authorities who usurped the legal right of Imam Ali (a.s.)
showed favor to the Umayyad rulers, removed the mask of humility and
meekness that Islam put on their faces, granted them abundant wealth,
and invested them with leading offices in the Islamic State. Mu’awiyah
ibn Abu Sufyan was the biggest beneficiary of such procedures. He was
given the governorship of Syria and was granted special support and
advocacy. When Umar ibn al-Khattab was informed that the governor of
Syria, namely Mu’awiyah, exceeded all limits in violating the Muslims’
treasury as he built palaces, committed every sin forbidden by Islam,
dressed silky clothes, and ate in golden and silver plates, Umar found
him excuses by saying, “This is the Khosrow- king of the Arabs.’’
Everybody knew that Islam has been empty of royalty or aristocracy. In
the sight of Islam, all Muslims are of the same class. Nothing
distinguishes them except piety and charity.

It is ironic that Mu’awiyah who opposed Islam openly and was forced to
accept it so as to save himself from killing; it is ironic for such an
individual to be described as the king of the Arabs. In the Holy Qur’an,
Mu’awiyah and his family are described as the doomed tree.[^37] In many
texts related authentically to the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the Umayyad
dynasty is cursed. After all, they are only slaves of Muslims although
the Prophet released them and they have been named ‘the Released Ones.’

In abstract, a view at the events of Karbala and the ordeals faced by
the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) proves that they, primarily, are the results of
the plot of Saqifah and the spurious forgery of Shura. Moreover, these
two unfounded systems have been the reason beyond all the ordeals of
Muslims during history.

In point of fact, the greatest and the most constructive service to be
presented to the Islamic nation is to hint at, propagate for, and refer
to the Ahl al Bayt’s (a.s.) numerous, genuine merits and elevated
idealities since these matters leave direct influence on the spread of
virtue and moral standards and the development of behavior. The Ahl al
Bayt (a.s.) have been acting, through their words, deeds, and behaviors,
as rays of Almighty Allah’s illumination, since they are, as is proved
by authenticated reports related to the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) “who does not
speak out of desire”, the ships of salvation of the Islamic nation and
the matches of the Book of Allah (s.w.t.).

The life accounts of the Ahl al Bayt (a.s.) have been schools of
God-fearing, genuine faith, and struggle against the wrong. They
dedicated their lives to the Almighty and acted perfectly sincerely for
His sake. Thus, the life account of any of them is no more than a record
of model items of God fearing and obedience to the Lord. They spent
their days with fasting and spent their nights with prayers and recitals
of the Holy Book of Allah (s.w.t.).

The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), men and women, acted earnestly for spreading
knowledge, wisdom and high moral standards among people. They also spent
their lives with distributing their charity among the needy acting
kindly to the miserable, struggling intently against the wrong and
exerting all possible efforts for opposing injustice and the unjust
individuals no matter how strong they were and which positions they
held.

They adopted the issues of the Islamic nation so bravely; therefore,
they were exposed to killing at the hands of the unjust rulers who lead
the reins of the Islamic nations wrongfully.

Among the individuals of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) to whom all the previous
activities and descriptions are applicable is Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.) who contributed in raising the word of Allah
(s.w.t.) on this earth and struggled intently against the oppressors and
had to suffer the most horrible adversities and misfortunes for this
sake. After the killing of her brother Imam al-Husain (a.s.), Lady
Zaynab (a.s.), as well as the other harem of the Prophet’s Household was
taken as captive and had to be present before the bastard Ubaydullah ibn
Ziyad who was given the position of the governorship of two Islamic
provinces.

Before Ubaydullah, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) showed such remarkable courage
that he could not control himself when he hurried towards her to beat
her.

The caravan of the Prophet’s Household then was taken to Syria where
they had to be present before Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah. Before this criminal
descendant of the mortal enemies of Islam, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) delivered
her historical speech, which is considered as the most important
document that condemned and decided as illegal the Umayyad State and its
partisans.

For the sake of Islam, this granddaughter of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
had to suffer horrifying adversities and misfortunes, and due to her
heroic situations and honorable struggle against wrong and oppression,
women of this world must take her as their model and through a deep
understanding of her pioneership of struggle against wrong, all women
should recognize their roles in adopting the issues of justice on this
earth.


