The Life of Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
==============================

To throw light upon the odorous memories and to work perseveringly for
obtaining the items of such memories; these two things cast on souls
good manners, virtues, and acquaintance with the conducts of the past
personalities who were characterized by high merits, piety,
righteousness, and decency.

Thus, the noble deep-rooted character of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) should not
be passed over because she has contained all points of immaculacy,
majesty, dignity and distinguished origin. She has also possessed
renowned bearings in the fields of perseverance on the principles,
courage, eloquence and full-heartedness in addition to asceticism,
chastity, piety, holiness and magnanimity.

On that account, it is necessary for seekers of merits and fact finders
to adopt from her precious life account and please the ears by listening
to her admirable, odorous memories so as to take from her a model of
self-disciplining, knowledge and aspiration.

Let us now refer to a brief presentation of the life of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.).

Lineage
-------

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) enjoyed the most exalted lineage since she ramified
from the tree of prophecy and Imamate and combined all the elements of
honor and dignity. The family of Imam Ali (a.s.) has been the most
elevated all over history in fields of struggle against wrong and
adaptation of the issues of human rights. For the sake of these issues,
sons and descendants of Imam Ali (a.s.) have provided hundreds of
martyrs.

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sgrandfather from the maternal side was Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) who exploded springs of knowledge and wisdom on this
earth, founded the features of civilization and development constructed
a noble society controlled by justice and law smashed the customs,
superstitions, and pagans of the savage, tribal society that prevailed
in the Arab Peninsula called for worshipping the One Creator and brought
to his nation abundant goodness. Indeed Almighty Allah sent Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) as mercy for humankind.

From this great personality, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) inherited defense of the
right and struggle for elevating the word of Allah (s.w.t.) highly.

Her grandmother, from the maternal side, was Khadijah (a.s.) who
supported Islam in its darkest days, struggled for sake of Allah
(s.w.t.) in the ever-best way, and spent her entire fortune for sake of
her religion. She therefore has been one of the two supports on which
Islam relied in existence. The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to appreciate for
his loyal wife her situation in her life and after her death.

From this great grandmother, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) inherited the highest
moral standards and perseverance on principles. Copying her grandmother,
she supported her brother Imam al-Husain (a.s.) in his revolution and
supplied his great uprising with elements of eternity.

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sfather is Imam Ali Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s.) (commander
of the faithful Believers): chief of the Prophet’s successors, leader of
the pious ones and head of the worshippers. Ali (a.s.) was the
representative, successor and heir of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.). His
merits are innumerable and his situations for sake of Allah (s.w.t.) are
incomparable. He was the most knowledgeable, the most self-possessed,
the most magnanimous, the most generous, the most ascetic, the most
courageous, the most reputable, the best worshipper, the most loyal, the
most faithful and the most pious among Muslims.

Historians have recorded unanimously that Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was
imitating her father in behavior, knowledge and conduct. She too,
adopted positively all of her father’s goals and situations for sake of
supplying Islam with elements of continuity. Hence, she, along with her
brother Imam al-Husain (a.s.), could thwart the Umayyad infidels’ plots
aimed at wiping out Islam and replacing it with the pre-Islamic customs.

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’smother was Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) the Veracious
(a.s.) who was a copy of her father in adoration of Allah (s.w.t.),
piety, self-discipline, knowledge, virtue, clemency, veneration and the
other features of perfection. Her father named her as the Chiefs of the
Women of the World.[^38] From this cause her father addressed his best
words of laudation and respect to his daughter who was the ideal woman
on this earth.

This was the mother, educator and instructor of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) who
was nourished on all features of human perfection,

Let us also refer briefly to the grandfather and grandmother of Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) from the paternal side.

Abu Talib, Father of Imam Ali (a.s.) was the protector of Islam as he
defended Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) so bravely and suffered in this
course unbearable troubles. Only under the guardianship of Abu Talib
(a.s.) could Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) propagate for his divine
mission and spread his principles fearlessly. With the demise of his
protector, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) expressed his great loss and grief. He
therefore called that year as ‘year of grief’. After the demise of Abu
Talib (a.s.), the enemies of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) agreed on
assassinating him, but Allah (s.w.t.) saved and ordered him to flee to
Yathrib and let his cousin, Ali (a.s.) sleep in his bed for making the
assassinators understand that he was still there.

From this great personality, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) drew the best lessons of
defending the principles.

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sgrandmother was Fatimah bint Asad (a.s.); an example
of faith and purity. On her hands, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was brought up
and treated so kindly and tenderly since she used to take care of him
rather than her sons and bestow upon him with all colors of sympathy and
love. Hence, she was highly respected by him; when she departed life, he
(s.a.w.a.) dressed her his own shirt and laid down in her grave as
expressions of his great love for her.

From this great mother, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) learnt the best lessons of
love and support for sake of her religion and its legal leaders.

We, also, should not neglect the fact that Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and Imam
al-Husain (a.s.) participated in composing the unparalleled personality
of their sister Lady Zaynab (a.s.) since she spent a long term of her
life under their custody.

The two Imams’ merits and virtues are too many to be contained. As a
result, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) called them ‘Chiefs of the Youth of
Paradise.’[^39]

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) imitated the morals and ethics of Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) who was known of his composure and liberality in addition to all
the high moral standards. As he noticed that his grandfather and parents
take care of Zaynab (a.s.) Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) encompassed her with
very much love and compassion and preferred her to the other harem of
the Prophet’s Household.

Imam al Husain’s (a.s.) relation with his sister Zaynab (a.s.) has been
the melody of seekers of human perfection. She could occupy his feelings
and emotions for the genuineness of her estimation, elevation of her
ethics, and high moral standards. She was the most dependable in the
sight of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) who used to take counsel with her in all
of his affairs. She also accompanied him in all the stages of his
revolution. Without Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sstruggle, efforts and honorable
situations, the revolution of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) would have been
lost. As an example of Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sgreat standing in the sight of
her brother Imam al-Husain (a.s.) is that when he bade her last farewell
on the day of ‘Ashura’, he asked her to mention him in her Night
Prayer.[^40]

Through the second part of this book, we will refer to sections of the
unmatched relation between Imam al-Husain (a.s.) and his sister, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.).

The Blessed New-born
--------------------

The life of the Prophet’s family was highly flourishing with the
existence of the two Imams al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) who
occupied their grandfather’s heart completely. Their patents, too, were
highly delighted as they saw their two sons before them and as they saw
the Prophet’s love for them. Once, he (s.a.w.a.) expressed his love for
these two sons by saying:

<p dir="rtl">
هٰذَانِ رَيْحَانَتَايَ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا
</p>

*“These two are my only basils that I take from this world.”[^41]*

In the midst of this delightful atmosphere, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.)
became pregnant for the third time. Everybody, including the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.), was waiting for the new baby.[^42]

With more delight and pleasure, Lady Fatimah (a.s.) gave birth of a
she-baby who would exceed all Muslim women in fields of faith, honor,
chastity, and perseverance on the principles. The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and
the Prophet’s companions received the news of the birth of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) with gladness.

Imam Ali (a.s.) hurried to take his newborn, kissed her frequently, and
held the Shariate ceremonies of newborns. The Imam (a.s.) recited
azan[^43] in his newborn’s right ear and iqamah[^44] in the left. Hence,
the first voice that penetrated the newborn’s hearing was her father’s,
shouting:

*Allaho Akbar - Allah is the Greatest.*

*Laa elaaha illallaah - thereis no god but Allah.*

These great words found a strong ground in the inner self of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.). They, later on, became the most significant elements of her
personality. In the future, she would adopt the calling to the true
application of these words for which she would encounter horrible
adversities.

As soon as he was informed about the news of the giving birth of this
newborn, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) hurried to his daughter’s house,
embraced the newborn to his chest warmly and began to weep. It was a
surprising view for the mother, Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) to see her
father’s tears drop on his face*“What for are you weeping, father?”*
asked she.

*“Fatimah,”* said the father (s.a.w.a.) with sad tone,*“you should know
that this daughter will have to suffer horrible misfortunes and
tragedies after my and your demise.”* [^45]

At these moments, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) perceived the horrifying
hardships that would afflict his granddaughter. Naturally, Fatemah
al-Zahra (a.s.) participated in her father’s griefs at these moments.
Then the close friend of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), Salman, came to
congratulate on that occasion but he found the Household (a.s.) sinking
in griefs and unhappiness. Hence, he also participated in that ceremony
of consolation.[^46]

Choosing The Name
-----------------

The blessed mother carried her newborn to the father and asked for
choosing a name for her.

“I will not precede the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in such a matter,”
answered the father modestly. He then took the newborn and asked him to
choose a name for her.

“I will not precede my Lord in such a matter” answered the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) modestly.

From the Heavens then ascended Archangel Gabriel to say to the Prophet,
“This newborn’s name is ‘Zaynab’ (a.s.).[^47] Almighty Allah has chosen
this name for her.”[^48]

She was also given the nickname ‘Umme Kulsum’ or ‘Umme al-Hasan’.[^49]

Epithets
--------

Epithet is a word or phrase expressing a quality or attribute regarded
as characteristic of the person or thing mentioned.[^50] Epithets, then,
show one’s mental characteristics, whether good or bad. Thus, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) had many epithets that expressed some aspects of her
personality.

### 1) al-A’qeelah

###

The Arabic A’qeelah means the gentlewoman who is honorable among her
people and venerated in her house.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was such an honorable and virtuous lady that all her
descendants have been called Banu al-A’qeelahsons of the gentlewoman.

During the journey of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) from Medina to Karbala, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) was the chiefs of the harem and was obeyed and respected
by everybody.

It is to add that she was also called Aaqelato Bani Hashim - the
gentlewoman of the Hashemites’, and Aaqelat ut-Talibiyyin the
gentlewoman of the sons (and descendants) of AbuTalib (a.s.).

### 2) al-Aalemah

###

For her supreme knowledge, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was called al (Aalemah)
the she-knowledgeable. Historians have confirmed that she was an
authority for Muslim ladies who used to refer to her in their religious
affairs. Of course, she received such knowledge from her grandfather,
parents, and brothers who were the sources of knowledge for the Islamic
Ummah. Furthermore, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) has had similar epithets, such as
al-Arifah (The well versed)and al-Muwasaqah (The trustworthy).

### 3) A’bidato Aali-A’li

###

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was recognized also as being distinguished worshipper
among Muslim ladies. She committed herself to all the recommendable
rites of Islam to the degree that even at the most horrible night of her
life - i.e. the night of the tenth of Muharram 61 A.H, she offered the
supererogatory prayers. Thus, she was called A’bidato Aali-A’li (The
she-worshipper) of Ali (a.s.)’s Household.

### 4) al-Kaamelah

###

In all aspects of human perfection, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) preceded
everybody and occupied the leading position. She therefore is called
al-Kaamelah (The perfect).

### 5) al-Faazelah

###

Because of her great Jihad, service for Islam and steadfastness for sake
of Allah (s.w.t.), Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sVirtue has exceeded all limits and
therefore, she was proudly conferred with the epithet of al-Faazelah
(The virtuous).

### 6) al-Siddiqah al-Sughra

###

Like her mother who is known as the Senior Veracious, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
was so veracious that she gained worthily the epithet of al-Siddiqah
al-Sughra (The Junior Veracious Lady).

### 7) Umm al-Masaa’eb

###

Because she had to suffer various and innumerable misfortunes all over
her lifetime, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was called Umm al-Masaa’eb (Mother of
misfortunes).

Let us refer to some of these misfortunes that she saw in a period of
about one month:

1)    She saw al-Hurr ibn Yazid force Imam al-Husain (a.s.) to stop and
reside in a desolate place.

2)    She saw the Imam’s few companions in comparison with the great
numbers of the enemy’s army.

3)    She saw most of the Imam’s so-called partisans abandon him and
join his enemies.

4)    She saw the women’s fear and worry when they had to reside in
Karbala.

5)    She saw the enemies deprive her people and her of water.

6)    She had to take care of the children and women while they were
crying out of thirst.

7)    Shehadtowitnessherbrother’sfeelingsof disappointment and
loneliness.

8)    She had to witness the martyrdom of her two sons, as well as the
other relatives and companions whom were martyred one by one, the
martyrdom of al-Abbas (a.s.) however was the most disastrous for her.

9)    She saw how Imam al-Husain (a.s.) was without any supporter or
helper, while he was seeking help.

10)  She saw the cut off head of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) lie on
Spearheads.

11)  She saw the enemies attack her brother’s caravan and Women and
trying to set fire on the tents.

12)  She had to gather the scattered children and women who fled to
everywhere in that desert.

13)  She had to pass by the dead severed body of her brother.

14)  She had to ride on saddle less, lean camels and to help the
children and women to ride on such animals.

15)  She had to exert all efforts for taking care of the ill nephew and
consoling him.

16)  She had to go through the scenes of being captives and driven from
a town to another whilepeople were looking at them as rebels.

It is narrated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) once said,*“To weep for
the misfortunes of Zaynab (a.s.) is as same as to weep for her brothers;
al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.).”* [^51]

Year of Birth
-------------

Historians and narrators have had different opinions about the year of
Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sbirth. Some have referred to the fifth year after
Hijrah[^52] others to the sixth, and a third party to the ninth. The
last opinion however is inaccurate[^53] and the most acceptable is the
first.

Early Life
----------

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was brought up at the hands of Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.), Imam Ali (a.s.), and Lady Fatimah the Veracious (a.s.). In
other words, she was brought up in the lap of the divine prophesy, spent
her early life in the house of the divine mission, suckled the milk of
the most perfect woman of all ages, and was nourished at the hands of
the Commander of the Faithful Believers. Hence, she enjoyed a divine
upgrowth and spiritual education and received garments of elevation,
eminence, chastity, and decency. After the demise of Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) and his daughter Fatimah (a.s.), Imam Ali (a.s.) married
Umamah[^54] who took care of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) perfectly since this
lady was known of her piety and submission to the Lord.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.), hence, was covered by the most exalted colors of
education, honor, dignity, mercy, and compassion. She learnt from the
behaviors of her parents and brothers many things that composed her
perfect personality.

For instance, whenever she visited her brother Imam al-Husain (a.s.), he
would stand up as a sign of reverence and respect for her. Whenever she
wanted to visit the Holy tomb of her grandfather, her father and two
brothers used to accompany her. They also used to extinguish any light
so that nobody would see her.[^55]

She was really the inheritor of Imam Ali(a.s.)’svalues, moralities, and
ethics. To the scholars and narrators of Hadees[^56] Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
enjoyed a great position. They, therefore, used to refer to Imam Ali
(a.s.), during the Umayyad reign who banned any mention to the Imam’s
name, by saying ‘Father of Zaynab (a.s.) reported...’

Scholarly Capacities
--------------------

From early life, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was marvelous in intelligence and
cleverness. She learnt by heart the Holy Qur’an and the Prophet’s
sayings regarding Islamic laws, rules of education, and principles of
ethics. She also memorized the famous, confounded the speech of her
mother, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) that she delivered in the Prophet’s
Masjid protesting against Abu Bakr’s usurpation of the Islamic Ummah’s
leadership, which was the right of Imam Ali (a.s.) according to the
instructions of Almighty Allah and Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) as well
as confiscation of Fadak that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had given to
her as gift within earshot of all Muslims. In addition to many other
narrations, she narrated her mother’s speech when the Muslim ladies
visited her in her final disease.

Her father too was greatly admired by her sharp cleverness. One day she
asked him, “Father, do you love us?” He answered “Of course I do,
daughter. I do love you because you are the fruit of my heart.” She
replied politely, “Father, love is exclusively for Almighty Allah, while
it is compassion which is for us.”[^57]

As he was teaching her the numbers, he asked,*“Say one.”* She said,
“One.” As he asked her to say*“two”* she kept silent.*“Why do you not
say two?”* asked the father. She answered “A tongue which pronounces
‘one’ cannot say ‘two’[^58] As he heard this great answer her father
kissed and embraced her.[^59]

She also used to say:

<p dir="rtl">
مَنْ اَرَادَ اَنْ لَا يَكُوْنَ الْخَلْقُ شُفَعَائَهٗ اِلَي اللهِ
فَلْيَحْمِدُه ٗ . اَلَمْ تَسْمَعْ اِلٰي قَوْلِه: سَمِعَ اللهُ لِمَنْ
حَمِدَه ٗ . فَخَفِ اللهَ لِقُدْرَتِه عَلَيْكَ، وَ اسْتَحِ مِنْهُ
لَقُرْبِه مِنْكَ.
</p>

*“Anyone who intends not to have the creatures as interceders for him
before Allah (s.w.t.) should praise Him. Listen to His saying:**‘Allah
listens to anyone who praises Him.’** Hence, one should fear Allah for
He has ability over him, and should feel shy of Him for He is very close
to him.”[^60]*

This statement in fact implies that she was so virtuous and perfectly
adhered to Allah (s.w.t.).

Moreover, she represented her brother, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) whenever he
would be absent. Hence, Muslims used to refer to her in the questions of
the Islamic laws. For her extensive knowledge, Imam Zayn al-Abideen
(a.s.), Abdullah ibn Ja’far, Lady Fatimah daughter of Imam al-Husain
(a.s.), Muhammad ibn Amr, and Ata ibn al-Sa’ib used to report her
sayings.[^61]

In Kufa and during her father’s reign, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) had special
sessions to which Muslim ladies used to come for listening to her
precious lectures about Islam and exegesis of the Holy Qur’an. She thus
was the most trustworthy reference from whom Muslim ladies used to take
concerning questions about Islam, moral instructions and general ethics.

For her tremendous virtue too, Abdullah ibn Abbas[^62] frequently asked
her for answers of questions that he ignored. He also reported proudly,
a good number of narrations on her authority. In this regard he would
say:

<p dir="rtl">
حَدَّثَنَا عَقِيْلَتَنَا زَيْنَبُ بِنْتُ عَلِيٍّ.
</p>

“Our A’qeelah[^63] (i.e. the Honorable gentlewoman), Zaynab (a.s.)
daughter of Ali (a.s.) narrated to us that... etc.”

One of his reports that he related on the authority of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) was Lady Fatemah al-Zahra’s (a.s.) famous speech in the Prophet’s
Masjid.

She also represented Imam Zayn al-Abideen (a.s.) during his illness.
About her, he (a.s.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
اِنَّهَا عَالِمَةٌ غَيْرُ مُعَلَّمَةٍ.
</p>

*“She is so knowledgeable that she does not need other’s
knowledge.”[^64]*

Finally, she was the most eloquent speaker in Islam; she could shake the
enemies’ emotions, disorder the public opinion, and provoke the publics
against the Umayyad ruling regime when she delivered her famous speeches
in Kufa and Damascus. In fact, these speeches hint at her precious
cultural and literate fortunes.

In addition, the reasons beyond her peculiar scholarly capacity may be
mentioned in the following points:

1- She was always pious and observant towards the Almighty Allah’s
commandments and instructions. To be God-fearing and pious achieves
knowledgeability and notable learning. This is clear in Almighty Allah’s
saying:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۖ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ اللَّهُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ بِكُـلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيْمٌ
</p>

***“And be careful of (your duty) to Allah, Allah teaches you and Allah
knows all things.”[^65]***

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was so God-fearing and pious. She dedicated a good
time of her daily activities to her Lord; she was sinking in praising
and glorifying Him. At nights when sounds calm and eyes sleep, she used
to turn her face and heart towards her Lord with teary eyes, fearful
heart, and hopeful mind to say confidently:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا مَنْ لَبِسَ الْعِزَّ وَ تَرَدّٰي بِهوَ تَعَطَّفَ بِالْمَجْدِ وَ
تَحَلّٰي بِه، اَسْئَلُكَ بِمَعَاقِدِ الْعِزِّ مِنْ عَرْشِكَ وَ مُنْتَهَي
الرَّحْمَةِ مِنْ كِتَابِكَ وَ بِاسْمِكَ الْاَعْظَمِ وَ جَدِّكَ
الْاَعْلٰي وَ كَلِمَاتِكَ التَّامَّاتِ الَّتِيْ تَمَّتْ صِدْقًا وَ
عَدْلًا اَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلٰي مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ الطَّيِّبِيْنَ
الطَّاهِرِيْنَ وَ اَنْ تَجْمَعَ لِيْ خَيْرَ الدُّنْيَا وَ الْآخِرَةِ.
</p>

*O You Who dresses and adorns Himself with valor! O You Who deigns and
dons Himself with glory! I implore to you by the seats of might in Your
Throne, by the utmost of mercy in Your Book, by Your Grandest Name, by
Your most high Majesty, and by Your Perfect Words that have been
accomplished truly and honestly, [I implore to You] to send Blessings
upon Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and the family of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and to
arrange for me the good of both this world and the world to come.*

2)    Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was well known of her unparalleled
intelligence, apposite opinion, and wisdom. Her words were as regulated
as necklace and her opinions were to the point. She was the ideal of
eloquence and expressiveness. Allah (s.w.t.) gifted her utmost of
knowledge, morality, composure, religiousness, and ethics. This is not
strange since she was the granddaughter of the Holy Prophet, the
daughter of the model parents of Islam and the sister of the two Chiefs
of the Youths of Paradise. In her grandfather, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) takes
pride saying:

<p dir="rtl">
وَ مَنْ كَجَدِّيْ النَّبِيَّ الْعَرَبِيِّ الْهَاشِمِيِّ الْقِرَشِيِّ
الَّذِيْ اصْطَفَاهُ اللهُ تَعَالٰي وَ اخْتَارَهٗ لِيُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ
طَرِيْقَ الْحَيَاةِ مِنْ خَيْرٍ وَ شَرٍّ فِيْ اَسْلُوْبِهِ الْعَذِبِ
الْجَمِيْلِ وَ عِبَارَتِهِ الطَّلِيَّةِ الْمُمْتِعَة الَّتِيْ تَفِيْضُ
رِقَّةً وَ حَنَانًا وَ ع َطِفًا وَ اِشْفَاقًا.
</p>

*“None is like my grandfather; the Arab, the Hashemite, and the
Qurayshite Prophet whom is selected by Allah (s.w.t.), the Elevated, for
guiding people to the path of life in its good and evil branches, and he
did in such a handsome approach and pleasant, articulate statements full
of softness, tenderness, sympathy, and compassion.”[^66]*

3)    She was taught by the most knowledgeable pair in Islam; her father
and mother, and it is so natural that a student of these persons would
be so intelligent and knowledgeable.

About Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sacumen and sagacity, let us listen to the
following narration recorded by Ibn Humayd in his book entitled
al-Musnad and al-Yafi’l in Mir’at al-Zaman:

One day, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and Imam al-Husain (a.s.) were discussing
some of their grandfather’s sayings,

*“The Halal is obvious and the Haram is also obvious, but between these
two there are many dubious matters most of people ignore. To avoid such
dubious matters is acquittal for the religion and the honor, while to
fall in such dubious matters is plunging into the Haram, A shepherd who
grazes about a shelter will decisively pasture in it. There is a shelter
to every kingdom, and the shelter of Allah is what He deems unlawful.
There is too a single morsel in each one’s body; when this morsel be
good, the whole body will be so, and when this morsel be bad, the whole
body will be so. This is the heart.”[^67]*

Commenting on this statement, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) said:

*Listen to me, Hasan and Husain (a.s.)! Your grandfather, the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.), has acquired the ethics of the Lord. It is Almighty
Allah Who disciplined him so perfectly. In this regard the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.)says,**My Lord has disciplined me, and He has done so
perfectly.***

*None is like my grandfather; the Arab, the Hashemite, and the
Qurayshite Prophet whom is selected by Allah (s.w.t.), the Elevated, for
guiding people to the path of life in its good and evil branches, and he
did in such a handsome approach and pleasant, articulate statements
fullof softness, tenderness, sympathy, and compassion.*

*The Halal is obvious and the Haram is also obvious,
butbetweenthesetwo,therearemanydubious matters. Accordingly, the
religion is of three degrees; Halal, Haram, and dubious matters. The
Halal is what Allah, the Exalted, has deemed lawful by way of a text in
the Holy Qur’an or through the explanations of the
Prophet,suchasthelegalityofpurchaseand rendition...*

*The Haram is whatever Allah (s.w.t.) has deemed unlawful in the Holy
Qur’an. It is also the contrary of the Halal.*

*The dubious matter is everything that is unknown whether Halal or
Haram.*

*A faithful believer who intends to achieve happiness in this world and
bliss in the world to come must perform all that which Allah (s.w.t.)
has made incumbent, follow the path drawn by the Holy Qur’an, take my
grandfather the Prophet, as example, and go away from the dubious as
much as one can.*

*To avoid the dubious matters is acquittal for the religion and the
honor and also purity for both. It also achieves sincere obedience to
the Lord.**“Now, surely, sincere obedience is due to Allah alone”**
.[^68]*

*For those who follow the line of the dubious matters, it is not safe to
have their feet slipped and thus they commit unlawful deed. There is a
shelter beside each possession, but the shelter of the All-king is what
He deems unlawful. The Holy Prophet says, ‘Avoid the unlawful and you
will be the most pious.’*

*Allah the Exalted has put in each human being a minute gem and morsel;
when it is good, the whole bodywillbegood,pureandclearfromfilth,
impairments and acts of disobedience to the Lord of the Worlds. This is
the heart. If one’s heart is sound, he will be attentive to the affairs
of his religion and the principles of its law and will see real
happiness lie in straightness on the lights of the guidance of the Holy
Qur’an and the Sunnah. Those who follow this straight path and these
divine instructions will be within the winners on the Day of
Resurrection.*

*Our life is in fact only a stage among many stages that lead either to
Paradise or to Hell. Death will be the end, and no blame falls after it.
Nothing is after this world except Paradise or Hell.”*

As she finished, Imam al-Husain (a.s.) said to her,

*“How great you are! You are surely from the tree of Prophecy and the
core of the Divine Message.”*

She once said:

*“My grandfather has decided for us (i.e. women) rights that are
incumbent upon our husbands in the same way as he has decided rights for
our husbands that are incumbent upon us.” In this regard, the Holy
Qur’an says:*

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ ۚ وَلِلرِّجَالِ
عَلَيْهِنَّ دَرَجَةٌ
</p>

***And they have rights similar to those against them in a just manner,
and the men are a degree above them[^69] .***

*My noble Grandfather also says:*

*‘A woman who offers the five obligatory prayers, observes fasting on
the month of fasting, guards her chastity, and obeys her husband shall
have the choice to enter Paradise from any gate she likes.’*

Ibn Asakir, in his al-Tareekh, records the following:

After she arrived in Egypt, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) once came over an
indisposition. The chiefs of Egypt decided to fetch her physician but
she refused saying:

*“We are not among those who hope for this world or for perpetuation in
it. We are the Household of Prophecy and the most desirable meeting for
us is the meeting of our Lord. A physician, however cannot change one’s
decided term of death.”*

Ibn Humayd, Abu Asim and Ibn Abu Shaybah narrated that Abdullah ibn
Abbas said:

Once, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) recited Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ... وَطَائِفَةٌ مِنَ الَّذِينَمَعَكَ
</p>

***O you who have wrapped up in your garments... and (also) a party of
those with you.***

She then commented:

*“Thanks to Allah (s.w.t.), we are included with this party [of those
who are with the Prophet].”*

The evidences on Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’seloquence and rhetoric are her
addresses in more than one occasion. These addresses changed the public
opinion against Yazid and the Umayyad State and showed the real goals of
Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) revolution. Later on, these addresses will be
referred to in details.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) enjoyed a peculiar rank in the world of mysticism. In
this regard, Allamah al-Burghani says:

“Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’sspiritual rank is very nigh to that of the
Immaculate Imams...”

Al-Rawandi, in al-Tiraz al-Muzahhab, says: “In addition to her high
spiritual rank, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) comes after her mother in virtue,
high merit, peculiarity,
majesty,knowledge,infallibility,chastity,illumination, light, honor and
splendor.”

Muhammad Riza al-Isfahani, in Jannat al-Khulud, records:

“Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was the nearest to her parents in eloquence,
asceticism, management and courage. After the martyrdom of Imam
al-Husain (a.s.), she was the custodian of her family members and
furthermore the Hashemite’s.

Ibn Anbah, in Ansab al-Talibiyyin, says:

“Lady Zaynab (a.s.) is distinguished by her innumerable merits, elevated
peculiarities, praiseworthy characters, admirable habits, remarkable
prides and manifest virtues.”

Marriage
--------

When Lady Zaynab (a.s.) attained maturity famous celebrities competed
with each other for asking for her hand. Her father, however, refused
them all.

Abdullah son of Ja’far son of Abu Talib (a.s.) also asked for her hand.
He was one of the noblest men of the Hashemites and one of the most
generous men of the Arabs. Besides, Imam Ali (a.s.) loved him very much.
He therefore responded to him and accepted to give him Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) in marriage.

Abdullah’s father was Ja’far who is described as the most similar to the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in morality and nature.[^70] He was one of those
who preceded others in embracing and defending Islam. He emigrated
twice, once to Abyssinia and the other to Medina and was well known of
his pity and sympathy to the poor and paupers. Like his brother Imam Ali
(a.s.) Ja’far was very much respected by the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
who housed him next to his Masjid because he recognized Ja’far’s strong
faith and sacrificing himself for sake of Islam.

In the eighth year after Hijrah, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) appointed Ja’far
as the commander of the Muslim army in their campaign at Mu’tah. In this
battle, Ja’far had been martyred after his two arms were severed because
he held fast on the pennon. About this situation the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) said:

*“Allah the Exalted shall have given Ja’far two wings with which he will
fly in Paradise everywhere he wishes, instead of his two severed
hands.”*

Ja’far therefore is named ‘Zul-Janahayn’ (the two-winged). The martyrdom
of Ja’far was one of the most difficult misfortunes that the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) had to encounter. Hence he (s.a.w.a.) said:

*“For Ja’far and his matches, weeping should be ceaseless.”[^71]*

Abdullah’s mother was the great lady Asma bint Umays. She was within the
earlier embracers of Islam. Accompanying her husband; she immigrated to
Abyssinia where she gave birth of Abdullah, Awn and Muhammad. She then
immigrated to Medina. After Ja’far’s martyrdom, Asma was married by Abu
Bakr and gave birth of Muhammad who is one of the most celebrated men of
Islam. When Abu Bakr died, Imam Ali Amir al-Mu’mineen (a.s.) married her
and she gave birth of a boy called Yahya.[^72]

Asma stuck sincerely to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and had strong
relationship with Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.). She reported about sixty
ahadees directly on the authority of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

She acted as a tender mother for Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), Imam al-Husain
(a.s.), and Lady Zaynab (a.s.) as soon as she entered Imam
Ali(a.s.)’shouse as a wife. They therefore appreciated her situations,
nice treatment, and tenderness.

She thus was an example of chastity, purity, and loyalty to the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.).

Abdullah ibn Ja’far was such a nonesuch person that none, including his
enemies, could hide admiration for his unparalleled personality. About
him, Mu’awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan said, “Abdullah ibn Ja’far is worthy of
all honor. He preceded everyone else to the noble deeds and
qualities.”[^73]

He was loyal to the Ahl al Bayt (a.s.) in general and Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) in particular, though he did not join the Imam’s caravan to
Karbala. Historians have recorded that Abdullah held the biggest
obsequies for the martyrdom of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), though his two
sons were also martyred in the same time. During that ceremony, one of
the slaves said to him, “We have suffered long because of al-Husain
(a.s.)!” As he heard this statement, Abdullah threw a sandal on that
slave out of his rage and said, “Son of the fetid one! How dare you say
such a thing about al-Husain (a.s.)? By Allah (s.w.t.) I swear, had I
been with him, I would not have left him before I would be killed there.
To me, he is undoubtedly more favored than my two sons are. What makes
my misfortune easy is that they were killed with him without complaint
or impatience. Thanks to Allah (s.w.t.), if I could not support
al-Husain (a.s.) during his fighting my two sons did.”[^74]

He was also well known of his generosity about which narrators have
reported many marvelous stories. Because of the Prophet’s supplication
to Allah (s.w.t.) for him, he was the richest among people of Medina.
Besides, he was so virtuous. He reported many narrations on the
authority of his uncle, Imam Ali Amir al Mu’minin (a.s.), and his two
cousins, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and Imam al-Husain (a.s.).

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) gave birth of four sons and a daughter; Awn, Ali
al-Zaynab, Muhammad, Abbas, and Lady Umme Kulsum.

Awn was virtuous and well-mannered. He accompanied his (maternal) uncle,
Imam al-Husain (a.s.), to Iraq. In the battle of Karbala, Awn fought
very bravely and took pride in his father, Abdullah, and grandfather,
Ja’far.

After a brave round of fighting, Awn was attacked by the vicious
Abdullah al-Ta’i who could kill him.[^75]

Umme Kulsum, daughter of Lady Zaynab (a.s.), was famous for her beauty,
chastity, and personality. She was highly respected by all people in
general and the Hashemites in particular. As an attempt to curry favor
with the Hashemites so as to find himself a respectful position in the
Muslims view, Mu’awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan sent a missive to his governor in
Medina, Marwan ibn al-Hakam, ordering him to ask the hand of Umme
Kulsum, daughter of Lady Zaynab (a.s.), for his son, Yazid.

Marwan ibn al-Hakam knew that Imam al-Husain (a.s.) would surely refuse
and thwart the matter. He therefore postponed it as he looked for a
proper opportunity. He seized the opportunity of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.)
travel and hurried to Abdullah ibn Ja’far who understood the whole
matter. He said to Marwan that he should wait until Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) would come back from his journey.

When the Imam was back, Abdullah rushed at him informing of the whole
story. The Imam became very angry, for he rejected completely that his
niece would become the wife of the sinful, lewd grandson of Abu Sufyan.
He therefore hurried to his sister, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), and asked her to
bring her daughter, Umme Kulsum, before him. When the daughter came, the
Imam told that her cousin al-Qasim, son of Muhammad ibn Ja’far, would be
the worthiest of marrying her. The mother welcomed, the daughter
accepted, the father showed no rejection, and the Imam gave her a big
dowry.

They kept the matter secret until the wedding night came. On that night,
the Imam invited many personalities among who was Marwan ibn al-Hakam
who thought that the invitation was held for announcing the Imam’s
acceptance of Yazid’s marriage to his niece, Umme Kulsum. Yet, he was
disappointed when the Imam declared the marriage of al-Qasim to Umme
Kulsum. Marwan reported the matter to Mu’awiyah who, accordingly felt
malice towards the Imam.[^76]

Personality
-----------

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) contained all elements of nobility and virtue that
Almighty Allah bestowed upon her grandfather, her father, her mother and
her two brothers. She inherited their peculiarities and copied their
high moral standards.

By virtue of her ethical inheritances and unmatched peculiarities, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) is indeed the greatest lady in Islam as she signalized its
true values and principles. Along with her mother, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
struggled in the best way and stood firmly against the factional
currencies that tried using all their possibilities and powers, to throw
curtains on the real leaders and guides of the Islamic Ummah.

In the same way as Lady Fatemah al-Zahra stopped strongly with Imam Ali
(a.s.) and opposed the illegal government of Abu Bakr through her
splendid speech as well as her honorable situations, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
stopped to the last spark of life with her brother, Imam al-Husain
(a.s.) and opposed the black government of the Umayyad rulers who aimed
openly and frankly at uprooting Islam and erasing its existence by
excluding the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) from the Muslims’ social and political
lives.

Let us now refer to some of such peculiarities that made Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) at the head of Muslim women:

### Faith

###

In the center of calling to Almighty Allah, and the house where the
revelation of the Divine Message was descended, and the pivot from which
the word of monotheism advanced to cover, with its bright rays, all the
peoples on this earth; in this very house Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was brought
up. She was fed with the core of true faith and the reality of Islam;
hence, love for Almighty Allah was in her nature and, later on, became a
distinctive feature in her personality that led her to stand all the
misfortunes and adversities she had to encounter from her early life.

Firm faith and exclusive devotion to Almighty Allah were the features
that Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)’s family enjoyed in a special way. Each
member of this exalted family expressed his/her firm faith
distinctively. Lady Zaynab (a.s.), for instance, stopped at the severed
body of her brother Imam al-Husain (a.s.), and expressed her firm faith
by saying:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّٰهُمَّ تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا هٰذَا الْقُرْبَانَ
</p>

*“O Allah! accept this offering from us.”*

These words have been the best example on the sublimity of the prophetic
inheritance. They also showed the reality of Islam through the lesson
that each sacrifice must be purely offered for Almighty Allah’s sake.

Humanity, in all ages, must bow before such unparalleled faith, which
was the secret beyond the perpetuity of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) and her
principles.

On the cruelest night in the life of Lady Zaynab (a.s.), as well as the
Islamic Ummah, she offered a Thanksgiving Prayer while she was
completely surrounded by horrific tragedies; the bodies of the Prophet’s
family and their pure companions were thrown before her eyes without
covers, fire was playing in the canopies of the Alawid ladies who became
shelterless after the savage, merciless soldiers had usurped their
jewelries and properties, and children had nothing to do other than
weeping and crying. In the midst of this shocking situation, Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) directed her face towards her Lord to thank Him for that grace.

Indeed, such faith is more perpetual than civilizations, fortunes and
even perpetuity itself.

### Steadfastness

###

Since early life, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) armed herself with steadfastness
against misfortunes. She first was deprived of her grandfather, Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), who loved her very much and sympathized with her.
She then saw the horrible events that surprised her parents immediately
after the Prophet’s demise. Her father was taken away from the position
that Almighty Allah and Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) chose for him. Her
mother was severely mistreated by the people until she departed life
while she was in the flush of her youth. She then saw people of Kufa
cheat her brother Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), and let him down to the degree
that he had to make a peace treaty with Mu’awiyah, the mortal enemy of
Islam and the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). A few years later, the Imam was
assassinated by poison. She saw him vomit blood to death.

On the tenth of Muharram, 61 AH, she had to see the ever bitterest
adversities, her brother Imam al-Husain. (a.s.), yielded to death after
he had lost all supporters and helpers, the swords of the wicked Umayyad
soldiers killed the Alawid youths, children and even babies.

Before all these unbearable misfortunes, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) stood like
an unshakable mountain. She faced all these with the weapon of
steadfastness and resisted all the events with conviction. Thus, she is
intended in Almighty Allah’s saying:

<p dir="rtl">
وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِيْنَ. الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُمْ مُصِيْبَةٌ
قَالُوْا إِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُوْنَ. أُولٰۤئِكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ ۖ
</p>

***And give good news to the patient who, when a misfortune befalls
them, says: Surely we are Allah’s and to Him we shall surely return.
Those are they on whom are Blessings and mercy from their Lord.[^77]***

Many poets have depicted Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’ssteadfastness in the most
beautiful and expressive way.

She, being the Prophet’s granddaughter, showed steadfastness and
endurance before the enemies of Allah (s.w.t.). By virtue of her
determination and persistence, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) could withstand all
adversities and misfortunes.

### Dignity

###

Dignity was a prominent feature in the personality of Lady Zaynab
(a.s.). After the killing of Imam al-Husain (a.s.), she, as well as the
Prophet’s granddaughters was taken as captives from Karbala to Kufa and
all their personal properties were usurped. While the children were
harshly harmed by hunger, she looked down upon asking some food from the
soldiers of the Umayyad army. When the captives’ caravan arrived in
Kufa, and the women there knew that the captives had been the Prophet’s
family, they hurried to serve some food for the children. Preventing
this thing Lady Zaynab (a.s.) spoke to the ladies of Kufa:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلصَّدَقَةُ مُحَرَّمَةٌ عَلَيْنَا اَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ.
</p>

*“It is forbidden for us, the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), to have from alms.”*

As soon as they heard these words from their aunt, the child threw from
their hands and even mouths everything they had taken from these ladies
and preferred feeling hungry to accepting alms that are forbidden for
them.

This is the fruit of the education of the choice ones; the prophets, the
veracious, and their real followers.

Along the captives’ journey from Kufa to Damascus, Lady Zaynab (a.s.),
because of her disdain and sense of honor, did not ask for any aids for
the children and women though they were in urgent need for such.

Thus, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) did not succumb to anything other than Almighty
Allah. She showed dignity, honor, and disdain inherited from her
grandfather and father in spite of hardships.

### Courage

###

No one can ever doubt the courage of the Prophet’s family. The members
of this family gave the best examples of bravery and courage. For
instance, Imam Ali (a.s.), the head of the Prophet’s family, said:

*“Even the Arabs helped each other to fight me, I will never flee.”*

He showed the best sorts of courage during the battles and campaigns of
Islam. His son, Imam al-Husain (a.s.), also gave the best examples of
bravery and courage. On the day of Ashura, he amazed his enemies and
could stop so bravely and steadfastly before their great numbers.
Despite the horrifying misfortunes that he had to encounter on that day,
he did not show surrender or weakness. On the contrary, his
steadfastness increased with the increase of his misfortunes. He alone
attacked thirty thousand soldiers and could oblige them to turn the
backs just like goats that run away from a lion. Even when he fell to
the ground out of his heavy wounds, they were too scared to approach
him.

Patterning after her family members, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) behaved so
courageously before the criminals who killed her brother. As she had to
stop before Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, the governor of Kufa, while she was
considered as captive, she despised and disrespected him. He therefore
showed his gloating over her misfortunes by saying, “Thanks to Allah
(s.w.t.) Who unmasked, killed and belied your revolution.”

As a reply, she said courageously:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي أَكْرَمَنَا بِنَبِيِّه، وَ طَهَّرَنَا مِنَ
الرِّجْسِ تَطْهِيرًا. إِنَّمَا يَفْتَضَحُ الْفَاسِقُ وَ يُكَذِّبُ
الْفَاجِرُ، وَ هُوَ غَيْرُنَا، وَ هُوَ غَيْرُنَا يَا بْنَ مَرْجَانَةَ...
</p>

*Thanks to Allah (s.w.t.) Who honored us with His Prophet and purified
us from uncleanness thoroughly. It is only the lewd whom is unmasked,
and it is only the dissolute that is belied. We are not any of these
two. Indeed, we are not any of these two, sons of Marjanah[^78]*

This statement was in fact more lethal than weapons. She said it while
she, as well as the ladies of the Prophet’s family was under captivity
and their protectors’ heads were on spearheads.

These words too, took the tyrant from his throne to his grave. Before
his servants and officials, these words made him realize the fact that
he was the real defeated and the very unmasked, while the real
triumphant was Imam al-Husain (a.s.) the killed one and his companions.

As he received these shocking words, Ubaydullah, son of Marjanah, had
nothing to say; he therefore spoke a word of wreak as an attempt to
cover his failure and incapability to answer, he addressed her, “How do
you see that which Allah (s.w.t.) has done to your brother?”

Bravely and steadfastly Lady Zaynab (a.s.) answered with words of
triumph:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا رَأَيْتُ إِلَّا جَمِيْلًا- هٰؤُلَاءِ قَوْمٌ كَتَبَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْهِمُ الْقَتْلَ فَبَـرَزُوْا إِلٰى مَضَاجِعِهِمْ- وَ سَيَجْمَعُ
اللَّهُ بَيْنَكَ وَ بَيْنَهُمْ فَتُحَاجَّ وَ تُخَاصَمُ- فَانْظُرْ لِمَنِ
الْفَلَجُ يَوْمَئِذٍ. ثَكَـلَتْكَ أُمُّكَ يَا ابْنَ مَرْجَانَةَ.
</p>

*It was nothing but good. Those were peoples whom Allah (s.w.t.) knew
they would be killed. They therefore came to the places where they would
be slain. Allah (s.w.t.) will gather you with them for judgment and
sentence. See, who will be the triumphant on that day. Woe shall be you,
son of Marjanah, then.*

These words are surely a source of pride, not only for Lady Zaynab
(a.s.), but also for Islam and Muslims. They are also regarded as
endless glory for the Prophet’s family.

Lady Zaynab(a.s.)’ssituations in the royal place of Yazid, her situation
with the Syrian man, and her everlasting revolutionary speech shook the
Umayyad throne and revealed the baseless reality of Yazid and those who
enabled him to come to power.

In the coming chapters, these situations will be discussed in details.

### Abstention From Worldly Pleasures

###

Imitating her father who divorced the worldly pleasures
returnlessly[^79] and her mother who possessed nothing other than a rug
made of leaves of date-palm trees and a skin of a ewe; Lady Zaynab
(a.s.) abandoned all the worldly pleasures and stuck to Almighty Allah
and deeds of charity. She had never saved anything for tomorrow.[^80]

She left everything for accompanying her brother, Imam al-Husain (a.s.),
while she was the wife of the wealthiest man of Medina; all that was for
supporting her religion and defending its principles and values.

### Firmness

###

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) stopped against the tyrants so firmly that she
represented the right and the justice perfectly. In all situations, she
replied the tyrants courageously and faced their falsity with words of
light that have perpetuated and acted as models of stopping against any
tyrant for sake of the right and justice.

While she was surrounded by the policemen and the attendants whom were
invited by Yazid to witness his false victory, Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
replied each and every single word that Yazid said fearlessly until she
unmasked him and proved the genuineness of his brother’s issue.
Moreover, she threatened and showered at the tyrant with severe words of
rebuke as if she was the governor and he was the captive. Referring to
Verses from the Holy Qur’an and items of logic, she did not leave any
argument to the tyrant. Her words were the swords with which Yazid and
his likes have been killed.

The same thing she did before the other tyrant, Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad who
tried to gloat at her misfortunes, but all his attempts were faced by
sharp words and a strong style that obliged him to keep silent. She
ignored him completely, and that was enough shame for him.

Her intrepidity was clear during the journey of her brother after she
had taken various honorable roles in his undying revolution. She managed
the Imam’s affairs with a nonesuch activity despite the enemies’ siege.
A single look at the bright face of her brother would remove any
tiredness she might have felt.

She also took care of the children and harem after the Imam’s martyrdom,
and that was really a hard mission that ordinary women cannot manage.
The source of such power and firmness was that she understood Imam
al-Husain’s (a.s.) revolution perfectly and exerted all efforts for
giving success to it.

These have been some features of the unmatched personality of Lady
Zaynab (a.s.). As a matter of fact, this lady’s personality included all
features of moral highness and perfection. To refer to all these
features requires great efforts and very much time, though Lady
Zaynab(a.s.)’sfeatures are timeless. This is the reason why only a few
features of her personality have been mentioned here.


