Lady Zaynab (a.s.) In traditions
================================

For her high position, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was mentioned in a number of
traditions ascribed to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.). We have already referred to the Prophet’s saying that weeping
for her is as same as weeping for her two brothers.

Shaykh Sulayman al-Hanafi in his famous book entitled Yanabi al-Mawaddah
Section 58, records the following -we excerpt only the point of
discussion:

Rabi’ah al-Sa’di reported: As I asked Huzayfah about a number of
matters, he said, “Listen to this, understand it, and convey it to
people. I have seen the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and heard him with
my ears when Al-Husain ibn Ali (a.s.) came to him on the minbar and he
seated him on his shoulders and said:

*O people! This is al-Husain (a.s.); his grandfather and grandmother are
the best of people. His grandfather is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
and master of Adam’s descendants... And this is al-Husain (a.s.) whose
father, mother, brother, and sisters (a.s.) are the best of people...
and his sisters are Zaynab and Ruqayyah... and his two sisters shall be
in Paradise...[^81]*

This prophetic saying is a clear-cut proof on the exceptional position
of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) as she is added to the Prophet and the Imams and
is regarded as the best of people.

Shaykh al-Saduq in his Ikmaal al-Deen wa Itmaam al-Ne’mah, reports the
following, we excerpt only the point of discussion:

Ali ibn Mahziyar said that Abu al-Husain Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Asadi
said that Ahmad ibn Ibrahim said:

*In the year 262 A.H, I visited [Lady] Hakimah daughter of Muhammad ibn
Ali and sister of Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), and asked her about
the Religion... She then said, “This is what al-Husain ibn Ali (a.s.)
had done when he appointed his sister Zaynab (a.s.) as his
representative openly and hence any item of knowledge that was said
byAli ibn al-Husain (a.s.) was ascribed to Zaynab (a.s.).*

This is another proof on the high position of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) in the
sight of Imam al-Husain (a.s.) as he appointed her to carry the weighty
inheritance of Imamate.

Shaykh al-Mufid records the following narration:

*During the Battle of the Camel, Aysha gathered children and bondmaids,
gave them drums, and ordered them to chant some poetic verses against
Imam Ali. When Umme Salamah, the Prophet’s widow, was informed about
this, she decided to go there and reproach “Ayesha and the gathering
women. Lady Zaynab (a.s.) asked to do this instead of Umme Salamah since
she knew these women very well. Hence, she disguised herself and her
bondmaids and left towards these children and women. When she reached
there, she noticed their vainness and futility. She then showed her
reality to Ayesha and said, “It is not strange from you and your
companion (i.e. Hafsah) to help each other against Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s.), since it was both of you who helped each other against his
brother, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), until you were reproached by
the Holy Qur’an.”[^82] Ayesha felt ashamed and excused that these women
had done this out of their ignorance.*

This tradition gives a clear idea about the sagacity and wisdom of Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) who participated in the defense of Islam with her father
and brothers.

The following tradition is recorded in al-Tiraz al-Muzahhab as quoted
from Nasikh al-Tawarikh:

*One of the miracles of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was that he used to
put his tongue in the mouths of Fatimah’s suckling children and they
were satiated. Zaynab and UmmeKulsum were engaged in this virtue besides
al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.). This is in fact a sufficient honor
for Lady Zaynab (a.s.).*

The following is recorded in*Bihar al-Anwar,* as quoted from*Ma‘ani
al-Akhbar:*

Muhammad ibn Imran asked Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (a.s.) whether it is true
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had said that because Fatimah guarded
her chastity, Allah (s.w.t.) shall forbid Hell to take her progeny. Imam
al-Sadiq (a.s.) said,*“Yet, it is. Her progeny are al-Hasan, al-Husain,
Zaynab, and UmmeKulsum (a.s.).”*

The previous are only small excerpts of the traditions in which Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) is mentioned. It has been already mentioned that she
herself was a trustworthy narrator of prophetic traditions and incidents
that she lived or heard from her mother.

Traditions Of Lady Zaynab (a.s.)
--------------------------------

The most famous narration of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was her mother’s address
of Fadak.

Ibn Abu al-Hadid, in Shark Nahj al-Balaghah, reports the address from a
series of narrators all relate to Lady Zaynab (a.s.) in more than one
way of narration. Abdullah ibn Abbas also relates the address to Lady
Zaynab (a.s.).[^83]

She also narrated her father’s last words to her two brothers and his
instructions how to wash his dead body and where to bury him.

She also narrated the story of Imam al-Husain’s (a.s.) birth, as quoted
from her mother (a.s.).[^84]

She also narrated the story of the Heavenly Food that Lady Fatemah
al-Zahra (a.s.) prayed to the Lord to give her so as to serve it to her
father.[^85]

She also narrated the famous story of her mother’s prayer to the
Believers saying, “Neighbors should be preceded to the family
members.”[^86]

She also narrated to her nephew, Imam Zayn al-Aabideen (a.s.), the words
of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) about what they would face after him.[^87] In
the same manner, she narrated her father’s confirmation of Umme Ayman’s
narration in the same respect.


