The Caliphs’ Reigns
===================

The Holy Qur’an has depicted adeptly the tragedy that inflicted the
Islamic Ummah because of the absence of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), yet
no one else can depict such a vision. Listen to the Holy Qur’an.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
أَفَإِنْ مَاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلٰى أَعْقَابِكُمْ وَمَنْ
يَنْقَلِبْ عَلٰى عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَنْ يَضُرَّ اللَّهَ شَيْئًا وَسَيَجْزِي
اللَّهُ الشَّاكِرِيْنَ.
</p>

***And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heel will by no means
does harm to Allah (s.w.t.) in the least, and Allah (s.w.t.) will reward
the grateful.[^114]***

In fact, the most disastrous tragedy that inflicted the Islamic Ummah
after the Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) demise was taking the Prophet’s Household
(a.s.) away from the political fields and giving the leadership to other
unworthy individuals. Besides the many adversities that the Islamic
Ummah has been suffering because of these procedures, this matter
resulted in the Umayyad rulers’ coming to power and behaving savagely
with Muslims in general and the Prophet’s Household (a.s.) in
particular, In few words, the plot of taking Imam Ali (a.s.) away from
the leadership was the major reason beyond slaying the Prophet’s
Household (a.s.) and the genuine companions in Karbala at the hands of
the Umayyad army.

The events that occurred during the reigns of the first three caliphs
had left clear prints on the life of Lady Zaynab (a.s.). Let us then
refer briefly to these events.

The Plot of Al-Saqifah
----------------------

While Prophet Muhammad’s (s.a.w.a.) dead body had not been buried yet,
some individuals from the Ansar[^115] hurried to hold a secret congress
in Saqifah -shed- of Banu-Sa’idah for proposing one of them for the
headship of the Islamic Ummah because they anticipated that the
Mohaajerun[^116] would seize power.

Sa’d ibn Ubadah, the chief of al-Khazraj tribe, delivered a speech in
which he applauded the Ansar’s straggle for sake of Islam and that they
would be worthier of leading the Islamic Ummah than the tribes of
Quraysh who antagonized the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and tried to assassinate
him.

Another chief from the Ansar, namely al-Habbab ibn al-Munzir, delivered
a speech in which he warned his people from the people of Quraysh and
advised them to give the people of Quraysh a share in power because he
anticipated that the descendants of those whose fathers, sons, and
brothers were killed during the Prophet’s campaigns would come to power
and revenge themselves on the Ansar.

Unfortunately, the anticipation of al-Habbab ibn al-Munzir came true;
when Mu’awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan, whose relatives were killed by those who
defended Islam during the Prophet’s campaigns, came to power, he
intentionally humiliated the Ansar and spread poverty among them. His
son, Yazid, made what is worse; he usurped their properties, shed their
blood, and abused their honors.

Sudden Arrival of the Mohaajerun
--------------------------------

While the Ansar were discussing the affairs of the next leadership, they
were surprised by the arrival of Abu Bakr, Umar ibn al-Khattab, Abu
Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah, Salim, and others from the Mohaajerun. Despite
secrecy of their congress, the Ansar were revealed and all their plots
failed.

Taking advantage of the situation, Abu Bakr delivered a smooth-tongued
speech in which he referred to the Mohaajerun as the foremost in
embracing and defending Islam. He then offered the position of vizierate
to the Ansar and kept the position of leadership to his people and him.

In his speech, Abu Bakr did not refer to the death of Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) or to the Ahlal-Bayt (a.s.). He should, at least, have
demanded with postponing that congress for some time because the
Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.)Holy body had not been buried yet. He also should
have referred to the Prophet’s(s.a.w.a.) repetitive instructions of
nominating Imam Ali (a.s.) as his successor and representative.

However, his party hurried to support him and pay homage to him as the
next leader, Umar ibn al-Khattab, by using his famous stick and tough
style, played the greatest role in this play. In fact, they did their
roles so successfully, because their plot had been already known and
agreed upon.

Omitting any participation in the funeral ceremonies of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), the party of Abu Bakr carried him to the Prophet’s Masjid in
procession like a bride.

Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Illegal Homage
--------------------------------------

When he heard of their plots, Imam Ali Amir al-Mu’mineen (a.s.) refused
to pay homage to the illegal government of Abu Bakr, because he
considered this matter as flagrant violation of his right. Imam
Ali(a.s.)’sposition in relation to the leadership of the Islamic Ummah
is as same as the position of the axis in relation to the hand-mill. The
floodwater flows down from him and the bird cannot fly up to him.[^117]
However Abu Bakr and his party agreed upon coercing Imam Ali (a.s.) to
pay homage by any means. They therefore sent their forces to arrest him
at home and bring him out forcibly. The Imam’s (a.s.) claims against
them were so strong and effective that they could not say anything logic
to him,[^118] He then came back home without paying homage to Abu Bakr.

At home, many waves of grief and sorrow surrounded the Imam whose right
was usurped before his eyes. The same waves covered his family members
among whom was the little Zaynab who saw her father resist grief and opt
for patience, and saw her mother weep for her father’s departure and her
husband’s grievance,

Strict Procedures Against the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------

As he failed to coerce Imam Ali (a.s.) to pay homage to him, Abu Bakr
resorted to a number of shameful means, hoping they would oblige the
Imam (a.s.) to renounce his right. They first canceled the Khums
(one-fifth) tax that Almighty Allah gave exclusively to Prophet Muhammad
and his family (a.s.)

Abu Bakr then imposed an economic blockade on the Prophet’s Household
(a.s.) by confiscating their properties and counting them on the public
treasury so that they would not be able to revolt against his illegal
government. He also confiscated the land of Fadak, which the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) gifted to his daughter, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.), in
particular before the very eyes of all Muslims, including Abu Bakr
himself.[^119]

Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) was very angry with the behaviors of Abu
Bakr who locked in her face all spaces of life. Accompanied by a number
of pious women, she entered the session of Abu Bakr in her father’s
Masjid where many men from the Mohaajerun and the Ansar were present.
When a screen was put between her and the attendants, Lady Fatemah
al-Zahra (a.s.), first, moaned so pathetically that everybody could not
resist weeping. She then delivered an astounding speech; she first
referred to the Islamic knowledge, philosophy of the Islamic laws, and
then took up some important issues. She mentioned her father’s great
favors on those peoples who, before him, had lived in dimness of
ignorance, incivility, and humiliation. She also referred to the virtue
and precedence of her cousin and husband, Imam Ali (a.s.), and his
struggle for sake of Islam while others lived in luxury and did not
exert a single effort in this regard. Before entering upon the main
issue, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) expressed her great sorrow for the
current deviation and perversion that inflicted the Islamic Ummah, and
predicted the Ummah’s imminent collapse and incurrence of adversities
and misfortunes because of taking away the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) from the
positions that Almighty Allah and His Apostle chose for them.

She then cited the question of depriving her of her father’s heritage by
giving examples from the Holy Qur’an and the Islamic laws in this
regard.

In point of fact, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) disproved the claims of
Abu Bakr so unquestionably that nobody could answer her.

She then put before his eyes the bitter future that he would most
certainly encounter when he shall be judged by Almighty Allah and His
Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

She then addressed to the Muslims, attempting to awaken their
determinations for demanding with her right and revolting against the
illegal government.[^120] However, she knew that they were too weak to
be stirred up by any word or any situation. At any rate, the speech is
regarded as the most impressive innovative speech throughout history of
humankind.

Due to his craftiness, Abu Bakr could contain the situation, which was
about to be exploded, by using an amazing diplomacy; he answered Lady
Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) with words of welcome and honoring. He also
lowered himself before her and showed that those strict procedures had
not been his own opinion. Yet, they had been the Muslims decisions.

In abstract, no rational individual can excuse Abu Bakr who, in addition
to dressing himself with the position of leadership of the Islamic
Ummah, confiscating the Prophet’s heritage, seizing Fadak and other
personal properties, and imposing an economical blockade on the
Prophet’s family, lied very much when he fabricated lies against the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)[^121] and when he told that all Muslims decided
to deprive Imam Ali (a.s.) of his right of leadership.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.), witnessing all these events, understood the reality
of those individuals who caused troubles, pains, and grief to her
mother.

It is worth mentioning that Lady Zaynab (a.s.), while she was only five
year old, memorized her mother’s long and eloquent speech. She was the
major narrator of that speech. This is in fact a clear sign of her
extraordinary genius.

Rejected Apologies
------------------

Abu Bakr and Umar tried to please Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) in any
way, but she refused to receive them. They then directed towards Imam
Ali (a.s.) and begged him to arrange a meeting with her. The Imam did
and Lady Fatimah (a.s.) permitted them.

When they both sat before her, she turned her face away from them. They
then apologized for her, but she asked them:

*“Now if I tell you something said by the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.a.),
will you accept and follow it.”*

“Of course we will,” answered them.

She asked,

*“I ask you by Allah (s.w.t.), you have heard the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) say: ‘To please Fatimah (a.s.) is my pleasure and to enrage
her is my anger. Hence, anyone who loves my daughter Fatimah (a.s.) has
in fact loved me, anyone pleases my daughter Fatimah (a.s.) has in fact
pleased me, and anyone who enrages Fatimah (a.s.) has in fact enraged
me.’ Have you not?”*

“Yes, we have,” they confirmed, “We have heard the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) say so,”

Furiously, she addressed to Abu Bakr and his companion:

*“I now call upon Allah (s.w.t.) and His Angels to witness that you have
enraged me and that you have never pleased me. I will certainly complain
against you as soon as I will meet the Prophet (s.a.w.a.).”[^122]*

Moreover, she addressed more intense words when she said,*“By Allah
(s.w.t.) I swear that I will invoke Allah (s.w.t.) against you in every
prayer I offer.”*

Hence, Abu Bakr and his companion left without obtaining the
satisfaction of Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.).

Naturally, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) who witnessed these events closely took
the same attitude and participated in her mother’s rage at Abu Bakr,

Sorrows of Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.)
---------------------------------------

Since her father’s demise, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) did not live a
single moment of happiness or even a moderate temper. She used to weep
day and night to the degree that some “powers” in Medina asked her
husband, Imam Ali (a.s.), to force her to weep either in day or at
night, not in both. She therefore used to take al-Hasan (a.s.),
al-Husain (a.s.), and Lady Zaynab (a.s.) to a place out of Medina and
sit under a tree there to weep freely as much as she could. Because her
weeping reminded them of their unjust situations, the evils’ hands
extended to that tree. Hence, she had to sit under sun heat for mourning
her father. But it was very hard for Imam Ali (a.s.) to let his wife and
most beloved one be exposed to the heat of the sun. He therefore hurried
to build for her a house he called ‘Bayt al-Huzn’ (House of Griefs) so
that she would take for weeping and mourning her father (s.a.w.a.).
Thus, she, accompanied by her sons and daughter, used to sit at that
gloomy house all the day, and the Imam (a.s.) used to take them back
home when night would fall.

Her only source of pleasure was visiting her father’s tomb; she wanted
to go there, throw herself on the tomb, and complain about what had
happened to her after his departure.[^123]

Demise of Lady Fatimah (a.s.)
-----------------------------

As grief prevailed in her soul, the Prophet’s daughter lost all her
powers; she could hardly stand up and do her daily activities. Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) was helping her mother as much as she could. She felt her
griefs, offered to aid her, and stopped with her.

Nevertheless, her health was declining, her body was exposed to
illnesses, and she had to stay in bed.

Once, some ladies visited her. With a faint, sorrowful voice, she
answered:*“I have hated this world and I will be happy only if I depart
you. I will meet Allah (s.w.t.) and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) with numerous
sadness, My rights have been violated, My relationship to the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) has not been respected, his will concerning me has not been
regarded, and nobody has considered my sanctity.”* [^124]

Like a rose losing its bloom, the Prophet’s daughter (a.s.) began to
wither, and death walked to her in speedy steps while she was in the
vigor of youth.

When Imam Ali (a.s.) attended according to her request, she told him
about her will, which included many points the most important of which
were that (1) her Holy body must be buried at the darkest hour of night,
(2) those who aggrieved, wronged, and violated her rights must never
participate in her funeral ceremonies, and (3) her tomb must not be
known by anybody so that her issue and grievances would be objects of
wonderment to the coming generations.

The Imam left her after he had guaranteed for her all these matters
while he was sinking in sadness.

She also asked her daughter, Lady Zaynab (a.s.), to do something
prophetic in the future in a certain situation. The daughter promised
her mother that she would do. She then asked Asma bint Umays to make for
her a bedstead that would hide her pure body.[^125]

On the last day of her life, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) seemed to be
in a better state; because she realized that she would very soon join
her father, she was glad. She washed her sons, made food for them, and
asked them to visit their grandfather’s tomb. She then looked at them so
deeply, turned to Lady Zaynab (a.s.), and looked at her the same look.

She then asked Asma to fetch her some water, then dress of mourning,
then put her bed at the middle of the house. Asma knew that these were
the last moments of Lady Fatemah al-Zahra’s (a.s.) life; therefore, she
became astounded.

Afterward, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) began to recite verses of the
Holy Qur’an until her Holy soul ascended to the heavens to meet her
father (s.a.w.a.) after whom she hated the worldly life. As Lady
Zaynab(a.s.)’seyes fell on the motionless body of her mother, she began
to wail and cry out in grief.

As soon as al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husain (a.s.) knew about their
mother’s death, they threw themselves on her body and wept. But Asma
asked them to go to the Masjid and tell their father about this
heartbreaking news.

When their father heard, he felt as if his heart had cleft and wished if
he had departed life. He hurried to the house with teary eyes, looked at
the dead body, and said words full of sufferings.

Beside the body, there was Lady Zaynab (a.s.) crying out in grief after
she had lost all hopes. For a child, nothing is more difficult than
departing mother forever.

The Imam asked Salman (the Persian) to inform the wordless people who
gathered at the door that the funeral would be at night. Nobody was
allowed to see the dead body of Lady Fatemah al-Zahra (a.s.) even
A’ishah, the Prophet’s widow.[^126]

When the big part of that night went by, Imam Ali (a.s.) washed the pure
body while the two sons, the daughter, and Asma were looking with teary
eyes and broken hearts. He then put the body in the coffin and asked his
children to take the last look at their mother. They hence threw
themselves on their mother’s body. When only a few hours remained from
that night, the Imam (a.s.) offered the Deceased Prayer to the dead
body, carried it to the final resting place with the help of the choice
ones, such as Salman and some Hashemite men, put it in the grave, heaped
dust, and wiped out the place of the grave. The Imam’s tears wetted the
dust while he was referring to his wife, Lady Fatemah al-Zahra the
Veracious (a.s.), with words that expressed his deep sadness and great
suffering.[^127]

The Imam (a.s.) then returned home to participate in his children’s
weeping for their mother.

Thus, sadness and pain colored the childhood of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) who
lost her grandfather (s.a.w.a.), the compassionate, then, only a few
weeks later, her tender mother. While she was in such an early age, Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) realized the major goals that made those people oppress
her mother and violate her rights. She therefore decided to follow her
mother’s course and never succumb to the tyrants and the illegal rulers
of the Islamic Ummah,

Umar’s Reign
------------

After about two years of ruling, diseases surrounded Abu Bakr who
nominated Umar ibn al-Khattab as his successor though many celebrated
personalities of the Islamic State objected this matter and complained
about Umar’s rudeness. Nevertheless, Abu Bakr did not respond to such
protests and went on stressing his unjustifiable decision.[^128]

The most distinctive feature of Abu Bakr’s reign was persecuting the
Prophet’s family and divesting them of their sacredness that the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), due to a divine instruction, cast on them. This matter in
fact opened the door to the illegal rulers who reigned the Islamic Ummah
illegally to persecute them and treat them severely. This means that Abu
Bakr gave green light to the Umayyad rulers to perpetrate the massacre
of Karbala during which Imam al-Husain (a.s.), along with his relatives
and virtuous companions, was slain and his pure body was severed so
crudely, and his harem, headed by Lady Zaynab (a.s.), were taken as
captives for nothing but their being the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).

After Abu Bakr’s death, Umar held the affairs of the Islamic Ummah with
an iron hand. His ruling was so rude that even the major companions of
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), such as Abdullah ibn Abbas, kept themselves away
from him.[^129]

In the same way as he did during Abu Bakr’s reign, Imam Ali (a.s.), the
true leader of the Islamic Ummah, isolated himself from the social and
political life during Umar’s reign. In fact, they tried their best to
keep him away from any affair related to their government,[^130] yet,
they had to refer to him in every problem they faced.[^131]

The Imam thus confided himself to his house while griefs, bitterness,
and gloom were his only companions. Like their father, Imam
Ali(a.s.)’ssons took part in the sadness that covered their house, and
were so angry with Umar. Imam al-Husain (a.s.), once, shouted at Umar
who was climbing the Prophet’s minbar and asked him to descend since him
Umar was unworthy of that place.[^132]

Lady Zaynab (a.s.), too, had the same feelings towards Umar to whom she
referred in a statement included by her historical speech addressed to
Yazid in his palace:

<p dir="rtl">
وَ سَيَعْلَمُ مَنْ سَوَّلَ لَكَ وَ مَكَّنَكَ مِنْ رِقَابِ
الْمُسْلِمِيْنَ...
</p>

*“The one who seduced you and gave you the power due to which you are
ruling over the Muslims shall certainly know...”*

At any rate, Umar acted in the Islamic Ummah according to his personal
opinions. For example, he hated the Persians very much that they, in
return, have hated him. He prevented any of them to enter Medina city,
the capital of the Islamic state, unless he would be under full age, and
decided that they have no right to inherit except those who were born in
the Arab lands.[^133]

As a result, Umar was assassinated by a Persian slave whom he humiliated
and ridiculed.[^134]

In his final days, Umar thought for quite a while whom should he assign
for the leadership of the Islamic Ummah. As he recalled his old
associates who participated actively in the implementation of the plan
of taking the Prophet’s family away from leadership, he showed sadness
for them, for death wrenched them away.

Finally, he put a mean plot due to which Imam Ali (a.s.) would never be
able to hold the position of leadership. He named his unsubstantiated
play as Shura. He decided to choose six personalities who should
nominate one of them for the caliphate. After Umar’s death, the six
persons held their meeting.

After long discussions and disputations, Usmaan ibn Affan, the
representative of the Umayyad dynasty, was selected as the coming
caliph. From its first spark, the one and only purpose beyond
fabricating the emaciated play of Shura, along with its funny
stipulations put by ‘Umar, was to nominate Usmaan as the caliph and to
take Imam Ali (a.s.) away from this position.

Umar’s Shura, in fact, brought about seditions and disorder for the
Islamic Ummah. It was an important step in enabling the mortal enemies
of Islam, the Umayyad family, to come to power and take revenge for
their individuals whom were killed during the battle of Badr at the
hands of Imam Ali (a.s.), the Hashemite youths, and the pure Muslims.

Usmaan’s Reign
--------------

Once Usmaan held leadership, the Umayyad and the Abu Ma’it’s families
surrounded him and controlled on the Ummah’s destiny. Usmaan loved his
relatives, the Umayyad family, and lost himself in the loyalty to
them.[^135] As a result, all the offices of the state were in their
hands and all the fortunes of Muslims became theirs exclusively.
Accordingly, disorder, rebellion, and public anarchy spread throughout
the provinces of the state. Moreover, Usmaan persecuted the foremost
Muslims and the authorities of the Ummah, such as Abu Zarr al-Ghifari,
Abdullah ibn Mas’ud, and Ammar ibn Yasir. Even A’ishah, the Prophet’s
widow and Abu Bakr’s daughter, opposed Usmaan, accused him of atheism,
and urged people to kill him.

The matter reached its climax when complete provinces, such as Iraq and
Egypt, mutinied. Some military phalanxes, as well, directed towards
Medina, surrounded Usmaan’s house and demanded with taking Marwan ibn
al-Hakam and the Umayyad individuals away from the state’s offices or
abdicating his position.

He, in the first place, promised the mutineers he would respond to them,
but he did not. They therefore assassinated him so violently and left
his dead body in one of the dunghills of Medina without permitting
anyone to bury it. However, Imam Ali(a.s.) asked the mutineers to bury
the dead body, and they had to accept.

By closing the final part of Usmaan’s reign, a new page of the Islamic
history began. Without the seditious matters that A’ishah, Mu’awiyah,
Talhah and al-Zubayr aroused against Imam Ali(a.s.)’sgovernment, his
reign would have rectified all the problems that the three caliphs
caused to the Ummah.

Imam Ali(a.s.)’s Reign
----------------------

After they had overthrown Usmaan’s government, the mutineers surrounded
Imam Ali (a.s.) and declared that they unanimously select him for the
leadership of the Islamic Ummah. As he anticipated the coming crises,
the Imam (a.s.) refused, but the public’s insisted and declared that
they would not opt for anyone else, and that the Islamic Ummah would be
without leader if he would refuse.

Thus, the Imam (a.s.) had to accept, and the public’s hurried to pay
homage to him. Talhah, al-Zubayr, the military forces, the foremost
warriors and authorities of Islam, and all the publics paid homage to
the Imam (a.s.).[^136] In fact, none of the first three caliphs, or any
ruler of the Islamic state, won such a non-compulsory homage except Imam
Ali (a.s.).

In the same way as they received the prophethood of Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.), the tribes of Quraysh received the leadership of Imam Ali
(a.s.) with discomfort and gloominess.[^137] They knew the Imam (a.s.)
from another angle; it is he who beheaded their masters and crushed
their pride under the pennon of Islam.[^138] They also knew that the
Imam (a.s.) would never neglect their plundering the public treasures
during the dark reign of Usmaan.

As soon as he held the position of leadership, Imam Ali (a.s.), the one
and only deserver of the epithet of Amir al-Mu’mineen (the commander of
the faithful Believers), decided to confiscate all the fortunes that
Usmaan robbed from the public treasure and gave exclusively to his
faithless relatives. He then deposed Usmaan’s officials who spread
injustice and persecution throughout the Islamic Ummah. As a third step
in his program of social justice, the Imam (a.s.) declared equality
among people and cancelled any class distinction.[^139]

On this righteous plan, Imam Ali (a.s.) educated his sons who raised his
slogan of justice, fought for its sake, and challenged all its
oppressors and violators.

Rebellion Against The Imam (a.s.)
---------------------------------

Because Imam Ali (a.s.) insisted on applying the instructions of the
Holy Qur’an and the Sunnah honestly and impartially, many straying
powers opposed him so as to safeguard their personal interests that they
obtained illegally.

The first ones to declare rebellion against Imam Ali(a.s.)’sgovernment
was Talha and al-Zubayr. Because the Imam treated them just like any
other Muslim and refused to give them privileges at the expense of the
others, they mutinied against him and breached the homage that they had
paid to him. He also refused to invest them with any official position
because he knew their greediness.

One day, they both asked the Imam’s (a.s.) permission to leave for Mecca
for performing Umrah.[^140] The Imam (a.s.) gazed at them and said:

*“By Allah (s.w.t.) I swear, you do not intend to perform Umrah. You
intend to mutiny and breach your homage to me.”*

However, the Imam (a.s.) permitted them after he had asked them to pay
homage to him again. Without hesitation, they did and swore they would
never mutiny.

As soon as they fled to Mecca, they joined A’ishah.

Even though she was in the lead of those who revolted against Usmaan ibn
Affan and decided his apostasy, A’ishah could not stand the news of Imam
Ali(a.s.)’sundertaking the position of the Islamic Ummah’s leadership,
because of her uncontrollable malice towards him.

Thus, A’ishah’s situation towards Usmaan changed completely. She began
to mourn for him and betake his assassination as a pretext to overthrow
the Imam’s government.[^141]

Talhah and al-Zubayr, as well as the past profiteers of Usmaan’s
government, joined A’ishah and decided to march towards Basra for
fighting against the Imam’s authorities.

The lawless mutineers seduced A’ishah by mounting her on a camel[^142]
and calling her their mother. When she arrived in a place, dogs received
her companions and her with barking. The barking reminded her of a word
she had heard from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). She asked in a terrified
tone, “What is this place called?”

“It is called al-Haw’ab,” she was answered.

The moment this name came to her ear, she became panic-stricken and
asked them to take her back home. When she was asked for a reason, she
answered that she once had heard the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) saying to his
wives,*“I see coming that the dogs of al-Haw’ab will bark at one of you.
Do not be it, little reddish one!* [^143] *”* [^144]

All the mutineers’ efforts to make A’ishah change her decision failed;
therefore, they, led by Talhah and al-Zubayr, bribed some individuals to
come and witness that the place was not called al-Haw’ab. That was the
first perjury in Islam.[^145] Unfortunately, A’ishah was deceived by
that false testimony.

When the lawless mutineers arrived in the suburbs of Basra, Usmaan ibn
Hanif, the governor of Basra, sent Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali to see the
matter. The man met A’ishah and al-Zubayr and discussed the matter with
them so logically. Yet, they did not respond to him.

Abu al-Aswad told the governor that they had decided to fight. So, the
two parties agreed on a temporary peace treaty as they waited for Imam
Ali(a.s.)’sopinion.

Nonetheless, A’ishah’s party breached the treaty, attacked the governor,
arrested and tortured him, robbed the public treasury, and aroused
sedition in Basra.

The Imam (a.s.) then led his army to Basra to fight against the
mutineers. As soon as he arrived there, he sent Abdullah ibn Abbas and
Zayd ibn Sawhan to call them to peace. But their call was not responded.
He then sent a generous boy and ordered him to carry a copy of the Holy
Qur’an and call them to peace and apply the instructions of the Qur’an.

The mutineers attacked him, severed his both hands, and threw darts at
him until he departed life.

The Imam (a.s.) then had to attack the other camp, which was led by
A’ishah. The mutineers could not resist the Imam’s army; as a result,
A’ishah tried to breath life in her soldier’s determinations, but they
were too weak to face the famous sword. They surrounded their mother’s
camel, and the Imam (a.s.) ordered Ammar ibn Yasir and Malik al-Ashtar
to cut the camel’s legs because A’ishah’s soldiers, according to the
Imam’s expression, had betaken that camel as center. They did, and thus
the fighting ceased with the bitter defeat of the lawless mutineers.
That fighting was called ‘Battle of the Camel’.

The Imam (a.s.) then issued a general amnesty[^146] and released A’ishah
to go back to Medina.

From these events, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) realized, more deeply, the serious
hostility that the tribes of Quraysh bore against her grandfather and
father. She also understood the factuality of the Islamic Ummah and the
Muslims’ duties to it.

Mu’awiyah’s Sedition
--------------------

As a matter of fact, A’ishah paved the way of mutiny to Mu’awiyah who,
too, betook the issue of Usmaan’s assassination as pretext to oppose the
Imam’s impartial government.

The one and only reason beyond Mu’awiyah’s mutiny was that he knew for
certain that the Imam would dismiss him from his position,[^147] divest
him of all the fortunes that he usurped from the public treasury, and
get even with him concerning his behaviors that violated Islam, such as
wearing silk garments, using golden and silver bowels, and wasting huge
riches in building palaces. Furthermore, the Imam (a.s.) would not admit
Umar’s purposeful glorifying and supporting him.

At any rate, Mu’awiyah rejected the Imam’s call to peace and paying
homage to him. He gathered a big army and directed towards a place
called Siffin on the Iraqi-Syrian borders. The first thing he did was
occupying the two banks of the River Euphrates in order that the Imam’s
army would not find water.

On the other side, the Imam (a.s.) readied for meeting the mutinous
forces. His armies could not reach the Euphrates for supplying
themselves with water. He therefore sent one of his companions to meet
Mu’awiyah and convince him to let the Imam’s army have water. Of course,
Mu’awiyah refused out of his meanness. The Imam (a.s.) then had to give
orders of occupying the river and having water from it. The armies did,
and the mutineers were defeated and taken away from the river’s banks.
Afterwards, the commanders of the Imam’s army found it a good
opportunity to make an eye for an eye, by depriving Mu’awiyah’s army of
reaching the river, but the Imam (a.s.), out of his matchless humanity
and high morals, refused.

As an attempt to prevent bloodshed, Imam Ali (a.s.) sent Messengers of
peace to Mu’awiyah’s camp, but the latter refused and resolved to enter
the war against the Imam (a.s.). As a consequence, the Imam had to
battle against them. First of all, there were individual campaigns from
both parties, because the Imam (a.s.) hoped for Mu’awiyah’s responding
to calls of peace. When the Imam (a.s.) despaired and knew that
Mu’awiyah was preparing for general attack, he had to recruit his
soldiers. Thus, a fierce war, during which great figures of Islam such
as Ammar ibn Yasir was martyred, broke out.[^148]

The army of Mu’awiyah was defeated and their leader was about to flee.
As a result of a secret conspiracy between Amr ibn al-Aas, the counselor
of Mu’awiyah, and some commanders of the Imam’s army, headed by
al-Ash’as ibn Qays, the Syrian army raised copies of the Holy Qur’an on
spearheads and called for its being the arbiter of the dispute.

Hence, the conspirers in the Imam’s army urged importunately the others
to respond to the Syrian army’s call. Even though he had known the
reality of that trick, the Imam (a.s.) had nothing to do other than
responding to his army’s demanding calls to peace. Before so, he had
proven the falsity of Mu’awiyah’s trick and informed that Mu’awiyah and
his party had never respected or even believed in the Qur’an, but the
soldiers refused the Imam’s words, responded to Mu’awiyah’s trick, and
even threatened to kill him if he would not respond.

That was not all, the Imam’s (a.s.) soldiers selected Abu Musa
al-Ash’ari to be their representative in the arbitration between Imam
Ali (a.s.) and Mu’awiyah, while the Imam’s (a.s.) nominee was Abdullah
ibn Abbas, the great Islamic authority. Once again, the Imam’s soldiers
refused his representative and insisted on choosing the mindless Abu
Musa. On the other side, the Syrian army selected Amr ibn al-Aas the
foxy.

When the two met for appointing the time of arbitration Amr ibn al-Aas
convinced delusively, the mindless representative of the Imam’s army
that they both should depose the two parties, Mu’awiyah and Imam Ali
(a.s.) so as to save the Islamic Ummah from conflicts, The trick of the
foxy representative of Mu’awiyah’s party worked with the mindless
representative of the Imam’s. Before the delegates of the two parties,
Amr cheated Abu Musa to climb the minbar and declare his decision of
deposing the Imam (a.s.). After him, Amr climbed the minbar and decided
to depose the Imam and nominate Mu’awiyah as the leader of the Ummah.

Thus, Abu Musa al-Ash’ari had to flee towards Mecca after he had
invented sedition and schism in the Imam’s (a.s.) party.

The Kharjites’ Sedition
-----------------------

It is ironic that the very individuals who forced the Imam (a.s.) to
respond to Mu’awiyah’s trick of the Qur’an’s arbitration mutinied
against him claiming that he should not have responded to that trick.
They formed a political movement, which was called Khawarij (plural of
Kharijite: dissidents). They were extremists; they killed numerous
innocent people, such as Abdullah ibn Khabbab, the decent companion of
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), and camped in al- Nahrawan.

The Imam (a.s.) intended to direct towards Syria for fighting the
mutinous Mu’awiyah, but his companions consulted him to fight, first,
against the Kharijites whose danger on the Islamic Ummah had been more
serious than Mu’awiyah’s. The Imam (a.s.) hence directed towards
al-Nahrawan, fought against the Kharijites, and could kill them all
except nine individuals only.[^149]

Then, the Imam’s soldiers wearied of wars; therefore, they did not
respond to him when he intended to fight against the disobedient
Mu’awiyah despite urgings.

Decline of the Honest Government
--------------------------------

If truth be told, the Orient has never known the like of Imam
Ali(a.s.)’sgovernment in honesty, justice, and impartiality.
Unfortunately, the evil and opportunist powers of his time spared no
efforts for stopping against his political and social plans of
reformation. They forced him to enter wars that exhausted his military
forces and occupied him from doing the reformative schemes of the state.

By the slowdown of the Imam’s soldiers, it was the best opportunity for
Mu’awiyah to strengthen and arm his forces. Moreover, he began to wage
campaigns against the Islamic provinces that were under Imam
Ali(a.s.)’sruling so as to make the public believe that the Imam (a.s.)
lost the ability to protect his people. Meanwhile, all the Imam’s (a.s.)
attempts to arouse his soldier’s determinations failed. He therefore
supplicated to Almighty Allah to save him from such a frozen society
whose individuals could not recognize his principles and policies of
spreading justice and equality.

The Assassination of Imam Ali (a.s.)
------------------------------------

Groups of the Kharijites held a secret meeting in Mecca and discussed
the current issues of the Islamic Ummah. They agreed that Imam Ali
(a.s.), Mu’awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan, and Amr ibn al-Aas stood beyond the
catastrophes of the Ummah. They therefore decided to assassinate the
three. Abd-al-Rahman ibn Muljim, the cursed, took upon himself the
assassination of the Imam (a.s.), while two others took upon themselves
the assassination of the others. They specified a definite hour at which
they would implement their plans. It was after the Fajr (dawn) Prayer on
the nineteenth of Ramadan. Hence, Abdul-Rahman ibn Muljim the cursed,
returned to Kufa, which was the capital of the Islamic state, to do his
mission. There, he met a Kharijite lady whose father and brother were
killed during the Battle of al-Nahrawan. As he asked for her hand, she
specified as dowry three-thousand dirhams, a slave, a bondmaid, and the
killing of Imam Ali (a.s.). The cursed Abd-al-Rahman agreed and promised
her of arranging for all these things.[^150]

On the night of the eighteenth of Ramadan, Imam Ali (a.s.) had strange
feelings. He anticipated the imminent occurrence of a horrifying matter.
It was Friday, and the Imam (a.s.), that night, did not sleep. He spent
it with recitation of the Holy Qur’an and offering prayers. When dawn
was about to fall, he intended to leave for the Masjid, but some swans
cried in his face. This happening gave a signal to the Imam (a.s.) who
said,

*“All power and might belong only to Allah (s.w.t.). These cries will be
followed by wailings.”[^151]*

He then came towards the door, but could difficultly open it. That was
another sign he alone could understand. When he reached in the mosque,
he, as usual, awoke people for offering the prayer. He then began his
prayer. When he sat after the first Sajdah,[^152] the cursed ibn Muljim
strokes him with the sword so heavily that the Imam’s forehead was cleft
and the sword reached his brain. As soon as the Imam felt the stroke, he
raised his voice with the statement:

<p dir="rtl">
فُزْتُ وَ رَبِّ الْكَعْبَةِ.
</p>

*“By the Lord of the Kaabah, I have won.”*

People hurried from every side and began to mourn the Imam (a.s.) with
melted hearts. They then carried him to his house and arrested the
murderer. He however asked his son, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), to treat the
murderer kindly. When the son wondered, the Imam (a.s.) answered,

*“O son, we are the Household of mercy and forgiveness. Feed him (i.e.
your prisoner) from the food you eat and water him from the drink you
take. If I will die, you may then retaliate upon him (according to
Allah’s taw of retaliation) by killing him. But, never do anything to
his dead body, for I heard your grandfather the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) say: “Never do anything to the dead body of even biting
dogs.” If I will survive, I know what I will do with him. It is however
better for me to pardon him, for it is my ethics to forgive. We, the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.), return on those who do wrong against us in forgiveness
and generosity.*

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) with her Father
----------------------------------

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) hurried to her injured father with tearful eyes and
broken heart. She asked him whether the Prophet’s report, related by the
righteous lady Umme Ayman, regarding the adversities and misfortunes
that the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) would have to encounter in the future was
true or not.

The Imam (a.s.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
الْحَدِيثُ كَمَا حَدَّثَتْكَ أُمُّ أَيْمَنَ وَ كَأَنِّي بِكِ وَ
بِنِسَاءِ أَهْلِكِ سَبَايَا بِهٰذَا الْبَلَدِ أَذِلَّاءَ خَاشِعِيْنَ
تَخافُوْنَ أَنْ يُتَخَبَّطَكُمُ النَّاسُ فَصَبْرًاصَبْرًا فَوَ الَّذِي
فَلَقَ الْحَبَّةَ وَ بَرَأَ النَّسَمَةَ مَا لِلَّهِ عَلَى ظَهْرِ
الْأَرْضِ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلِيٌّ غَيْرُكُمْ وَ غَيْرُ مُحِبِّيْكُمْ وَ
شِيعَتِكُمْ وَ لَقَدْ قَالَ لَنَا رَسُوْلُ اللَّهِ(صلی الله علیه و آله و
سلم) حِينَ أَخْبَرَنَا بِهٰذَا الْخَبَرِ: اِنَّ إِبْلِيْسَ لَهَنَهُ
اللهُ فِيْ ذٰلِكَ الْيَوْمِ- اَيْ يَوْمَ قُتِلَ الْحُسَيْنُ-
يَطِيْرُفَرَحًا فَيَجُوْلُ الْأَرْضَ كُلَّهَا فِي بِشَيَاطِيْنِه وَ
عَفَارِيْتِه فَيَقُولُ: يَا مَعَاشِرَ الشَّيَاطِيْنِ قَدْ أَدْرَكْنَا
مِنْ ذُرِّيَّةِ آدَمَ الطَّلِبَةَ وَ بَلَغْنَا فِي هَلَاكِهِمُ
الْغَايَةَ وَ أَوْرَثْنَاهُمُ النَّارُ. اَلَا مَنِ اعْتَصَمَ بِهٰذِهِ
الْعِصَابَةَ فَاجْعَلُوْا شُغُلَكُمْ بِتَشْكِيْكِ النَّاسِ فِيهِمْ وَ
حَمْلِهِمْ عَلٰى عَدَاوَتِهِمْ وَ إِغْرَائِهِمْ بِهِمْ وَ
بِأَوْلِيَائِهِمْ حَتّٰى تَسْتَحْكِمَ ضَلَالَةُ الْخَلْقِ وَ كُفْرُهُمْ
وَ لَايَنْجُوَ مِنْهُمْ نَاجٍ.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وَ لَقَدْ صَدَّقَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِبْلِيسُ وَ هُوَ كَذُوْبٌ اَنَّهٗ لَا
يَنْفَعُ مَعَ عَدَاوَتِكُمْ عَمَلٌ صَالِحٌ وَ لَا يَضُرُّ مَعَ
مَحَبَّتِكُمْ وَ مُوَالَاتِكُمْ ذَنْبٌ غَيْرُ الْكَبَائِرِ.
</p>

*Umme Ayman has told the truth. I see coming that you, as well as your
people’s harem, will be captives in this country. You will be submissive
and terrified, fearing lest people might carry you off by force. At that
time, be patient and adhere to patience, for, on that day, there will be
no disciple (of Allah (s.w.t.)) on theearth except you, your followers,
and you partisans. I swear this by Him Who split the grains and created
the souls.*

*When he foretold us of this news, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
added: “On the same day as al-Husain (a.s.) will be slain, Eblis[^153]
the cursed will be overjoyed and will wander about the earth with his
devils and afreets[^154] to declare: O devils, only today have we
revenged ourselves on the descendants of Adam, attained our objective of
wiping them out, and led them to the fire of Hell. Now, you must turn
all your efforts towards filling people’s minds with doubt towards
al-Husain (a.s.) and his companions, inciting them to bear hostility
against them, and provoking them against anybody who shows loyalty to
them (i.e. al-Husain (a.s.) and his
companions)inorderthatpeople’sstrayingand atheism would be so guaranteed
that none of them would be saved (on the Day of Resurrection).”*

*Even though he is the biggest liar, Iblis said the truth in that
question. It is quite true that the good deeds of anyone who bears
hostility against the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) is of no avail (no matter how
great they are), and the sins, not the grand ones, of anyone who loves
them and is loyal to them are of no harm.[^155]*

The Imam’s FinalAdvices
-----------------------

In his final hours, Imam Ali (a.s.) advised his sons and daughters to
cling to the high moral standards and abstinence from the transitory
pleasures of this world.

To his two sons, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and Imam al-Husain (a.s.), he
said:

*I advise you (both) to fear Allah (s.w.t.) and that you should not
hanker after the (pleasures of this) world even though it may run after
you. Do not be sorry for anything of this world that you have been
denied. Speak the truth act (in expectation) for reward. Be an enemy of
the oppressor and helper of the oppressed.*

*I advise you (both) and all my children and members of my family and
everyone whom my writing reaches, to fear Allah (s.w.t.), to keep your
affairs in order, and to maintain good relations among yourselves for I
have heard your grandfather the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) saying,
“Improvement of mutual differences is better than general prayers and
fasting.”*

*Fear Allah (s.w.t.) and keep Him in view in the matter of orphans. So,
do not allow them to starve and they should not be ruined in your
presence.*

*Fear Allah (s.w.t.) and keep Him in view in the matter of your
neighbors, because they were the subject of the Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.)
advice. He went on advising in their favor until we thought he would
allow them a share in inheritance.*

*Fear Allah (s.w.t.) andkeep Him in view in the matter of the Qur’an. No
one should excel you in acting upon it.*

*Fear Allah (s.w.t.) and keep Him in view in the matter of prayer,
because it is the pillar of your Religion.*

*Fear Allah (s.w.t.) and keep Him in view in the matter of your Lord’s
House (the Kaabah). Do not forsake it so long as you live, because if it
is abandoned you will not be spared (or you will be deprived of your
Lord’s grace).*

*Fear Allah (s.w.t.) and keep Him in view in the matter of jihad with
the help of your property, lives, and tongues in the way of Allah
(s.w.t.).*

*You should keep to a respect for kinship and spending for others. Avoid
turning away from one another and severing mutual relations. Do not give
up bidding for good and forbidding from evil lest the mischievous gain
positions over you, and then if you will pray, the prayers will not be
granted.*

Then the Imam (a.s.) said:

*O sons of Abd-al-Muttalib, certainly I do not wish to see you plunging
harshly into the blood of Muslims shouting that Amir al-Mu’minin has
been killed.*

*Beware; do not kill on account of me except my killer.[^156]*

*Wait until I die by his (Abd-al-Rahman ibn Muljim) existing stroke.
Then strike him one stroke for his stroke. But, never do anything to his
dead body, for I heard your the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his family, say; never do anything to the dead body of even biting
dogs.[^157]*

The final will of Imam Ali (a.s.), however, was narrated by Lady Zaynab
(a.s.).

Afterwards, the Imam (a.s.) began to recite Verses of the Holy Qur’an
and suffer death agonies. Then, his pure soul elevated to the Supreme
Comrade and joined the endless joy with the prophets, saints, and
righteous people. Excellent is the companionship of such ones.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), accompanied by his brothers, assumed
responsibility for his father’s funeral ceremonies, and at the last part
of night, they carried Imam Ali(a.s.)’spure body to the final
resting-place in al-Najaf. Lady Zaynab (a.s.),[^158] while she was
shedding tears heavily, participated in that funeral ceremony.


