Imam Al-Hasan (a.s.)’sReign
===========================

On the second day, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), surrounded by his brothers and
the Hashemite youths, directed towards Kufa Masjid and delivered a
funeral orations in which he used words as glorious as his father. He
showed that his father hadbeen such a unique personality that none from
the past and coming generations can be his like.

In the field of justice, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) declared the following
fact about his father:

*“He (i.e. Imam Ali (a.s.) has not left behind him a single yellow
(golden) nor white (silver) piece except seven hundred dirhams with
which he had intended to have a bondmaid for his family. Yet, he ordered
me to return them to the public treasury.”*

As Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) finished his speech, the publics hurried to
swear allegiance to him, even though the majority of them were not
honest.

At any rate, Mu’awiyah realized the reality of Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.)’sarmy whose individuals were controlled by weakness, looseness,
and determination of rebel; he therefore challenged him to fight.
Moreover, he led his army whose individuals, quite the opposite, were
completely obedient and submissive to campin al-Mada’in. Once they heard
of this news, the hearts of Imam al-Hasan(a.s.)’s soldiers were filled
up with horror and panic. Thus, they refused the Imam’s (a.s.) call to
fight against Mu’awiyah. The Imam (a.s.) still did not stop; he exerted
all efforts for urging people to fight. Finally, a farrago of people of
different tendencies and thoughts responded to him and camped in
al-Mada’in,

The commander in chief of the Imam’s army, namely Ubaydullah ibn Abbas,
joined Mu’awiyah’s camp after he had received a seductive bribe and, as
a consequence, disorder and sedition dominated the Imam’s army and many
celebrated individuals, as well as eight thousand soldiers and the
tribes of Rabi’ah, insinuated themselves into Mu’awiyah’s camp.[^159]

The matter reached its climax when a gang headed for robbing Imam
al-Hasan (a.s.)’sbaggage, the bribes attempted to assassinate him
moreonce, and, finally, a party in his army, most likely the kharijites,
accused him of atheism.

In view of this situation, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) had to make peace with
Mu’awiyah, though unwillingly, so as to save his party from
distinction.[^160]

After the truce, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) had to leave Kufa, the city whose
people disappointed his father and him (a.s.), for Medina whose people
received him so delightedly because he was the branch of that pure
origin, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

By the fading of the rightful government and the coming of the wrongful
one, the life of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) entered a new stage would carry new,
yet more grievous, adversities.


