Edits On Pork â€“ Part 1
======================

QUESTION: What is the teaching of Islam about pork?

ANSWER:

Pig is absolutely unclean and eating its meat, and fat etc., as well as
using its skin or any other parts is strictly forbidden. Allah(SWT) has
said in various places in the Holy Qur'an;

"Forbidden to you (for food} are: dead meat blood. the flesh of
swine"

Qur'an: 5:3

QUESTION:

I, being a Christian, have no difficulty in eating pork. I often wonder
why Muslim brethren have not been allowed to enjoy this tasty food, as
we Christians do?

ANSWER:

This question is somewhat astonishing because, according to the
Scriptures, even the Christians are not allowed to eat pork.

QUESTION:

How can you say this?

ANSWER:

Well, let us see what the Bible says about pork:

"And the swine,. . . he is unclean to you. Of the flesh shall ye not
eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch; they are unclean to you."
Leviticus, 11:7-8

The same command is repeated in Deuteronomy, 14:8.

Rev. W. K. Lawther Clarke says in his Concise Bible Commentary (pub.
S.P.C.K., 1952) commenting upon these passages:

"The laws were inculcated and obeyed because they embodied God's will"
(p.371). Dr. E. A. Widmer quotes in his article Pork, Manand Disease
(Good Health,vol.69, no.1):

"Pork although one of the most common articles of diet, is one of the
most injurious. God did not prohibit the Hebrews from eating swines'
flesh merely to show His authority, but because it was not a proper
article of food for man."

QUESTION:

Well, these revelations are very interesting. Can you please, give some
more references on this subject from Christians' writings?

ANSWER:

Yes, you may see the discourse under the word "Swine" in The
Westminster Dictionary of the Bible which is very clear. Here is an
extract from it:

"The swine was a ceremonially unclean animal... It is dirty, does not
refuse to eat offal and carrion, and the use of its flesh for food in
hot countries is supposed to produce cutaneous disease. It was not
raised by Arabs (Plit7y Hist. Nat. viii.78), and was regarded as unclean
by Phoenicians, Ethiopians, and Egyptians. . .

To the Jews swine's flesh was abominable, the pig was the emblem of
filth and coarseness... Yet pork found entrance to the idolatrous feasts
of degenerate Hebrews ( Isa.65:4; 66:17). In the reign of Antiochus
Epiphanes the command to a Jew to offer or to taste swine's flesh was
used as a means of determining whether he was loyal to the religion of
his fathers or was willing to accept the worship favoured by his
conquerers (I Macc. 1:47,50; II Macc. 6:18,21; 7:1,7).

But many Jews.affected Grecian manners, and John Hyrcanus found it
advisable to issue an edict that no one should keep swine. In the time
of Christ one large herd of swine at least was pastured in the Decapelis
(Mark 5:11,13), a region colonized by Gr eks, among whom the swine was
highly esteemed as an article of food.

There is no reason to suppose that Jews owned either these swines or
those in the far country fed by the prodigal son (Luke 15:15)"

(pp.584-5)

Similar statements may be found in almost all Bible dictionaries.

QUESTION:

Thank you very much. But I have just observed that all these quotations
are from the Old Testament. They are binding upon the Jews. But we, the
Christians, would like to know what was the teaching of Jesus Christ on
this subject.

ANSWER:

Well, I was coming to that point. You see, whatever the teaching of Old
Testament, the same was the teaching of Jesus Christ. He says in clear
words that the laws of the Old Testament were to be obeyed without any
change:

"Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven
and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these
least commandments, and shall teach men, so he shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven." (Mat., 5: 17- 19).

QUESTION:

I remember reading this saying of the Gospel several times. Sometimes I
wondered why Christ stressed this point in so many words?

ANSWER:

It was because he knew that after his ascension some of his followers
would denounce the Law. Jesus Christ himself obeyed the Law faithfully.
It was only after his departure from this world that St. Paul, a
forceful orator, and a member of "elite" circle of the society, who took
to heart the Greek 'advanced' civilisation (as many people now-a-days
take pride in being 'Westernised') prevailed upon the illiterate and
simple-minded Christians to abandon the Law. The fact that he himself
had never met Jesus Christ, and those who opposed him were constant
companions of Christ, is most revealing.

Jesus Christ corrected Pharisees' misinterpretation of the Law. For
example, his disciples in their hunger plucked the ears of corn on
Sabbath day. When the Pharisees objected, Jesus Christ replied,

"The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath." (Mk.,
2:27).

But he never said anything against the Law, including the dietary
laws.

St. Paul on the other hand denounced the Law, saying that

"the Law worketh wrath; for where no law is, there is no
transgression." (Rom., 4:15)

