Supplement
==========

QUESTION:

This logic seems to me very convincing.

ANSWER:

Well, if you are really convinced of this reasoning, then you should
see to it that all legislatures are abolished, and all courts are
closed. Thus there would be no criminals, because there would be no law
to transgress!

QUESTION:

I don't think any Christian government would be pleased with this
suggestion. Let us forget it. But tell me how St. Paul abrogated the
Law?

ANSWER:

He claimed that,

"I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of itself; but to him that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to
him it is unclean." {Rom., 14:14)

QUESTION:

Well, I think it settles the matter nicely.

ANSWER:

No. On the contrary, it creates more problems than it solves. You see,
if that is what Jesus Christ had intended to be the tenent of
Christianity, why did he not declare so when he was with his disciples
in this world?

Why did he advocate the theory of unchangeability of Mosaic Law? Did
St. Paul want the people to believe that Jesus Christ was not sincere in
his pronouncements when he was with the people?

We Muslims cannot believe it. As for the Christians, action speaks
louder than words.

QUESTION:

I must admit that you have got a very strong point here. I now agree
that according to the Original Christianity, pork was and will remain
forbidden. But, frankly speaking, I do not find anything wrong with
pork.

ANSWER:

I hope that you are not one of those who think that aping the Western
culture is the proof of enlightenment.

In directing the dietary principles of the children of Israel and,
thereafter of the Muslims, God meant these rules to be a source of
continued benefit to mankind. The transfer of certain disease, as modern
medical research has substantiated, would be adequate justification for
this ancient law.

QUESTION:

But this "transfer of diseases" is not the unique feature of pork. Even
beef and mutton contain

some germs of diseases.

ANSWER:

Well, why limit your argument to beef and mutton? We know that even
vegetables contain infectious germs. But the fact remains that pork
reigns supreme in the greater content of germs among all meats that are
known to human-beings. The more we read about it the more we dread it.

QUESTION:

Can you name some of those germs to which you have just referred

ANSWER:

The following list shows germs or parasites that are found in pork.
Many of them are contagious, others are fatal. This proves once more
that the more science advances, the more Islam is proved to be correct
in so many respects.

The present day science of parasitology lists a protozoan ciliate, the
pork tapeworm, and the trichina roundworm as causing important diseases
that the pig shares with man.

QUESTION:

Well, I do not understand these Latin words. Please explain them in
simple language.

ANSWER:

In fact, I had not used their full Latin names. For example, protozoan
ciliate is called by the doctors "Balantidium Coli." It is a "parasite,
harbouring in the large intestine" and is "the largest protozoan
affecting man ."

QUESTION:

What has this "Balantidium Coli" to do with pigs and how does it affect
human-beings?

ANSWER:

It is normal inhabitant of the pigs' bowels. It is excreted by its
faeces and finding the external environment unsuitable for itself,
develops a shell round it which is called a "cyst."

The cyst contains living parasites that communicate with man's diet
thus enter his bowels, was found by Dr. Malmston (1857) and Stein
(1862).

Dr. E. A. Widmer writes in his article Pork, Man and Disease (Good
Health, vol.69, no.1):

"The protozoan ciliate, known technically as Balantidium Coli, is
extremely common in swine. Recent surveys in various countries reveal an
incidence range of 21 to 100 per-cent. This organism is much less common
in man. The general incidence of one per-cent reported in Puerto Rico is
representative of the incidence in many countries. When found in man
serious clinical symptoms may result. Current evidence points strongly
to the pig as the chief source of human infection." (Emphasis mine)

QUESTION:

And what are those "serious clinical symptoms" which are caused by this
germ?

ANSWER:

It creates uncurable dysentry. Dysentry is a disease very familiar to
the public. The symptoms of this disease are horribly acute and may end
fatally. Unfortunately there is no specific cure for dysentry caused by
Balantidium Coli up-to-date. According to Dr. Chandler in his book,
Animal Parasites and Human Disease, "it is only in pig-raising countries
and where there is too close an association between man and this animal
that this disease is common." (page 7) (Emphasis mine)

QUESTION:

What are other germs which are transferred from pig to man?

ANSWER:

There are many more. For example, there is the "Trichinella Spiralis"
(Trichina Worms) .

Dr. Glen Shephered wrote an article on the dangers of eating pork in
the 31st May, 1952 issue of the Washington Post; and the following
information's are taken from that article:

"One in six people in the United States of America and Canada have
worms in their muscles - Trichinosis - from eating pork infected with
Trichina or Trichinelly. Many people so infected have no symptoms. Most
of those who do have, recover slowly. Some die. Some are reduced to
permanent invalids. All were careless pork eaters." He continued:

"No one is immune from this disease and there is no cure. Neither
antibiotics nor drugs or- vaccines affect these tiny deadly worms.
Preventing infection is the real answer.

"Fully grown Trichina worms are about 1/8 inch long and about 1/400
inch broad. They remain alive for about forty years, curled up in lemon
shaped, invisible tiny capsules between muscle fibres. When you eat
infected meat, these dormant worm capsules are digested, but their live
contents grow into full size worms each of which has about 1,500
offsprings. They get into your blood one to three weeks after you eat
their parents. Because many organs can be invaded by the worms, symptoms
can resemble those of fifty other diseases. This makes diagnosis
difficult." (Emphasis mine)

