The Ban
=======

When the polytheists knew that Abu Talib would not leave our Master
Muhammad [s] alone and that he was ready to die for him, they decided to
announce an economic and social ban on Bani Hashim. At the same time,
they cut off all relations with them.

In the month of Muharram, the seventh year after the Prophetic Mission,
forty Quraishi leaders signed the ban and fixed it to the wall in the
Ka'aba.

The Quraish expected Abu Talib to surrender. But Shaikh al-Bat-ha had
another plan.

Abu Talib took his tribe to a valley between two mountains to protect
our Master Muhammad [s] from assassination. He was always visiting the
valley to close the openings where the enemies might pass through to
kill our Master Muhammad [s] at night.

Abu Talib, though old man, his brother Hamza, and some men of Bani
Hashim were always guarding the Prophet [s] one by one at night. Abu
Talib was always moving the Prophet's bed from one place to another to
keep it a secret.

Days and months passed. The besieged were in perfect isolation. They
suffered from the pains of hunger and deprivation. When the time of
pilgrimage came, they got out to buy some food and clothes.

The richest Quraishi tyrants in Makkah were always buying all kinds of
food to prevent the besieged from buying it.

During that bitter period of time, Abu Talib was as solid as the
mountain. He was always standing by our Master Muhammad [s]. He was a
fearless, resolute believer.

Abu Talib loved our Master Muhammad [s] more than his sons. He was
sometimes looking at him, weeping and saying:

*When I look at him, I remember my brother Abdullah.*

One night, Abu Talib came and woke our Master Muhammad [s]. He said to
his son Ali aged eighteen:

*My son, sleep in his bed.*

To know his father's loyalty to Muhammad, Ali said:

*But, I'll be killed.*

His father said:

*Be patient!*

Eagerly Ali said:

*I'm not afraid of death. But I want you to know my support.*

Abu Talib patted Ali's back. He took our Master Muhammad [s] to a safe
place to sleep in.

When our Master Muhammad [s] went to bed, Abu Talib went to bed, too.

Months after months passed. The patience and hunger of the besieged
increased. They ate the leaves of the trees. The Prophet [s] took pity
on the hungry children.


