Foreword
========

The present work has its genesis in a series of lectures given to groups
of young students at the Quran theological seminary that began in the
academic year 1974-75.These lectures which followed a novel method that
will be described later, continued up to 1978.

After the victory of the Islamic Revolution the writer continued to
teach, lecturing groups of military personnel on such subjects as
cognition, cognition of God, justice, and prophethood with each
successive audience there were improvements in both form and content,
resulting in no small measure from enthusiastic audience-participation.
A final presentation of the material was as a series of lectures given
to members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guardian Corps (IRGC) on a
remote - instruction basis.

The lectures were later broadcast by IRTV, the Islamic Republic of
Iran's television network, and they also appeared in the Maktab
al-Enqclab '('Message of the Revolution') magazine published by the
IRGC'S ideological and political instruction unit. In the spring of
1986, with the publication of the first volume of Osul al-Aqaycd Eslami
('Principles of Islamic Beliefs'), the text of which was based on the
revised and expanded text of the lectures as published in Maktab
al-Enqelab. Some new material, including sections on the correction of
ideology and freedom of opinion, was added at this time.

The original purpose of these lectures and their published texts, which
arc the fruit of many years of research into questions of Islamic
ideology, was to help correct religious belief by exposing superstition
and fostering sound ideology, particularly among ordinary Iranians and
the other Persian-speakers to whom they were addressed. The writer has
been most gratified by the response so far evoked.

It soon became evident; however, that one of the most significant
effects of Iran's Islamic Revolution has been the growing interest in
Islam which it has generated among people all over the world. It was
therefore decided to produce an EnglishÂ­ language version of the first
pamphlet of the first volume of Osul al-'Aqayed Eslami, and hopefully or
the subsequent volumes, which are at an advanced stage of preparation.

The present English text is a translation of the original Persian with a
small amount of additional explanatory material deemed useful to the
English reader. It also incorporates some minor Corrections and
revisions to the Persian original as published.

In humbling submitting this volume to a wider and relatively unknown
readership, the writer hopes that his original purpose will be further
served and that English-speaking Muslims will benefit from a fresh
analysis of the ground work of their faith. At the same lime he has been
encouraged to believe that there is an even larger group of potential
readers in the world who have hitherto been deprived of an extensive
survey of Islamic ideology. It is to this group in particular that the
present pamphlet is most respectfully dedicated.

Mohammadi-ye Reyshahari  
 Tehran March 20 1988


