Chapter 2: Taqlid in Ideology
=============================

Another problem which must be reconsidered before we embark on our
discussion of convictions and the principles of Islamic beliefs is that
of *Taqlid*[^1] in articles of faith from the point of view of both
reason and Islam.

As a first step let us see how we acquire the basis of our beliefs if we
reply urely on the judgement of reason. Does reason permi us to take as
gospel. What we earn from pur parents, political parties, or
organizations, scholars and trustworthy persons and so on, as the basis
of for our beliefs on matters of convictions and worldview? In other
words,does reason permit a person to practise *Taqlid* in convitional
matters or must he investigate for himself?

Once reason has supplied the answer to this question we must see what
Islam has to say on the matter. Is the Islamic response the same as that
of reason, or Islam supply another answer?

Let us begin with the first question. We shall assume the case is
beingaruged by reason in the court of conscience. We ask reason which is
the right course to adopt in matters of convitional principle.
Independent investigation or *Taqlid*? Before considering reason’s reply
we must interpret *Taqlid* more closely.

What Is Taqlid?
---------------

*Taqlid* consists of accepting the theories and judegements f another
person or persons without demanding proof, “without considering or
thinking.” As the al-Munjid, a celebrated medieval Arabic dictionary
pits it.

Based on this definition the question is whether reason permits a person
to accept other people’s theories in convictional matters without
demanding proof, or not? Does it, in other words, demand that a person
should acquire his beliefs through investigation, and accept other
people’s theories only after the investigation has taken place and on
the basis of rational proof?

The Rational View Of Taqlid
---------------------------

Keeping in mind our definition of *Taqlid* we see that reason
unquestionably forbids a person from acquiring his beliefs through
*Taqlid* because in matters of basic principles science[^2] is and
*Taqlid* is not conducive to science.

And yet the necssity of science in matters of convictions is beyond
question, and since belief is the basis of action, and reason most
definitely does not permit one to base his individual and social actions
on beliefs without personally confirming their validity and agrreement
with reality.

Now it is obvious that *Taqlid* is not conducive to science, since if it
were, all schools of thought, all beliefs and religions,whether existing
now or hitherto, would be scientifically correct and in accordancewith
reality.

Taqlid, Fictitious Knowledge!
-----------------------------

*Taqlid* is indeed not conducive to science, and a *muqallid*[^3]*,*
when all is said and done, thinks that he is a learned man, but he is
learned only in the world of his imagination, not the real world. In
other words, he is a person of imaginary knowledge not a man of
learning.

The followers of every religion think of their own beliefs as correct
and free of error, and that only their own beliefs are sound and in
accordance with reality, and call them “scientific” and “certain”.[^4]

If the followers of every religion allowed themselves to think about
their beliefs, and remove the veils hiding true knowledge and
investigate rather than take on a blind trust, differences between
various schools of thought would disappear from human, society, and
everyone would arrive at a single common nation and a single religion.
Since differences occur only when fictitious knowledge takes the place
of true knowing where true scienec reigns there is no room for
differenceof divergence.

Taqlid in Belief, The Islamic View
----------------------------------

Now that the rational view of *Taqlid* is convictional matters has been
expounded let us see what Islam has to say on the subject. Does Islam,
like reason,condemn *Taqlid* orpermit it?

First of all we must state that in general Islamic beliefs are divided
into two categories, principles (primary beliefs) and subsidiaries
(secondary beliefs), which we may also term basic and non-basic beliefs.

The principles of Islamic belief (Usul al-din)[^5] consist of the
articles of faith which forms the infrastructure of questions of Islamic
jurisprudence, politics, mortality, society, economics and culture, such
as *Tawhid* (monotheism), *Nubuwwah* (belief in prophethood), *mo’ad*
(resurrection of the dead), *‘adl* (divine justice) and *Imamah* (belief
in the imamte).

Susidary or non-basic beliefs (foru’ al-din) consist of the ordinaries
which Islam has decreed to regulate the relationships between man and
God, and man and his fellows, such as prayer, fasting, *khoms* (Islamic
system if tithes), *zakat* (almsgiving), *hajj* (pilgrimage to Mecca)
ane the like.

In the Islamic view, with respect to non-beliefs *Taqlid* is not only
permitted but obligatory. The authority for *Taqlid* in non-basic
beliefs is secifically vested in the Prophet Muhammad or the Imams, and
in their absence, for those who do not have the specialized knowledgeto
solve Islamic problems for the words of the Prophet or the Imams in a
Mujtahid al-jame’ol-sharayet.[^6]

What we are concerned here with is position of Islam on *Taqlid*
regarding basic beliefs;whether Islam, like reason, rejects *Taqlid*
absolutely in matter of principle, or permits it. In other words, in the
Islamic view, ought people to investigate convitional peinciples
personally or practise *Taqlid* in this respect.

As everyone who is familiar with the Quran and other Islamic texts well
knows, Islam clearly and explicitly rejects *Taqlid* in matters of basic
principles and insists emphatically that people should investigate
matter of belief personally and not adopt any opinion without due
consideration and rational proof.

In the Quranic view, the creator has never required mankind to accept
his word alone, for example, regarding His own existence or the mission
of his prophets, as an article of blind faith, without any rational
proof. To substantiate His existence and the truth of the prophetic
missions, God justifies on rational ground and invites man to let his
reason be the judge.

No prophet has ever urged his flock to follow him blindly in matters of
basic belief or to accept his word unquestionably as God’s
representative. In proving the genuiness of his mission every prophet
has relied on rational proof, and asked his followers to let their
reason decide and by the same token has requested his adversaries to
prove their claims, telling them in the words of the Quran:

***“Show us your proof”***[^7]

Today, no Mujtahid or Islamic theologian permits *Taqlid* in matters of
fundamental belief. Instead, such scholar exhort people to study the
basis of their convictions for themselves.

In order to clarify the precise Islam;s view of *Taqlid* in matters of
fundamental belief we must now examine a number of Quranic verses and
hadith[^8] on this subject.

Taqlid: The Quranic View
------------------------

The Quran, in numerous verses strongly condemns *Taqlid* in matters of
basic belief, and explicitly states that until a person has acquired
conclusive knowledge and awareness of a particular theory or opinion he
is not entitled to adopt it or base his individual or colleactive life
on it. Thus:

***“Do not follow that which you have no knowledge of” (17:36).***

This Quranic verse counseld one to follow the explicit dictates of the
mind. It says, in effect, “O man hear to what your conscience and mind
clearly tell you, and in matters of doctrine do not follow others
blindly. Do not take a belief as a crterion for your actions or adopt it
until you are quite sure it is correct.”

Another verse states:

***“The most evil of beasts in God’s sight are the deaf, dumb, those who
do not reason.” (8:22).***

The wounds ‘deaf’ and ‘dumb’ here refer not to persons without the sense
of physical hearing or the power of speech but to those who do not use
their minds, the ones who do not think properly about matters to belief.
Of such persons another verse tells us,

***“ They have hearts, but do not comprehend; eyes, but do not see;
ears, but do not hear.” (7:179).***

In other words, they are people who do not use their eyes, or their
ears, or their tongues follow in the path of others, adopting other
people’s opinions without proof, instead of using their own minds and
thoughts.

The Quran thus unlinks the chains created by blind imitation of other,
and frees man from such fetters of thought. Every individual is granted
the independence of thought and permitted expression of ideas. By
freeing man from the tyranny of *Taqlid* in convictional matters the
Quran thus exhorts him to investigate and contemplate.

This leads us an extremely important and sensitive point. The Quran
strives to eardicate the credence of knowledgeability from people’s
minds and make them truly knowledgeable. The Quran wants to cure the
followers of every school of thought and those with all kinds of beliefs
of the disease of this credence which is the product of blind acceptance
of the beliefs of others, and to lead them to true knowledge and
knowledgeability[^9]. It therefore strongly condemns those, who prefer
*Taqlid* and allow traditional beliefs to prevent them from seeking
truth.

The Quran has numerous verse on this subject, two of which we will
examine here:

***‘When they are told: “Come to what God has revealed, and to His
prophet” they say: “What we have inherited from our fathers is enough
for us”…. (5:104)***

In other words, when people of traditional beliefs who have always
followed blindly the customers and beliefs of their ancestors, tribe or
clan are urges to examine the words of God and His Prophet it is as if
they were told, “look, you’ve heard everyone else why don’t you hear,
what we have to say and when you’ve digested it use your intellects to
decide which of all these is correct? If you decide that God and His
Prophet are telling the truth, accept what they say and act accordingly,
and if you decide that your parents and the traditions of your tribe or
clan or ideals of your party or organizationare right then follow them.”

In reply to this logical argument they say: “No, we don’t need to hear
the word of God and His Prophet.The traditional beliefs we’ve inherited
from our ancestors are quite enough for us”. The Quran then goes on the
reply to them with a clear reference to rule of reason, by saying:

***“….Even though their fathers knew nothing and had received no proper
guidance.” (5:104).***

Is their attitude logical? Can reason accept their view simply because
their parents held certain beliefs not based on logic and understanding
they should follow them blindly and close their eyes and ears as they
tread the same path!!”[^10]

Taqlid in Belief According To The Hadith
----------------------------------------

In the language of the HAdith a person who has no views of his own and
accepts the views of others based on no investigation but on *Taqlid*,
is called a floater. In the al-Nahaiyeh, a respected collection of
Hadith, the Prophet Muhammad is quoted as saying: ‘Wake up in the
morning as a scholar or as a student, but do not be a ‘floater”, Ibn
Athir commenting in the word*”imma’ah”* used in this hadith says: “The
word imma’ah is applied to a person who has no views or opinions of his
own and therefore follows anyone with an opinion. The form imma’a also
occurs.”[^11]

In other words, ther term imma’a is used in Arabic to indicate someone
holding no independent thought, who does not dare tothink and express an
opinion. His eyes and ears are always glued to others and to what they
must have to say. He waits to see what the party’s ideologue says, what
the head of his organization thinks, or how public at large reacts to a
given situation. A floaters is one who never questions what others say
or write.

In this Hadith, the prophet is telling people that in matters of
doctrine, they should either be learned or at least try to acquire
learning, but in no account they should follow blindly what others
believe. From this we may deduce that from the Islamic viewpoint a
person should either know that his beliefs are correct and in accordance
with reality or else he should strive to acquire such knowledge. But on
no account may he be a floater and merely follow the beliefs and views
of others.

In this connection, we may quote some verses ascribed to Imam
Ali:according to one tradition.

“When I am faced with something I don’t know I seek the truth: I seek it
high and low, I’m not a floater, who can never chose, and everywhere he
goes asks, “What’s the news?” I use analogy and knowledge vast, and
often read the future in the past.”[^12]

So the true followers of the path of Islam and the real disciplines of
the prophet and Imam Ali are those who form their own opnions on matters
of faith personally and do not blindly accept the views of this or that.
They do not adopt the prevailing view just to avoid being laughed at.
The only opnions and beliefs they accept are those that they find to be
true after careful consideration, even though the general public may
hold the opposite views. They take the path that they find to be true
after a thorough study, and they do only what they consider logical,
human and wise, which comes as a result of much thought.

Another hadith reported in Tarmadhi’s Sahih and related by Hudhdhifa,
tells us how the prophet told, his companions ‘not to be floaters’ and
then expounded it in these words: ‘Don’t be like those people who say:
“If others do good, I’ll do good, and if others do evil, I’ll do evil.”
Instead be prepared to do good if otheres do good, but if they do evil
don’t follow them by doing so”.[^13]

Imam Sadeq the sixth Imam, is also reported to have told his disciplines
‘not to be floaters’ and further explained it by saying: ‘A floater is
someone who says: “I’m with the people and I’m just like one of the
people”.[^14]

What he meant was that in matters of belief and action one should not
follow others unquestionably. Regarding what others say and do we should
always think if their words and deeds are right or wrong. Do not say I’m
with the people and I’m just like one of the people, so I’ll say
whatever they say and do whatever they so.”

In another Hadith, Imam Kazem, the seventh Imam, is reported as telling
to one of his followers, a man certain Fadhl bin Yunis: “Do good and
speak good and do not be a floater”. Fadhl bin Younis tells us that he
asked the Imam what he meant by this and the reply came: ‘Do not say:
“I’m with the people and I’m just one of the people”. The Imam when on
the quote ahadith of the prophet, as follows: ‘O people, there are two
paths to follow, the path of righteousness and the path of evil. You
should not be prefereing the path of evil to the path of
righteousness”.[^15]

The words of the prophet:verily we have shown them two paths” are an
allusion to the Quranic verse ***“We have shown him the two paths”
(90:10),*** the implication being that man has been created ina way that
is capable of telling the difference between right and wrong. The words
of the prophet, alluding thus to the word of God, convery a reprimand.
He is saying: “When there are only two paths to choose from why does man
forsake the path that reason tells him is correct and choose the path
that reason tells him to avoid?” While explaining what the prophet meant
by a ‘floater’ Imam Kazeem’s reasonung makes two points.

The first point is that socially what causes a person to choose the path
of evil is being a ‘floater’ and blindly following the opnions and
actions of others, and if someda manking manes to free himself from the
bondage of *Taqlid* a great deal of social problems will be solved.

The second point is that man has been created in such a way that is e
gets rid of *Taqlid* he can be a man of independent ideas and choose the
path of righteouness. Since reasoning can help man to distinguish
between right and wrong. Islam too exhorts man to do good and what is
just and right and to shun evil and cruelty.[^16]

Adopting The Beliefs Of Distinguished Personalities
---------------------------------------------------

An important point which strikes us in perusing hadith relating to
*Taqlid* is that in matters of basic belief and articles of faith
*Taqlid* is firmly condemned by the Imam, even if those beliefs happen
to be correct.

Thus Imam Sadeq is quoted as saying: A person who is converted to this
religion in emulation of a strong personliaty may also leave it for the
same reason but if a person accepts it as a result of studying the Quran
and the sunna[^17] mountains should be shaken from their seat before he
abandons his convictions.[^18]

Another version of this hadith is as follows: ‘One who learns his
religion from the Book of od mountains will be moved before he doubts
his faith, wheareas one, who gets involved in an affair out of ignorance
may also leave it through ignorance.’[^19]

There are several senitive and valuablepoints to be learned from these
hadith: The first point is that following persons of influsence in
matters of religious belief is condemned and regarded as undesirable:
for a person of reason should acquire his beliefs through researh and
one’s own discrenment not thorough *Taqlid*.

The second point is that in the cae of those who embrace Islam as a
result of following the beliefs of Islamic personalities, for the reaons
that the basisof their conversion is tqlid and emulation of an
individual they admire and since their beliefs are not rooted in reason
or knowledge of one day their hero decides to abandon Islam they too
will change their beliefs in order to follow him therefore. Beliefs
based on *Taqlid* are always subject to change and decline ’A person who
enters this religion in emulation of a strong personality may also leave
it for the same reason’.

The third point is that if a person who embrace Islam under the guidance
of the Quran and the hadith his religious convictions will be so firmly
entrenched in him that they will be stronger than mountains.

In other words mountains may be uprooted from the earth; but the
religious beliefs of someone who has found his faith in the uran and the
Hadith will never be wrenched from his heart.

‘But if a person enters religion as a result of studying the Quran and
Sunna, mountains will be moved from their seat before he abandons his
beliefs.’

The fourth point is, that the guidance provided by the Quran and the
Hadith indicates that a person’s beliefs must be founded on reasonable
and scientific grounds. If he accepts them on the same basis. “A person
who becomes involved in an affair through ignorance may also leave it
through ignorance”.

The points mentioned by ImamSadeq are confirmed by experience and
history. In the last 1400 years of history of Islam we may find many
examples of people who embraced this religion through emulation of a
powerful personalities and abandoned it for the same reason.

The history of the divinely inspired reslion signifies that following
political or religious personalities in matters of beliefs that is the
cult of the personality, has caused untold harm to these religions. A
study of the hitory of relion from this aspect although of great interst
and indeed of instructive value, is nevertherless beyond the scope of
the present introductory discussion. We shall therefore limit ourselves
to two examples of the cult of the personality, one taken from the dawn
of Islam, and the other from the recent past.

The Cult of the Personality in the Dawn of Islam
------------------------------------------------

In the time when Imam Ali was ruling as Caliph many of his
contemporaries, together with a number of political and religious
personalities of the day, who have become known as Nakethin, Qasetin and
Mareqin, as a result of infactuation by the personality cult abandonded
the true Islam. Infact they formed ranks against it and casued great
form to the roots of this young sapling, the bitter effects of which
have affected Islamic society to this day.

The Imam was painfully disappointed at how the efforts of the Prophet,
himself and the followers of true Islam to establish a government and
society worthy of Islam were ending in failure because of the sabotage
inflicted by those who had once beein his commrade-in-arms.

What vexed Ali more was the fact the many people did not hestate to
think it through to see if what those respected personalities were
saying was true or false, or whether the cause of action chosen by them
was right or wrong, or whether in claiming to be fighting under the
banner of Islam they were really trying to help Islam or they were just
using Islam as a stepping-stone to reach to their personal ambitions.

Without a doubt the ‘floaters’ and blind followers of the deviationisfs
of ‘Ali’s day caused the Imam greater pain than did the devistaionists
themselves, because without these followers they would have accompilshed
nothing. In Chapter 147 of the Nahj-ol-Balagha ‘Ali is reported as
giving a short but profound analysis of the politicial and socil
conditions of his community, which can also provide valuable guidance to
understanding our society today. This analysis has two special aspects
that are worthy of attention.

One aspectis that in order to explain the matter to Kumayl one of his
senior disciplines, the Imam took him by the hand and led him to the
desert, while full of grief,he expounded to him on what was troubling
him. The second aspet is that before embarking on his analysis of
society as he as he saw it, the Imam drew Kumayl’s attention to the
capacity of people’s hearts,saying some can take a great deal and others
more, and the greater one is in his heart the better.

It is obvious that the Imam could not tell about his grief to everybody.
To hear his words required a capacity that not everyone had. After all,
how he speak of the numbers of true Muslims, those who really understood
and were still faithful to Islam? How could he openly say that people
with such excellent past, finding their oersonal interests threathened,
had abandoned Islam?

How could he say that many of his contemporaries had been seduced in the
name of Islam by the establishments of distinguished figures of society,
were not real Muslims at all? Or that they did not understand Islam, and
their religion was in pawn to the personalities that they trusted and
followed, or that their standards of what was right and wrong belonged
to those distinguished personlities, not to themselves?

In any event, ‘Ali began his plaintive analysis for Kumayl who had the
heart to hear the social ills of his time. it starts with these words:
‘People are of three classes; those who know God;those who seek the path
of salvation; and those who like foolish flies follow every voice that
calls, and go on every direction that wind blows, unenlightened and have
no firm refuge.

With these words the Imam divides the people of his community, or
perhaps people in general, into three groups: The first group consists
of those who have recognized the divine truth, and, whose beliefs and
deeds, individual and social attitudes are based on sound standards. The
Imam cals them “those who know God”.

The second group consists of those who may not yet have recognized the
divine truth, but are people of contemplation and thought, and are on
the path that leads to divine knowledge. If they continue on this path
to the end they will be saved from domination. The Imam, therefore,
calls such people ‘those who seek the path of salvation.

The third group consists of those who have neither recognized the divine
truth nor emarked on the path that leads to divine knowledge which may
be called students on the path of salvation. Rather, they are people who
have totally failed to think and investigate such matters for
themselves. The Imam calls such people ‘foolish flies’.

The Imam compares this third group, who fail to think for themselves,
with the flies and feed on him, they are attracted to the sound of every
voice that calls out without stopping to think who that person may be
and whether what he says is true or false, flies that are carried along
on every direction that wind blows.

The reason why people have become so vulgar and ignorable, in the Imam’s
view, is that they have not been illuminated by the light of knowledge
and lack of firmconvitional basis.

This categorization by Imam Ali is infact the same as the one that is
attributed to the Prophet by Ibn Athir.[^20] The difference being that
prophet’s words are in the form of a statement. The prophet says that
Muslims must be knowledgeable or seek knowledge but never a ‘floater’,
the Imam states Muslims in his day are of three kinds:those who know
God, those who seek the path of salvation and those who are like
‘foolish flies’.

The expression of ‘foolish flies’ as used by the Imam, is the same as
the ‘floater’ refered to bye the Prophet, namely people, lacking an
independent convitional basis, who merely follow the opnions of others.
Such people are the most dangerous enemies of those governing based on
truth and justice. What greived Ali so and caused him to sigh to heaven
was that his contemporaries were almost without exception, of the third
category: ‘floaters’, ‘foolish flies’, those who lacked a firm
conviticonal base, and swayed on that way with every passing breeze.

Those who sought the oath of salvation were extremely few in Ali’s day.
As his subsequent remarks tells us, such persons are characterized by a
refusal to misuse knowledge or betray their faith,possesing sufficient
insight to deal with doubts and totally rejecting the lust for
materialistic life. People a speculative nature who are endowed with
these characteristics were all too few in Ali’s day.

Even scarer than those who sought the path of salvation were those who
had achieved knowledge of the Divine. As the Imam puts it: ‘I swear to
God, their number is extremely few’.

‘We see, then, that Imam Ali was surrounded by a mass of people who were
neither persons of discrement nor seekers after the truth, neither
persons of knowledge nor seekers after the truth, neither persons of
knowledge nor students of knowledge; rather, they were people whose
minds and thoughts, knowledge an ideology, and even their fate, were in
extricably tied to the fate of the distinguished personalities they
admitted most and were pulled in every direction that they wished.

Imam Ali was accompanies by people who did not want to understand, or
were incapabe of understanding that the personalities theyadmired were
just as fallible as others. They could not understand that Talha and
Zobair might also make mistakes, and that the Holy Men of Nahravan might
err.

Society was in such a deplorable state that some could not even imagine
the possibility that Mu’awiyah[^21] might be wrong? At the Battle of the
Camel one of ‘Ali’s supporters, a man named Harith bin hut spoke to the
Imam in such terms that show to what a sad level Muslim thinking had
declined.

When Harith saw that the leader of opposite side at this battle was none
other than Aiysha, the Mother of the Faithful, and that personalities
with such a distinguished Islamic background as Talha, and even more
distinguished Zobair, who had sought sanctuary in Ali’s house during the
Saqifa affair,[^22] has chosen to fight on her side he simply could not
believe that men with such records of distinction could be wrong to
fight against Ali. So he approached the Imam and said:

“O Commander of the Faithful, I cannot believe that Talha and Zobair and
Ayesha could unite unless it were for a just cause”.

In another version, Harith’s words are reported as being. ‘Do you expect
me to believe that the companions of the Camel were misled?”[^23]

Just imagine, if among the Imam’s companions, living as they were in an
enviornment full of the light of knowledge and spiritual awareness,
individuals were to be found incapable of believeing that personalities
with such distinguished records as Talha and Zobair were wrong to be at
war with ‘Ali what can we expect of other Muslims of his da who perhaps
had not even seen the Imam?

Nevertheless, in reply to Harith, the Imam delivered words which, as Dr.
Taha Hussein, the well-known Egptian writer so apthy put it “Were the
epitome of firmness words of such greatness as have never been heard
since the Revelation fell silent and the Voice of Heaven spoke no
more.”[^24]

The Imam’s reply was this: ‘You are in grave eror. Truth and falsohood
can in no wise be distinguished by the yardstick of personality. Know
the truth, you will know who follows the truth; and know falsehood. You
will know who follows falsehood.[^25]

In other words, your mistake, and that of others like you, os that
instead of using truth anmd falsehood as criteria to judge personalities
b, you have used personalities as a criterion for truth and falsehood.
You are attempting to understand the truth b the standards of a
personalit, weheras if you permit ourself to think for yourself you will
know that the correct course is quite the opposite: a personality,
however exalted and trustworth, can never the criterion for truth and
falsehood. When a person knows the truth he knows who is the follower of
the truth, regardless of the background or status of that follower: and
when falsehood is understood the follower of falsehood can easily be
identified regardless of their distinguished records or the universal
acclaim they may enjoy.or status of that follower: and when falsehood is
understood the follower of falsehood can easily be identified regardless
of their distinguished records or the universal acclaim they may enjoy.

The Cult of the Personality Today
---------------------------------

*Taqlid* in ideas and the cult of the personality have continued
throughout the course of history. and the changes that have occurred are
largely superficial. The main difference is in the form that *Taqlid*
takes and the personality that is followed, not in the underlying
principle. takes and the personality that is followed, not in the
underlying principle.

At one time the cult-figures in matters of belief were their
ancestors[^26] or their tribal chiefs and kings[^27] once the. Were
leading religious authorities[^28]. Today, in its modern form the
leaders of political parties and organizations are followed the
organizational and non-organizational supporters of these leaders are
called 'floaters'. Whose eyes and ears are closed and who do not permit
themselves to think for themselves and have no doubts about the
soundness., of the beliefs. actions. views and official instructions of
the authorities they follow.. Today, in its modern form the leaders of
political parties and organizations are followed the organizational and
non-organizational supporters of these leaders are called 'floaters'.
Whose eyes and ears are closed and who do not permit themselves to think
for themselves and have no doubts about the soundness., of the beliefs.
actions. views and official instructions of the authorities they follow.

The difficulties posed to the Islamic Republic of Iran by the
organizations. parties and individuals opposed to it or are in armed
conflict with are almost practically those which Imam 'Ali was
confronted with by his opponents. The problem facing his government was
the simple-minded or foolish followers who did not bother to evaluate
the beliefs and actions of the personalities they admired.” The problem
for the Islamic Republic. although nothing like so extensive since a
decisive majority Of the Muslim people of Iran enjoy considerable
intellectual maturity. is that within the confines of the opponents of
the Islamic Republic and those groups in armed conflict with it are
simple minded and ignorant supporters of these groups. whose infatuation
with the personality-cult prevents them from appreciating reality.minded
and ignorant supporters of these groups. whose infatuation with the
personality-cult prevents them from appreciating reality.

The main factor responsible for the deviation of these simple-hearted
supporters from the straight path of the Revolution and Islam, which has
led them into the trap of these groups, is this disease- the cult of the
personality. Their deviationism is due to the fact that their
revolutionary beliefs are based on personality and not discernment, and
the positions they have adopted are the result of *Taqlid* and not the
quest for truth. and not the quest for truth.

Thus it was that when their ideologues deserted the true path of the
Islamic Revolution and joined forces with its enemies they followed
their leadership unquestioningly. Matters came to such a sorry pass
those, who had once denounced imperialism with such vehemence
shamelessly embraced the forces of imperialism and Zionism.embraced the
forces of imperialism and Zionism.

Even more shameless were the illicit sexaul relations of the leadership
in the name of an ideological revolution! This has been presented as a
model to these blind followers, the "floaters" and "flies", but they
cannot understand that such deeds whatever they are, are certainly not
revolutionary! And if that type of relationships are revolutionary they
are certainly not an ideological revolution!and "flies", but they cannot
understand that such deeds whatever they are, are certainly not
revolutionary! And if that type of relationships are revolutionary they
are certainly not an ideological revolution!

Advice Of Imam Sadeq
--------------------

Imam Sadeq, the Sixth Imam advised one of his followers, a certain
Thamali. in these terms: a certain Thamali. in these terms:

'Be aware not to seek high positions and do not follow, great men
blindly!”!”

It means that in life we should avoid two common habits: the pursuit of
power and the cult of the personality. In society we should try to be
neither in the vanguard nor the rearguard neither a leader nor the
led!to be neither in the vanguard nor the rearguard neither a leader nor
the led!

Thamali failed to understand what the Imam meant assumed that he was
denouncing the position of leadership in general. For if there is no-one
in the vanguard or the rearguard of society, the leadership, even of
divinely-appointed leaders is likewise, automatically denied, and
teaching and learning arc pointless also for it implies that the pupil
will not follow the teacher and teacher will not undergo the stages
required for his position. So Thamali replied:So Thamali replied:

‘May I sacrifice myself for you! I understand what you say about the
evils of seeking power and position, but I don't understand a hat you
mean by not following great men. After all. two thirds of whatever
knowledge and learning I have is the result of following great men. If I
hadn't followed you and people like you, I wouldn't have any knowledge
worth mentioning. So why should I avoid following great men.' The Imam
replied: "It is not as you have supposed. Because lest you choose a
person as your leader and accept whatever he tells you without any
reason.[^29]

The Imam is saying that: "What I meant by following the great man is
that you should not choose someone as your leader without the
confirmating of your mind and without proper proof and accept everything
that he tells. You unquestioningly, or blindly submit yourself”.
[-however great his personality-].. [-however great his personality-].

What an ugly sight it is indeed to see a person who will not think for
himself and has put his mind at the disposal of another and allowed
himself to be led wherever that person chooses! And how regrettable it
is that whenever a person pushes himself to the fore there are people
who will follow him blindly and act as his disciples!how regrettable it
is that whenever a person pushes himself to the fore there are people
who will follow him blindly and act as his disciples!

Taqlid In Secondary Or Non-Basic Matters
----------------------------------------

It has by now been clearly established that both from the intellectual
point of view and according to the Quran and Hadith *Taqlid* in matters
of convictional principles is a practice to be condemned. Here the
question may arise: what about *Taqlid* in non-basic matters" Is
*Taqlid* in such matters, as in the case of basic or fundamental
religious principles, to be avoided or is these a difference between the
two cases??

The answer is that *Taqlid* in such non-basic matters is not only
correct but mandatory. for those who arc not experts in religious
jurisprudence and incapable of taking the appropriate action as required
by religious beliefs without referring to such experts. Another question
that may be posed is: Why is *Taqlid* in basic matters of religion
rejected by both the purely intellectual and the theological stand
point, yet in nonbasic matters it is held to be mandatory? in basic
matters of religion rejected by both the purely intellectual and the
theological stand point, yet in nonbasic matters it is held to be
mandatory?

In other words, if the explicit dictates of reason. Hadith and the Quran
are that a person should not accept the opinion of others without
knowledge and science and awareness, and if because it is not conducive
to science then *Taqlid* in basic matters of belief is not permissible,
why should it be correct and even mandatory in non-basic matters?why
should it be correct and even mandatory in non-basic matters?

Again, if *Taqlid* is not conducive to science, this must be so both for
basic and non-basic matters alike; but why is it held that in basic
matters of belief it is not correct yet in non-basic matters it is? And
finally, why is reference made to the intellect and reason in matters of
basic belief while this is not the case in non-basic matters? And
finally, why is reference made to the intellect and reason in matters of
basic belief while this is not the case in non-basic matters?

Taqlid In Non-Basic Matters Is A Reference To Reason
----------------------------------------------------

There are both a brief and a long and detailed answers to these
questions: The brief answer is that *Taqlid* in non-basic matters as
well is in fact resorting to one's reason. For an explanation and to
provide a detailed answer, consider the following analogy: Imagine you
are ill or one of your family is ill, and you want to consult a doctor.
What does reason tell you to do? and you want to consult a doctor. What
does reason tell you to do?

When it comes to finding a doctor, who is a specialist in the disease in
question and one you can place your confidence in, reason tells you that
you can find him by consulting reliable acquaintances who know about
such matters and in this way get the name of the most experienced
specialized and reliable doctor available. When it comes to finding a
doctor, who is a specialist in the disease in question and one you can
place your confidence in, reason tells you that you can find him by
consulting reliable acquaintances who know about such matters and in
this way get the name of the most experienced specialized and reliable
doctor available.

But once you have his name and have consulted him and he has carried out
his examination and given you a prescription reason does not tell you to
ask him what the basic for his diagnosis is or why he has prescribed
this part particular treatment. On the contrary, reason tells you that
since you are not a medical specialist yourself you should take whatever
prescription he has given you and follow the course of treatment
prescribed. Following the doctor's prescription is a form of *Taqlid*..

Just as reason has told you to enquire as to who is the most suitable
factor it also tells you that when it comes to an acting on the course
of treatment prescribed by the doctor *Taqlid* is mandatory. is
mandatory.

Making enquiries on matters of non-basic belief is the same as finding
the right doctor, and it is what reason tells you to do: it does not
tell you to accept the opinion of others and act on them without making
through enquiries to find the right consultant. *Taqlid* in non-basic
matters, just like following the treatment prescribed by the doctor,
takes place after finding the right consultant and being convinced of
his expertise and putting your trust in him. in non-basic matters, just
like following the treatment prescribed by the doctor, takes place after
finding the right consultant and being convinced of his expertise and
putting your trust in him.

And justas *Taqlid* with respect to medical consultant, that is
following his advice and the course of treatment he prescribes, is not
contrary to reason. On the contrary in following the dictates of reason,
so too *Taqlid* in matters of non-basic belief with respect to a
mojtahid having all the necessary qualifications, who is a specialist in
religious matters, is in fact consulting one's reason & following its
dictates.necessary qualifications, who is a specialist in religious
matters, is in fact consulting one's reason & following its dictates.

[^1]: Taqlid has no exact equivalent in the European languages,
literally it means “Imitation” or “mimic” but in Islamic usage it
denotes accepting the opinion of a religious leader on faith without
independent investigation. As we shall see, it applies only to the more
complex questions of ideology, not to fundamental principles. The
English expressions “to take as gospel” and “to accept on faith” partly
convey the sense of Taqlid.

[^2]: The Arabic-Persian world for “science”, ilm or elm’, is more
comprehesive’ than its European equivalent, and covers all aspects of
knowledge, pure and applied, theoretical and empirical.

[^3]: One who practices Taqlid, follower of a particular religious
leader.

[^4]: See chapter four “The correction of Belief”.

[^5]: One of the problems facing the translator of Islamic texts written
in Persian is the Transliretion of the specialized terminolog which is
usuall Arabic in origin. This is normall transliterated according to the
Arabic pronounciation, but the transator has as a rule chose to reflect
the pronounciation current in Iran today, this osul al-din not usul
ed-din, Imamah not imamat and so on. However, in the case of Arabic
proper names particularly those of author a simplified form of the usual
Arabic transcription has been preferred.

[^6]: A mojtahid is one who practices ijtehad, defined as exegesis of
Islamic law. A mujtahid is this one qualified to give rulings on points
of religiois jurisprudence, particularly according to the Shi’a rite. A
mojtahid who is jame ‘osh-sharayet’ possesses all the necessary
qualifications for the exercise of spritual authority, in other words he
is an Islamic Jurisprident. This matter is discussed more full at the
end of the chapter.

[^7]: 2:111; 21:24; 27:64

[^8]: A hadith is a report of words spoken by the prophet for one of the
Imams on a specific subject. There are many collections of such sayings
running to tens of thousands in all, with varing degrees of
authentocity. The are often referred to as Traditions.

[^9]: This point will be discussed further in chapter four: ‘The
correction of Belief?’

[^10]: A selection of other Quranic verse with similar content includes.

[^11]: Ibn Athi, Al-Nahaiyeh Vol , is here translated as ‘floaters’.

[^12]: Mizan al-Hikma Hadith No. 16783

[^13]: Mizan, Hadith No, 16780.

[^14]: Ibid, Hadith No. 16781

[^15]: Mizan Hadith No. 20604. According to another version the prophet
said’ Why do you prefer the path of evil to the path of righteousness?’
(Hadith No. 20605).

[^16]: Truly God bid just & virtue…& fobid prostitution, evil & cruelty.

[^17]: The Sunna, literally ‘the path’, is the collective actions and
sayings of the Prophet.

[^18]: Mizan, Hadith No. 6269.

[^19]: Ibid, Hadith No, 6297

[^20]: ‘Don’t be a floater’ (see p-above)

[^21]: Ummayyad Caliph and Imam “Ali’s arch-enem.

[^22]: Nahj al-Sa’ada Vol. 1.p. 298

[^23]: Mizan al-Hikma, Hadith No. 4126.

[^24]: A refernce to the Islamic belief that after the death of the
Prophet Muhammad no further divine revelations have taken place.

[^25]: Mizan, Chapter 898

[^26]: They say: "This was what our fathers practiced and we are only
following in their foot Steps” (43:22)

[^27]: On the day of Judgment) 'The depraved masses will say to those
who held away over them “Had we not followed you we might have been
believers." (34:31).

[^28]: "They (Jews and Christians) worship their rabbis and monk. and
the Messiah. Mary’s Son, as Gods besides Allah" (9.31).

[^29]: Mizan. Hadith No. 16784.


