Chapter 3: Research in Ideology
===============================

In previous discussions we have while proving that *Taqlid* in
fundamental beliefs is wrong from the points of view of reason and
Islam. and at the same time we proved the necessity for earring out
investigation and research into such matters. In this chapter the
importance that Islam ascribe to research including research into Islam
itself and the view that persons engaged in this task cannot be called
infidels. will also be examined. Three main aspects of research will
therefore be looked at: a) the Islamic view, b) the relationship between
science and faith, c) the relationship between ignorance and *kufr*.
[^1]

The Islamic View Of Research
----------------------------

In order to establish what the Islamic view is of the importance of
research and investigation into convectional matters we must first study
such terms as *‘Ilm* (science) '*aql* (reason) *m'arafat* (knowledge),
*fikr* (thought), *Fiqh* (Islamic jurisprudence) *Hikmah* (wisdom,
tadabbor (foresight) *tazakkor* (reminding), *tabyin* (explanation) and
*ro’yat* (observation) in the Quran and the hadith.hadith.

Such a study conclusively proves that no school of thought attaches such
importance to research into the foundations of belief and investigation
of the truth or to the eradication of obstacles as well as the creation
of circumstances conducive to this end as docs Islam.[^2]39

With astonishing insistence Islam invites people to investigate and
think for themselves about their fundamental beliefs. The extent to
which Islam appreciates the importance of science and knowledge is well
illustrated by numerous hadith such as: 'Science is the highest
attainment.[^3] 'the veil of calamity.’[^4] ‘the most valuable of
treasures.[^5] 'the basis of all goodness.[^6] the soul of the self.[^7]
'man is judged by the extent of his knowledge.[^8] 'it is incumbent on
every Muslim, both male and female, to seek knowledge in all
circumstances.[^9] 'those who seek knowledge are closest to the rank of
prophet hood.[^10] 'the angels place their wings beneath their
feet.[^11] 'forgiveness is implored for the student'.[^12] 'paradise
seeks the student.”[^13] scholar is heir to the prophets.[^14] 'the
scholar's pen is mightier than the blood of martyrs.[^15] regard for
scholars is an act of worship’;[^16] Islam ascribes dozens, perhaps
hundreds, of other virtues to knowledge. studying and scholarship, and
all this respect is to encourage people to study, so that by the aid of
knowledge they can be freed from the tyranny of *Taqlid*, and base their
beliefs and actions on reasonable and scientific standards., and base
their beliefs and actions on reasonable and scientific standards.

In the Islamic view, even the slightest indications of a person's
intentions should be carefully weighed and coordinated in accordance
with reason. Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, gave his disciple
Kumayl the following advice: 'O Kumayl, in everything you do there is a
need for knowledge.[^17]54

In other words Islam does not permit a person to perform an action
without prior investigation and assurance that it is correct. If he does
so. not only is he not free from fault, but such an action is itself a
grave error. Islam thus endeavor to persuade people that before
embarking on any action they should carry out an investigation and
acquire the requisite knowledge, and considers the ideal Muslim to be
one whose cognition and knowledge, not acts of worship. exceed those of
others. The Prophet Muhammad is reported as saying: 'The best of you in
terms of faith is the person among you with the greatest
knowledge.[^18]55

Another version of this *hadith* describes the ideal Muslim in these
words: 'Some of you are superior to others in prayer, some in
pilgrimage, some in almsgiving, some in fasting, but the best of all of
you is the person who is superior in terms of knowledge.[^19] This is
why Imam Baqer, the Fifth Imam. advising his successor Imam Sadeq says:
'My son, Know the real value of our followers by the extent of their
knowledge of the traditions for verily knowledge is understanding the
traditions.'My son, Know the real value of our followers by the extent
of their knowledge of the traditions for verily knowledge is
understanding the traditions.

By traditions the Imam meant the words of the Prophet and the Imams and
by knowing the traditions he meant research and investigation and
expounding on the real meaning of these sayings.By traditions the Imam
meant the words of the Prophet and the Imams and by knowing the
traditions he meant research and investigation and expounding on the
real meaning of these sayings.

In other words. he is referring to the preservation and transmission of
*hadith*, 'knowledge' of the traditions is jurisprudent (faqih) & the
science of *hadith* & a jurisprudent (faqih) is one who has studied and
understands the *hadith.hadith.*

In this *hadith*, Imam Baqer first advises his son to judge the Shi'a
and followers of the Prophet’s Household by the criterion of their
knowledge, that is understanding of hadith. He then goes on to say': It
is understanding of the *hadith* that ralses a believer to the highest
levels of faith'. In other words. what 'really matters is a deep
understanding of the *hadith* and a more knowledge of many *hadith*
without fully Understanding them is of little value. without fully
Understanding them is of little value.

Continuing. the Imam quotes a *hadith* of Imam Ali. He says: 'I was
studying the book of Ali and in it I came across this sentence:' "The
value of every person is the extent of his understanding".[^20] On
another occasion Imam Sadeq has this to say on the importance of
understanding *hadith*: 'One *hadith* that you understand is worth a
thousand that you merely relate'. that you understand is worth a
thousand that you merely relate'.

Narating a *hadith* may be useful.[^21] and instructive for those to
whom it is related, but for the narrator a *hadith* is only useful if he
understands it, otherwise as Imam Baqer says. he derives little
advantage from his knowledge. In fact. sometimes it may even be harmful
both for the narrator and his audience alike, since when the narrator is
not knowledgeable about *hadith* more often this may cause *hadith* to
be distorted. to be distorted.

This is the reason for the commander of the Faithful words:
'Understanding of hadith is incumbent upon you, not narrating
them'.[^22] And on another occasion Imam Ali is quoted as saying: ‘The
ignorant devoute their efforts to narrating traditions. but the wise to
understanding them.’[^23] In these *hadith* and other similar ones.[^24]
There are two points to be noted: The first is that Islam attaches the
utmost importance to research and understanding of the truth and the
avoidance of *Taqlid* in ideological matters. in ideological matters.

It is a religion that stresses the need for a full understanding of its
precepts, and not its ill-understood and unconsidered transmission. In
other words faith must be based on knowledge and understanding not blind
devoutness.It is a religion that stresses the need for a full
understanding of its precepts, and not its ill-understood and
unconsidered transmission. In other words faith must be based on
knowledge and understanding not blind devoutness.

The second point is the confidence shown by the leaders of Islam that
this religion is fully compatible with the most stringent scientific and
rational standards, to the extent that scholars, if they are
fair-minded, they will conclude that Islam is the true religion:
otherwise why would so much emphasis be placed on study and
research?placed on study and research?

The Relationship Between Science And Faith
------------------------------------------

For scholars, the native of the relationship between science and faith,
in the Islamic view, is indeed an interesting question.
Pseudo-intellectuals who lack religious-faith and are opposed to
religious beliefs claim that there is no link between science and faith,
and that in principle religious convictions are opposed to science and
vice versa. They therefore. think that in every society where science
flourishes there is no room for religion, and wherever religion
flourishes there can be no room for science to grow and develop.for
science to grow and develop.

Let us see what Islam has to say on this subject.Let us see what Islam
has to say on this subject.

In the Islamic view, there is an inseparable link between science and
faith: faith is seen in principle, as the fruit of science, the
scientist is a true believer, and a lack of faith stems from ignorance!
See how profoundly and beautifully the Quran expounds this truth:
ignorance! See how profoundly and beautifully the Quran expounds this
truth:

***'Those to whom knowledge has been given can clearly see that what
your lord has revealed to you is the truth.' (34:6).'Those to whom
knowledge has been given can clearly see that what your lord has
revealed to you is the truth.' (34:6).***

***'... So that those to whom knowledge has been given may know that
this Quran is the truth revealed by your Lord and thus believe in it.'
(22:54).***

We may note that these verses clearly and explicitly state that there is
a relationship and inseparable link between science and faith, and that
scholars and scientists undoubtedly understand the truth of Islam. In
other words, when ignorance is eradicated from human society) Islam will
embrace the whole world because it is a scientific and logical religion
with rational standards.world because it is a scientific and logical
religion with rational standards.

In other words, these verses teach us that a person cannot be a
scientist or have reached- a state of true knowledge and understanding
without being a firm believer in Islam. To be sure, the possibility
exists that. a person may think of himself as a scientist and having
acquired an understanding of the truth, yet not be a believer.
Pseudo-science certainly is compatible with a lack of faith, but real
science is necessarily accompanied by faith, since science and faith, as
these two verses tell us, are inseparable. In the Islamic view, science
and faith are like a pair of Seamese twins, born together and die
together.

Now see what a beautiful expression Imam; 'Ali has left us. inspired by
the Quran'.Now see what a beautiful expression Imam; 'Ali has left us.
inspired by the Quran'.

'Faith and science are like twin brothers or inseparable
companions.’[^25]62

'Ali is saying in other words that just as if a person comes across one
of a pair of Seamese twins or a pair of inseparable companions he really
has visited and recognized the other. If a person reaches a high degree
of knowledge he will also have reached a high degree of faith. and if a
person acquires faith. he will also hate attained knowledge and
understanding of the truth.degree of knowledge he will also have reached
a high degree of faith. and if a person acquires faith. he will also
hate attained knowledge and understanding of the truth.

In this connection an interesting hadith of the prophet has been
recorded that explains the link between science and faith in a different
way: 'Knowledge is the very life-force of Islam and the pillar of
faith.[^26]63

This hadith compares the link between science and faith to two things:
the relationship between body and soul, and that of between a pillar and
the ceiling it supports.This hadith compares the link between science
and faith to two things: the relationship between body and soul, and
that of between a pillar and the ceiling it supports.

If a body lacks life or soul it is incapable of movement or growth. and
a ceiling without a pillar to support it cannot remain in its position
for a single moment. Islam likewise has such inseparable links with
science and knowledge: bon from and approved by knowledge, Islam can’
only thrive and develop in a scientific environment.scientific
environment.

Which Science?
--------------

Here is two important questions presents themselves: Which science is
twinned with faith? Which branch of learning is the vital force of faith
and the pillar of its support?branch of learning is the vital force of
faith and the pillar of its support?

The brief answer to these questions is this: the science which is
inseparable from faith consists of a specific world view that presents
the universe to man as it is, and gives all branches of science and
knowledge their direction. validity and worth.presents the universe to
man as it is, and gives all branches of science and knowledge their
direction. validity and worth.

This brief answer will be more fully explained in the discussion of the
*Nobovat khasa* (proper prophet hood) in a later chapter, accompanied by
a commentary on the Quranic verses quoted at the start of this section.
*1-The relationship between ignorance and* *Kufr*

Next we will discuss the third aspect of our present topic, namely the
relationship between ignorance and *Kufr*. Is the relationship between
ignorance and *kufr* the same as that between science and faith. and is
every: *kafir* an ignorant? Or do ignorance and *kufr* have a different
mutual relationship? have a different mutual relationship?

The faith of the matter is that the relationship between ignorance and
*Kufr* is not like that between science and faith. i.e. ignorance and
*Kufr* are not linked or twinned inseparably together. since it is
possible for someone to be ignorant without being a *Kafir* and it is
also possible for a person to be a *Kafir* without being ignorant.
without being ignorant.

To explain this brief statement more fully two introductory discussions
are necessary: first what do we mean by *Kufr* and *Kafir*? and second,
what are the practical positions a person can adopt in relation to facts
which are either known or unknown to him?? and second, what are the
practical positions a person can adopt in relation to facts which are
either known or unknown to him?

The Meaning Of Kufr And Kafir
-----------------------------

The original sense of *Kufr* is that of concealing, and a person who
concealing something, or a thing which conceals something else, is
termed a *Kafir*. Concealment is of two kinds literal and metaphorical
putting a seed in the ground is an example of the first kind and hiding
the truth by means of falsehood or vice versa, is an example of the
second kind.[^27]64

So if a person states something which is contrary to his knowledge and
belief his action is a form of *Kufr* and he himself is termed a
*Kafir*..

Someone who knows the truth and claims not to know it, is a *Kafir*, and
so is someone who does not know the truth, but claims to do so. since
the first person is concealing his knowledge and the second his
ignorance: whereas someone who does not know the truth and admits that
he does not, is not a *Kafir* but merely ignorant.but merely ignorant.

Positions Be Adopted In Factuals
--------------------------------

When confronted with facts that are either known or unknown to him a
person can in practice adopt one of four position:one of four position:

1) he may know the truth and state that he knows it.[^28]

2) he may know the truth and state that he does not know it.

3) he may not know the truth and state that he does not know it or state
nothing at all.3) he may not know the truth and state that he does not
know it or state nothing at all.

4) he may not know the truth and state that he does know it.4) he may
not know the truth and state that he does know it.

A person who knows the truth and states that he knows it, is a person of
knowledge and faith. A person who knows the truth and states that he
does not know it is a person of knowledge and a *kafir* because he is
concealing his knowledge. A person who does not know the truth yet
claims to do so is a person of ignorance and a *kafir*. And finally a
person who does not know the truth and does not claim to do so is
ignorant but not a *kafir*..

In his attitude towards the truths of existence a person may therefore
be knowledgeable and a believer, knowledgeable and a *kafir*, ignorant
and a *kafir* or ignorant but not a *kafir*..

Form these explanations it is obvious that in the case of ignorance and
*kufr* there is no such link as that between knowledge and faith. In the
language of the logicians between ignorance and *kufr,* there is a
relationship known as partial overlapping i.e. a person may be a *kafir*
but not ignorant, or he may be ignorant but not a *kafir*. or he may be
both ignorant and a *kafir*..

The Kafir Who Is Not Ignorant
-----------------------------

A person who denies something he knows to be true is a *kafir*. but he
is not ignorant, since he is aware of the truth. It is like someone who
is fully aware of the existence of God but for some private reason
denies this in his public utterances or in the Imam 'Ali's expression.
\`His heart confesses while his tongue denies.[^29]66

This category includes such people as Pharaoh and his followers.
According to the Quran. despite the fact that Moses had provided clear
proofs of the existence of the Creator of the Universe and his own
prophetic mission. the truth of which they fully realized. they were
unable to acknowledge this truth because of their egotistical,
ambitious, cruel and criminal character, which caused them to denounce
Moses and deny God. As the Quran tells it:As the Quran tells it:

 ***\`In their wickedness and pride (Pharaoh and his followers) denied
(God's undoubted signs), although*** ***their souls knew them to be
true.' (27:14).their souls knew them to be true.' (27:14).***

As a result of the clear proofs and powerful logic that Moses gave them.
and the miracles he performed in their presence, they were convinced
that Moses was telling the truth and that the God of whom he spoke.
whose prophet be claimed to be and who' summoned the people to worship,
was the creator of the world and all therein. But despite this inner
certainty they denied the signs of God, denounced Moses, and called his
God a fable. Why did they do this?the creator of the world and all
therein. But despite this inner certainty they denied the signs of God,
denounced Moses, and called his God a fable. Why did they do this?

The Quran provides us with the answer. The reason for this denial was
their wickedness and the desire to be superior. They knew that if they
acknowledged the truth of Moses and the God of whom Moses claimed to be
the prophet they would have to put an end to their wickedness and
wrong-doing, and their pride and ambition. And since they were loath to
do so they concealed their knowledge, covered the face of truth with the
veil of *kufr*, and denied the signs of God.[^30]67

This concludes our examination of the case where *kufr* exists but
without ignorance, or the case of the *kafir* who knows. Now for the
second case. who knows. Now for the second case.

The Ignorant Non-Kafir
----------------------

A person who does not know the truth and does not claim to know it, is
an ignorant *non-kafir*. In other words, someone, who does not express
an opinion about what he does not know, or who admits not knowing, is
ignorant, but is not a *kafir*, because he has not concealed anything.
and *kufr* lies in the act of concealment. lies in the act of
concealment.

Imam Sadeq is reported to have said: "If people when they do not know
something pause and do not deny they have not committed *kufr*.”[^31]
This shows that this form of *kufr* resuts from denying something the
essence of which the speaker does not know if person does not express an
opinion about something he does not know, and does not deny the truth of
it, he is not a *kafir* in respect to that truth, since by acknowledging
his ignorance or by simply pausing and saying nothing he has not
concealed the truth. An ignorant person of this type is therefore not a
*kafir*, although at the same time he is not a believer either.,
although at the same time he is not a believer either.

One of Imam Sadeq's followers, a certain Muhammad bin Muslim relates
that one day when he was sitting on the Imam's left side and Zurara was
sitting on his right *Abu Basir* entered and asked: "What is your
opinion about someone who has doubts about the existence of God?"
entered and asked: "What is your opinion about someone who has doubts
about the existence of God?"

The Imam replied: "Such a person is a *kafir*." A few moments later, to
amplify his answer, the Imam added: "Verily, he is a *kafir* if he
denies the existence of God.[^32]69

That is to say that if a person, has doubts about the existence of God
but does not actually deny His existence he is not a *kafir*. A *kafir*
is someone who although he has doubts and cannot produce any proofs that
God does not exist nevertheless denies His existence. is someone who
although he has doubts and cannot produce any proofs that God does not
exist nevertheless denies His existence.

Regarding the question of whether or not an ignorant person who does not
claim knowledge is a *kafir* or not there is another *hadith*, this time
from the *Imam 'Ali* which raises an interesting point. The text of this
hadith is as follows: 'If people who do not know about something refrain
from commenting on it they will not be committing *kufr* nor straying
from the true path'.[^33]70

What is of special interest in this *hadith* is that according to the
Imam if ignorant people refrain from commenting on truths of which they
are not aware, they will avoid not only being afflicted by the disease
of *kufr*, but also going astray, that is to say an ignorant person who
pauses and refrains from comment will gradually be drawn towards
enquiring and investigation to discover the truth. Once he has entered
the path of enquiring, with the goal of discovering the truth, he will
be saved from error and deviation in his beliefs and will ultimately,
through divine grace, discover the truth.discovering the truth, he will
be saved from error and deviation in his beliefs and will ultimately,
through divine grace, discover the truth.

In other words it seems that the Imam is implying that the root-cause of
ideological error and deviation is comments made by ignorant and
non-specialist persons, and that if such people refrained from
expressing their opinions on matters they are ignorant of *kufr* and
deviation would be eradicated from human society. and deviation would be
eradicated from human society.

The Ignorant Kafir
------------------

A *kafir* who knows the truth is not ignorant, and the ignorant person
who does not conceal his ignorance is not a *kafir*, but if an ignorant
person conceals his ignorance then ignorance and *kufr* are united in
him.united in him.

An ignorant *kafir* is therefore someone, who expresses his opinion
about something he is ignorant of. In the discussion which we will later
have about understanding God we will see that people who deny the
existence of God assuming that their reasoning is sound, can at the very
most prove that man has no way of knowing the metaphysical world, that
is to say he is not able to understand whether or not anything exists
beyond the world which we know from the evidence of our senses.existence
of God assuming that their reasoning is sound, can at the very most
prove that man has no way of knowing the metaphysical world, that is to
say he is not able to understand whether or not anything exists beyond
the world which we know from the evidence of our senses.

If such people confess their ignorance, they are not committing *kufr*.
But so often they not only refrain from making such a confession but
even claim to reap scientific results from their ignorance! They use
their lack of knowledge as the basis of their theories about the
metaphysical and transcendental world and claim that nothing exists
beyond the world of our senses!. But so often they not only refrain from
making such a confession but even claim to reap scientific results from
their ignorance! They use their lack of knowledge as the basis of their
theories about the metaphysical and transcendental world and claim that
nothing exists beyond the world of our senses!

This is the true meeting-place of ignorance and *kufr*, that is to say
that such people conceal their ignorance with scientific claims., that
is to say that such people conceal their ignorance with scientific
claims.

In concluding this chapter we must have two important questions.

The first is whether the result of research in all cases leads to truth
and an understanding of reality? In other words does the researcher
always arrive at an understanding of what he is searching for? Or is it
possible that a person could carry out his research and not reach a
conclusion, or perhaps imagine that he has reached a real understanding
when in fact has not done so?searching for? Or is it possible that a
person could carry out his research and not reach a conclusion, or
perhaps imagine that he has reached a real understanding when in fact
has not done so?

The second question is whether the criteria for understanding the
correctness of a theory or opinion actually exist or not?The second
question is whether the criteria for understanding the correctness of a
theory or opinion actually exist or not?

The answer to the first question is that there are obstacles to and
conditions affecting understanding. and if the researcher can eliminate
these and create conditions conducive to understanding then he wilt
undoubtedly reach a conclusion. The obstacles and conditions will be
discussed in the second book of the present work, and the second
question will be deal with in the chapter that now follows.The answer to
the first question is that there are obstacles to and conditions
affecting understanding. and if the researcher can eliminate these and
create conditions conducive to understanding then he wilt undoubtedly
reach a conclusion. The obstacles and conditions will be discussed in
the second book of the present work, and the second question will be
deal with in the chapter that now follows.The answer to the first
question is that there are obstacles to and conditions affecting
understanding. and if the researcher can eliminate these and create
conditions conducive to understanding then he wilt undoubtedly reach a
conclusion. The obstacles and conditions will be discussed in the second
book of the present work, and the second question will be deal with in
the chapter that now follows.The answer to the first question is that
there are obstacles to and conditions affecting understanding. and if
the researcher can eliminate these and create conditions conducive to
understanding then he wilt undoubtedly reach a conclusion. The obstacles
and conditions will be discussed in the second book of the present work,
and the second question will be deal with in the chapter that now
follows.

[^1]: Kufr is a comprehensive Islamic term that includes blasphemy'.
Disbelief, atheism and the like and has no exact equivalent in the
European languages. A person practicing kufr is a Kafir. i.e. an
infidel, unbeliever, atheist and so on. The author gives a more deviled
definition of this concept later in this chapter (IV)

[^2]: This point is discussed more hilly in the second and third parts
of understanding (pp --to -)

[^3]: Mizan Hadith No.13330

[^4]: Ibid. No.13338.

[^5]: Ibid No. 13352.

[^6]: Ibid. Chapter 2832.

[^7]: Ibid. Chapter 2833.

[^8]: Ibid. Chapter 2836.

[^9]: Ibid. Chapter 2864 and 2847.

[^10]: Ibid. Chapter 2837.

[^11]: Ibid. Chapter 285I.

[^12]: Ibid. Chapter 2853.

[^13]: Ibid. Chapter 2852.

[^14]: Ibid Chapter 2838.

[^15]: Ibid. Chapter 2839.

[^16]: Ibid. Chapter 2845.

[^17]: Ibid. Hadith No 7421

[^18]: bid. hadith No 1873

[^19]: Ibid. No. 11873.

[^20]: Mu’ani al-akhbar. p. 2

[^21]: Mizan.hadith No3351

[^22]: Miran. Hadith No. 3355

[^23]: Ibid Hadith No. 3356.

[^24]: Ibid. Chapter 719.

[^25]: Mizan. Hadith No. 19457.

[^26]: Ibid. Hadith No. 19456.

[^27]: A more complete definition of Kufr is contained in a later
section of this book 'bars to Understanding'.

[^28]: It alludes to devotees.

[^29]: Mizan, Hadith No. 4093.

[^30]: Today, most of the leaders of the tiny groups that in various
ways are in opposition to the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran are
fully aware who is in the right and who is the real supporter of the
people. Where wise all the enemies of the Islamic Republic of Iran know
that in all matters of principle the Islamic Republic is in the right.
The United States knows this, as does the Soviet Union. as well as their
satellites and the tiny opposition groups affiliated to them. But their
Pharaonic natures. in other words their oppressive nature and pride.
Prevent them from acknowledging the truth.

[^31]: Mizan. Chapter 3493. "Causes of Kufr".

[^32]: Ibid. Hadhith No. 17401.

[^33]: Bihar-ol-Anvar. Vol. 2. P 120.


