Chapter 6: Freedom of Opinion
=============================

One of the most important and relevant problems in today's world,
especially since the publication of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, is the problem of freedom of opinion.

Article 18 of the International Convention on Civil and Political rights
states that: Everyone has the right of freedom of thought, conscience
and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or
belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in
public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance.

While Article 19 states that: this right includes freedom to hold
opinions without reference and to seek, receive and impart information
and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.

In this chapter we will examine freedom of opinion from the view point
both of reason and Islam, and then explain why this question is so much
promoted in today's world. But first we must consider three questions as
an introduction to the subject. These are: the meaning of opinion, the
sources of opinion and the meaning of freedom of opinion.

The Meaning Of Opinion
----------------------

As we saw in some detail in chapter I the world for opinion in Arabic
and Persian *(aqideh)* is derived from the verbal root *'adq',* meaning
to tie or knot. When a view is 'tied' to person's believes, rightly or
wrongly, correctly or incorrectly, in accord or at odds with reality, to
the benefit or harm of himself and society-is called an opinion.

Sources Of Opinion
------------------

From where do a person's opinion and beliefs, which are the basis of his
actions and positions he adopts, originate? This question is extremely
important, since it must be answer before we study the problem of
freedom of opinion. If we have the answer to this question it will be
easier to express an opinion about freedom of opinion.

With a little reflection it becomes clear that a person's opinions and
beliefs originate from these two sources:

a) research

b) *Taqlid*

Sometimes a person arrives at a view or opinion about a question by
independent thought and by study and research. For example, he concludes
from his researches that the earth goes round the sun or that the sun
goes round the earth that something other than material objects exists
or does not exist, and so on. In such a case the source of his opinion
is research, regardless of his theory being in accord with reality or
not.

And sometimes a person's opinions and beliefs are not the product of
research and study with an open mind: either he has accepted an opinion
without carrying out research or, if he has reached his beliefs while
his mind was captive to *Taqlid*. The roots of a person's opinions are
therefore either research or *Taqlid.* There is of course a third
source, which consists of inspiration or enlightenment, but since this
source is not general, but only to be found in exceptional persons, we
will exclude it from the present discussion.[^1]

It is worth nothing that a close study of the matter reveals that
people's opinions and beliefs are not as a rule based on thought and
research, but on *Taqlid.* One’s parents, clan or tribe, social
environment party organization or group, the personalities one admire,
all these are the source of inspiration for one’s views. Without
demanding reason or proof, but purely on the basis of *Taqlid,* people
accept those views and gradually become accustomed to them until they
are ‘tied’ to their minds and become appendices to them, firmly
established in their very souls as their own opinions.

For this reasons people’s family and social environment play a
fundamental role in the formulation of their opinions. Whatever family
and environment a person lives in, he usually adopts the opinions and
views if individuals in that family or environment, and to tell the
truth, therefore are few people who have acquired their opinions and
beliefs entirely by means of personal investigation.

This is why the Quran warns people that if they follow the opinions of
most people in the world they will be led astray, since such beliefs
lack any scientific basis:

***‘If you were to obey the majority of mankind they would lead you
astray from God’s path. They follow nothing but idle speculation and
guess’ (6:116).***

Freedom Of Opinion
------------------

Before discussing freedom of opinion we must specify what we mean by
such freedom, because until its meaning is clarified we cannot judge
whether it is right or wrong. Freedom of opinion may be interpreted in
three ways:

a) Freedom to choose one’s opinions, i.e. the freedom to believe
whatever one likes.

b) Freedom of expression, i.e. the freedom to express whatever on
believes.

c) Freedom to propagate opinion, i.e. the freedom to advocate and
disseminate whatever one likes.

So when freedom of opinion is under discussion it is possible that any
of these three meanings, or all of them, may be meant.

Now, having clarified the meaning of the word opinion, the sources of
opinions and the many of freedom of opinion, let us see what our reason
has to say about freedom of opinion.

Freedom Of Opinion From The Point Of View Of Reason
---------------------------------------------------

Reason has a specific view about each of the three interpretations of
the expression, freedom of opinion, and so we cannot give a single
categorical judgment on the matter, but must examine each of these
interpretations separately.

### a) Freedom of choice in one’s opinions

The first interpretation of freedom of opinion is the sense that a
person is free to choose his own opinions, and to adopt any opinion he
likes and to believe whatever strikes his fancy.

A little contemplation soon shows us that this kind of freedom of
opinions is, in practice impossible; because a person’s opinions and
beliefs are not in his control, nor are they in the control of others. A
person can neither believe whatever he wants, nor can another person
forcibly impose an opinion or belief on him.

Opinions are not like garments that a person can put on, or change, as
the fancy takes him, or that someone else can force him to wear. A
person’s beliefs are like his loves. Love and friendship cannot be
switched on at will, so that he can feel love for anyone or anything as
he decides, nor is it in the power of anyone else to induce him to feel
love for a person or thing, or not to feel it. If a person is convinced
that it is daytime now, he cannot neither believe of his own accord that
it is night-time, nor can anyone else force him to change his opinion. A
person may be induced to say something against his opinion, but it is
not possible for him to be induced to change his opinion.

In 1632, Galileo wrote a book on the subject of the theories of Ptolemy
and Copernicus. A year later the Pope summoned him to Rome and declared
that his opinion that the earth moves around the sun was blasphemous.
The Pope forced him to kneel down and recant his view. The story is well
known that after Galileo had recanted he got up and left the room and
then they noticed that he had written on the ground with his finger
“Nevertheless, the earth does move.”[^2]

Only in one case can an opinion change and that is when the source of
the opinion changes. If the source of the opinion was research it may be
that research, in continuing his studies, will come across evidence
proving that his earlier opinion was wrong, or if the source of his
opinion was *Taqlid* it may be that the chain of *Taqlid* will be
broken.[^3]

### b) Freedom of expression

The second sense in which the expression ‘freedom of opinion’ is used is
the freedom to state or express one’s opinion. From the point of view
rights for a person to be able to say what his opinion is without being
molested by anyone, just as everyone has the right to lead his private
life as he wishes, provided of course that he does not disturb others in
doing so.

The freedom to express one’s opinion, apart from being the natural right
of every person, also promotes the exchange of ideas, the development of
scientific beliefs and the correction of opinions. There is therefore
the slightest doubt from the point of view of reason the validity and
even the necessity of his freedom. There are two further aspects of the
matter which deserve inspection, however. The first is whether a person
has the right to express a view which is contrary to what he knows to be
correct and contrary to his real beliefs. The second is whether or not
from the point of view of reason a person has the duty to correct a
fallacious opinion or a belief that is not based on though and research.

The answer to the first question must be that if is purely a question of
the judgment of reason, however much reason may disapprove of a person
expressing an opinion which is contrary to his real beliefs, to the
extent his use of this freedom does not harm others there is no
justification in depriving him of it.

The answer to the question is that reason, while considering the
expression of an opinion to be free, also considers it one’s duty to
endeavor to correct false opinions, for two reasons. The first is that
opinion is the basis of action and superstition and false beliefs can
lead society to corruption and perdition. The second reason is that to
campaign against superstition is a step towards freedom of thought, and
reason cannot ignore its obligation to promote such freedom.

It should also be borne in mind that freedom of opinion and freedom of
thought are fundamentally opposed to each other: opinion and thought
cannot both be free, because as we have already explained opinion is
something which is ‘tied’ onto a person’s mind, forming a knot there and
becoming an appendix to his very soul.

So if a person’s beliefs are not based on thought and research they
become chains which fetter his reason and soul, imprisoning his mind in
walls of superstition and preventing him from thinking freely or
arriving at scientific beliefs that are in accord with reality. We must
therefore choose between freedom of thought or the freedom to have
superstitious opinions, and if we choose freedom of thought the campaign
to break the chains of superstitious belief becomes a serious and
essential matter.

Just as if a person who is bound fast in chains and cannot free himself
single-handed needs the help of someone who is free so mind that is
bound fast in the chains of fallacious beliefs, and encircled by
incorrect opinions cannot free itself from the bondage of incorrect
beliefs, and someone else who is free is needed to break these chains
and set him free.

From the point of view of reason therefore, it is incumbent on a person
to correct the opinions of others, and by virtue of the fact that it is
impossible to correct opinion by force or compulsion the appropriate
measure consist of explaining matters so as to promote correct opinions,
acquaint people with the true facts by means of logic and proof, and
replacing *Taqlid* with research.

If, however, an individual or a group become obstacles to freedom of
thought and the correction of opinion, logic and proof are ineffective,
and in this case reason tells us that such obstacles must be forcibly
destroy so as prepare the ground for the development of correct opinions
and the collapse of false ones.

### c) Freedom to propagate opinion

The third sense in which the expression ‘freedom of opinion’ can be
interpreted is the freedom to propagate and promote opinions, and
transmit them to others, whether such opinions are based on research or
*Taqlid* whether they are in accord with reality or not, and whether
they are beneficial or harmful to society.

When reason, according to what have been mentioned, considers it an
obligation to fight superstition, it most certainly cannot justify
absolute freedom to propagate opinion. How can reason accept the
spreading of superstitious beliefs that have no intellectual or
scientific basis; ideas which imprison the mind and halt the growth of
society, or even cause social retrogression and harm? Wrong and harmful
beliefs are a kind of psychological sickness. Ideological diseases are
more dangerous than physical ones: When does not permit an individual to
spread the physical diseases that one may have in the society how can it
justify the right to spread psychological diseases?

Belief in Slavery
-----------------

The inherent slave-like nature of the deprived classes is an opinion
ascribed to Aristotle, who says in his book under the title of
“Politics”: ‘Nature made slaves. Generally, the barbarians and people
far from civilization were created for submission and services and the
Greeks for commanding and freedom.’[^4]

Will Durant says: ‘After the passage of several centuries slavery
because a custom, and people regarded it as essential and innate:
Aristotle considered it natural and unavoidable and St. Paul sanctified
it and in his opinion it was a system in keeping with God’s will.[^5]

Ernest Renan also confirms this opinion. He says: The West is the
master-race and the East is the race of labors and this is why nature
made the race of laborers greater in number’.[^6]

Burying Females Alive
---------------------

According to Will Durant: ‘In some places, such as New Guinea, New
Hebrides, the Solomon Islands, Fiji and India, women were strangled and
buried with their dead husbands and were expected to kill themselves so
as to be able to serve their husbands in the next world’.[^7]

Infidels at the time of the Prophet of Islam believed that females were
a cause for shame, and therefore buried their daughters alive.

Belief in The Nutritional Qualities Of Blood
--------------------------------------------

Will Durant, in discussing the general characteristics of civilization,
after mentioning the various kinds of food eaten by primitive peoples,
from louse-stew[^8] to human flesh [^9] writes of human blood as follow:
‘Now for many tribes human blood is a delicious food. Many of tribal
people who are pure and good sometimes drink human blood, either as a
medicine or in completion of a row or a religious rite. They usually
believe that when they drink a person’s blood his strength passes to the
drinker.’[^10]

These are examples of millions of superstition and false beliefs of
various societies. If someone were to write a book about superstitious
beliefs it would run to dozens of volumes.

Does reason permit these false and dangerous beliefs and similar, get
even more dangerous beliefs, which imperialism today propagates for
drinking the blood, eating the flesh and enslaving of man in modern
from, to be freely transmitted?

Islam And Freedom Of Opinion
----------------------------

So far we have been looking at freedom of opinion from the point of view
of reason and, to summarize briefly, we have concluded that freedom of
opinion in the sense of individual liberty to choose one’s opinion is
not a rational concept, and in the sense of a person’s right to express
his opinion it is one of his natural rights, and in the sense of the
right to propagate superstitious and harmful beliefs and to transmit
them to society, it is strictly forbidden from the point of view of
reason.

Now let us see what the Islamic attitude to freedom of opinion is. The
short answer is that the Islamic attitude to freedom of opinion is the
same as the rational attitude. The detailed answer requires an
examination of the Islamic view on each of the three senses of freedom
of opinion based on the available evidence.

As was explained in our examination of the rational attitude a person’s
beliefs are in principle outside his control in the sense that he can
believe or disbelieve whatever he wishes. Opinions are not like garments
that a person is free to choose or to change as the fancy takes him or
that he can constrained to change against his will. Opinion is like love
which can only change if the source itself changes.

Since opinion is not subject to choice, freedom of choice in this matter
is not something that can be discussed in an Islamic context. This it
was that when a number of nomadic Arabs of the tribe of Bani Asad came
to the Prophet of Islam in a year of drought and professed their
adherence to Islam[^11], but did not really accept Islamic beliefs and
were motivated by materialistic considerations, the following Quranic
verse was revealed:

***‘The nomadic Arab say they have found faith. Tell them they are not
true believers. They should say they profess Islam, and true faith has
not yet entered their hearts’ (49:14).***

To profess Islam is to express one’s adherence to Islamic beliefs, while
faith is heart-felt belief in Islamic ideology.[^12] Expressing one’s
beliefs is within a person’s power, but possession of true faith is not.
A person may have various motivations for expressing his belief, but
faith is a produce of the heart and can only be claimed when Islamic
beliefs have become an appendage of the soul.

Freedom of Expression In Islam
------------------------------

A study of the Quran and the *hadith*, as well as of the history of
Islam, shows that Islam officially recognizes the freedom to express
one’s opinions. Indeed, no other religion respects this kind of freedom
to the extent that Islam does. Not only is the expression of opinion is
free in Islam but the Quran advises people to listen to various
different views and opinions and to examine and criticize them with an
open mind, and when the investigation has revealed which are the
soundest views to adopt them as a basis of action.

In other words, the guidance provided by the Quran is that a person
should use freedom of expression as a means to promote the growth of
sound opinion and to enable the best opinions to be identify and
adopted:

***‘Give good news to those of My servants who, listen to what is said
and follow what is best ‘, (39:17).***

Not only is the expression of opinion free in Islam, but individuals are
free even to express views that are contrary to their real beliefs.
Although Islam considers such conduct to be shameful, and punishable in
the hereafter, it nevertheless never compels a person to confess to what
he really considers to be true. In numerous verses the Quran
specifically status that faith is not a matter for compulsion and the
Prophet of God has no obligation to force people to faith.

What Is Faith?
--------------

Faith consists of a belief accompanied by confession and the action that
such belief demands.[^13] Confessing Islam opinions without heart-felt
belief is not faith,[^14] and heart-felt belief that is not accompanied
by an overt confession is not faith. In this respect, although Pharaoh
was convinced that Moses was speaking the truth and although he believed
in his heart that Moses had a prophetic mission[^15] he cannot be
considered a true believer because in his stubbornness and pride he
would not confess to the unity of God and the prophetic mission of
Mosses. But when he was on the point of drawing, in desperation he did
make such a confession, and said: ‘I express my faith that there is no
god but the God which the Children of Israel believe in, and I am to be
counted as one of the Muslims.’ (yunis/90)

Here, Pharaoh expresses his faith under compulsion. Earlier, he had
believed in his heart, but now fear of drowning provokes him to making a
spoken confession. So he becomes a believer, but out of desperation and
compulsion. So we see that faith has two main pillars: belief from the
heart and practical confession. The first pillar is not within a
person’s power to control, that is to say, he cannot believe or
disbelieve anything he wishes as the fancy takes him, but the second
pillar is within his control, that is, he can confess to what he
believes and take action as these beliefs demand, and similarly he may
fail to confess in practical terms to his beliefs.

Heart-felt beliefs, which are the first pillar of faith, since they are
not within a person’s power to control, can likewise not be imposed,
that is to say, his beliefs cannot compulsorily changed. But the second
pillar of faith, which is practical confession. Since it is within a
person’s control, is subject to compulsion. Or in other words it is
possible to force a person to make a practical confession of his beliefs
or to act against them.

Once faith is defined we see that when we say it is not compulsory we
are referring to the second pillar of faith, since the first pillar is
not susceptible to compulsion. We mean that Islam does not force a
person to confess to Islam beliefs without his believing them. On the
contrary, as we discussed in detail in chapter 2 and 3 in relation to
*Taqlid* as a basis of opinion and research, Islam does not accept that
fundamental beliefs should be acquired except through research and
individual investigation.

In other words, of someone says he believes that God created the
universe and is the one God he should have his reason for believing
this. If he says that Muhammad is the Prophet of God, he should know
why. If he says believes that, on the Day of resurrection man will be
raised from the dead and his deeds will be examined, he should know
reasons for this beliefs, or says that because his parents or teacher
said so he too believes this, his beliefs are not acceptable to Islam.

In short, Islam says that fundamental beliefs must be researched and not
based on *Taqlid,* and everybody must solve the basic problems of
ideology for himself, and other people’s comments have no use to him.
Further, Islam does not compel a person, even to confess to what he
believes, in other words, when we say that in the Islamic view faith is
not compulsory we mean that not only does Islam not compel a person to
confess to Islamic beliefs that he does not really possess, and not only
is confession of beliefs based on *Taqlid* without research and
reflection and knowledge unacceptable, but even people who do believe
the doctrines of Islam but for some reason do not admit to doing so are
free to adopt such a course, and no Muslim has right to force them to
confess their beliefs. The Quran specifically states that:

***‘There shall be no compulsion in religion, since true guidance is now
distinguishable from error.’ (2:256).***

This verse, apart from categorically denying the imposition of religious
beliefs by force leaves it to the discretion of the individual weather
to confess publicly to what he knows to be true, and by doing so
explains the reason for this absence of compulsion. It first states that
the acceptance of Islamic beliefs and the practical confession of them
are not compulsory, and that people are free to accept or not accept
Islam (‘***There shall be no compulsion in religion’***). Immediately
after, it explains that the reason for this freedom is that the right
path and the wrong path have been clearly indicated (‘***true guidance
is now distinguishable from error’***).

Religion is a program and a path to perfection for man to follow, and in
order to do so he must either know the path so as to follow it freely
and with conviction, or else he must be taken by that path forcibly.

In the Quranic view once the road to perfection has been defined there
is no reason for religion to be compulsory. Rather, there is necessity
for man to be free in choosing this road, since the desire for
perfection is optional and man fulfill the philosophy of his creator
only when he chooses the right road freely and of his own volition. So
once the right road is defined, but man abuses this freedom and diverges
from the road he knows to be right and chooses a road he knows to be
wrong, there is no point in exercising compulsion. Let him fail and
afterwards learn what his punishment is.

A point worth nothing, one which the author has not seen referred to by
any other writer, is that since in this verse the freedom to accept
Islam is under discussion, that is to say ‘true guidance is now
distinguishable from error’ it is obvious that this verse, and indeed
all the Quranic verses dealing with compulsion refer to people who have
been shown the difference between true guidance and error, and those who
understand the truth of Islam and Islamic beliefs but for various
reasons are not prepared to confess to what they believe.

Nevertheless, the Quran categorically states that none is entitled to
force them to do so.Another verse that categorically denies the use of
compulsion in the expression of Islamic beliefs is the following:

***‘If you are Lord so willed He could have made all the people on earth
believe in Him. Would you therefore force faith on people?’ (10:99).***

With regard to the revelation of this verse Imam Reza relates that
according to his ancestors, going back to Imam ‘Ali some of the
Prophet’s companions proposed to him that if he forced some of the
people under his authority to accept Islam the number of Muslims would
increase and so would their military strength against the enemy. The
Prophet replied: ‘I cannot face God having made an innovation that I was
not commanded to make, and I am not a person who imposes his will on
others.’[^16]

At this point God Almighty revealed this verse, saying in effect ‘O
Muhammad, if I had wanted to I could have forcibly converted everyone to
Islam. This would be like people suddenly finding faith after death when
they are suffering punishment for their evil deeds. If I did this with
them they would not be worthy of my rewards and praise. I want them to
find faith freely and without compulsion.’

In short, the explanation of this verse, in the light of the
circumstances in which it was revealed is this: in the system of
creation man has been created as a free being, capable of choosing
between perfection and corruption, so that reward and punishment in the
after-life have a justification: so the imposition of faith on an
individual, since it is against the philosophy of man’s creation is not
permissible, and the Prophet of GOD is not entitled to do something
which is against the tradition of creation and contrary to the divine
will, even though such a deed might strengthen the Islamic government
and weaken the enemies of Islam.

The third instance of a Quranic verse which specifically rejects the
imposition of faith is this verse, addressed directly to the Prophet:

***So give them warning. Verily your duty is only to admonish you are
not their custodian. (88-22-3).***

In other words, the function of the Prophet is to warn and explain, to
communicate the divine message and show the true path, and it is the
people themselves who must make their choice and choose the true path.
The Prophet was not appointed by God to a position of supremacy over the
people so as to impose faith on them forcibly. The prophet’s mission is
to expound opinion, not impose it.

The fourth Quranic verse that explicitly condemns the imposition of
Islamic doctrine is also addressed directly to the Prophet:

***‘You shall not use force on them; rather, use this Quran to warn
those who fear My threats.’ (50:45).***

These verses tell us that the Prophet of Islam was extremely sad when he
saw how his contemporaries were trapped by harmful and superstitious
beliefs. He wanted by whatever means, to free them from these chains, so
when he realizes that his constant efforts to free a considerable number
of them were of no avail the grief in his soul knew no bounds, and his
body could not cope with such distress, so that God was obliged to find
a way of reducing his grief, the cause of which was his compassion
towards the people.

The verses quoted are therefore a kind of consolation to the Prophet,
telling him that his duty is to pass on the divine message and to warn
the people and not to impose faith on them by force. He has done his
duty, God tells him, he has not failed, and if God wished people to
become true believers coercion. He would have acted in a different way.
What we infer from these verses is expounded more clearly in another
verse:

***‘You will perhaps kill yourself by worrying about their lack of
faith. If We wished, We could reveal to them a sign from heaven and they
would be forced into utter humility.’(26:3-4).***

And another verse tells us:

***‘You may destroy yourself on their account, worrying why they do not
believe this new revelation. We have beautified the earth so as to test
them and see who acquits himself best‘.***
***(18:6-7).***

These last two verses tell us clearly that the Prophet of Islam was so
distressed at the way in which people were enslaved by superstitious
beliefs, yet reluctant to accept correct ones, that sometimes there was
the very real danger of him dying of grief. It is worth nothing that to
comfort the Prophet the first of these quotations[^17] states that faith
cannot be subjected to force, and the second[^18] alludes to the
philosophy of freedom, namely the testing and perfection of man.

The Campaign Against Superstition In Islam
------------------------------------------

It may be that from what has been said about freedom of opinion and
freedom to express one’s opinion in Islam the conclusion is drawn that
Islam does not prescribe any measure to combat superstition or correct
wrong beliefs. Since if a person’s opinions are not his to control and
everyone is free to state his beliefs, and the imposition of faith even
on persons who have recognized its truth is not permissible, any such
measures would be pointless.

But a moment’s thought shows that such a conclusion is false, because
the fact the opinion is not discretionary is not incompatible with the
possibility of correcting wrong opinions, and freedom of expression does
not preclude a basic campaign against superstitious beliefs, and indeed
it is a prelude to such a campaign.

Although Islam confirms freedom of expression as part of the evolution
towards the perfection of man it also considers a campaign against
superstition so as free the mind from the bondage of incorrect beliefs,
to be obligatory, and presages ultimate victory in this campaign Islam,
is confident that the day will one day come when human society is freed
from such bondage that is the day when Islam rules the whole world.[^19]

The justification of the campaign against incorrect opinions, in the
Islamic view, is that reason considers it obligatory, just as the method
proposed by Islam for the correction of beliefs is precisely the same as
that which is proposed by reason. Islam cannot permit that because of
wrong and unrealistic opinions, a person’s real inner beliefs, which
form the basis of all his actions, should be unscientific and false, and
that if such is the case the situation should remain so.

Islam cannot permit that opinions which are contrary to reason, should
fatter a person’s mind, or grapple on to his a very soul or that if his
mind remain in the bondage of superstitious beliefs.

The Islamic Way of Dealing with Superstition
--------------------------------------------

As has already been mentioned, the method selected by Islam for dealing
with superstitious beliefs is the same as that which reason suggests. To
clarify things further, the Islamic approach to the correction of belief
may be divided into two parts. The first is the Islamic way of ridding
people’s minds of incorrect opinions, and the second is the Islamic way
of confronting obstacles to freedom of expression, and encouraging the
growth of correct beliefs in society.

With regard to the first part the Islamic, way is a publicity campaign
and with regard to the second part it is an armed campaign.

Publicity Campaign Against Superstition
---------------------------------------

The Islamic way of dealing with superstition eliminating incorrect
beliefs from people' s minds and encouraging them to adopt correct
opinions and beliefs that are in accord with reality consists in the
first instance of reliance on reason and proof, advice and exhortation,
debate and free discussion, in other words a publicity campaign.

***‘Call people to the path of your Lord with wisdom and kindly
exhortation. Dispute with them in the most courteous manner.’
(16:125).***

In this verse the Quran proposes logical methods of ridding people’s
minds of superstitious beliefs, and instructs the Prophet to use these
methods to invite them to adopt Islamic opinions.

These methods are the following:

### 1. Wisdom

The first practical method proposed by Islam in confronting incorrect
opinions is reliance on reason and proof, rational argument, or as the
Quran puts it ‘The wisdom’ *(al-hikma).*

The meaning of al-hikma, as defined by the *‘Mufradat of Raghib’* as the
acquisition of truth by means of science and intellect. In other words
the discovery of the truth through scientific and intellectual
reasoning. Islam in every case relies on proof to substantiate its
claims and demands its opponents to produce proofs for theirs.[^20]

### 2. Exhortation

The second practical Islamic method of dealing with superstitious
beliefs, besides reason and proof, is exhortation and counsel.
Exhortation consists of two words of warning and instruction which is to
be stimulate the emotionally to accept the truth. Thus wisdom, through
the intellect and exhortation through the emotions and inmost feelings
call upon a person to break the ties of incorrect belief.

A point worth nothing is that in the Quranic verse quoted above
‘exhortation’, is qualified by the epithet ‘kindly’. This is a reference
to the fact that exhortation and counsel are only effective in
motivating a person’s emotions and feelings to accept the truth if they
are free from all adverse qualities, such as harshness, superiority or
contempt, and instead are accompanied by various beauties, such as
eloquence, a sympathetic attitude, purity of motivation and even the
physical appearance of the person giving the exhortation or advice, all
of which help to reinforce his message. Most important of all is the
necessity for that person to set a good example himself, for the worst
kind of exhortation comes from someone who does not practice what he
preaches.

Finally, the more admirable and attractive the exhortation is presented
the greater will be the effect on the listener, for it frequently
happens that the effect of good advice in encouraging ordinary people to
adopt sound beliefs and courses of action is greater than the effect of
logical arguments and proofs.

Conversely, unattractive exhortation or ‘sermonizing’ is not only
ineffective, but can sometimes have a reverse effect and cause a person
to reject what he may have accepted through logic and proof, a Persian
poem says:

*The way in which you recite the Quran-*

*Being Muslim is not going to be popular around.*

### 3. Debate

The third practical Islamic way of dealing with unscientific opinions,
in addition to the methods already mentioned, is debate and free
discussion. The Quran makes mentioned of this method, using the terms
*jedal* and *mera* (dispute and controversy).

Debate in this sense consists of discussion in the form of a dispute or
competition, in other words kind of wrestling –match between ideas. The
Quran has two different approaches for the healthy confirmation of ideas
in debate that lead to the clarification of the truth and the
development of correct beliefs. The first one is the expression which is
translated above as ‘disputing in the most courteous manner’ and the
second is what is ‘controversy’.[^21]

Disputing with courtesy involves the use of the healthiest and kindest
forms of debating so as to clarify the truth, and obvious appearance
involves the use of proofs so decisive that they are obvious to
everyone, learning the other side without an adequate rejoinder.

Islam, which is the religion of all the divinely-inspired prophets, is
the founder of free discussion and the healthy confrontation of ideas.
The Prophet of Islam, as the bearer of the greatest divine message, in
an age when victory and defeat were matters of sheer power and wealth,
was the first to introduce such concepts into that society. Both he and
the learned members of his family were pioneers in this field and that
is why a considerable proportion of the collections of hadith are
devoted to debates conducted by the Prophet and the Imams of his
family.[^22]

It is worthy to note that the Islamic method of ridding people’s mind of
unscientific opinions is completely scientific and logical, and in this
regard Islam has entirely refrained from the use of military strength.
The method adopted by the Prophet of Islam in his mission, in conformity
with the commandments of the Quran, relied on reason proof, good advice
and the use of the best and ‘healthiest methods’ of debate and free
discussion. He specifically states that his method and that of anyone
claiming to follow him is to invite people to god on the basis of
insight, vision and, awareness.

***‘Say “This is my path, I call on the people to have faith in God, on
the basis of insight, and so do my “followers,” (12:108).***

It is therefore the height of injustice to say that Islam has ever
imposed itself by force, especially since such claims have been made by
people whose crimes in the Inquisition are a shameful chapter of in the
history of their times. Islam does indeed use military force, not to
impose its doctrines; but to remove obstacles that the development of
correct beliefs.

The Struggle For The Liberation Of Thought
------------------------------------------

If reasoning and proof debate and exhortation all fail to give
satisfactory results the Islamic way of confronting obstacles that are
blocking the road to freedom of thought is armed struggle and war.[^23]

Obstacles to freedom of thought consist if regimes and false traditions
that deprive the people of power, thought discernment and hence prevent
them from adopting correct opinions.

Corrupt, dictatorial and unjust regimes and powers that are nourished by
the ignorance of the masses, and that will collapse if the public
becomes known. Such regimes are therefore an obstacle to correct
beliefs, or as the Quran put it, an obstacle on the path of God.

After having made the conditions clear and the discussion completed
Islam confronts such regimes with force so as to remove the obstacles to
freedom or through and prepare the way for the growth of correct opinion
through enlightenment.

In the discussion entitled ‘The Prophethood’ on understanding the
Prophet of Islam and the way in which he dealt with his opponents we
shall see that in confronting hostile powers he first of all used
debating tactics and relied on reason and proof, and at the second stage
he resorted to *mobahilah* a traditions Arab practice of calling on the
creator to act as arbitrator in a dispute, and if neither of these
methods proved effective, he considered warfare and battle as ways of
breaking the obstacles to awareness and freedom of thought. Debate and
*mobahileh* were final words of the Prophet’s against the powers that
were opposed to him.

In addition to corrupt regimes, traditions affecting a society can be an
obstacle to freedom of thought. If a person is endowed with freedom of
thought a moment’s reflection will tell him without the slightest doubt
that idolatry, such as the worship of claves or fire, and dozens are
even hundreds of other irrational beliefs are pure superstition. But
false traditions and customs which have embedded themselves in the heart
and soul of those who believe in them are veritable chains fettering the
mind and preventing a person from thinking logically. In the words of
Shahid Ostad ‘Alameh Mottahari.

First there are greedy and exploitative people who want to establish a
regime for themselves. This regime needs an ideological base, for
without such a base nothing can be done. The person who established this
base is well aware of what he is doing. His treachery is deliberate. He
chooses an object, an idol, a bull, a dragon, and gives it extensive
publicity. The public are hood winked. Perhaps at first people don’t pay
a great deal of attention to it, but then after a few years their
example. Generation follows generation and the cult becomes established,
as a historical event, and becomes part of the national heritage, one of
their national traditions and a matter of great pride, which cannot be
abolished. It’s just like plaster. When plaster is first mixed with
water it’s a gooly substance and you can mould it into any shape you
like. But when it has been moulded into its final shape and begins to
dry, the more it dries the larger it becomes hard, until in the end it
becomes too hard that you cannot even break it with a pickaxe.

‘Ought we to fight against such cults? In other words, this freedom of
through that we say should have should it include opinions like this?
The world today is in the grip of a fallacy here.

They say people’s minds should be free, and they say opinions should be
free; idolatry in their opinion should also be free. People should be
free to worship a cult or a dragon; everyone should be free to worship
what they want, and to choose anything they want for their beliefs,
whereas in fact these beliefs run counter to freedom of thought. Its
opinions like these that tie a person’s mind up in knots.’[^24]

Islam says that the chain of superstitious beliefs which fetters the
mind and which cannot be unlocked by reason and proof, and exhortation
and counsel, must be opened by military force, and that the obstacle
consisting of false traditions, which over the years and over the
centuries have sedated up society’s mind with the sediment of erroneous
culture until it has become so hard that it cannot be removed with
ordinary implements, must be destroyed in a mighty explosion so as
liberate men’s minds.

Since direct military action against opinion is as we have seen,
impossible, Islam begins its battle against false traditions by
campaigning against their social manifestations. For example, in the
campaign against idolatry the idol-temples must be destroyed, as Abraham
did, and in the campaign against calf-worship the golden calf must be
melted down by fire, as Moses did.

Abraham was the only person in his society to discover the secret of
existence through independent thought and thus reach a correct
philosophy of life.[^25] Faced with a people who were bogged \`down in
superstition and false beliefs, and who lacked the basic ability to
think for themselves. Abraham tried as hard as he could, using reason
and proof and advice, to make them see the error of their ways and to
free their minds from the bonds of false beliefs, but without success.
The more he admonished them the less effect it had. Finally, he came to
the conclusion that he should prove to them in a practical way that
these idols, which they had fashioned themselves, could not be true
gods.

On day when the people were celebrating festival by going out into the
country, Abraham decided to carry out his plan. He went to the main
idol, then hung his axe round the idol’s neck and left. Abraham’s plan
was to stage a scene in which he would accuse the chief idol of
massacring the other idols so as to eliminate false beliefs from
people’s thoughts and set their minds at liberty. When the people came
back to the town from their festival they discovered that the idols had
quarreled and killed each other. All the idols were broken except the
chief idol, which had an axe round its neck.

It looked as if the chief idol was responsible for the carnage but their
native wit told them it was impossible for a collection of inanimate
objects to quarrel among themselves. So they immediately set about
looking for the person who was really responsible. Since Abraham had
always been complaining about their idolatry and had also threatened to
destroy the idols they their idolatry and had also threatened to destroy
the idols they summoned him on charges of having killed their Gods and
began to interrogate him in public.

The first question was: ‘Did you do this to our gods?’ In order to stir
their consciences Abraham replied by saying that the seen indicated that
the chief idol had done the killing and if idols could talk why didn’t
they asked the idols themselves what had happened?

The way was gradually being prepared for them to free their minds and
think independently, Abraham’s answer made the idolaters stop and think,
and to realize how wrong they were in their beliefs. In their hearts
they blamed themselves for this ideological tyranny and finally they had
to confess that their gods could not talk. With their superstitious
beliefs thus weakened and the obstacle of false traditions broken,
Abraham saw his way clear to begin an appropriate publicity campaign.

***He said: ‘Would you worship, rather than God that which can neither
help you nor harm you? Shame on you and your false gods! Have you no
minds to think with?’ (21:66-67)***

It is worth nothing that when Islam has broken the obstacle and freed
the mind from the captivity of false beliefs it says ‘Now think! See
.what your reason tells you. If it tells you that Islam is right, then
accepts Islam, and if it tells you some other religion or ideology is
right, then accept that. In other words Islam does not break open one
chain with military force in order to fetter the mind with another
chain, or even to impose another belief founded on reason and thought.
On the contrary, when Islam has freed a person from erroneous beliefs it
says, ‘Think, and choose a belief on the basis of thought and research.
Even if you choose Islam without thinking, this is not acceptable.

After the conquest of Mecca when the worship of old traditions was
broken and amnesty had been declared, the people of the Hejaz flocked to
Islam. But the leaders of the idolaters, who had created innumerable
difficulties for the Muslim, felt themselves in a dangerous position,
and a number of them therefore fled Mecca. One of those who because of
his evil past decided to flee was Safwan bin Ummaya.

‘Safwan bin Ummaya, apart from other serious crimes, had publicly hanged
some Muslims in Mecca in broad daylight, in revenge for the death of his
father, Ummaya, who had been killed at the battle of Badr. Fearing
punishment, he decided to leave the hijaz by ship. ‘Omair ibn Wahab, one
of the Prophet’s attendants, requested that his faults be pardoned. The
Prophet accepted his intercession and gave him the turban he was wearing
when he entered Mecca as a sign of safe conduct. ‘Amir went to Jiddah
with the turban and personally accompanied Safwan back to Mecca.

When the prophet saw this arch-criminal of the age he told him with
great magnanimity that his life and possessions were safe, but it was
advisable for him to accept Islam. Safwan requested two months grace to
study and think about Islam. The Prophet said. “I’ll give you not two,
but four months, so that you can choose this religion with complete
knowledge and understanding.” Before four months had passed Safwan
embraced Islam.[^26]

Even more interesting than this is the story of how Suheil bin ‘Umar
become a Muslim. To use his own words, 'After the conquest of Mecca,
when the Prophet of God entered the city, I went to my house and shut
myself up and sent my son “Abdullah to the Prophet to request an
assurance of safety, for I was not prepared to become a Muslim just to
save my own life.”

Abdullah came into the presence of the Prophet and said. “My father
requests a promise of safety. Will you give it to him?” “The Prophet
said, “Yes, he is in God’s care. He can come out of his house.| then he
turned to those around him and said, ‘if any of you see Suheil you must
not show any hostility to him. He must be allowed to come out of his
house. Upon my soul, Suheil is an intelligent and honorable man, and a
person like him cannot fail to understand Islam and become a Muslim.”

‘Once he had received the assurance and heard the Prophet’s words
‘Abdullah left the assembly and returned to his father and told him what
had happened. Suheil, perhaps not expecting that the prophet would treat
him like this, said in voluntarily, “By God, as a child and a grown man
he has always been a good and worthy person.”

After he received this assurance of safety, Suheil, although he remained
a non-believer, mixed freely with the Muslims and even accompanied the
Prophet’s at the battle of Hunein, without accepting Islam. Until
finally at place called Ja ‘rana’. He did so.[^27]

These two tales are clear example of practical biography of the Prophet
of Islam in encountering those who theoretically opposed him. These
tales prove that despite what a group of orientalists claim, the goals
of battles of Islam commanded by Quran decrees were removing the
barriers of freedom of opinion and ploughing the ground for the growth
of correct beliefs.

Freedom To Propagate Opinion In Islam
-------------------------------------

So far we have seen that Islam not only confirms freedom of expression
but defends it. Now we must see whether Islam permits anyone to
propagate any opinion he may have and to communicate it to another
person.

On the basis of what was said about the rational attitude towards this
question Islam most decidedly cannot permit the absolute right to
propagate opinion. To explain the matter further, the following brief
summary is necessary: Propagation of opinion sometimes takes the form of
reasoning and submission of proof, with the propagandist genuinely
basing his arguments on reason and logic, and sometimes it takes the
form of demagogy and the transmission of false beliefs by means of
trickery and guile.

In the case of opinions which have their origins in thought and logic,
to the extent that they rely on reason and logic and argument and proof,
their propagation and dissemination, and hence the freedom to propagate
them, are included in the category of freedom of expression, and here
the Islamic attitude has been fully explained.

But demagoguery for the purpose of communicating opinions which lack a
logical base and are harmful to society is something that reason cannot
justify-as has already been explained-nor can Islam confirm it against
the dictates of reason.

To sum up briefly, we may say that in Islam the expression of opinion is
free, but demagogy for the transmission of false opinions to the people
is forbidden[^28].

Freedom Of Opinion In The World Today
-------------------------------------

The final question that must be discussed in this chapter is the
question of freedom of opinion in the world today, what are the motives
for promoting this freedom in international circles, particularly in
Europe, and what objectives the world of imperialism is pursuing in its
support for this freedom?

We can say that the promotion of the idea of freedom of opinion in the
world today is a social reaction to the inquisition that the fathers of
the Church carried out in the Middle Ages. They did not allow anyone to
express an opinion, even an opinion unconnected with religious matters
that was contrary to what the Church taught. For example, because the
Church taught that the sun revolved around the earth no one was entitled
even if he submitted logical arguments and proofs to show that the
sentenced thousands of scholars to be burned alive.

Giordano Bruno, an Italian priest and one such scholar, was sentenced to
be burned at the stake in the year 1600, on charges that he had
expressed the belief that ‘Anyone who has reached the age of reason can
reach an opinion about the world and life in conformity with his
rational and deductive faculties.’ The court considered this opinion to
be a proof of his opposition to Christianity, since in the Court’s view
every Christian who reaches the age of reason must adopt belief’s about
the world in accordance with the Holy bible, and not in accordance with
his rational and deductive faculties. By expressing his views Bruno
proved himself to be an apostate. His apostasy was due to the Devil
entering his body and therefore he must be burned so as the exercise the
Devil!

In addition, religion, in the view of those who control international
politics and the philosophers inspired by these polices, is no more than
a pastime and pastimes are not concerned with matters such as right or
wrong. Religion, in their view, is like a piece of poetry or a film. As
Shahid Ostad ‘Alameh Mottahari says: ‘In the view that concerns only the
personal conscience of the individual, regardless of what that religion
is, whether, for example, it’s idolatry, such as calf-worship, or
worship of God…

‘Regarding the question of religion, since they do not want to admit to
the reality of religion and prophethood or accept that prophets really
came from God to reveal the true path to man, and that man’s happiness
lies in following this true path, they say instead, “we don’t know what
they reality and origin of religions are, but we do realize that man
cannot live without religion.

One of the essential conditions of human life, one of the pastimes and
distractions in man’s life, is that he occupies himself with this thing
known as religion. It does not make any difference whether the object he
decides to worship is a monotheistic God a man called Jesus Christ, or a
calf or an object made of metal or wood. So nobody ought to be
persecuted for their beliefs, and whatever a person’s individual
preference is, it’s quite all right.[^29]

As has been pointed out, such attitudes towards religion are not
inspired by ideas that are based on philosophy, but by ideas that use
science and philosophy for political ends.

If those in charge of imperialist policies pretend to be in favor of
freedom of opinion it’s not because they really want everyone to be free
to express his opinion so that correct beliefs might develop, and people
be liberated from superstition, since such freedom would be against the
interests for their political power. Instead, they want to distract
people’s minds so that they can more easily achieve their anti-popular
political object.

And since the best narcotic pastime is religion without politics, and
superstitious religious beliefs, there is no difference between the
various false religious, so they judge it to be in their political
interests to declare religious opinions to be free, so long as these do
not conflict with their interests.

But if a religion tries to gain to the world of politics, and became
instrumental to the development of correct beliefs and the liberation of
the masses from the bondage of incorrect belief, and hence from the
domination of imperialism, this religion is not only deemed illicit by
the very champions of freedom of opinion, but it’s followers are
destroyed by these same exponents of freedom of thought, on the pretend
of the defense of freedom.

[^1]: It is discussed in a later chapter entitled “Understanding with
the Heart”.

[^2]: Mohammad Mo’in. Farhange Mo’in (Mo’in’s Dictionary) Vol 6. under
‘Galileo’.

[^3]: Freedom to choose the source of opinion will be discussed in the
next sense of the expression ‘Freedom of opinion.’

[^4]: Quted in History of slavery. p.35.

[^5]: Durant, Will. History of civilization. Vol.1.p.33.

[^6]: Durant, Will, History of civilization. Vol.1.p.33.

[^7]: Ibid.p.53

[^8]: Others eat the lice in each other’s hair and when these numerous
they cook them in stew, and if they have caught an enemy they eat him
with shouts of joy. Ibid.p.17

[^9]: ‘To all of these kinds of foods man added a very tasty dish, the
flesh of his fellow, man. It can be shown that cannibalism was once
almost universal among primitive tribes. This custom was practiced by
people until quite modern times, such as the Irish, Iberians Picts and
even the Dares of the eleventh century. In New Britain, human flesh was
hung up & sold in butcher’s shops, just like the flesh of other
animals’Ibid.p.18

[^10]: Ibid.p.18-19.

[^11]: Commentary by Abu ‘Ali’ Ibn-al- Tabresi, Majm’a-ol-Bayan.Vol. 9.
138.

[^12]: See Mizan, Chapter 255 (Al-Imam…)

[^13]: Ibid, Chapter 255.

[^14]: Holy Quran:49/14,

[^15]: Holy Quran:27/14,

[^16]: Sheikh Sadug. Tawhid. PP. 341-2. Mizan hadith No. 17496

[^17]: Quran, 26:3-4.

[^18]: Quran, 18:6-7.

[^19]: Quran, 48:28.

[^20]: Show us your proof(2:112:27:64;28:75) A famous dictionary of
Quranic words.

[^21]: Quran:Kahf,22

[^22]: This subject will be covered more fully in a later Chapter” The
scientific understanding of the Prophet.”

[^23]: See-Darsi bozorg va arzandeh (An Important and instructive
lesson.) p. 22.

[^24]: Text of lecture given by the martyred Ostad at the Hoseiniyeh
Ershad, in Tehran in the autumn of 1969 entitled-freedom of opinion”,
Published in collection of essays entitled “About the Islamic
Republic…………..

[^25]: This was showed Abraham the kingdom of heavens of the earth, so
that they might have certain faith. (6:75).

[^26]: Jafar Subhani, Forough al-Abadiyat (‘The splendor of eternity’)
Vol,II, PP, 736-7. Full detail of Safwan’s Convention to Islam can be
found in Kanzol-Ammal, Vol,X-PP.503-6

[^27]: Further details are given in the article “Kurnameh Islam” (“The
Islamic record”).

[^28]: “Mohammad Khatim Peyambaran,” “Mohammad the seal of the Prophets”
vol.II.PP. 59-71

[^29]: About the Islamic Revolution.


