Chapter 7: The Teaching Ideology
================================

By the virtue of the fact that the purpose of a course of instruction in
ideological principles is to teach ideology before embarking on such a
course we should address a number of questions. These are as following:

1. If we bear in mind the fact that a person’s opinions and beliefs are
not within his power to control; but like love are involuntary
phenomena[^1] is the teaching of opinion fundamentally possible? Can one
teach love?

2. If research is necessary in ideology[^2], and everyone has a duty
both from the rational and religious point of view to seek out correct
opinions. Is it net better to encourage people to investigate and
research their opinions instead of being taught them? And is it not the
teaching of ideology, in the scene of transferring an opinion from
teacher to pupil, a form of *Taqlid*? And finally, why is the teaching
necessary?

3. How many methods are there for the teaching of ideology? And in the
lessons that follow which of these methods will be used to teach the
principles if Islamic ideology?

These question will be answer under the following headings:

Can Ideology Be Taught?
-----------------------

It has already been explained that although ideology is neither within a
person’s power to adopt as he wishes, nor within another’s power to
impose forcibly on him,[^3] by changing the source of beliefs it is
possible to change incorrect and unscientific opinions. In other words,
if the ideological basis is *Taqlid*, by breaking the chain of *Taqlid*,
opinions can be changed, and if the basis is inadequate research then by
means of more an adequate research scientific opinions can be
substituted for follower ones.

It is the same with love. Although love is not within a person’s
control, and cannot be imposed on him, by changing the object of love it
is possible to destroy it and even to transform it into hatred and it is
also possible to transform an absence of love or even hatred into love
and interest. As the mystic poet says:

*‘When I was bound apprentice*

*My father bless his soul.*

*Spoke these words to my master,*

*“Let love be his one goal”.*

The teaching of love consists of the provision of instruction which
caution the pupil against becoming attached to being the love of which
is harmful and stress him towards things the love of which is
beneficial. In other words, the teaching of love is training a person to
avoid worthless loves and instead to nature love which are innate and
real.

The teaching of ideology is just the same. In other words, it consists
of the provision of instruction which alienates a person from false and
unscientific beliefs, and inculcates in him correct and scientific
beliefs. And clearly this is a feasible goal.

The Need To Teach Ideology
--------------------------

No knowledge, to be is so essential for a person to acquire as ideology,
or the science of opinion. In this connection, there is a valuable
hadith of Imam Baqer, an address to Jaber bin Yazid Ja ‘fi, who had
sought his advice: ‘Know that there is no science to equal that which
safeguards one’s health, and there is no health so important as the
health of one’s soul’.[^4]

Indeed, no science is so valuable as that which ensures the health of a
person’s heart and soul, since the standard of judgment of any science
is the service it provided man, and man can only put science to work and
benefit from knowledge if he is healthy. A person’s health, in turn, has
two dimensions. The first is his physical health, and the second is his
psychological health. Now since psychological health is the more
essential form of these dimensions it follows that a science which
safeguards a person’s psyche is the most of all sciences, and it’s study
has a higher than does any other science in terms of improving a
person’s life and curing the ills of human society.

Proof that the science of ideology safeguards a person’s psychological
health is provided by the fact that opinion is grafted on the his mind
and soul, and as was explained in Chapter I of this introduction,
unscientific grafts and incorrect beliefs cause a person’s inner and
real form and structure to deviate from their natural state, and this
unnatural condition makes him morally sick.

The subsequent tendency towards wrong attitudes causes his individual
and social life to be diverted from its natural course. Since the
science of ideology prevents unscientific and fallacious beliefs from
being grafted on to a person’s psyche, it is a safeguard of his
psychological well-being, and therefore must be considered the most
valuable of all sciences and the study of which has a greater priority
than any other form knowledge.

Compulsory Education
--------------------

Article 13 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that
primary education should be compulsory and free for all.

If you were to have asked the signatories of this declaration why they
had thus deprived illiterates of their liberty, why they did not wish to
allow them to exercise the option of remaining illiterate, and what
their reason was for insisting on compulsory education, their reply
would undoubtedly have been that a minimum start of literacy is
essential for everyone.

We accept this view and the Prophet of Islam some thirteen centuries ago
ordinary the acquisition of knowledge to be a religious duty incumbent
on every male and female Muslim.[^5]

Our disagreement with these gentlemen is over the question of why they
made literacy compulsory on the grounds that it is essential in life,
but made no mention of the teaching of correct opinions.

Is minimum standard of literacy a necessity, but correct opinions which
guide life in a proper direction not such a necessity? Which is more
harmful for a person, wrong opinions or illiteracy? Do illiterates
create more trouble for themselves and others, or literate people with
false opinions, wrong ideas and psychological deviations?

The truth of the matter is that if we judge man’s essential requirements
for life equitably and without considering political interests we see
that nothing is more essential than psychological health, because if a
person does not possess this he cannot benefit from a healthy body, or
from knowledge and science, or indeed from anything else. As was stated
in the words of Imam Baqer, the science which ensures a person’s health
in this field is the most essential thing a person should know. This
makes it necessary for the way to be prepared for everybody to be taught
ideology, and such instruction, like literacy, should be universal and
obligatory.

As for the objection that the teaching of ideology amounts to the
conveying the opinions of the teacher to the pupil by means of blind
obedience and *Taqlid*, the answer is quite clear, since *Taqlid*
consists of accepting the views of others without reason or proof, and
ideological instruction that is based on reason and proof cannot be
considered *Taqlid*. Moreover, if instruction in ideological studies is
considered to be *Taqlid* then all classes in which the various sciences
are taught must be so considered.

Finally, the proposal that instead of ideological instruction people
should be encouraged to study and research opinions for themselves
cannot be carried put without formal instruction. Because a study of
ideological problems, although it may require no more instruction than
the other sciences, certainly does not requires less than they do, and
if literacy classes need a classroom and a teacher how can it to be said
ideological instruction does not need a teacher?!

Methods Of Teaching Ideology
----------------------------

It can be said that there are all three methods of teaching ideological
principles:

1) The method of the philosophers.

2) The method of the scholars.[^6]

3) The method of the divinely-inspired prophets.

Each of these three groups-philosophers, scholars divinely-inspired
prophets-have discussed the question of ideological principles, but each
has its own particular method of explaining them.

The method used by the prophets to teach the principles of ideology has
two important and fundamental characteristics which the method of the
philosophers and scholastics does not have. These are: universality and
comprehensiveness.

The first characteristic of the method adopted by the prophets in
teaching ideological principles is that it is universal, and addresses
all classes of society, unlike the method of the philosophers and
scholastics, which is directed at specific audiences.[^7]

The audience of the philosophers and scholastics are special individual
who understand their particular language and style, and not the people
as a whole. In other words when philosophers and scholastics discuss
ideological questions or write books they are not talking to the general
public. Their audience is solely people with an interest in and
specialized knowledge of philosophy or scholasticism, and have studied
these subjects is intend to do so; hence their words and writings cannot
be appreciated by the general public.

But the audience of the prophets is everybody. They are the teachers and
mentors of all mankind. In matters of ideology they refer everybody to
reason, argument and proof. Their audience is not only people who have
studied or intend to study philosophy, or whose inclinations and talents
are towards scholasticism. Their message is not addressed solely to
scholars and students, or to any other specific social group.

Every social group or class is addressed by the prophet of God, so they
must talk in a manner that everybody can benefit from, and in
ideological fields they must reason in such a way that is universally
comprehensible as well as being useful and convincing to all classes of
society, from the most learned to the most illiterate.

The second characteristic of the method used by the prophets of God in
teaching ideology is its comprehensiveness. In the method used by the
philosophers and scholastics beliefs are discussed without reference to
action, and the ideological argument consists of a series of dry
scholarly discussions divorced from social, political and moral
activity. But in the prophets, method ideological discussion is
particularly comprehensive, and belief and action are examined in
relation to each other.

Instruction in the principles of ideology that utilizes this method,
while introducing a person to deep scientific and philosophic arguments
in matter relating to the origins of life and the resurrection of the
dead can also reach him the most delicate question of mysticism, and
explained the most precise questions of economics, politics and
sociology to him.

In other words, the principles of ideology, when taught according to the
prophet method, are a mixture philosophy, mysticism, sociology,
economics and ethics. The nature of this comprehensiveness to the extent
that the writer’s scientific ability permits-will be illustrated in the
course of the lectures that follow.

Our Method of Teaching Ideological Principles
---------------------------------------------

In view of the universality and comprehensiveness of the method used by
the prophets in teaching ideological principles, as explained above the
writer has chosen this method. Rather than the method of the
philosophers or scholars, that is, he will try as far as possible to
make the discussion universal, understandable to all, and at the same
time comprehensive. To this end, the overall plan of the discussions and
the structure of the lectures will be taken from the words of the
divinely-inspired prophets.

In other words, the reason found in the Quran or the words of the
prophets and Imams regarding ideological matters will be gathered
analyzed and commented on. This does not mean to say that in ideological
discussions that require pure rational interpretation we will rely on
the Quran and Hadith, but rather that the purely intellectual reasoning
are taken from the Quran and hadith and subjected to explanation and
study. We will also show how the divinely-inspired prophets, who always
referred people to their reason in matters of ideological principles,
themselves use to prove the opinions they invited the people to adopt.
We will also show whether or not these arguments are convincing from the
rational point of view.

The selection of this method, furthermore, may achieve two other
results: it may prove the scientific miracles of the prophets, and it
may show their immunity from ideological error.

In a hadith already quoted in our discussion of *Taqlid* Imam Sadeq
says: ‘When a person knows his religion from the book of God, mountains
will be moved before he abandons his beliefs, whereas a person who
becomes involved in a business through ignorance may also leave it
through ignorance.[^8]

The teaching of ideological principles according to the method of
prophets establishes belief in the origins of life and the resurrection
of the dead in a person’s heart with a firmness that the very mountains
of the earth cannot mated. See how firmly and peacefully the mountains
are set in the around the plains. A person’s religious beliefs which
have been implanted in his heart by the instruction of the prophets are
even firmer than this, for as the Imam says mountains may move before
such beliefs will change.

A Suggestion To Committed Artists
---------------------------------

One of the characteristics of the method which we have chosen, inspired
by the method used by the prophets, to teach ideological principles is
that it enables committed artist to convert ideological questions and
discussions into image-form for presentation on stage.

To take an example some of the questions discussed in this Introduction
could be very interestingly acted on stage: the Battle of the Camel and
the question which Imam ‘Ali was asked by the Bedouin Arab in the midst
of the battle and the Imam’s reply explaining the importance of
ideological debate: the question of *Taqlid* could be shown by the way
supporters of political organizations and groups copy their leaders in
ideological matters and blindly follow the party-line; people suffering
from self-delusion and pseudo-knowledge could be portrayed as could
really wise people, who refer to the authority of their reason in
matters of belief.

All of these could be most effective in publicizing ideological
discussion and even in exporting the culture of the Revolution and
creating cultural revolutions in Islamic and non-Islamic countries. In
other words, putting ideological questions and discussions into
theatrical form is a way of adopting the allegorical method which the
prophets used to explain intellectual problems to the masses.

If we study the Quran and the words of the prophets and Imams we see
that they often used parables to explain an intellectual question. A
parable can turn a rational idea into a mental picture, and give it
cinema or television screen, and this is much more effective than a
parable in illustrating reality.

In other words, we can explain ideological and intellectual questions by
means of television or film images so as to complement the use move by
the prophets of parables. Committed artist, inspired by the prophets’
method, can play a useful, effective and delusive role in enhancing
society’s awareness and intellectual maturity and mobilizing the people
of the world towards authentic Islamic beliefs.

The writer would therefore like to propose to committed artists that
they should try to bring ideological questions and principles of Islamic
belief to theatrical form in a respectable and appropriate way. It is of
course realized that this is no easy task, yet it should not be
impossible.

[^1]: See previous chapter under ‘Freedom to choose one’s opinions P.
108.

[^2]: See Chapter III of this Introduction.

[^3]: See previous Chapter under ‘Freedom to choose one’s opinions’
p.\*\*\*

[^4]: Mizan Hadith No. 13838.

[^5]: Mizan hadith No.13445.

[^6]: The scholastics (motekallemin).

[^7]: For an understanding of the method used by the philosophers and
scholastics see Mortahari’s Ravesh-haye Fikr Eslami (Islamic
Intellectual processes).

[^8]: See P. ---(P.4l of Persian)


