Jerusalem and Three Main Religion
=================================

**Islam, Christianity, and Judaism**

jerusalem is considered one of the sacred holy land in the history of
the mankind and respected by the three main religions.

**judaism**

the jewish consider jerusalem an old historical city. since babylonian
captivity upto the destruction of the temple, the events of the sinai,
spending forty years after their deliberation from the pharaoh are
examples of jewish history.

**christianity**

jesus was and is the focal point of the christians nation because jesus
and his disciples brought the message of god to that part of the world
from ramallah, town of khalil, and bethlehem. jesus and his followers
lived up to their principles in jerusalem. christianity regards
jerusalem as the center of their faith.

**Islam**

islamic faith and history have strong ties to jerusalem. first, it was
the direction of prayers of muslims for a period of time as commonly
believed and it was the ascension point when prophet muhammad (p. )
ascended to heaven. this event is known as mi'raj.

god says," glory to god who did took his servant muhammad for a journey
during night from sacred house mecca to the farthest mosque (jerusalem)
whose precincts we did bless, in order that we might show him (muhammad)
some of ours signs for he is the one who hears and sees. " the qur'an
17:1.

also, the prophet (p.) said, " pilgrimage should not be made except to
three mosques : mecca, mesjid of aksa, (jerusalem), and mosque of
(madina)."

**History of Government**

most of the government that ruled jerusalem, build their rules on the
distraction of previous cultures without any respect for the other
religions. during the islamic rule in jerusalem, however, all three
religions in jerusalem were respected. throughout the islamic period,
philosophers, doctors of medicine, and poets (non arabs) enjoyed the
protection provided for them by islamic rulers. in short, islam
considers jerusalem as the cradle of all prophets.


**muharram.... what is it?**

"do you not see that righteousness has been abandoned and evil goes
unforbidden. in such condition, the true believeraspires to hasten into
the presence of god.

" indeed i do not see death in such a condition but happiness, and life
under shadow of tyrants but grief "

imam husayn (a.) (625-680 c.e.)

the memory of muharram is alive in the hearts of every muslim. it is a
source of inspiration, and courage to stand against evil. muharram is
the first month of the islamic calendar during which shi'ite muslims
commemorate the martyrdom of imam husayn (a.), the grandson of prophet
muhammad(p.) from his daughter fatima al zahra (a.)

imam husayn (a.)

imam husayn (a.) was born on 3rd of sha'ban in the 4th year of the
islamic calendar, 625 c.e. in the holy city of madina, arabia. his
grandfather named him husayn, a diminutive word indicating his physical
attraction and suggesting his beautiful character. the holy qur'an
refers to him and some other members of prophet's family, saying:

" indeed god desires to purify you; oh! the people of the house" the
qur'an 33:33 thus, on many occasions, the prophet (p.) indicated that
his grandson al husayn is the most qualified imam. once he said of him
and his brother al hasan " these two are my sons; they are two imams".

**Imam and Caliphate**

on the other hand, contrary to the teachings of the prophet (p.), for
the first time in the islamic history, mu'awiyah, the governor of
damascus claimed the caliphate and changed it to a monarchy and
hereditary kingship, opposing the previous system of ruling which was in
practice. he thereby appointed his son yazid as his successor, who was
not fit for this position according to principle of shura.

at this point, most muslims scholars of the time refused to accept the
legitimacy of the shift to monarchy. among them were abdul rahman, son
of the first caliph, and abdullah, son of zubayr, but no one stood
against yazid as imam husayn (a.) did.

imam husayn(a.) declared the false foundation of such a change.
consequently, after the death of mu'awiyah in 60/679 c.e., most of the
muslims looked toward imam husayn (a.) as their true religious leader.
thus, creating resentment on the part of yazid, who demanded
relinquishment of imam husayn's (a.) leadership.


**Imam Husayn's mission**

further, imam husayn (a.) declared that, " we are family of the prophet
(p.), and have the true message of god. yazid is a corrupt person, and i
cannot support him ".

meanwhile, most of residents of the city of kufa, iraq, sent over
10,000 letters of support to imam inviting him to their city which was
one of the largest city of that time. therefore, imam sent hid cousin
muslim, son of aqeel to review the circumstances concerning the
invitation. at first, the people overwhelmingly welcomed him, but the
propaganda of omayyads was able to crush the mission.

furthermore, imam husayn (a.) said, " i was not born an evil nor a
cruel man. i am not a corrupt person. my mission is to lead the muslims
nation to the right path and to correct that which is wrong. i must
follow god's order to commend kindness and stop evil"

**The just cause**

however, imam was fully aware that yazid would never allow him to live
because the life of imam husayn (a.) was a threat to yazid's throne,
which had foundation of cruelty, injustice and hypocrisy. in contrast to
the true muslim leadership which was establish to protect muslim nation.
imam carried his mission as the holy qur'an says, " fight for the cause
of god, those who fight against you, but do not exceed the limit. " the
qur'an 2:190.

accordingly, as imam had predicted, the army of yazid attacked imam
husayn's (a.) small party totaled 72 persons, fighting against the
yazid's army of 10,000 men as it is documented. finally, imam and his
companions courageously gave their lives to very just cause and his
martyrdom became the symbol of courage and bravery in the islamic
history.

**The catastrophe**

the martyrdom of imam unveiled the true picture of yazid and awakened
the muslim nation. most muslim historians consider it a catastrophe in
islamic history. after the martyrdom, there were 33 strokes of lance and
34 blows of swords on the body of imam husayn (a.) moreover, the head of
yazid's army, 'umar son of sa'd ordered his horsemen to run over the
bodies, and trample them underneath the horses hoofs. afterwards, imam's
head and others martyr's heads were carried to yazid to damascus, syria.
however, later the places where the head was temporarily placed, became
the holy shrine. they are honored by all muslims in order to honor the
mission of imam husayn (a.).

**The holy shrine**

after three days, the bodies of imam husayn (a.) and his companions
were buried by the loyal followers. today, it stands in the center of
the holy city of karbala, iraq.

the 27 meter high golden dome is centered on the actual grave of imam
husayn (a.). in the interior part, one can view the precious box placed
on the actual grave and covered by gold and precious stones. this box is
with six angels to signify the grave of imam and his son ali al akbar.
other places of inside the tomb are covered by thousands of small
mirrors, mosaic, precious stones, silver and gold.


