The Spirit of Karbala
=====================

annually, on ashura, the tenth of muharram, the first month of islamic
calendar, shi'ite muslims commemorate this martyrdom. beginning with the
first until the tenth of muharram, majlis, memorial gatherings are held
in almost every residence to recite the events which had taken place
during these ten days in the desert of karbala, iraq. furthermore, on
this anniversary, shi'ites from all over the world go to karbala to hold
or attend these gatherings in the holy city of karbala where the actual
events had happened.

in short, the catastrophe of karbala cannot be described adequately
with words. it changed the islamic history, and whatever course history
may take, the spirit of karbala remains as a symbol of absolute loyalty
to truth. wa assalam alaykum.

**The islamic will**

in the name of god, the compassionate, the merciful

" will is prescribed for you when death approaches one of you. . . "
the qur'an, 2:180 every soul shall taste death. the qur'an, 3:184

whoever dies without will, he would die as non muslim. the prophet (p.
) declaration of faith:

it is recommended to recite the following invocation before any will:

o, lord! the creator of heaven and earth, who knows the invisible and
the visible, the compassionate, the merciful.

o, lord! i declare my faith in this world and bear witness that there
is no god but you alone, without any associate.

that muhammad ( peace be upon him and his house ) is your servant and
your messenger.

that the paradise is a verity, the hell is a verity, the resurrection
is a verity, the questioning is a verity, the divine decree is a verity,
the justice is a verity, the qur'an is the same as you have revealed,
and that indeed you are the self evident truth.

may almighty reward muhammad ( peace be upon him and his house ) the
best reward, and may he keep in peace muhammad and his house.

o, lord! the helper at the time of trouble, the sympathizer at the time
of difficulty, the supporter at the time of comfort, my lord and the
lord of my ancestors, do not leave me to my self, even for a moment.

indeed, if you leave me to myself, i will be near to evil and far from
virtue. put at ease my loneliness in grave, keep for me a promise when i
meet you when i am resurrected at the day of judgment.

**The first muslim refugees**

one of the important problems that prophet muhammad (p.) and the first
muslim community had faced was opposition of powerful people in mecca.
the opposition produced many difficulties. one of which was the
persecution of the early muslims. this persecution led muslims to choose
a new life as refugees.

in the fifth year of the prophet's call ( 615 c.e.), when his followers
were persecuted by the quraish, the prophet (p.) suggested to them to go
abyssinia, ethiopia, in order to protect themselves. according to ibn
hisham, who mentions them all by names, 83 men took up the prophet's(p.)
suggestion and left for abyssina. a number of them accompanied by their
wives and children. this event is known in the islamic history as the
first hijrah. the first muslim group which reached abyssinia was led by
jaffer ibn abi talib (the prophet's(p.) cousin).

after they had reached abyssinia, the leaders of quraish realized that
the large proportion of prophet muhammad's (p.) followers have their
freedom in abyssinia, they sent some deputies to the negus, the king of
abyssina, to ask for their extradition. the two delegates sent were men
of outstanding capability and intelligence,

they were abdullah ibn rabia and amr ibn al 'aasi, who later became one
of the most famous muslim conquerors. they were instructed on their
arrival in the court to bribe the abyssinian leaders in order to
persuade them to use their influence with the negus on their behalf. the
delegation met with the king and accused the muslims saying, " they have
forsaken our religion and not accepted yours but have introduced a new
religion which they have invented. they begged negus to send them back
to mecca.

the negus, however, refused to expel them until they would have an
opportunity to state their case. the king summoned the muslims to the
royal presence, the refugees chose jaffar ibn abi talib as their
spokesman.

he commenced the difference by saying, " o king! we were a barbarous
nation, worshipping idols, eating carrion, commshameful acts, killing
our blood related kins, forgetting our duty towards our neighbors, the
strong amongst us devouring the weak.

such was our state until god sent to us an apostle from ourselves, with
lineage, integrity, trustworthiness and purity of life we were
acquainted. he called us to god, to believe in his unity, to worship him
and abandon the stones and idols which we and our fathers used to
worship instead. he commanded us to speak the truth, to be faithful in
our trusts, to observe our duties to our kinsfolk and neighbors, to
refrain from forbidden things and bloodshed,

from committing immoralities and deceits, from consuming the property
of orphans and from slandering virtuous women. he ordered prayers, give
alms and fast. so we trusted in his word and followed the teachings he
brought us from god. wherefore our countrymen turned against us and
persecuted us and tried to seduce us from our faith, that we might
abandon the worship of god and return to the worship of idols". when
negus asked about jesus, jaffer, quoted appropriate verses from the holy
qur'an to support his claim. the qur'an says,

" mention in the book about mary when she placed a screen from them
then we sent to her our angel and he appeared before her as a man in all
respects. she said, " i seek refuge from you to god, most gracious if
you do fear god " the qur'an 19: 16,17 & 18.

finally, negus refused to hand over the refugees to the delegation of
quraysh.

in short, the period during which the refugees remained in abyssinia
extended from about 615 to 628 c.e.. the most logical explanation of the
sequence of events which occurred during those years might be that there
refugees status probably represented a threat to quraysh and meccans.
rather, the fear of the growing political activities of muslims against
quraysh from a safe base in abyssinia was the main course for such a
delegation. after muslims had been establish themselves in abyssinia,
the attempt to extradite the refugees make no sense unless that the fear
of their growing political activity caused the meccan's to desire some
control over the muslim refugees.

**Are capsules forbidden?**

it seems the question concerns the hard gelatin, which is technically
referred to as the dry filled capsule (dfc). these capsule consist of
two section, one slipping over the other, thus completely surrounding
the formulation, filled with powdered material or globules into the
longer end of the capsules and then slipping on the cap. these capsules
are available in the different sizes. the reason for prohibition is
based on the fact that, in our time , capsule is made of unlawful
substance.

according to the pharmacists, it is made of " gelatin." " there are two
types of gelatin. type a, derived mainly from pork skin by processing,
and type b, obtained from bone and animal skin by alkaline processing...
" (see remington's pharmaceutical sciences, p 1576, chapter 89, 16th
edition (1980), mack publishing co., easton, pennsylvania. editor and
chairman, arthur osol.)

on the basis of this information, one can not eat capsules unless
science invents gelatin made of different substance. one can also empty
the capsule and use drug only or ask the doctor for tablets instead of
capsules of the prescribed drugs.


**Doctrine of " Mahdi "**

the doctrine of mahdi is commonly held by muslim scholars. basically
there is not much difference between sunni and shia faith about this
doctrine. both sects believe that there is a hadith from holy prophet
muhammad (p.) that the "mahdi," who is the descendant of fatima al-zahra
(a.), will appear to spread justice throughout the world. the only
difference is whether he is already born or will be born. the denial of
this doctrine is based on the fact that it is an unusual event.

but one thing is grossly misunderstood. one cannot deny the religious
believe on this basis. there are other unusual doctrines held commonly
by muslims, such as the belief that prophet jesus is alive. he was not
killed nor he was crucified, and even though he has been alive all this
time, we do not see him. as khadr and elyas are also alive for longer
period of time than jesus. the fact about prophet noah, as the holy
qur'an says, he lived for 950 years, which sounds unusual. god says: "
we have sent noah to his nation. he lived amongst them one thousand
minus fifty years." 29:14.

in regard to people of cave, the holy qur'an says:" they lived in their
cave three hundred and nine years". the qur'an 18:25. these are some of
the unusual doctrines which muslims believe because the islamic sources
mention them.

the doctrine of mahdi did not appear in the qur'an but it is mentioned
in the hadith of the holy prophet. all muslims basically consider the
saying of god or his messenger as the second islamic source.

the reason is that the holy qur'an says:

" the messenger does not speak from himself, but the things revealed to
him. the qur'an 53:3. on this basis the doctrine of mahdi is held by
majority of muslims.

on this subject, many hadiths are narrated from the prophet, and many
books have been written by muslim scholars. ibn hajar says," hadiths
regarding mahdi are numerously reported and many eminent scholars, like
abu nuaim and suyuti, have written on the subject. see al sawaiq, page
160, cairo ed. 1375 h.


**The beautiful names of god**

the holy qur'an says: " to god belongs the most beautiful names, so
call on him

thereby," 7:180.

since god is the creator of the universe, the lord of the worlds,
therefore, his attributes, and names are unique as he is.

the fact that god is not limited by anything leads us to the fact that
his names and attributes are unlimited. but according to our
understanding , as humans, we can use some of his attributes of god.
this explains what has been narrated that prophet muhammad(p.) said, "
god has four thousand names " (see bihar,v.4 p.211 ). that is to say
that the human mind could not reach more than four thousand attributes
of god.

there are many hadith that numbers are up to 90 attributes of god, even
though they differ on the naming. but they do not reach beyond 99. it is
said that since god is unique in his existence, therefore, his name
should be odd number and not in even number. the most likely reason is
that these 99 names or similar in meaning appeared in the holy qur'an.
the comparison between these names and the text of the holy qur'an makes
this point clear.

in the islamic tradition, the names are studied and memorized. imam al-
rida(a.) narrates via his father from prophet muhammad(p.) that he said:
" almighty god has 99 names, whomever calls upon him by them, he will
answer his prayer. and whomever counts them, he will enter the
paradise."

shaikh al-suduq in his commentary of the hadith says that the prophet
(p.) means by counting the 99 names is to comprehend the names and
understand their meaning. it does not mean simply counting them.

imam al-sadiq (a.) narrates via his father the prophet muhammad(p.) all
of these 99 names. in addition, he mentions the first name ( allah )
because it is the only proper name of almighty god ( be exalted ).

the names in arabic and their meaning according to the mentioned hadith
are as follows:

names: meaning:

1. allah the only one who deserves to be worshipped.

2. al-wahid the one

3. al-ahad the unique

4. al-samad the perfect

5. al-awwal the first

6. al-akhir the last

7. al-sami the all hearing

8. al-basir the all seeing

9. al-qadir the powerful

10. al-qahir the subduer

11. al-'ali the high

12. al-a'ala the victor

13. al-baqi the one who remains

14. al-badi the wonderful

15. al-bari the producer

16. al-akram the most generous

17. al-dhahir the apparent

18. al-batin the hidden

19. al-hayy the alive

20. al-hakim the wise

21. al-alim the all knowing

22. al-halim the patient

23. al-hafidh the guardian

24. al-haqq the truth

25. al-hasib the reckoner

26. al-hamid the praised one

27. al-haff the kind

28 ar-rab the lord

29. ar-rahman the merciful

30. ar-rahim the compassionate

31. al-dhar the increaser

32. al-raziq the provider

33. al-raqib the watchful

34. al-raufq the benevolent

35. al-ra'i the seeker

36. al-salam the peace

37. al-mumin the faithful

38. al-muhaimin the protector

39. al-aziz the mighty

40. al-jabbar the almighty

41. al-mutakabbir the high handed

42. al-sayyid the master

43. al-subbuha the glorified

44. al-shahid the witness

45.al-sadiqrid the truthful

46. al-sani the builder

47. al-tahir the clean

48. al-adl the just

49. al-afuw the pardoner

50. al-ghafur the forgiver

51. al-ghani the rich

52. al-ghayath the aid

53. al-fatir the broker

54. al-fardd the single

55. al-fattah the opener

56. al-faliq the divider

57. al-qadim the eternal

58. al-malik the authority

59. al-quddus the holy

60. al-qawi the strong

61. al-qarib the near

62. al-qayyum the everlasting

63. al-qabidh the holder

64. al-basit the giver

65. al-qadi al-hajjat the one who fulfills the needs

66. al-majid the glorious

67. al-mawla the patron

68. al-mannan the gracious

69. al-muhit the surrounder

70. al-mubin the evident

71. al-muqith the saver

72. al-mussawir the designer

73. al-karim the generous

74. al-kabir the magnificient

75. al-kafi the sufficient

76. al-kashif al-dhur the one who removes harm

77. al-witr the odd in number

78. al-nur the light

79. al-wahhab the grantor

80. al-nasir the helper

81. al-wasi the extent

82. al-wadu the devoted

83. al-hadi the guide

84. al-waffi the one who fulfills his promise

85. al-wakil the entrust

86. al-warith the inheriting

87. al-barr the charitable

88. al-ba'ith the resurrector

89. al-tawwab the one who accepts repentence

90. al-jalil the significant

91. al-jawwad the open handed

92. al-khabir the chief

93. al-khaliq the creator

94. al-khayru nasirin the best helper

95. al-dayyan the one who gives judgement

96. al-shakur the thankful

97. al-adhim the great

98. al-latif the graceful

99. al-shafi the heeler

**The meaning of " ummi"**

the term ummi and its derivation occur six times in the qur'an; four
times as plural and twice as singular. the english translations of the
holy qur'an vary.

the commentators of the qur'an hold different views on the actual
meaning of the term in each verse. in order to find the basic meaning to
this word as used in the qur'an, one must look at the context of each
verse. briefly, i shall examine each of them.

1. " and there are among them ummiyyun who understand the book only as
they desire. the qur'an 2:78

various english translators give the meaning as "illiterate", "common
folk", or "unlettered folk". the context of the verse shows that if it
refers to the people of moses. their names was mentioned in the previous
verse no. 67. it seems most likely that the verse therefore means:

"among the jews are ummiyyun jews who do not understand their book
except what they desire to know." i.e., they do not recall the
appropriate sense of the context. in other words the most likely meaning
here of ummiyyun is one who does not follow the holy book.

2. " so if they dispute with you, say, " i have submitted my self to
god and so have done those who follow me. " and say to the people of the
book and those who are ummiyyun, are you [ willing] to submit yourselves
[to god ]. [ if they do, then,] they are rightly guided." the qur'an,
3:19.

the first pronoun ( they ) refers to ( people of the book ) which was
mentioned in the previous verse, no.19. therefore, it is most likely
that the term in this verse means "one who has no book" because of the
contrast with the previous verse which refers to the people of the
book.

3. " among the people of the book are some who if entrusted with a
heart of gold will pay it back, and others who are entrusted with a
single coin will not repay it unless you constantly stand demanding
because they say, " there is no obligation on us [ to keep faith] with
those ummiyyun. but they tell a lie against god while they know. " the
qur'an, 3:74.

in this verse, the contrast between the people of the book and ummiyyun
are those who have no book. thus, all of meaning mentioned in arabic
lexicons are applicable.

4. "it is he who has sent among the ummiyyun an apostle from among
themselves to rehearse to them his sign to sanctify them and to instruct
them in scripture and wisdom for they had been before, in manifest
error." the qur'an, 62:2.

this verse obviously refers to prophet muhammad (p.) and his people.
the description and responsibilities of prophet muhammad (p.) are
mentioned. the people were in need of an instructor who would give them
wisdom and understanding in scripture. prophet muhammad (p.) was chosen
from his folk to take responsibility for teaching and instructing them
in scripture. therefore, the ummiyyun in this context obviously refers
to those who have no book for guidance. singular usage of the term ummi
occurs twice in the following verses. in both verses it refers to
prophet muhammad (p.) and describes him as an ummi prophet.

first: " my mercy extends to all things. that i shall ordain for those
who do right thing, and practice regular charity, and those who believe
in our signs. those who follow the apostle, the ummi prophet whom they
find mentioned in their scriptures, the torah and gospel. " the qur'an,
7:157.

the relative pronouns " those who " in this verse refers to the people
of the book even though their name is not mentioned here. at the end of
the verse, we find that their books are the torah and the gospel.

maintaining these two books, the only popular holy book in arabia
during that time, show that the word ummi is used in reference to the
jews and the christians. therefore, the verse seems most likely to mean
a prophet among those who have no book.

second: " say, o, mankind! i am sent to you all as an apostle of god to
whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. therefore, there
is no god but he. it is he who gives both life and death. so believe in
god and his apostle, the ummi prophet. " the qur'an, 7:158.

the context in this verse does not help to determine any specific
meaning. all meanings mentioned in the arabic lexicons could apply here
including the meaning of illiteracy. though most likely, it would mean
the same as other verses, the one who has no book.

**The commentators**

the commentators of the qur'an hold various views regarding these
verses, usually based on the hadith and their own personal opinions.
they usually give the meaning of the term at its first occurrence the
qur'an, surah 2:78.

the following are the commentators views, chronologically arranged
based on the available sources :

1. ibn abbas. people who do not believe in messengers, nor in any
books

(d.68/690)

2. ibrahim nakhai: one who does not write well.

(d. 96/718) ( tabari 2/259 )

3. al mujahid: some people among the jews.

(d. 104/726) ( tabari 2/257 )

4. al outadah al basri: the arabs.

(d. 117/739 ) ( tabari 6/522)

5. al sudday: the arabs.

(d 127/749) ( tabari 6/525)

6. ibn jareeh; some muslims during jahiliyya

(d.150/772) pre islamic period ( tabari6/525)

7. al qummi ali: \* jews. ( tafsir 1/106)

(d. 3rd/9th c. ) one who has no book

(tafsir 1/106)

8. al maturidi: one who does not write or read from a book.

(d. 232/854)

9. al tabari: those who do not write nor read

(d. 311/933) ( 2/257 )

10. al tabarsi: \* one who does not write well.

" majmaal bayan " (6th/12th century.)

11. al razi: one who does not write or read well.

(d. 606/1228)

12. al qurtubi: one who does not write or read well.

(d. 671/1293)

13.al kashani fayd:\* one who does not write.

(d. 1090/1712)

14. al qasimi: those who do write well

(d.1292/1914)

15. al shubbar: \* those who do not write or read.

16. abdu muhammad: one who does not read

(d. 1283/1905)

\* it refers to sh'iah tafsirs


**The miracle of ummi**

in islamic culture, the term ummi , in the sense of " illiterate " is
one of the favorite epithets for prophet muhammad (p.). it is commonly
held views of many muslims that this was a miraculous sign, an
illiterate prophet coming to mankind.

muslims scholars emphasize that his status as an illiterate validates
his claim to be a true prophet. that is it would be impossible for an
illiterate man to bring a book like the qur'an unless he truly is a
prophet.

in all likelihood, the first one who held this interpretation was al
mawardi, abu al hasan ali b. muhammad al shofi (d. 450/1072). he say
that the illiteracy of prophet muhammad (p.) is one of his explicit
miracles and the most important one.

al-baydawi (d.685/1307) says that prophet muhammad's (p.) perfect
knowledge coupled with his illiteracy was one of his miracles.

al-busyri, muhammad b. suid (d. 685/1307 ) in his poem about prophet
muhammad (p) says: it is sufficient for you to have knowledge in your
state of ummi miracle. ibn mandur (d.711/1337) says that this
characteristics [ i.e. illiteracy] is one of the miraculous signs of
prophet muhammad (p.)

during the 14th/19th century almost all muslims scholars agreed on the
illiteracy of prophet muhammad (p.). shaik abdu says that the illiteracy
is one of the most important signs of his prophecy since he had brought
after his prophecy the most valuable knowledge, and this is the common
belief among muslims today.


