Al-afghani's Nationality
========================

the nationality of sayyid-jamal al-din al-husaini al- afghani (
1838-1897) is a matter of debate among scholars, whether he was actually
an iranian or an afghani. as one scholar says, "this disagreement over
al-afghani's connection to afghan is one of the strangest things,
inspite of the fact that he lived in our era and in our areas and his
works are before eyes."

none of these scholars, muslims or non-muslims, discuss the question of
afghani's nationality in relation to his ideology (the pan islamic
policy ) which he spent all of his life for as once he said: " i have no
aim except to grant every assistance to reform muslim's life. i hope
that my blood, like the blood of any other martyr, will serve in this
way." that is why he related himself to different regions. his signature
appeared in connection of his documents more often as ( jamal al-din al-
hussaini ) indicating his lineage to imam al-hussain , the grandson of
prophet muhammad (p.). also his signature appears as follows "
al-istanbuli, al-asad , al-afghani , al-kabuli, al-rummi, and al-tusi ".
( see : asnad sayyid jamal al-din by afshar, tehran).

in order to answer the question about al-afghani's nationality
affiliation, we must first answer the following questions:

1. why did he present himself with nicknamed relating himself to
different nations?

2. why he did not present himself as an iranian at all?

3. why did he more often present himself as al-afghani when referred to
nationality?

i. there are several factors which show that al-afghani's intentionally
related himself to several nations. this fact was not an accident. it
was most likely that he wanted to display his ideology of muslim's unity
and pan islamic policy. therefore he claimed nationality in several
islamic countries but not, at all, to any non islamic lands.

inspite of the fact that he lived in europe for a long tome, he did not
claim to be a citizen of any european country such as england or france,
the two european countries in which he lived for a long time.

2. inspite of the fact that he had a great effect on iranian policy, he
did not present himself as an iranian. it is legitimate to believe that
because of his political activities, he wanted to avoid any authorities
of the iranian government which could have lead to his extradition as an
iranian citizen through the local government wherever al-afghani went.

3. al-afghani presented himself as an afghani. there is no doubt that
he was satisfied with the title of al-afghani, perhaps because he lived
in afghanistan for a long time and because he admired the afghan type of
life as his book tarikh of al-afghan shows.


**The Caliphate**

the title " caliphah" is an islamic title for the universal muslim
authority. the term "caliphah" and "caliphate" are derived from the word
( khalfah) which means successor, even though it is a subject of debate
whether it is used in the sense of a successor of prophet muhammad (p.)
or the high authority who represents god on earth. in other words, there
is no sure answer to the question whether the title is given by god as
uthman, the third caliphah, claimed or it is given by the people as the
majority of muslims scholars believe. the title "caliph" used to imply
both religious and political authority in the beginning of islamic
history but later, it applied only to the political authority.

however, the caliphate played a great role on unifying the muslim
nation. it was the symbol of unity especially during the serious crisis
of islamic history, such as the civil war between imam ali ( a. ) and
governor mu'awiyyaah and the other crisis which followed it. the common
belief was that the title "caliphah" was suitable only for one person as
the universal authority. therefore, two persons cannot assume the same
title at the same time.

the origin of the ideal caliphate goes back to the shari'ah institute
which is totally based on the islamic thought. perhaps, the first one
who gave more details on the subject was al- mawardi ( d.1058 ). he
outlines the ideal caliphate, paying particular attention to the
authority who it should be regulated. he illustrates ten duties
incumbent on caliphah in the interest of the islamic community:

1. to preserve islam.

2. to enforce judgments between disputants.

3. to protect the lands.

4. to apply penalties keeping god's prohibition from violation.

5. to defend the frontiers against enemy attack.

6. to carry out the holy war.

7. to collect the community's portion of war booty, tribute and alms
tax.

8. to assess what is due the treasury and make disbursements on time.

9. to choose competent advisors for appointments and financial
matters.

10. to carry out for himself the supervision of affairs.

the qualification of calipha for the caliphate always, was a matter of
debate throughout islamic historyand its eventual failure.

the emphasis outlining the duties of the authority by al- mawardi shows
the weakness of the calipha during his term.

the title "caliph" gradually changed its original sense signifying the
dual religious and political power. there was then a subsequent
significant loss of the actual political power of the caliph when he no
longer ruled all of the regions under the caliphate name. many regions,
locally, established power or raised their local ameers as independents
not following the central government of the caliphate. the caliphate
became so weak that its power was usurped by other tribes such as
saljuqi turks.

as a result of lack of islamic practice among the authority, the
abbassid caliphate began to break down. many independent governments
emerged mostly the shi'a independent governments as buyids in iraq and
iran, and the fatimids in egypt.


**Islamic Faith**

"islam" is the name of the religion of god revealed to prophet
muhammad(p.). the word "islam" is derived from "salam" which literally
means peace. it is called islam because it teaches everyone to think,
act and live peacefully. furthermore, it has chosen the phrase "assalam
alaikum" (peace be upon you) as the regular greeting for muslims to
signify this goal.

when islam is properly understood and implemented, one will live in a
peaceful mind, a happy family and in harmonious community. a community
that looks upon all human as equal. the only difference among them would
be their deeds and behavior. the qur'an says,

" . . . in the sight of god, the most righteous is the one who is the
best in conduct." the qur'an, 49:13

faith in islam is not a blind obedience rather, it is based on
reasoning and thinking. the qur'an says,

" i preach you one thing that you rise up for the sake of god jointly
and singly, then think." the qur'an, 34:46

therefore, in islam there is no force to accept the islamic faith
without understanding. the qur'an says,

" there is no compulsion in religion." the qur'an, 2: 256


**Unity of god**

the first doctrine in islam is the unity of god, and it is the source
of other doctrines. the qur'an says, "there is none worthy of worship
but one only one almighty god, the creator of the earth and heaven. he
is free from all defects, i.e., holy . he is all mercy and all power. he
has no partner. he neither begets nor is he begotten and none is like
him. the qur'an 112:1-4

Prophethood

the second doctrine is the continuity of prophethood upto prophet
muhammad (p.). as human mind had developed since the creation, god
taught humanity various religions. he sent prophets at different times
such as ismael, issac, moses, john, jesus, and finally muhammad (p.).

the qur'an says,

". . . we believe in god, and the revelation given to us and to
abraham, ismael, issac, jacob and the tribes, and that given to moses
and jesus, and given to prophets from their lord. we make no difference
between any of them....". the qur'an, 3:83.

all religions have their origin in truth. with the passing of time the
truth was either forgotten or became overlapped with the interest of
human interventions.

when the world reached that stage of understanding, when it was ready
for final lesson, god has sent the last prophet muhammad (p.) with the
holy qur'an to correct the errors which had found their way into various
religions.

these two doctrines, the unity of god and prophethood of muhammad (p.)
are the first step for any one who wants to become a member of islamic
community.


**Time of Prayers**

in the name of god, the merciful, the compassionate


".... indeed prayer is a timed duty for believers." the qur'an, 4:103
as general principle of prayer's time, qur'an says, " perform prayers at
sunset until the darkness of night and recital of dawn. indeed , the
recital of dawn is witnessed. the qur'an, 17:78

the exact time of daily prayer was explained by the prophet (p.)

1. morning prayer at dawn.

2. noon prayer.

3. afternoon prayer.

4. sunset prayer, immediately after sunset.

5. evening prayer.

teaching of islam insists to pray on time. qur'an reads: " observe
prayers and the middle prayer and stand obedient to god." the qur'an
2-238 this middle prayer, according to the teaching of ahl-ul-bayt is
the noon prayer. the emphasis on this prayer at noon time indicates the
balance between the nutritional need and spiritual need of body.

every individual muslim should be sure of prayer's time before starting
prayer. the times of five daily prayers are as follows:

**first : morning prayer ( fajr )**

morning prayer ( subh-fajr ) consists of two units offered in audible
voice. the time of this prayer begins from dawn and ends before sunrise.
to determine its time one should distinguish between " twilight " (
subh- kadhib ) and " dawn" (subh-sadiq ).

twilight is the faint darkish light in the sky during the time when
night is about to become a day. this appears when sun is 18 degrees
below the horizon. since each degree is four minutes, the twilight
appears approximately 72 minutes before sunrise. immediately after
twilight another light occurs and extends with the sunrise. the later is
called dawn.

**second : noon prayer ( zuhr )**

it consists of four units offered silently. the time of noon prayer
starts after the sun reaches its highest point in the sky. this is also
known as "zawal".

to determine this, one can consider the time of the sunrise and sunset
and divide them into two; the middle is the midway which is called noon
or zuhr.

**third: afternoon prayer ('asr)**

it consist of four parts offered silently. its time is when the shadow
of an object becomes equal to its own length. its time extends to
sunset. ( note: these two prayers -- noon and afternoon prayers-- may be
performed together, that is , when the zuhr prayer is finished, one may
start the 'asr prayer, or delay the 'asr prayers to its proper time,
this is according to the practice of the prophet (p.), as it is reported
by ahl-ul-bayt (a.).

**fourth: sunset prayers ( maghrib )**

it consists of three units. the time of this prayers is immediately
after sunset until the end of twilight-- the redness which remains on
the horizon after sunset.

**fifth: evening prayers ( isha )**

it consists of four units. the time of this prayers begins after the
sun fully sets, and extends until midnight. ( note: these two
prayers--sunset prayers and evening prayers--may be joined together,
that is when maghrib is finished, one may start the isha prayer or delay
it to its proper time . this is according to practice of the prophet
(p.), as it is reported by the ahl ul-bayt.)

**joining prayers**

it is recommended to perform each prayer on its time. one, however may
join two of them together. that is to pray, for instance, noon and
afternoon prayers at one time or to delay the noon prayer and pray both
later. according to the teachings of ahl ul-bayt, it is allowed during
travel as well as at residence. also, there are hadith, narrated from
the prophet, which allows to do so. bukhari narrates that the prophet
prayed in madina seven and eight , zuhr and asr, and maghrib and isha
prayers together. see bukhari, v.1,p.136, cairo. likewise muslim
narrates that " the prophet prayed zuhr and asr together in madina
without any (reason) . the narrator asked the reason of combining two
prayers and ibn abbas replied that " [prophet (p.)] did not want to make
it difficult for his followers." ( see muslim, v.2.p.151,cario ).

**postponed prayer**

when one misses any of the five daily prayer at anytime, he or she has
to perform it later as soon as possible.

when we pray

when you determine the time of sunrise and sunset, you can determine
the time of all prayers.

1. approximately 72 minutes before sunrise is dawn prayer.

2. the point which divides sunrise and sunset equally is the time for
noon praye.

3. subsequent to noon prayers is the time of afternoon prayer until
sunset.

4. sunset is the time for sunset prayer.

5 . after sunset is the time for isha prayer until midnight.

**Direction of Prayers Qibla**

in the name of god, the compassionate, the merciful

". . . . turn your face [ in prayer ] toward sacred mosque." the qur'an
2:144 "ka'ba", the cubical house is mecca , is honored since it was
built by prophet abraham and his son ismael as the house of worship of
god. qur'an describes ka'ba as al-bayt ( the house[of worship]),3-97; al
bayt al atique (the ancient house), 22:29; al- bayt-haram ( the sacred
house ),5-97; and as the first house of worship ever dedicated to
almighty god.

the qur'an reads:

" indeed, the first house [of worship] ever set up for mankind was that
which is at bakka [ mecca ] blessed and [source of] guidance for all the
worlds. it has the clear signs, the place whereupon abraham stood up and
whoever enters it is in peace. the qur'an, 3:96 & 97 this verse clearly
indicates the reason that islam considers ka'ba ( in mecca) the symbol
of abraham's message; the oneness of god and continuation of this symbol
of islam.

the qur'an reads :

" we made the house [ of worship ] the destination of people and
sanctuary. treat the place abraham stood upon as place of prayer." the
qur'an, 2-125


**declaration of qibla**

jews and christians used pray toward jerusalem some reports state that
prophet muhammad (p.) used to pray toward the ka'ba as qibla-as
direction of prayer ( see tafsir-al-tabari,d.310, vol 2.p.4,ed. cairo,
1323). the prophet, however, announced the ka'ba, instead of jerusalem,
as qibla on 17th rajab, second year of hijra.

most mosques in islamic countries have niche or recess, inner place to
indicate the direction of qibla called "mihrab". muslims ever since are
united by one direction of prayer-qibla.

**finding qibla**

at distance places from mecca, qibla can be determined in many ways.
probably the easiest is to use a compass. in using the compass, however,
it is important to distinguish between the true north pole and magnet
pole. " the distance between the two is more than 1,000 miles south of
geographical north pole, i.e., 73 degrees latitude and 100 degrees
longitude of greenwich." ( see qibla nama by h . razmara, p.5, tehran,
1332 sh=1953 ).

likewise, it is important to avoid using the flat maps to determine the
qibla. one should consider the global earth. the oval shape of the earth
and the flatness of the map makes a difference in degrees.

in 1372h=1952, mr. h. razmara invented a new compass to determine the
qibla and ever since it has been accepted by religious scholars of the
different islamic thoughts and countries. though it disregards the
annual change of magnetic compass which is not more than a few seconds a
year. this compass, however , shows the qibla as most accurate as
possible.

**the qibla in north america**

in north america, compasses differ on the direction of qibla; the
difference are due to the following:

1. the global earth should be considered and not a flat map.

2. the calculation of any compass should be based on the true north
pole and not on the magnetic pole. the deviation between the two varies
in degrees.

considering the above- mentioned facts, the qibla in north america
would be northeast ( or in some places, the north ). however, if these
two points are neglected, the compass would show the southeast as the
direction of qibla. in 1952, mr. hossein ali razmara invented a compass
based on the mentioned facts. since the hadith says " ta'ammad al qibla
jahdak," which means try hard to find the qibla as much as possible, the
razmara compass offers this service and should be followed unless it
proves wrong. for details see : ghebleg nama by hossein ali razmara,
tehran : dar al- kutub al islamiyyah, 1344, pp.3-5.

direction of prayer ( qibla ) :

1. find the north pole on any map ( the top side usually pointed as
north);

2. adjust the compass with the arrow pointing to the north;

3. the line parallel to the name of the city on this compass points the
qibla ( the center of the compass).


