Meaning of Shi'a?
=================

the word "shia" in arabic means "follower". therefore, the followers of
imam ali (a.), as an imam after the prophet (p.), were called "shia".
shi'a consider the life of imam ali (a.) in total accordance with
islamic teachings; he implemented the holy qur'an in his life. he was
very close to the prophet (p.). he was fully aware of the holy qur'an
and the teachings of the prophet (p.). on one occasion he said, "i used
to follow the prophet (p.) as a child who follows the parents".

therefore, all muslims historians report that he was the most
knowledgeable person on the holy qur'an and the prophet (p.). when ata,
a companion of the prophet (p.) was asked who was the most knowledgeable
person beside ali (a.) among the companions, he said, "i swear by god, i
do not know anybody beside ali". see isabe vol :3 p 1104. for these and
other reasons, shi'a took imam ali (a.) as their leader for
interpretation of the holy qur'an and prophet muhammad's (p.)
tradition.

wa assalam alaykum

**shi'a basic beliefs**

shi'a believe in five principles :

1) tawheed (unity of god): the holy qur'an says,

"indeed your lord is one. the lord of heaven and earth and what is in
between ". (37:4-5)

2) nabuwwa (prophethood) : the god has sent prophets to guide humans to
the right path. first of them was adam (a.) and the last one is muhammad
(p.). the holy qur'an says, "o' prophet ! we have sent you as a witness
who brings good news and warn evil and calls to allah's order". (33
:45)

3) qiyamma (resurrection): the god resurrects people after death and
rewards good people and punishes the bad doers. the holy qur'an says, "
he is the one who created people and he will resurrect them. it is
easier for him ". ( 30 : 27)

whoever denies one of these principles would not be considered a member
of muslim community. however, the following two principles distinguish
the shi'a. whoever denies them would not be a shi'a, though he is a
muslim.

4)' adl ( justice): the god is not in need of anything. so he does not
treat anybody unjustly. only a needy person can be unjust. the holy
qur'an says, "god does not treat people unjustly, but people treat
themselves unjustly". (10:44)

5) imama (leadership) : the prophet (p.) always looked after the
interest of islam and muslims. he could not leave his people without an
appointed successor for leadership of the islamic society. the leader
cannot be unjust. the holy qur'an says to prophet ibrahim (a.), " i
appoint you a leader", ibrahim said, " what about my descendants"? god
said, " an unjust people cannot reach my promise". (2 :124)

these five principles are called usul-ud-din which means articles of
faith.


**Succession to the prophet Muhammad (p.)**

shi'a believe that someone should have been appointed by the prophet
muhammad (p.) to lead the muslims to the right path. therefore, the
prophet (p.) did not leave this world without such an appointment. no
wise leader would do so; every leader has someone to carry his message
after him. therefore, in the case of the prophet (p.), according to
shi'a, he appointed imam ali (a.) as his successor. it is impossible to
say that the prophet (p.) ignored this important matter. in addition, it
was not possible for muslims to ask the prophet (p.) about minor things
but forget such an important matter while they used to read holy qur'an
addressing the prophet muhammad (p.) explained this. among them are the
following reports.

1. hadith-ul-manzila : when the prophet (p.) went to tabuk in the 9th
year a.h., he left imam ali (a.) in madina and said " wouldn't you like
to be to me as haroon (a.) was to moses (a.)?" sahih bukhari vol :5 p.
24, cairo. sahih muslim adds to this report the following phrase, " but
there would be no prophet after me ". sahih muslim vol : 7 p. 120,
cairo. the prophet muhammad (p.), in this report, appointed imam ali
(a.) as moses (a.) appointed haroon (a.). the holy qur'an defines the
relationship between haroon (a.) and moses (a.) as follows :

a). succession : the holy qur'an says,

" moses says to his brother haroon, succeed me among my people and
righteous and do not follow the way or mischievous people". (7 :142).

b). help : the holy qur'an says,

" amid appoint for me a helper from my family, haroon my brother ". (20
:29-30).

c). consultant : the holy qur'an says, " and consult him in my affairs
". ( 20-32).

therefore, all of the mentioned in the holy qur'an should be for imam
ali (a.) as it was for haroon. 2. hadith-ul-thaqalain : the prophet (p.)
said, " o, people ! i am a human being, i am going to die and i leave
two valuable things among you, one is the book of allah, in it you find
guidance and light ". then said, " and my family (ahl-ul-bayt), i remind
you, the ahl-ul-bayt three times". see sahih muslim vol :7 p. 121.

3. hadith-ul-ghadir : it is a place between mecca and madina in which
the prophet (p.) gave a ceremony on 18th dhul hijjah 10th a.h. zaid ibn
arqam says that we went with the prophet (p.) to the valley called vadi
khum \*. he asked us to pray, then he gave a speech in which he said, "
don't you know, don't you witness that i am the leader of every believer
"? they replied, "yes". then he said, " whomever i an the leader of ,
ali (a.) would be his leader. o' lord ! be enemy of his enemy and be
helper of his followers ". see musnad ahmed bin hanbal vol : 4 p. 372.

**Qualification of leadership**

qualification for leadership are as follows :

1.) the leadership in islam during the prophet muhammad (p) was both
for religion and daily matters. most important qualifications were
knowledge and justice. there is no value for blood relationship nor age
in islam. therefore, we see prophet muhammad (p.) appointed osama bin
zaid who was 20 years old as a leader for the islamic army. the prophet
(p.) ordered all his older companions to follow osama because prophet
muhammad (p.) found in him the qualification of knowledge and justice.
the prophet muhammad (p.) did not care about the age. therefore, shi'a
believe that the question of age which was brought against imam ali (a.)
was not valid at all. further, during the islamic history until 1339
a.h. most of a leader as a required qualification for leadership.

2.) infallibility : the other qualification is justice. according to
shi'a principle, the leader should be just. the holy qur'an says to
ibrahim (a.), " unjust people cannot reach my promise ". (2 : 124) the
holy qur'an says " who does not repent is unjust " . therefore, every
wrong doer is unjust. the prophet muhammad (p.) brought the message of
islam completely during his life. the holy qur'an says, " today we have
completed your religion " ( 5: 3).

therefore, no one has the right to add anything to islamic principle.
rather everyone should apply qur'anic teachings to his life.
infallibility of an imam is nothing but to adhere to his duty as leader.
imam ali (a.) says, " how can i be called a commander of faithfuls and
not share with them their difficulties of life". the ahl-ul-bayt
followed the prophet (p.) who said, " i am not but a human being like
you ". in short, infallibility is adhere to the principle of leadership
as it is explained by the islamic teachings.

Meaning of Shi'a?

the qualification of a leader can be fully understood but by the
previous leader. therefore, the prophet muhammad (p.) appointed imam ali
(a.) and each imam appointed the imam after him. the first imam is imam
ali (a.) and the last imam medhi (a.). the prophet (p.) mentioned twelve
leaders to come after him. bukhari reports that jabir bin samra said, "
i heard the prophet (p.) saying there will be twelve leaders all are
from quraish ". sahih bukhari vol : 9 p 101, sahih muslim vol : 6 p 3
and this number agrees with the twelve imams (a.). it is obvious that
political leadership cannot be justified in numbers because as long as
there is life, there would be leadership. therefore, the number should
be explained in the spiritual leadership. the islamic history does not
show anyone qualified better then the twelve imams (a.) who implemented
islam in their life.

**Imam Mahdi (a.)**

many reports are reported by scholars that a person from the family of
the prophet (p.) will appear to bring justice to the world. the word "
al-mahdi" means a true guided person. ibn hajar says, " mahdi is the
descendent of fatima (a.)". sawaiq p. 165. all muslims agree upon this
hadith. shi'a say these hadiths refer to the 12th imam who is alive by
the will of god and the only reason that other people deny him is his
long life. but by will of god, that is possible. the holy qur'an says,

" for noah (a.), he lived with them for 1000 but 50 years " (29 : 14).
that is not natural to live that long but the will of god made that
happen. also, the holy qur'an says, " regarding the people of cave, they
lived in their caves for 309 years ". ( 18: 25) also regarding jesus
(a.) the holy qur'an says," they did not kill him nor did crucify him "
(4 : 157). therefore, the 12th imam is alive by the will of god as jesus
(a.) is alive, all of these have been proven by hadith which confirms
the will of god almighty.

32, 33, 34, & 34 i would like to have you reply regarding the following
questions?. ( zamir mohamed. bombay, 400 003 india )

1. is interest forbidden ?.

2. which is the greatest ayat (verse) of the holy qur'an ? is it sura
fateha, or ayatul kursi, or any other verse ?.

3. what is the substitution for interest ?.

4. are mujtehids liable and why do they differ on friday prayer ?
**Interest in Islam**

interest is totally forbidden in the holy qur'an. there are seven
verses in the holy qur'an against interest. in fact, there is no such
severe punishment for any other actions which are forbidden by the holy
qur'an as it is against interest. the holy qur'an says, " whomever deals
with interest let him fight against god". the main reason probably is
that muslims should invest their money instead of giving it to someone
else to invest. however, according to shari'ah, any earning which does
not fluctuate is forbidden. thus, if the deal earns dividends, which
fluctuate, it is not forbidden. one can use this guideline for any
particular transaction.

greatest verse of the holy qur'an which is the greatest ayat ( verse of
the holy qur'an ) ? is it sura fateha or ayat-ul-kursi or any other
verse?

the verses of the holy qur'an are unique at their level of impor.
therefore, each verse of the holy qur'an is important on different
subjects. ayat-ul-kursi explains the most important a tribute of god,
while the surat-ul-hamd explains the relations of man to his lord. if we
are to look at the arrangement of the holy qur'an in the way it is
written and read by all muslims since the time of the prophet (p.), one
should consider surat-ul-hamd, the greatest one as it is the opening of
the holy qur'an. in addition, it is obligatory to recite it in the daily
prayers. no prayer is accepted without surat-ul-hamd. while one can
recite other suras in the place of surat-ul-tawhid, this emphasizes the
importance of surat-ul-hamd which has to be recited in the five daily
prayers. the content of fateha \* clearly indicates the importance of
the spiritual guidance which one repeats everyday to his lord.

**substitution for interest**

what is substitution for interest as interest is prohibited in islam?

interest is forbidden in the islamic law, while dividend is not. the
main objective of this legislation seems to be that any profits should
be earned justly by working for it. on the basis of the islamic law, if
someone uses interest, he earns money and benefits without helping the
society. the interest multiples as a result of time period and not any
actual work of an individual in the society. but if one uses that
capital in business, that capital would help others who are employed in
the society because people would work with that capital for more
products. on the contrary, by keeping money in a bank for interest,
mainly banks would benefit from that money and people of the society
have to bear difficulties. in the dividend system, money would be used
in business which helps the society directly or indirectly. thus, the
substitution of interest can be in mutual funds and dividends of a
lawful transaction not dealing in alcohol or gambling or likewise
transactions.

are mujtahids \* liable ? why do they differ on friday prayers ?

this question has two dimensions :

a.) any decision from anyone either mujtahid or not, that contradicts
the holy qur'an or reliable hadith, should be totally rejected, but it
equally important to understand that mujtahid is in position to know the
most likely interpretation of the holy qur'an and the hadiths.
therefore, for a mujtahid, it is impossible to contradict the holy
qur'an.

b.) on the friday prayer, in principle, there is no difference between
shi'a and sunni, mujtahids and non mujtahids, that the friday prayer is
obligatory. the only difference between them is on the conditions on
which this prayer would become obligatory. both schools of thought,
shi'a and sunni, believe that friday prayer cannot be performed with
wudu \*. in addition, both agree on some conditions e.g. that friday
prayer should be performed in congregation (jamat) \*. also they
basically agree on the condition of minimum numbers participating in the
congregation; there should be at least five of three according to
different schools of thought. distance between the two places where
friday prayer is performed is also important. the most important
difference between the two is that shi'a and some hanfi believe, among
the conditions for friday prayers to be the establishment of an islamic
government, which practices islam in its totally. since this condition
is absent from many muslim communities in which there are muslim rulers
by names but not by practice. some shi'a mujtahids believe this
condition is not obligatory because the conditions are not met exactly
as wudu\* or congregation. however, there are some mujtahids who do not
consider this as a condition for friday prayer on the basis of different
hadiths.

**al-sahifa al-kamilah**

write to you concerning the sources of the al-sahifa al-sajjadiyya. in
a few months i will be ready to begin writing the introduction to the
text which will include a section on the life of the imams (a.), an
analysis of text's importance for islamic spiritually and ethics, and
also, i hope a well founded argument for the text's authenticity. for
the first part it is not difficult to find sources, and for the second
part can rely on the text itself. but for the third part i am lost at
where to turn, since i have no experience in tracking down the isnad of
such work. dr. modaressi suggested that you may be able to give me
information concerning books or articles that have written about
authenticity of al-sahifa. naturally, any help you can give will be
fully acknowledged in the introduction.

thanking you in advance for any assistance you can give, i remain,

william c. chittick port jefferson ny 11777

in response to your question you will find a list of books concerning
al-sahifa al-kamilah. in the introduction of some of these books,
authors have discussed in details on the "isnad", namely, in riyadh
al-salihkin by ibn masum d. 1120 a.h., al-sahifa al-sajjadiyyah
al-thaltha by al-afandi d. 1130 a.h., al-sahifa al-khamisa by al-amin d.
1371 a.h.. the oldest manuscript of the book is copied by yaqut
al-mustasinum in 694 a.h. as it is described in fihrst-e-kutub-e-din
kitakhan-e-saltanati by atabi, tehran, 1352 sh.p.787. unfortunately, i
was not able to examine this manuscript, which is interesting is copied
in 1079 a.h. with some chain of "isnad".

it is preserved at the tehran university central library no. 73.
mishkat's collections. some pages of this are attached for your
consideration. the following is the list of various sources concerning
al-sahifa al-kamilah, which are in my possession.

note: in this list the following abbreviation are used:

1 : comment = commentary.

2 : photo = photography or xerox.

3 : script = manuscript.

4 : trans. = translation.

1. ad\`iyyat-ul-ayyam al-sab\`a li ahl-il-bayt (a.). copyist ; yaqut
a;-musta\`sami d.682 a.h. - photo).

2. shaifa sajjadiyyah, imam zayn al-abidin d.95 a.h. ( copyist : ala
al-din muhammad hafiz tabrizi in 981 a.h. tehran, husayinyah irahad 1329
a.h.

3. ibid, with introduction, by m. baqir al-sadr dar al-taruf. lebanon.
n.d.

4.dua' al -sahifa al-kamila. copyist : ghulam ali m.amin in 1079
a.h.-photo).

5. aharh al-sahifa ( comment.) by mir m.baqir al-damad d. 1040 a.h.
copyist : m. zaman nafi ' phote-library of mar'shi qum no. 2616.

6. al-sahifa al-thaniyyah. by m.b. al-hasan al-hur al-amil d. 1104
a.h.

7. riyadh al-salikin (comment). by sayyid ali khan b. ahmed madani (ibn
ma'sum) d. 1120 a.h. lithograph 1137 a.h. iran.

8. al-sahifa al-thaniyyah, al-durdar al manthura by mirza abdullah
afandi d. 1130 a.h. (photo) mar'shi qum no. 1960. 9. sahifa kamila (
trans) urdu by sayyid ali qibla. pakistan ( 1128 a.h.).

10 sahifa kamila ( trans. urdu ) by sayyid m. huran qibla, delhi.1333
a.h.

11 al-sahifa al-rabi'a by mirza husayn al-nuri s. 1320 a.h. ( photo )
mar'shi no. 167.

12. al-sahifa al-kamila with introduction by sayyid m. mishkat and
sayyid mar'shi copyist : tahir khunshniwis in 1321 sh. tehran 1321 sh.
)

13. sharh b'ad ad'yyah al-sahifa ( trans farsi ), by wuthuq al-hukama
mirza ibrahim sabziwari in 1342 a.h. copyist : ahmed b. m.hizarjiriby
lethograph tehran 1349 ).

14 tarju'ma sahifa ( trans farsi ) by husayn imad zadeh isfahani,
tehran, 1374 a.h.

15. al-sahifa al-khamisa, by muhsin al-amin al-amili d. 1371 a.h.
damascus 1330 a.h.

16. tarjumai sahifah ( trans farsi ) by sayyid ali naqi fayd al-islam
copyist : tahir khusniwis in 1376 a.h. tehran 1376.

17.tarjumai sahifah ( trans : farsi ) by jawadi-fazil copyist : tahir
khushnivis in 1376 a.h. tehran 2536 sh.

18. sharh al -sahifa ( comment). by sayyid muhammad shirazi. najaf 1387
a.h.

19. tuhfat al-talibin fi talkhis riyadh al-salikin. by aby al-fadi
al-husayni in 1381 a.h. tehran 1381 a.h.

20. tarjumai al-sahifa ( trans farsi ). by muhi al-din ilahi qumshi,
tehran 1378 a.h.

21 al-sahifa al-sajjadiyah by dr. husayn ali mah, an excerpt from
al-balagh, baghdad 1967=1387.

22. al-mu'jam al-mufahras lil sahifa by ali akbar al-qurashi. dar
al-tabligh, qum, 1391 a.h.

23. tarjumat ul-sahifa ( trans farsi ) by abu al-hasan sha'rani tehran
1378 a.h.

24. fi zilal al-sahifa ( comment ) by muhammad jawad mughniyyah, dar ul
taaruf lebanon 1399 a.h. =1979.

25. sharh al-sahifa ( comment ) by iz al-din al-jaza'ri lebanon 1398
a.h.=1978.

26. al-sahifa al-sajjadiyyah copyist : abbas misbah zadeh in 1403 a.h.
london.

27. al-dalil ila mawzu'at al-sahifa by muhammad hussayin al-muzaffar,
qum, 1403 a.h.

28. saheefa-e-kamelah ( trans english ) (the book of perfection). by
ahmed ali mohani b.a. 2nd edition 1968. peer muhammad ebrahim trust
pakistan, 1968.

29. tarjuma sahifa ( trans urdu ) by qasim raza nasin amr dahwi .
copyist : m.abbas siqqiqi karachi.

30. al-sahifa al-sajjadiyah with introduction by sh. ahmad wa'ili
ahl-ul-bayt society cario.

i hope most of the sources mentioned above are available at the
libraries such as princeton or harvard. however, if you find that
inconvenient, please do not hesitate to specify the pages of any book in
this list in order to copy them for you.


