Temporary Marriage, Mutah
=========================

**a. cheldown, toledo, oh 43064**

mutah or temporary marriage is one of the controversial issues among
muslims scholars though this concept was generally attributed to shi'a.
therefore, many think that it is a shi'i concept. in fact. it is not
only a shi'a concept rather it exists in quranic commentaries and many
reliable books in which are generally held by sunnis next to the holy
quran ( i.e. bukhari : muslim). the holy quran says, " for what you
receive (mutah) from them ( women ) give them their pay as the religious
duty ". ( 4:24)

many commentators mention that this verse was revealed in regard of
temporary marriage ( mutah ) such as ibn hurairah, mujahid and ubay ibn
kab ( see fadhul qadir, vol. 1 by al-shawakani ).

some commentators believe that this verse is related only to the
permanent marriage. however those who believe in mutah, consider it a
marriage, but a temporary one having many points in common with
permanent marriage. thus, it is another kink of marriage, which is
allowed is islam.

hadith :

there are three groups of hadiths regarding mutah :

1. that allows mutah ( without any condition ).

2. that forbids mutah ( without any condition).

3. that allows and forbid ( this group indicated that it was allowed by
the prophet ( p.) then forbidden by the prophet himself (p.).

the second and third group are well known, so we will mention only the
first group, which generally ignored.

bukhari reports vol: 7 p.16 cairo edition.

a) hadith reported from ibn abbas that he was about mutat-ul-nisa and
he said it was allowed.

b) jabir ibn abdullah and salama ibn akwa said we were in the army when
the messenger of allah (p.) came to us and allowed us to perform
mutah.

sahih muslim vol : 2 p 705. english ( lahore edition ):

a.) abdullah ( b masud ) reported : we were on an expedition with the
messenger of allah (p.) and we had no women with us. we said, should we
not have ourselves castrated ? the prophet (p.) forbid us to do so. he,
then granted us permission to contract temporary marriages for a
stipulated period giving her a garment. abdullah, then recited this
verse : o! those who believe, do not forbid what god had made lawful for
you and not exceed the limit. indeed god does not like those who exceed
the limit ". (5:87)

b.) jabir ibn abdullah and salama ibn akwa said, " there came to us the
proclaimer of allah's messenger (p.) and said, " allah's messenger (p.)
has granted us the permission to benefit ourselves:i.e. to contract
temporary marriage with women"

c.) salama ibn akwa and jabir ibn abdullah reported, " the prophet (p.)
came to us and permitted us to contract temporary marriage".

d.) ibn juraih says that : " ata' reported that jubair ibn abdullah
came to perform ' umra and we came to his abode and then people asked
him about different things. they mentioned temporary marriage during the
lifetime of the holy prophet (p.) and during time of abu bakr and ' umar
".

e.) jabir ibn abdullah reported : we contracted temporary marriage
giving a handful of dates and flour for some days during the lifetime of
prophet (p.) and during the time of abu bakr, until 'umar forbade it in
case of 'amr ibn huraith ".

note : the original arabic publication of muslim reads ( al ayyam) i.e.
for some, but the translation gives the meaning wrongly as "dower".

f.) abu nadr reported : while i was in the company of jabir ibn
abdullah; a person came to him and said that ibn abbas and ibn zubair
differed on the two types of mutah (tamatu' of hajj and tamatu' of woman
) whereupon the lifetime of allah's messenger (p.) ' umar then forbade
us. so we did not revert to them.

this group of hadiths clearly allowed mutah, that was practiced by the
companions during the time of the prophet (p.) and abu bakr and umar.
the other two groups of hadiths contradicts the first group. however, we
have to consider the following points :

1). if mutah was forbidden by the holy prophet (p.), there would have
been no need for anybody to forbid it again.

2). the group which forbids, differs on the date on which the holy
prophet (p.) forbade it. some say it was forbidden in umrat-ul-qada,
others say in fath khaiber, hunnain, awatas, tabuk, thanyatul wada and
hajjatul wada. therefore, it was said that mutah was abrogated many
times. (see al ahinqiti mohammed habib allah, zaid al muslim, vol 5 p
528 ). this leads to the question that if it was abrogated by the holy
prophet (p.) once, there would have been no need for another abrogation.
no muslim would dare to go against the order of the prophet muhammad
(p.).

3). there is evidence in the islamic history that mutah was practiced
by some muslim jurists after 'umar's reign e.g. abdul malik juriah (
jurist of mecca). he died in 149 a.h. he had married 70 women of mutah (
see zahabe in his book mizan vol: 6 p 147)

these two points show that there was not ijma\* of sunni muslim
communities to forbid mutah until the third century of the islamic
history because it was a controversial issue until the time of mamoon. (
the abbaside caliph, in the 3rd century a.h.)

from this one can conclude that :

1). the hadith that forbids mutah contradicts itself in date.
therefore, they are not certain.

2). there would have been no need for ' umar to forbade it after
prophet (p.).

3). there would have been no room for controversial discussion until
the third century if it was forbidden before.

therefore, it is best to say that 'umar's prohibition was his own
personal view and that mutah was not forbidden until his own reign.

this represents the validity of mutah according to sunni sources,
however the sources of shi'a have different reports.

**witnesses in marriage**

most sunni schools of law consider two witnesses at the time of
marriage why is there a need for witnesses for validity for marriages?
(l. neeley, palatka, fl 32077)

as a required condition for validity of marriage, they believe that
marriage is not valid without witnesses. the reasons given are as
follows:

1. husband would not be able to deny the marriage if two witnesses go
against him.

2. hadith from the prophet muhammad (p.) which orders to announce
marriages.

the shi'a point of view is contradictory. shi'a believe it is recommend
to have witnesses, but it is not obligatory. they indicate neither of
the above mentioned reasons are valid. in the first case, it is possible
that a marriage be contracted with two witnesses; then the witnesses be
asked to keep it secret. in this, case we see the presence of witnesses
without any reason; the presence of two witnesses is not going to change
the situation. the only important fact is the agreement between husband
and wife.

as to the second reason, the hadith only encourages to announce
tmarriage at the time of marriage contract, so everybody shall know that
the couple are married. thus, shi'a strongly recommend to have
witnesses, though it is not obligatory.

**on prophethood**

what is the status of one who denies the prophethood of the prophet
(p.) and believes in imam ali (a.)? imam abu bakr, kalamazoo, mi 49007
it is obvious that that anyone who denies the prophethood of the prophet
muhammad (p.) is not muslim, i.e.; kafir \*. also, anyone who believes
that imam ali (a.) was a prophet is also kafir.

we believe that the best answer to this question is to give some
passages from nahjul balagha: (sermons, letters and saying of imam
ali(a.)). n sermon no. 2, imam ali(a.) says: through the prophet
muhammad(p.), god made these people check their ways of thought and
worship. he wanted to bring them out of ignorance. god decided to call
back the prophet muhammad(p.) to the sublime vicinity of his glory and
selected him to receive his highest favor and blessings".

in sermon no. 89, imam ali (a.) says, "god has revealed his book for
you which explains and describes everything for you. he has allowed the
holy prophet(p.) to live among you long enough to explain completely his
words and deeds, the religion which was revealed to him until he
received his teaching and instruction completed and until such a
perfection of his chosen religion was achieved by him that satisfied and
pleased him".

in sermon no. 92, imam ali (a.) says, "the almighty god has sent our
holy prophet (p.) with his mission at a time when the world was left for
long without any prophet or any guide, when nations have passed years
without realizing

the duty of man towards man and god. when man had gone through ages of
disturbances and discord; when long spells of wars had ravaged human
society; and when the world was passing through utter darkness and
delusions. he sent the holy prophet(p.) among human beings when humanity
had a very evil past".

from the above passages of nahjul balagha, one can conclude that any
attribution which contradicts these passages is of true. imam ali (a.)
said in his well known words, "i am a true follower of prophet (p.). i
had followed him since my childhood, and i shall fight for his religion
until my death".

we would like to remind you that this kind of accusation is usually
spread by the enemies of islam to divide muslims and divert them from
unity. the main objective of imam ali (a.) during his life time is shown
in the history. he was a true follower of the prophet muhammad (p.). he
has done whatever islam required him to do whether fighting against
enemies in a battle field or being silent from his own right for the
sake of the islamic unity. we hope this would explain the true concept
of prophethood and leadership in islam according to imam ali's (a.)
view.

**death in islam**

explanation of death in the holy qur'an and what is the reason for
death? (g. dobson, socorr, nm 87801)

the holy qur'an says, "every soul shall taste death". (3:185) and it
also says, "wherever you will be, death shall reach you even if you are
in high castles" (4:78).

the holy qur'an also says, "god is the one who has created the death
and life in order to see who is the best in his deeds". (67:2). death
according to the islamic faith is the continuation of life. in another
words, there are two phases of life, the life which a person experiences
in this world and the life which shall come after this world. a human
being accordingly is composed of two components, his physical body and
his spirit. when the physical body and his spirit together are active,
it is referred to as life. but when the spirit is separated from the
physical body, it is referred to as death. to this fact, the verses of
the holy qur'an points out, "god has created death and life". (67:2)

in other words, the separation between these two components is death.
the soul will remain eternally forever, and the body will be
disintegrated like any other material. that is what imam ali(a.) refers
saying, "with death, there is the end of the world". nahjul balagha part
1:154. and imam zain-ul-abedin (a.) says, "we have to prepare, for
death". sahifa sajjadiyyah prayer no. 4 p.43. imam baqir (a.) says,
"death is like sleep which one experiences daily at night in his life
except that death has longer duration". since islam sees death as
reality of life, it never ignores it in daily life. imam sadiq (a.)
says, " death is like perfume for a believer". furthermore, islam
recommends every muslim to prepare for death and write his will as being
prepared for reality. there are many hadiths which indicate the moment
of separation between soul and body as a great moment for a believer
because the soul would be able to see everything in its true nature. the
privilege which was not granted before the separation of the spirit and
the body; in fact, the spirit was imprisoned within the body. so, it is
reported that at the time of death, the spirit of the believer would be
happy looking at the relatives around the body who are unhappy but he is
unable to communicate his feeling with the relatives. in short, death
according to islamic faith , is but a new phase of life.

**Islamic names**

how to choose islamic names for children? (l. neeley, palatka fl
32077)

islam has laid down the basic principle of self-esteem for children by
choosing a good name for them in an honest faithful manner. in
particular, many hadiths are reported to educate them on these
principles during their childhood. the prophet says, "every child is
born naturally as a muslim (the one who submits to god), but parents
change his religion either to christianity, judaism or zoroastrian."
also the prophet (p.) said, " among the rights of children on parents
are to choose a good name , educate him and prepare him for a good
life". he also said, "parents have to choose a good name for the child,
teach him, how to write and also prepare for his marriage'. therefore,
prophet (p.) changed the names of some companions after they became
muslim, for example, the name "harb" which means "war", was changed to
"silm" which means "peace", to indicate the principle of peace. imam
baqir (a.) said, "the best name is the one which indicates the worship
of allah". imam sadiq (a.) says, "we name every child born in our family
"muhammad" for seven days. afterwards, we may change it". imam kadim
(a.) says, "the first thing which a father has to do is to choose a good
name for his child".

there are three ways to choose an islamic name:

1. one is to choose one of the 99 names of god, adding to it the word
'abd' which means "servant". for instance, 'karim' to 'abdul karim',
'allah' to 'abdullah', and so on.(for detail see "beautiful names of
god" q\# 11)

2. also, one may choose an islamic name by considering the occasions of
the birth, if it coincides with the birthday or the death of any prophet
(a.), companion, imam or important historical names, of those who have a
great significant contribution to the islamic history. for example, one
might select either their proper names or their nick names.

the following list highlights the important islamic occasions :

rabi 'al-awwal: 1st of hijra: the migration of the prophet (p.) from
mecca to madina

12th: martyrdom of imam hassan al-askari

17th: (52 b.h.): birthday of prophet mohammad (p.)

17th: (83 a.h.): birthday of imam ja'far al-sadiq(a.)

rabi 'al thani:

8th: (232 a.h.): birthday of imam hassan al-askari(a.)

jamada i:

5th (5 a.h.): birthday of zainab al-kubra (a.)

13th (11 a.h.) martyrdom of fatima al-zahra(a.)

jamada ii:

20th (8 b.h.): birthday of fatima al-zahra(a.)

rajab:

1st (57 a.h.): birthday of imam muhammad al-baqir (a.)

3rd (254 a.h.): martyrdom of imam ali al-hadi al-naqi(a.)

10th (195 a.h.): birthday of imam muhammad al-jawad(a..)

14th (62 a.h.): death of zaal-kubra(a.)

13th (23 b.h.): birthday of imam ali abn abi talib (a.)

27th (11 b.h.): mi'raj, the journey of the prophet(p.) to heaven.

shaban:

3rd (4 a.h.): birthday of imam al-hussain (a.)

5th (38 a.h.): birthday of imam al-mehdi

ramadan:

15th(3 a.h.): birthday of imam hassan al-mujtaba, al-zaki, al-sibt

21st (40 a.h.): martyrdom of imam ali (a.)

19th, 21st, and 23rd: the nights of qadr

shawwal:

1st: idl al-fitr

25th (148 a.h.): death of imam ja'afar al-sadiq(a.)

dhul qidah:

11th (148 a.h.): birthday of imam ali al-rida(a.):

29th (216 a.h.): martyrdom of imam muhammad al-jawad(a.)

dhul hijjah:

7th (114 a.h.): martyrdom of imam muhammad al-baqir(a.)

10th: id-al-adha

15th (212 a.h.): birthday of imam al-hadi al-naqi (a.)

18th: id ghadir khum

muharram:

9th: tasu'a

10th (61 a.h.): ashura-martyrdom of imam al-hussain(a.)

25th (94 a.h.): martyrdom of imam zain al-abidin al-sajjad (a.)

safar:

7th (128 a.h.): birthday of imam musa al-kadim(a.)

20th: 40th day of arba'in 28th (11 a.h.): death of the prophet muhammad
(p.) 29th: martyrdom of imam al-rida(a.)

3. the third way to choose an islamic name is to select any common name
used by muslims. the following list of names may be helpful . these are
arranged in three columns: the arabic name of male, female, and each
followed by an english meaning and romanization.

male female meaning

1. abid worshipper

2. amin peaceful, trustworthy

3. asim masuma protector protected

4. amir prosperous

5. ali aliyyah

6. azeez azeezah respected, powerful, rare

7. abbas gloomy

8. adeeb adeebah educated

9. afeef afeefah virtuous

10. ahmed praised

11. ameer ameerah commander, chief, prince

12. amjad majeeda glorious

13. asad lion, the nick name of imam ali (a.)

14. aqeel aqeelah intelligent

15. askari nick name of 11th imam who was forced to live in 'askar'
i.e., a military camp.

16. asma wife of the prophet (p.)

17. ata atiyyah gift

18. ayyub prophet job

19. azhar azharf bright, flower

20. baqir one who splits and spreader of knowledge. nick name of 5th.
imam(a.).

21. basi basil brave

22. bahir bahirah dazzling

23. badr badriyyah full moon

24. baheej baheejah happy

25. bahy bahiyyah brilliant

26. bilal companion of the prophet (p.)

27. basim basmahµ smile

28. bishr bushra joy, glad

29. fadhil fadhilah virtuous

30. faheem faheemah intelligent

31. fakhry fakhriyya honorable

32. fareed fareedah precious

33. fatimah daughter of the prophet (p.)

34. fatin charming

35. fawzy fawziyyah victorious

36. faudd heart

38. ghalib victorious

39.ghadah graceful

40. haydar nick name of imam ali (a.)

41. hany hana pleasant

42. hameed hameedah gentle

43. haleem haleemah gentle

44. hady huda guide to the right path.

45. hijr companion of the prophet (a.)

46. hammam energetic

47. hashim grandfather of the prophet (p.)

48. hasan the 2nd. imam(a.)

49. husayn the 3rd. imam(a.)

50. hakeem hakeemah wise

51. hamza uncle of the prophet (p.)

52. habeeb habeebah beloved

53. haroon successor of prophet moses(a.)

54. ibrahim the prophet ibrahim(a.)

55. isa the prophet jesus(a.)

56. ismael the prophet ishmael(a.)

57. isam noble

58. ishaq the prophet issac(a.)

59. imadd pillar, important

60. ilyas the prophet elija(a.)

61. iman faith

62. islah peace

63. jalal great

64. jamal graceful

65. jameel jameelah handsome, beautiful

66. jawad generous

67. ja'far name of the 6th imam (a.)

68. jubayr companion of the prophet(p.)

69. jawahir jawharah jewel, jem

70. kamal perfection

71. kamil kamilah perfect

72. kareem kareemah noble

73. khadijah wife of the prophet(a.)

74. kumayl perfection

75. kadim kadimah patient

76. khaleel khalelah friend

77. luqman name of prophet

78. lutfi lutfiyah of kindness

79. labeeb labeebah intelligent

80. mahdi mahdiyyah rightly guided

81.maryam mary, mother of prophet jesus(a.)

82. musa the prophet moses(a.)

83. mustafa saffiyah nick name of the prophet(p.)

84. mufeed mufeedah useful

85. majeed majeedah praise worthy

86. muna wish

87. miqdadd companion of the prophet(p.)

88. mujtaba chosen one

89. murtudha nick name of imam ali(a.)

90. muneer muneerah shining

91. muhsin mohsinah generous

92. masud masudah happy

93. misbah light

94.nafi beneficent

95. nabeeh nabeehah outstanding

96. nasir nusrah helper

97. noor noriyyah brightness, light

98. naqi naqiyyah pure

99. naji najiyyah saved

100. najeeb najeebah excellent

101.nazeeh nazeeha pure

102. najm najmah star

103. qassim divider

104. qa'id qa'idah chief, leader

105. qani qani'ah content

106. qays companion of the prophet(a.)

107. rasool messenger

108. rasheed rasheedah rational

109. ridha radiyyah pleasant, content

110. raqey ruqeeyah superior

111. rafi rafi'ah sublime

112. sabir sabirah patient

113. sarah 1st. wife of the prophet ibrahim. (a.)

114. sabih sahibah friend

115. salam peace

116. saleem saleemah safe, free

117. sukaynah daughter of imam husayn(a.)

118. salih salihah good, pious

119. sibt grandson

120. sajjad sajidah worshipp

121. sa'eed sa'eedah happy

122. sadiq sadiqah truthful

123. salman companion of the prophet(p.)

124.siddiqah the nick name of fatima zahra(a.)

125. shakir shakirah graceful

126. shareef shareefah noble, honored

127. shahid shahidah witness

128. taqi taqiyyah pious

129.tawfeeq prosperity

130.tayyib tayyibah pleasant

131.tali rising

132.tahir tahirah pure

133.talib talibah pursuer

134. waheed waheedah matchless

135. waly waliyyah protector

136. wafy wafiyyah faithful

137. wajeeh wajeehah leader

138. wid widad friend

139. waseem waseemah graceful

140. yasir companion of the prophet(p.)

141. yahyah the prophet john(a.)

142. yusuf the prophet joseph(a.)

143. ya'qub the prophet jacob(a.)

144. yaseen nick name of the prophet(p.)

145. zayd historical name

146. zafar zafirah victorious

147.zaynab daughter of imam ali(a.)

148. zaky zakiyyah pure

149. zahra bright, nick name of fatima(a.), the daughter of the
prophet(p.)

150. zayn zaynah short of zayn ul-abidin(a.) i.e., who adores worship


