Foreword
========

***Says Qur’an:***

***Allah affirms that there is no god but He; and so do the angels, and
those with knowledge, He is established in justice. (3: 19)***

Such is the claim of the ***Qur’an***. So when we come across the
atheistic people or those who seriously believe in the Theory of
Evolution and deny the existence of any Creator of this Universe and its
paraphernalia we attribute it to their lack of knowledge either inherent
or acquired.

Again, says ***Qur’an:***

***“Your God is one God.”*** **(16: 7),**

***“Allah-there is no deity but He, Living the Eternal*****.” (2: 257)**

This is the assertion of the last Book of Allah revealed to Muhammad
(S). But for an explanation of the verses of the ***Qur’an*** we must
refer either to Muhammad (S) himself to whom it was revealed or to those
about whom he did direct us to refer to.

Said Muhammad (S): I am the City of knowledge and ‘Ali is the gate of
it.

After ‘Ali (A) we have a chain of his children and grand children
towards whom we must look for inspiration and guidance in all our
affairs.

Now in an age when people have either denied the very existence of One
God or have lost faith in His attributes such as Omnipotence,
Omniscience etc., we present a conversation that took place in the 2nd
century of Islamic era between Hazrat Imam Ja’far al-As-Sadiq {A), the
sixth in the series of the twelve Imams of the House of Muhammad (S),
and a philosopher-cum-physician from India who was a staunch votary of
atheism.

Needless to say that the intellectual caliber of the Imam was highest in
that age as he had his knowledge from Allah. What needs our close
attention is the fact that nearly 1200 years ago the mind of a man like
us could argue so forcefully that not many intellectual giants that
survived during this long period could have attained that standard.

However the counter arguments of the Imam (A) convinced the atheist
about the Existence of Allah, His Oneness and other attributes so much
so that he embraced Islam.

How true it is:

An Imam excels all other persons both in knowledge and piety. The
intellectual caliber of an Imam shall always remain the highest
irrespective of the age in which he survives. The reason being simple
that he is deputed by Allah to guide the people, and Allah can not
depute a person with lesser knowledge to guide those superior in
knowledge.

With this book in hand the Muslims in particular and the other non
atheistic people in general can help eradicate atheism from the surface
of the globe.

To achieve our goal we need not use force. We can do it peacefully with
the help of our *'aql* (reason) and achieve splendid success.

Regarding *'aql* suffice it to quote an anecdote. This relates to our
common ancestor-Hazrat Adam (A).

An Anecdote
-----------

The Last Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S) about whom says ***Qur’an:***

***“And we sent thee to mankind at large, to announce and threaten. But
most of the people understand not.”*** **(34: 29)**

passed on *'ilm* (knowledge) to his Vicegerent ‘Ali who relates:

Jibrael-al-Ameen (Gabriel, the Trustworthy) called on Adam and said to
him:

“Allah had commanded me that I leave it to your discretion to pick and
choose one thing out of the three and leave the remaining two.”

Adam (A) asked: “O Jibrael ! What are those things?”

Jibrael said: “These are *‘aql* (Reason), *haya* (Modesty) and *deen*
(Faith).

Adam (A) expressed: “I pick and choose *'aql* (Reason).” Jibrael said to
the other two (*haya* and *deen*):

“Both of you go back.”

The two (*haya* and *deen*) replied: “Allah has ordained us to adhere to
*'aql* wherever it may be.”

Jibrael, saying: “Well you know your position best,” rose back to the
firmament.

Is it not representative of the distinctive personal character of Adam
(and Eve too)? We can certainly say that it scuttles the theory of a
Godless universe. And it does retard the theory of the 'evolution' of
man from a 'larva' for a sensible person?

The people of the world today are almost in the grip of a 'Godless cult'
and there is an imminent danger of mankind at large due to the serious
challenge of atheism.

Let the Muslims in particular and non-Muslims in general turn to Islam
as presented by Muhammad and Ahlul Bayt 'alaihim us Salaam' and live in
peace here and gain salvation in the hereafter.

Syed Farzande Raza  
 Chief Organizer  
 Majlisul Muslemeen  
 14.H, Rizvia Colony  
 Karachi 18, Pakistan  
 3rd Shaban, 1383  
 l0th December, 1963


