The Hadith
==========

Mufaddal bin ‘Umar al-Jau\`fi wrote a letter to Hazrat Imam Ja’far
al-As-Sadiq (A) that some people held the “No Allah” theory and
contested among themselves with groundless arguments. He requested the
Imam (A) to refute these atheists, as he (the Imam) had done on previous
occasions.

The Imam replied, “In the name of the Most Merciful and the Most
Compassionate Allah. May He the Almighty give us the good sense of ever
remaining obedient to His will, drawing down upon us His pleasure and
mercy.

Your letter with reference to those evils that have crept into our midst
is in our hands You mention that these 'atheistically disputes' and
controversies have become a menace to our religion (Islam), and you
desire me to publish a book in condemnation and contradiction of them,
as I have done (for antagonists and opponents of Allah) before.

Let us offer our thanks to Allah-the Most High for all His blessings to
us, and for His Hujjat (proof) incomparable, and the justice of trial
with which he tests His favorite as well as His ordinary slaves. One of
the greatest and most important favors from Him is the establishment of
convincing proof-deep in the innermost heart of each creature that 'He
is'. Thus He has secured the vow of His *ma'arefat* (knowledge of His
being) from all His creatures, and has sent (through His prophet) His
sacred book ***Qur’an,*** which contains efficacious remedies for all
doubts and suspicions.

Allah has done all this for man. He has neither left him nor any other
thing dependent upon others save Him. He has directly proved Himself. He
himself is indeed independent and the praised. By my life these men in
their ignorance are losers, when they deny the existence of Allah in the
face of all those perfect and clear proofs and signs which surround
them.

The sky, the earth and the wonderful things pertaining to both, evince
beyond all doubts, the existence of some creator. These men have opened
for themselves a gate leading to a crime. They seek their relief in
insatiable, incessant worldly pursuits. Their sensual desire has
blighted the purity of their hearts. For their oppression and tyranny,
Allah has abandoned them. Satan has assumed dominion over them. Thus
Allah seals the hearts of the proud and the arrogant.

It is a matter of great surprise that man seeing in himself perfect
creation, can still so unreasonably refute the theory of a perfect
Creator. The structure of the body, the perfection of its design and its
connection with some spiritual thing called the soul, reveal or manifest
its creator to be of extraordinary wisdom and intellect. I vow by my
life that these men have bestowed no thought upon the question, or else
they must have observed this distinct and vivid perfection in creation,
e.g. the design of the universe, and the knowledge that these things
once were not in existence, should have called forth an unhesitating
affirmation of a creator.

There is not a single thing that does not show signs of Allah Who
created it. I write to you an account of the arguments I had with an
atheist physician of India. He visited me frequently, always discussing
his “No Allah” theory and placing forth all his arguments in support of
it. Once while pounding *halila* (Myrobalan fruit), a new idea came to
him. “This Universe”, said he suddenly, has existed for eternity before,
and will still exist for eternity.

One tree grows and another withers; one in born whilst the other dies;
and the link that binds them together existed in the past, and will
exist in the future. Your claim to the divine knowledge is a baseless
one, founded on no such actual proof as to justify the existence of
Allah. It can only be called a belief, a belief inherited from your
forefathers and traditions”.

Proceeding with the same force, he went on to say: “The existence of
various things of the Universe whether real or not could only be
determined through the medium of the five senses. Eyes with which we
see, ears by which we hear, nose by which we smell and hands and feet
with which we touch and feel”.

Continuing the chain of his arguments to the extent of his self-made
principles, he said, “Now I have never known Allah through any of the
above mentioned senses, and cannot therefore believe in Him. But I
request that you will let me hear those arguments with which you
convince others”. When he reached thus far I said: “I prove His
existence by the inherent instinct of His being, which each man, whether
an affirmed atheist or not, has in him”.

“How can you say so?” He asked. “The mind cannot know the existence of
any thing through any medium but that of the five senses. Have you seen
Allah, heard His voice, smelled Him, tasted Him with your tongue, or
touched Him with your hands or feet? How could one realize Him?”

“Your denial of Allah, then is”, said I, “because, you have not felt Him
with the senses given to us for knowing objects, I too have not felt Him
with either of them. But my belief is as strong as your disbelief, both
cannot be right; do you admit this?”

“Most certainly” he replied. “Either you are mistaken or I am”.

“Very well”, said I, “If you are right, there is no danger for me in
threatening you with Allah's displeasure for your disbelief”.

“No”, said he, “You shall be in no danger.”

“If I am right”, asked I, “Do you not think that you will suffer the
punishment for your disbelief, and I shall receive a reward, for being
away from your opinions?”

“Quite possibly” he replied.

“Will you tell me”, I asked, “which of us is the wiser, granting the
possibility of both the situations?”

“Oh”, He replied. “Your belief is a presumption, a groundless assertion,
while mine is a truth, based upon common sense. I do not perceive Him by
my senses, therefore He does not exist”.

“When your senses”, said I “could not perceive Allah, you disbelieved
Him, While I, on the contrary, believed in Him, because my senses failed
to discern Him. The very theory that made you disbelieve, compelled me
to believe in Him”.

“How is it possible?” he asked.

“Because”, I replied, “things are '*murakkab*' (compound, made of
parts). Every *murakkab* possesses shape and color that attracts the
senses. Therefore, that which is felt or known by the senses, having
shape and color, cannot be Allah.

Your argument for disbelief is foolish, because Allah cannot be like any
of the things perceived by the senses, nor can He be said to bear any
resemblance to anything which has to undergo an ordeal of change and
decay. For, everything is under the one and the same law-the law of
transformation and decline. Allah, our creator cannot be perceivable by
the five senses you mention; for, He is not a thing-which is *murakkab*
or created. ……………If He was visible to the eye, and perceivable to the
senses, He would have resembled the things that are visible and
perceivable to the senses on account of their being *murakkab* and
created, and in that case He would no longer have remained a creator”.

“What nonsense you talk?” said he. “No, I cannot believe unless I
perceive by any of these five senses”.

Since he so persistently adhered to this theory, the folly of which I
strove to point out, I said, “I charge you then for the very defect you
accused me of. Your claim is without reason and proofs also. Your
arguments are too on the same lines, as, you thought, were mine; and for
which you had such an aversion”.

“How can I be held liable for the same defect as you?” he asked.

“You, in the beginning”, replied I, “falsely reproached me with this
that my claim to the knowledge of Allah was purely traditional and had
no actual basis for the fact. That imputation is now applicable to you,
because you persist in the theory, that a thing not known through the
medium of the senses is not existent, though strong evidence proves it
otherwise. You disregard the arguments, and all messages from Allah
through the prophets and the favored ones of Allah tell me, 'have you
visited every corner of this world?'“

“Of course not”, he said.

I went on. “Have you ever ascended or visited this sky, which you behold
with your eyes, or been in the depths of the earth? Have you traversed
the world, dived in every sea, and moved through the atmosphere? To
presumptuously deny the existence of an Omniscient, Omnipotent Creator,
you must have been to all these places”.

“No, he said, “You know I have never”.

“Well”, I said, “How can you say that He is not in those places where
neither you nor your senses have ever been?” Perhaps, He may be living
there”.

“I cannot be certain” he said. “Perhaps a person of extraordinary
intelligence may reside in one of those places”.

“As”, I went on, “you have admitted the probability of a creator, you
will, I hope, be convinced to admit the certainty. From flat denial you
have come to doubt, from that perhaps to faith”.

“This doubt”, he said, “is the result of the question you put about the
places that my senses have not seen, but I am at a loss to understand
how a thing can be said to exist unless felt by them”.

“Well, I explain this, and bring you to a belief through the medium of
this *halila*”.

“Oh yes”, he said. “Try. The *halila* will be very suitable for it is
one of the fruits of medical science, in which I am well versed”.

“I take the *halila*”, I said, “Because it is nearest to us. Had
anything else been there instead, it could also have proved Allah's
existence”.

“Everything *murakkab* is created. Creation shows a creator. That, which
was not is, and that which is, is destroyed by Allah. Allah made it and
destroyed it. Tell me do you see this “*halila*? “

“I do”, he said. “Can you see”, I asked, “what is in its interior?”

“No”.

“Then there must not be a stone in this one”, I said, “for you do not
see it with your eyes”.

“How can I say that?”he replied; “but there may not be one”.

“Nor”, I persisted, “a kernel hidden under the shell nor color within?”

“I know nothing”, he replied, “both may be absent”,

“I am sure”, I said, “you will at once admit that it can be had in
India, for all Indian physicians agree on this point”.

“They may be wrong in their opinion”, he said, “I do not admit it”.

“All right”, said I. “but you at least believe that this fruit grows in
some part of the world”.

He said “This earth is like that and I have seen that place where it
grows”,

I said, “Will you believe by the presence of this *halila* that there
are other *halila*s, which you do not see with your eyes?”I asked,

“No”, he replied obstinately. “This may be the only one of its kind in
the world,”

Seeing him thus willfully bent upon ignorance, I asked him, what he
thought the *halila* to be? Whether it was a product of a tree or it had
come into existence by itself?

“I am not foolish to say that it has come into existence by itself. It
is emphatically the product of a tree”

“Then, you admit”, said I, “the existence of a tree which you have not
seen”

“Yes” he said “But add that the *halila* tree like all other things has
self-existed for all eternity. Can you refute this belief of mine?”

“Yes”, I said, “in connection with the *halila*, have you seen the tree
from which this one came? Do you now it perfectly well?”

“Yes”, he answered,

“Did you see the *halila* before it came into existence?”

“No, how could I?”

“Then perhaps”, said I “it might have happened thus:

“When you saw the tree first, it had no *halila*s. But next time you saw
it, it had. Will you therefore believe that the *halila*s came into
existence from the state of non-existence?”

“Why not?” I believe it, “but I say, what went to make a *halila* was
already in the tree, which in due course of time got united and formed a
*halila*”.

“Had you seen the seed from which the *halila* sprang up?” I asked.

“Yes I had”, he replied.

“Does it sound perfectly consistent to you to say said I “that the
roots, branches, bark, leaves and all the fruits, which combined
together, weigh many tons, were lying concealed in so small a seed?”

“No”, said he. “I cannot understand how all these things could be
concealed in one seed”.

“Will you admit that they could not be present in the seed, but came
into existence afterwards?”

“Yes”, he said. “But I do not say that they we created by some one, and
you cannot prove it to me”.

“Why not?” said I, “if I show you a design or a painting you will have
to believe that it was done by some one”.

“Yes”, he said.

“Does it not strike you that this *halila* is made upon a fixed
standard-special?

Color, special size, special seed, special taste-some portion of its
kernel is soft, while the rest hard-one portion coalescing into another
has formed a compound-there is a layer over layer, body over body, and
color over color? It has a hard material enveloped by a soft one. Its
structure is composed of particles allied together. Its yellow color has
a whitish tinge. It has a skin to preserve it from external influences.
Roots to convey moisture. Leaves that preserve it from the sun lest it
be burnt and scorched to ashes, or the cold, lest it be reduced to
thinness and lose its vigor”?

“Would it not have been better”, asked he, “to cover the seed with
leaves?”

“Allah was the best judge”, I replied, “Had it been covered with leaves
as you suggest, the air without, which gives it strength and vigor would
not have reached it. It could not have been influenced by the cold which
makes it robust. The sun would have had no power to ripen it. It would
have gone rotten. These different influences proportionately divided,
held to bring the fruit to perfection designed by the powerful wisdom of
Allah- the Almighty”.

“The seed in its rudimentary state”, said I “was neither kernel nor
shell. It had neither color nor taste. It was only water”.

“Yes”, he said, “this I know”.

“If Allah”, said I, “had not strengthened the drop of water, which was
no bigger than a mustard seed, suggested its shape, proportionately
divided its particles, how could that very small drop of water have
reached its present state of development? How could it have assumed its
present form, uncombined as it was with shell or particles? Presume some
development. But it would be in size and bulk and should only have
consisted in the increase of water. It could not have scientifically
assumed its present shape- it would have had no definite shape”.

“You prove to me”, he said, “beyond all doubts, the existence of some
one who has created these things. Your arguments about the tree's
growth, its development, its mode of bearing fruit, the shape of that
fruit, have convinced me. But why make it a distinct creator? Why not
say these things have created themselves of their own accord!”

“Because”, replied I, “the design points to a perfect intelligence. Does
it not?”

“Yes, it does”, He admitted. “It is obvious”.

“Then”, I asked, “Do you think it consistent to say that perfect
intelligence and wisdom came into existence from non-existence?”

“No”, he replied.

“Do you not know”, I asked, “that this *halila* is '*haadith*', i.e. it
did not exist before, but came into existence afterwards? And that it
also perishes, and returns to non-existence.

“Yes, I do know this”, he replied “This *halila* may be *haadith.* But I
did not say that its creator was *'haadith*', and that he could not
create his own being. It is possible that he may be '*haadith*', or he
may be *'Wajib-ul-wujud'* (self-existing from all eternity)”.

“A little while ago”, said I, “you admitted that the creator could not
be '*haadith*', but the '*halila*' was *'haadith*'. Tell me then, how
the fruit which is a created thing (*haadith*), created itself. When you
declare *halila* fruit to be a created thing, it necessarily follows
that you do not think it to be its own creator. If, however, you resume
your old standpoint of argument, persisting in saying the fruit to be
its own creator, you are admitting what at first you denied, You have
possessed consciousness of perfect intelligence, though the proper name
and its attributes are not known to you.”

“How is it”, he asked, “that I now admit what I first denied?”

“It is thus:” I replied. “When you admitted the existence of some wise
and perfect intelligence, you admitted Allah. But called it by the name
of '*halila*', instead of calling it Allah. If you had used but a little
discretion and reflection, you must have realized that the *halila* had
no power to create or design itself”.

“Have you other proofs besides this?” he asked, “or this is all?”

“I have many”, I replied. 'Will you tell me why this *halila* which you
say to have created itself, is so insignificant and powerless a thing
that it can not save itself from being plucked, squeezed and devoured?”

“Because it has only the power of creating itself” he said.

“If you are inclined to persist in your obstinacy, do so; but at least
assure me as to when this *halila* created itself-whether it did it
before it came into existence, or afterwards? If you say afterwards,
your assertion is absurd. Because it is impossible for a thing to create
its own self when it was already created. The purpose of your assertion
would be that the *halila* made itself twice. It would mean that its
first endeavors consisted in creating itself, and when it was quite
ready and created, it created itself again. This is the most absurd and
impossible theory-the acquisition of what is already acquired
(*tahsil-e-hasil*).

If you say that it created itself before it came into existence, it is
really stupid. Because it was absolutely nothing before it came into
existence. How is it possible for a non-existing thing to create another
thing? You consider my belief in an existing thing that creates another
non-existing thing as absurd. But you do not consider your own, as to
the non-existing thing having the power to create an already existing
thing, as absurd and stupid. Be yourself the judge, and tell me whose
theory is absurd and irrational”.

“Yours”, said he, “is the most correct”.

“Then why do you not accept it?” said I.

“I do accept” he replied. “I am quite clear about the truth and veracity
of the fact that the things, including *halila*, are neither created by
themselves nor depend on themselves for their growth and functioning.
But a doubt arises in my mind that the tree may perhaps be the creator
of the '*halila*'; because '*halila*' is the product of the tree”.

“Well”, asked I, “who made the tree then?”

“Another *halila*”.

“This is all the same” said I, “Rather fix a limit. Else our arguments
must go round and round in a circle, having no goal or termination. If
you want to come to any conclusion believe the creator to be Allah, and
terminate the chain of arguments. If you prefer your own belief for the
sake of not arriving at a final decision I will question you once more
upon it.”

“Do question me”, said he.

“Is it not right”, I asked, “that the tree springs up from the *halila*,
after the *halila* becomes extinct?

“Yes”, he replied.

“The tree lives about a hundred years after the death of *halila*,
(which you think is the creator of the tree). Tell me then, who
preserves the tree and makes it thick and strong? Who nourishes it,
guards it and provides the leaves? Surely you must say that it was He
Who created it. If you call the ‘*halila*' the creator, and say that a
dead thing manages the above mentioned things, your words convey no
meaning. Because the words 'creator' and 'guardian' mean one and the
same, and it is impossible for a dead creator to be guardian. Moreover,
the tree begins to grow only when the *halila* begins to dissolve and
annihilate itself. When the tree attains full growth, the *halila* seed
is dead. In this case tell me who remains to guard, nourish and design
the tree?”

“That I cannot say”, said he.

“Why don't you believe”, I asked, “that it is Allah, the Almighty?
Surely you can have no more doubts lingering in your mind”.

“I have some”, he said. “You have not yet given me convincing proofs of
His existence”.

“If you will still persist in your absurd theory that existing things
must be known through the medium of five senses, let me tell you that
the senses can not know anything except through the mind's medium. The
mind is the true guide. It is the mind which brings all things into
close affinity. Your assertion is quite the reverse of this. You hold
that the mind has no power whatsoever to know anything without the
intermeddling of the senses-quite a wrong assertion”.

“Your argument is quite new”, he said, “Before I admit it, I must have
details”.

“Then I begin to give you some.”

I said. “You must know that when one sense or even if all the senses
become useless, ears deafened, eyes blinded, smelling power vanished,
the mind alone regulates the respective functions of the senses. The
mind only guides one to perform a particular thing or avoid it; and
things done by its suggestion bring about a very wholesome result”.

“Your argument”, he said, “seems a very strong one, but explains it to
me more distinctly and concisely”.

“Alright”, asked I. “Do you know that the mind survives the death of the
senses?”

“Yes”, he replied. “But its feeling and knowledge of things vanish with
the senses. For instance, ears can hear but not so the mind; it is deaf
with the ears”

“Do you know’? Asked I, “that when a mother gives birth to a child, that
child's senses have no power to act. The senses are quite unfit to
perform any function at that period of life”.

“Yes, I do know” he replied.

“Tell me then”, said I “which of the senses suggested the child to cry
for milk, and to be cheerful and jolly when it sucked it? Which of the
senses excited the birds of prey, and the birds that feed on grain to
supply their young ones with flesh and grain respectively? Why does one
feed on flesh, and the other smaller kind on grain? Again regarding
'water fowl'-why are they able to swim, on the surface of the water, and
those inhabiting the land drown and die when thrown into water?

When all the creatures have the same senses, how is it possible for the
water fowl to derive greater benefits than the land fowl? Why do the
birds of the air die, if kept in water for a short time, and the fish,
those inhabiting the sea, die if kept out of water for a while? Do not
these different characteristics of senses refute your theory of their
all-powerfulness; and suggest a greater intellect, an intellect that has
created these species of birds and fish, intentionally ordained that one
should live on land and the other in water-that has created
circumstances to suit their necessities? If senses were consistently
powerful they would have shown a similarity of action in all the
species. Also have you not observed the ant which has never seen water,
begins to swim when thrown into it, and the strong and clever man who
does not know the art of swimming, sinks down to the bottom, and comes
to the surface a dead body?

Now if the theory that all things are known by the senses be correct,
why does not the wise experienced stout man use his senses in order to
save his life as the ant does? Do you not also know that the mind-the
treasure house of wisdom-is present in a brute child as well as in a
human-child? That it is the mind that suggests the child to cry for
milk, the birds of grain to feed on grain, and the carnivorous to prey
upon flesh”.

'I know only this” said he, “that the mind can only know things through
the senses”.

“You still adhere to your argument in favor of the senses, though once
you admitted that it is the mind that guides the senses. Very well; now
I shall prove to you in connection with these senses that they are
unable to know anything but external things. They can in no way know the
existence of invisible things such as the Almighty Allah and the soul.
It is for this reason that the Creator gifts us with a mind and
establishes through its medium His 'Hujjat' (proofs of His existence).

He has created the senses that they may observe external conditions and
argue in favor of Him. When the eye observed creation in all its parts,
it drew the attention of the mind to it. The eye saw the celestial sky
retained in a position without obvious support, their regularity of
motion, rotation, and revolution,-they neither lacked behind that they
come in closer proximity to us, nor preceded further that they might
undergo any damage. Their distance from us remains unchanged and so
their condition. They do not get old or decayed though centuries of
successive nights and days have passed. Their corners or ends do not
fall down.

The motion of the seven planets also depends on rotation of the sky.
They change their places every day, every month, and every year. Some
are very rapid; some are very slow in their movement, but none too slow
in their movement, but none too slow. They all return to the same place
after performing their fixed duties with unswerving some of them take
their courses towards the North, and sometimes towards the South. They
remain obscure during day and visible at night. The appearances of the
Sun and the Moon at certain places at certain times as understood by
those men well-versed in the Science of Astronomy, the men endowed with
thinking power are surely not the results of any human experience or
will. Nor do they think that the investigations, searches or researches
of any human being can produce a like phenomenon.

Thus putting everything to severe test and scrutiny the mind reasons,
and concludes that there must be some one Who has created this most
wonderful Universe, Who has preserved the skies in their natural
position, prevented them from falling down upon the Earth. Along with
the skies he has created the planets and the stars. Again when the eye
observed the earth to be convex, and informed the mind of its
observation, the mind felt that the upholder of this Earth in its
present form must be He who kept it in its fixed place and prevented it
from slipping into space, and that He must be the same, Who retained the
skies overhead in firm position. The mind also felt that if there had
been no upholder of these things, the Earth with the weight of all it
possesses such as mountains, trees, seas, sands, etc would have easily
crumbled down.

The mind with the eye's help decided that the creator of the Earth must
be He Who created the skies….. Then again the ear heard the noise of
boisterous whirl-winds, and that of soft and pleasant breezes. The eye
saw that the former uprooted mighty trees, demolished strongest
buildings and swept sand hills to the ground carrying them from one
place to another. Though the eye observed all these movements, it could
see none who performed them. The ear could hear no one. Nor could any of
the senses detect His presence. The eye could not see the air because of
its extent; hands could not hold it, because it was not solid. The eye,
the ear and the senses could know nothing without the mind's assistance.

It was the mind that said that there was someone who controlled all
these things. When the senses conveyed their impressions to the mind,
the mind sensibly thought that the wind did not blow of its own accord.
It thought, if it blew of its own accord, it would blow on continuously
and would not pause. Because it is proved in science of natural
philosophy that a natural force does not stop, unless resisted by some
stronger force, Again it would not have demolished one thing and left
another unmolested, and pulled down one tree and not the next one- it
would have over one portion of land and not another.

Cogitating thus, the mind concluded that someone controlled the wind,
moved it or stopped it just as He pleased, sent or withdrew its currents
from whomsoever He liked again when the mind saw that the wind was
connected with the sky and its wonders, it unhesitatingly decided that
the creator of the wind is He Who has created and upheld the skies,
earth and all their wonders. Likewise when the eye, the ears and other
senses united, informed the mind of an earthquake, it reflected upon the
quaking of a mighty earth, with its mountains, seas and other great
appurtenances, and upon the fact that the earth is one solid body
without fissures or disunited parts, yet one part shakes and the other
remains unaffected, demolishing buildings on one hand. and not on the
other; and as a result it concluded that the One Who shook one portion
of the Earth and saved the other is He Who moves the wind and controls
the air withholding them or not, according to His pleasures.

He is the designer and organizer of the skies and the earth and all
things pertaining to them. The mind guessed for certain that it was
quite impossible for the Earth to quake by itself. Because being
naturally firm it should never have shaken at all.

And if it was not naturally firm, it’s hold have never ceased shaking.
Because the natural condition of every thing always remains immutable.
Thus it was proved to the mind that He Who created and designed the
earth shakes any portion of it or not. Again the eye observed another
wonderful sign of Allah's existence in the cloud which by His order
hangs like smoke over-head between the Earth and sky. It does not
possess a body to collide with mountains.

It passes through trees without shaking or sticking to them. It often
passes through caravans, and when it is dark and thick obscures their
way. Despite its light appearance it carries vast quantities of water.
Its qualities are beyond description. It carries immense thunderbolts,
lightning, snow, hail, dew (congested) so much so that the human
imagination cannot fully comprehend its secrets or its wonders. It soars
very high in the regions of skies - sometimes it is seen in a scattered
state. Sometimes in united position.

Its movements depend upon the wind that is regulated by the will of
Allah. Through its influence, it sometimes rises high and descends low,
not letting of course quantity of water, it holds, fall down upon the
Earth. When it does, it pours down in showers. Many a time we see it
passing overhead covering cities, towns and places without letting even
a drop of water fall down. When it has spread over hundreds of miles of
land, it begins to rain drop by drop, and sometimes in torrents from the
same quantity of water. Sometimes it rains so continuously that
reservoirs, tanks, lanes and rivers overflow, and roads are flooded, and
mountains of water seem to stand before the eyes. Sometimes it rains so
violently that the ears get deafened with its roar and thunder.

With this rain, Allah revives the dry land, changes its color and
clothes it in green verdure, the grass which is the fodder of beasts,
begins to spring up. After it ceases raining, the clouds disperse, and
gradually become invisible none can say where they have gone to these
observations were no sooner conveyed to the mind, by the eye, then did
the mind begin to reflect over them.

It thought that if these movements and functions of the clouds had come
into existence of themselves and were not regulated by any perfect
wisdom, it could not have been possible for the cloud to carry half the
weight of water. And that if the cloud poured down the rain by itself it
could not have gone further from its place, and it would not have rained
drop by drop, but on the contrary would have poured all the water down
all at once on the spot, because it is destitute of intelligence, and
cannot foresee the result of raining all at once on the same spot.

In this case the mind thought that the buildings would have collapsed,
vegetable product ruined, one portion of the land would have been
over-irrigated, and the other would have been left dry and barren. Thus
thinking, the mind concluded that the creator of all these things must
be one and the same. Because had there been more than one say two or
three, there must have arisen differences and disagreements in so long a
period with regard to the regularity of these functions. Some would have
been slower than others. Some lofty things would have lowered down, and
lower things would have taken higher places.

Some planets (in contradiction to prescribed rules) would have risen
instead of setting and some set instead of rising. In short, the unity
of design, so manifest in the creation, convinced the mind of the fact
that the creator of all the obvious and obscure things and wonders of
the universe is He, Who has been existing from all eternity before
anything was created. He is the creator and upholder of the sky, the
creator and designer of the Earth, and the creator of all the things I
have just mentioned and other things too numerous to enumerate.

Again, the eye observed succession of nights and days following each
other with no possible change in the regularity and condition. It saw
them merging one into another in regular hours, their peculiarities of
light and darkness, their varying shortness and length. It saw the stars
and planets unaffected by these successions of days and nights, the
approach and departure of the different seasons, their commencement and
end unvarying. And the mind with that instinctive sense given to it by
Allah-Almighty, realized beyond all doubts, that the creator of all this
perfect wisdom must be One Omnipotent, Omniscient, Eternal, Allah.

If there existed more than one creator, each creator would not have
considered the other's creation worth anything, and would have tried to
excel the others in design. Thus, instead of regularity and uniformity
there would have been disorder and tumult…. Also the ears heard the
message of Allah through the apostles, which verified the conclusion of
the mind. The ears heard evidence as to Allah the Creator having neither
a wife nor a son nor a partner and the message went to the mind for it
to realize the truth”.

“What you described” said he, “are very wonderful things - things I had
never heard before. Still I hesitate to accept, what you have said,
unless you give me some more convincing proofs”.

“Well”, said I, “when you feel yourself unable to refute or find fault
with my descriptions, and begin to water in your arguments I am
confident your mind will very shortly assure you Insha’Allah (if Allah
wishes), of the truth that the senses can know nothing without the help.
Now tell me have you ever experienced a dream in which you were eating
something and relishing its pleasant taste”

“Yes”, said he.

“Have you ever dreamt” I asked, “that you are laughing or weeping
bitterly, traveling in known or unknown countries, recognizing those
countries you had seen or known?”

“Yes” he replied, “I had had many such dreams”.

“Have you ever”, I asked, “seen in your dreams relatives parent or
brothers that had died long ago, and identified them as you did in the
life time”

“Why not” he exclaimed “I have experienced many such dreams.”

“Well then”, said I, “which of your senses felt the dead man and pointed
him out to the mind that it could recognize him and converse with him
Which sense relished the food, recognized the countries known or
unknown, through which it traveled? Which sense wept and laughed?”

“I am confounded” he said, “I cannot reply, which of my sense (in this
sleeping state) did the above things. In fact when one is asleep, he is
like one dead, and in that condition, it is quite impossible for the
senses to feel, know, see or hear anything.”

“Tell me”, asked I, “when startled, you woke from your sleep. Did you
not recollect your dream sufficiently to narrate to your relations and
friends, forgetting nothing?”

“Yes”, he replied. “Sometimes I have seen a thing in a dream and the
same thing again in a waking state.”

“Alright”, said I, “which of the senses imbued you with the memory of
what you saw when those senses were asleep?”

“None of the senses”, said he “seem to have had any hand therein.”

“Can you not see now” said I, “that it is the mind that sees all these
things, remembering (in a dreaming state) when all the senses have
ceased working? Don't you know that the mind has been endowed with
reason, by means of which Allah establishes His Hujjat?”

“What I see in a dream” said he, “is unsubstantial like a Surab'
(mirage), which from a distance appears to be real water, but on
approach is discovered to be only sand.”

“How do you make comparison, when in your dream you relish different
tastes?” I queried.

“Because”, he replied, “when I approached that ‘Surab', I discovered
only sand, and when I awoke I discovered nothing of that which I had
seen in dream.”

“Well” asked I, “if I give you an example of what you may have enjoyed
in a dream, and which may have made you uneasy, will you believe in the
reality of dreams?”

“Yes, why not?” He replied.

“Tell me”, said I, “have you ever in a dream lived with a woman familiar
or unfamiliar?”

“Many times”, said he.

“Did you not feel then”, asked I, “exactly the same sensation derived
from the satisfaction of carnal appetite in the waking state, and were
not the traces left the same?”

“This refutes the argument regarding the 'Surab'. Because the latter is
quite unreal-when one approach, it fades away. But here the case is
quite contrary. The action in the dream leaves behind traces to prove
the reality of sensation.”

“The dreamer”, he said, “sees the same things that his senses in a state
of wakefulness have witnessed.”

“Very well”, said I, “you strengthen my argument, when you admit the
mind's ability to comprehend and identify the things of which the senses
(no longer working} have no remembrance. Why did you first assert that
the mind even with the help of the senses and in the state of
wakefulness has not this power, and that they are the senses only which
comprehend all these things? Will you tell me who (when the senses were
out of work) gave this power to mind that has neither ears nor eyes?
Because now you admit that it was the mind that saw the woman and
enjoyed the pleasure of her company even though the senses were not at
work?”

“It is foolish to admit the knowledge of the mind when the senses are
sleeping and to deny it, when the senses are waking. A man of reason
must believe that the mind is the king, and prime administrator of the
senses. However foolish he may be, he cannot be ignorant of the fact
that the hand cannot extract the eye, nor amputate the tongue, nor can
have any senses any power to deal with any part of the body without its
permission, suggestion and contrivance.

Allah has created the mind to be the regent of the body, and the body
can only feel, see or hear, through its agency. If the mind conceives
retreat, the body can not advance and vice-versa. It is only through its
medium the senses work. They are obedient to its orders. If the mind
prohibits them to act, they at once obey its command. It is the mind on
which sorrows prey, and joys enliven. Despite the loss or derangement of
the senses, the mind remains intact. But if the mind gets out of order
the senses share the same fate, the eyes do not see properly, the ears
do not understand,”

“I scarcely believed”, said he, “that you would be able to deal with
these difficult questions without being confounded. Your arguments are
so elegant as to appear irrefutable”.

“Listen”, said I, “and I will more firmly convince you, as to the truth
of what I have narrated, and of the things you have seen in your dreams”

“Do so”, he exclaimed, “I am not a little astounded your eloquence.”

“When you think of any calling”, asked I, “or devise plans to build or
erect something, do you not deliver order to that effect?”

“Yes”, He replied.

“While devising such plans, and forming designs of non-existing things,
do you make any of your senses the partner of the mind that creates
them?”

“No”. He replied.

“Is it not visible”, said I, “that things done in compliance with the
mind's mature judgment, are of a high order?” (Then is it not proved
that it is the mind that knows all the things and not the senses?).

“I think so”, he said. “But please go on with your arguments. I am now
anxious to throw off doubts and accept the truth.”

“So much the better”, said I. “Tell me if there are any astronomers in
your native place?”

“You do not seem to be acquainted with the extent of astronomical
knowledge possessed by my countrymen.” he said. “I don’t think there is
a nation to surpass us in this particular science.”

“Well, tell me”, asked I, “how they acquired this knowledge of
astronomy, for this knowledge cannot be acquired through the medium of
the senses, but through profound thought and deep reflection?”

“Yes”, he replied, “it is true. Some wise and learned persons prepared
tables of such importance, which generation after generation in
successive order have followed. When an inquiry is made, the movements
and the positions of the Sun, Moon and Stars are considered. They state
which of the visible stars are ill-omened, and which of the invisible
ones are auspicious. They are so well versed in this science that they
rarely err in their calculations. People take their children to these
astrologers, and they calculating from the movements of the planets,
predict events and incidents occurred or to occur in the child's life.”

“What concern”, I asked, “have the movements of planets, with the lives
of children that their parents take them to astrologers.”

“Because”, he replied, “each child's birth corresponds with a planet's
movement, If this were not so, the astrologers would make mistakes. They
calculate the movement-day, month and year-in which the child is born,
and are correct in their conclusions.”

“If this be really true”, said I, “You have described a science so
wonderful, that none other can be compared to it or more worthy of
respect; for the incidents and the accidents of a person's life from
birth to death are known through its means. Do you think the knowledge
of this science is an innate one, born with every person?”

“No”, he said, “I do not think it is so”.

“Then, let us think”, said I, ''as to how this knowledge was acquired.
And let us use if it be correct to say that all people cannot acquire
it, though all are born in connection with the movements of the planets
and stars. I am ready to grant that only few people learn and master the
science. But the question is how did they learn or master it-specially
the knowledge which declares one star to be ill-omened and the other to
be auspicious? How have they fixed the time, hour and degrees, the slow
or rapid movements of the planets and the stars, their exact position
over or below the Earth; and their predictions which you mention? How
have they gathered them? I believe that any of the creatures inhabiting
this globe are so advanced as to penetrate the secrets of the visible
and invisible Universe”.

“You may not believe”, said he. “But that they have done so, I am
positive about it”.

“When you assert”, said I, “that all the Earth's inhabitants are born in
conjunction with the movements of the stars and planets, the wise man
(Hakim) who first discovered the science of astronomy must have been
born like-wise.”

“Of course”, he exclaimed, “he must be included in the category of the
human race.”

“Then does not your reason guide you to the fact that these planets and
stars existed before the birth of that wise man, who, as you say
discovered the science of astronomy, and was born in conjunction with
the movements of the stars and planets?”

“Indeed”, said he, “the planets and stars must have existed prior to his
birth”.

“Tell me” said I, “how could the wise inventor of the science learn the
method of calculating the stars without a master to teach him? If you
say that he had a master, then that master must have existed before the
existence of the stars. And indeed must be He, Who established the rules
and regulations for those movements, on which you say the events of a
life are based, and from which the future of a new born child is
foretold. Taking this for granted, the wise man inventor of the science-
must have been the follower and pupil of that master, who had existed
before the stars, and had created them-the wise man-in conjunction with
the movements of certain of them.

Then He who established the science, was He who lived before the stars,
the Creator of them and the people born according to their movements.
Presupposing the age of the wise man to be ten times that of the Earth,
he must have had the same observation of the stars as we have now. They
must have twinkled over-head as they down-where lay the difference
between him and us? How did he know the exact calculation whilst we do
not? Had he special power to go nearer to this very high firmament, and
more closely study the secrets of the stars, their position and
movements; learn, which of them eclipse the Sun and the Moon; which are
consistent with the birth of children; which are ill-omened and
suspicious, rapid or slow, and many other things, such as the length of
time they are concealed under the Earth, and the exact hours of their
appearance and disappearance?

How chances it that a human being has so great a knowledge of things
heavenly, since deep reflection cannot give it to him and his senses
cannot reach so far? How did he invent the method of calculation by
which is known the movement of the Sun and Moon, and the
knowledge--which among the seven planets suspicious or ill-omened; the
exact position of these luminaries, and correct judgment as to which was
rising or a setting one? How could he-on the surface of the Earth-study
that which was in the heavens? How could he see those stars which are
made invisible by the Sun's blinding luster? If you suggest that he flew
up to the skies, my mind still perplexes me, for even then he could not
master the science without a teacher; when one cannot master an earthly
science thus, how can he master a science not of the Earth?”

“I do not even recollect”, said he, “of hearing of a human being going
up to the skies”.

“Perhaps”, I suggested, “the wise man may have done so, and you may not
be aware of it”.

“I would not accept its truth “, he said, “from any source”.

“I agree with you there”, I said, “but let us suppose the fact of the
wise man's ability to climb up to the skies. In that case we shall have
to believe that he performed incredible journeys, visited every star and
planet, staying with them as they set or rose till he had gained fullest
knowledge about those functions; and as some of the planets take as much
as thirty years to complete their rotation, he must necessarily have
stayed with them for the prescribed period however long it may have been
in order to fully collect all information. Let us take all this for
granted also, that he not only ascended to the skies, but he traveled in
company with each and every luminary, till he had become fully
acquainted with their habits.

Still however, his observations could not be called complete until he
had studied those stars under the Earth. In this he must take the same
amount of time, that he took in observing the heavenly stars, for the
movements of the stars beneath the Earth cannot be said to be the same,
and to master the science to its present accuracy of calculation he must
miss no point of knowledge. To know the period of time these stars
remain invisible, whether by day or by night, is very necessary;
besides, the question must be settled fully and for ever as there was
only one wise man to do it. If there had been more than one wise man,
they must have differed in their calculations. Now really does not
strike you that it is only you who can hold the idea of a wise man, who
dived down into the depths of the seas, and penetrated through the
darkness of the Earth; who floated along the shies, clinging to the
stars and the planets and acquiring the knowledge of their movement and
doing the same to stars under the Earth!”

“I do not hold”, said he “the opinion that any man can ascend the skies,
or dive to the bottom of the seas, or penetrate the interior of the
Earth.”

“As you don't hold this opinion”, said I, “tell me then how could the
wise man (whom you think to be inventor) learn the science of Astronomy?
How could he complete his researches in connection with it when he came
into existence long after the creation of the stars he knew all about?”

“In face of your arguments” he said, “it does not seem prudent or wise
to say that this science was invented by a being of this Earth?”

“Then”, said I, “you admit that this science can only be known to one
cognizant with the ins and outs of heaven well as Earth?”

“If I do so”, he said, “I must admit Allah, who you say is the creator
of heaven and earth.”

“Have you not told me”, I asked, “that the calculations based on
Astronomy are perfectly correct and the birth of children correspond to
certain movements of the stars?”

“Yes” he replied, “I have told you so, and also I have no doubt of this,
but I have a doubt as to there being a creator”.

“That doubt will be removed”, said I; “have you not said that no human
being can scale up to the skies, or travel in company with the movements
of the Sun, moon and stars - East, West or in any direction?”

“To scale up to the skies is impossible”, he said.

“Well” I said, “what other alternative have you beyond admitting that it
was a heavenly teacher who taught this science?”

“If I say so”; said he, “that no teacher taught this science, I am
absurd; and if I say it was an earthly teacher, it would be an equally
irrational statement, for no human being ever by himself acquired
knowledge of heaven above, or of hell beneath; for no human being has
the power to pry into those things beyond the range of his eye's
observation. Even granting closeness of observation no inward knowledge
can be gained, for according to my belief nothing is real except what is
known through the medium of senses, and it is obvious that the senses
have no hand here. The eye can only perceive movements, and nothing
beyond that. The knowledge and calculation of the movements, the
differences between rapid and slow, the season of the disappearing and
the reappearing of the stars are beyond the scope of the senses.”

“If you wish to study the science of the heavens”, asked I, “would you
choose an earthly being or a heavenly being as your teacher”?

“I would choose a heavenly being”, he replied, “Because the stars hand
in his region, where earthly being cannot reach”

“Alright. Now I hope you will give yourself to profound thought, and
clear up all doubts from your mind.”

“If all the people of the earth have their birth in conjunction with the
movements of the stars-either sinister or auspicious, it stands to
reason that the stars pre-existed the people of the earth, don’t you
think so?”

“Yes, I do”, he replied.

“Well then”, said I, “your statement as to man having existed on earth,
has been contradicted by you yourself. You have admitted without the
least doubt, that the human race came into existence after the stars,
and if the stars pre-existed the human race, it necessarily follows that
the earth also pre-existed the human race.”

“I do not say”, he said, “that the earth pre-existed them.”

“If the earth”, said I, “which the Almighty Allah created as a carpet
for men to walk on, did not pre-exist the race, these beings together
with the lower orders of life, would have had nothing to rest upon. It
is not reasonable to state that they lived in space, for they do not
possess wings.”

“Of what good would wings have done”, said he, “when they had no means
of subsistence.”

“Bravo”, said I, “Do you now entertain doubts as to the pre-existence of
the earth as well as the stars?”

“No”, said he, “now I am fully convinced of the pre-existence of both.”

“I’ll now”, said I “dilate upon such subjects that exciting your
curiosity, may add to your store of knowledge.

“Your previous arguments”, he said “are sufficient to remove my doubts.”

“You know I suppose”, said I, “that it is in the Sky, the Sun, Moon and
Stars perform their duties.”

“Yes I do” he replied.

“Would you not call it the basis and foundation of luminaries?”

“Yes, I would”, he replied.

“In my opinion then”, said I, “the stars which you say, are connected
with the birth of the human race were created after the skies, because
it is in the skies they perform their rotation-sometimes moving upwards
and sometimes downwards.”

“All proved so clearly”, said he, “that only an insane man could deny
it. The sky is the foundation of the luminaries, and undoubtedly existed
before them, for it is in that those said luminaries move and perform
their duties.”

“Now”, said I, “you have admitted the creator of the stars, according to
whose movements, human beings are born, to be the same as He, who
created the skies and the earth, for without the earth, there could be
no creation.”

“Yes you are right”, he said, “I see no alternative but to accept this
as true.”

“Does not your reason further point out”, said I, “that He Who created
the earth, the skies, Sun, Moon and other planets must be All-powerful
and Wise, for without the skies, the creatures of the earth must perish;
for the heavenly bodies are directly necessary for those upon the earth
to live? For instance, had there only been no Sun, nothing could ripen,
the poisonous effect of the air would not be nullified and everything
would die.”

“Now”, said he. 'I would bear witness to the wisdom of Allah, Who made
all these things, for you have completely overthrown my doubts. I must
hold your theory that the teacher of the science of Astronomy, and the
inventor of the calculations appertaining to it, cannot be an inhabitant
of this earth, for that which he studies is in the skies, and the person
able to unravel the mysteries of the skies must be powerful enough to
pry beneath the earth. It is beyond my comprehension all the same as to
how a human being has mastered this science and brought it to its
present state of uniformity, the logic of which no one denies. If I had
not known the principles of the science I would have from the very
start, flatly denied the same, and called the article a futile one.”

“I will make it clear to you”, said I, “by the means of *halila* you
hold in your hand, and the science of medicine which has been the
profession of your forefathers and is now yours. This *halila*, with
medical science, I will compare to the heavenly objects and their
science. But do you promise not only to acknowledge the truth, but do
justice by it?”

“Yes, I do promise”, he replied. “Please go on”.

“Has there”, asked I, “ever been a time when the human race was in
ignorance of knowledge (‘*ilm*) and its benefits, in fact as senseless
as this *halila*?”

“Why not?” he replied, “There must have been a time, when none was
acquainted with medical science and its advantages. Knowledge was
acquired”.

“How? When they were totally ignorant of science, how did they acquire
it?”

“By experience and experiments”, he said, “after considerable time.”

“Whence came the idea of experimenting” I asked. “What made them think
such thing made into medicine was beneficial to the human body, when the
external form of these things appear hurtful, and some placed on the
tongue are so bitter as to cause pain and uneasiness And how did they do
the investigation of such medicinal plants that were totally unknown,
and not recognized by their senses, for to demand an unknown thing is
quite an impossibility and absurdity?”

“Experience led to the investigation”, he said, “and invention of the
medical science.”

“Well”, said I “tell me who invented it, or who described the nature and
effects of the herbs used, when some grow far west and some others far
east. Do you not sensibly feel that the person, who did so, was one who
inhabited the places where they grew?”

“Yes”, he said, “and what a wise man he was, for he has drawn every
other man to his side to agree with his conclusions,”

“If you wish to abide by your promise to me, and give justice to the
truth, tell me how that man-the inventor came to know the nature of
every medicinal plant. Let us suppose he got himself acquainted with all
the medicinal plants in his village, or even the whole of Persia; but
can you suppose that he continued his researches and investigations
allover the world and tasted every fruit, leaf and root to test their
qualities from the effects on himself?

Can you suppose even with the help of other wise persons that he was
able to fully acquaint himself with the plants growing in Persia alone,
studying with his senses those plants that his senses did not recognize;
noting their peculiarities and importance or non-importance of the
botany of Persia, how did they come to know that such and such herb was
useless?, unless the prescription. included the *halila* from India, gum
mastich from Rome, musk from Tibet, cinnamon from China, willow from
Turkey, opium from Egypt, aloes from Yemen, salt peter from Armenia and
various other articles from different parts of the world, which mixed
and pounded together make a particular medicine.

How could they know living in Persia that individually these articles
produce no effects? How did they know about the places where these
articles are produced, when they are so different in kind and nature,
and grow at so great a distance from each other? Some plants roots alone
are used, of others the fruit, shell, essence, juice, gum or oil- some
are used internally, and others externally; again in different countries
they hold different names; the people of different countries are not
always friendly to each other they vary in opinions, manners and modes
of life; one nation desires to predominate over the other, they
slaughter and pillage and try to imprison one another: it is not always
easy for a stranger to carryon investigation? How was that knowledge
gained?

Can you say that the person who invented the science went to every nook
and corner of the world, learnt every language, and traveled every
country? That he was able to investigate the medicines from east to west
quite fearlessly and safely, and that he never fell sick, did not under
go any troubles but remained healthy and intact? That he made no
mistakes, was never misdirected found all the countries, remembered all
he learnt, remained always happy and finished all his researches with
regard to the origin and nature and effects of what he sought-despite
all differences of color quality and names? That he got correct
description of each and every tree, its origin, smell and taste, flowers
and fruits?

Can you really think the enterprise such as one individual may undertake
and accomplish when you consider that each and every medicine has at
least twenty different natures? Is it not impossible that he learnt the
science of medicine the secrets of the trees that demand close
observation and grow in so many different countries? Even granting him
the possibility how did he come by the knowledge that such and such a
plant could be used as a medicine for the senses do not hold the innate
ideas? How did he separate the bitter, the sweet, and the saltiest and
acrid trees from another? If you say that he did so by inquiry and
converse with the people of different lands they grew in how did he
inquire and converse about the things unknown to him? How did it come to
his mind that he must ask these questions of a particular man? And how
could he arrive at a satisfactory conclusion despite so many social and
political barriers, and the difference of languages?

Even granting these things whence came the knowledge of advantages and
disadvantages of medicine? Why this affected a cure? Why this caused an
injury, their nature, their sweet and bitter tastes, and the softness of
one and the hardness of the other? If you answer, by pondering, I say it
is impossible; because these things are beyond the scope of the senses
and cannot be comprehended by thought. You cannot say either it was by
personal test; for had he made experiments upon himself he must have
died from some poisonous effects that he had not before known. And if
you say that he traveled in all the countries, lived with every class of
people mastered their languages, experimented upon them, killing some
here and some there, yet still it was impossible to know the exact
nature of one medicine without killing many people. And is it possible
that these people would allow him to continue his experiments upon them
to take more lives.

Still let us say that by some miracle they listened to what he said, and
tolerated his deadly experiments. Well, where did he get the opportunity
and time for mixing the various things and knowing the respective
weights. How did he learn the proportion necessary to mix one with
another? Never mind. Granted, this knowledge was also acquired. Whence
came the knowledge that an overdose would bring death to the person to
whom it is administered, whilst an under close would have no good
effect. Granting again that he succeeded in acquiring all this traveled
in all parts of the world and had the necessary long life to do so, how
did he acquire the knowledge of those thing not belonging to the
vegetable world?

You are perhaps aware that some of the medicines unless mixed with the
bill of the gall bladders of certain beast and birds on earth and sea,
are inefficacious and not pure. As such is the case, his mode of
investigation must be similar to the one relating to the vegetable
world. He has no other alternative, but to investigate the birds and
beasts of the world, slay them and examine their gall bladders. Well
when he has finished his investigations with the birds and beasts of
this world, there remain now the animals of the sea. To know their
nature it was just as necessary to dive down into the seas and
investigate them also, as it was necessary for him to investigate the
vegetable world.

It does not matter if you do not know all these things, but you cannot
deny the knowledge, that the animals of the sea live in the sea, and
that to thoroughly know them he must necessarily dive in the sea and
study them in that element. Tell me now can you reasonably say that
these things were known through experience and experiment”

“I am completely at a loss to reply”, he said.

“I will describe something more”, said I, “which will convince you of
the truth. You are probably aware that the bile’s of the different
animals unless mixed with roots cannot form prescription.”

“Yes”, he said.

“Tell me”, said I, “How he fixed the exact weights of medicine to such a
nicety? As you are a physician you probably know only too well that you
put four hundred ‘miskals’ of a particular leaf or fruit, and one or two
or another in a compound prescription, some few 'miskals' sometimes less
sometimes more till the prescription reaches a satisfactory point. When
a particular dose of a particular medicine is given to a patient
suffering from diarrhea, it cures him of it, yet the same medicine in
large dose when given in a case of colic has quite an opposite effect,
and set up purging.

How did the physician know the knowledge of the effects of medicines?
How does he knows that one medicine would affect the head and not the
foot, though it is easier for the medicine to descend than to rise, that
if it is given for the lower extremities, it will not affect the higher
though the head is near the mouth, and could be more easily affected? In
the same way particular medicines carried the affected part by means of
blood vessels are used for its different parts of the body.

First of all these internal medicines reach the stomach and from thence
by reason of their power are distributed to the different parts of the
body. How did that wise man discover that the effect meant for the brain
would not reach the hands, legs, loins, or abdomen, etc, or vice versa.
Was it really possible for his senses to have known all these things?
Why do medicines administered for one part of the body produce no effect
on the other parts? How did his senses know that a certain medicine
affected the ears and not the eyes? Why do different medicines cure
diseases in different parts? And how came senses, reason or discernment
to know the places of all those parts concealed as, they are from
external contemplation -blood vessels are hidden in muscles, and covered
up with skin, to which the medicines reach? The senses by themselves
cannot detect them”.

“What you say”, said he, “was already known to me” but we physicians
hold the opinion, that the person who invented the science, performed
postmortem examinations, when the patient was not cured of his disease,
and thus examined the blood vessels passages and places and located the
traces of the medicines.”

“Do you not know”, I asked, “that the medicines taken internally
circulate with the blood throughout the body, and become mixed up with
it?”

“Yes I know it”, he replied.

“Don't you know”, I asked again, “that when a person dies, his blood
thickness?”

“Yes it does”, he replied.

“Then”, I asked, “How did the physician examine the medicine, when it
was clotted in the blood, for all trace was surely lost, and in such a
state could not be analyzed properly?”

“I am at my wit's end now,” he said.

“Again tell me”, “how the people were able to now the beneficial effects
of the roots and plants they had investigated and their locations? How
did they learn to analyze and mix them together, ascertain their
respective weights, and discover the need of gall bladders and stones in
certain medicines?”

“You have discussed the subject with such perfection”, said he, “that I
have neither the imagination nor thought nor wit to find a way of
properly answering your question. As these prescriptions have not
invented themselves, they must have been invented by some one else and
that same one else must have acquired a thorough knowledge of the
natures and qualities of the items he had laced in such order. Will you
kindly explain to me how the people were able to know those medicines
that were beneficial to health, and how they could investigate these
things in every part of the world?”

“Since you wish me to explain it to you”, said I, “I shall give you an
illustration, and discuss it in such a way that you will easily learn
who the inventor of medicine was, who created the various kinds of
plants and fruit? And who made the body and blood vessels, which carry
the medicine through it to its affected parts.”

“If you will do so”, he said, “I shall be very glad indeed”.

“Supposing”, said I, “a certain man had planted a garden surrounded by a
wall to protect it from outside harm. Do you not think the owner would
know every tree planted therein and its position? After a time the trees
began to bear fruits and even the smallest vegetation also bloomed, In
the meantime you happened to go there, and desired the owner to bring
you certain fruits and vegetable pods. The owner went to do so. Were you
not in that case be sure that he would go straight to the exact place,
where the desired fruits add pods grew, knowing perfectly well where
they were,-in a near or a distant part of the garden? You know he would
not waste time puzzling over their whereabouts”

“Yes”, he said; “he would undoubtedly find the places easily.”

“But if the owner”, said I, “instead of going himself asked you to go
into the garden, and pluck the desired things for yourself, could you
have gone straight for them without looking earnestly here and there”.

“I could not have done so”, he said, “without knowing the proper
places.”

“Supposing”, said I “you reached these places after some considerable
exertion and trouble. For instance you touched and examined each and
every tree till you found out the desired one, but if you failed to
detect that tree, you would be forced to return empty-handed”.

“I don't see how I could find out the whereabouts for a tree, of whose
position I had no knowledge”, said he.

“Seeing”, said I “how helpless your senses are in guiding you, surely
your mind tells you that he who planted this large garden which extends
from east to west, and north to south, must have taught that wise man,
whom you considered to have invented the science of medicine. Can you
not easily understand that the names of the medicine and the cities
wherein they could be found, were shown to the wise man by Him, and that
He must have been as well versed in the location of the vegetable world
as the owner himself (as the owner of that garden I instanced to you).
It is reasonable to say that He, who taught the exact whereabouts of the
tree that grew in the garden, was He who planted them; and He Who taught
their advantages, disadvantages, and weights and was also that Self-same
person.”

“You’re reasoning”, said he “seems to be flawless.”

“If the creator of body of man”, said I, “with its nerves, veins and
intestines through which the medicines course from head to foot were not
the same person as the creator of this garden, would that creator have
know and made known to man the existence of those trees and herbs, their
proportion in medicine and their necessity to the well-being of man?
Would that creator know that such medicines were particularly beneficial
to certain diseases and had such and such effect on certain nerve?”

“How could he know these things?” He said.

“These things are not known through the medium of senses. So if man is
aware of them it must be through the teaching of Him, who created the
garden of the world, for He alone could know the effected and nature of
that which He created.”

“Then”, said I “does it not follow that the vegetable and the animal
world would have one and the same creator? If there had existed two
creators, one for human beings and their ailments, and the other for the
vegetable world, the first would have no knowledge of medicines and the
diseases they cure, and the other similarly would have no knowledge of
the plants and trees by which medicines are made; but if the creator of
the animal, and vegetable world be one and the same, it would be easy
for him to know the medicine for the particular disease. He would be
fully aware of the nature of medicine and its exact weight and effect on
the body-whether it would affect a cure to the brain, feet or some other
part of the human body. For having created both the medicine and the
body he is cognizant of the science of both.”

“You are really right”, he said, “If there were two different creators,
each would have been ignorant of the science of the other.”

“Then”, said I. “He who taught the wise man, whom you consider to be the
inventor of this science, and established it is the creator of the
garden of the world. He created the human body. He informed the wise man
(who was prophet like Luqman or Dawood) the nature of all plants and
trees, their location and surroundings, attributes such as leaves and
veins, oily substances branches, bark and fruits. He taught him the use
and nature of medicine and the weight to be used. He made all the beasts
and birds of the world together with those gall bladders which are also
necessary to medicine. If the creator of birds and beasts had been
different from he, who created the man and the vegetable world, he would
never have known the effects of the gall bladders, which should be mixed
with vegetable medicine; and which not; but as He was the creator of
all, He knew their actions, attributes and names, which knowledge He
imparted to the wise prophet, and this is how the wise man came to know
the advantages and the disadvantages of medicines belonging to the
vegetable and animal kingdom. In no other way could He have known all
those things. In truth he must have been some Prophet or Apostle taught
by the most august omnipotent glorious Allah of the Universe.”

“What you say is quite right”, he said, “Before your eloquence all
reasoning of the senses and so called experience pale into
insignificance.”

“Since you have admitted so much”, said I, “Let us go a step further,
and with our senses reason whether it was advisable for Him who planted
the world's garden, and created the animal world for the benefit of the
human race, to scatter all these things in the land belonging to some
other person than himself If He did so, He could not have carried any
experiment of any sort upon His belongings except by the other's
permission. Don't you think so?”

“Yes”, he replied.

“The earth, on which this garden is planted, must have also been created
by Him who created the garden, plants, trees and animals.”

“You think the earth belongs to Him”, said I, “because of its close
connection with those other creations that belong to Him?” Are you not
also aware”, asked I, “that a garden of such magnificence, containing
men and animals along with its trees, and other creations, to be kept in
health must be irrigated, and refreshed with life-giving water?”

“Yes”, he replied. “None of these creations can live without water”.

“Will you say”, asked I, “that the creator of the garden with all that
is in it, is not the creator of water; that the existence of the garden
that he created depends upon the pleasure of He who created the water,
who may stop its supply when he chooses?”

“It is impossible”, he replied, “to believe in the existence of two
creators, one for the garden and one for the water. I am sure there is
one creator for the both, and it is the same who created the mountains
which are the sources of great rivers and flowing waters. If this
irrigation had been by other one, the garden and its contents must have
withered and died. He who created the garden must have created the water
first, knowing it was needed to keep the garden in the best condition”,

“If there were no store of water” asked I, “to flow to the garden, and
refresh it in case of emergency, do you not think it would have been
destroyed, for you may have heard that it has many times suffered
through want of water?”

“Yes”, he replied, “I am wondering now if there is any need of anyone to
manage these things. The law of nature may be that water must ever flow
without cessation.”

“You have admitted”, said I, “that but for the ocean and its store of
water the garden might have become dry and barren.”

“Yes”, he said.

“Well”, said I, “I intend to convince you of the creator of the ocean
being the same creator as He of the earth; and that the ocean is really
a reservoir held in reserve into which the streams and rivers pour their
superfluous energy for time of need. And that in the ocean He has
created many good and profitable things.”

“Convince me of this”, he said, ''as you have done already with regard
to other things.”

“Are you not aware that all surplus water is collected by the sea?”

“Yes”, he replied.

“Have you ever known its quantity being increased through and abundance
of rain; or decrease through excessive heat or famine?” I asked.

“No”, he replied.

“Does not your reason says”, said I, “that the Allah who created the
garden was He who created the ocean, and that He fixed a limit to the
latter? The proof which stands in favor of my argument is that, were
those great mountains like waves which arise out of the sea, not
restrained from passing a certain limit they would have overwhelmed the
whole garden of the world. We see despite their fury and passions that
there is a fix limit, which reaching, their fury and passion become
spent.

“Yes “, he said, “You are quite right. The wonder of the phenomena makes
your argument very strong.”

“I will dwell further on the matter”, said I, “and convince you of the
connection of the different creations one with another connection which
must prove to you that the Universe is the work of one omnipotent,
omniscient, and omnipresent Allah. You must be aware that many gardens
are not watered by rivers or streams. That many vegetables, trees and
plants growing in fore are supplied water by the rains which fall from
the sky, and all the wild beasts who inhabit these spots, depend on the
rain for water also.”

“Certainly”, he said.

“Well, do not your senses, which you claim to be the perfect means by
which we come to the knowledge of things, point out to you that the rain
clouds carry water to those places devoid of rivers and streams? If
these clouds were creation of some other than He, who created the
garden, that other might have stopped supplying water at any time, and
the owner of the garden must have been in perpetual anxieties as to the
welfare of his garden.”

“You are indeed right”, he said, “There is a perfect connection with
each and everything of the world. It would be absurd to say that the
creator of the garden, its contents and the store of water laid for its
use, is not the same as the creator of the sky and the clouds. He must
be the same to water his garden, at certain necessary moments lest His
garden die. I wish you to discuss further, that I may clear my brain of
any lingering doubt and be thoroughly convinced of the truth.”

“Insha’Allah, with God's pleasure, I will convince you that the things
of this world are created by some wise creator. I will convince you
through this '*halila*' and prove its connection with the things of the
garden and the skies.”

“I can hardly imagine”, said he, “that you can remove all my doubts
through the medium of this ‘*halila*'.”

“I will from it”, said I, “show you the stability of creation, the atoms
and ingredients, that go to make perfect development, and from this
*halila*'s first connection with its roots and branches prove the
dependence one thing has on another, and the close relation borne to
celestial objects.”

“If you prove these things”, he said, “I can no longer doubt.”

“You must know”, said I, “that the *halila* springs from the earth,
fibers run to one strong root that flings up a stem. The stem has
branches, and the branches twigs and the twigs are studded with pearl-
like buds from which leaves emerge, and all these things from a canopy
to shelter the whole buds, flowers, fruits, from the severity of the
cold or heat.”

“No doubt can linger in my mind”, he said, “the *halila* with its
perfection, and connection, with the place where it grew, its roots and
leaves, witnesses with me that there is only one creator; that He has no
partner (*sharik*). For his creations are related to each other and are
in harmony one with another”.

“If I further prove to you”, said I, “the wisdom and necessity of these
creations, and the dependence of each on the other will you bear witness
to the existence, and wisdom (*hikmat*) of God?”

“I would not hesitate to do so”, he said. “Listen to me”, I said “Do you
know that the *halila* is dependent on the earth, and the earth on the
effects of the heat and cold on weather, the weather on the wind, the
wind on the clouds, the clouds on the rain, the rain on the season the
season on the movements of the Sun and Moon, the Sun and Moon on the
revolution of the sky, and the sky on that atmosphere between the heaven
and the earth? Surely this dependence and connection of creations are
themselves proofs of the wonderful wisdom and skill of God. Their
connection is so close to each other that not one can be dispensed with,
even (if) one for a moment became out of order, the whole creation-earth
and plant would be destroyed.”

“What you say is correct”, he said, “But the creation you missed
mentioning, may not have so intimate a connection with the universe.”

“What creation is that?” I asked.

“It is man you have not mentioned”. He replied.

“Don't you know”, I said, “that these things are most closely connected
with man? God has created all these things for his benefit.”

“Can you prove it to my satisfaction” He asked.

“Why not', I replied.

“I will prove it to you so thoroughly, that you will afterwards bear
testimony to the fact that the world and every thing in it is for the
use and benefit of man.”

“Tell me, how?” he asked.

“He has created the sky” I said, “overhead as a proof for him, had it
been lower or just up to his head he would have suffered. The sun would
have scorched him to death. The stars He created as guides to him when
he traveled at night by sea or land, others serve him for astronomical
calculations and to prove the senses inaptness to know every thing.

They are living witnesses of the existence of great almighty God, who
taught man this science. For such science could never be known through
the medium of senses and those not taught must have always remained
unknown:

“Oh Magnificent (*Azim*) and Mighty (*Jabbar*) one, how marvelous are
these creations of yours, “He has created for lamps the Sun and lustrous
moon. They float in the sky with marvelous rapidity. He lights them
accordingly. Their appearance and disappearance cause the seasons. On
them rest the calculations of the years; months and days, founded for
man use and benefit.

He works during day, and rests at night. Had the days and nights
remained in one condition, the day never to become night, nor the night
to become day, the people could not have made head-way in their affairs.
He the most wise and skilful Creator created the clear and the shining
day for work, and the dark night for the rest and repose. He arranged
the heat and cold- two contrary effects, yet both necessary. If there
had been all heat or cold, nothing could have lived.

The gardens would perish with the beings in it, for all these things are
connected with the air that floats in the space. The coldness checks
excessive perspiration, and the heat nullifies the harmful effects of
the food on the body, besides actively assisting in its development-
when the body gets dried, moisture is produce by it; when moist, the
heat absorbs the moisture. In the same way the clouds absorb or give
out; you see they rain in proportionate quantity to the need of the
world. If they did not, the whole world runs risk of total destruction.

God sends rain regularly to the earth inhabited by the Sons of Adam -the
carpet on which they walk, or cradle wherein they sleep. God has kept
the world upright for him -the mountains are the weights, and from the
mountains the rivers flow to water the world- without these streams of
water the earth must have remained dry and the people in a poor
condition. He has created the seas, over which men voyage. In these seas
are creatures some of which give food to man, and ornaments by which he
adorns himself.

The combination of the whole world and the uniformity of design
throughout plainly indicate one creator of the whole. For nowhere exists
the Contrast and difference of opinion that must necessarily arise, in
the case of another creator. The sky has produced things for man's
benefit the earth likewise. There are vegetables, fresh grapes, grain,
dates, green gardens, fruits and pastures skillfully devised for man's
use and pleasure.

The beasts and many other purposes are created by God for him. They are
necessary for his upkeep and well-being. You must bear in mind that
there are two distinct species of life in the world. One of generation,
the other of production. One is made to eat; the other to be eaten both
(kinds of) creatures necessarily being the same. Because He who
constructed the human body also knows the correct food for it. He gave
the appetite that asks the food, the stomach that digests, and supplies
the tissues and replenishes the blood. He arranged those intestines
through which waste and effect matter passes. Had the creator of man
been other than the creator of his food. He would not have created
appetite that wants the food of that other creature nor would the other
creature allow his creation to be eaten.

“You have by your eloquence”, he said, “Made me unhesitatingly declare
that the creator of all the things is one and the same. He is the only
one wise, merciful, omnipotent and omniscient God,

I praise Him and glorify Him. But I have doubt with regard to one thing.
Are the deadly poison that kill man and injure the creations created by
Him?”

“Is it not clear to you”, I asked, “that poison is created by God?”

“Well, I don't understand”, he replied, “Why He creates injurious and
evil things. Such evil things be far from His nature, and it does not
have Him to injure what is His own.”

“I will still by this, *halila* and the medical science explains and
prove to you that such things seemingly harmful to man are not in
reality so. Do you know of any plants perfectly harmless to man?” I
asked.

“Yes”, he replied.

“What are they?”

“Those which men eat daily for food”, he said. “Do you believe”, I
asked, “that food sometimes produces change of color in the body, and
various ailments, such as leprosy, consumption or Jaundice?”

“Yes”, he said.

“Then your reply, a short time back was incorrect.”

“Yes, indeed”, he said.

“Do you know of roots of no benefit to man?” I asked.

“Yes”, he replied.

“What are they?” I asked.

“They are ………… (this remains an unfilled space as the words of the reply
are not found in the original text).

“But do you not know, that mixed with other things there very roots cure
leprosy and consumption? I think you must know this. Can you tell me the
name of plant that acts as an antidote to poison?”

Has not '*Tiryak*' such an effect?” I asked.

“Yes”, he replied, ‘*Tiryak*’ is the King of all medicines. It is sought
for in cases of snake bite, sting of a wasp or an ant, or when poison
has been taken internally.”

“Do you not Know”, said I “that poisons are administered in two ways,
namely, external application, and internal administration, and this
'*tiryak*' is prepared by special distillation and the burning with it
of the flesh of the most venomous snakes?”

“Yes” he said, “I am wrong again, for, *tiryak* dose, not prove an
efficacious antidote to poison unless prepared as you mention.”

“Then there is nothing really evil, though it may seem so at the first
sight, created by God”, said I.

“Now I declare, 'La-i-laha, il-lallah, vah-dahula sharik-a-lahu (There
is no God but one God, and He has no partner), and bear testimony that
He has created all the (seemingly) injurious things as well as the good.
The heavenly bodies, the clouds and wind He regulates. The diseases and
medicines are all from Him. He knows man's body exactly -its ailments
and remedies. He knows man's soul in the same way. He has made the stars
that calculate man's destiny. There is uniformity of design, and no
contradiction. The whole Universe in harmony speaks of one God. Tell me
now, something of Him Why do you call Him '*Avval*' the first, '*Akhir*'
the last, '*Khabir*' the omniscient and '*Latif*' the wise and grand?”

“He is '*Avval'* because He is free from every kind of
'*kayfiyat'*-circumstances such as heat, cold, hardness, softness, etc.
He is 'Akhir' because He has no end. There is no one like unto him. He
has created the Universe with the help of no one. (He has created
absolutely from nothing; no matter was required. His '*Amr'* (command)
passed, and the Universe was in existence). He created without the least
trouble or reflection of mind. He needs no '*kayfiyat*' (condition) to
create, for conditions themselves are created by Him. We call Him
'*Avval*', because He had no beginning. He is from all eternity. He has
none to equal Him in power, nor any self-existing adversary, nor any
equal in any of His attributes. He is not known to the senses-(for the
senses can only detect created things). He is known only by His
creation-the wonderful phenomenon, whose existence speaks of great
wisdom. He is God, the most holy and exalted- Tabarak-va-ta’ala.

“Why do you call Him ‘*Qavi*’, the most powerful?” he asked.

“We call Him '*Qavi*', because He has created very enormous and strong
things such as, earth with mountains, seas and sands, moving things,
such as men, beast?, clouds of water, sun, moon and Stars. The magnitude
of their size, their munificence and luster, the revolution and majesty
of the empyrean empire, with the wonders of the earth are appallingly
great. These momentous of His Mightiness guide us to
'*ma’arifat*'-knowledge of His self. We do not call Him '*Qavi'*,
because, of the power of the created things. In no way does He compare
with created things, for their attributes diminish or increase, their
power is dependent on some other thing for existence, and eternal has no
likeness to them, in their defective greatness. We call Him '*Azim*'-the
great--and *'Kabir*'-mighty- incomparable to any earthly greatness. We
call a tree great, and we call a wrestler strong. But this gives us no
idea of God's greatness and strength.”

“How is it?” he asked, that He calls Himself in the holy book of
'***Qur’an***' “*Sami*’”-one who hears,

“*Basir*” -who sees and “*Aleem*”-one who knows?”

“For this reason that nothing from Him is hidden- neither any act nor
any thought. He is '*Basir*', for His observation extends over the
Universe. He is '*Sami’*' for the whispers of every man are heard by
Him. He hears the secrets of every whisper,-no three persons whisper
together, but He is the fourth among them, and so on. He hears the sound
of an ant walking on a viscid stone, the sounds of noiseless birds
flying in the air. Nothing escapes His knowledge-visible or invisible,
felt or unfelt;-all things are in His knowledge. He is '*Sami'*, not
because He hears with ears as we of the earth do, for He has neither
ears nor eyes. He is '*Aleem*', for nothing is unknown to Him, whether
it be fathom deep in the ground or beyond the skies, whether it be near
or far. He had knowledge of all things before they came into existence.
He is '*Aleem*'. But His knowledge is not acquired as man does with the
aid of his senses. His attributes are His essence. He is exempt from all
human attributes, pure and undefiled. These attributes of *Sam’a, Basar
and Ilm* must not give you an earthly idea of God. He is far above His
creations, holy and pure, and His names are holy too”.

“You have made it perfectly clear to me”, said he, ‘but I want you to
explain it in such a way that I may give proper reply to all queries put
to me, I wish to so study the subject that I may at once confound or
refute atheists and their skepticism, and moreover be useful to those
who are seeking the truth, and solidify the ground on which true
believers stand. Why is He called '*Latif*'-fine? I am aware because He
has created fine things. But I should like (to have) a further
explanation of this”.

“He is *Latif*”, said I, “because every thing of His to the smallest
creation, sometimes so small as to be unperceived by the human eyes,
shows fineness and finished perfection to the minutest detail-some small
creations, a gnat or an ant are indistinguishable as to sex, condition
or age-when one observes that these have a certain reasoning power, have
desires, passions, and fear of death and they love their young ones and
recognize their friends, despite their minuteness; when we see other
creatures inhabiting different places-skies, seas, forests or houses -
all with the above attributes, in wonder and worship we call Him
'*Latif*'-the creator of fine and minute creations, as we call Him
'*Qavi*', because He created powerful and strong things”.

“What you have explained to me is very clear”, he said. “But how come it
possible for man to call himself - by the names applicable to God?”

“Because God, the most holy and high has not prohibited it. Man calls a
certain thing one, and calls God one also. He calls one man *muthawwir*
(artist) and God is ‘*muthawwir* ' also, another ‘*Raziq*’-supplier of
food-or *Sami*’, '*Basir*' and he calls God the same; but the meaning
vastly different when applied to God. When a thing to be one, it
suggests that there are more like it. But when God is called one, it
suggests that there never was or is or will be another like unto Him.
You may be aware that names are given to people for identification only.
We call a person when he is alone, but in truest sense of word man is
not one, he is many, he has different limbs unlike to one another, has
blood, flesh, bones and sinews ash hairs and nails, darkness and
whiteness, and all creature is like this, proving that a person is one
only in name and not really in structure or sense. But the word 'one’ is
justly applicable to God, who is like unto no one. He holds the names
*Sami’, Basir, Qavi, ‘Aziz, Hakim* and in the same way. He the most
exalted God,-has created every wonder. These very names bespeak not His
attributes, but that which He is-His essence. His attributes are not in
addition to His-self but He is *Sami’, Basir, Hakim,* ‘*Aleem* and
*Qavi* in His very essence”.

“Explain to me”, he said, “why He has called Himself *'Rauf*' '*Rahim*',
merciful and what is meant by His will or consent and '*Gadhab*', anger
or displeasure?”

“Mercy in us”, said I “is an instinct which prompts to kindness and
gifts. But the mercy of God is the kindness and reward bestowed on man.
Man's mercy holds two interpretations-pity for a man in distress without
alleviating it; or pity in a more substantial form as extricating him
for the time from his trouble, say, supplying him with food or clothing.
People speak very highly and point out this charity as most commendable.
The action of charity was produced by the instinct of mercy in the human
heart. But God's mercy is also the mercy originating from us. For
example, when one has been rescued by another from the pangs of hunger,
or the fangs of some fierce animal, at once we feel the mercy of God. It
is true that He is merciful, but not in the same way as man is merciful.
The mercy that originates in man's heart does not exist in God's, though
God put it in men; for, God has no heart like man. Again '*gadhab*' when
man gets angry, he himself undergoes changes-his limbs tremble, his
color changes, and he inflicts punishment on the one who roused his
anger. But God suffers no changes. The word '*gadhab*' is used in two
senses--that one originating from the heart is not applicable to God, in
the same way '*Raza*' (pleasure) ‘*Rahmat* (mercy) and *Na-raza*
(displeasure). He is only the '*Jalil*'-(glorious)-,
'*Azim*'-(magnificent), and there is none like unto him”.

“Now, explain to me His intention and will”, he said,

“Why is he called '*Murid*' (willing)?”

“Man's action”, said I “Is the result of intention and pre-conceived
thought. The intention of God is the accomplishment of the deed without
pre-meditation or thought. At His ‘*Amr*', or command-the thing is
already at perfection, without trouble or care on His part.”

“You have fully convinced me”, he said, “in every detail, and your
arguments are more than enough for any person of common sense. To God,
who guides us to the right path, and prevents us from falling into sin,
or daring to compare Him; or doubt His greatness, might and Omnipotence,
I offer my heart felt thanks. Indeed He is great, without a rival. There
is none like Him. He is too exalted to have any equal or partner”.

Peace unto Those Who Follow The Truth.


