Introduction
============

Over the last 50 years there has been renewed interest in Islamic
countries in examining the relationship between Islam and science in the
spectrum of its history. After gaining independence most of the Islamic
countries have been struggling to come to terms with their religious
beliefs and the Western concepts of science and education. The education
systems adopted by the most of the Islamic countries have been based on
‘so-called secular Western education’. Consequently a cultural dichotomy
is observed in their societies between a traditional Islamic education
on the one hand restricted to religious groups, and a secular Western
education in main stream schools, colleges and universities. Education
is viewed as a means of acquiring scientific knowledge and technology,
in order to progress economically in the modern world. However,
education has unsuccessfully tried to blend Islamic thinking with this
Western education system (Al-Faruqi and Nasseef, 1981).

The period between the seventh to the fifteenth centuries is considered
as the ‘Golden Age of Islamic Civilisation’. During this period there
was great emphasis on the pursuit of knowledge. Consequently there were
individuals who lived scholarly and pious lives, such as Ibn Sina,
Al-Khwarizmi, and Al-Biruni, who in addition to excellence in the study
of religious texts also excelled in mathematics, geography, astronomy,
physics, chemistry, and medicine. At this time Islam was not just a set
of religious beliefs, but a set of ideas, ethics and ideals encompassing
all aspects of human life. This resulted in the establishment of an
Islamic civilisation. Thus the motivating force of this civilisation was
its Islamic faith (used here both in the spiritual and temporal sense)
and its language was Arabic (Khettani, 1976).

While the progress of scientific knowledge in Europe languished during
the Dark Ages, science flourished in the Golden Age of Islam. The
renaissance that subsequently occurred in Europe might not have taken
place without the contribution of Muslim science in the preceding
period. This was acknowledged by Sarton (1927, p. 17) who wrote:

From the second half of the eighth to the end of the eleventh century,
Arabic was the scientific, the progressive language of mankind. It is
suffice here to evoke a few glorious names without contemporary
equivalents in the West: Jabir Ibn Haiyan, al-Kindi, al-Khwarizmi,
al-Farghani, al-Razi, Thabit ibn Qurra, al-Battani, Hunain ibn Ishaq,
al-Farabi, Ibrahim ibn Sinan, al-Masudi, al-Tarabi, Abu ibn Wafa, Ali
ibn Abbas, Abu-l-Qasim, Ibn al-Jazzar, al-Biruni, Ibn Sina, Ibn Yunus,
al-Karkhi, Ibn al-Haitham, Ali ibn Isa, al-Ghazzali, al-Zarqali, Omar
Khayyam!

Many Muslims scholars in the Golden Age of Islam studied nature in the
context of the Quran. The Quran depicted the relationship between nature
and man, and this inspired the Muslim scholars to study natural
phenomena, in order to understand God. Islam’s contribution to the
scientific enterprise was complex and rich and it spanned over three
continents and nearly a millennium of time.


