Islamic View of Nature
======================

The Islamic view of nature during the Golden Age was for mankind ‘to
study nature in order to discover God and to use nature for the benefit
of mankind’. Nature could be used to provide food for mankind and its
bounty was to be equally distributed among all peoples. All activities
that caused harm to mankind and in turn destroyed nature were forbidden.
Destruction of the natural balance was discouraged, for example,
unnecessary killing of animals or removal of vegetation might in turn
lead to starvation due to lack of food. This view was an extension of
the idea that ‘man’ had been placed on earth as God’s representative.

The Islamic view of nature during the Golden Age had its roots in the
Quran, the very word of God and the basis of Islam. Muslim scholars at
that time were inspired to study nature in the context of the Quran. The
following passages from the Quran illustrate the relationship between
nature and man and how this relationship inspired Muslim scholars to
study natural phenomenon, in order to understand God. The following
verses also show the way the Quran presents the whole universe:

We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, merely in
(idle) sport. We created them not except for just ends: But most of them
do not understand, (Surah Al-Baqara 44: 38-39, (Pickthall, 1977)).

Behold! In the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the alternation
of the night and the day; in the sailing of the ships through the ocean
for the profit of mankind; in the rain which Allah sends down from the
skies and the life which He gives therewith to an earth that is dead; in
the beasts of all kinds that He scatters through the earth; in the
change of the winds and the clouds which they trail like their slaves
between the sky and the earth; (here) indeed are signs for a people that
are wise, (Surah Ad-Dukham 2: 164, (Pickthall, 1977)).

Thus it was concluded that God created the world and placed man in it as
trustee, to benefit from it, to use it wisely and to understand his
purpose in the universe. Iqbal has emphasised this point eloquently as
follows:

It is the lot of man to share in the deeper aspirations of the universe
around him and to shape his own destiny as well as that of the universe,
now by putting the whole of his energy to mould its forces to his own
ends and purposes. And in this process of progressive change of God
becomes a co-worker with him, provided man takes the initiative:

‘Verily God will not change the condition of men, till they change what
is in themselves (13:11).’ (Iqbal, 1986, p.10)

Thus mankind was inspired to study, understand and mould the natural
forces for its own purposes. The point to note is the general empirical
attitude of the Quran which engendered in its followers a feeling of
reverence and thus made them founders of an enlightened society (Iqbal,
1986).


