Filtering of scientific knowledge from the Islamic world to Europe
==================================================================

The conquest of the Eastern Empire by the Arabs meant that Western
Christendom was deprived of the main reservoir of Greek learning for
centuries by intolerance and mutual suspicion of opposing creeds, as
well as the breadth of the Mediterranean Sea (Crombie, 1963). But as
early as the end of the tenth century knowledge had began filtering from
the Islamic world to the West. Thompson (1929) in his article “The
Introduction of Arabic Science into Lorraine in the Tenth Century”
discussed the question of Arabic science being introduced in the schools
of Lorraine as early as the end of the tenth century and thereby into
Latin Europe. Thus an intellectual avenue through Spain to Europe beyond
the Pyrenees was opened by the expansion of the Islamic Empire across
North Africa.

Throughout the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in Spain and Sicily, the
transmission of scientific knowledge continued with the establishment of
an Arabic-Latin translation program. In Sicily after the Norman kingdom
was established in 1060, its Latin, Greek and Muslim subjects lived in
more favourable conditions than those in Spain (Crombie, 1963) for the
growth of intercultural and intellectual exchange. Here the knowledge of
antiquity was rediscovered in its original Greek versions and the major
developments recorded in Arabic that were subsequently translated into
Latin (Burnett, 2001; Schramm: 2001), in corners of Europe prior to the
Renaissance.


