Discussion
==========

It has been seen that the scholars working in the Islamic Empire
spanning over three continents started in the beginning with the
translation movement, as well as creating the necessary language tools
in Arabic for the translations of the works of the Greeks, Persians,
Indians and all ancient knowledge. But having acquired the knowledge
they set about not only assimilating, testing and analysing, but also
adding important and original contributions to that knowledge.

Beginning from the end of the tenth century this knowledge began to
filter back to Europe through the translations of Arabic versions of the
Greek knowledge and the original Greek treatises (Burnett, 2001). But
also transferred to Europe were the seminal contributions of scholars of
the Islamic world. Modern science as we know it today works with
theories and models that must be tested empirically, starting in the
fields of mathematics, astronomy and medicine. The Muslims developed the
procedures for testing knowledge both empirically and logically. However
an important characteristic of Islamic science was its experimental
character. Islamic scientists were interested especially in the applied
sciences, in the construction of apparatus, in testing theories by
undertaking observations, and analysis of results through mathematics
(Bammate, 1959). These ideas and procedures were all available in
Western Europe through the seminal works of Islamic scholars before the
times of Galileo, Descartes and Newton to whom they have been largely
attributed.


