Future research
===============

While there is currently research being carried out on the use of single
works or the ideas and writings of individual authors, it is too early
to draw all possible conclusions. In order to form a comprehensive
picture of both the translation processes, and the transmission of
scientific knowledge from ancient Greek libraries to the Islamic world,
culminating in the eighth and ninth centuries (Sabra, 1996; Sabra, 1987)
and the subsequent translation and transmission of Islamic scholarly
works to Europe during the twelfth to fourteenth centuries further
scholarly work is needed. Fortunately various collections of Arabic
manuscripts are still preserved in European libraries. Further detailed
investigations would help throw light on the critical role of Islamic
scholarly works in the development of Renaissance Europe (Saliba, 1999).
What is important to note is that the Islamic conception of God
(Bausani, 1974) made possible a major advance in scientific thinking
during the period of the eighth to the fifteenth centuries in Islamic
lands, while Europe lay largely dormant during the Dark Ages.
Developments would only appear to have occurred in Europe where there
was direct contact with Islamic knowledge in Spain and France, until the
fall of Constantinople in 1453. Thus the initial development of Modern
Science did not occur in Italy with the spectacular work of Galileo, but
in the Islamic world several centuries earlier, where it slowly and
gradually advanced in ways that have been largely ignored but scholars
in Western Europe.


