Al-tawhid
=========

**( 19 )**

'Ashura - History and Popular Legend
------------------------------------

### Second Sermon

##### *Martyr Murtada Mutahhari* *Translated from the Persian by 'Ali Quli Qara'i* *Vol XIII No. 3 (Fall 1996)*

###### In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

All Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and the Maker of all
creation, and may Peace and benedictions be upon His servant and
messenger, His beloved and elect, our master, our prophet, and our sire,
Abu al-Qasim Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his pure, immaculate, and
infallible Progeny.

I seek the refuge of Allah from the accursed Satan:

*So for their breaking their compact We cursed them and made their
hearts hard; they would pervert the words from their meanings, and they
forgot a portion of what they were reminded of.* (5:13) 

We said that the event of 'Ashura' has been subject to *tahrif* and it
has occurred both in its outward form as well as its inner content. A
consequence of these distortions has been that this great historic
document and this great educative source has become ineffectual or less
potent, in our lives, leaving, at times, even an opposite effect. All of
us have the duty to purge it of the distortions that have polluted this
sacred document. Tonight we will discuss the general factors responsible
for *tahrif*. Thereafter our discussion will focus on *tahrif* in the
content and significance of this event. 

The Factors of *Tahrif*: 
-------------------------

These factors are of two kinds, one of which are of a general nature.
That is, there are in general certain factors that lead to the
corruption of histories and these are not limited to the event of
'Ashura' alone. For instance, the enemy's motives are themselves a
factor that distort an event. In order to achieve their purposes, the
enemies bring about alterations in historical texts or misinterpret
them. There are many examples of it which I do not wish to mention here.
All that I would say is that this kind of *tahrif* did play a role in
distorting the facts of *Karbala'*, and the enemies did take resort in
misrepresenting the uprising of Imam Husayn. As usually happens, the
enemies accuse sacred movements of causing conflict and division and of
disrupting social harmony and peace. The Umayyad regime also made much
effort to give such a hue to the Husayni uprising. 

**( 20 )**

Such propaganda began from the very first day. When Muslim arrived in
Kufah, Yazid, while sending an order appointing Ibn Ziyad to the
governership of Kufah, wrote: "Muslim, son of 'Aqil, has gone to Kufah
and his aim is to disrupt peace and to create social discord and
disunity in the Muslim community. Go and suppress him." When Muslim was
captured and brought to the *dar al-imarah*, the governor's residency,
Ibn Ziyad said to Muslim: "Son of 'Aqil! What was it that brought you to
this city? The people here lived in satisfaction and peace. You came and
disrupted their peace, causing disunity and conflict amongst Muslims."
Muslim answered in a manly manner and said: "Firstly, I did not come to
this city on my own account. It was the people of this city who invited
us. They wrote a great number of letters, which are in our possession.
In those letters they wrote that your father, Ziyad, who ruled this city
for years, had killed its virtuous men and imposed its scoundrels over
the virtuous, subjecting them to various forms of tyranny and injustice.
They appealed to us to help them establish justice. We have come to
establish justice!" 

The Umayyad regime did wage much propaganda of this kind, but their
misrepresentations did not affect the history of Islam. You will not
find a single competent historian in the world who might have said that
Husayn ibn 'Ali, *naudhubillah*, made an unlawful uprising, that he rose
to cause conflict and disunity among the people. No. The enemy could not
bring about any misrepresentation in [the history of] the event of
Karbala'. Most regrettably, whatever *tahrif* has occurred in the event
of Karbala' has been at the hands of the friends. 

The Second Factor:
------------------

The second factor is the human tendency towards myth-making and for
turning facts into legends. This tendency has been at work in all the
world's historical traditions. There is a tendency in men for hero
worship which induces the people to fabricate myths and legends about
national and religious heroes. [[13]](#n13) The best evidence of it are
the legends that the people have invented around the figures of some
geniuses such as Ibn Sina and Shaykh Baha'i. Ibn Sina, undoubtedly, was
a genius and was gifted with extraordinary physical and intellectual
powers. But these very gifts have led the people to weave out legends
about him. For instance, it is said that once Ibn Sina saw a man from a
distance of one parasang and remarked that the man was eating a bread
made with oil. They asked him how could he know that the man was eating
a bread and that it was made with oil. He replied that he saw flies
circling the bread, which had made him conclude that there was oil in
the bread. Obviously, this is a legend. Someone who can see flies from
the distance of one parasang will see a bread made with oil much sooner
than he would see flies! 

Or it is said that once during the time that Ibn Sina was studying at
Isfahan he complained that when he gets up in the middle of the night to
study, he was disturbed by the noise of the hammering of the
coppersmiths of Kashan. They went and made a test. One night they told
the coppersmiths of Kashan not to use their hammers. That night, said
Ibn Sina, he had slept peacefully and was undisturbed in his study.
Obviously this is a legend. 

Many such legends have been made about Shaykh Bahi'i as well. Such
things are not confined to the event of *'Ashura*. However, let the
people say what they would about Ibn Sina. What harm does it do? None!
But in respect of individuals who are guides of mankind and whose words
and deeds and whose stands and uprisings serve as a model and authority,
there should not be any *tahrif* whatsoever in their statements, in
their personality, and history. 

**( 21 )**

How many legends have been fabricated by us Shi'is about Amir al
Mu'minin 'Ali, many Peace be upon him! There is no doubt that 'Ali
(*'a*) was an extraordinary man. No one has doubts about 'Ali's courage
which was superior to that of any ordinary human being. 'Ali did not
encounter any contestant in battle without felling him to the ground.
But does that satisfy the myth makers? Never! For instance, there is the
legend about 'Ali's encounter with Marhab in the battle of Khaybar with
all the curious details about the physique of Marhab. The historians
have also written that 'Ali's sword cut him into two from the middle (I
don't know whether the two halves were perfectly equal!). But here they
found the opportunity to weave out fables which are harmful for the
faith. It is said that God commanded Gabriel to go immediately to the
earth lest 'Ali's sword when it comes down on Marhab should cut the
earth into two halves, reaching right down to the Cow and the Fish.
Gabriel was told to shield the blow with his wings. Gabriel went and
when 'Ali struck the blow with his sword, it slashed Marhab into two
halves which had they been put in a balance would have turned out to be
exactly equal. However, one of Gabriel's wings suffered injury and he
could not ascend to the heaven for forty days. When at last he arrived
in heaven, God asked him as to where he had been all these days. He
replied, "O Lord! I was on the earth. You had given me an assignment to
go there." He was asked why he had taken so much time to return. Gabriel
said, "O God, the blow of 'Ali's sword wounded my wings and I was busy
bandaging and healing them all these forty days!" According to another
legend 'Ali's sword flew so swiftly and slickly through Marhab's
forehead cutting all the way to the saddle that when 'Ali pulled away
his sword Marhab himself did not know what had happened (he thought the
blow had gone amiss). He jeered at 'Ali, "Was that all of your
swordsmanship?!" 'Ali' said to him, "Just move yourself a bit and see."
As soon as Marhab made a movement, one half of his body fell on one side
of the horse and the other on the other side! 

Hajji Nuri, this great man, in his book *Lu'lu wa marjan*, while
condemning the practice of fabricating of such legends, writes about
legends that some people have put into circulation concerning the valour
of Hadrat Abu al-Fadl al-'Abbas. According to one of them, in the Battle
of *Siffin* (in which, basically, it is not known whether he had
participated, and even if he did he must have been a boy of fifteen
years) he threw a man into the air, then another, and so on up to eighty
men, and by the time the last one was thrown up the first one had not
yet reached the ground. Then when the first one came down, he cut him
into two halves, then the second and so on to the last man! 

A part of the interpolations in the narratives of the event of Karbala
have resulted from the myth-making tendency. The Europeans assert that
one finds many exaggerations in accounts pertaining to the history of
the East, and there is some truth in what they say. Mulla Darbandi
writes in his book *Asrar al-shahadah* that the cavalry of the army of
'Umar ibn Sa'd consisted of six hundred thousand horsemen and twenty
million infantrymen - in all a force of one million and six hundred
thousand plus all the people of Kufah! Now how large was Kufah? Kufah
was a recently founded city and not more than thirty-five years old, as
it was built during the time of 'Umar ibn Khattab. It was built at
'Umar's orders as a military outpost for Muslim warriors near the
borders of Iran. It is not certain whether the entire population of
Kufah during that time was even a hundred thousand. That a force of one
million and six hundred thousand could have been assembled on that day
and that Husayn ibn 'Ali' should have killed three hundred thousand of
them is not at all reasonable. Such figures cast a shadow on the whole
event. 

**( 22 )**

It is said that someone once made exaggerated claims about the largeness
of the city of Herat in former days. He said, 'Herat was a very big city
at one time.' 'How big? he was asked. He said, 'At one time there were
in Herat twenty thousand one-eyed cooks named Ahmad selling head and
totters stew. Now imagine, how many men there must be in a city, and how
many named Ahmad, and how many one-eyed Ahmads, to have twenty-one
thousand one-eyed Ahmads selling head and totters stew! 

This myth-making tendency has always been very active; but we must not
leave a sacred document to the mercy of myth-makers. 

There is amongst us, the *Ahl al-Bayt*, in every generation reformers
who purge the faith of the perversions of the extremists, of the false
beliefs of the falsifiers, and of the misinterpretations of the
ignorant. [[14]](#n14) 

We have a duty here. Now let anyone say anything he likes about Herat.
But is it right that such legends as these should find way into the
history of the event of *Ashura'*, an event concerning which our duty is
to keep it alive and revive its memory every year? 

### The Third Factor

The third factor is of a particular nature. The two factors that we have
discussed above, that is, the hostile ends of the enemies and the human
tendency for conjuring legends and myths, apply to all histories of the
world, but there is also a factor which is specific to the event of
*Ashura'* that has led to fabrication of stories. 

The leaders of the faith, from the time of the Noble Messenger and the
Pure Imams, have commanded in clear and emphatic terms that the memory
of Husayn ibn 'Ali must be kept alive and that his martyrdom and ordeals
should be commemorated every year. Why? What is the reason underlying
this Islamic ordinance? Why is there so much encouragement for and
emphasis on visiting the shrine of Husayn ibn 'Ali? We should reflect
over these questions. Some might say that it is for the sake of
condoling with Hadrat Zahra' and offering her consolation! But is it not
ridiculous to imagine that Hadrat Zahra' should still need consolation
after fourteen hundred years, whereas, in accordance with the explicit
statements of Imam Husayn and according to our creed, since his
martyrdom Imam Husayn and Hadrat Zahra have been together in heaven?
What a thing to say! Is it correct to think of Hadrat Zahra as a little
child that goes on weeping, even after fourteen centuries, and whom we
have to go and console? Such kind of beliefs are destructive for
religion. Imam Husayn (*'a*) established the practical ideology of Islam
and he is the practical model for Islamic movements. They (that is the
Prophet and Imams) wanted Imam Husayn's ideology to be kept alive. They
wanted Husayn should reappear every year with those sweet, sublime and
heroic summons of his and declare" 

Don't you see that what is right and true is not acted upon, and what is
wrong and false is not forbidden? [In such conditions] the man of faith
should long to meet his true Lord! [[15]](#n15) 

**( 23 )**

They wanted the words: 

Death is better than a life saddled with indignity, [[16]](#n16) 

to be kept alive forever, and so also the words: 

To me death is nothing but felicity, and life with oppressors is nothing
but disgrace, [[17]](#n17) 

They wanted such other saying of Imam Husayn to be kept alive: 

The children of Adam carry the mark of death like necklaces that adorn
the neck of damsels! [[18]](#n18) 

Far from us is disgrace and indignity! [[19]](#n19) 

They wanted to keep alive the memory of such scenes as that of Imam
Husayn's confronting a force of thirty thousand men, in a state when he
and his family are faced with a great ordeal, and declaring in a manly
manner - and the world has never seen such a manly personage! 

Indeed, that baseborn son of a baseborn father has left me only two
alternatives to choose from: the sword or disgrace. And far from us is
disgrace! It is disdainful to God, His Messenger and the faithful that
we should yield to anything of that kind, and those born of chaste
mothers and high-minded fathers and possessing a lofty sense of honour
disdain that submission to vile men should be preferred to honourable
death! [[20]](#n20) 

They wanted to keep alive the formative school of Imam Husayn so that
the rays of the Husayni spirit may breathe life into this community. Its
objective is quite clear. 

Do not allow the event of 'Ashura' to be consigned to oblivion! Your
life, your humanity, and your dignity depend on this event! 

You can keep Islam alive only by its means! That is why they have
encouraged us to keep alive the tradition of mourning Imam Husayn, and
very rightly! The institution of mourning Husayn ibn 'Ali has a correct
philosophy underlying it, a philosophy which is also extremely sublime.
It is fitting that we should do all that we can to endeavour for the
sake of this cause, provided we understand its purpose and goal.
Unfortunately some people have not understood it. Without making the
people understand the philosophy of Imam Husayn's uprising and without
making them understand the station of Imam Husayn, they imagine that if
they just came and sat in mourning assemblies and shed tears, without
knowledge and understanding, it would atone their sins. 

**( 24 )**

Marhum Hajji Nuri mentions a point in the book, *Lu'lu' wa marjan.* That
point is the belief of some people that the reward (*thawab*) for
mourning Imam Husayn is so great that it is justifiable to employ any
means whatsoever for this end. Nowadays a group which subscribes to the
views of Machiavilli in political thought says that ends justify the
means. If the end is a good one, it does not matter what means are used
to achieve it. Now these people also say that we have a sacred and
exalted goal, which is mourning Imam Husayn and it does not matter what
means are used for this end. As the end is a sacred one, it does not
matter what the means are: Is it correct to perform *ta'ziyahs* - even
*ta'ziyahs* which are vulgar - for this purpose? They ask, 'Do they make
the people cry? If they do, there is so problem with such *ta'ziyahs*.'
So also there is no problem if we blow trumpets, beat drums, commit
sinful acts, make men dress as women, conjure a wedding for Qasim, or
fabricate and forge episodes. Such things do not matter in the tradition
of mourning Imam Husayn, which is something exclusive. Here lying is
forgiven, forgery and fabrication are forgivable, making pictures, and
dressing men as women is pardonable. Here any kind of sinful conduct is
forgivable as the end is most sacred! As a consequence of such thinking,
some persons have resorted to such *tahrif* and misrepresentation that
are stunning. 

About ten or fifteen years ago when I was on a visit to Isfahan, I met a
great man, marhum Hajj Shaykh Muhammad Hasan Najafabadi, may God elevate
his station. I recounted to him a *rawdah* that I had heard recently
somewhere. It was something which I had never heard until that time.
Incidentally, this man who had delivered that *rawdah*, an opium addict,
had made the people weep profusely with that *rawdah* of his. In it he
recounted the story of an old woman during the reign of Mutawakkil (the
'Abbasid caliph who persecuted the Shi'ah). The woman had set out with
the purpose of making a pilgrimage to the tomb of Imam Husayn, which was
forbidden at that time and they would cut off the hands of the pilgrims.
He went on with the narrative until the point when the old woman is
taken and thrown into the river. In that state she cries out for help,
calling out, "O Abu al-Fadl al-'Abbas!" As she is about to drown a
horseman appears and tells her to catch hold of his stirrup. The woman
takes hold of the stirrups but she says, "Why don't you give me your
hand?' The horseman says, "I haven't any hands!" At this point the
people wept a lot. 

Marhum Hajj Shaykh Muhammad Hasan recounted for me the history of this
legend. In a place near the bazaar, in the near abouts of Madrasah Sadr,
there used to be held a *majlis* which was one of the major *majalis* of
Isfahan and which even the *marhum* Hajj Mulla Isma'il Khwaju'i used to
attend. One day there had occurred there an incident. (It had taken
place earlier and he had heard its account from reliable persons.) It
involved a well-known *wa'iz*; who himself had recounted it in these
words: "One day mine was the last turn to speak from the minbar. Other
speakers had come and each one of them had exerted his skills to make
the people weep. Everyone that came would try to surpass his predecessor
and having delivered his *rawdah* would descend from the minbar to sit
among the audience and watch the art of the succeeding *rawdeh-khwan*.
This continued until the time of noon. I saw that everyone had tried his
prowess and together they had drawn out all the tears that the people
could shed. What should I do? I thought for a while, and then and there
I made up this story. When my turn came, I went up and related the
story, leaving all of them behind. In the afternoon, the same day, while
attending another *majlis* in the Char-suq locality, I saw that the one
who took to the minbar before me related this same story. Gradually it
came to be written in books and appeared in print." 

**( 25 )**

The false and wrong notion that the tradition of mourning Imam Husayn is
an exception to all norms, that it is justified to use any means to make
the people weep, has been a major factor leading to fabrication of
legends and *tahrif*. 

*Marhum* Hajji Nuri, that saintly man and teacher of *marhum* Hajj
Shaykh 'Abbas Qummi, who as confessed by Hajj Shaykh 'Abbas himself as
well as others was superior to his pupils, was an extraordinarily
learned and pious man. In his book he makes the point that if it is a
correct notion that the end justifies the means, then one may also
justify the following line of reasoning. One of the Islamic precepts is
that bringing delight to the heart of a believer and to do something to
make him happy is a greatly commendable act. Such being the case,
according to this reasoning, it is justifiable to do backbiting in his
presence, as he loves listening to backbiting. And should someone say
that it is sinful to do so, the answer will be," No! The purpose is a
sacred one and the backbiting is being done to make a believer pleased
and happy!" 

*Marhum* Hajji Nuri gives another example. A man embraces a non-mahram
woman, which is an unlawful act. We ask him why did you do that? He
replies, "I have done it for a believer's delight." The same reasoning
can be applied to such unlawful acts as adultery, drinking wine, and
sodomy. Isn't this an absurd reasoning? Wouldn't such a notion destroy
the Shari'ah? By God, to think that it is permissible to use any kind of
means for making people cry in mourning Imam Husayn is a notion that
contradicts everything that Imam Husayn stands for. Imam Husayn was
martyred to uplift Islam, as we confess while reciting his *ziyarah:* 

I bear witness that you established the prayer, gave *zakat* commanded
what is right and forbade what is wrong, and did such *jihad* in the way
of God as ought to be done. [[21]](#n21) 

Imam Husayn was killed in order to revive Islamic traditions, Islamic
laws and regulations, not in order to create an excuse for the violation
of Islamic norms. *Na'udhubillah*, we have changed Imam Husayn into a
destroyer of Islam: the Imam Husayn that we have conjured in our
imagination is a destroyer of Islam. 

In his book Hajji Nuri mentions a story that was related to him by one
of the students in Najaf, who originally came from Yazd. "One day," he
said, "in my youth I made a journey on foot to Khorasan, going by the
road that passes through the desert (*kawr*). In one of the villages of
Nayshabur I went to a mosque, as I did not have any place to stay. The
imam of the mosque came and led the prayers. Afterwards he went on the
*minbar* to make a *rawdah* I was amazed to see the mosque attendant
bring a pile of stones which he handed over to the imam. When the
*rawdah* started, he ordered the lamps to be put out. When the lamps had
been put out, he pelted the stones at the audience and there arose cries
from the people. When the lamps were lighted, I saw bleeding heads.
Their eyes were tearful as they walked out of the mosque. I approached
the imam and asked him why he had done such a thing. He said, 'I have
tested these people. There is no *rawdah* in the world that will make
them weep. As weeping for the sake of Imam Husayn has a great reward and
*thawab*, I have found that the only way to make them cry is to throw
stones on their heads. This is how I make them weep.' " He believed that
the end justifies the means. The end was to mourn Imam Husayn though it
should involve emptying a pile of stones on the people's heads. 

**( 26 )**

Accordingly, this is a particular factor which is specific to this
historic event and it has led to much fabrication and *tahrif*. 

When one studies history one finds what they have done to this event. By
God, Hajji Nuri is right when he says that if we were to weep for Imam
Husayn today, we should mourn for him on account of these falsehoods,
fabrications and *tahrif*! 

There is a well-known book called *Rawdat al-shuhada'*. whose author was
Mulla Husayn Kashifi. According to Hajji Nuri, he was the first to write
in his book the stories of Za'far the Jinn and the one about Qasim's
wedding. I have read this book. I used to imagine that it contained only
one or two of such cases. But afterwards when I read it I saw that the
matter was very much different. This book, which is in Persian, was
compiled about five-hundred years ago. Mulla Husayn Kashifi was a
scholar and learned man. He has authored several books including the
*Anwar suhayli*. His biographical accounts do not indicate whether he
was a Shi'i or a Sunni. Basically he was a Chameleon: among the Shi'ah
he would pose as an outright Shi'i, while amongst the Sunnis he would
pass as a Hanafi. He was a native of Sabzawar, a Shi'i centre whose
people were staunch Shi'is. In Sabzawar he would act as an out and out
Shi'i, and at times when he would go to Herat ('Abd al-Rahman Jami was
the husband of his sister or sister-in-law) he would give sermons for
the Sunnis in the Sunni style. But in Sabzawar he narrated the tragedies
of Karbala'. His death occurred around 910/1504, that is, either at the
end of the 9th or the beginning of the 10th century. This was the first
book, compiled about five hundred years ago, to be written as an elegiac
narrative (*marthiyah*). Earlier the people used to refer to the primary
sources. Shaykh Mufid, may God be pleased with him, wrote the *Irshad*
and how sound is his narration! If we were to refer to the *Irshad* of
Shaykh Mufid we would not stand in need of any other source. Tabari,
among Sunni authors, has also written about it. Ya'qubi, Ibn 'Asakir and
Khwarazmi have also written. I don't know what this unjust man has done!
When I read this book I saw that even the names are spurious. He
mentions names among Imam Husayn's companions that never existed. He
mentions names of the enemy's men which are also spurious. He has turned
the factual accounts of the event into fables. 

As this was the first book to be written in Persian, the orators in
mourning assemblies, who were mostly illiterate and could not use the
Arabic texts, would take this book and read from it in the mourning
sessions. That is why the gatherings that are held nowadays to mourn
Imam Husayn are called *rawdeh-khwani*. *Rawdeh-khwani* was not in vogue
during the time of Imam Sadiq or Imam Hasan 'Askari, nor it was
prevalent during the times of Sayyid Murtada [d 436/1044] or even
Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi [d. 672/1273]. *Rawdeh-khwani* came into
vogue since the last five hundred years and it came to be called as
such. *Rawdeh-khwani* meant reading from the book *Rawdat al-shuhada'*,
a pack of lies. From the time that this book fell into the hands of the
people, no one has bothered to study the actual history of Imam Husayn. 

Then, about sixty or seventy years ago, there appeared another man, the
*marhum* Mulla Darbandi. He took all the contents of the *Rawdat
al-shahuda*' and compiled them together with other material, collecting
it all in a book called *Asrar al-shahadah*. The contents of this book
make one lament for the fate of Islam. 

**( 27 )**

Hajji Nuri writes, "We used to attend the lectures of Hajj Shaykh 'Abd
al-Husayn Tehrani (who was a very saintly man) and benefited from his
teaching. A sayyid from Hillah, who was a *rawdeh-khwan*, came to meet
him and he showed him a book written about the events of Imam Husayn's
martyrdom (*maqtal*, plural: *maqatil*) to see whether its contents were
reliable. This book did not have any beginning or end. Only at one place
in it was mentioned the name of a certain mulla of Jabl al-'Amil who was
among the pupils of the author of the *Ma'alim al-usul*. Marhum Hajj
Shaykh 'Abd al-Husayn took the book to examine it. 

First he studied the biographical accounts of that scholar and found
that such a book had not been attributed to him. Then he read the book
itself and found it to be full of falsehoods. He said to that sayyid,
'This book is a pack of lies. Don't circulate this book and don't quote
anything from it, for it is unlawful to do so. Basically this book has
not been written by that scholar and its contents are spurious.' " Hajji
Nuri says that the same book fell into the hands of the author of *Asrar
al-shahadah* and he copied all its contents into his book, from the
beginning to the end!" 

Hajji Nuri relates another episode, which is rather touching. Once a man
came to author of the *Maqami*' [[22]](#n22) and said to him, "Last
night I saw a horrible dream." "What was it?" he asked him. He said, "I
saw that I am biting away flesh from the body of Imam Husayn." The
scholar trembled on hearing these words. He lowered his head and thought
for a while. Then he said, "Perhaps you are a *marthiyeh-khwan*?". "Yes,
I am," he replied. He said, "Hereafter, either abandon
*marthiyeh-khwani* altogether or draw your material from reliable books.
You are tearing away the flesh Imam Husayn, with these lies of yours. It
was God's grace that He showed this to you in a dream." 

If one studies the history of 'Ashura' one will find that it is the most
vivid and well-documented of histories with plenty of sources. The
marhum Akhund Khurasani used to say, "Those who are ever after 'new'
*rawdahs* should go and read the true accounts, for no one has ever
heard them" One should study the addresses of Imam Husayn (*'a*)
delivered in Makkah - in the Hijaz as a whole - at Karbala', during his
journey, as well as the sermons addressed to his companions, the
questions and answers that took place between him and others, the
letters that were exchanged between him and other people, the letters
that were exchanged between the enemies themselves, in addition to the
accounts of those (from among the friends as well the enemies) who were
present on the occasion of 'Ashura'. There were three or four persons
from among Imam Husayn's companions who survived, including a slave
named 'Uqbah ibn Sam'an, who had accompanied the Imam from Makkah and
lived to write the accounts pertaining to the Imam's troops. He was
captured on the day of 'Ashura' but was released when he told them that
he was a slave. Humayd ibn Muslim was another chronicler who accompanied
the army of 'Umar ibn Sa'd. Of those present on the occasion was Imam
Zayn al-'Abidin (*'a*) himself who has recounted all the events. There
is no blind spot in the history of Imam Husayn (*'a*). 

**( 28 )**

Hajji Nuri refers to a spurious story that relates to Imam Zayn
al-'Abidin (*'a*). According to it when there remained no companion with
Hadrat Abu 'Abd Allah (*'a*), the Hadrat went into the tent of Imam Zayn
al- 'Abidin (*'a*) to bid him good-bye. Imam Zayn al-'Abidin (*'a*)
asked him, "Father! How did things come about between you and these
people? (that is, Imam Zayn al-'Abidin was unaware of what was happening
until that time). The Imam said to him, "Son, this matter has ultimately
led to a battle." 'What happened to Habib ibn Mazahir?, asked Imam Zayn
al-'Abidin. "He was killed," replied the Imam. "How about Zuhayr ibn
Qayn?" "He was also killed," replied the Imam. "What happened to Burayr
ibn Hudayr?" "He was killed," said Imam Husayn (*'a*). Imam Zayn
al-'Abidin continued naming each of his father's companions one after
another and the Imam's reply was the same Then he asked concerning the
men of Banu Hashim. "What happened to Qasim ibn Hasan?" What happened to
my brother 'Ali Akbar?" "What happened to my uncle Abu al-Fadl The
answer was the same: "He has been killed." This is a fabrication and a
lie. Imam Zayn al-'Abidin, *na'udhubillah*, was not so sick and
unconscious as not to know what was going on. Historians have written
that even in that state of illness he rose from his bed and said to
Zaynab, "Aunt, bring me my staff and give me a sword." In any case, Imam
Zayn al-'Abidin (*'a*) was one of those who were present on the scene
and related the accounts of events. 

Truly, we should be penitent for these crimes and treacheries that we
are guilty of in respect of Abu 'Abd Allah al-Husayn (*'a*), his
companions, comrades and members of his family, and for effacing all
their achievements. He should do penance and then make effort to derive
benefit from this most educative source. 

Is there any inadequacy in the life of 'Abbas ibn 'Ali as recounted in
the reliable *maqatil* (accounts of martyrdom)? The single point that
there was no danger to his own life is enough to be a matter of pride
for him. Imam Husayn had also told him, "They are only after me, and if
they kill me, they will not have anything again anyone else." At Kufah,
when Shimr ibn Dhi al-Jawshan was departing for Karbala', one of those
who were present said to Ibn Ziyad that some of his relatives on the
mother's side were with Husayn ibn 'Ali. He requested Ibn Ziyad to write
a letter granting them amnesty, and Ibn Ziyad wrote it. Shimr belonged
to a clan that had remote ties with the tribe of Umm al-Banin (the
mother of Abu al-Fadl). Shimr personally brought this letter of amnesty
on the night following the ninth day of Muharram. This wretch approached
the camp of Husayn ibn 'Ali and shouted, "Where are my nephews!" (*ayna
banu ukhtina*?!).[[23]](#n23) Abu al-Fadl, along with his full brothers,
was sitting with Hadrat Abu 'Abd Allah (*'a*). He remained silent and
did not reply, until the Imam said to him, "Answer him, though he be an
evil man (*ajibuhu in kana fasiqa*). At the Imam's leave, he answered
Shimr, saying, "What do you want?" (*Ma taqul*?). Shimr said, "I have
come with some good news for you. I have brought a letter of amnesty for
you from the emir, 'Ubayd Allah. You are now free, and you will be safe
if you leave now." Abu al-Fadl said to him, "May God damn you and your
emir, as well as the letter that you bring. Do you think we will abandon
our Imam and brother for the sake of our own safety?" 

**( 29 )**

On the night of 'Ashura', the first person to declare his loyalty
towards Abu 'Abd Allah was his brother Abu al-Fadl. Aside from the
foolish exaggerations that are often made, that which is confirmed by
history is that Abu al-Fadl was a very wise person, valiant and
courageous, tall and most handsome. He had been nicknamed 'The Moon of
the *Hashimis*.'[[24]](#n24) These things are true. To be sure, he had
inherited Ali's courage. The story is also true regarding his mother,
that Ali' had asked 'Aqil, his brother, to propose a woman born of a
heroic descent (*waladatha al-fuhulah*) [[25]](#n25) who might give
birth to son who would be a warrior and man of valour (*li-talidani
farisan shuja'ah*).[[26]](#n26) 'Aqil had suggested Umm al-Banin. So
much of it is true. 'Ali's wish was fulfilled in Abu al-Fadl. 

According to one of two reports, on the day of 'Ashura' Abu al-Fadl came
to the Imam and said, "Dear brother, now give me the permission. This
breast of mine is suffocated and I can bear it no more. I want to
sacrifice my life for your sake." I don't know the reason why Imam
responded to Hadrat Abu al-Fadl's request in the manner that he did. Abu
'Abd Allah himself knows better. He said, "Brother, now that you want to
leave, try to get some water for these children." Hadrat Abu al-Fadl had
already come to receive the nickname *Saqqa* (water carrier), as
earlier, on one or two occasions, at nights he had been able to pass
through the enemy's ranks to fetch water for the children in Abu 'Abd
Allah's camp. It was not the case that they had not drunk any water for
three days and nights. Access to water had been closed for three days
and nights, but during this time they had been able to get some water on
one or two occasions, including the night of 'Ashura', when they had
taken bath and washed their bodies. Abu al-Fadl consented. Now note this
majestic scene! What greatness! What valour! What a spirit of
understanding and self-sacrifice! A lone warrior, alone by himself,
advances against a host. The number of men who guarded the river bank
was four thousand. He descends along the river bank and leads his horse
into the water (all historians have written this). First, he fills the
waterskin that he has brought and lays it on his shoulder. He is
thirsty. The air is hot and has been fighting. But as he sits on the
back of his horse and the horse stands in water reaching up to its
belly, he lowers his hands into water, takes water into them and raises
them somewhat towards his sacred lips. 

Those who were watching from a distance report that he hesitated for a
while. Then they saw that he threw the water back and came out of the
river without drinking any. No one knew why Abu Al-Fadl did not drink
water there. But when he came out he recited *rajaz* verses which were
addressed to himself. Now from these verses they understood why he had
not drunk water: 

*O soul of Abu al-Fadl!  
 My wish is that you live not after Husayn!  
 Will you have a drink of cold water,  
 While there stands Husayn, thirsty, near the tents,  
 And about to drink the cup of death!?  
 Such is not the way of my faith,  
 Nor that of one who abides in conviction and truth! [[27]](#n27)*

**( 30 )**

What would become of manliness? Of honour? Of caring love? And of
sharing in the hardship of one's dear ones? Isn't Husayn your Imam, and
you his follower? 

*While Husayn is about to drink the cup of death,  
 Will you have a drink of cold water? *

Never! My faith does not permit me to do that! My loyalty does not allow
me to do such a thing! Abu al-Fadl changed his route while returning and
now he came through the palm groves. Earlier, he had come by the direct
way, but he knew that he now carried a precious trust with him. So he
changed his route and all his concern now was to get the water safely to
the camp, for it was possible that a single arrow may pierce the
waterskin and fail his task of bringing the water to its destination. In
the mean while they heard that Abu al-Fadl had changed his *rajaz*. It
appeared that something had happened. Now he cried out: 

*By God!*

*Even if you sever my right arm,  
 I will persist in defending my faith,  
 And the Imam, who is the true one, for certain,  
 the Prophet's grandson, pure and trustworthy! [[28]](#n28) *

That is, by God even if you cut my right arm I will not flinch from
defending Husayn. Not much time passed when his *rajaz* changed again: 

*O my soul, fear not the faithless,  
 And receive the good news of Almighty's mercy,  
 In the company of the Prophet, the Master and the Elect, Though,
insolently, they should slash my left arm! [[29]](#n29) *

These *rajaz* verses signaled that his left arm too had been severed.
They write that with characteristic dexterity he somehow turned the
water-skin and bent himself over it. I will not say what happened
thereafter as it is most heart rending. 

It is a custom to recount the account of the ordeals of this great human
being on the night of *Tasu'ah* (9th Muharram). Let me add that Umm
al-Banin, the mother of Hadrat Abu al-Fadl was alive at the time of the
event of Karbala', though she was in Madinah at the time. She was given
the news that all her four sons were martyred at Karbala'. This saintly
woman would go to the Baqi' cemetery and mourn over her sons. They write
that her elegies were so full of pathos that they brought tears to
everyone who heard them, even Marwan ibn Hakam, who was the staunchest
of the enemies of the Prophet's family. Sometimes she would remember all
her sons and, at times, especially Abu al-Fadl, the eldest of them, who
was senior most of the brothers, both in respect of age as well as in
respect of spiritual and bodily merits. I remember one of her two
elegies and I will recite them for you. These are the elegiac verses
that this grieved mother recited in mourning for her sons (in general,
the Arabs recite elegiac verses in a very touching style): 

**( 31 )**

*You, who have seen 'Abbas make repeated forays against the base hosts,
And following him were the Lion's sons, each a mighty lion!*

*I have been told, my son's head was struck when his arms were cut, Alas
for my Lion's cub! Did a club fall on his head?*

*O 'Abbas! None would have dared to approach it, Were your sword in your
hand! [[30]](#n30) *

That is, 'O observant eye, tell me, you who have been in Karbala' and
watched its scenes and observed the moment when Abu al-Fadl, my son of a
lion, with my other lion's cubs following him, attacked that cowardly
crowd - tell me is it true what I have been told? They say that when
they had cut my son's arms an iron club fell on my dear one's head. Is
that true?' Then she says, "Abu al-Fadl! My dear! I know that if you had
arms there wasn't a man in the whole world to have the guts to face you!
They had the temerity to do that because your arms had been severed from
your body. 

###### *Continued in part 3 ...*

**( 32 )**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes to part 2:
----------------

[[13]](#r13) During the nights of the *'id* of Ghadir, Dr. Shari'ati
delivered an excellent lecture on this general human tendency for
hero-worship and making of myths and legends, turning historic figures
into legendary heroes with extraordinary and superhuman
characteristics.  [[14]](#r14) Al-Kulayni, *Usul al-Kafi*, "kitab fadl
al-'ilm", p. 32; al-Saffar, *Basa'ir al-darajat*, p.10  [[15]](#r15)
*Bihar al-anwar*, vol. 44, p. 381; *Tuhaf al-'uqul*, p. 176; *al-Luhuf*,
33; al-Khwarazmi's *Maqtal al-Husayn*, ii, p. 5.  [[16]](#r16) Ibn Shahr
Ashub, *al-Manaqib*, iv, p. 110; *al-Luhuf*, p. 50, *Bihar al-anwar*,
vol. 45, p. 50; al-Irbili, *Kashf al-ghummah*, ii, p. 32.  [[17]](#r17)
*Bihar al-anwar*, vol. 44, p. 381; *Tuhaf al-'uqul*, p. 176; *al-Luhuf*,
33.  [[18]](#r18) *Bihar al-anwar*, vol. 44, p. 366; *al-Luhuf*, p. 25. 
[[19]](#r19) *Al-Luhuf*, p. 41; Khwarazmi's *Maqtal al-Husayn*, ii, p.
7; Ibn 'Asakir, *Ta'rikh al-Sham*, iv, p. 333; al-Muqarrim's *Maqtal
al-Husayn*, p. 287; al-Harrani, *Tuhaf al-'uqul*, p. 176; Shaykh 'Abbas
al-Qummi, *Nafs al-mahmum*, p. 149, *Mulhaqat Ihqaq al-haqq*, xi, pp.
624-625.  [[20]](#r20) *Ibid.*  [[21]](#r21) *Mafatih al-janan,* the
*ziyarah* of Imam Husayn (*'a*) for the nights of 'Id al-Fitr and 'Id
al-Adha.  [[22]](#r22) *Marhum* Aqa Muhammad Ali was the son of *marhum*
Wahid Behbahani and both of them were great men. *Marhum* Aqa Muhammad
Ali migrated to Kirmanshah where he wielded great influence. 
[[23]](#r23) al-Muqarrim's *Maqtal al Husayn*, p. 252, *Bihar al-Anwar*,
vol. 44, p. 391, *al-Luhuf*, p. 37  [[24]](#r24) al-Muqarrim's
*al-Abbas*, p. 81; Ibn Shahr Ashub, *al-Manaqib,* iv, p. 108 
[[25]](#r25) al-Muqarrim's *al-Abbas*, p. 69  [[26]](#r26) *Ibsar al-ayn
fi ansar al-Husayn alayh al-salam,* p. 26  [[27]](#r27) *Yanabi
al-mawaddah,* ii, p. 165; *Bihar al-Anwar*, vol. 45, p. 41  [[28]](#r28)
*Bihar al-Anwar*, vol. 45, p. 40  [[29]](#r29) *Ibid.*  [[30]](#r30)
*Muntaha al-amal,* i, p. 386. 
