Introduction
============

Contemporary discourse concerning the political role and application of
Islam is deeply influenced by the west, as it is largely considered as
either a positive or negative reaction to the western way of life.
Confronted by the emerging technical and military superiority, economic
achievements and apparent affluence of western society, Muslims have
been forced to address the challenge of modernity and the various
dimensions that accompany it. As a result, the need to review and
redefine the Islamic position has become necessary, a discussion which
has established two main streams of political thought amongst Muslim
scholars and intellectuals.

Firstly, there are those who advocate a “liberal” interpretation of
Islam and strive to demonstrate its compatibility with the underlying
values of modernism and, more precisely, the western political system.
Supporters of this stream see their interests and objectives in secular
terms; many adopt ideologies such as nationalism, pan-Arabism, socialism
and Marxism, frequently disconnecting themselves from classical Islamic
political thought.

The second stream of thought, often categorised as revivalism or
fundamentalism, embody an extreme reaction to the spread of western
ideas throughout the Muslim world. Its followers totally reject
parliamentary liberalism, amongst other western ideologies, and advocate
the comprehensive adoption of the sources of divine revelation as a
means to end the West’s hegemony, whilst overcoming present difficulties
faced by Muslim societies.

The reflexive nature of these two streams offers little beyond a
positive or negative reaction to modernism and the western way of life
(specifically in the political field). Followers of the former adopt a
secular approach; providing an optimistic analysis of western political
values, either endorsing them or assuming them as Islamic concepts. In
short, this attitude provides no potential for the development or
evolution of Islamic political heritage.

On the other hand, despite strong aspirations to establish a pure
Islamic society and government, revivalism and fundamentalism fail to
provide a complete or unambiguous model for this ideal society. Many
revivalists have attempted to reform the political theory of traditional
Sunni jurist’s (i.e. the theory of *Khilafah* or Caliphate) whilst
other, more excessive versions of fundamentalism (such as the Taliban
movement) present an aggressive, oppressive and backward image of the
Islamic model.

Born amidst shallow and ultimately reactionary Islamic political
ideologies, the theory of “*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*” constituted an entirely
new direction and mode of thinking. This conception of Islamic
governance, formally embodied in the constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, is distinguished by its close connection to Shi’a
political doctrine and the successful amalgamation of *Shari’ah* and
democracy. It composes the authority of an Islamic legal system, the
political guardianship of a just and capable Mujtahid (jurist) and the
democratic role of the people in the distribution of political power.
Within the framework of the traditional Shi’a doctrine of Imamat, this
political doctrine reconciles the authority of religion and the
authority of the people.

There are many misunderstandings concerning the theory of *Wilayat*
*al-Faqih*, its historical background and political justification, the
role of people and what separates it from other Islamic political
theories (such as that of the Caliphate). The primary function of this
book is to clarify these different dimensions and dispel any ambiguities
surrounding this version of the Islamic state.  
 The *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* (guardianship of the scholars) is a religious
model of government. It is therefore essential to discuss why we are in
need of a ‘religious state’ and to take full account of the implications
and justifications of this model in the contemporary world. Chapter one
addresses the definition of a ‘religious government’ and explores the
relationship between Islam and politics. It also assesses the principal
arguments presented by various Muslim thinkers, particularly those who
are opposed to the concept of an Islamic government.

Chapter two intends to clarify the doctrine of *Wilayat al-faqih*, its
historical background, what distinguishes it from other political
theories, and its connection to the traditional religious authority of
the Islamic jurists (Marja’a Taqleed), to whom ordinary Shi’a refer to
and whose decrees they follow on religious affairs. All scholars and
jurists accept that the Marja’a has a duty to act as vicegerent on
behalf of the absent, infallible Imam. However, it is the scope of
authority in this vicegerency that is contentious. The second chapter
aims to expound and develop this discussion, thereby explicating the
role of a jurist in the model of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih*.

As a political theory of state, *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* maintains the
collective vicegerency of the faqih adil (a just or trustworthy jurist),
which is the maximum scope of his authority. The third chapter will
discuss the justifications of this theory and expound some of the
traditional evidence provided by high- ranking jurists who support the
doctrine of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih*.

Liberal democracy remains the prevalent political theory of our time.
The final chapter of this book will deal with the dichotomy that arises
between the concept of Islamic democracy, embodied in the theory of
*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*, and the liberal interpretation of the democratic
system, which exists in the majority of western countries today.

It is my hope that these four chapters will provide the reader with a
comprehensive outline of Shi’a political thought in general, and the
modern incarnation of this political thought, which is embodied in the
constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular.

At the end I would like to thank Dr: Seyyed Muhammad Marandi who
encouraged me for writing the book and kindly undertook the final
editing. I am grateful to Eskandar Khalili for typing and editing the
manuscript of chapters three and four. Thanks also to Yasmin Merchant
and Jondab who typed chapters one and two. I am grateful to all my
friends and colleagues in Islamic center of England especially Shaikh
Muhsen Araki and Shaikh Hamid Hadji Haidar for encouragement and
offering helpful advice

***Ahmad Vaezi***  
***Cambridge University***  
***February 2004***


