Islam and Politics
==================

What is a “Religious Government”?
---------------------------------

The influence of religion upon politics is not a phenomenon that is
confined solely to the Islamic world. However, it is impossible for any
political theorist to ignore the role of Islam in the public lives of
Muslims. Its considerable impact upon the politics of Muslim nations can
be attributed to the strong inclination of the population towards it,
and thus the powerful voice that it is given by them. Leaman writes:

*One of the comments which writers on Islamic Political Philosophy often
make is that it is irremediably conservative. Even the so-called
modernizers have in mind some sort of theocracy, a state in which
religion* *plays a leading role*[^1].

It is obvious that any legal system requires a government to adopt it
and the apparatus of a state to implement and enforce it. Therefore,
Islamic Law (*Shari’ah*) is also in need of a state for its sanction and
application. However, the key concern then becomes whether or not all
theories shaped in the history of Islamic political thought are actually
seeking the establishment of an “Islamic state”. The two aforementioned
factors; that Islam is a vital and necessary aspect of a Muslim’s
culture, and that the *Shari’ah* requires political power and authority
in order to be implemented, might bring one to the conclusion that all
political systems in the Islamic world were historically religious
governments.

Although there are obvious difficulties associated with finding a
precise and agreed definition of a “religious government”, it is
essential to distinguish between various levels of state commitment to a
specific religion. The minimal degree of dedication would be that a
government did not prevent its people from undertaking their religious
rituals and practices. On the other hand, a maximized relationship
between religion and politics requires the total commitment and
adherence of a state to the contents of a specific religion. Obviously,
many varying degrees of religious authority could be supposed between
these two extremes.

Official definitions of a “religious state” focus on a series of
prescribed characteristics and functions embodied by this model of
political system. These may be related to individual characteristics,
such as a governor necessarily belonging to a specific religion or
social class, similar to the governments of European states throughout
the Middle Ages. One might also define a religious government according
to its partial or prejudicial favour towards a particular religion.
Consequently, a religious state uses its military, political and
economic power to promote and strengthen the position and followers of
that specific faith.

This draws our attention to a few, specific aspects of a religious
government. However, it fails to adequately introduce what most
contemporary Islamic political movements and doctrines have in mind when
they apply the term “Islamic State”, which is perhaps most effectively
described as the maximum realization of a religious state.

An Islamic government’s primary aim is to establish a truly Islamic
society. Islam does not consider society to be merely a collection of
individuals. Rather, it deems that society also consists of their social
relationships and the social order in which these individuals exist.
These are perhaps the most definitive factors of a society, as different
societies are categorized as being just or unjust, developed or
undeveloped and complex or plain, according to their social formations
and their systems of rights and duties. Financial sources, social
advantages and the structure of the prevailing political system, are all
part of the complex web of social relationships that contribute to the
makeup of society. Therefore, an Islamic society, by definition, is an
ideal society in which social order is established and regulated
according to underlying Islamic values, teachings and rulings.

An Islamic government is one that accepts and admits the absolute
authority of Islam. It seeks to establish an Islamic social order
according to the contents of Islam, implementing the *Shari’ah*, while
attempting to direct its political decisions and public functions
according to the aims and values of Islam.

This understanding of an Islamic state obviously faces criticism,
especially from those who adopt more secular political ideologies. The
following pages will assess some of the contentious aspects surrounding
this theory of Islamic governance.

Rejection of Islamic Government
-------------------------------

Opponents of Islamic governance can be divided into two major
categories: The first of these are the supporters of secularism, who
contend that religion must be completely separate from worldly affairs.
In their eyes, the concept of a religious state is backward and
outdated. They maintain that this model of political system must be
confined to a time when human beings lacked the knowledge or experience
to organize their social order and were in need of religion to arrange
their legal, economic and cultural relationships.

However, secularism is not a doctrine that merely addresses the
relationship between religion and politics. Essentially, it is a radical
approach to the role of religion and revelation in shaping human
knowledge. Secular rationality maintains that the human intellect is
capable of forming its own knowledge independent of revelation.
According to this, reason in itself is self-sufficient and autonomous.
Hence, mankind is capable of constructing natural and human sciences as
well as philosophy, law and ethics without the aid of God or religion.

Secular thinking, therefore, leaves very little scope for religion.
According to secularist thought, every instance in which the human
intellect is capable of gaining knowledge exists as part of the
exclusive realm of the human being, without any need for faith or
revelation. Such reasoning constrains the role of religion to regulating
the individual relationship between man and his creator, while isolating
it from the social and political order. This is because social
relationships form part of “human” affairs and not “divine” affairs;
they are “extra-religious” as opposed to “intra- religious”. Law,
economy and political decisions as well as the formations of our social
structures and systems of rights and duties are all considered as merely
dealing with the relationship between man and man, not man and God.
Therefore, religion in these cases must delegate everything to human
reasoning and science.

This concise overview of secular thinking illustrates that the reduction
of secularism to a political doctrine, which purely insists on the
separation of faith from politics, is incorrect. The isolation of
religion from politics is but one of the many accomplishments of secular
rationality. Advocates of this view insist on the disengagement of
religion, not only from politics, but also from ethics, art, law,
philosophy and the sciences. Consequently, they advocate not only a
secular state, but secular laws, a secular culture, a secular science
and so on.

Whereas the first approach delegates a limited scope for religion, the
second group of opponents have no argument with those who believe it
cannot be restricted to merely having a limited, fixed or previously
determined capacity. In principle, they agree that no one has the right
to confine the contents and the implementation of Islam to private life,
or more precisely, to the individual relationship between man and God.
The central concern of the second group, however, is that although Islam
embodies certain values and ideas, it is not composed of both
spirituality and politics. Thus it has not specified any particular form
of government and Muslims are free to support any regime they desire.

So the fundamental distinction that arises between these two groups is
that, while secularists argue that religion and politics must remain
separate, the second faction contend that Islam does not in any way
oblige it’s followers to establish it in the political realm. They
attempt to demonstrate that Islam has no connection to politics by
concentrating on the Holy Qur’an and early Islamic history, arguing that
it is a purely spiritual doctrine, as opposed to a spiritual and
political one. Secularists, on the other hand, focus on the demands of
modernity, the inability of religion to conduct and organize the
contemporary world, and its failure to overcome the complications
presented by modernism. Therefore, it is crucial to clarify whether or
not Islam compelled its followers to establish an Islamic government,
and whether or not Islam is indeed capable of regulating modern society.

No credible Muslim thinker advocates the segregation of religion from
worldly affairs, as the secular tradition would insist, reducing it to
little more than a personal relationship between man and God. In fact,
very few Islamic intellectuals appeal to secular rationality other than
to insist on the separation of religion from socio-political
relationships (i.e. restricting the scope of religion and extending the
role of reasoning in public life). Although these thinkers do not
explicitly call themselves secular, their attitudes towards the issue of
Islam and politics obviously have common characteristics with those of
secularists.

Having introduced the two main critical attitudes towards Islamic
government, the following pages will examine the central arguments
presented by adherents to these two schools of thought, beginning with
the reasons provided that reject any original connection between Islam
and politics.

### The First Argument

In his famous book “Islam and the Foundations of Government” (*Al-Islam
wa Usul al-Hukm*) Shaykh Ali Abd al-Raziq[^2] (1888-1966) sought to
justify the separation of religion and political authority on the basis
of religious evidences. He argued that the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) did
not intend to establish a political state in Madina and that Islam did
not support the rise of any particular social system.

This assertion totally contradicted the traditional belief, which held
that the Hijrah (migration to Madina in 622) marked the beginning of the
Prophet’s political activity and the realization of Islamic governance.
Abd al-Raziq argued that the Prophet was the bearer of a religious
message; he did not have a government, nor did he seek to establish a
kingdom in the political sense or anything synonymous with it. Rather,
his authority was sacred, derived from God so that he could deliver the
divine revelation. According to Abd al- Raziq, this did not entail
political leadership; it was the mandate of a Prophet and not of a
Sultan.

To justify his view, Abd al-Raziq refers to several verses of the
Qur’an. He believes that according to these, the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh)
was only a messenger, commissioned to deliver God’s revelation to the
people and nothing else.

***We have sent you only to give good news and to warn. [Chapter 17,
Verse 105]***

***The duty of the messenger is to convey the message clearly. [Chapter
27, Verse 54]***

***Yet we have sent you only to give good tidings and to warn. [Chapter
25, Verse 56]***

***Tell him: I am only a warner. [Chapter 27,Verse 92]***

Abd al-Raziq argues that if the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) had other roles,
such as that of a political leader, then the Qur’an would clearly have
announced them[^3].

In order to justify his position, he argues that every state requires a
political structure that contains specific institutions and
administrations, but that Muhammad’s leadership was devoid of these
necessary elements of government. In fact, according to this point of
view, political authority only appeared in the Islamic community
following the demise of the Messenger of God. Consequently, striving for
the establishment of a government is not considered part of Islamic
teachings[^4].

However, contrary to Abd al-Raziq’s opinion, there is a mass of
historical evidence that clearly demonstrates the Prophet’s role as both
a political and religious leader. In fact, many western thinkers, such
as Anthony Black, agree that the Prophet’s objective was not merely to
establish a new identity by replacing old tribal customs. According to
these thinkers, he addressed political power as well as spiritual and
cultural authority. Black writes:

*His purpose was to construct out of tribal confederacies a new people
driven by his own sense of moral mission. Judaism had preached an all-
embracing (ethnic) law, While Christianity had preached spiritual
(universal) brotherhood. But, neither seriously addressed the problem of
military power and political authority; both had accepted life under
alien, pagan rule. Muhammad preached spiritual brotherhood, plus an
all-embracing law, and universal political control to be achieved*[^5].

The activities of the Prophet Muhammad following the Hijrah brought
about revolutionary changes to the Arabian Peninsula. These cannot
simply be interpreted as the ordinary behavior of a religious leader.
Included here are concise examples of his political deeds, which could
not have been issued without political authority.

He assembled a number of hostile tribes and forged them into a new
community (ummah). This is essentially a political endeavor, which is
embodied in what Montgomery Watt refers to as the “Constitution of
Medina”, a document that outlines the nature of the state that the
Prophet was intending to establish. The charter incorporates articles
concerning the rights and duties of the various tribes and social
groupings that formed this new society, including their obligations
regarding one another, criminal events and the rights of non-Muslim
members of this community[^6].

He delegated both religious and political responsibilities to his
companions. Some, such as Amr ibn Hazm, were sent to lead the prayers
and teach the people about the Qur’an. Whilst others, such as Abu Musa
al-Ashari and Saed ibn Aas, were dispatched as representatives to
collect taxes (zakat), arbitrate disputes and punish criminals as well
as to educate people about Islam. Sometimes, the Prophet would assign
companions to exclusively governmental capacities, such as when he sent
Abu Sufyan to gather taxes in Najran, while Amr ibn Hazm remained his
religious representative in that region[^7].

The Prophet (pbuh) was a general, a diplomat and a judge. He led the
army, entered into treaties and agreements with various tribes, and
passed judgment in criminal cases. Issues such war, diplomatic relations
and legal arbitration are all obviously included in political authority
and have no connection to a specifically spiritual mandate.

Furthermore, it is unreasonable to compare the structures of a modern
state and the Prophet’s authority in Madina in order to determine
whether he established a political state. Dr. Senhoury, for example,
argues that the political order established in Madina adequately met the
demands of a simple tribal community, thus there was no need to
establish a complex social order when the Prophet’s political system was
appropriate to the requirements of his age and society[^8].

Some thinkers, such as Abid al-Jaberi, contend that because the word
“dawlat” (state) was not adopted as a political term until the beginning
of the Abbasid-era, the political concept of an Islamic state did not
exist either. According to Al- Jaberi, the Prophet (pbuh) established an
“ummah” as opposed to a state. However, although it may be true that the
term dawlat was not prevalent in Arab vocabulary at the time of the
Prophet, it is not the name that constitutes a state. Rather, it is the
nature of the authority that establishes an Islamic government, thus it
is irrelevant whether the term “state” was adopted or not.

Although Abd al-Raziq refers to several verses of the Qur’an in order to
justify his opinion, which is that the Prophet (pbuh) had no role beside
that of a messenger, the verses that he submits as evidence do not
confine the character of the Prophet to a single attribute. A clear
distinction must be made between a relative restriction and an absolute
or definite restriction. The latter confines the character of a subject
to one feature, whilst the former refers to a restriction in a limited
scope of attributes. For example, someone supposes that x is both a
writer and a poet. You correct his opinion by telling him that ‘x is
only a writer’. However, this does not mean that x has no other
qualities apart from being a writer, because your statement restricts
his character in relation to only two attributes.

All the verses to which Abd al-Raziq refers fall into the first
category, which is that of relative restriction. They are merely
emphasizing that the Prophet has no responsibility towards those who
disbelieve in his call. Certainly, the Prophet as a human being has many
other qualities and duties. Therefore, emphasis upon one issue within a
specific context does not nullify the possibility of other tasks or
characteristics. Take, for example, following verses:

***O Prophet, urge the believers to war. [Chapter 8, Verse 65]***

***And judge (rule) between them by what Allah has revealed, and do not
follow their low desires. [Chapter 5, Verse 49]***

***Your Wali is none but Allah and his Messenger. [Chapter 5, Verse
55]***

***And We did not send a messenger except that he should be obeyed….
[Chapter 4, Verse 64]***

### Second Argument

Aside from those who subscribe to a view similar to that of Abd
al-Raziq, other opponents of the Islamic state accept that the Prophet
did, in fact, establish a political order following his migration to
Madina. However, they also maintain that this does not constitute an
intrinsic connection between Islam and politics. The emergence of the
Prophet’s authority in Madina is considered as little more than a
historical event; a specific situation in which the social and political
circumstances necessitated this endeavor, rather than a religious duty
that was included in divine revelation.

Dr. Haery seems to adopt a similar opinion in the following passage, in
which he emphasizes that the Prophet’s government was formed upon the
consensus of the people and then later endorsed by God. He writes:

*Some previous Prophets, especially the Prophet of Islam, besides the
exalted position of Prophethood had undertaken governing people and
committing political affairs. We have to know that since people
compelled them with no anticipate inclination, these political
authorities and special circumstances forced them to accept, the
Political authority cannot be taken into account as part of God’s
revelation*[^9].

To support this point of view regarding the Prophet’s authority, Haery
refers to the following verse of the Qur’an:

***Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree. [Chapter 48, Verse 18]***

He, and others who adopt a comparable opinion, insist that although God
endorsed the pledge of allegiance (bay’a) given to the Prophet, His
approval is not enough to make the establishment of political authority
an Islamic objective[^10].

However, the relationship between Islam and politics and the historical
events precluding the creation of an Islamic social order are two
entirely separate and distinct topics. Studying the latter requires a
precise analysis of the historical, social and cultural context in that
era. Whereas the former necessitates a comprehensive evaluation of the
Islamic ideology to determine whether or not it encompasses a political
dimension and if it has the potential to be practically applied. Thus,
the correlation of historical stages and circumstances to the process of
forming a government is entirely separable from our present debate,
which concerns the Islamic political system. Hence, many contemporary
Muslim scholars, such as Muhammad Ammareh, who is an advocate of the
Islamic state, come to the following conclusion:

*Even though the generous Qur’an did not explicitly* *[make it]
incumbent upon Muslims to form a religious government [it obliged them]
with some duties [that] would be impossible to fulfil without the
establishment of an Islamic State*[^11].

Both Dr. Haery and Muhammad Ammareh maintain that the pledge of
allegiance (*Bay’a*) given by the tribal representatives of Madina to
the Prophet, during the year prior to his emigration from Mecca, was the
keystone of his government. However, this theory, which introduces the
allegiance (*Bay’a*) of the people as the root of the Prophet’s
political authority, confronts two difficulties. The first is that the
contract of *Bay’a* was a prevailing custom amongst the Arabs, which
occurred for a variety of reasons; the pledge of *Bay’a* to a political
leader or tribal chief was only one of these. Accordingly, it is
essential that we assess the content of these pledges used to support
the arguments of Dr Haery and Muhammad Ammareh.

The pledge mentioned in Chapter 18 of the Qur’an, known as “*Bay’a
rezwan*”, occurred at Hudaybiyah, near Mecca, in the sixth year after
Hijrah. The Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) and a number of his followers were
en-route to perform the pilgrimage to Mecca, when Meccan polytheists who
wished to prevent them from entering the city confronted them. Under
these dangerous circumstances, a number of believers pledged allegiance
to the Prophet so as to reassure him that they would remain by his side
and protect him from the enemies of Islam. This pledge was merely a
reaffirmation of their loyalty in a difficult situation, rather than the
acknowledgement of the Prophet’s political authority. Furthermore, it
took place five years after the establishment of the Islamic state in
Madina, thus it seems strange to consider this event the original root
of his government.

What is often referred to as the second pledge of allegiance known as
“*Bay’a* al-Aqabeh” also has no connection to the nomination of a ruler.
Comparing it to the negotiations that took place at Saqifa, prior to the
appointment of Abu Bakr, explicitly demonstrates that the pledge of
al-Aqabeh was not a recognition of the Prophet’s political authority.
The negotiations at Saqifa were concerned with leadership following the
death of Muhammad (pbuh). Hence, the *Bay’a* at Saqifa merely served as
an election, whereas the pledge of al-Aqabeh was regarding the
protection and safety of the Prophet; the representatives of Madina
promised to resist the polytheists and protect the Prophet as they would
their own families.

The second difficulty confronted by the supporters of this argument,
arises from several verses of the Holy Qur’an which delegate and approve
the guardianship (*Wilayat*) of the Prophet over the believers, with no
reference to any anticipated acceptance from the people; therefore
indicating that his authority is indeed divine. These verses shall be
discussed in greater detail later, but for now we shall mention a few:

***The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful that they have on
themselves. [Chapter 33, Verse 6]***

***Only Allah is your guardian (Wali) and His Apostle. [Chapter 5, Verse
55]***

### The Third Argument

Another prevailing argument, employed by secularists to undermine the
theory of a religious government focuses on the ambitions of those who
support an Islamic state (i.e. the establishment of an ideal social
order according to Islam and the application of the *Shari’ah* to all
facets of society). Secularists, who adopt this line of reasoning,
contend that a religious social order is an incompatible thesis because
it is confronted by an inherent difficulty known as “the problem of
accommodation”. To justify this argument, they rely on two premises:

Social, economic and cultural relationships undergo constant change and
development: There is a significant difference between our contemporary
lifestyles and the lifestyles of previous generations in areas such as
transportation, commerce, education and so on. Thus social formation is
essentially variable and no one can expect a society to remain stable
for a prolonged period of time.

Religion is fixed, unchanging and stable: Every religion is confined to
a specific period of history; as it was founded upon the demands,
circumstances and problems of a particular age. Religion is an event
that happened in a determined time and place, which cannot be repeated.
Consequently, the message of every religion is inflexible and has no
capacity for adaptation to new situations.

Thus, a secularist would argue that because religion is a fixed and
unchanging set of ideas, it is entirely incapable of accommodating
changes to social relationships, which are in turn fundamentally unfixed
and variable. It is entirely reasonable to admit that religion is able
to form a social order, which is influenced by its conventions and
ethics, but only at a time when social circumstances would permit such
an influence. For example, in the time when Islam emerged, it was able
to adequately meet the demands of the historical period. Thus, Islam
succeeded in establishing a civilization during that era. However, it
seems paradoxical to suppose that Islam is capable of effectively
shaping social order under any circumstances and at any time. The core
of this reasoning is that social associations and relationships are
fluid and open to regular changes; no one is able to prevent these
social alterations and thereby narrow them to a fixed religious form and
structure. In summary, secularists assert that although *Shari’ah* has
within it the competence and capability to deal with social formations
similar to those existing at the time when Islam appeared, there are
serious obstacles for the application of *Shari’ah* to contemporary
social configurations.

Such an assessment is based on the presupposition that the conception of
a religious state leaves no room for adaptation or the endorsement of
social changes. Therefore, the response to this argument will discuss
three significant points;

(a) An evaluation of this interpretation of social changes.

(b) Aspects of the Islamic legal system, which have been overlooked by
secularists who subscribe to this opinion, that render it both dynamic
and flexible.

(c) A clarification of what is meant by the accommodation of *Shari’ah*
and the precise definition of the establishment of “Islamic social
order”.

Categorizing Social Alterations
-------------------------------

No one can dispute the fluidity and variable nature of social
relationships. Changes occur both radically over a short period of time,
and gradually over a more prolonged period. They have numerous
dimensions and affect various aspects of human life. As far as the
present discussion is concerned, which is the role of religion in a well
ordered society; the legal and moral dimensions are the most important
ones that should be considered.

From a legal perspective, every social order and its assorted
characteristics confront many questions. An efficient legal system must
be able to overcome these problems and introduce a competent framework,
which is able to respond to new developments that are the result of
social alterations. In order to practically implement a religion that
encompasses social interactions, it becomes crucial to institute a
dynamic legal structure that is able to organize their juridical
aspects. Because the aim of a religious state is to harmonize social
order according to a religious legal system, it is therefore essential
to understand the nature of the legal aspect of social alterations.

Establishing a truly Islamic society and regulating social relationships
according to the Islamic ideology cannot, however, be confined to merely
the legal aspects of this transformation. The moral and cultural
outcomes of such a revolution are fundamental as well. An Islamic
government must maximize the role of moral virtues, Islamic values and
true humanity in social relationships. Advocates of the Islamic state
believe that religious aims and values, stemming from moral virtues and
true humanity, can lead human society towards a higher level of
existence. However, the argument that denies the possibility of
harmonizing social order according to Islamic laws and values usually
attempts to reduce the discussion to a purely legal one, attempting to
illustrate that the Islamic legal system is incapable of accommodating
social changes.

Those who subscribe to this argument presuppose that social alterations
result in entirely new legal problems that have no previous precedent.
Hence, they argue that a religious legal system, because of its
unchanging nature, cannot deal with the problems that it will be
frequently confronted by.

Social changes ultimately give rise to two areas of legal discourse. The
first stems from an entirely new social phenomenon, of which there is no
previous record. Every legal system must define its position with regard
to these. For instance, the invention of computers and the development
of information technology require fresh legislation. Another example is
transplantation, a new technique in medicine that requires jurists to
clarify the legal aspect of this new medical ability, such as the laws
regarding the exchange of natural organs between human beings. The
significant factor with this first group, is that they require more than
merely the application of old and current laws to new situations,
rather, they require a set of absolutely new laws and up-to-date
legislation.

Secondly, there are those social transformations that, despite the fact
they are new, have emerged from pre-existing relationships and
associations, consequently these social phenomena are new in form and
not in content. Accordingly, they do not require totally new legislation
or a fresh set of laws; jurists could and would categorize them
according to previous legal precedents. For instance, previously there
existed only a few types of companies, whereas at present there are many
forms of commercial relationships. However, these are not new legal
phenomena. They are distinguished from previous kinds of companies
essentially in form, because they are merely new structural designs.

In short, with regard to analyzing social alterations, we must adopt the
following conclusion. From a juridical perspective, social changes
cannot be restricted to a single definition. Generally speaking, two
streams of social transformation can be identified in this regard. On
the one hand, there are the cases of completely new legal phenomena that
are without previous record, while on the other there are those that
possess obvious connections or similarities to previous and familiar
elements within the existing legal framework, though they may have each
adopted a partially, or entirely new form.

Flexibility of the Islamic Legal System
---------------------------------------

The precise criticism introduced by this argument against the concept of
an “Islamic state”, when we are confined to the juridical aspect, is
that the Islamic legal system is incapable of coping with social
transformations. Hence, because it is inflexible and unable to meet the
juridical requirements of new circumstances, it cannot possibly satisfy
the legal demands of human society.

In order to efficiently cope with the various societal relationships it
will inevitably encounter, every legal system prerequires the existence
of flexible elements in its methodology and basic foundations. Although
the Islamic legal system does not contain these factors, it is essential
that we realize that it has aspects that provide it with the capacity to
meet and fulfil all the juridical requirements presented by the two
aforementioned categories of social change.

The Islamic legal system is fully equipped to deal with the first
category of social changes. Even though the historical advent of Islam
occurred during a specific time and in a specific place, it is quite
reasonable to extrapolate a universal, ahistorical and timeless legal
framework for different aspects of social relationships. Many legal
aspects of social alterations can, in fact, remain stable in spite of
their formal changes. This enables Islamic law (*Shari’ah*) to form a
general juridical framework for the various categories of social
associations. In reference to different sections of Islamic law, there
exist a selection of unchanging, absolute and general rules that, at any
time and place, all Muslims are obliged to respect; they are required to
harmonize their public and private relationships with these rules. For
example, in commercial affairs there are some general rules as follows:

It is incumbent upon believers to fulfil their contracts and
obligations:

***O you who believe! Fulfil the obligations. [Chapter 5, Verse 1]***

Some types of contracts and commercial agreements are prohibited because
they include unlawful profit such as usury:

***Allah has allowed trading and forbidden usury. [Chapter 2, Verse
275]***

Lawful commercial and financial contracts and covenants must fulfil some
general conditions such as mutual consent without coercion and must not
be subject to false methods of attaining wealth, for example, gambling:

***O you who believe! Do not devour your property among yourselves
falsely, except that it be trading by your mutual consent. [Chapter 4,
Verse 29]***

These examples of obligations, prohibitions and conditions concerning
one aspect of social life, even though they do not embrace all the
Islamic edicts in this field, help us to confront developing models of
contracts. New forms of contracts, whether they are altered versions of
familiar and prevailing models or entirely original ideas without
previous record, can be categorized as either lawful or unlawful
according to these three principals and so on. For instance, “insurance”
is an example of an entirely new contract, while purchasing books via an
online bookstore is merely a new method of trading which, although
formally different, is a continuation of a particular category of
business. When all these new forms of contracts adopt and fulfil the
framework that has been drawn by *Shari’ah*, they are considered
lawful.  
 The other important aspect concerning the flexibility of Islamic law
emerges when we take into consideration the role of covenant and promise
in this context. Some verses of the Qur’an order Muslims to fulfil their
promises when they enter into a covenant or agreement:

***And fulfil the promise, surely every promise shall be questioned
about. [Chapter 17, Verse 34]***

This Islamic principle enables an Islamic state to enter into
international conventions, in order to make use of their advantages,
even though some of these conventions are concerned with completely new
forms of social relationships, such as maritime laws or laws governing
airlines and international trade, of which there is no previous record
in the *Shari’ah*.

The doctrine of “*Ijtihad*”, which is the deduction of laws through
reference to Islamic sources, enables a qualified Jurist (*faqih*) to
deduce responses to both old and new questions. Every qualified *faqih*
is free to issue new decrees with regards to subjects that have no
previous record amongst other Imami jurists; thereby providing the
Islamic legal system with a high degree of flexibility, which enables it
to confront new situations and circumstances. This potential is
reinforced in view of jurists who subscribe to a doctrine that advocates
the absolute guardianship of the well-qualified *faqih*
(*Wilayat*-*a-mutlaqih*). This doctrine insists that the trustworthy
jurist, who is responsible for Muslim society, has the right to
legislate according to specific conditions. This subject will be
discussed further in the next chapter.

Rational Management versus Juristic Management
----------------------------------------------

Misconceptions surrounding the implementation of *Shari’ah* and the role
of *fiqh* (Islamic jurisprudence) in governing a state and it’s society,
have given rise to two opposing groups, who erroneously come to the
conclusion that the Islamic method of governance is completely
incompatible with “rational management”, which prevails in most modern
states. This group is divided into two categories; the first of which
insists that Muslims in the modern world must submit to the organization
of their economic, political, social and cultural affairs through
rational and technical management. In this model of regulation, the
human intellect, technology and the sciences have authority, while
religion remains separate from worldly affairs. Therefore all public
decisions and the organizing of the fundamental structures of society
are fulfilled according to the rational form of authority.

The second group, however, advocates the total authority of religion and
attempts to organize social affairs by presenting absolute “juristic
management”. This model of management, according to them, ignores the
role of humanistic sources of knowledge and instead insists that the
solution to all problems must emanate solely from Islamic jurisprudence
(*fiqh*). In other words, this school of thought endeavours to replace
rationality and reference to scientific means, with religion and purely
juristic solutions.

It was indicated previously that this misleading interpretation for the
role of Islamic jurisprudence with regards to social management and the
making of political or economic decisions, arises from a
misunderstanding of the term “religious state” and “religious social
order”. This misconception of a religious society and state grants a
foothold to the critics who wish to portray the Islamic state as
backward and ignorant of the demands of the contemporary world and who
depict Islam as a system that denies human knowledge, rationality and
progress.

Adopting the Islamic ideology and applying its laws and aims in order to
harmonize different aspects of life is one thing, and ignorance of human
knowledge and rationality is another. Drawing such a sharp and
distinctive line between juridical and rational management is purely
fictitious, as it overlooks any possible cooperation between these two
methods, while incorrectly assuming that a religious state’s model of
government does not overlap with that of a non- religious state’s in any
way, shape or form (When in fact all states are burdened with similar
responsibilities). Consequently, this third model would enjoy the
advantages of both methods of management and combine rationality with
respect to the ultimate authority of religion. The unusual, and
irrationally narrow distinction between the two models of management,
fails to provide any definite reason to suppose that the integration of
religious authority and rationality is either impossible or
incompatible. According to the history of Islamic thought, the Shi’a and
Mutazali schools have always believed in rationalism. They endorse the
role of the human intellect as a significant source of religious
knowledge alongside Islamic evidence (Qur’an and hadith).

Rationality is included with Islamic sources and reasoning is taken into
account as a part of religious knowledge.

It is necessary to emphasize that organizing social relationships, in
its full scope, involves many facets. These include legislation,
politics and policymaking as well as industrial-economic planning,
social services and education. It is incorrect to suppose that, under an
Islamic government, these functions and tasks would be undertaken
exclusively by jurists and that all types of social, economic and
cultural difficulties would be resolvable by jurisprudence.

In fact, the fundamental distinction between an Islamic state and a
secular one should be based on the acceptance or denial of the authority
of Islam in social affairs, rather than the denial of rationality and
scientific knowledge. An Islamic authority would address the needs of a
society according to the criteria laid down by Islam; the extent to
which jurisprudence and *Shari’ah* influence this depends on the depth
to which Islam has defined the subject matter. For instance, the role of
*Shari’ah* is greater in legislation than in policy making or
international politics. The various elements of an Islamic government
must harmonize and adapt their functions, policies and decisions to the
contents of Islam, though they are able to employ their reasoning and
scientific knowledge wherever it is required.

In conclusion, the allegation that Islam is somehow unable to cope with
social progress or changes to various aspects of human existence is
false. Islam cannot be confined to a specific time or set of
circumstances, as it has within it the capacity to guide humanity
towards happiness at all times. However, Islam’s ability to adapt to the
demands of various social formations and situations should not be taken
to mean that Islam has a passive attitude towards alternative
lifestyles. It is illogical to assume that every kind of cultural,
social or economic relationship can be universally endorsed by Islam,
for it has timeless rules, values and objectives that disagree with
certain types of associations and lifestyles. This approach is not the
product of essential links to a specific model of social formation or a
particular social order. Rather, it is an active and dynamic attitude
that emerges from a set of unchanging rules and principals that are not
restricted to a specific age or generation.

Objectives of an Islamic State
------------------------------

Ideological aims and functions are an essential part of any political
system, as they serve to distinguish and separate it from alternative
doctrines. Objectives such as creating a welfare state and extending
education or promoting prosperity and defending a nation’s borders are
not specific to any one model of political system. In fact, almost all
political theories commonly emphasize upon these targets. Therefore, it
is necessary that we define the unique objectives of a religious
government and discuss how they set it apart from other political
systems.

### Implementation of the Shari’ah

The application of Islamic laws and rulings is a fundamental aspect of
the religious state. A government that neglects the *Shari’ah* cannot be
considered a legitimate Islamic authority; as such a notion is
paradoxical and ultimately self- contradicting. The Holy Qur’an obliges
the believers to implement, protect and respect Islamic laws in all
spheres of their public and private lives. For example, take the
following verses:

***And we have revealed to you the Book with the Truth, verifying what
is before it of the book and a guardian over it, therefore, judge
between them by what Allah revealed. [Chapter 5, Verse 48]***

***And whoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, they are the
unbelievers. [Chapter 5, Verse 44]***

***Allah raised prophets as bearers of good news and warners, and He
revealed with them the book with truth, that it might judge between
people in that in which they differed. [Chapter 2, Verses 2 & 3]***

***These are the limits of Allah, so do no exceed them, and whoever
exceeds the limits of Allah, these it is that are the unjust. [Chapter
2, Verse 229]***

***And if you differ in anything amongst yourselves, refer it to Allah
and His messenger. [Chapter 4, Verse 59]***

For the government and citizens of the Islamic state to fulfil this
duty, it becomes essential for the state’s laws to be consistent with
the *Shari’ah* and it’s ruling system to be founded upon the principals
of Islamic jurisprudence (*fiqh*). As pointed out, many modern Muslim
intellectuals have criticized this jurisprudential conception, insisting
that *Shari’ah* must be separated from governance, public affairs and
the shaping of the system of human rights and duties that regulate
society. They maintain that these should be governed according to human
sciences, rationality and an extra-religious conception of human rights,
rather than through Islamic jurisprudence. This ultimately secular
approach belittles the importance of the *Shari’ah* and its practical
necessity in an Islamic state. This approach shall be further assessed
in the final chapter when considering the arguments of those who seek to
reconcile Islam with liberal democracy.

### To Enjoin the Good and Forbid the Evil

Islam has made it incumbent upon believing men and women to establish a
healthy society, which is purified of corruption and wrongdoing and
conducts itself correctly and avoids injustice. This duty is embodied in
the principal of “al-amr’ bi’l maruf’ wal-nahi an al-munkar” (Enjoining
the good and forbidding the evil) that is mentioned in the following
verses of the Qur’an:

***And from among you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and these it is that shall be
successful. [Chapter 3, Verse 104]***

***And (as for) the believing men and the believing women, they are
guardians of each other; they enjoin good and forbid evil. [Chapter 9,
Verse 71]***

Calling people to what is right and preventing injustice is the joint
responsibility of the state and its citizens. An Islamic government
cannot remain neutral concerning the moral- religious conditions of
society. Also, as well as being accountable for affairs such as
security, welfare and social order, the government is also charged with
maintaining human virtues, common good, morality and religious
commitment.

Unlike most contemporary political theories, especially those formed
upon the traditions of liberalism, Islam does not support the concept of
a ‘limited state’. According to this liberal approach, the authority of
a government is limited by the scope and framework defined by liberalism
and it’s interpretation of human rights and social justice, which are
connected to the underlying values of liberal doctrine. Consequently,
the government is rendered unable to adopt a partial position with
regards to morality, religion or ethics. Whether someone is moral or
immoral, religious or irreligious, these are regarded as individual
matters that the individual is able to choose as he pleases. Only if the
individual break the law or violates the rights of others is the liberal
government allowed to interfere in their affairs.

However, it must be pointed out that the duty of a religious government,
regarding the moral-religious position of society, does not allow Muslim
rulers or citizens to impose Islamic beliefs and values upon others.
Religious tolerance is a significant characteristic of the Islamic
ideology; a fact to which history testifies. For example, the Jews and
Christians of the Spanish Peninsula enjoyed the same rights, security
and prosperity afforded to all citizens of the Islamic state, as did
many other ethnic and religious minorities throughout the domain of
Islam at that time.

The nature of a religious government’s responsibility regarding the
moral condition of society is concerned primarily with decision-making,
legislation and government policy. An Islamic state is obliged to
maximize the opportunities to promote spirituality, moral values and
individual virtues, while providing the people with a stable environment
in which to attain a comfortable, safe and fruitful existence.
Essentially, its role is to maintain a healthy social atmosphere. People
are free to adopt their own beliefs and opinions, but in public they
must respect and abide by Islamic laws. For instance, it is not the duty
of an Islamic government to monitor the private lives of it’s people to
discover whether or not they drink alcohol, but no one is allowed to
publicly consume the substance, as this would damage the social
environment, and it is the responsibility of an Islamic authority to
protect society from corruption and immorality.

From the Islamic view the problem of happiness and wickedness eventually
rests on the choice made by the individual. Almighty God says:

***Surely we have shown him the way; he may be thankful or unthankful.
[Chapter 76, Verse 3]***

***That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, and those who
believe follow the truth from their Lord. [Chapter 47, Verse 3]***

Therefore an individual is allowed to adopt his or her personal wishes
and ideas in private, but these cannot be allowed to infringe upon the
moral health and stability of society. Nothing must prevent the
government and believers from striving to create desirable social
circumstances, or promoting Islamic values in order to remove the
obstacles in the path of a truly correct and fulfilling lifestyle.

Modern political doctrines tend to emphasize human rights, rather than
human goods. For them, it would be more desirable and practical if we
concentrated on defining the mutual duties of the rulers and the ruled
according to the rights of human beings. This is because other concepts
such as happiness, virtue and social good are often ambiguous,
subjective and controversial. For example, there is a strong tradition
in political thought that amongst the members of any polity there is a
common good and the function of the government is to determine and
actualize this. However, adversaries argue that there are a number of
significant difficulties regarding the idea of a “common good”.
Modernist political thinkers usually ask “what is a common good? and how
are we to know what it is?” Robert Dahl says:  
*Every attempt I have seen to prescribe the common good is either too
limited to be generally accepted or too general to be very relevant and
helpful*[^12].

The Islamic doctrine approaches this problem of “common good” by
extending it beyond the boundaries of a community. Not only do the
members of a community have a common good but also all human beings have
a common good. Islam believes that human beings share common
inclinations and needs, which they are able to fulfil correctly through
their own actions with the aid of a desirable, just and true Islamic
government.

### To Protect True Freedom of Human Beings

Liberty is arguably one of the most important underlying values upon
which contemporary western political thought is founded. Although there
are contending analyses regarding the nature of freedom amongst western
thinkers, liberals traditionally recognize individual freedom as the
most fundamental human value and they define and evaluate all other
values according to their relationship with it[^13].

Because most people, especially in the west, adopt a liberal conception
of liberty, they often have reservations about whether a truly religious
government can promote the freedom of its subjects. At a glance, it may
seem strange to suppose that Islam, with its binding nature and
limitations, could act as an effective safeguard of human freedom. But
before proceeding with this discussion, it is appropriate to explore and
assess the liberal theory of freedom.

Also known as the negative view of liberty, the liberal conception of
freedom has come to be understood as the absence of coercion. This
definition of freedom emanates from the works of thinkers such as Hobbes
and Bentham, who envisaged it merely as the absence of external,
physical or legal impediments. However, this theory fails to acknowledge
less immediate or obvious obstacles to freedom, such as lack of
awareness, false consciousness, repression or other inner factors of
this kind. In fact, it insists that to speak of such inner factors as
relevant to the issue of freedom, is to abuse words. The only clear
meaning that can be given to this perception of freedom is the absence
of external obstacles[^14].

Alternatively, the positive view of liberty asserts that freedom
involves the realization of some specific capacities, abilities and
powers. And it implies that if these are not realized, then the
individual is not truly free, even if he or she is not subject to
external coercion. Whereas negative freedom is best described as
‘freedom from’ (compulsion), positive freedom can be termed as ‘freedom
to’, meaning that an individual must be free to realize his
capabilities. Therefore, it is necessary for positive freedom to adopt a
theory concerning human nature and a set of ideas about human needs and
abilities[^15].

Taylor maintains that the positive perception of freedom concerns the
exercising of control of ones life:

*Doctrines of positive freedom are concerned with a view of freedom
which involves essentially the exercising of control over one’s lives;
one is free only to the extent that one has effectively determined
oneself and the shape of ones life. The concept of freedom here is an
exercise-concept*[^16].

According to the Islamic conception of human nature, we are subject to
various desires and capacities. Those who follow merely their natural
instincts will remain in the prison of their low desires, unable to
realize their potential. But those who exercise control over themselves
and strive for self-purification, rather than merely obeying their
impulses, are truly free. The Qur’an says:

***Have you considered the one who takes his low desires as his Master;
Allah has made him err having knowledge and has set a seal upon his ear,
his heart and placed a covering upon his eyes. Who can then guide him
after Allah? Will you not then be mindful? [Chapter 45, Verse 23]***

***Then know that they only follow their low desires, and who is more
erring than he who follows his low desires without any guidance from
Allah? Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people. [Chapter 28, Verse
50]***

From this perspective, namely the positive interpretation of freedom,
Islam should be recognized as a perfect form of guidance from Allah and
a divine means to achieve true human freedom. The Qur’an says:

***Those who follow the Apostle Prophet, the ummi, whom they find
written down with them in the Taurat*** ***[Torah] and the Injeel
[Gospel], (who) enjoins them good and forbids them evil, and makes
things lawful to them the good things and makes unlawful to them impure
things, and removes from their burden and the shackles which were upon
them, so (as for) those who believe*** ***in him and honour him and help
him, and follows the light which has been sent down with him, there is
it that are the successful*****.** ***[Chapter 7, Verse 157]***

This verse among many others like it, state that the revelation received
by the Prophet was sent as guidance to all mankind. That Islam is able
to free human beings from the shackles placed upon them by their low
desires, to raise them from a state of ignorance (concerning God and the
hereafter) and to elevate them to a position of enlightenment and
progress. By submitting oneself to the divine revelation and teachings
of the Prophet, the individual is making an obvious commitment to
worship and obey God, to control oneself and to accept certain
limitations. In other words, Islam is a religion; a way of life that
encompasses both spiritual and worldly aspects, thus obliging its
followers to follow a specific lifestyle. This disagrees with the
liberal ‘negative’ conception of human liberty, because it establishes
boundaries and limitations upon freewill. But according to the Islamic
point of view, these limitations help them to attain true freedom
embodied in spiritual life and nearness to Allah.

In conclusion, one of the key objectives of an Islamic state is to
prepare a desirable social condition, so that people are able to realize
their full capacities, and thus free themselves from burdens. This
self-realization means that people can promote their individual virtues
and prepare themselves for the ultimate salvation.

Establishing a just society and respecting human equality Justice (Adl)
and Equality (Qest) are two of the most important aspects of the Islamic
ideology. There are many verses of the Qur'an that oblige the believers
to treat people equally and to deal with them justly.

***Certainly we sent our apostles with clear arguments, and sent down
with them the book and the balance that men may conduct themselves with
equity. [Chapter 57, Verse 25]***

***Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and
that when you judge rule between people you judge with justice. [Chapter
4, Verse 58]***

***O you who believe, be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness of
Allah's sake, though it may be against your own-selves or your parents
or near relatives, if he be rich or poor, Allah is nearer to them in
compassion; therefore, do not follow low desires, lest you deviate; and
if your swerve or turn aside, then surely Allah is aware of what you do.
[Chapter 4, Verse 135]***

These concepts of justice and equality encompass many different aspects
of individual and public affairs. With specific regard to politics, they
require the government to ensure that all people are granted an equal
entitlement to citizenship, protection, the rights granted by Islam, and
the benefits that accompany it, regardless of their ethnicity, beliefs
or talents.

However, the establishment of a society upon justice and equality does
not require ‘legal equality’. Meaning that it does not need to adopt a
legal system that endorses universal and indiscriminate rights and
duties for all members of that society. In fact, in its most precise
definition, legal equality is clearly impractical. All contemporary
legal systems adopt legal inequalities within their structures of rights
and duties. In politics for example, no democratic state allows children
to vote, while in economics the salary of a qualified expert is greater
than that of a labourer. Equally so, the Islamic legal system, which was
revealed as divine law, includes legal inequalities. These arise in
cases such as that of inheritance, where the share of a woman is less
than that of a man. Therefore, social justice and fair governance cannot
be defined as merely overlooking all categories of inequality. Instead,
Islamic social justice is realized by the correct and complete
implementation of the Islamic laws (*Shari’ah*) and values without
exception.

Thus an Islamic state is distinguished by the objectives stated above,
which have been laid down by the Qur’an and Islamic traditions. Other
objectives include the eradication of tyranny, the promotion of
tolerance and peaceful co- existence with non-Muslims in Islamic
territory, the dissemination of knowledge amongst the people and the
creation of a welfare society in order to decrease the economic divide
between the rich and the poor. Finally, it is also essential that the
Islamic government should be led by a just and well-qualified leader, so
that it may realize it’s fundamental aims. This is emphasized in the
following tradition of Imam Rida (peace be upon him):

*Some of the reasons behind appointments of lawful amirs (holders of
authority) by God and making their obedience obligatory are as follows:
Firstly, people would feel duty bound to follow certain rulers that
would rescue them from corruption. It is not possible to follow such
rulers unless power is entrusted on a trustee ruler. Secondly,
prosperity of nations depends on the existence of rulers who try to
solve their temporal and spiritual problems. God, the Wise, never leaves
His creatures without a guide. The third reason is that, in the absence
of a right leader and guide, the religious commandments and orders would
be ruined*[^17]*.*

Spheres of Islamic Political Thought
------------------------------------

At present, there is a significantly broad scope for political debates.
Many scholars and intellectuals examine various spheres of political
thought such as political philosophy, political ideology, political
science and political systems. Thinkers who explore the relationship
between Islam and politics are usually interested by what sort of
political knowledge Islam provides, whether or not Islam supports
political philosophy or advocates a specific political ideology and
whether or not Islamic sources support a particular form of political
system.

Historically, Islamic political thought has been concerned with
leadership; the means of appointing a political authority and the
qualities that a ruler must possess. One might suppose that Islam has
restricted the discussion to a particular area of debate, and that it
therefore overlooks many serious political concerns. However, it is
necessary for us to distinguish between the political heritage of Muslim
thinkers and what is provided by the contents of Islam. The political
heritage of Muslims is embodied in the works of a selection of prominent
Shi’a and Sunni jurists, philosophers and theologians, whose disciplines
can be placed into four major categories: “political theology”,
“political philosophy”, “political jurisprudence” and “political
ethics”. It is essential that we briefly review these aspects of Islamic
political thought in order to clarify the perspective and nature of the
discussions in the following chapters.

### i) Political Theology

The nature of Islamic political debates has been deeply influenced by a
long history of theological (kalam) disagreement between Shi’a and Sunni
scholars. Shi’a political thought, the original and oldest Islamic
political theory, is essentially theological because its primary concern
is leadership; the characteristics of the rightful leader and the
correct method of identifying and appointing him. The Shi’a school of
thought does not restrict these issues to a solely political or
juridical (*fiqh*) discussion, rather they are considered a fundamental
component of the Islamic ideology. Imamate is the focal point of this
aspect of political thought and many books have been written by an
assortment of thinkers from different sects on this topic.

### ii) Political Philosophy

Political philosophy refers to a set of political consequences that are
inferred from fundamental metaphysical-moral issues. The political
writings of Al-Farabi are a typical example of Islamic achievements in
this field. By definition, political philosophy should remain
independent of any particular religious system or set of beliefs, as it
is based upon metaphysical and rational foundations. However, Islamic
political philosophers have formed deeply rational grounds for many
Islamic doctrines before applying these as religious-philosophical
premises in their political philosophy.

To deny the validity of Islamic political philosophy is to ignore the
philosophical and ideological aspects of political issues. Many
philosophical problems in politics have a close relationship with
religion. And there are many Islamic teachings that offer, either
directly or indirectly, suitable answers to some essential questions in
political philosophy.

### iii) Political Ethics

Political ethics (or the morals of politics) refers to a series of
writings from Muslim scholars, who have attempted to advise and guide
rulers to a successful and just method of government. These
prescriptions were usually accompanied by stories of previous kings and
rulers. They were collections of Islamic teachings, Greek philosophy and
some elements of Persian literature. Examples of these include “*Siyasat
Nameh*” (Book of Government) of Nidham al-Mulk (1020-1092), and
“*Nasihat al-Mulk*” (Advice to King) of Ghazzali (1058-1111).

### iv) Political Jurisprudence

Muslim jurists (fuqaha) adopted the method of political jurisprudence
(or “*fiqh* *ul-siyasi*”) to explicate and define the Islamic political
system and juridical aspects of political affairs. They discussed the
duties of rulers over their subjects, the means for appointing and the
grounds for dismissing of political leaders, the personal qualities that
an Imam or Deputy (caliph) should possess, and the relationship between
different elements of the government to one another. Political
jurisprudence overlaps political theology in several areas, such as the
discussion concerning leadership. However, political jurisprudence is
distinguished by its methodology and the large scope of its subject
matter.

“*Al-ahkam as-sultaniyya*”, written by the jurist Al-Mawardi between
1045 and 1058, is a good example of this facet of Islamic political
heritage.

The assumption that Islam has a political ideology implies that it is
impossible for one of these disciplines of political thought to
illuminate its dimensions in isolation from the others. Ideology, as a
political term, refers to a collection of ideas and instructions that
are capable of directing political action. Every political ideology
includes ultimate aims and offers a particular form of political regime
that emphasizes upon specific norms, values and rights in order to draw
a framework for all political affairs. In summary, a political ideology
is a set of ideas that is considered as a decisive solution for the
political aspects of human life. It attempts to adjust and arrange
political relationships according to determined ideas and directives.
Every political ideology ultimately relies upon political philosophy,
because it must express its position according to fundamental political-
philosophical issues, namely questions concerning human nature, the
concept of justice, freedom and it’s limitation and the relationship
between liberty and equality and so on.

From this brief exploration of political ideology, it becomes clear how
extensive the dimensions of a comprehensive political theory might be.
Thus, any explanation of Islamic political ideology must develop all
four aspects of Islamic political heritage; especially regarding
political philosophy and jurisprudence.

However, it is not the intention of this book to explicate the entire
Islamic political system, including the wide disputes and disagreements
amongst the various Islamic sects and movements. The focus of the
following pages will be on Imami political theory, which is known as the
doctrine of Imamate in the age of the present, infallible Imam, and as
“*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*” in the age of the absent Imam. Although, in order
to keep this book concise, the political ideology shall not be discussed
in great depth, the most important aspects of it will be clarified. The
content and debate of the next chapters will be a composition of
theological, philosophical and mostly Islamic juridical (*fiqh*)
discussions.

[^1]: Oliver Leaman, A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy, Polity
Press, 1999, p. 134.

[^2]: Born in Egypt, a disciple of Shaykh Abduh, Abd al-Raziq studied at
Oxford University and was a senior member of al-Azhar University, an
authorative centre of Sunni learning. His short, but controversial book
caused many debates in religious and political circles. Al-Azhar
immediately condemned Abd al-Raziq’s work; he was thrown out of the
university and dismissed from his position as a religious judge.

[^3]: Islam wa Usul al-Hukm, Cairo 1925, p. 73.

[^4]: Islam wa Usul al-Hukm, Cairo 1925, pp. 62-64.

[^5]: Anthony Black, The History of Islamic Political Thought, Edinburgh
University Press, 2001, p. 10.

[^6]: Montgomery Watt, Islamic Political Thought, p. 5.

[^7]: Tabary, Tareekh al-Rasul wa al-Malik (History of Messengers and
Kings), volume 3, p. 318.

[^8]: Ahmed Abd al-Razig al-Senhoury, Fiqh ul-Khilafah wa Tataworeha
(The Jurisprudence of Caliphate and Development), Cairo, 2nd Edition,
1993, p. 82.

[^9]: Mehdi Haery Yazdi, Hekmat wa Hokumat, London: Shadi Publication,
1995, p. 143.

[^10]: Mehdi Haery Yazdi, Hekmat wa Hokumat, London: Shadi Publication,
1995, p. 152

[^11]: Muhammad Amareh, Al-Elmaniya wa Nehzatona, Cairo: Dar al-
Shorugh, 1986, p. 35.

[^12]: Robert Dahl, Democracy and its Critics, Yale University Press,
1989, p.283.

[^13]: For instance Immanuel Kant in ‘Theory and practice’ defines
justice as ‘the restriction of each individual’s freedom so that it
harmonizes with the freedom of everyone else’. For him justice is more
than a condition in which external freedom is guaranteed to all, it is a
condition of maximum liberty for all. Allen Rosen, Kant’s Theory of
Justice, Cornell University Press, 1993, pp. 9-11.

[^14]: Charles Taylor, “What’s Wrong with Negative Liberty?” in
Contemporary Political Philosophy, Robert E. Goodin (ed), Blackwell,
1997, p. 418.

[^15]: Rymond Plant, Modern Political Thought, Blackwell, 1991, p.
222-3.

[^16]: Charles Taylor, Contemporary Political Philosophy, Blackwell,
1997, p. 419.

[^17]: Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Babwayh (al-shaykh al-Saduq), Ellal al-
Shariah, Qom: Maktiba Davari, p. 253.


