Why Wilayat al-Faqih?
=====================

In the previous chapter, we encountered the absolute priority of God as
a fundamental component of Imami political doctrine. After all, it is He
who has accorded the Holy Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them) the
authority to lead and govern the Islamic society (ummah), and ‘*Wilayat*
*al-Faqih*’ is an extension of this authority. However, while the
*Wilayat* of the Imams has traditionally been verified according to
Islamic theology (kalam), the guardianship of the jurists (*Wilayat*
*al-Faqih*) is almost exclusively discussed within the sphere of
jurisprudence (*fiqh*). Hence the universal authority of the faqih
(*Wilayat* al- amma) must be substantiated according to ijtihad
(juridical reasoning).

This method shall be referred to as an “internal justification” as it is
intended to convince those who already accept the basic principals of
the Shi’a creed. On the other hand, *Wilayat* *al-Faqih*, as a political
model of guardianship, must be able to justify itself amongst other
political ideologies; especially the democratic theories that
essentially criticize any guardianship form of state. This approach is
what we shall refer to as the “external justification” for the theory of
*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*, and we shall return to it later.

The internal justification relies primarily on religious traditions
narrated from the Holy Prophet and Imams, although some jurists also
refer to rational arguments as well. Consequently, from the basis of
Islamic jurisprudence, the authority of the faqih may be established
according to sunnah (traditions) and reason (daleel al-aql).

Traditional Evidences for Wilayat al-Faqih
------------------------------------------

Imami jurists usually refer to a set of reports from the Prophet
Muhammad and the Imams to establish *Wilayat* al- amma for the fuqaha.
We shall examine a few of them here.

### A Signet Letter (Tuqih)63 from the Absent Imam

One of the most reliable traditions adduced by scholars[^1] for the
purpose of this discussion is a report from the twelfth and absent Imam
(May God hasten his reappearance). Shaykh al-Sadiq transmits in his book
‘Ikmal al-Deen wa itmam an-Ni'ma’ that Ishaq ibn Yaqub wrote a letter to
the absent Imam asking him about some concerns that he had. The Imam's
deputy (Muhammad ibn Uthman al-Umari) conveyed the letter to him. The
Imam replied:

*As for events that may occur (al-hawadith al-waqi'a) [when you may need
guidance] refer to the transmitters (ruwat) of our teachings who are my
Hujjah (proof) to you and I am the proof of God* *(Hujjatullah) to you
all*[^2].

Shaykh al-Tusi also transmits the narration in the book ‘al- Qayba’[^3]
and other collections of Imami ahadith report the tradition from the
books mentioned above.

Advocates of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* often refer to the second part of the
tradition, namely, “they are my proof to you, and I am the proof of God
to you all” to establish the authority of the fuqaha. However, some
scholars (such as Imam Khomeini) maintain that the first part of the
hadith may also be used to establish the authority of the faqih. The
first section of this narration encourages people to ask those who
relate the traditions of the Imams (peace be upon them) about any new
occurrences that they encounter. It is highly unlikely that Ishaq ibn
Yaqub asked the Imam about what was to be done regarding religious
questions; even ordinary Shi’a would know that in these cases of *fiqh*
(jurisprudence) one should refer to the fuqaha (jurists). In fact,
according to some narrations, people would recourse to the students of
an Imam during his lifetime. Therefore, Ishaq must have been referring
to something other than this by his question about ‘al-hawadith
al-waqi’a’, Imam Khomeini says:

*What is meant by hawadith al-waqi'a is rather the newly arising
problems that affect the people and Muslims. The question Ishaq ibn
Yaqub was implicitly posing was this: now that we no longer have access
to you, what should we do with respect to social problems? What is our
duty?*[^4]

It is necessary to establish what the Imam meant by ‘ruwat’ (narrators),
when he commands his followers to refer to the narrators of traditions
with respect to these new circumstances. After all, it is self evident
that people who merely transmit traditions and narrate what they have
seen and heard, without a comprehensive understanding of the science of
ahadith or jurisprudence, are not qualified to undertake this duty.
Therefore the Imam must have been referring to the fuqaha (jurists) who
are experts in the interpretation and explanation of Islamic sources.

We mentioned earlier that most Imami jurists usually refer to the second
part of this tradition to establish the guardianship of the jurists. The
statement makes clear that fuqaha (ruwat) act as the proof (*Hujjah*) of
the Imam in all matters in which the Imam acts as the proof of Allah.
Imam Khomeini describes a ‘proof of God’ (or *Hujjah*) as someone who
God has designated to conduct affairs; all his deeds, actions and
sayings constitute a proof for the Muslims. If the proof commands you to
perform a certain act and you fail to obey him, or if despite the
existence of the proof, you turn to oppressive authorities for the
solution of your affairs, then God almighty will advance a proof against
you on the Day of Judgment[^5].

In summary, being a hujjat implies the authority of one over his
followers, and hence the injunctions of the holder of such a status must
be complied with. Since the Imam as God's hujjat (the ‘proof’ that Allah
will not accept any excuses for disobeying) has designated the fuqaha as
his *Hujjah*, the commands and directives of the fuqaha are as those of
the Imam.

With regards to its chain of transmission (sanad), the only issue that
arises is the existence of Ishaq ibn Yaqub. There is no particular
attestation of him found in the Imami books of biography (Ela al-Rejal).
Hence the question may be raised, how can we be certain that the letter
was really issued by the Imam and that Ibn Yaqub received the letter?
There is a difference between reporting an ordinary transmission and the
claim that one has received a special letter from the Imam in the era of
the minor occultation, during which, access to him is only possible
through his appointed deputy. The key point, however, is that many great
Imami scholars such as Shaykh Sadiq, Shaykh Tusi and specially Shaykh
Kolayni, who were alive during the era of the minor occultation (and
were experts in ahadith) mention the tradition as ‘tuqih’ which is
sufficient evidence for a valid chain of transmission[^6].

### Maqbula of Umar ibn Hanzala

According to the science of ahadith, the ‘maqbula’ is a narration that
has been accepted by fuqaha as a valid tradition without examining the
authenticity or weakness of its chain of transmission. In other words,
even though some of those who appear as its transmitters may be weak and
unreliable, some evidences that support the soundness of the text compel
the fuqaha to ignore such weakness.

Umar ibn Hanzala, who was a disciple of Imam as-Sadiq (pbuh) said[^7]:

*I asked Imam Sadiq whether it was permissible for two of the Shi’a who
had a disagreement concerning a debt or an inheritance to seek the
verdict of the ruler or judge. He replied: 'anyone who has recourse to
taghut [i.e. The illegitimate ruling power], whatever he obtains as a
result of their verdict, he will have obtained by forbidden means, even
if he has a proven right to it. For he will have obtained it through the
verdict and judgment of the taghut, the power that almighty God has
commanded him to disbelieve in.*

***“They wish to seek justice from illegitimate powers, even though they
have been commanded to disbelieve therein”. [Al-Qur’an, Chapter 4, Verse
60]***

Umar ibn Hanzala then asked what was the correct action for two the
Shi’a to take under such circumstances. Imam Sadiq replied:

*They must seek out one of you who narrates our traditions, who is
versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden, who is well
acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as judge and
arbiter, for I appoint him as hakim [judge]*[^8].

No Imami jurist disputes that this tradition firmly establishes the
authority of a faqih with regards to the administration of justice
(*Wilayat al-qada*). However, many leading scholars such as Mirza
al-Nayini, Sayyid Mohammad Reza Gulpaayigani, Shaykh al-Ansari[^9] and
Imam Khomeini believe that the text does not confine the authority of a
faqih to *Wilayat al-qada*. They assert that the Imam designated the
faqih as trustees of universal authority (*Wilayat al-amma*) when he
said: “I appoint him [faqih] as hakim [judge]”.

However, a judge's role is not limited to merely resolving disagreements
amongst the people; their conflicts and disagreements compel them to not
only recourse to judges, but also to possessors of political power. The
tradition of Imam Sadiq (pbuh) unconditionally prohibits any referral to
illegitimate authorities (*taghut*) and there is no reason to assume
that the Imam solely commanded his followers not to refer to judges
appointed by an illegitimate government, while allowing them to recourse
to the same government for the regulation of their affairs. By
appointing the faqih as hakim, the Imam made it incumbent upon all Shi’a
to refuse any kind of recourse to illegitimate authority. Hence in all
aspects of disagreement it is necessary for them to refer to a faqih,
whether it is in a governmental or judicial capacity.

There are no problems surrounding this hadith’s chain of transmission.
All of the transmitters (Muhammad ibn Yahya, Muhammad ibn al-Hussain,
Muhammad ibn Isa, Safvan ibn Yahya and Dawood ibn al-Husayn) are
reliable. And although there is no specific confirmation that Umar ibn
Hanzala himself existed, fuqaha generally accept this and other
transmissions from him.

### The Tradition of Abu Khadija

Fuqaha such as Imam Khomeini and Shaykh Muhammad Hassan[^10] appeal to a
famous transmission that was narrated by Abu Khadija (who was one of
Imam Sadiq's companions), to argue in favor of *Wilayat al-amma*. The
tradition is mentioned by Shaykh Tusi, Shaykh Sadiq, and Shaykh Kolayni.
According to them, Abu Khadija said:

*I was commanded by the Imam [Ja'far as-Sadiq (pbuh)] to convey the
following message to our friends [Shi’a]: 'when enmity and dispute arise
among you, or you disagree concerning the receipt or payment of a sum of
money, be sure not to refer the matter to one of these malefactors for
judgment. Designate as judge and arbiter someone amongst you who is
acquainted with our junctions concerning what is permitted and what is
prohibited, for I appoint such a man as judge over you. Let none of you
take your complaint against another of you to the tyrannical ruling
power*[^11].

The explanation of the argument here is similar to the previous
narration. Even though the Imam says: “I appoint such a man as judge”, a
statement that explicitly concerns *Wilayat al-qada*, it is essential to
recognize that the final section of this transmission is not merely a
repetition. Rather it is a prohibition of recourse to tyrannical
authorities in matters relating to the executive. In the first instance,
the Imam has commanded his followers to turn away from illegitimate
judges, while in the second he has prohibited them from referring to
other illegitimate powers with regard to non-judicial issues. This
indicates that the appointment of a faqih is necessary in all matters of
judgment and of government.

Many experts in the field of biography (*Elm al-Rejal*) testify that Abu
Khadija is a trustworthy narrator. In addition, the hadith is well known
amongst the fuqaha and classified as mashureh (famous), consequently
there is no problem regarding its chain of transmission.

One might suppose that the designations issued by Imam Sadiq in the
previous two traditions are temporal and limited to his lifetime. This
possibility is based on the assumption that his successors may have
dismissed the fuqaha from authority, just as the successors of a ruler
may dismiss his previous commands. However, this supposition obviously
overlooks the status of Imams within Imami *Shi’ism*; their commands and
instructions are not equitable to those of an average ruler and their
orders must be obeyed both during their lifetime and after their death.
Furthermore, Imam as- Sadiq referred to a verse of the Qur’an (4:60),
which ordains disbelief in *taghut* (oppressive authority) and prohibits
any recourse to illegitimate government as a ground for his designation
of the fuqaha as ‘hakim’. This is a strong indication that his edict is
not restricted to a specific time, and that it is forever obligatory for
people to turn away from tyrannical authorities.

These three traditions are considered reliable and act as solid
foundations for the establishment of *Wilayat al-amma*. Nevertheless
there are some disagreements amongst Imami jurists pertaining to the
transmission and interpretation of the texts. Most critics maintain that
the above-mentioned traditions confirm little more than the
administration of justice (*Wilayat al-qada*) by the fuqaha.

Aside from the three aforementioned traditions, advocates of *Wilayat
al-amma* also appeal to a set of transmissions that, although too weak
to prove the universal guardianship of the faqih by themselves,
certainly reinforce and verify the doctrine.

### The First Tradition: The Sound Transmission of Qadah

Ali bin Ibrahim, from his father, from Hamad bin Eisa from Qadah (Abd
al-Allah bin Maimun) from Imam Sadiq (pbuh), who narrated the Prophet
(pbuh) as saying:

*The superiority of the learned man over the mere worshipper is like
that of the full moon over the stars. Truly the ulema (scholars) are the
heirs of the Prophet (pbuh); the prophets bequeathed not gold* *(dinar)
and silver (dirham) instead they bequeathed knowledge, and whoever
acquires it has indeed acquired a generous portion of their
legacy*[^12].

According to this tradition, the just and pious religious scholars
(ulema) are the heirs of the Prophet; consequently, they must fulfil all
the attributes and responsibilities that Allah designated for him (aside
from receiving the divine revelation). Hence they are entrusted with
maintaining his authority (*Wilayat*) and the integrity of Islam. And,
as has become clear from previous discussions, the Prophet has been
appointed as the guardian and leader of the ummah. As the Qur’an says:

***The Prophet has higher claims over the believers than their own
selves. [Chapter 33, Verse 6]***

So his right to rule and govern over the believers is also entrusted to
the scholars.

Critics believe that the tradition discusses the knowledge rather than
the status of the prophets. So the scholars are the heirs of the Prophet
in the field of knowledge. The hadiths’ chain of transmission is sound
and the fuqaha usually accept it.

### The Second Tradition: Saduqs’ Morsala76

Shaykh Saduq in several of his many books mentions the following hadith:

*Imam Ali narrated the Prophet (pbuh) saying: “O God! Have mercy on
those that succeed me”* *[Kholaphayi]. He repeated this twice and was
then asked: “O Messenger of Allah, who are these that succeed you?” He
replied: “They are those that come after me, transmit my traditions and
practice and teach them to the people after me*[^13].”

The interpretation of this tradition is similar to the previous one.
Those who are successors of the Prophet (pbuh) should have his status
(in all areas apart from those such as receiving divine revelation), as
Imam Khomeini says:

*To be a successor means to succeed to all the functions of Prophethood.
In this respect, what is implied by the sentence, ‘O God! Have mercy on
my successors’ is not less than what is implied by the sentence: ‘Ali is
my successor’, since the meaning of successorship is the same in both
cases*[^14]*.*

### The Third Tradition: The Fuqaha are the Trustees of the Prophets

Shaykh Kolayni mentions the following hadith from the  
 Prophet (pbuh):

*The fuqaha are the trustees of the Prophets, as long as they do not
concern themselves with the world* *(dunya). The Prophet was asked:
‘what is the sign with their concern to this world?’ He replied: ‘By
seeing whether they follow Kings (sultans). If they do that, then fear
for your religion*’[^15].

The argument is that the fuqaha are trustees of the Prophet not merely
with respect to deducing Islamic laws, but with all the duties and
functions of the Prophet (pbuh) and this encompasses the establishment
of a religious government and a just social system.

### The Fourth Tradition: The Ulema are the Rulers

Amody transmits a tradition from the Commander of the faithful, Ali
(pbuh):

*The ulema [scholars] are the rulers [hakim] over people*[^16]*.*  
 The meaning of this tradition explicitly supports *Wilayat* al- amma,
but the chain of transmission is weak.

### The Fifth Tradition: Imam Hussain’s Sermon

During a sermon about enjoining good and forbidding evil, Imam Hussein
(pbuh) addressed the scholars and said:

*…The disaster that has befallen you is greater than what has befallen
others, for the true rank and degree ulema has been taken away from you.
The administration of the country and the issuing of orders should
actually be entrusted to religious scholars* *(ulema) who are guardians
of the rights of God and knowledgeable about Gods ordinances concerning
what is permitted and what is forbidden. But your position has been
usurped from you, for no other reason than you have abandoned the pivot
of truth and have disagreed about the nature of the sunnah, despite the
existence of clear proofs. If you were strong in the face of torturing
and suffering and prepared to endure hardship for God’s sake, then all
proposed regulations would be brought to you for your approval and for
you to issue*[^17].

If it were not for the weakness of its chain of transmission, the
tradition would have been the most explicit verification *Wilayat
al-amma*.

### The Sixth Hadith: The Fuqaha are the Fortress of Islam

Shaykh Kolayni mentions the tradition from Imam Kazim (pbuh):

*Believers who are fuqaha are the fortresses of Islam, like the
encircling walls that protect a city*[^18].

The statement, which is that the fuqaha are the fortresses of Islam,
means that fuqaha have a duty to protect Islam. They must do whatever is
necessary to fulfil that duty hence they need to follow the Prophet as a
good example for every believer. The Qur’an says:

***Certainly there is for you in them a good example, for him who fears
Allah and the last day. [Chapter 60, Verse 6]***

The Prophet (pbuh) as the fortress of Islam did not restrict himself for
training and teaching to protect Islam, rather he undertook
socio-political duties and functions as well, hence all the tasks
entrusted to the Prophet Muhammad must also be fulfilled by the well
qualified fuqaha, as a matter of duty to become the true fortresses of
Islam.

Wilayat al-amma as Hisbah
-------------------------

By referring to textual evidences (the Qur’an and ahadith), advocates of
universal authority (*Wilayat al-amma*) intend to illustrate that well
qualified fuqaha not only have priority over others to govern the
believers, but are also explicitly designated as guardians (*Wali*) of
the Muslim community. However, some Imami jurists maintain that even
when you overlook the traditional proofs of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih*, one
can establish the same authority for the faqih by considering
‘*hisbah*’. Although this method of reasoning cannot confirm the
designation of the faqih as *Wali*, it does emphasize the priority of
the fuqaha to undertake these social duties and makes clear that their
authority is legitimate.

‘*Hisbah*’ as a word literally means reward or spiritual wage, and it is
usually applied to deeds that are done to please God and seek heavenly
reward (*thawab*). In Islamic jurisprudence, this term refers to
something that God is not willing to ignore or overlook. For instance,
there are people who are minors or suffer from insanity, who are unable
to discharge their own affairs and need someone to take care of them. If
they have no father or grandfather, someone else should undertake their
responsibilities and since these who prepare themselves to be in charge
of their affairs do that for the sake of God, it is called ‘*hisbah*’.

There is an important difference between ‘*hisbah*’ and what is referred
to as sufficient necessity (*wajib al-kefai*). Sufficient necessity is
an obligation that everyone one can fulfil, but if undertaken by a
sufficient number of individuals, other people are relieved of their
duty, whereas ‘*hisbah*’ should be undertaken by the faqih. If a
qualified jurist is not available, then only the just believers
(mumineen adil) have the right to be in charge of such affairs.

Having clarified the meaning of ‘*hisbah*’, we will now examine an
argument that presupposes the extension of its denotation. People who
adopt this line of reasoning argue that ‘*hisbah*’ is not restricted to
its traditional examples such as in the case of minors and the insane.
Rather, the philosophy and reasoning behind such a role demand its
extension to social and political affairs. This argument has two major
premises:

(a) Muslims are obliged to observe the instructions and prohibitions of
Islam in all areas of their personal and social lives, and some of these
realistically require the authority and apparatus of a state in order to
be practically implemented. Furthermore, it is impermissible for the
believers to allow illegitimate and unjust rulers to govern their
society, while they have the potential to manage their own affairs
independently. From a juridical perspective, this premise is universally
accepted.

(b) A just faqih must undertake the duty of social and political
guardianship for two reasons: either that the traditional evidences
supporting *Wilayat al-amma* are sound, or the just faqih has priority
over others to undertake this duty. The reason behind this is that no
one has the right to establish his authority over another unless they
are qualified to undertake the duty of ‘*hisbah*’ (guardianship). And
the protection of Islam and Islamic society is an instance of
‘*hisbah*’, which means God is not willing to ignore or overlook it,
consequently well-qualified fuqaha have priority over ordinary people to
bear this responsibility. In other words, necessarily someone has to
undertake the function. We have two options; either to delegate the
authority to those who have no professional knowledge about Islam or
approve the authority of a just faqih. We have natural misgivings about
the former when the later is feasible. Therefore, the fuqaha have a duty
and a right to fulfil it[^19].

Despite the traditional arguments illustrating that the fuqaha have been
designated as *Wali*, this argument merely establishes the priority of a
faqih to be in charge of governmental affairs similar to other cases of
*hisbah*.

The Rational Argument
---------------------

Recourse to rational argument has a long history amongst Shi’a scholars.
Some believe that the rational theory was first adopted by the Zaydi
Shi’a, al-Qasim ibn Ibrahim (785 - Medina 860), who argued that divinely
appointed political authority is necessary due to the imperfections of
human nature[^20].

Mullah Ahmad Naraqi (d. 1829), the author of ‘Avaed al-Ayyam’, was the
first Imami jurist who appealed to logical reasoning to support the
concept of universal authority (*Wilayat al-amma*).

This approach adopts a similar structure to those rational arguments
upon which Shi’a scholars base the necessity of Prophethood and Imamate;
that it was necessary for God to appoint some people as Prophets and
Imams in order to provide divine guidance to mankind. Therefore it is
only reasonable to assume that in the absence of such infallible
guidance, God would entrust the responsibilities of religious and
political leadership to those people best qualified to undertake it as
deputies of the absent, infallible Imam.

Two strands of argument are presented as a justification of *Wilayat*
*al-Faqih*. The first of which is an argument consisting entirely of
rational premises without reference to the Qur’an or traditions, while
the second is an argument established by a combination of reasoning and
textual evidences. However, purely rational arguments are generally
unable to definitively establish the prophecy or leadership of a
particular person. Rational arguments must typically consist of
universal, certain and necessary premises, and consequently, pure
reasoning can prove the necessity of Prophethood and Imamate, although
these rational arguments often encompass an explanation of
qualifications that the ideal leader should have (e.g. sinless or just).
Although there are many different lines of reasoning, it will suffice
here to mention a few of them. In his volume concerning theology,
Avecina (Ibn Sina) presents a discussion based on the necessity of a
well-organised social order in order to establish the necessity of
prophets[^21].

Although this argument has naturally been appealed to by Muslim scholars
and philosophers in order to establish and define Prophethood, the
addition of some premises gives it the potential to confirm the
necessity of its continuation in the vicegerency of the fuqaha. The
structure of modified version of the proof is as follows:

(a) Man is a social being and therefore necessarily needs social order
to overcome many of his conflicts and affairs.

(b) Human social life and order should be designed so that it provides
individual social happiness.

(c) A set of adequate and perfect laws and the existence of one who is
capable of executing these laws and leading society are two necessary
conditions for the establishment of an ideal society.

(d) It is not in the power of human beings to establish an ideal, just,
and truly well-ordered society without the aid of God and His divine
laws.

(e) To avoid any deficiency, interference or possession of God’s message
(revelation), the Prophets who delivers His message must be infallible.

(f) The explanation of the contents of the perfect religion and the
execution of its laws prerequisite the appointment of infallible Imams.

(g) When there is no access to infallible Imams for attaining the
above-mentioned aim (3), the leaders who are just and are expert in
religious knowledge (Just faqih)[^22].

The first four premises prove the necessity of prophecy and that it is
necessary for God to send prophets. The sixth one extends the reasoning
to the question of Imamate and the necessity of an infallible Imam. And
the final premise establishes the necessity of a qualified religious
leader in the era of the absent Imam.

Another rational argument has been presented by Ayatollah Borujerdi who
applied some historical and religious premises in his reasoning.

(1) The leader and ruler of a society must be entrusted with the
protection of social order and meet the essential needs of the people.

(2) Islam has paid attention to those essential needs and has legislated
suitable laws. The ruler (*Wali*) of Islamic society is responsible for
the execution of these laws.

(3) Within the early period of Islam, the Prophet (pbuh) and the Imams
(pbut) were the legitimate political leaders and the organisation of
political and social affairs was their duty.

(4) The need to regulate social relationships according to divine laws
and values is not confined to a specific period of time. Rather it is a
crucial need for every age and generation. Certainly when infallible
Imams were present amongst people, they appointed reliable people as
their representatives to undertake Shi’a social affairs and prevent
their followers from recourse to tyrannical governments (*taghut*) for
their affairs. The assumption that Imams encouraged people to avoid
referring to *taghut* without presenting an alternative solution to
their problems is illogical.

Considering the previous premise, it is also logical that just fuqaha
should be appointed as their representatives and deputies in the era of
greater absence because there are only three possibilities:

(1) A non-faqih (one who is not a just faqih) is designated as the
Imam’s deputy. This supposition is obviously unwise and impractical, as
a person lacking the essential knowledge or qualifications would be
unable to provide guidance.

(2) In the era of occultation, Imami have a duty to avoid any recourse
to illegitimate government for their social affairs, however the Imams
did not introduce any alternative point of reference. This theory is
equally impractical.

(3) The Imam has designated the just faqih as his deputy to undertake
these affairs and that is what we are seeking[^23].

Before concluding the internal justifications of *Wilayat al-faqih*, it
is necessary for the sake of our discussion to examine what
qualifications a deputy of the Imam must have. Although we have
previously mentioned that only a well-qualified jurist may be considered
the Imam’s deputy (neyab), we have not yet discussed what qualifications
he requires according to Islamic sources, i.e. Qur’an and Sunnah.

The Characteristics of Wali al-Faqih and the Problem of ‘A‘lamiya’
------------------------------------------------------------------

When compared to other political doctrines, Imami political thought has
some significant advantages. For example, when it insists that the ruler
of the society must possess specific characteristics. In modern
democratic systems, factors such as popularity, being telegenic and
having the support of a powerful party and large corporations are the
most important factors, while individual virtues and qualifications are
often neglected. Shi’a political thought, on the other hand, makes the
personal characteristics of a political leader an essential factor. Some
of these are as follows.

### Ijtihad (Proficiency in Islamic Jurisprudence)

Since the implementation of Islamic laws and values in the various
aspects of social life are one of the most important aims of an Islamic
state, the ruler must naturally have expertise and knowledge in Islamic
thought in order to be able to make socio-political decisions and issue
orders according to the Islamic point of view. Many traditional proofs
of *Wilayat al-amma* insist that the *Wali* (hakim) must be a faqih: In
maqbula of Umar ibn Hanzala, Imam Sadiq (pbuh) says:

*They must seek out one of you who narrates our traditions, who is
versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden, who is well
acquainted with our laws and ordinance, and accept him as judge and
arbiter, for I appoint him as hakim*[^24].

In the tradition of Abu Khadija too, Imam says:

*Designate as judge and arbiter someone among you who is acquainted with
our injunctions concerning what is permitted and prohibited*[^25].

In a signed letter the Absent Imam (may Allah hasten his reappearance)
writes:

*As for events that may occur, refer to the transmitters of our
teachings*[^26].

As we have already discussed, these titles and attributes correspond
with a just and competent faqih’s (mujtahid) abilities, and not those
who merely transmit traditions.

### Justice

Justice is a quality required of all forms of authority and leadership
in Imami political doctrine; judges and prayer leaders must all be
considered fair and capable, and their roles are considerably less than
those who rule an entire state. In addition, the Qur’an teaches Muslims
to have no inclination and cooperation with unjust people and tyrannical
authorities:

***And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest the fire shall touch
you, and you have no guardians beside Allah, then shall you not be
helped. [Chapter 11, Verse 113]***

In some verses of the Qur’an Allah Almighty invites the believers to
show their disobedience to unjust people, those who commit great sins:

***And do not obey the bidding of the extravagant, (those) who make
mischief in the land and do not act right. [Chapter 26, Verses
151-152]***

***Do not follow him whose heart we have made unmindful to our
remembrance and he follows his low desires and his case is one in which
due bounds are exceeded. [Chapter 18, Verse 28]***

Although justice has not been stipulated in the traditional proofs of
*Wilayat* *al-Faqih* examined in the course of this subject, the Qur’an
and a number of transmissions criticize unjust rulers and those who are
obedient to tyrannical governors. They also maintain that a community
founded on Islamic laws and teachings, cannot be run by someone who does
not believe in or behave in accordance to justice. To cite an example,
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) said to Muhammad b. Muslim:

*O Muhammad, surely the unjust rulers and those who follow them are
separated from God’s religion. Certainly they went astray, and led many
astray*[^27].

### Prudence, Trustworthiness, Administrative Facilities, and Courage

Such qualities are obvious requirements of any appropriate political
leader, thus there is no need to mention evidences regarding them.

### Knowledge

Many evidences stipulate that a trustee of Islamic political authority
must be amongst the most knowledgeable (*‘alem*), competent and
qualified of Islamic scholars. This criterion is somewhat contentious
however, as many of the traditions mentioned in it’s support have weak
chains of transmission.

According to the book of Solaim b. Qais, Ali (p) says:

*Does anyone deserve to be the ruler (caliph) over the ummah except one
who is most knowledgeable of God’s book (Qur’an) and the Prophet
(pbuh)’s traditions (sunnah). Allah says in the Qur’an (10:35), “Is he
then, who guides to the truth, more worthy to be followed, or he who
himself does not go aright unless he is guided?*[^28]

It is transmitted from the Prophet (pbuh) that he said:

*One who leads his people, while there are among them more knowledgeable
than he, their sovereignty* *(the people’s) would begin to decline
forever*[^29].

As we mentioned in the previous chapter, a just faqih has various
functions. Some of them like the administration of justice (qada) and
‘*hisbah*’ are categorized as ‘*Wilayat*’, whilst others such as ‘ifta’
do not require a designation from the Imam. In the context of the
present subject, it is essential to determine which of these functions
is dependant on ‘*alamiyat*’ (being the most knowledgeable).

Reference to Imami jurists’ decrees shows that those who consider
‘*alamiyat* as a condition have merely concentrated on ‘ifta’. Ayatollah
Sayyid Kazim Yazdi, the author of ‘al- ‘urwat ul-wuthqa’ writes:

*With regard to a mujtahid’s functions, none of them are restricted by
al-‘alamiya but taqleed (ifta). The matter of his Wilayat however, is
not conditioned by al-‘alamiya*[^30].

Many great Imami jurists who have commented upon this important book
(al-urwat ul-wuthqa), such as Ayatollahs Haery, Mirza al-Nayini, Aqa
Ziya al-Araki, Sayyid Abul- Hassan al-Esfahani, Burujerdi, Khomeini,
Khui, Milani, and Gulpaayigani, do not add any marginal notes to this
decree of Yazdi, which means they agree with him that the functions of
the faqih that exercises his authority (*Wilayat*) are not conditioned
by being the most knowledgeable.

Shaykh al-Ansari also maintains that ‘alamiya is not necessary in the
designation of a faqih as *Wali* (hakim)’. Every just faqih has the
right to undertake affairs which require justified authority
(*Wilayat*). He believes that only when fuqaha have different decrees
(fatwa) the decree of the one who is most knowledgeable (‘alam) has
priority over others[^31].

Shaykh Muhammad Hassan, the author of ‘Jawahir al- Kalam’, also believes
that the traditional proofs, which state that the fuqaha are designated
as ‘*Wali*’ and the deputies of the Imam, emphasize on the professional
knowledge about Islam (fiqahat) and not upon the ‘most knowledgeable’ as
the condition of a faqih’s *Wilayat*[^32].

Essentially with regards to some functions of the faqih such as ‘qada’,
it seems incredible if one supposes that it is conditioned on ‘alamiya
because this implies on a very large scale that the Shi’a community has
only one faqih who has legitimate authority to judge.

Finally, we have indicated that ‘Ijtihad’ has various aspects and
therefore it is quite reasonable to assume ‘X’ is the most knowledgeable
(a’lem) in chapters of Islamic jurisprudence concerning worship (such as
praying and fasting), while ‘Y’ is a’lem in the chapters of transactions
(moamelat) and ‘Z’ is the most knowledgeable in the context of the
administration of justice and punishment (hudud). Consequently, we have
to take into account the relationship between a function that a faqih
wants to undertake and the kind of knowledge that is a prerequisite to
that function. There is no sufficient reason to convince us that one who
is the most knowledgeable in chapters of worship would be able to
perform the function of ‘qada’ better than a faqih who is most
knowledgeable in administration of justice.

On the other hand, ijtihad and fiqahat are but one characteristic that a
leader of the Islamic society should have. There is no reason to
concentrate on the priority of ‘a’lem’ and thereby ignore other
qualifications that *Wali*s (fuqaha) must possess, which might provide
them with the necessary abilities and characteristics of a ruler.
Certainly, in a situation wherein a few faqih are completely equal in
all qualifications of leadership except ijtihad, one might claim that
the authority of a’lem has priority over others, especially when he is
the most knowledgeable in social- political aspects of Islamic law. But
it should be noted that even this is merely a ‘rational preference’,
because as the author of Jawaher al-Kalam indicated, the traditional
proofs of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* are silent about alamiya as a condition
of *Wilayat*.

### The External Justification

Many political theories are known as ‘guardianship’ in spite of the
profound differences they have with one another. By guardianship, we
mean a political system in which the state is governed by qualified
rulers (guardians).

The ruler or rulers are not subject to election and do not come to
office through free election. They deserve to govern the people due to
their specific qualifications and abilities. Therefore, the delegation
of authority in a guardianship model of state is not due to a democratic
process, but rather to the qualities of a guardian. Advocates of
guardianship commonly believe that the entrustment of political power to
a highly qualified minority, who has exceptional expertise, guarantees
the interests and good of the people. Although the followers of
guardianship disagree about the qualifications the guardians must have,
or about the interpretation of happiness and people’s good. This is why
the guardianship supported by Plato is rationally different from the
Marxist Leninist interpretation of it. Plato’s guardians are a minority
of well- qualified philosophers, whereas the latter’s are an organized
group of revolutionaries.

There are many arguments to justify guardianship over democracy.
Although on the other hand, guardianship in turn faces many criticisms,
especially from advocates of democracy. So if we admit that ‘*Wilayat*
*al-Faqih*’ is a political doctrine belonging to the guardianship model
of state, it must be able to overcome its critics and eventually
establish itself as a reasonable, rational and legitimate political
doctrine. That is what is meant by ‘external justification’, which,
contrary to ‘internal justification’, does not rely on religiously
accepted reasoning.

First of all, we must assess why and how ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ poses as
a guardianship regime. According to this theory of state, a just,
capable and pious jurist, who possesses a number of qualities, has
legitimate authority to govern the society in the era of occultation
(ghaibat). This obviously indicates that other kinds of experts and
average people have no equal access to the highest political office and
only specific experts (jurists) have the right and the opportunity to
attain the highest level of political leadership. Moreover, they are not
elected by people, but are instead designated by Imams as ‘*Wali*’ and
possessors of the authority.

On the other hand, the unique example of this political system, whose
detailed blueprints are embedded in the constitution of the Islamic
republic of Iran, does not adopt a pure system of guardianship. After
all, it’s constitution respects a limited democratic processes in that
the majority of governmental institutions, even the political leadership
is chosen through elections. According to article 107, a group of
elected experts (a few jurists are elected by people every seven years)
shall elect a well-qualified faqih as the political leader. Both the
authority of *Shari’ah* (*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*) and the sovereignty of
the people in this political regime make it a mixture of democracy and
guardianship. Hence it should be categorized as a ‘meritocracy’, because
it does not go hand in hand with all the standards of guardianship.

What distinguishes this model of ‘meritocracy’ from guardianship is the
role of the people in participating in the distribution of political
power and in shaping political decisions through their representatives.
However, people and their representatives are not religiously free to
delegate the political authority to a non-faqih or those who have no
tendency to rule, legislate and execute within the framework of divine
laws and Islamic values and teachings. Consequently, in this
meritocracy, a just Imami jurist as ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ and a group
of fuqaha as the ‘guardian council’, supervise and control the decisions
and functions of representatives and bureaucrats, who are themselves
subject to the democratic process. The central discussion here concerns
the relationship between ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ and what traditionally
are stated as the foundation and justification of the guardianship. We
must now evaluate whether these foundations are adequate to cite as
justifications of ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ and how could this doctrine
overcome the critiques of guardianship.

Some advocates of guardianship hold that ordinary people lack the
necessary qualifications for ruling. They seem to lack much
understanding of their own basic needs, interests and good. Many of them
are unable or unwilling to do whatever may be necessary to attain deep
knowledge about their own needs and good as well as the appropriate
means to achieve these needs and goods. In conclusion, people have no
political competence to govern themselves. Their deficiency is partly in
knowledge, partly in virtue i.e. strong tendencies to seek good ends;
hence they are not qualified to govern. This approach undermines the
fundamental ground of democracy and supports the idea that guardians who
have sufficient political competence should govern people.

Obviously, the doctrine of ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ does not rely on the
political incompetence of people to justify the priority of the faqih’s
authority. Neither in traditional proofs of ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ nor
in the rational ones, do Imami scholars stress on people’s deficiencies.
Some rational proofs of ‘*Wilayat al-faqih*’ depend on the belief that
it is not in the power of human beings to establish an ideal, ordered
society with no aid of God’s revelation. Clearly, this premise expresses
the deficiency of human beings as such, and not simply the imperfection
of ordinary people, confirming the competence of a small minority as
guardians. Indeed, this deficiency justifies man’s need of religion, and
its important role in organizing social relationships.

The second foundation mentioned as a reason for guardianship consists of
a specific conception of governing. For them, ruling people is an art.
Therefore, rulers must be experts of a certain type, meaning experts in
the art of governing. They as guardians would be specialists whose
specialization would make them superior in the art of leadership, not
only in comparison with ordinary people but also with other kinds of
experts such as economists, physicists, engineers and so on.  
 Although most people are potentially capable of acquiring the
qualifications needed for leadership, they lack the time to acquire
them. A society needs many different types of experts. The need for
acquiring different skills and then implementing them, makes it
impossible for each and every person to spend the time they would need
to gain the moral and instrumental competence for ruling. To suppose
that a large number of people each have the capacity to acquire and use
numerous specialized skills is not realistic. Consequently, in a well
ordered society some persons should be rigorously trained and selected
to function well as rulers (guardians). Because leadership is so crucial
nothing could be of greater importance than the education of our
rulers[^33].

Apart from the fact that many scholars have misgivings about the actual
existence of the art of governing, this argument exclusively supports
the Platonic version of guardianship. There is no single art or science
that can provide us with the moral and technical knowledge and abilities
required for being an ideal leader. Many versions of guardianship,
including ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’, do not look at guardians as
specialists in the art of governing. Instead, they believe that the duty
of governing should delegate to a few qualified persons, because of some
certain qualifications and abilities that they have. Guardians have a
advantage over others in matters of leadership, such as their in depth
knowledge of ideological, great commitment to the ambitions of specific
party, being vanguard and leader in revolution or possession the
knowledge that is necessary for shaping particular social formation.

The unique reason that justifies (apart from traditional religious
reasons) the ruling of the fuqaha as guardians, pertains to their
knowledge about Shari’a which must be accompanied with personal virtues
and moral competence. It is true that moral competence is not confined
to a small minority and that many people have the capacity to gain moral
competence and become just and pious. However, what distinguishes the
just fuqaha and render them the unique group who has legitimate
authority to rule over the believers is their expertise in Islamic
jurisprudence. The justification of the guardianship of fuqaha is owed
to the fundamental role of Islamic law in the lives of Muslims. Islam
obliges Muslims to adopt Islamic laws and values in both their
individual as well as public lives. Consequently, one who has the
ability (as a jurisprudent) that is necessary for undertaking this task
must be in charge of ruling the people. Therefore, the question of
‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ is not a question of having a specific art. It
has roots in a religious belief that sees a crucial role for *Shari’ah*
in Islamic society.

The distinction between the general good and personal interests could
provide the advocates of guardianship the third reason for
justification. The case of guardianship sometimes rest on assumption
that the composition of the general good (general interest) and how the
knowledge of what composes the general good may be acquired. If the
general good were only composed of individual interests and if we were
to believe that everyone could pursue his personal interests without
guardians, then the guardianship model of state would be unnecessary and
undesirable.

But if the general good and interest of society consists of something
more than an aggregation of personal interests, then to achieve it will
require more than this. To bring about the general good would then
require an understanding of the ways in which the general good differs
from a combination individual interests. If it is also true that most
people are mainly concerned with their own individual interests instead
of that of the general public, then the task of deciding on the general
good should be entrusted to those especially trained to understand what
the general good consists of. Obviously, that depends on what is meant
by the general good[^34].

Although the followers of ‘*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*’ do not fully accept
this argument, however, a modified version of it would sufficiently
justify this model of guardianship. Islam as a perfect religion aims for
real human happiness, hence, its laws and teachings are necessarily
established for the ultimate self-realization of the human being and for
gaining true salvation. From this point of view both the good of the
individual as well as the general public are harmonized with the
contents of Islam. Concepts such as public interest should not be
defined without considering of the crucial role played by Islam in both
the public and private spheres. When one acknowledges this fact, which
is especially true in a society where most people believe that Islam is
the ultimate way to salvation, the following argument could be supposed
as external justification for the doctrine of ‘Willayat *al-Faqih*’:

(1) General interest and public good are not merely a composition of
individual interests and they must be determined through a higher
source.

(2) Within an Islamic society the real public good and interest cannot
be known while neglecting Islamic laws and values. It does not mean that
other kinds of expertise play no role in the process of determining
public good, rather, the key point is that all political and economic
decisions, various legislations as well as government orders must take
Islamic teachings (especially jurisprudence) seriously and harmonize
themselves with the demands of Islam.

(3) eople are mostly concerned with their own individual interests so
the task of deciding the public interest, at least in cases that are
specifically dealt with by Islam should not be entrusted to the ups and
downs of public opinion.

(4) Technocrats and those who are experts in the various sciences are
often more concerned than average people with the good and interest of
the public. However, as mentioned in the second premise, in an Islamic
society technocrats as policymakers can not have a full understand of
the public good, unless they are experts in Islamic thought.

Policymaking, legislation, organizing the system of rights and duties
and other significant functions of government must be done under the
supervision and authority of a well qualified faqih (or fuqaha) who is
just, brave, honest, intelligent, knowledgeable about social and
political issues, and an expert in Islamic ideology.

This external justification seems quite convincing within a specific
context, that is, for those who pursue Islamic culture and support the
establishment of an Islamic society. For those who do not believe in
Islam, the premises of this justification (particularly the second and
fourth) need further evidence.

Criticism of Guardianship
-------------------------

Advocates of democracy usually criticize guardianship and its
justifications. We have to consider briefly a few of these criticisms to
assess how the connection between the doctrine of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih*
and these critiques might be? In my view the three following criticisms
are more significant than the others:

(i) Adversaries of guardianship insist that the keystone of this theory
that tries to justify the deserts of guardians to rule based on their
knowledge is disputable. The possession of this religious knowledge is
not sufficient enough to prove that political power should be entrusted
to a fagih to protect and promote public welfare and prosperity. How can
we know that the guardian is not seeking his own interests rather than
that of the general public? Is there any system of control over them to
prevent hem from abusing his authority? In the guardianship model of
state, since the people do not delegate authority to the guardian, they
cannot legally or constitutionally withdraw political power from the
guardian. The guardians are free of popular controls.

(ii) Unlike democracy that provides people with the opportunity to
engage in governing themselves and to improve their moral-political
experiences, the guardianship system of rule prevents an entire
population from developing their social, political and moral capacities.
This is essentially because only a few people (guardians) are engaging
in governing. Therefore, only a few people have the opportunity to learn
how to act as morally responsible human beings. Only guardians can
exercise the freedom of participating in the process of making laws,
while in democratic states the whole population enjoys that freedom.
Even though in many democratic states, the cooperate and political elite
are far more powerful than ordinary citizens, however, they cannot be
compared to guardians. These elites are not despots and people can still
play a role in the distribution of political power and in making
political decisions.

(iii) Guardianship is based upon the idea that there is a set of truths,
objective propositions and valid knowledge that can determine public
good or true social interests. The second pillar of guardianship rests
on the point that only those who have this knowledge[^35] (what does
public good consist of and by what means can we achieve it?) are
exclusively competent to hold political authority. Some critics of
guardianship criticize the first pillar of the argument. They emphasize
that there is no such thing as rational, unquestionable, or objective
knowledge. There are no determined truths as ‘science of ruling’ that
can justify the authority of a few people as guardians. In addition,
they believe advocates of guardianship face the problem of validation
because they can not establish why their understanding of public good
and social interests is objectively true. Robert Dahl writes:

*In judging the validity of statements about the general good we can and
should employ reason and experience. Nonetheless, no assertion that ‘the
public good definitely consists of such and such’ can be shown to be
‘objectively true’ in the same sense that many statements in
mathematics, logic, or the natural sciences are understood to be
objectively true*[^36].

To clarify the relationship between these critiques and the Imami
political doctrine of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* we have to keep in mind that
these criticisms are targeting ‘pure guardianship’, a political theory
that leaves no room for people in political affairs while entrusting
complete political authority to non-elected minority (guardians). In the
next chapter it will be explained that *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* is
compatible with a specific version of democracy called ‘religious
democracy’. In any case the mixture between the authority of a just
faqih who represents both the authority of Islamic jurisprudence as well
as the authority of the people, renders some of these criticisms
essentially irrelevant to the doctrine of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih*. For
example the second critique mentioned above is absolutely inapplicable
to the guardianship of the faqih. Moreover, according to what has been
discussed in the previous chapter about the meaning of absolute
authority of a just faqih, the first criticism is also irrelevant,
because the guardianship of a faqih is not beyond the control of a group
of elected experts who supervise and control his usage of power and
authority. In addition, it is the religious responsibility of all
Muslims to be not neutral about the behavior of their governors and
leaders.

In the previous pages it is clear that the guardianship of the faqih is
not base on the assumption that leadership is a specific art or
knowledge that consists of a set of truths and skills. Therefore, the
final criticism cannot undermine this version of guardianship either.
Almost all Shi’a scholars believe in rationalism, hence, the problem of
validation is very important in their eyes. This is true not only with
regards to fundamental Islamic beliefs, but also in other aspects of
Islamic thought including political thought. They attempt to justify
their system of beliefs through rational arguments, as well as through
traditional evidences. As a result, Shi’a political thought is based
upon a set of true, valid and objective doctrines about human nature,
the philosophy of life, and morality. It consists of a set of
philosophical-theological statements that produce an Islamic world ‘s
view. Indeed, this theory of state like other political theories is
rested upon a comprehensive philosophy and the justification of this
political thought is due to the justification of its moral-philosophical
foundations as well. However, we do not believe in ‘hard rationalism’,
which demands that all religious statements and beliefs must be verified
by decisive rational proofs, exactly as with mathematics. Obviously,
religious statements and beliefs should be categorized according to
their own appropriate methods of justification. Islam consists of
objective truths and valid statements; however, one can not prove its
validation by recourse to a unique methodology (rational proofs). Unlike
the fundamental doctrines of Islam (usul al- Din) that can largely be
validated and justified through rational arguments, the validation of
Islamic law is, to a large extent, based upon trust in the commands of
God, which in turn can be established by appealing to rational proof.

The key point is that the validity of this model of guardianship
(*Wilayat* *al-Faqih*) does not acquire its approbation from the
assumption that there is an objective art or science for ruling people
or a specific knowledge used for understanding public good and finding
the means for achieving them. Its verification is due to the validation
of Islam’s moral, philosophical and theological foundations including
the importance of Shari’ah for our ultimate happiness.

The external justification of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* consists of two
independent sides, the positive and the negative. Positive justification
aims to justify the validation of this theory directly and through the
emphasis on the necessity of the Islamic legal system and the
implementation of its laws for the establishment of an ideal social and
personal existence. However, the negative side refers to any efforts
undertaken to prove the priority of this doctrine over its alternatives.
Since the doctrine of democracy in general and the theory of liberal
democracy in particular is the most important alternative theory facing
guardianship, the external justification of our political theory would
be insufficient if we fail to assess the relationship between the theory
of *Wilayat* *al-Faqih* and democracy. The next chapter will attempt to
make complete the external justification of this political doctrine by
evaluating the nature of democracy and its possible connections to this
version of guardianship.

There is another significant reason why we should discuss democracy.
Some Muslim thinkers maintain that Islam fundamentally disagrees with
democracy. Hence, in their eyes our interpretation of imami political
thought that mixes the guardianship of the faqih with elements of
democracy is totally wrong and is against the foundations of Islam.

[^1]: For example, Shaikh Muhammad Hassan in Jawaher al-Kalam, Volume
15, p. 422, Shaikh Morteza Ansari in al-Aada wa al-Shahadat, p. 46,
Shaikh Morteza Haeri in Salat al-Jum’a, p. 154, Kashif al-Qeta in al-
Ferdus al-A’la, p. 54.

[^2]: Shaikh al-Saduq, Ikmal al-Din, Ali Akbar al-Qafari (ed), Qom,
1405AH, Volume 2, Chapter 45, p. 483.

[^3]: Muhammad ibn Hassan al-Tusi, Kitab al-Qayba, Qom, 1411AH, p. 290.

[^4]: Imam Khomeini, Islam and Revolution, p. 85.

[^5]: Imam Khomeini, Islam and Revolution, p. 86.

[^6]: Seyed Kazim Haeri, Wilayat al-Amr fi asr al-Qayba, Qom, Majma al-
Fikr al-Islami, 1415AH, pp. 123-124.

[^7]: Shaikh al-Kolayni reports the tradition in Al-Kafi, Kitab al-Fazl
al-Elm, Chapter of Ekhtelaf al-Hadith, Volume 1, p. 67 also Al-Tusi,
Tahzib al- Ahkam , Kitab al-Qada, Volume 6, p. 218, Hadith 514.

[^8]: Translated in Islam and Revolution, p. 93.

[^9]: In Kitab al-Qada wa al-Shahadat, p. 48.

[^10]: In Jawaher al-Kalam, Volume 21, p. 395 and Volume 40, p. 17.

[^11]: Al-Kolayni, Al-Foru’ men al-Kafi, Kitab al-Qada, Volume 7, p.
412; Al-Tusi, Al-Tahzib, Kitab al-Qada, Volume 6, p. 303; Shaikh
al-Saduq, Man la Yahzoruhu al-Faqih, Volume 3, p. 2.

[^12]: Shaikh al-Kolayni, Al-Kafi, The Book of Virtue of Knowledge,
Volume 1, p. 34.

[^13]: Uyun al-Akhbar al-Reda, volume 2, chapter, 31, p. 37 also Ma‘ani
al- Akhbar, p. 374 also Man la Yahzurohu al-Faqih, Volume 4, p. 420.

[^14]: Imam Khomeini, Islam and Revolution, p. 72.

[^15]: Kolayni, al-Kafi, Volume 1, p. 46.

[^16]: Amodi, Qorar al-Hekam, Volume 1, p. 137, 506.

[^17]: Harrani Iibn Shobeh, Tohaf al-Huqul, Qom, 1404 A.H. Volume 1,
p.238.

[^18]: Al-Kolayni, Al-Kafi, Volume 1, p. 38.

[^19]: Seyed Kazim Haeri, Wilayat al-Amr fi Asr al-Qayba, p. 96.

[^20]: Antony Black, The History of Islamic Political Thought, p. 40.

[^21]: Ibn Sina, Al-Shefa, The book of Al-Elahiyat, The 10th Article,
Chapter 2, p. 487.

[^22]: Abdullah Javadi Amoli, Wilayat ul-Faqih, Qom: Esra Publication,
1378 AH, pp. 151-152.

[^23]: Hussain Borujerdi, Al-Badr al-Zaher fi Salat ul-Jom‘a
wal-Mosafer, Qom, 1367AH, pp. 72-78.

[^24]: Muhammad Hassan Hor al-A’meli, Wasael al-Shi°a, Qom: Ahl ul-Bait
Institution, 1412AH, Volume 27, p. 137.

[^25]: Al-Kafi, Volume 7, p.412.

[^26]: Sheikh al-Saduq, Ikmal al-Din, Volume 2, p.483.

[^27]: Al-Kafi, Volume 1, p. 184.

[^28]: Solaim ibn Qais Al-Helali, Kitab al-Solaim, Tehran: Dar al-Kotob
al- Islamiya, p. 118.

[^29]: Barqi, Al-Mahasin, Volume 1, p. 93.

[^30]: Al-Urvat ul-Wosqa, The Chapter of Ijtihad wal-Taqlid, Question
68.

[^31]: Shaikh al-Ansari, Taqlid, Published by International Congress of
Shaikh al-Ansari publications, p. 67.

[^32]: Jawahir al-Kalam, Volume 40, pp. 44-45.

[^33]: Democracy and its Critics, pp. 62-63.

[^34]: Democracy and its Critics, pp. 70-71.

[^35]: There is no agreement among advocates of guardianship about the
nature of this knowledge therefore they disagree about the
qualifications of this small minority of rulers (guardians). For
instance, in the eyes of Plato this knowledge consists of a set of
propositions about what is best for the community. This knowledge is
based on rational certainty that ordinary people have no access to.
Unlike true philosophers, ordinary people just have opinions
(uncertainties) instead of knowledge (rational certainty). From an
entirely different perspective, Marxist-Leninists maintain that this
knowledge consists of the laws of historical development based on
‘historical materialism’ as a rigorous methodological approach rooted in
the belief that the structure of society and human relations in all
their forms are the product of material conditions and circumstances
rather than of ideas, thought or consciousness. Consequently, for them
the guardians are a few revolutionaries who know the laws and material
conditions that rule over these historical developments.

[^36]: Democracy and its Critics, p. 71.


