Islam and Democracy
===================

Contemporary Islamic political thought has become deeply influenced by
attempts at reconciling Islam and democracy. Muslim thinkers who deal
with political debates cannot ignore the significance of the democratic
system, as it is the prevailing theme of modern western political
thought. Thus it is necessary for any alternative political system,
whether it is religious or secular, to explore its position with regards
to democratic government. In the past, prominent Islamic thinkers such
as Imam Khomeini, Mirza Muhammad Hussain Nayini and al-Kawakibi
maintained that a democratic Islamic form of government is a compatible
and practical thesis, believing that a constitution could protect and
guarantee both the essential Islamic as well as democratic aspects of
government.

In contrast to this more optimistic approach, many fundamentalist
thinkers argue that Islam and democracy are irreconcilably opposed, and
that there exists a clear contradiction between Islamic and democratic
principles. This opinion has emerged as a result of their perception of
the source from which democracy came, the creed from which it emanated,
the basis upon which it has been established as well as the ideas and
systems of thought with which it is currently associated. However,
opposition to religious democracy is not confined to fundamentalists;
advocates of a secular state also believe that the concept of a
democratic Islamic government is a paradoxical thesis, and they often
refer to a selection of Islamic rulings and beliefs that they construe
as antagonistic to the foundations and underlying values of the
democratic system.

Other Muslim intellectuals maintain that any apparent incompatibility or
conflict between the ideas of religion and democracy are caused by the
misinterpretation of Islam. They maintain that there is no conflict
between democracy and an understanding of religion, which is changing,
rational and in harmony with accepted extra-religious criteria and
values. They believe that by reinterpreting Islam and constantly
reviewing and renewing its beliefs, the vision of a religious democracy
would be completely feasible and indeed desirable.

Consequently the question of whether or not religious democracy is
feasible has given rise to four major schools of thought amongst
thinkers and Muslim political movements:

1. The implementation of Islamic laws (*Shari’ah*) and the establishment
of an Islamic society based upon Islamic values is possible within a
constitutionally Islamic and democratic political system. The
participation of citizens in making political decisions can serve the
socio- political aims of Islam and democracy merely acts as a system and
method for the distribution of political power and a means by which
citizens express their opinions.

2. There is an obvious conflict between the traditional juridical
(*fiqh*i) based conception of Islam and democracy. The establishment of
a religious democratic government is in need of a rethinking,
reinterpretation and review of Islamic thought in order for it to become
harmonious with contemporary global and philosophical foundations,
values and implications of democracy. Therefore, the practicality of
religious democracy rests upon the reformation of traditional religious
knowledge.

3. Democracy is a system of disbelief (kufr) and is totally and
completely irreconcilable with Islamic beliefs and principles.
Commitment to Islam leaves no room for democracy.

4. The fourth approach arrives at the same conclusion as the third, that
the idea of a democratic Islamic government is paradoxical. However,
unlike advocates of the third approach, this group emphasizes the
desirability and justification of democracy, and insists that religion
cannot possibly satisfy the values and foundations that democracy
requires.

These approaches shall be addressed in detail later in this Chapter, but
first it is necessary to examine democracy, its various interpretations,
its relationship to liberalism and some philosophical presuppositions
that support this political doctrine. Many apprehensions surrounding the
theory of religious democracy are caused by conceptional ambiguities
concerning the description of democracy and its possible models. We must
define what it is that democracy means, whether or not there is a unique
and commonly agreed interpretation of democracy and what exactly
distinguishes a democratic government from a non- democratic one.
Without answering such questions it will be impossible to come to an
objective and accurate conclusion regarding the issue of religious
democracy.

What is Democracy?
------------------

The term democracy is derived from the Greek words ‘demos’ (people) and
‘kratia’ (rule), so democracy literally means ‘rule by the people’. In
other words it is a political doctrine in which it is believed the
people possess the capacity needed in order to govern and regulate
society. This idea originally emerged towards the beginning of the fifth
century B.C. in ancient Greece, primarily amongst the Athenians. The
city-state of Athens referred to itself as a democracy (from 500 B.C to
330 B.C) because all citizens  
 (excluding women, slaves and non-residents) could participate in
political decisions. Abraham Lincoln’s famous definition of ‘Government
for the people and by the people’[^1] refers to this model of
participatory democracy.

Throughout the long history of political thought, many different forms
of democratic government have emerged and declined, they often came into
being almost completely independently of one another, as Dahl writes:

*It would be a mistake to assume that democracy was invented once and
for all, as, for example, the steam engine was invented...democracy
seems to have been invented more than once, and in more than one place.
After all, if the conditions were favorable for the invention of
democracy at one time and place, might not similar favorable conditions
have existed elsewhere? I assume democracy can be independently invented
and reinvented whenever the appropriate conditions exist*[^2].

Although the root meaning of the Greek term ‘demokratia’ is clear and
straightforward (rule by the people), it is necessary to properly define
what constitutes ‘demos’ (the people). Historically the criteria of who
ought to be included in ‘demos’ to rule and participate in political
decisions, as a citizen has been an ambiguous and contentious issue. In
the most ancient models of democracy, ‘the people’ did not include all
adults; women and slaves were not given the right to participate in the
political system. And even today there are noticeable disagreements
amongst modern interpretations of democracy about who should be included
among the ‘demos’. For example, even though the principle of equality
was firmly established in the American declaration of independence in
1776, the right for free men to vote on an equal basis was not granted
until 1850. Black males were prevented from voting until the fifteenth
constitutional amendment some twenty years later. And females, both free
and enslaved, were not given the right to vote until the nineteenth
constitutional amendment in 1920[^3].

Democracy in the above mentioned forms, is an imaginary and inapplicable
idea in large scale societies.

In general, both advocates and critics agree that ‘rule by the people’ -
in the truest meaning of the people – never existed and is never likely
to exist. It is impossible for any democratic regime to be fully
democratic, as it will always fall short of the criteria that emanates
from its self-evident meaning.

The virtues and advantages that are mentioned to justify democratic
government undoubtedly require ‘participatory democracy’, which
delegates decisions to citizens, so, in a single meeting or during an
election, people are able to express their opinions. That is why the
Greeks passionately supported ‘assembly democracy’. Obviously this
system is inherently limited by practical considerations, in a small
political unit such as a city, assembly democracy provides citizens with
desirable opportunities for engaging in the process of governing
themselves. This original conception of democracy, which was embodied in
Greek city-states, is possibly the most appropriate to the true meaning
of the term (excluding the fact that only a minority could vote).
However modern democracies within nation- states exist on a much greater
scale than before. Consequently, modern theories of democracy, despite
their alleged efficiency when dealing with the problems of large- scale
societies, effectively decrease the political participation of the
people. In modern democratic theories ‘the people’ (demos) are replaced
by ‘representatives’, so that a small proportion of the population are
made responsible for looking after the affairs of the people, thus ‘rule
by the people’ becomes ‘rule by representatives elected by a majority of
the people’.

A significant cause for the confusion concerning the meaning of
‘democracy’ at present is due to the fact that it has developed over
several thousand years and ultimately stems from a variety of sources.
Our understanding of the term ‘democracy’ is not necessarily the same as
an Athenian's understanding of the term. Greek, Roman, Medieval and
Renaissance notions have intermingled with those of later centuries to
produce a mosaic of theories and practices that are often deeply
inconsistent[^4].

If any attempt to apply the original meaning of democracy to the
nation-state is impossibly absurd, and moreover if there is no commonly
agreed definition of the democratic system amongst its advocates, it
should be reasonable to concentrate on what at present are known as
democratic states in order to recognize its major elements and what
distinguishes them from a non-democratic state.

Even though, in theory, political philosophers and theorists have
presented various models of democracy such as ‘elitism’,
‘participatory’, ‘pluralistic’ and ‘corporate’, in practice
representative democracy is the prevailing norm among contemporary
democratic systems. The major characteristics of modern democracy,
according to Dahl are as follow:

**Elected officials**: control over government decisions concerning
policy is constitutionally vested in officials elected by citizens.
Thus, modern, large-scale democratic governments are representative.

**Free, fair and frequent elections**: elected officials are chosen in
frequent and fairly conducted elections in which coercion is
comparatively uncommon.

**Freedom of expression**: citizens have a right to express themselves
on political matters without danger of severe punishment; this includes
criticism of officials, the government, the regime, the socio-economic
order and the prevailing ideology.

**Access to alternative sources of information:** citizens have a right
to seek out alternative and independent sources of information from
other citizens, experts, newspapers, magazines, books, etc.

**Associational autonomy**: citizens have the right to form relatively
independent associations or organizations, including independent
political parties and interest groups in order to achieve their various
rights.

**Inclusive citizenship**: No adult permanently residing in the country
and subject to its laws can be denied the rights that are necessary for
the five political institutions listed above[^5].

These help explain the political reality of democracy as a political
system in which people participate, and as a method and process for
making collective political decisions. The key point is that democracy
requires 'majority rule', meaning that majority support should not only
be necessary, but also sufficient for enacting laws. Some contemporary
writers even go so far as to argue that majority rule is a definition,
not a requirement of democracy[^6]. Also numerous advocates of democracy
do not confine the role of the people to the mere distribution of
political power, or participation in the process of collective political
decisions (via their representatives), rather, they have a right to
control governors. Mayo writes:

*In short, a political system is democratic to the extent that the
decision makers are under effective popular control*[^7].

In summary, democracy is a political system, which acknowledges the
right of the people to participate in political decisions, either
directly or indirectly through elected representatives, to distribute
and regulate the political power under the rule of a majority. Political
prerequisites such as free, fair and frequent elections, freedom of
expression, inclusive citizenship and so on, are necessary in order to
insure the soundness of the process.

Democracy and Liberalism
------------------------

Most contemporary democracies are liberal democracies: a combination of
the democratic political system, and the liberal political ideology,
that places emphasis upon specific rights and values such as private
possession, negative freedom, individualism and toleration. Therefore,
liberal democracies embody two distinct features; the first of these is
the liberal conception of a limited government; this is that the
individual should enjoy a degree of protection from arbitrary action of
government officials. This limitation of government - which is often
referred to as the theory of limited democracy – is rooted in the belief
that fundamental rights and values supported by liberalism possess a
moral standing and philosophical grounds, that are altogether
independent of democracy and the democratic process. These rights and
values serve as a limitation or restriction on what can be enacted by
means of the political system. Citizens are entitled to exercise certain
rights and should not be threatened by the powers of state and
governmental processes. Liberals believe in protecting these rights from
infringement, even though they may be by democratic means.

This is why liberal attitudes towards democracy have historically been
distinctly ambivalent. In the nineteenth century, liberals often
perceived democracy as something threatening or dangerous. The central
concern for liberals has always been that democracy could evolve to
become the enemy of individual liberty and pluralism. The rule of the
majority is the 'democratic solution' to conflicts that people have
regarding their interests and opinions. This means that the will of the
greatest number of people should prevail over that of the minority. In
other words, democracy comes down to the rule of 51 percent, a prospect
that Alexis de Tocqueville (1805-1859) famously described as ‘the
tyranny of the majority’. Individual liberty and minority rights can
thus potentially be crushed in the name of the people[^8].

Liberals have expressed particular reservation concerning democracy, and
have crafted a network of checks and balances in order to reconcile the
advantages of democracy and fundamental liberal rights and values. This
combination creates a model of democracy that, as Heywood says, has
three central features:

*First, liberal democracy is an indirect and representative form of
democracy. Political office is gained through success in regular
elections, conducted on the basis of formal political equality –* *‘one
person, one vote; one vote, one value’. Second, it is based upon
competition and electoral choice. This is ensured by political
pluralism, a tolerance of a wide range of contending beliefs,*
*conflicting social philosophies and rival political movements and
parties. Third, liberal democracy is characterized by a clear
distinction between the state and civil society. This is maintained both
by internal and external checks on government power and the existence of
autonomous groups and interests, and by the market or capitalist
organization of economic life*[^9]*.*

As far as our discussion – the relationship between Islam and democracy
– is concerned, it is fundamental to distinguish between democracy just
as a method to form a political system or as a process for making
collective decisions opposed and liberal democracy as one of the
possible models of democracy consisting of an ideological framework of
beliefs and values. Many opponents of religious democracy have failed to
distinguish between democracy as a method and liberal democracy, which
in principal represents a particular political philosophy and doctrines
with its own beliefs regarding human nature, human rights, ends and
moral values.

Benefits of Democracy
---------------------

There are many advantages that make democracy more desirable than any
other feasible alternative political system. Even though to attain all
of the potential benefits is beyond the capacity of current democracies,
these ideal consequences cannot be overlooked. When properly implemented
and regulated, the democratic political system should in theory produce
a series of beneficial objectives.

**Avoiding tyranny**: Democracy reduces the likelihood of a tyrannical
or autocratic government obtaining power. However, this does not mean
that democracy can totally guarantee the prevention of oppressive or
dictatorial rule, or that it is entirely capable of preventing injustice
in society. For example, the Nazi party in Germany (1933-1945) obtained
power through the manipulation of the democratic and free-electoral
systems. Advocates of democracy argue, though, that in the long-term a
democratic process is less likely to do harm to the interests of the
citizens than a non- democratic one.

**Protecting essential rights**: Democracy guarantees its citizens a
number of fundamental rights that undemocratic systems do not grant.
These political rights are all necessary elements of democratic
political institutions.

**Human development**: It is claimed that democracy fosters human
development more fully than any practical alternative. This claim is
controversial and very difficult to substantiate. The only way to test
this assertion is by measuring human development in democratic and non-
democratic societies.

**Political equality**: Only a democratic government can guarantee a
high degree of political equality amongst citizens.

**Protecting essential personal interests**: Democracy assists people in
protecting their own fundamental interests. It allows people to shape
their life in accordance with their own goals, preferences, values and
beliefs[^10].

Perhaps the most common justification given for democracy is that it is
essential for the protection of the general interests of the persons who
are subject to a democratic state.

However, it is worth mentioning that this attempt to justify democracy
has been attacked by some democratic theorists. For example, John
Plamenatz argues that we cannot compare governments and, as a reasonable
empirical judgment, conclude that “the policies of one have in general
done more than those of the other to enable their subjects to maximize
the satisfaction of their wants”. This is particularly true if the
governments are not of the same type and the values and beliefs of the
people concerned differ greatly. Moreover people do not and should not
prefer democracy to its alternatives because they believe it is better
at maximizing the satisfaction of their desires. They should instead
favor it because it provides people with certain rights and
opportunities or reject it because it does not[^11].

Foundations of Democracy
------------------------

It is widely believed that political theories have philosophical or
metaphysical foundations that justify every political ethos or system
amongst its alternatives. Referring to these foundations for the
justification of political thought is considered important because they
represent the basis from which the system has emanated. It is
insufficient merely to examine publicly admitted elements and values
that have emanated from this basis, as these have ultimately grown
around a political doctrine and logically cannot prove the validity of
that political theory. The prevalent approach maintains that the
question of justification is also a question of truth. A valid and
justified political system must be consistent with human nature, human
common goods and ends and other related moral-philosophical truths.

This method of political theorizing (also known as foundationalism) is
omnipresent in the history of political thought, especially so during
the age of enlightenment, when thinkers such as John Locke and Emmanuel
Kant presented rational foundations as basic elements of contemporary
western political culture. Political foundationalism presupposes that
there is a correct answer to every fundamental political question, and
through the appropriate method of thinking, political truths are made
available.

Recently, some advocates of liberal democracy, in contrast to
traditional supporters of democratic governments, have inclined to
justify their political system without reference to a particular
interpretation of human nature or any comprehensive moral, religious or
philosophical doctrine as a basis. John Rawls (1921-2002) and Richard
Rorty, the contemporary American philosopher, are to prominent figures
of this modern anti-foundationalism movement in political thought. They
present a ‘political’ democratic liberalism instead of a ‘philosophical’
one. Their justification for this model of political thought is not
rooted in any specific philosophical or moral doctrine. John Rawls
writes:

*Political liberalism, then, aims for a political conception of justice
as a freestanding view. It offers no specific metaphysical or
epistemological doctrine beyond what is implied by the political
conception itself*[^12].

This attitude, its influence and its relevance to our main debate (Islam
and democracy), will be assessed later in the Chapter. It is now
necessary to briefly refer to some philosophical foundations mentioned
by some thinkers to justify democracy as the most desirable political
system.

Intrinsic Equality
------------------

The belief that all humanity is made intrinsically equal by man’s own
inherent nature and instincts is a concept supported by the great
religions of Islam, Christianity and Judaism. For some, however, the
idea of inherent equality provides a justification for democracy because
it indicates that all human beings are of equal intrinsic worth and no
person is naturally superior to another. Locke says:

*Though I have said above...that all men by nature are equal, I cannot
be supposed to understand all sorts of equality: age or virtue may give
men a just precedence: excellency of parts and merit may place others
above the common level...and yet all this consists with equality, which
all men are in, in respect of jurisdiction or dominion over one another,
which was the equality I there spoke of, as proper to the business in
hand, being that equal right that every man hath, to his nature freedom,
without being subjected to the will or authority of any other man*[^13].

The politically implicit meaning of the last sentence of this quotation
is that the good or interests of each person must be given equal
consideration, hence, people have a right to express their will and no
one has the right to make a decision on behalf of them except with their
permission. For advocates of democracy who refer to the intrinsic
equality, every guardianship model of government, which entrusts the
authority to a few people (guardians) instead of people themselves, must
therefore be incompatible with the idea of the intrinsic equality of
people. Locke ascribed the intrinsic quality to ‘men’ instead of ‘the
people’ because in his own era the theory that men alone qualify as
‘active citizens’ was common (As indicated earlier, it was not until the
twentieth century that women gained the right to vote).

It is also worth mentioning that Kant too firmly supported political
freedom and according to his view, the legislative authority should be
placed in the hands of a representative assembly, whose members are
elected by a majority of voters in each district. However, Kant's
franchise is restrictive. He assumes that it should extend only to adult
males who own property and that these persons alone qualify as ‘active
citizens’. Others are merely ‘passive citizens’ and while they must be
assured the same civil rights and legal equality as everyone else, they
should not be allowed to vote[^14].

If we were to overlook this restriction and ascribe the intrinsic
equality to all human beings (men and women), it could not justify
democracy as the best desirable political system, as essentially there
is no necessary connection between admitting intrinsic equality and the
necessity of a democratic state. Robert Dahl states that intrinsic
equality is quite compatible with guardianship as well. He writes:

*As I have already said, nothing in the assumption of intrinsic equality
implies that Able, Baker and Carr are the best judges of their own good
or interests, suppose it were true that a few people like Eccles not
only understood much better than the others what constitutes their
individual and common good, and how best to bring it about, but could be
fully trusted to* *do so. Then it would be perfectly consistent with the
idea of intrinsic equality to conclude that these persons of superior
knowledge and virtue, like Eccles, should rule over all the others. Even
more: if the good of each person is entitled to equal consideration, and
if a superior group of guardians could best ensure equal consideration,
then it follows that guardianship would definitely be desirable and
democracy just as definitely would be undesirable*[^15].

Priority of the Will of the Majority over Rightness
---------------------------------------------------

A rare conception of democracy supposes that the democratic system and
the rule of the majority can guarantee correct decisions and right
answers to political needs. People who individually are the best judge
for their private, personal affairs also are the best judge in public
affairs (policy decisions).

The political judgments of the majority reflect what is best and right
for the community. According to this theory, there is no need for a few
experts (guardians) with specific moral and scientific-philosophical
knowledge to perform correct policy decisions, because the performance
of the experts is no better than the people's choices. The choice of the
majority would be based upon certainty and would achieve a correct
result.

However, the practical and realistic approach to democracy, supported by
its advocates, does not accept that the rule of the majority is a
guarantee for right decisions. It admits that people have a right to
decide, however it also accepts that voters and their representatives
may not always make the correct decisions. The validity of the
democratic political system is not owed to the knowledge that the will
of the people (majority) reflects the correct outcomes and true social
good. The political legitimacy of democracy, instead, rests upon the
will and consent of the people, not upon their reason or rightness. This
means that although there is no rational- philosophical certainty that
democratic political decisions are right, it is simply sufficient that
these decisions are outcomes of the will of the people and their
exercising of their practical rights and freedoms. Michael Walzer
writes:

*Democracy rests, as I have already suggested, on an argument concerning
freedom and political obligation. Hence it is not only the case that the
people have a procedural right to make the laws. On the democratic view,
it is right that they make the laws* *– even if they make them
wrongly*[^16].

Since the legitimacy of the democratic system rests on people’s rights
instead of their valid knowledge, there is no reason to suppose firstly
that the power of the people must be limited by the rightness of what
they decide, and secondly that a few experts ought to be empowered to
review what the people do and step in when they move beyond those limits
and make incorrect decisions. The presupposition of such a view is that
there is a small group of people, in every society, that can recognize
the truth better than society as a whole can, hence they must have a
right to intervene. Democracy in principle absolutely disagrees with
this procedure, for the people’s rule does not rest upon their knowledge
of truth. If we admit that finding objective knowledge, true answers,
and right decisions is possible and philosophers are those who can be
presumed to attain the truth, then the tension between philosophy and
democracy is inevitable because the democratic system fails to reconcile
between the rule of majority and the authority of truth (philosophy).
Walzer says:

*Nor can the philosophical instrument be a majority amongst the people,
for majorities in any genuine democracy are temporary, shifting and
unstable. Truth is one, but the people have many opinions, truth is
eternal, but the people continually change their minds. Here in its
simplest form is the tension between philosophy and democracy. The
people's claim to rule does not rest upon their knowledge of truth...the
claim is most persuasively put, it seems to me, not in terms of what the
people know, but in terms of what they are. They are the subjects of the
law, and if the law is to bind them as free men and women, they must
also be its makers*[^17].

Many advocates of the democratic system as the best desirable political
system strive to justify the detachment between democracy and the issue
of truth by stating misgivings about the possibility of attaining
objective knowledge about public good and moral truths. For instance,
Robert Dahl emphasizes that not only is the justification for democracy
independent of any specific answer to the epistemological ontological
questions about the nature of moral judgments, but also democracies
should have misgivings about such claims. For him, we are entitled,
indeed obliged, to look with the greatest suspicion on any claim that
another possesses objective knowledge of the good of the self that is
definitely superior to the knowledge possessed by the self[^18].

General Freedom
---------------

Democracy, not only as an ideal, but in actual practice prerequires
certain rights and liberties. A truly democratic government could only
be established within a political culture that profoundly supports these
rights and freedoms. That is why advocates of democracy always stress
its relationship to freedom and view democracy as the best political
system that maximizes and protects general freedoms such as freedom of
opinion and expression and freedom of religion. Accordingly some
liberties are preconditions for the emergence of a democratic state,
whereas others (such as the freedom of self determination) are seen as
results of such a state. Thus one can conclude that democracy is
desirable because freedom in general and freedom of self-determination
in particular is desirable.  
 In other words, to govern oneself, to obey laws that one has chosen for
oneself, and to be able to determine ones destiny is a desirable state
of affairs. On the other hand, however, human beings cannot exist in
isolation from society, and it is essential for them to live in
association with others and to live in association with others naturally
requires that they must sometimes obey collective decisions that are
binding upon all members of the association. Democracy maximizes the
potential for self-determination amongst society because its members
still govern themselves. Dahl claims that this justification for
democracy has been endorsed by all those, **f**rom Locke onwards, who
have believed that governments ought to be based upon the consent of the
governed[^19].

In a similar manner, democracy is also justified by the assumption that
this political system maximizes ‘moral autonomy’. A morally autonomous
person is one who defines his own moral principals. Dahl states a deeper
reason for valuing self-determination; that the freedom to govern
oneself is in fact an expression of the value of moral autonomy, but he
neglects to discuss the arguments for why moral autonomy should be
respected[^20].

Dahl believes that the cornerstone of democratic beliefs is the
presumption of personal autonomy, namely the assumption that no person
is, in general, more likely than yourself to be a better judge of your
own good and interests, or to act in order to bring them about.
Consequently you should have the right to judge whether a policy is, or
is not, in your best interest. On this assumption, then, no one else is
more qualified than you to judge whether the results are in your
interest[^21].

It is quite clear that this justification, if any, merely supports the
assembly model of democracy, which is appropriate for a small-scale
society in which people have an opportunity to share directly in the
process of making political decisions, whereas most present day
democracies are representative. In the representative model of
democracy, the choice of people about their goods and interests is
confined to electing representatives. Dahl in his later book (On
Democracy) refers to this dark side of representative democracy:

*The dark side is this: under a representative government, citizens
often delegate enormous discretionary authority over decisions of
extraordinary importance. They delegate authority not only to their
elected representatives, but, by an even more indirect and circuitous
route, they delegate authority to administrators, bureaucrats, civil
servants, judges and at a still further remove to international
organizations...popular participation and control are not always robust,
and the political and bureaucratic elites possess great
discretion*[^22].

Even though the roots of democracy mentioned by advocates who believe in
foundationalism are not restricted to what has been discussed above,
these four principals are viewed as more significant than the others. In
comparison with the second approach i.e. the political or pragmatic
defense of the democratic state, which does not rest on any specific
foundation or doctrine to justify this political system, foundationalism
is significant because with a comparative discussion one can make
judgment and recognize how compatible Islam and the foundations of
democracy might be. Before further debate about these foundations, it
would be appropriate to explore the modern approach to liberal democracy
(anti-foundationalism). As indicated previously, John Rawls, one of the
most influential political philosophers of the twenty century, in his
latest works insists that we should present a political conception of
liberal democracy – liberal justice – instead of the comprehensive
conception that rests upon specific moral and philosophical doctrines.
For him this new political liberalism is ‘free standing’ with no
reference to any particular comprehensive doctrine or specific
moral-philosophical foundation. He writes:

*While we want a political conception to have a justification by
reference to one or more comprehensive doctrines, it is neither
presented as, nor derived from, such a doctrine applied to the basic
structure of society…but as a distinguishing feature of a political
conception is that it is presented as free standing and expounded apart
from, or without reference to any such wider background*[^23].

By emphasis on a freestanding view of liberal democracy – a well
ordered, just, democratic society, which does not rest on particular
doctrines – he hopes that this conception can attain an overlapping
consensus among reasonable comprehensive doctrines. The political
conception of liberal democracy with its freestanding view supplies
appropriate circumstances to be endorsed by citizens who belong to
various comprehensive religious or philosophical doctrines. He says:

*The problem, then, is how to frame a conception of justice for a
constitutional regime such that those who support, or who might be
brought to support that kind of regime might also endorse the political
conception provided it did not conflict to sharply with their
comprehensive views. This leads to the idea of a political conception of
justice as a freestanding view starting from the fundamental ideas of a
democratic society and presupposing no particular wider doctrine, so
that it can be supported by a reasonable and enduring, overlapping
consensus*[^24].

Rawls’ starting point is the ideas and values that are latent in the
public political culture of contemporary western liberal democracies.
His political conception of a well-ordered democratic society based on
the principles of justice, is formed upon western culture without any
attempt to justify these ideas and values. Rawls writes:

*In order to state what I have called political liberalism, I have
started with a number of familiar and basic ideas implicit in the public
political culture of a democratic society. These have been worked up
into a family of conceptions in terms of which political liberalism can
be formulated on understood*[^25].

Richard Rorty, a famous American philosopher, maintains that Rawls does
not attempt to justify democratic institutions through philosophical
foundations. Rorty writes:

*Rawls is not attempting a transcendental deduction of American
liberalism or supplying philosophical foundations for democratic
institutions, but simply trying to systematize the principals and
intuitions typical of American liberals*[^26].

For Rorty, the sources latent in the public political culture of liberal
democracies seem to be all that is available, and so must be all that is
required to justify the liberal democracy political system. Rorty says:

*It is not evident that [liberal democratic institutions] are to be
measured by anything more specific than the moral intuitions of the
particular historical community that has created those institutions. The
idea that moral and political controversies should always be ‘brought
back to first principals’ is reasonable if it means merely that we
should seek common ground in the hope of attaining agreement. But it is
misleading if it is taken as the claim that some particular interlocutor
has already discerned that order*[^27].

For many thinkers it is obvious, that this method of justifying a
political system, which consists of merely invoking the basic elements
of a public political culture, because these cultural elements and
values grow and thrive around that political system, cannot logically
support this argument. This anti-foundationalist approach to the
contemporary democratic system comes to the conclusion that advocates of
liberal democracies are free to ignore critics whose criticisms question
the moral intuitions of western liberal democracies. Rorty, in
principle, disagrees with any attempt to provide rational foundations
for systems of values and concepts[^28].

Obviously this form of justifying a democratic state does not provide an
opportunity for comparative critical discussion between Islam and
democracy. This anti-foundationalist approach as a first step and
starting point wants us to completely admit all basic values of western
liberal democratic culture while allowing no room for criticism or
philosophical discussion concerning these values and foundations. As
Rorty states “Rawls puts the democratic politics first and philosophy
second.”[^29]

Limited Democracy versus Pure Democracy
---------------------------------------

Pure democracy or unlimited democracy is a political system in which all
political questions are settled directly, without any restrictions, by
the majority vote of citizens. Early liberals were concerned about pure
democracy for its potential harms, for instance Kant maintained that
pure democracy that relies upon the majority vote in an assembly,
without any constitutional restrictions, subjects the individual to the
whims of the masses, as it contains no constitutional safeguards against
the tyranny of the majority and, therefore, it cannot protect personal
rights. Justice demands that a people be given the right to make its own
laws, but the right must be constrained by constitutionally guaranteed
civil liberties. In Kant’s view, political freedom embodied in voting
and democratic processes, alone does not ensure civil freedom. The
majority may fail to respect the rights of the minority[^30].

Conversely the idea of a limited democracy is based on the doctrine that
there are many fundamental rights – including political rights – that
possess a moral standing and a philosophical ontological basis that is
independent of democracy and the democratic process. Since the validity
and foundational justification of these rights does not depend on
majority rule or the democratic process, they can serve as limits on
what can be done by means of the democratic process. Citizens are
entitled to exercise these rights, against the democratic process if
need be, to preserve fundamental political rights and liberties and in
order to protect themselves from infringement even by means of the
democratic process itself[^31].

The above-mentioned justification for limited democracy should not be
restricted to fundamental rights; rather, it also embraces moral and
religious values. According to this justification, whatever possesses a
moral or philosophical standing – a reliable and valid foundation –
independent of democracy and the democratic process, should be protected
from possible democratic harms. Consequently the limits of democracy
could be constitutional, moral or even religious. Theoretically, the
limits of this type of democracy depend on what is crucial and most
fundamental for citizens who choose democracy as their desirable
political system.

For example, in the United States, since 1803 the Supreme Court,
consisting of nine judges, has been assigned to declare whether
legislation is ‘constitutional’ or not. Indeed they have the authority
to review what the people and the people’s representatives enact via the
democratic process. Of course, the constitutional role of the Supreme
Court judges extends no further than the enforcement of a written
constitution that is itself based on democratic consent and is subject
to amendments through the democratic process. The tension between
judicial review and democracy occurs within the framework of the
constitution. Even when the judges act in ways that go beyond upholding
the textual integrity of the constitution, they generally claim no
special understanding of truth and rightness but refer instead to
historical precedents, long-established legal principals or common
values. Nevertheless, the place they hold and the power they wield make
it possible for them to impose philosophical constraints on democratic
choice[^32].

Having referred to these primary points concerning democracy, it is now
time to address the central purpose of this Chapter; that is the
possibility of a religious (Islamic) democracy.

What is the Conception of a ‘Religious Democracy’?
--------------------------------------------------

It goes without saying that ‘pure democracy’, which delegates all
dimensions of public affairs including legislation to majority rule
without limitation, is absolutely incompatible with Islam. Essentially
every school of thought, ideology and religion that follows a set of
beliefs, values or rules independent of the will and desire of people
cannot approve unlimited democracy. These values and rules must be
protected and this cannot be insured by the will of the majority, as
majorities in any form of democracy are shifting and unstable. Even
political ideologies such as Liberalism and Socialism are in need of a
constitution to control a purely democratic process and to protect their
fundamental values and beliefs from possible harm from majority rule. On
the other hand, democracy and the democratic process do not provide us
with a comprehensive ideology, way of life or any substantial values.
Democracy is but a method among other alternative methods for overcoming
difficulties in decision making in an association or society.

The philosophical foundations mentioned to justify the democratic
system, fail to uphold it as a reliable means to attain truth and
righteous decisions. Majority rule is too weak to be presented as an
alternative to comprehensive religious, moral and philosophical
doctrines. In fact what gave democracy superiority over other
alternative systems is far removed from any philosophical or ideological
basis; instead the democratic system is made desirable in comparison to
other political systems because of its practicality.

Democracy as a method does not contain fixed, unalterable or absolute
moral and philosophical ideas and values. However, in order for a
political regime to be democratic, it must meet some criteria. A
democratic political system should provide the opportunity for the
people to participate, at least in some significant political decisions,
to express their ideas, orientations and needs, to distribute political
power through free elections and be able to regulate and bring to
account the governors. These political rights and duties of the people
in a democratic regime could be dealt with within a fixed framework
consisting of specific rights and values. In current limited democracies
these frameworks are embodied in constitutions, and constitutions in
turn are influenced by values and beliefs that people of each country
respect and support. Muslim advocates of democracy cannot accept ‘pure
democracy’ as Abu al-Ala Mawdudi says:

*Islam is not democracy: for democracy is the name given to that
particular form of government in which sovereignty ultimately rests with
the people, in which legislation depends both in its form and content on
the force and direction of public opinion and laws are modified and
altered, to correspond to changes in that opinion*[^33].

Therefore the key issue concerning religious democracy is whether Islam
has the capacity to draw an appropriate framework for a democratic
government that meets the above-mentioned criteria. As I have indicated
in the earlier pages of this Chapter, many Islamic thinkers believe that
Islam has delegated significant political as well as social roles and
duties to Muslims. In Islam, no conflict exists between the supreme
authority of religion – the definite and unquestionable status of divine
laws and Islamic values – and the political status of people in an ideal
Islamic state. As there are limitations for the will and desire of the
people, they have authority within the framework of Islamic rules and
values. Hence, a majority of the people or their representatives have no
power to legislate or make judgments that contradict Islam. At the same
time the governors in an Islamic state must respect the rights, will,
and authority of the people. Ayatollah Khomeini, the founder of the
Islamic Republic of Iran during a meeting with the representative of
Pope VI said:

*I do not want to impose (my will) on my people, and Islam does not
permit us to establish a dictatorship. We follow our nation’s votes and
act according to their views. We have no right, God has not conferred
such a right to us, and the Prophet (pbuh) never permitted us to impose
our ideas upon Muslims*[^34].

Smoothing the Path to Religious Democracy
-----------------------------------------

The advocates of Islamic democracy usually refer to the shura
(consultation) as the most important Islamic teaching that supports and
justifies the authority of people in an Islamic government. Rashid
al-Ghannouchi (Tunisia, born 1941) writes:

*The Islamic government is one in which:*

*1- Supreme legislative authority is for the Shari’ah, which is the
revealed law of Islam, which transcends all laws. Within this context,
it is responsibility of scholars to deduce detailed laws and regulations
to be used as guidelines by judges. The head of the Islamic state is the
leader of the executive body entrusted with the responsibility of
implementing such laws and regulations.*  
*2- Political power belongs to the community (ummah), which should adopt
a form of ‘shura’ which is a system of mandatory consultation*[^35].

Thinkers like Sadek Sulaiman (Oman, born 1933) maintain that shura in
Islam includes basic elements of democracy. He says:

*As a concept and as a principle, shura in Islam does not differ from
democracy. Both shura and democracy arise from the central consideration
that collective deliberation is more likely to lead to a fair and sound
result for the social good than individual preference*[^36].

The Holy Qur’an explicitly proposes and encourages that public affairs
and the governance of the ummah should be based upon shura:

***And those who respond to their Lord and keep up prayer, and their
rule is to take counsel amongst themselves. [Chapter 42, Verse 38]***

***And ask pardon for them, and take counsel with them in the affair.
[Chapter 3, Verse 159]***

The second verse orders the Prophet (pbuh), who receives revelation and
enjoys infallible knowledge, to take counsel with believers in
management of public affairs. This command shows the fundamental
significance of the participation of Muslims in social and political
affairs. It is somewhat an exaggeration to suppose that the shura is the
functional equivalent of western parliamentary democracy because there
are some controversies amongst scholars about the political status of
shura. For instance, those who believe in the theory of Caliphate,
emphasize that members of the council only have a duty to express their
opinion with no right to make political decisions. Accordingly if the
Caliph refers to the assembly to take their opinion regarding rulings,
which he wants to adopt, their opinion is not binding on him, even if it
is a consensus of majority opinion.

What makes shura one of the basic elements of Islamic democracy, it
seems, is the fact that shura refers to one of the significant
essentials of democracy. Democracy in its long history has had
evolutions and alterations, but matters such as public participation,
the rule of law and the responsibility and accountability of governors
can be recognized as essential to democracy. In conclusion, the
assumption that the Islamic political system could be a democratic one,
merely implies that Islamic teachings endorse and agree with the
essentials of democracy. From this point of view, there is no doubt that
the verses of the Holy Qur’an concerning shura along with some
transmissions from the prophet and Imams emphasize on the necessity of
public participation in political and social affairs. But the question
concerning the political role of consultation (shura) in the process of
making decisions still remains. Is consultation merely a religious duty
of the ruler of the Islamic state, or is he bound by the decisions of
those consulted?

The last verse of Surah al-Imran verifies the view that shura is not
binding upon the ruler, for the Almighty God delegates the final
decision, after consultation, to the Prophet (pbuh):

***And take counsel with them in the affair, so when you have decided
then place your trust in Allah. [Chapter 3, Verse 159]***

However, the practice of the Holy Prophet, according to some traditions,
testifies that he had implemented and respected the opinion of the
believers even when it was against his own views. It is recorded that
the Prophet not only consulted with his experienced or close companions,
but sometimes he held open meetings in which all Muslims were invited.
The consultation that took place about the battle of Badr and Uhud was
one such example. In the case of Uhud he gave precedent to the opinion
of the majority of Muslims over his own concerning the location of the
battlefield and decided to fight outside the city of Madina. He also
consulted the people concerning the treatment of prisoners of war
following the battles of Badr and al- Khandaq[^37].

Clearly, however, the Prophet did not consult the Muslims concerning
religious affairs or divine matters. His consultations were restricted
to war, peace and ordinary public affairs that were not determined by
revelation and were not amongst the situations in which divine order
determined must be done. For example, with regard to the treaty of
al-Hudaybiyah the Prophet (pbuh) did not submit to the opinion of the
majority of his companions who were in disagreement with the covenant,
it was not in fact a consultation but a series of complaints made to the
messenger regarding the terms of the peace. He rejected their
suggestions to break his promises and continued to respect the
agreement, which he had made because it was a command of Allah (swt). He
told them: “Verily I am the servant of Allah and his messenger. I shall
never disobey his order.”

In short, even though the shura in its historical function within the
Islamic world does not totally overlap with the modern concept of
democracy and the political status of parliament in contemporary
representative democracies, it would be appropriate for shaping a
limited democratic model for an Islamic state. The Qur’anic emphasis on
the status of shura as an essential aspect of the Islamic political
system – according to those who interpret the word for amr in both of
the two verses relating to shura, as referring to governmental affairs –
makes way for defining a determined systematic role for the people’s
representatives (members of the shura) within the body of the Islamic
state. The above- mentioned verses are silent about how the form and
mechanism of shura in an Islamic political system might be, consequently
the constitutional approach inclines to determine and stabilize the
political status of shura (people’s authority) under the supreme
authority of Islam does not confront any religious problem.

The second element, however, often mentioned by advocates of religious
democracy as an appropriate approach to an Islamic democratic state is
*Bay’a*h. In the first Chapter, the meaning of ‘*Bay’a*h’ has already
been discussed. Here, the aim is to examine its legal nature, for it is
supposed that its political function is the same as the function of an
election in democratic systems. It should be noted that *Bay’a*h in the
sense of adherence to a religion (as occurred between the Prophet and
his supporters from Madina before Hijrah) or recognition of a
pre-established authority by other means (such as the testamentary
designation, such as the *Bay’a*h of people to the second caliph Umar)
is irrelevant to our debate. Bay’ah as a means and method of designating
a person as a ruler (caliph) among other legitimate methods is held to
be the same as democratic election in its legal nature. This political
view exclusively belongs to Sunni jurists, because Shi’a political
thought, except that of the Zaydis, maintains that the Imamah is
acquired by election within the Alid family. The *Bay’a*h has never been
able to play this role, for the Shi’a recognize only one method of
designating the Imam. He is appointed through the testament (nass) of
one in the legitimate line of descent[^38].

This sense of *Bay’a*h is a supposed contractual agreement between those
who elect and he who has been designated as the ruler. As far as
democracy is concerned, for at least two reasons, *Bay’a*h is not simply
and solely a democratic election. Firstly, *Bay’a*h implies binding
obedience to the ruler, and since it is a contractual agreement, like
commercial agreements such as bao (to sell), the obedience of the
elected ruler as a religious duty, would be obligatory. Secondly, this
obligatory obedience is life long, whereas the democratic process of
appointing a person as ruler is merely temporal with no religious
implications.

One of the most important characteristics of a democratic government is
its accountability to its people. A democratic state must be accountable
and its citizens must have the right to criticize its policies and
functions. Advocates of religious democracy maintain that al-amr
bi'l-maruf wal nahy'an al- munkar (enjoining good and forbidding evil)
is one of the most significant Islamic duties placed upon Muslims and it
should render the Islamic state accountable. Many Qur’anic verses
emphasize on this fundamental injunction, which if Muslims take
seriously would produce a healthy and healthy society that is far
removed from tyranny, injustice and dictatorship. Almighty God says in
the Holy Qur’an:

***And from amongst you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is that shall be
successful. [Chapter 3, Verse 104]***

***And (as for) the believing men and believing women, they are
guardians of each other, they enjoin good and forbid evil. [Chapter 9,
Verse 71]***

It is an Islamic duty, incumbent upon all Muslims, to concern themselves
with the health and well being of society, to oppose injustice and
immorality, and to scrutinize the actions of those who undertake
governmental affairs. There exists a mutual responsibility between the
rulers and those whom they rule to implement and uphold the Islamic
*Shari’ah* and this provides a clear framework and basis upon which
citizens may question the actions and policies of their governors with
regards to their socio-religious duties. As the most-noble Messenger
(pbuh) in a famous tradition says:

*Every one of you is a shepherd (of the community), and all are
responsible for their dependants and herd*[^39].

In order to fulfil this obligation (to monitor governmental functions)
there is a requirement for certain conditions to be met, such as the
freedom of speech and to criticize as well as access to accurate and
objective information. Otherwise, the active participation of people in
public-religious duties such as providing constructive feedback and
criticisms toward the governors and standing for justice and truth would
be impossible. It is obvious that Islam does not concur with individual
freedom to the extent prevalent in western culture. However, the
preconditions of an Islamic and democratic government that respects the
rights of the people and their contribution in socio-political affairs,
are outlined by the Qur’an and Sunnah (valid traditions). For example
the Qur'an encourages believers to listen to different opinions and to
select the best of them:

***Therefore give good news to my servant. Those who listen to the word,
then follow the best of it; those are whom Allah has guided, and those
it is who are men of understanding. [Chapter 39, Verses 17-18]***

There are many narrations in historical and religious texts documenting
dialogue and debate that occurred between Shi’a Imams and non-Muslim
intellectuals in which disbelievers (even atheists) were able to express
their ideological views so long as they were voiced as academic opinions
and kept within the circles of scholarly debate, rather than attempting
to propagate them. In a true Islamic state, it is the right granted to
the people that they be kept aware of affairs in society and government.

Imam Ali (pbuh) once explained the mutual rights and duties that exist
between an Imam (leader) and the people:

*It is your right that I must not hide any secret, except that of war,
from you. And that I should not take over matters (without your
consultation or awareness) other than those concerning divine laws
(hukm)*[^40].

Aside from the obvious distinction between religious democracy and
western liberal democracy, the former holds the same essential
advantages as any democratic government. These include the participation
of citizens, the distribution of political power by election, political
accountability of governors, constitutionalism and political
transparency as well as mutual responsibility between the rulers and the
ruled. Religious democracy however, is far more desirable for Muslims
than any feasible alternative because of the supreme role of the
*Shari’ah* in providing a basis for, and shaping the growth of, the
contents of this political system. It is also desired because of the
qualities and moral-religious commitments that the governor must have as
the leader of Muslim society.

For instance, constitutionalism and accountability in secular, western
democracies as Nathan Brown says, has expressed itself most frequently
in human authored constitutional texts and rights, whereas religious
constitutionalism is defined under the authority of the *Shari’ah*.
Therefore, the religious government is not only accountable with regard
to people's rights and needs, but also with regard to the *Shari’ah* and
divine laws. He writes:

*Many Muslims have come to believe that the crisis of political
accountability can be solved by insisting that Muslim governments rule
within the bounds fixed by the Islamic Shari’ah. In essence, this demand
renders the Islamic Shari’ah as a kind of constitution.* *Governments
may not cross the boundaries firmly established by the Islamic Shari’ah;
rulers are held accountable to God's law*[^41].

In summary, although governments throughout history have often ignored
the political teachings of Islam, the main purpose here is to show that
these significant teachings smooth the path towards the establishment of
a religious democracy.

Religious Democracy is Paradoxical
----------------------------------

Critics of religious democracy maintain that there is an inherent
antagonism between the fundamental aspects of the Islamic creed and the
basis of democracy. According to this view, those who subscribe to the
idea of religious democracy ignore the true nature of religion and
overlook the epistemological foundations of democracy.

The democratic system is based upon pluralism that places emphasis upon
freedom instead of regulation, diversity as opposed to homogeneity, and
multiplicity rather than unity. According to pluralistic doctrine, no
single person, group or school of thought can possess or claim to
possess the absolute truth or that it's understanding and opinions are
correct and that all others are false.

Truths are distributed amongst humanity, hence, every opinion is but a
composition of truth and falsehood, and consequently no opinion has
superiority over another, and cannot claim such. People are free to
follow and support any opinion they decide upon, whether it be religious
or secular, theistic or atheistic, moral or immoral. The unlimited
freedom of choice is one of the most important foundations of democracy,
a foundation that Islam is opposed to. Hamid Paydar writes:

*One of the epistemological foundations of democracy is the obscurity of
truth and its distribution amongst all human beings, however, if an
ideology or religion should call itself the sample of truth, maintaining
that other religions and opinions are manifestations of infidelity,
polytheism and misleading, it would not be compatible with democratic
government. Islam, according to some verses of the Qur’an introduces
itself as a unique right and true religion. Verses such as “This then is
Allah, your true lord; and what is there after the truth but error”
[10:32] “And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it should not
be accepted from him” [3:85] and the opening verses of Surah Taubah
(repentance) are in contradiction to man's freedom of choice*[^42].

This view emphasizes on the inflexibility of Islamic laws and the
absolute authority of the *Shari’ah* as evidence of incompatibility
between Islam and democracy. Obviously the interpretation of democracy
stated above does not represent what exists in an ordinary democratic
state. It is a particular version of democracy mixed with extreme
liberalism, which asserts the absolute neutrality of a liberal
democratic state. For this new approach a desirable political system
should ignore any conception of good and should not based upon any
particular philosophical-religious doctrine of life. As Galston says:

*According to this view, the liberal state is desirable not because it
promotes a specific way of life but precisely because it alone does not
do so. The liberal state is ‘neutra’ amongst different ways of life. It
presides benignly over them, intervening only to adjudicate conflict, to
prevent any particular way of life tyrannizing over others, and to
ensure that all adhere to the principals that constitute society's basic
structure*[^43].

It is not our objective to discuss whether the neutrality of a political
system is possible. However, the fact is that no form of political life
can be justified without appealing to certain ideas and values
concerning society and the individual. Some advocates of liberalism
maintain that liberal theorists covertly employ theories concerning
goodness. However, their adamant denial of any reference to a basis or
foundation reduces the strength of their argument and leaves their
theories vulnerable to criticism[^44].

Regardless of whether a neutral government is feasible or not, there is
no doubt that Islam is in complete disagreement with many underlying
values of liberal democracy, including secularism, pluralism and radical
individualism. Consequently the above-mentioned theory merely explains
the general incompatibility of Islam with liberalism and specifically
the new conception of a 'liberal state'. This, nevertheless, does not in
any way undermine other versions of limited democracy, including
religious democracy.

Usurpation of God's Sovereignty
-------------------------------

Some Muslim thinkers who emphasize on Islamic governance argue that
democracy is contradictory to Islamic principals because it involves the
legislation of laws, and there are may verses of Qur’an that demonstrate
that legislation is reserved for Allah (swt).

***Indeed judgment (hukm) is only for Allah. [Chapter 6, Verse 57]***

***And in whatever thing you disagree, the judgment thereof is with
Allah. [Chapter 42, Verse 10]***

***And if you were in dispute in anything amongst yourselves, refer to
Allah and His Messenger. [Chapter 4, Verse 59]***

In conclusion, Islam holds that sovereignty is with God (Divine law =
*Shari’ah*) and not with the ummah (people), thus the ummah does not
possess the right to legislate on any matter. For example, even if all
the Muslims were to gather together and agree to permit usury, usury
would remain prohibited because it is a decree from Allah and Muslims
have no choice in the matter. On the other hand, in democracy
sovereignty is with the people, thus they are able to legislate
according to their own free will and desires, either directly or
indirectly via the representatives they have elected[^45].

The Egyptian revivalist scholar, Sayyid Qutb holds that the essential
doctrine of liberal democracy, namely the sovereignty of man, is a
usurpation of God's sovereignty and a rebellion against His authority,
for it subordinates the individual to the will of other individuals
instead of God's governance on the earth[^46].

Clearly this approach to religious government, in principal, should not
ignore the administrative and executive role of the people in an Islamic
state, because for them the problem of legislation is fundamental. This
approach insists that the believers cannot frame any law for themselves,
nor do they have the right to alter or modify God's laws. This
assumption has emanated from the idea that it is incumbent upon Muslims
to follow *Shari’ah* and to restrict all actions and principals to this
basis. It is not allowed for them to undertake or leave anything except
after understanding the rule of Allah regarding it. Furthermore, those
who deny any legislative role for the people maintain that the Islamic
*Shari’ah* contains rules for all past events, current problems, all
possible incidents and that it encompasses the actions of man completely
and comprehensively. Allah says:

***And we have sent down to you the book as an exposition of everything,
a guidance, a mercy and glad tidings to those who have submitted
themselves to Allah. [Chapter 16, Verse 89]***

Accordingly, Muslims are allowed to make use of the sciences and
thoughts of human beings unless they contradict Islam. However, with
regard to laws and legislation it is prohibited for Muslims to devise
and obey un-Islamic rules because it is impossible to find a human
action that does not have an evidence or a sign that indicates its rule
in the Quran. This is due to the general meaning of His saying
‘exposition of everything’[^47].

Since the above view is both influential and popular amongst Islamic
revivalist movements, it would be both convenient and useful to examine
its various aspects. In order to do this, one must first clarify the
meaning of “God’s sovereignty”, then the assumption that all legislative
authority rests with God and that believers and qualified jurists
(fuqaha) cannot frame any laws for Muslim society should be examined. It
should also be emphasized that there is a lack of knowledge concerning
the Islamic model of democracy, which insists on the sovereignty of God
as well as people’s authority in limited aspects of political affairs.
The followers of this doctrine focus solely on a comparison between
their conception of an Islamic state and a purely democratic (or liberal
democratic) model.

By definition, sovereignty is the claim of ultimate political authority,
subject to no higher power with regards to the legislation and
enforcement of political decisions. In the international system,
sovereignty is the claim by the state to independent self-government and
the mutual recognition of claims to sovereignty is the basis of
international society[^48].

Through regarding sovereignty as the basis and foundation of the
political power that a government relies upon in order to be able to
exercise its power and organize its domestic and international
relationships, the idea that sovereignty as a political term has no
connection to God has come to being. Therefore those who attribute the
quality to God confuse between the religious status of God amongst
believers and the political power of a state referred to by the term
‘sovereignty’. Hence many thinkers such as Fazlur-Rahman essentially
deny any attempt to translate the supremacy of Allah into political
sovereignty.

*The term ‘sovereignty’ as a political term is of a relatively recent
coining and denotes definite and defined factors in a society to which
rightfully belongs coercive force in order to obtain obedience to its
will. It is absolutely obvious that God is not sovereign in this sense
and that only people can be and are sovereign, since only to them
belongs ultimate* *coercive force i.e. Only their 'word is law' in the
politically ultimate sense*[^49].

As a matter of fact, every formed state has sovereignty regardless of
how its political hegemony and power are established and shaped. So, all
political models of government - democratic, dictatorship, guardianship
and even a military government established by a coup d’etat - so long as
it remains in power and can exercise ultimate political authority,
possesses sovereignty. In the Islamic ideology, however, there is no
unique origin for the establishment of political sovereignty and thus
the fundamentally crucial question in this regard is one of
‘legitimacy’. Which form of political sovereignty is the legitimate one?
Amongst political philosophers there are several answers to this
significant question. The idea that ‘only people can be and are
sovereign’, as Fazl ur-Rahman stated, represents the democratic approach
to this question. Certainly, for philosophers who believe in
‘guardianship’ such as Plato, the rule of majority and the consent of
the people does not legitimize the political sovereignty of a
government.

Therefore, sovereignty as such could be created through a number of
means and in different forms, but every political doctrine presents its
own specific interpretation of legitimate sovereignty and emphasizes on
one factor as an essential element of a legitimate state. In the view of
those who support the doctrine of an Islamic state, the legitimacy of a
government is strongly tied to the extent of that government's
commitment to the *Shari’ah* as well as Islamic teachings and values.
Muslim thinkers construe the phenomena as God's sovereignty because
God's will is embodied in his legislations and His will and orders have
priority over the will and orders expressed by the rulers of an Islamic
government, who are obligated to rule in accordance with divine laws
(*Shari’ah*).

With regards to this interpretation of God's sovereignty with its
particular insistence on his supremacy in legislation, the key issue
that arises is whether sovereignty prevents the believers from any form
of legislation. This important question distinguishes between religious
democracy and the above-mentioned doctrine that does not recognize any
right for the believers to frame any law for themselves. Religious
democracy, as emphasized before, is based firmly upon the belief in the
ultimate authority of almighty God, including his legislative
sovereignty. But it is essential to recognize that the unquestionable
legislative superiority over dimensions of Muslim's life is one issue,
and their frequent need for appropriate, fresh and temporal laws to
handle new and unusual situations is another. Muslims society, like all
other societies, is in need of new laws and regulations in order to
adapt its legal system with the frequent alterations in social
relationships, namely, new developments in human lifestyle,
technological development and cultural– economical changes. Social
change in its broad meaning regularly produces many fresh judicial
questions, which often cannot be resolved without new legislation.

The conception that Islam is perfect, comprehensive and all- embracing
with regards to the needs of human beings, particularly the
judicial-legislative necessities that arise, and that the Islamic legal
system consequently includes all rules required for a desirable Islamic
way of life, with no need to draft new legislation and laws, can be
interpreted in two ways. The first notion incorporates a
misinterpretation of the idea that Islam is indeed a perfect religion.
This theory asserts that in every case in which mankind is in need of
laws, there are appropriate rules that already exist in the *Shari’ah*
that can be automatically applied. Islam contains every law that people
require in order to handle their private and public affairs. In
conclusion, there remains no legal vacuum to justify the existence of
another legislative sovereignty to derive new laws. According to this
view, Qur’anic verses such as “And we have sent down to you the book as
an exposition of every thing” [16:89] should be interpreted as
supporting this view, because the word ‘everything’ embraces all rules
we need in the various dimensions of our life, at all times and in every
model of social formation. Regarding the Islamic legal system, all
judicial demands would be satisfied either by in advance prepared rules
or through Ijtihad (fuqaha derive new laws by referring to Islamic
sources), which in turn is not legislation. Through ijtihad the faqih
recourse to the sources of *Shari’ah* to declare the position of Islam
with regards to new questions and situations, this in its nature is
completely separate from legislation. Islamic jurists have no right to
legislate, they merely are able to understand and announce to believers
what Almighty God has declared.

Small-scale societies have a relatively simple social structure that can
be easily regulated by a basic set of rules. However, contemporary
society is considerably larger and possesses a vast social structure
permeated by many complex interrelationships. In such an environment,
every circumstance and aspect of public life requires a flexible legal
network, consisting of both fixed and changeable rules, in order to be
able to stay in harmony with the demands of a growing and modern
society. The existence of ahistorical, non-temporal and fixed laws is a
significant characteristic that is common in many comprehensive legal
systems, especially in the Islamic legal code, nevertheless, the
importance of temporal, changeable rules that every government must
legislate according to new economic, social and political situations
cannot be ignored. These policies are required to protect the interests
of society and to overcome different social difficulties concerning
education, taxation, security, exports, immigration and so on. Therefore
the adoption of policy is one of the most important functions of a
government.

The *Shari’ah* is perfect, not because we do not need any kind of
legislation or because all the rules needed have been previously
prepared, rather it is because Islam is the most perfect of all legal
systems. It consists of comprehensive and all-inclusive divine laws and
Islamic jurisprudence also has specific elements, which render it a
dynamic and flexible system that is capable of operating hand-in-hand
with changes in society and reality. One of the most significant aspects
of this structure is the right of a well-qualified jurist (*Wali*
*al-Faqih* *mujtahid a-adil*) to issue rulings and commands. If the
*Shari’ah* has already providing a verdict regarding a specific issue,
it is an obligation upon the Islamic state to adopt the ruling of the
*Shari’ah*.

If a situation arises in which the *Shari’ah* is ambiguous or there
exists a difference of opinion concerning the divine law, the opinion
and edict of the *Wali* Amr (who carries the responsibility of rulership
in the absence of the infallible Imam) has precedence over all others.
In the case where there exists no obligation or prohibition in the
*Shari’ah*, it is permissible for the just faqih to issue a governmental
order necessitated by the interest of Islam and Muslims. Since the just
faqih has legitimate authority (wilayah) and legislative sovereignty
other governors, including those elected by the people such as members
of parliament and the president, should be appointed by the just faqih
otherwise they would have no legitimate authority to make governmental
rules and decisions. For instance Ayatollah Khomeini says:

*In the absence of the guardianship of a faqih or divine ruler, the
taghut (illegitimate authority) will prevail. If the president is not
appointed by a just faqih, he would be illegitimate*[^50].

In letters appointing the members of the Islamic Revolutionary Council
in Iran as well as the first premier, referring to the above points, he
writes:

*As a person who enjoys the wilayah of the sacred religion, I appoint
him...any opposition to this government is tantamount to opposition of
Shari’ah*[^51].

Therefore, being elected by the majority or obtaining public consensus
does not automatically grant legislative sovereignty or legitimate
religious authority to rule and govern Islamic society. And in cases
that governors have been appointed by the just faqih – even elected
officials – their authority for making decisions and orders cannot
contradict the *Shari’ah*. Finally, in instances where there is no clear
indication from the *Shari’ah* because the case is totally new, and
without previous record, it is the responsibility of the fuqhaha
(jurists) to deduce the appropriate rule from Islamic sources.

The legitimate status of the majority is what truly distinguishes
religious democracy from all other conceptions of the democratic state,
for religious democracy limits the authority of the people in accordance
with the legislative sovereignty of God. Whereas in non-religious
democratic states, the sovereignty of elected individuals is not
restricted by *Shari’ah*, and the doctrine explicitly assumes democracy
as a secular system detached from the authority and sovereignty of God.
It thus fails to make a fair assessment of the religious model of
democracy and the relationship between Islam and democracy.

The Problem of Legal Equality
-----------------------------

Legal equality is often highlighted as one of the crucial foundations of
democratic government. Consequently, every political theory that wishes
to categorize itself as democratic must respect the legal equality of
its citizens. Some critics of religious democracy maintain that Islam is
not compatible with democracy on the grounds of some inequalities
endorsed within the Islamic legal system.

*Islam may be credited with having disseminated the spirit of equality
and brotherhood amongst its followers, nevertheless the inferior status
of three groups, namely non-Muslim citizens, slaves, and women, and
their inequality before the law ascompared with free male Muslim
citizens do not help in smoothing the path to a democratic system*[^52].

Even though the modern conception of democracy emphasizes on all
embracing legal equality, democracy in its nature – as the history of
political thought – testifies that it is compatible with legal
inequalities. As discussed before, in ancient models of democracy only
free male landowners had the right to participate in the process of
making decisions for city-states. In modern democracies, the right for
all free men to vote on an equal basis was not granted until 1850. Males
of African origin were denied the right to vote until 1870, and females,
both those who were free and the slaves, were not granted the right
until the 19th constitutional amendment in 1920.

Moreover, even the modern conception of democracy does not rest upon a
complete, unexceptional, and all-inclusive legal equality. Instead it
relies upon the principal that all adult members of society are
considered equal in political rights, and are able to participate in
voting and the distribution of political power. Therefore the existence
of non-political legal inequalities, in principal, is not incompatible
with democracy. Suppose that according to a legal system, women have not
been granted the right to become a judge or religious leader, or that
they inherit less than males, obviously these non-political inequalities
do not undermine the idea of establishing a democratic system.

No one can make a credible attack against the Islamic ideology because
of its supposed endorsement of slavery, slavery was an age-old, and
universally accepted institution, which was only officially abolished in
the western world less than two centuries ago when emerged around the
world.

However, when Islam was revealed, slavery was considered a completely
natural aspect of human culture as well as an inseparable element of
society. Islam moderated this institution and encouraged believers to
emancipate their slaves. In fact, the concept of freeing slaves is an
important element in the Islamic system of punishment. The acceptance of
slavery by Islam should not, therefore, be considered an obstacle for
democracy. In summary, there is no doubt that there are some differences
in *Shari’ah* between Muslims and non-Muslims (for example in
retribution), between men and women (for example in inheritance), but
these legal inequalities have no connection to political equality and
citizenship. For example, in the constitution of Iran as a model of
Islamic democratic government, many articles emphasize the equal rights
of citizens, men and women, Muslim and non-Muslim:

*All people of Iran, whatever their ethnic group or tribe to which they
belong, enjoy equal rights; color, race, language and the like, do not
bestow any privilege.* [Article 19]

*All citizens of the country, both men and women, equally enjoy the
protection of the law and enjoy all human, political, economic, social
and cultural rights, in conformity with Islamic criteria.* [Article 20]

Reconciling Islam and Liberal Democracy
---------------------------------------

Muslim advocates of religious democracy strongly support the conception
of a democratic political system possessing a religious framework drawn
by *Shari’ah*. In other words, a judicial (*fiqh*i) based model of
democracy that respects the authority of the people regarding God's
sovereignty and Islamic law. They emphasize upon the accountability of
the government, the participation of the people in political affairs and
the implementation of the *Shari’ah*. According to their conception of
religious democracy, the political power belongs to the people, but
their authority is limited by the *Shari’ah*. Hence, it is not in the
people's power to make political decisions that contradict Islamic rules
and values. The basic structure of a *fiqh*i based society, namely the
system of rights and duties, should be defined according to instructions
and limitations set forth by Islamic teachings in general and *Shari’ah*
in particular.

Some Muslim intellectuals attempt to present a model of Islamic
democratic government, which in principle welcomes with open arms many
underlying values of contemporary liberal democracies. As a notable
sample of this modernist approach there is the conception of Abdul-
Kareem Soroush (an Iranian intellectual born in 1945) regarding
religious democracy. Here we will briefly explore a political approach
that strives to reconcile Islam and the western conception of human
rights, justice and rationality, by reducing the status of *Shari’ah* to
juridical conflicts with no connection to the management of society or
the regulation of social relationships. The basic elements of this
doctrine are as follows:

• In contrast to the prevailing conception of a religious society and
Islamic government, that is essentially *fiqh* based and defines a
religious society as one wherein the implementation of *Shari’ah* is the
ultimate aim and major function of the religious state, the above
mentioned doctrine does not give Islamic jurisprudence such a crucial
role. According to a *fiqh*-based interpretation of religious society
and Islamic governance, the rights and responsibilities of people have
been defined and determined by Islamic laws, in other words the issue of
human rights is defined within a religious context, particularly
jurisprudential arguments. However, the above doctrine insists that
defining human rights, and thus human duties, belongs to the
extra-religious area and should be determined outside the domain of
religion and *Shari’ah*.

• “The first issue concerning human rights is that it is not a solely
legal (*fiqh*i) inter religious argument. Discussion of human rights
belongs to the domain of philosophical theology and philosophy in
general. Furthermore, it is an extra-religious area of discourse. Like
other debates on matters that are prior to religious understanding and
acceptance such as the existence of God, and the election of the
Prophets, human rights lies outside of the domain of religious”[^53]

• Religious law (*Shari’ah*) is not synonymous with the entirely of
religion; nor is the debate over the democratic religious government a
purely jurisprudential argument, so we shouldn't define the religious
society according to the extent of its adoption of *Shari’ah*. The
prophets founded a society based on faith and spirituality, not on
legality. The heart of a religious society is freely chosen faith, not
coercion and conformity. Religious society is based upon free, invisible
faith, and dynamic and varied religious understanding[^54].

• The jurisprudential governing and attempt to resolve social and public
difficulties by Islamic laws must be replaced by rationality and
scientific magnanimity. Islamic jurisprudence (*fiqh*) was a solution
for simple, underdeveloped societies that had simple, uncomplicated
relationships. *Fiqh* could handle and successfully organize such
societies, but the problems of complicated modern societies would be
resolved solely by rationality and science instead of
jurisprudence[^55].

• Democratic religious regimes need not wash their hands of religiosity
nor turn their backs on God's approval. In order to remain religious,
they, of course, need to establish religion as the guide and arbiter of
their problems and conflicts. But, in order to remain democratic, they
need dynamically to absorb an adjudicative understanding of religion in
accordance with the dictates of collective reason. Furthermore, every
democratic religious government must be mindful of both the inside and
the outside of the religion in order to remain faithful to both of its
foundations[^56].

• Debates concerning justice, human rights and the methods of government
cannot be resolved through intra-religious debate: these are
extra-religious arguments that deeply influence the understanding and
practice of religion. Religious understanding must constantly renew and
correct itself according to philosophical-theological debate concerning
human rights, the meaning and nature of justice, the effective method of
government and so on. The legal and jurisprudential schools of thought
should harmonize their achievements with these novel insights[^57].

Having accepted these premises, one comes to the conclusion that many
substantial changes of modern humankind in its ideas, attitudes,
worldviews and lifestyle must be admitted and respected by religion.
These profound and widespread alterations include the desirable
political system, human rights, the structure of fundamental rights and
duties and the limited role of religion in human life. According to this
doctrine, these significant changes should be noticed as new realities
and truths, hence, religious knowledge must try to acknowledge and adopt
itself to these facts. Therefore Muslims should not strive to deduce
their political system from Islamic sources or form their social
relationships according to the *Shari’ah*, instead they have to shape
the fundamental basics of their society (i.e. The system of rights and
duties) to become consistent modern mankind's world views, ideas and
perspectives. The keystone of this political approach consists of the
concept that the traditional Islamic thought – religious knowledge – is
temporally limited and must therefore undergo a drastic metamorphosis in
order that it be brought into line according to the views of “modern
mankind”.

This political doctrine suffers from three major categories of weakness.
The first of these is that the fundamental aspects of this theory,
presupposed by a specific doctrine about the nature of religious
knowledge, rests on a subjective approach to the interpretation of
texts. This subjective approach, called by Soroush “theoretic evolution
and devolution of *Shari’ah*”, insists that religious knowledge and the
science of religion are relative to presuppositions, and in addition,
that they are also temporal.

He states that since these presuppositions are varied and restricted by
time, religious knowledge and the interpretation of religion is entirely
human and this worldly. All of this implies that religion is constantly
surrounded by a host of contemporaneous data and deliberations, thus the
interpretation remains constant so long as these external elements are
also constant. However, once they change, the change will be reflected
in the understanding of religion as well. Consequently, religious texts
(such as the Holy Qur’an and Islamic traditions or ahadith) do not carry
their meaning on their own shoulders, instead it is necessary to situate
them within a context. The interpretation of the text is in flux, and
presuppositions are actively at work here. Therefore, the interpretation
of religious texts is subject to expansion and contradiction according
to the assumptions preceding them. These assumptions are part of the
world’s view of an age, which need not and usually does not enter the
mind through any formal education or conscious adoption, but rather are
utilized inadvertently and fluently[^58].

This approach to religious knowledge and the interpretation of texts has
been strongly influenced by subjectivist schools of interpretation
particularly the German philosopher Georg Gadamer (died 2001) and the
philosophical hermeneutics of his famous book “Truth and Method” (First
German edition 1960)[^59]. According to these, the horizon of the reader
(his presuppositions, attitudes and expectations) share in the process
of interpretation, thereby making the reader more than a passive
observer who merely receives the message of the text, rather he is an
active participant who creates the meaning of a text, or at least the
horizon of the reader shares in the process of constructing a meaning
around the text. Hence, according to this theory, admitting modern and
popularly viewed and shared ideas as extra-religious presuppositions is
acceptable, even if this should interfere in the interpretation of
religion. Examples of such ideas include the western conception of human
rights, political system and the social formation of rights and duties.
Below are a few brief criticisms of this conception of the nature of
religious knowledge and understanding religious texts.

• When referring to a religious text, the fundamental aim of
interpretation for believers and religious scholars is to understand the
'intention' of the author (for instance the intention of God in divine
revelation and what the Prophet had in mind with regard to
interpretation of his hadith). To achieve this understanding, they seek
objective and valid interpretations of the texts. Obviously every form
of interference originates from the reader's prejudices, presuppositions
and expectations, which imposing a specific meaning upon the text, this
is obviously harmful for any attempt to interpret religious texts.

• It is quite possible to subjectively interpret a religious text with
no regard to the intentions of its author or its context. This form of
interpretation is known as tafsir bi rai (interpretation by personal
attitude and prejudice), and is criticized in many traditions
originating from the Prophet and the Imams (peace be upon them).
Developing a meaning according to the varied presuppositions and
prejudices that exist in human society, is not a question of
feasibility, rather it is a question of legitimacy.

• The assumption that religious texts do not carry their own meaning
ignores the profound semantical relationship between words and meanings
that is established in every natural language. This doctrine supposes
that sentences of a text are empty vessels that a reader may place his
own meaning within, as Soroush says:

*Statements are hungry of meanings instead of being pregnant of
them*[^60].(meaning a statement requires a meaning to be given to it,
rather than providing a meaning from it).

Clearly anyone who wants to use or understand a language must respect
its structure and limitations. Why aren't we free to apply and
understand an English text as we wish? The point is that the
pre-established connection between words (and their meanings) in this
language prevent us from doing so and these limit the shape and
framework of our linguistic activity. Therefore, statements in a text
are not devoid of meaning, rather they contain their own meaning and
play a crucial role in the process of understanding and transmitting the
intention of their author, although this is not to say that other
elements (such as the context of the text) are not important.

• This method of understanding in general, and understanding religious
texts in particular, lends itself towards 'relativism'. It emphasizes
that religious knowledge and the interpretation of text is a
theory-laden, as Soroush writes:

*Religious knowledge will be in continuous flux, and since it is only
through those presuppositions that one can hear the voice of revelation.
Hence the religion itself is silent*[^61]*.*

This absolute relativism doesn't allow any room for the question of
validity in interpretation of the text and religious knowledge.
According to this approach, the validity of religious knowledge is
connected to the validity of extra-religious knowledge, which consists
of the presuppositions of each age, which in turn are varied and
changeable. Whereas appealing to religious beliefs and knowledge based
on reliability and validity of religious knowledge is undermined by this
theory.

• As a matter of fact readers face a text through their horizons that
means they cannot ignore their knowledge, mental abilities, backgrounds
and personal experiences concerning the context and content of the text.
In other words, it is quite impossible that someone can overlook his own
horizon and keep his mind empty when confronting a text, because our
knowledge, experiences and so on are inseparable parts of our identity.
This reality would not excuse free and nonstandard interference of the
reader ‘s horizon in the process of the interpretation of the text.
Indeed, the horizon of every reader consists of several categories and
some of them play a crucial role in understanding the text. For
instance, those who know Arabic and have suitable background in Islamic
philosophy understand philosophical texts that have been written by
Muslim philosophers in Arabic language much better than others. On the
other hand, there are some elements whose influence we have to control
during the interpretation of text, such as our prejudices and
expectations that tend to impose particular and prejudged meanings over
the text. That is why even some great advocates of philosophical
hermeneutics notice the danger of some pre-understandings that hold back
the correct process of interpretation. Heidegger and Gadamer emphasize
that we have to distinguish between ‘correct and incorrect’, ‘legitimate
and illegitimate’ conceptions and prejudices that come into
understanding[^62]. Consequently we are not free to allow our
prejudgments, attitudes and fore conceptions to be presented in the
event of understanding. Substantial changes in ideas, lifestyle and
attitudes among modern humankind should not decide the message of a
religion. Certainly these radical alterations sometimes create
challenges and conflicts between a religion and modernism that require
solutions, but reinterpretation of religion in favour of these new ideas
and attitudes is not an appropriate solution, especially when we know
that there is no justification for many of these modern concepts and
approaches. Values such as consumerism, individualism, the liberal
concept of freedom, secularism, free market (capitalism) and technology
that make the major paradigms of contemporary civilization and modern
humankind ‘s lifestyle, have established themselves because of the
personal preferences of the majority. However, most of these paradigms
suffer from the problem of justification. Therefore, there is no reason
for believers to blindly apply all modern values and conception to their
religious texts and to reproduce their religious knowledge in accordance
to them.

Another criticism of the above mentioned political doctrine concerns the
ambiguous role of religion in this version of “religious” democratic
government. The scope of political- social affairs concerns the
practical aspect of Islam, which is largely embodied in Islamic law.
Yet, this doctrine essentially denies the *fiqh*i based model of
governing and, therefore, it remains ambivalent about the role (if any)
of the *Shari’ah* with regards to the organization of social
relationships and the process of making significant social- political
decisions.

On the other hand, if we endorse the claim that religious understanding
should constantly be renewed and corrected in light of extra-religious
presuppositions and that Islamic jurisprudential thought must harmonize
its achievements with these novel insights obtained by human sciences,
then what reason would justify and obligate us to harmonize our
political-social decisions with such dependent, relative and changeable
religious knowledge? Why shouldn't we just directly trust these novel
extra-religious sights and presuppositions and relinquish religion?

Soroush emphasizes that religious democracies in order to remain
religious, need to establish religion as the guide and arbiter of their
problems and conflicts[^63].

However, by overlooking the role of the *Shari’ah* in resolving the
problems of contemporary modern societies, he does not explicitly state
the mechanism upon which Islam might be the guide and arbiter of
conflicts in the modern world.

Also significant is the fact that this doctrine fails to demonstrate why
the problem of human rights and the system of rights and duties are
extra-religious and why we shouldn't respect the explanation of
religious sciences from intra-religious contents. It seems that the only
reason that could possibly justify this approach rests on an extremely
subjective conception of the nature of religious knowledge and the
interpretation of texts, which has been criticized previously. In spite
of this, there is no justification for ignorance concerning Islamic
teachings, conceptions and laws with regards to human rights and duties.
In cases where extra-religious notions and values contrast some Islamic
teachings first of all we have to assess their capacity for truth-valid
objective reasons that support and justify them. Clearly many
fundamental notions in the modern conception of human rights are deeply
influenced by concepts and values of liberalism, which in turn suffer
from absence of valid justification. For instance the liberal conception
of freedom plays a very significant role in shaping modern conceptions
of human rights, while advocates of Liberalism still have not presented
a valid convincing rational argument for this conception of liberty.

Consider John Stuart Mill who tried to base and defend this freedom
entirely on the principle of utility[^64], which as many critics have
pointed out is ill-equipped to bear the burden. If personal liberty is
as valuable as Mill insists, liberals should at least attempt to find a
more permanent foundation for it than the disputable proposition - the
principle of utility. Classical liberals like Mill are not the only
liberals whose defense of individual freedom have run into trouble.
Recent defenders of the liberal conception of personal freedom such as
Friedrich Hayek and Isaiah Berlin do not present a convincing rational
justificatory basis for it. Hayek stakes his defense of personal liberty
on skepticism about moral rationality, while Berlin resorts to a kindred
species of moral relativism. For Hayek ‘reason’ is powerless to
determine ‘ends’ and, therefore, cannot tell us what we ought to do.
Human intellect cannot by itself settle questions concerning value,
especially questions about moral values.

Consequently people personally must be absolutely free to choose[^65],
Berlin, on the other hand, emphasizes on ‘relativity of values’ and the
subjective nature of values to conclude that there is no objective
higher good than the arbitrary or relative good each individual sets for
herself[^66]. The weaknesses of these arguments seem plain. How is it
possible to claim that there are no objective values and that all values
are purely subjective, and yet simultaneously state that we should
always hold personal liberty in such high regard as to make it one of
the central pillars of human rights and political life. If they are
right that there are no objective ends or values, then there can be no
rational or objective grounds for valuating individual ends or liberty.
In short, liberals must avoid the temptation to base their argument on
relativistic or skeptical premises because it undercuts rather than
supports their own arguments.

There are other points about the above mentioned political doctrine
regarding the role of Islamic law (*fiqh*) in an Islamic government,
which were discussed in the first chapter and do not need to be repeated
again.

[^1]: Daniel Webster in 1830 (thirty three years before Lincoln’s
definition) said: people’s government, made for the people, made by the
people and answerable to the people. Cf: Patterns of Democracy, p. 1.

[^2]: Robert Dahl, On Democracy, Yale University Press, 2000, p.9.

[^3]: Sulaiman Sadek Jawad, Democracy and Shura, Published in Liberal
Islam, p. 97.

[^4]: Democracy and its Critics, p.2.

[^5]: On Democracy, pp. 85-86.

[^6]: Democracy and its Critics, p.135.

[^7]: H. .B. Mayo, An Introduction to Democratic Theory, Oxford
University Press, 1960, p. 60.

[^8]: Andrew Heywood, Political Ideologies, Macmillan Press, 2nd
Edition, 1998, p. 43.

[^9]: Andrew Heywood, Political Ideologies, Macmillan Press, 2nd
Edition, 1998, p. 46.

[^10]: On Democracy, pp. 45-57.

[^11]: John Plamenatz, Democracy and Illusion, Longman, 1973, pp.
164-168.

[^12]: John Rawls, Political Liberalism, Columbia University Press,
1996, p.10.

[^13]: John Locke, Two Treatises of Government, Peter Laslett (ed),
Cambridge University Press, 1970, p. 322

[^14]: Allen Rosen, Kant’s Theory of Justice, Cornell University Press,
1993, pp. 34-35.

[^15]: Democracy and its Critics, p. 88.

[^16]: Michael Walzer, “Philosophy and Democracy”, in Political Theory,
Volume 9, No 3, August 1981, p. 386.

[^17]: Michael Walzer, “Philosophy and Democracy”, in Political Theory,
Volume 9, No 3, August 1981, p. 383.

[^18]: Democracy and its Critics, pp. 66, 101, 103.

[^19]: Democracy and its Critics, p.89.

[^20]: Democracy and its Critics, p.91.

[^21]: Democracy and its Critics, p.99.

[^22]: On Democracy, p. 113.

[^23]: Political Liberalism, p. 12.

[^24]: Political Liberalism, p. 40.

[^25]: Political Liberalism, p. 43.

[^26]: Richard Rorty, “The Priority of Democracy to Philosophy”, in
Reading Rorty, Alan R. Malachowski (ed), Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990,
p. 289.

[^27]: Richard Rorty, “The Priority of Democracy to Philosophy”, in
Reading Rorty, Alan R. Malachowski (ed), Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990,
p. 290.

[^28]: Stephen Mulhall and Adam Swift, Liberals and communitarians,
Blackwell, 2nd Edition, 1996, pp. 259-261.

[^29]: Reading Rorty, p. 291.

[^30]: Kant’s Theory of Justice, p. 34.

[^31]: Democracy and its Critics, p. 169.

[^32]: Walzer, “Philosophy and Democracy”, in Political Theory, Volume
9, No. 3, August 1981,pp. 387-388.

[^33]: Abu al-A’la Mawdudi, Political Theory of Islam, Karachi:
Maktaba-e Islami, p. 30.

[^34]: Ruhollah Khomeini, Sahifa Nur, Tehran: Ministry of Islamic
Guidance, Volume 10, p. 181.

[^35]: Rachid Ghannouchi, “Participation in Non-Islamic Government”, in
Liberal Islam, p. 91.

[^36]: Liberal Islam, p. 98.

[^37]: Ibn Kathir, Umda, Volume 3, p. 63; Ibn Hisham, Sireh Ibn Hisham,
Volume 2, pp. 272-273.

[^38]: Encyclopedia of Islam, Volume 1, p. 1113a.

[^39]: Sahih Muslim, Hadith 1829.

[^40]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh-e- Nahjul Balaqeh, Volume 16, p. 17.

[^41]: N athan Brown, “Islamic Constitutionalism in Theory and
Practice”, in Democracy the Rule of Law and Islam, Eugene Cotran (ed),
Kluwer Law International, 1999, p. 491.

[^42]: H amid Paydar, “The Paradox of Islam and Democracy”, in Modara wa
Modiriyat, Abdul Karim Surush (ed), Tehran: Serat Publication, 1997, pp.
525-526.

[^43]: William .A Galston, Liberal Purposes, Cambridge University Press,
1991, p. 80.

[^44]: William .A Galston, Liberal Purposes, Cambridge University Press,
1991, p. 79.

[^45]: Abdul Qadeem Zalloom, Democracy is a System of Kufr, London: Al-
Khilafah Publication, p. 35-37.

[^46]: “Sayyid Qutb, Ideologue of Islamic Revival”, in Voices of
Resurgent Islam, John Esposito (ed), Oxford University Press, 1983.

[^47]: Democracy is a System of Kufr, pp. 22-25.

[^48]: Oxford Concise Dictionary of Politics, p. 464.

[^49]: Fazlur-Rahman, “The Islamic Concept of State” in Islam in
Transition, Ponohue and John Esposito (eds), Oxford University Press,
1982, p. 269.

[^50]: Sahifa Nur, Volume 9, p. 253.

[^51]: Sahifa Nur, Volume 5, p. 31.

[^52]: Forough Jahanbakhsh, Islam, Democracy and Religious Modernism in
Iran, Brill, 2001, p. 49.

[^53]: Abdul Karim Soroush, Reason, Freedom and Democracy in Islam,
Mahmoud Sadri and Ahmad Sadri (trs), Oxford University Press, 2000, p.
128.

[^54]: Abdul Karim Soroush, Reason, Freedom and Democracy in Islam,
Mahmoud Sadri and Ahmad Sadri (trs), Oxford University Press, 2000, pp.
134-141.

[^55]: Abdul Karim Soroush, Qesseye Arbab-e Marefat, Tehran: Serat
Publication, 1995, pp. 54-55

[^56]: Reason, Freedom and Democracy in Islam, pp. 128-129.

[^57]: Reason, Freedom and Democracy in Islam, p. 148.

[^58]: Abdul Karim Soroush, “The Evolution and Devolution of Religious
Knowledge,” in Liberal Islam, pp. 245-246.

[^59]: I have written a few books and articles concerning the
exploration and criticism of this hermeneutical approach for instance
refer to: “The Hermeneutical Reflection of Heidegger,” in Transcendental
Philosophy, Volume 3, No. 3, September 2002. An Introduction to
Hermeneutics (Persian), Tehran, 2001, Chapters3&4. The Alteration of
Understanding Religion (Persian), Tehran, 1996

[^60]: Qabs wa Bast-e theory e Shari’a, Tehran, Serat Publication, 1995,
3rd Edition, p. 287.

[^61]: Liberal Islam, p. 245.

[^62]: Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, John Maquarrie and Edward
Robinson (trs), Oxford: Blackwell, 1962, p.195; Hans Georg Gadamer,
Truth and Method, London: Sheet& Ward, 1999, p. 298.

[^63]: Reason, Freedom and Democracy in Islam, p. 128.

[^64]: John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, Edited by Gertrude Himmglfarb,
Penguin Books, 1984, p. 69-70

[^65]: Friedrich Hayek, Law Legislation and Liberty, University of
Chicago, 1973, pp. 32-34.

[^66]: Isaiah Berlin, Four Essays on Liberty, Oxford University Press,
1969, pp. li, lvi, 172.


