Final Word
==========

During these four chapters I have attempted to explain the main elements
of Imami Shi’a political doctrine and, where necessary, reconstruct some
arguments that provide the reader an opportunity for better
understanding the various dimensions of this political theory. However,
it should be noted that there are still many things that must be
discussed. Surely this political theory like any other theory is based
on some philosophical foundations that have not been examined here in
detail. One of these foundations, for instance, is the theory of self or
the concept of human nature that underlies this political ideology.
Obviously, each political ideology presupposes a specific concept of
human nature because it tries to offer a desirable form of
social-political life and naturally each form of life carries with it
its own picture of human nature. As Hollis says:

*All political and social theorists, I venture to claim, depend on some
model of man in explaining what moves people and accounts for
institutions. Such models are sometimes hidden but never absent. There*
*is no more central or pervasive topic in the study of politics*[^1].

The other significant moral-philosophical discussion pertains to the
relationship between right and good and which one has priority over the
other. Liberalism insists on rights and maintains that no definition of
good life, human’s ends and virtues, or ideal way of life can impose
limits on individuals and what they select as their path in life.

Therefore, liberalism instead of basing a conception of politics upon a
specific concept of human nature and good life, concerns itself with
rules that secure human rights, particularly rules that secure each
individual the greatest amount of freedom to follow his own
interpretation of what is good. Accordingly, political action including
legislation, decision making, policy making and other governmental
functions must be done independent of any concept of good and moral
philosophy. Indeed neutrality and moral pluralism is a central value of
modern Liberalism.

Joseph Raz writes:

*Liberalism is committed to moral pluralism, that is to the view that
there are many worthwhile and valuable relationships, commitments and
plans of life which are mutually incompatible*[^2].

Explicitly, Shi’a political thought contrasts the doctrine of Liberalism
basing itself on underlying moral values drawn by Islamic jurisprudence
and ethics. As a result, human rights and duties must be defined
according to these fundamental Islamic rules and values instead of being
neutral. There is no doubt that a comprehensive assessment of Shi’a
political doctrine requires a profound comparative discussion about
these moral philosophical issues that are absent in the present book.

The content of the book is concerned mostly with the clarification of
what is the desirable political regime among Imami jurists. This type of
discussion belongs to Islamic political jurisprudence (al-*fiqh*
al-siyasi), but it is correct to keep in mind the fact that al-*fiqh*
al-siyasi does not confine itself to the question of ‘what is the
desirable model of state- political regime- among Muslim thinkers?’ The
mutual rights of the governed and governors, the method of controlling
political power at the various levels, and the rights of minorities are
just some significant examples of political *fiqh*i debates that should
be considered in an exhaustive assessment of Shi’a political thought. In
any case it is hoped that this book has succeeded in explaining some of
the major elements of current Imami political theory.

[^1]: Martin Hollis, Models of Man, Cambridge University Press, 1977.

[^2]: Joseph Raz, Liberalism Autonomy and the Politics of Neutral
Concern, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 1982, p. 7.


