Why Commemorate the Massacre?
=============================

**In The Name Of Allah, The Most Compassionate, The Merciful.**

O Allah! Send your blessings to the head of your Messengers and the Last
of your Prophets Muhammad (S), and his pure and cleansed progeny.

\*\*\*

The tragedy of Karbala took place on the 10th of Muharram, the first
month in the Islamic calendar, in the year 60 A.H. In Karbala, Imam
Husayn ibn ‘Ali (a.s.), the grandson of the Most Noble Messenger
Muhammad (S), was martyred along with his family members and his
companions.

\*\*\*

The commemoration of Imam Husayn's (a.s.) martyrdom has been observed by
the followers of Ahlul Bayt (members of the House of the Prophet (S) for
centuries; yet many Muslims resent it, thinking that it increases the
division of the Muslims. To my understanding this argument is unfounded
for the following reasons:

Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his opponent Yazid are on the opposite ends of
the Heavenly Scale. There is no Muslim School that doubts the purity and
qualification of the Imam (a.s.). Righteous Muslims also know that Imam
Husayn is a dear grandson of the Prophet Muhammad (S), and that he is a
leader of the youth of the paradise.

On the other hand, Yazid is un-acceptable to any Muslim, and every
Muslim condemns him, and will continue to do so, for his transgression
and for the crimes he committed against the Ahlul Bayt. With such a
clear distinction there should be no confusion among the Muslims on
account of the commemoration of this great Imam. No Muslim party should
be angered by hearing the truth about the great Imam and his opponent
Yazid!

Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the rest of the Ahlul Bayt did not receive in
their lives the fairness and respect due to them on the part of the
Muslims, while the rest of the Companions of the Prophet (S) received of
that as much as they deserved (or more). The members of the House of the
Messenger were denied even the right to live or feel safe. The Muslims,
should therefore try to correct the mistake of history by un-covering
the virtues of these distinguished people.

To keep the names of these people alive is in the interest of the
Muslims. The Messenger of God, Muhammad (S), said when he was returning
from his valedictory pilgrimage, while at Ghadir Khum, “*I am about to
be called (by the Lord to depart from this World) and respond (to His
call). I am leaving for you the Two Valuables (one of them is bigger
than the other): The Book of God and the members of my House. Beware how
you shall treat the two after me, because they will not part with each
other until they join me on the Day of Judgment!”*

Ref:  
 Mustadrak of al Hakim, vol 3 p 109  
 Sahih of Tirmizi, vol 2 p 307  
 Musnad of Ahmed Hanbal, vol 3 p 14, 217  
 Khasais of al Nasai, p 30  
 Sahih of Muslim, vol 4 p 1286 hadith 5920  
 ... and many many more

Thus honoring their memories and informing people about them would be in
accord with the advice of the Messenger (S), and would provide the
Muslims with what they need of Guidance.

The History of this great Martyr is a school for the seekers of the
truth. Every Muslim can learn a great deal from the supreme sacrifice
and the courage of the Imam. The Muslims are still living under similar
conditions now as before. Corruption is still prevalent in our society,
and tyrants, like Yazid, are no rarity in Muslims and non-Muslim
countries, but we don't have men like Imam Husayn. Fortunately, this
commemoration is providing the Muslim World with some of his excellent
students.

Ref:  
 Imam Husayn - Leader of Martyrs  
 The Late Muhammad Jawad Chirri


