The Continuation of the Journey
===============================

(While this had been going on) al Husayn, peace be on him, had left
Hajiz in the direction of Kufa until he came to one of the watering
(places) of the Arabs. There there was 'Abd Allah Ibn Muti al-'Adawli,
who was staying there. When he saw al Husayn, peace be on him, he got up
and said to him, *“(May I ransom) my father and mother for you, son of
the Apostle of God, what has brought you (here)?”* He brought him
(forward) and helped him to dismount.

*“It is a result of the death of Muawiya as you would know,”* replied al
Husayn, peace be on him. *“The Iraqis have written to me urging me to
(come to) them” “I remind you, son of the Apostle of God, (of God) and
the sacredness of Islam, lest it be violated. I adjure you before God
(to think) about the sacredness of Quraysh. I adjure you before God (to
think) about the sacredness of the Arabs. By God, if you seek that which
is in the hands of Banu Umayya, they will kill you. If they kill you,
they will never fear anyone after you. Then it will be the sacredness of
Islam which is violated, and the sacredness of Quraysh and the
sacredness of the Arabs. Don't do it! Don't go to Kufa! Don't expose
yourself to Banu Umayya!”* Al Husayn, peace be on him, insisted on
continuing his journey.

(In the meantime) 'Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad had ordered (the area) which
was between Waqisa and the roads to Syria and Basra to be occupied (so
that) they should not let anyone enter, nor anyone leave (Kufa).

However, al Husayn, peace be on him, went on without knowing anything
(of that) until he met some Arabs. He asked them (about the situation)
and they told him, *“No, by God, we don't know (anything about it)
except that we cannot get into or out of (Kufa).”*

He continued on his journey.

A group of Fazara and Bajila reported (the following account).

They said:

We were with Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn al-Bajah when we came from Mecca.
(Although) we were travelling alongside al Husayn, peace be on him,
there was nothing more hateful to us than that we should stop with him
at a halting place. (Yet) when al Husayn, peace be on him, travelled and
halted, we could not avoid halting with him. Al Husayn halted at the
side (of the road) and we halted at the (other) side (of the road).
While we were sitting, eating our food, a messenger of al- Husayn, peace
be on him, approached, greeted us and entered (our camp).

*“Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn,”* he said, *“Abu 'Abd Allah al Husayn, peace be on
him, has sent me to you (to ask) you to come to him.”*

Each man of us threw away what was in his hands (i.e. threw up his hands
in horror); it was (as surprising) as if birds had alighted on our
heads.

*“Glory be to God,”* (Zuhayr's) wife said to him, *“did the son of the
Messenger of God send for you? Then aren't you going to him? If you went
to him, you would hear what he had to say. Then you could leave him (if
you wanted to).”*

Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn went (across) to him. It was not long before he
returned to announce that he was heading east. He ordered his tent (to
be struck) and (called for) his luggage, mounts and equipment.

His tent was pulled down and taken to al Husayn, peace be on him, then
he said to his wife, *“You are divorced, go back to your family, for I
do not want anything to befall you except good.”*

Then he said to his companions, *“Whoever wants to follow me (may do
so), otherwise he is at the end of his covenant with me (i.e. released
from obedience to follow Zuhayr as the leader of his tribal group). I
will tell you a story (of something which happened to me once): we were
raiding a rich land. God granted us victory and we won (a lot of) booty.
Salman al-Farsi, the mercy of God be on him, said to us: 'Are you happy
with the victory which God has granted you and the booty you have won?'
We said: 'Yes.' Then he said: 'Therefore when you meet the lord of the
young men of the family of Muhammad be happier to fight with them than
you are with the booty which you have obtained today.' As for me. I pray
that God may be with you.”*

He remained among the people with al Husayn until he was killed.

Abd Allah Ibn Sulayman and al-Mundhir Ibn Mushamill both from Asad,
reported:

When we had finished the pilgrimage, there was no concern more important
to us than to join al Husayn, peace be on him, on the road, so that we
might see what happened in his affair. We went along trotting our two
camels speedily until we joined him at Zarud. As we approached, there we
(saw) a man from Kufa who had changed his route when he had seen al
Husayn, peace be on him. Al Husayn, peace be on him, had stopped as if
he wanted (to speak to) him, but (the man) ignored him and went on. We
went on towards the man.

One of us said to the other, *“Come with us to ask this man if he has
news of Kufa.”*

We came up to him and greeted him. He returned out greeting.

*“From which (tribe) do you come, fellow?”* we asked.

*“(I am) an Asadi,”* he answered.

*“We also are Asadis,”* we said. *“Who are you?” “I am Bakr Ibn so and
so,”* he answered and we told him our lineage.

*“Tell us of the people (you have left) behind you?”* we asked.

*“Yes,”* he replied, *“I only left Kufa after Muslim Ibn 'Aqil and Hani'
Ibn 'Urwa had been killed. I saw them being dragged by their legs into
the market-place.”*

We went on to join al Husayn, peace be on him, and we were travelling
close to him until he stopped at al-Thalabiyya in the evening. We caught
up with him when he stopped and we greeted him. He returned our
greeting.

*“May God have mercy on you,”* we said, *“we have news. If you wish, we
will tell it to you publicly or if you wish, secretly.”*

He looked at us and at his followers.

*“There is no veil for these men,”* he answered.

*“Did you see the rider whom you were near, yesterday evening?” “Yes,”*
he answered, *“I had wanted to question him.”*

*“We have got the news from him and spared you (the trouble of)
questioning him,”* we said. *“He was a man from our (tribe), of sound
judgment, honesty and intelligence. He told us that he had only left
Kufa after Muslim and Hani' had been killed, and he had seen them being
dragged by their legs into the market-place.”*

*“We belong to God and to Him we shall return; may God have mercy on
them both,”* said al Husayn, and he repeated that several times.

*“We adjure you before God,”* we exhorted him, *“for your own life and
for your House that you do not go from this place, for you have no one
to support you in Kufa and no Shia. Indeed we fear that such men (will
be the very ones who) will be against you.”*

*“What is your opinion,”* he asked, looking towards the sons of 'Aqil,
*“now that Muslim has been killed?” “By God,”* they declared, *“we will
not go back until we have taken our vengeance or have tasted (the death)
which he tasted.”*

Al Husayn, peace be on him, came near us and said: *“There is nothing
good (left) in life for these men.”*

Then we knew that his decision had been taken to continue the journey.

*“May God be good to you,”* we said.

*“May God have mercy on you both,”* he answered.

Then his followers said to him, *“By God, you are not the same as Muslim
Ibn Aqil. If you go to Kufa, the people will rush to (support) you.”*

He was silent and waited until daybreak. Then he ordered his boys and
servants to get a lot of water, to give (the people) to drink and more
for the journey. They set out (once more) and went on to Zubala. News of
Abd Allah Ibn Yuqtur reached him. He took out a written statement to the
people and read it to them:

*In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate, News of the
dreadful murder of Muslim Ibn Aqil Hani' Ibn Urwa, and Abd Allah Ibn
Yuqtur has reached us. Our Shia have deserted us . Those of you who
would prefer to leave us, may leave freely without guilt.*

The people began to disperse from him to right and left until there were
only left with him those followers who had come with him from Medina,
and a small group of those who had joined him. Al Husayn had done that
because he realised that the Arabs who had followed him had only
followed him because they thought that he was going to a land where the
inhabitants' obedience to him had already been established. And he did
not want them to accompany him without being (fully) aware of what they
were going to.

At dawn, he ordered his followers to provide themselves with water and
with extra (supplies of it). Then they set out until they passed Batn al
Aqaba. He stopped there and was met by a shaykh of the Banu Ikrima
called Amr Ibn Lawdhan.

*“Where are you heading?”* he asked.

*“Kufa,”* replied al Husayn, peace be on him.

*“I implore you before God,”* exhorted the shaykh, *“why are you going
there? You won't come to anything there except the points of spears and
the edges of swords. If those who sent for you were enough to support
you in battle and had prepared the ground for you, and you came to them,
that would be a wise decision. However, in the light of the situation as
it has been described I don't think that you ought to do it.”*

*“Servant of God,”* he answered, *“wise decisions are not hidden from
me. Yet the commands of God, the Exalted, cannot be resisted. By God,
(my enemies) will not leave me till they have torn the very heart from
the depths of my guts. If they do that, God will cause them to be
dominated and humiliated until they become the most humiliated of the
factions among nations.”*

---

- Kitab al Irshad  
 Shaykh al Mufid  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard

- Tahrike Tarsile Quran  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-940368-11-0


