Imam Husayn (a.s.) meets al-Hurr
================================

He, peace be on him, went on from Batn al Aqaba until he stopped at
Sharaf (for the night). At dawn he ordered his boys to get water and
more for the journeys when he continued from there until midday. While
he was journeying, one of his followers exclaimed, *“God is greater
(Allahu akbar)!” “God is greatest (Allahu akbar)!”* responded al Husayn,
peace be on him. Then he asked: *“Why did you say Allahu akbar?” “I saw
palm-trees,”* answered the man.

*“This is a place in which we never see a palm-tree,”* a group of his
followers asserted.

*“What do you think it is then?”* asked al Husayn, peace be on him.

*“We think it is the ears of horses,”* they answered.

*“By God, I think so too,”* he declared. Then he said, *“(So that) we
can face them in one direction (i.e. so that we are not surrounded), we
should put at our rear whatever place of refuge (we can find).”*

*“Yes,”* said to him, *“there is Dhu Husam over on your left. If you
reach it before them,it will be (in) just (the position) you want.”* So
he veered left towards it and we went in that direction with him. Even
before we had had time to change direction the vanguard of the cavalry
appeared in front of us and we could see them clearly.

We left the road and when they saw that we had moved off the road, they
(also) moved off the road towards us. Their spears looked like palm
branches stripped of their leaves and their standards were like birds'
wings. Al Husayn ordered his tents (to be put up) and they were erected.
The people came up; (there were) about one thousand horsemen under the
command of al-Hurr Ibn Yazid al-Tamimi. (It was) during the heat of
midday (that) he and his cavalry stood (thus) facing al Husayn, peace be
on him. Al Husayn, peace be on him, and his followers were all wearing
their turbans and their swords (ready to fight).

*“Provide (our) people with water and let them quench their thirst and
give their horses water to drink little by little,”* al Husayn ordered
his boys. They did that and they began filling their bowls and cups and
took them to the horses. When a horse had drunk three or four or five
draughts, the water was taken away and given to another horse-until they
had all been watered.

‘Ali Ibn al Taan al Muharibi reported:

I was with al-Hurr on that day, I was among the last of his followers to
arrive. When al Husayn, peace be on him, saw how thirsty both I and my
horse were, he said: *“Make your beast (rawiya) kneel.”* I thought
rawiya meant water-skin so he said, *“Cousin, make your camel (jamal)
kneel.”* I did so. Then he said, *“Drink.”* I did so, but when I drank,
water flowed from my water-skin.

*“Bend your water-skin,”* said al Husayn. I did not know how to do that.
He came up (to me) and bent it (into the proper position for drinking).
Then I drank and gave my horse to drink.

Al-Hurr Ibn Yazid had come from al-Qadisiyya. Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad had
sent al Husayn Ibn Numayr and ordered him to take up (his) position at
al-Qadisiyya. Then al-Hurr had been sent in advance with one thousand
horsemen to meet al Husayn.

Al-Hurr remained positioned opposite to al Husayn, peace be on him,
until the time for the midday prayer drew near. Al Husayn, peace be on
him, ordered al-Hajjaj Ibn Masruq to give the call to prayer. When the
second call to prayer immediately preceding the prayer (iqama) was about
(to be made) al Husayn came out (before the people) dressed in a
waist-cloth (czar) and cloak (rida') and wearing a pair of sandals. He
praised and glorified God, then he said, *“People, I did not come to you
until your letters came to me, and they were brought by your messengers
(saying), 'Come to us for we have no Imam. Through you may God unite us
under guidance and truth.' Since this was your view, I have come to you.
Therefore give me what you guaranteed in your covenants and (sworn)
testimonies. If you will not and (if you) are (now) averse to my coming,
I will leave you (and go back) to the place from which I came.”*

They were silent before him. Not one of them said a word.

*“Recite the iqama,”* he said to the caller for prayer (mu'adhdhin) and
he recited the iqama.

*“Do you want to lead your followers in prayer?”* he asked al-Hurr Ibn
Yazid. *“No,”* he replied, *“but you pray and we will pray (following
the lead of) your prayer.”*

Al Husayn, peace be on him, prayed before them. Then he returned (to his
tent) and his followers gathered around him. Al-Hurr went back to the
place where he had positioned (his men) and entered a tent which had
been put up for him. A group of his followers gathered around him while
the rest returned to their ranks, which they had been in and which now
they went back to. Each of them held the reins of his mount and sat in
the shade (of its body).

At the time for the afternoon (asr) prayer, al Husayn, peace be on him,
ordered his followers to prepare for departure. Then he ordered the call
to be made, and the call for the asr prayer was made, and the iqama. Al
Husayn, peace be on him, came forward, stood and prayed. Then he said
the final greeting (of the prayer) and turned his face towards them
(al-Hurr's men).

He praised and glorified God and said, *“People, if you fear God and
recognise the rights of those who have rights, God will be more
satisfied with you. We are the House of Muhammad and as such are more
entitled to the authority (wilaya) of this affair (i.e. the rule of the
community) over you than these pretenders who claim what does not belong
to them. They have brought tyranny and aggression among you. If you
refuse (us) because you dislike (us) or do not know our rights, and your
view has now changed from what came to us in your letters and what your
messengers brought, then I will leave you.”*

*“By God,”* declared al-Hurr, *“I know nothing of these letters and
messengers which you mention.”*

*“Uqba Ibn Siman,”* al Husayn, peace be on him, called to one of his
followers, *“bring out the two saddle-bags in which the letters to me
are kept.”*

He brought out two saddle-bags which were full of documents, and they
were put before him.

*“We are not among those who wrote these letters to you,”* said al-
Hurr, *“and we have been ordered that when we meet you we should not
leave you until we have brought you to Kufa to 'Ubayd Allah.”*

*“Death will come to you before that (happens),”* al Husayn, peace be on
him, told him. Then he ordered his followers, *“Get up and get
mounted.”*

They got mounted and (then) waited until their women had been mounted,
*“Depart,”* he ordered his followers.

When they set out to leave, the men (with al-Hurr) got in between them
and the direction they were going in.

*“May God deprive your mother of you,”* said al Husayn, peace be on him,
to al-Hurr, *“what do you want?” “If any of the Arabs other than you
were to say that to me,”* retorted al-Hurr, *“even though he were in the
same situation as you, I would not leave him without mentioning his
mother being deprived (of him), whoever he might be. But by God there is
no way for me to mention your mother except by (saying) the best things
possible.”*

*“What do you want?”* al Husayn, peace be on him, demanded.

*“I want to go with you to the governor, Ubayd Allah,”* he replied.

*“Then by God I will not follow you.”*

*“Then by God I will not let you (go anywhere else).”*

These statements were repeated three times, and when their conversation
was getting more (heated) al-Hurr said, *“I have not been ordered to
fight you. I have only been ordered not to leave you until I come with
you to Kufa. If you refuse (to do that), then take any road which will
not bring you into Kufa nor take you back to Medina, and let that be a
compromise between us while I write to the governor, 'Ubayd Allah.
Perhaps God will cause something to happen which will relieve me from
having to do anything against you. Therefore take this (road) here and
bear to the left of the road (to) al Udhayb and al-Qadisiyya.”*

Al Husayn, peace be on him, departed and al-Hurr with his followers
(also) set out travelling close by him, while al Hurr was saying to him,
*“Al Husayn, I remind you (before) God to (think of) your life; for I
testify that you will be killed if you fight.”*

*“Do you think that you can frighten me with death?”* said al- Husayn,
peace be on him. *“Could a worse disaster happen to you than killing me?
I can only speak (to you) as the brother of al-Aws said to his cousin
when he wanted to help the Apostle of God, may God bless him and grant
him and his family peace.*

*His cousin feared for him and said: Where are you going, for you will
be killed? But he replied: I will depart for there is no shame in death
for a young man, whenever he intends (to do what is) right and he
strives like a Muslim, (Who) has soothed righteous men through (the
sacrifice of) his life, who has scattered the cursed and opposed the
criminal.*

*If I live, I will not regret (what I have done) and if I die, I will
not suffer. Let it be enough for you to live in humiliation and be
reviled.”*

When al-Hurr heard that he drew away from him. He and his followers
travelled on one side (of the road) while al Husayn, peace be on him,
travelled on the other, until they reached Udhayb al- Hijanat. Al
Husayn, peace be on him, went on to Qasr Bani Muqatil.

He stopped there and there a large tent had (already) been erected.

*“Whose is that?”* he asked.

*“That belongs to Ubayd Allah Ibn al-Hurr al-Jufi,”* he was told.

*“Ask him to come to me,”* he said.

The messenger went to him and said, *“This is al Husayn Ibn ‘Ali, peace
be on them, and he asks you to come to him.”*

*“We belong to God and to Him we shall return,”* said 'Ubayd Allah. *“By
God, I only left Kufa out of dread that al Husayn, peace be on him,
would enter Kufa while I was there. By God, I do not want to see him,
nor him to see me.”*

The messenger returned to him (al-H. usayn). Al Husayn, peace be on him,
rose and went over to him. He greeted him and sat down.

Then he asked him to go with him. Ubayd Allah Ibn al Hurr repeated what
he had said before and sought to excuse himself from what he was asking
him (to do).

*“If you are not going to help us,”* al Husayn, peace be on him, said to
him, *“then be sure that you are not one of those who fight against us.
For, by God, no one will hear our cry and not help us without being
destroyed.”*

*“As for that (fighting against you),”* he replied, *“it will never
happen, if God, the Exalted, wishes.”*

Then al Husayn, peace be on him, left him and continued to his camp.
Towards the end of the night, he ordered his boys to get provisions of
water. Then he ordered the journey (to continue). He set out from Qasr
Bani Muqatil.

---  
 - Kitab al Irshad  
 Shaykh al Mufid  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard

- Tahrike Tarsile Quran  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-940368-11-0


