Towards Karbala
===============

'Uqba Ibn Sim'an reported:

We set out at once with him and he became drowsy while he was on his
horse's back. He woke up, saying, *“We belong to God and to Him we will
return. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds.”*

He did that twice or three times, then his son, '‘Ali Ibn al Husayn
approached him and asked: *“Why are you praising God and repeating the
verse of returning to Him?” “My son,”* he answered, *“I nodded off and a
horseman appeared to me, riding a horse and he said: 'Men are travelling
and the fates travel towards them.' Then I knew it was our own souls
announcing our deaths to us.”*

*“Father,”* asked (the youth), *“does God regard you as evil? Are we not
in the right?” “Indeed (we are),”* he answered, *“by Him to Whom all His
servants must return.”*

*“Father,”* said (the youth), *“then we need have no concern, if we are
going to die righteously.”*

*“May God give you the best reward a son can get for (his behaviour
towards) his father,”* answered al Husayn, peace be on him.

In the morning, he stopped and prayed the morning prayer. Then he
hurried to remount and to continue the journey with his followers,
veering to the left with the intention of separating from (al-Hurr's
men). However al-Hurr Ibn Yazid came towards him and stopped him and his
followers (from going in that direction) and he began to (exert pressure
to) turn them towards Kufa, but they resisted him. So they stopped
(doing that) but they still accompanied them in the same way until they
reached Ninawa, (which was) the place where al Husayn, peace be on him,
stopped. Suddenly there appeared a rider on a fast mount, bearing
weapons and carrying a bow on his shoulder, coming from Kufa. They all
stopped and watched him. When he reached them, he greeted al-Hurr and
his followers and did not greet al- Husayn and his followers. He handed
a letter from Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad to al-Hurr. In it (was the
following):

*When this letter reaches you and my messenger comes to you, make* *al
Husayn come to a halt. But only let him stop in an open place without
vegetation. I have ordered my messenger to stay with you and not to
leave you until he brings me (news of) your carrying out my
instructions.*

*Greetings.*

When al-Hurr had read the letter, he told them, *“This is a letter from
the governor Ubayd Allah. He has ordered me to bring you to a halt at a
place which his letter suggests. This is his messenger and he has
ordered him not to leave me until I carry out the order with regard to
you.”*

Yazid (Ibn Ziyad) Ibn al-Muhajir al-Kindi who was with al Husayn, peace
be on him, looked at the messenger of Ibn Ziyad and he recognized him,
*“May your mother be deprived of you,”* he exclaimed, *“what a business
you have come to!” “I have obeyed my Imam and remained faithful to my
pledge of allegiance,”* (the other man) answered.

*“You have been disobedient to your Lord and have obeyed your Imam in
bringing about the destruction of your soul,”* responded Ibn al-Muhajir.
*“You have acquired (eternal) shame (for yourself) and (the punishment
of) Hell-fire. What a wicked Imam your Imam is! Indeed God has said:*

***We have made them Imams who summon (people) to Hellfire and on the
Day of Resurrection they will not be helped.*** **(28: 41)**

*Your Imam is one of those.”*

Al-Hurr Ibn Yazid began to make the people stop in a place that was
without water and where there was no village.

*“Shame upon you, let us stop at this village or that one,”* said al-
Husayn, peace be on him. He meant by this, Ninawa and al- Ghadiriyya,
and by that, Shufayya.

*“By God, I cannot do that,”* replied (al-Hurr), *“for this man has been
sent to me as a spy.”*

*“Son of the Apostle of God,”* said Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn, *“I can only
think that after what you have seen, the situation will get worse than
what you have seen. Fighting these people, now, will be easier for us
than fighting those who will come against us after them. For by my life,
after them will come against us such (a number) as we will not have the
power (to fight) against.”*

*“I will not begin to fight against them,”* answered al Husayn.

That was Thursday, 2nd of (the month of) Muharram in the year 61
A.H.(680). On the next day, Umar Ibn Sad Ibn Abi Waqqas, set out from
Kufa with four thousand horsemen. He stopped at Ninawa and sent for
'Urwa Ibn Qays al-Ahmasi and told him, *“Go to him (al- Husayn) and ask
him: What brought you, and what do you want?”* Urwa was one of those who
had written to al Husayn, peace be on him, and he was ashamed to do
that. The same was the case with all the leaders who had written to him,
and all of them refused and were unwilling to do that. Kathir Ibn Abd
Allah al-Shabi stood up - he was a brave knight who never turned his
face away from anything - and said, *“I will go to him. By God, if you
wish, I will rush on him.”*

*“I don't want you to attack him,”* said 'Umar, *“but go to him and ask
him what has brought him.”*

As Kathir was approaching him, Abu Thumama al-Saidi saw him and said to
al Husayn, *“May God benefit you, Abu Abd Allah, the wickedest man in
the land, the one who has shed the most blood and the boldest of them
all in attack, is coming towards you.”*

Then (Abu Thumama) stood facing him and said, *“Put down your sword.”*

*“No, by God,”* he replied, *“I am only a messenger. If you will listen
to me, I will tell you (the message) which I have been sent to bring to
you. If you refuse, I will go away.”*

*“I will take the hilt of your sword,”* answered (Abu Thumama), *“and
you can say what you need to.”*

*“No, by God, you will not touch it,”* he retorted.

*“Then tell me what you have brought and I will inform him for you. But
I will not let you go near him, for you are a charlatan.”*

They both (stood there and) cursed each other. Then (Kathir) went back
to Umar Ibn Sad and told him the news (of what had happened).

Umar summoned Qurra Ibn Qays al-Hanzali and said to him, *“Shame upon
you Qurra, go and meet al Husayn and ask him what brought him and what
he wants.”*

Qurra began to approach him. When al Husayn, peace be on him, saw him
approaching, he asked, *“Do you know that man?” “Yes,”* replied Habib
Ibn Muzahir, *“he is from the Hanzala clan of Tamim. He is the son of
our sister. I used to know him as a man of sound judgement. I would not
have thought that he would be present at this scene.”*

He came and greeted al Husayn, peace be on him. Then he informed him of
'Umar Ibn Sa'd's message.

*“The people of this town of yours wrote to me that I should come,”*
answered al Husayn, peace be on him. *“However, if now you have come to
dislike me, then I will leave you.”*

*“Shame upon you, Qurra,”* Habib Ibn Muzahir said to him, *“will you
return to those unjust men? Help this man through whose fathers God will
grant you (great) favour.”*

*“I will (first) return to my leader with the answer to his message,”*
replied Qurra, *“and then I will reflect on my views.”*

He went back to 'Umar Ibn Sa'd and gave him his report.

*“I hope that God will spare me from making war on him and fighting
against him,”* said 'Umar and then he wrote to 'Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad:

*In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. I am (writing this
from) where I have positioned myself, near al Husayn, and I have asked
him what brought him and what he wants. He answered: 'The people of this
land wrote to me and their messengers came to me asking me to come and I
have done so. However if (now) they have some to dislike me and (the
position) now appears different to them from what their messengers
brought to me, I will go away from them.’*

Hassan Ibn Qa'id al-'Absi reported:

I was with 'Ubayd Allah when this letter came to him, he read it and
then he recited, *“Now when our claws cling to him, he hopes for escape
but he will be prevented (now) from (getting) any refuge.”*

He wrote to 'Umar Ibn Sa'd:

*Your letter has reached me and I have understood what you mentioned.
Offer* *al Husayn (the opportunity) of him and all his followers
pledging allegiance to Yazid. If he does that, we will then see what our
judgement will be.*

When the answer reached Umar Ibn Sa'd, he said, *“I fear that 'Ubayd
Allah will not accept that I should be spared (fighting al- Husayn).”*

(Almost immediately) after it, there came (another) letter from Ibn
Ziyad (in which he said), *“Prevent al Husayn and his followers from
(getting) water. Do not let them taste a drop of it just as was done
with 'Uthman Ibn Affan.”*

At once Umar Ibn Said sent Amr bin al-Hajjaj with five hundred horsemen
to occupy the path to the water and prevent al Husayn and his followers
from (getting) water in order that they should (not) drink a drop of it.
That was three days before the battle against al- Husayn, peace be on
him.

Abd Allah Ibn al Husayn al-Azdi, who was numbered among Bajila, called
out at the top of his voice, *“Husayn, don't you see that the water is
as if in the middle of heaven. By God, you will not taste a drop of it
until you die of thirst.”*

*“O God, make him die of thirst and never forgive him,”* cried al-
Husayn, peace be on him.

- Kitab al Irshad  
 Shaykh al Mufid  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard

- Tahrike Tarsile Quran  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-940368-11-0


