The Battle of Karbala
=====================

Qurra reported (later):

I thought that he (al-Hurr) was going to leave the battle, and did not
want to be present at it but was unwilling to be seen when he (left).

So I said, *“I have not watered it and I was going to water it.”* Then I
left him where he was. By God, if he had told me what he was intending
to do, I would have gone with him to al Husayn, peace be on him.

He (al-Hurr) began gradually to draw closer to al Husayn.

*“What do you want, Ibn Yazid?''* asked Muhajir Ibn Aws, but he did not
answer. (Instead) a great shudder came over him.

*“Your behaviour is suspicious,”* said Muhajir. *“By God, I have never
seen you act like this before. If I was asked who was the bravest of the
Kufans, I would not (normally) neglect (to mention) you. What is this I
see in you, (today)?” “By God, I am giving my soul the choice between
Heaven and the fire (of Hell),”* answered al-Hurr. *“By God, I will not
choose anything before Heaven, even though I am cut to pieces and
burnt.”*

(With that) he whipped his horse and (galloped over) and joined al-
Husayn, peace be on him.

*“May I be your ransom, son of the Apostle of God?”* he said. *“I was
your companion who stopped you from returning. I accompanied you along
the road and made you stop in this place. But I did not think that the
people would refuse to respond to what you have offered them and that
they would ever come to this position I (which they have now come to)
with regard to you. By God, if I had I known that they would finish up
(by doing) what I am seeing (them do) to you, I would not* *have
committed what I have committed against you. I repent to God for what I
have done. Will you accept my repentance?”*

*“Yes,”* replied al Husayn, peace be on him, *“God will forgive you. So
get down.”*

*“You will have (no) horseman better than me, (nor), while I am on foot,
any foot-soldier,”* he said. *“I will continue fighting on foot to the
(bitter) end.”*

*“Do so,”* replied al Husayn, peace be on him. *“May God grant you mercy
(though) what He has revealed to you.”*

He advanced, in front of al Husayn, peace be on him, and called out,
*“People of Kufa, your mother(s) will be deprived of their sons and
tears will come to their eyes. Have you summoned this righteous man (to
come to you), then, when he has come to you, have you handed him over
(to his enemies)?*

*Did you claim that you would fight with your own lives for him, and
then have you begun to attack him in order to kill him? You have laid
hold of his life; you have seized his throat; you have encircled him on
every side in order to prevent him returning to God's broad land (i.e.
the Hijaz). He has come into your hands like a prisoner who no longer
has the power to use his own life and* *cannot defend it against harm.*

*You have prevented him, his womenfolk, his children and his people from
(getting) the water of the Euphrates which Jews, Christians and Majians
may drink, and which the pigs and dogs of Sawad drink. They (al Husayn's
family) are likely to die of thirst. How wickedly you have treated the
offspring left by Muhammad. May God not give you water to drink on the
Day of Thirst.”*

Some of the foot-soldiers attacked him by shooting arrows at him.

He went and stood in front of al Husayn, peace be on him.

*“Durayd,”* 'Umar Ibn Sad called out, *“bring forward your standard (for
us).”*

He brought it forward. ('Umar) put an arrow in his bow and let it fly.
He said, *“(All of you) be witnesses of who was the first to shoot.”*

The people began to shoot at each other and to come forward (for single
combat). Yasar, retainer (mawla) of Ziyad Ibn Abi Sufyan, came forward
(from Umar's army). 'Abd Allah Ibn Umayr (al-Kalbi) came forward (from
al Husayn's ranks) to meet him.

*“Who are you?”* Yasar asked him, and (Ibn al-Kalbi) gave him his
lineage.

*“I do not know you,”* (Yasar) answered. *“Let Zuhayr Ibn al-Qayn or
Habib Ibn Muzahir come out against me.”*

*“Son of a prostitute, you wanted to do single combat with one of the
people,”* retorted Abd Allah Ibn Umayr (al-Kalbi).

With that (Ibn al-Kalbi) struck him with his sword until he had
quietened him. While he was occupied with striking against him, Salim,
retainer (mawla) of 'Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad, attacked him (Ibn al-Kalbi).

Al Husayn's followers cried out (in warning), *“The (other) servant is
closing in on you!”* (Ibn al-Kalbi) did not notice (Salim) until the
latter was upon him. With his left arm he warded off Salim's blow but
the fingers of his hand were cut off. Then he turned on (Salim) and
struck him and killed him. After (thus) killing them both, (Ibn
al-Kalbl) came forward and recited, *“If you do not know me, I am Ibn
al-Kalbi: I am a man of bitterness and anger, I am not a weakling in the
face of disaster.”*

Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj, with the Kufans under his command, launched an attack
on the right wing of the supporters of al Husayn, peace be on him. When
they drew near, the followers of al Husayn, peace be on him, knelt down
and pointed their spears at them. The (attackers) horses would not come
forward against the spears and they swung round to retreat. The
followers of al Husayn, peace be on him, began to shoot arrows at (the
enemy), killing some of them and wounding others.

Abd Allah Ibn Hawza, one of the Banu Tamim, approached al Husayn's camp
and the people called out to him, *“Where are you going, may your mother
be deprived of you?” “I am (in the right) advancing to a merciful Lord
and an intercessor who is listened to (i.e. the Prophet),”* he answered.

*“Who is that?”* al Husayn, peace be on him, asked his followers.

*“Ibn Hawza al-Tamimi,”* he was told.

*“O God, drive him into the fire!”* (al Husayn) exclaimed. With that his
horse upset him in its stride and fell. His left leg was stuck in the
stirrups and his right leg was free. Muslim Ibn Awsaja attacked him and
struck his right leg and cut it off. The horse galloped off (dragging)
him (along) and his head struck every stone and clod of earth until he
died. God hurried his soul to (Hell) fire. (More) fighting then broke
out and more men were killed.

Al-Hurr Ibn Yazid attacked the followers of 'Umar Ibn Sa'd and (as he
did so), he recited the words of 'Antara, *“With my charger's neck and
breast thrust forward I will launch myself at them again and again until
(the beast) is clothed in blood.”*

Yazid Ibn Sufyan, from Banu al-Harith (of Tamim), came forward to meet
him. Soon al-Hurr killed him.

(In the meantime) Nafi' Ibn Hilal came forward, declaring, *“I am the
son of Hilal. I believe in the religion of ‘Ali.”*

Muzahim Ibn Hurayth came against him, crying, *“I follow the religion of
Uthman.”*

*“Rather you follow the religion of Satan,”* Nafi replied and attacked
and killed him.

*“You stupid fellows,”* Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj cried out to (his) men,
*“don't you realise whom you are fighting? (These) knights of the town
are people who are seeking death. Don't let any of you go forward to
fight them in single combat. They are only few and their time is running
out. If you only threw stones at them, you would kill them
(eventually).”*

*“True, you've come to the right conclusion,”* 'Umar Ibn Sad said to
him. Then he sent (the message) to the commanders that none of their men
should fight in single combat.

Amr Ibn al-Hajaj and his men launched an attack against al- Husayn,
peace be on him, from the direction of the Euphrates. They fought
together fiercely for a time. Muslim Ibn Awsaja was struck down, may God
have mercy on him, (but) Amr and his men withdrew. When the dust
settled, (al Husayn's followers) found Muslim stretched out dying. Al
Husayn, peace be on him, walked towards him and he was on the point of
death.

*“Muslim, may God have mercy on you,”* said (al Husayn).

***“of them (the believers) is he who has accomplished his vow, and of
them is he who waits; they have not changed at all.”*** **(33:23)**

Habib Ibn Muzahir approached and said, *“Muslim, your death is hard for
me to bear but I bring you good news of Heaven (where you are going).”*

*“May God bring you good news too,”* replied Muslim in a weak voice.
*“Even if I knew that I would follow you at this very moment, I would
still like you to appoint me to carry out everything which concerns
you.”*

Then the people came again against al Husayn, peace be on him.

Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan attacked with his left wing (and thrust at)
(al Husayn's) left wing, but they stood firm against him and forced him
away (with their spears). Al Husayn, peace be on him, and his followers
were attacked on every side but the followers of al Husayn fought
fiercely. Then their cavalry began to attack and even though they were
only thirty-two horsemen, they did not attack any side of the Kufan
cavalry without putting it to flight.

When Urwa Ibn Qays saw that - he was in command of the Kufan cavalry -
he sent word to 'Umar Ibn Sad, *“Don't you see what my calvary is
receiving today from this small number (of men)? Send the foot-soldiers
and archers against them.”*

He sent the archers against them. Al-Hurr Ibn Yazid's horse was lamed.
He dismounted and began to shout, *“You have lamed my (horse) but I am
the son of freedom and braver than a maned lion.”*

He struck out against them with his sword but a great number came
against him. Ayyub Ibn Musarrih and another of the Kufan horsemen shared
in killing him.

The followers of al Husayn, peace be on him, continued to fight fiercely
against the enemy until it was midday. When al Husayn Ibn Numayr - he
was in command of the archers - perceived the steadfastness of the
followers of al Husayn, peace be on him, he advanced against his
supporters with five hundred archers so that they showered the followers
of al Husayn, peace be on him, with arrows.

They continued shooting at them until they had lamed (most of) their
horses and wounded some of their men. Then they moved against them and a
fierce battle was fought between them for some time. Shamir Ibn Dhi
al-Jawshan (also) attacked them with his followers but Zuhayr Ibn
al-Qayn with ten of the followers of al- Husayn (counter) attacked and
drove them away from the tents.

---  
 References:  
 - The History of al Tabari  
 Volume XIX The Caliphate of Yazid Ibn Muawiyah  
 Pages 65 - 179 (Selected)  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-7914-0041-7

- Kitab al Irshad  
 Shaykh al Mufid  
 Pages 328 - 372  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard

- Tahrike Tarsile Quran  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-940368-11-0

Martyrdom of Companions and Banu Hashim
---------------------------------------

Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan turned back against them but (some) of his men
were killed and the rest retreated to their positions. (The number) of
killed was apparent among the followers of al Husayn, peace be on him,
because of the fewness of their number while it was not so apparent
among the followers of 'Umar Ibn Sa'd because of their great number.

The battle (continued to be) fought fiercely and desperately. The number
killed and wounded among the followers of Abu 'Abd Allah al Husayn,
peace be on him, continued to grow until the sun began to decline. Al
Husayn and his companions prayed the prayer according to the rite of the
prayer of fear.

Hanzala Ibn Sa'd al-Shibami advanced in front of al Husayn, peace be on
him, and called out, *“People of Kufa,*

***O people*** ***I fear for you the same (that happened) on the Day of
Parties. I fear for you on the Day of Summoning”*** **(40:30,32)**

*“O people, do not kill al Husayn,*

***for God will destroy you with punishment. He who forges a lie will be
disappointed.*** **(20:61)**

He advanced and fought until he was killed, may God have mercy on him.
After that, Shawdhab, retainer (mawla) of Shakir, went forward, (after
saying), *“Greetings, Abu 'Abd Allah and may God store his mercy and
blessings for you.”*

He fought until he was killed, may God have mercy on him. Then came Abis
Ibn Shabib al-Shakiri. He greated al Husayn, peace be on him, and fought
until he was killed. Each man of (al Husayn's) followers continued to go
forward and be killed until there only remained with al Husayn, peace be
on him, the members of his own House.

His son, ‘Ali Ibn al Husayn, peace be on them, whose mother was Layla
daughter of Abu Murra Ibn Urwa Ibn Masud al-Thaqafi, was (the next) to
advance. He was one of the most handsome men of the time. On that day he
was nineteen years of age.

He attacked the enemy declaring, “*I am ‘Ali Ibn al Husayn Ibn ‘Ali. By
the House of God, we are those rightly (endowed) with the Prophet.* *By
God, the son of a spurious son will not judge us. I will strike with my
sword in defence of my father.* *I will strike with the blow of a
Hashimi, a Qurayshi.”*

He did that several times, and the Kufans were afraid to kill him.

Then Murra Ibn Munqidh al-Abdi saw him. He said, *“May the felonies of
the Arabs come on me, if he gets past me doing the same as he has been
doing, (and) if I do not deprive his mother of him.”*

('‘Ali Ibn al Husayn) continued to attack the enemy as he had been doing
but then Murra Ibn Munqidh came against him and stabbed him. He was
struck down and the enemy fell upon him, cutting him with their swords.
Al Husayn, peace be on him, went out until he stood over him and said,
*“May God kill (the) people who killed you, my son. How fool hardy they
are against the Merciful and in violating the sacredness of the family
of the Apostle, may God bless him and his family.”*

His eyes filled with tears and he said, *“There will (only) be dust on
the world after you.”*

Zaynab, the sister of al Husayn, peace be on him, came hurrying out,
crying, *“My brother, my nephew!”* She came up and threw herself on (her
dead nephew). Al Husayn raised her head and then led her back to the
tent. He told his young (sons), *“Carry your brother back.”*

They carried him and put him before the tent which they had been
fighting in front of. (Then) one of 'Umar Ibn Sad's men called 'Amr Ibn
Subayh shot an arrow at 'Abd Allah Ibn Muslim Ibn Aqil. Abd Allah put
his hand to guard his brow. The arrow struck his hand and penetrated
through his brow, and riveted the hand to it. He was not able to move it
when another man came down on him with a spear, thrust it into his
heart, and killed him.

Abd Allah Ibn Qutba al-Ta'i attacked Awn Ibn 'Abd Allah Ibn Ja'far Ibn
Abi Talib and killed him.

Amir Ibn Nashhal al-Tamimi attacked Muhammad Ibn Abd Allah Ibn Ja'far
Ibn Abi Talib and killed him.

Uthman Ibn Khalid al-Hamdam launched himself against 'Abd al- Rahman Ibn
'Aqil Ibn Abi Talib, and killed him.

Humayd Ibn Muslim reported:

It was like that among us (i.e. many of al Husayn's supporters had been
killed by 'Umar Ibn Sa'd's army) when a young lad came out against us.
His face was young like the first splinter of the new moon and he
carried a sword. He was wearing a shirt and a waistcloth (izar), and a
pair of sandals, one of whose straps was broken. 'Umar Ibn Sa'd Ibn
Nufayl al-Azdi said to me, *“Let me attack him.”* I said, *“Praise be to
God, what do you want to do that for? Leave him. While even one of the
family of al Husayn remains, that will be enough to take vengeance on
you for his (death).”*

But he insisted, *“By God, let me attack him.”*

So he rushed against him and did not turn back until he had struck his
head with his sword and split it in two. The young lad fell face
downwards and he called out, *“O uncle!”* At this, al Husayn, peace be
on him, showed himself just like the hawk shows itself. He launched into
attack like a raging lion and struck Umar Ibn Sad Ibn Nufayl with his
sword. That man tried to fend off the blow with his arm but his arm was
cut off from the elbow, and he gave a great shriek (of pain) which was
(even) heard by the people in the camp.

As al Husayn, peace be on him, turned away from him, the cavalry of Kufa
attacked in order to save him but they (only succeeded) in trampling him
to death beneath the horses' hooves, and the dust rose.

I saw al Husayn, peace be on him, standing by the head of the young lad,
looking at his feet and al Husayn, peace be on him was saying, *“May the
people who have caused your death perish. For the one who will oppose
them on the Day of Resurrection on your behalf will be your grandfather
(‘Ali, or great grandfather, i.e. the Prophet).”*

Then he continued, *“By God, it is hard on your uncle that you called
him and he did not answer you, or rather he answered but your cry was
(too late) to help you. For by God, those who kill his relatives are
many but those who help him are few.”*

Then he carried him in his arms. It is just as if (even now) I am
looking at the two legs of the boy making marks (as they trail) on the
ground. He took him and put him with his son, '‘Ali Ibn al Husayn, peace
be on them both, and the other members of the household who had been
slain. I asked about the boy and was told that he was al-Qasim Ibn
al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abl Talib, peace be on them.

Then al Husayn, peace be on him, sat in front of the tent. He brought
his son, 'Abd Allah Ibn al Husayn, peace be on him, who was (just) a
baby and sat him on his knee. But one of the Banu Asad shot an arrow
which slaughtered the child. Al Husayn, peace be on him, caught the
child's blood in the palm of his hand.

When his palm was full, he poured (the blood) on to the ground and said,
*“O Lord, if it be so that You have kept the help of Heaven from us,
then let it be because (Your purpose) is better than (immediate help).
Take vengeance on these people who are (such) oppressors.”*

Then he carried the child and laid him with the (other) members of his
household who had been slain.

(Just then) Abd Allah Ibn Uqba al-Ghanawi shot an arrow at Abu Bakr Ibn
al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali, peace be on them, and killed him. When al-Abbas Ibn
‘Ali saw the number of his family who had been killed, he said to his
brothers on his mother's side, Abd Allah, Ja'far and Uthman, *“My
brothers through my mother, go forward so that I may see that you have
remained true to God and His Apostle. For you have no children (to
defend).”*

Abd Allah, may God have mercy on him, advanced and fought fiercely. He
exchanged blows with Hani' Ibn Shabib al-Hadrami and Hani' killed him.
After him Ja'far went forward and Hani' also killed him. Khawali Ibn
Yazid al-Asbahi, may God curse him, went against Uthman who had taken
the place of his brother. He fired an arrow at him and brought him down.
One of the Banu Darim attacked him (while he was down) and cut off his
head.

The attack against Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his Martyrdom
-------------------------------------------------------

The group then launched an attack against al Husayn, peace be on him,
and cut off his access to his camp. His thirst became severe, and he set
off towards the dam, trying to reach the Euphrates. In front of him was
his brother, al-'Abbas. However, the cavalry of Ibn Sa'd, may God curse
him, blocked his route. Among these was a man from the Banu Darim; he
said to (the cavalry), *“Woe upon you! Prevent him from reaching the
Euphrates, don't let him get water.”*

Then al Husayn, peace be on him, cried out, *“O God, I am thirsty.”* The
Darim became angry and shot an arrow at him which lodged in his throat.
Al Husayn, peace be on him, pulled out the arrow and held his hand below
his throat. Both his palms were filled with blood which he shook away,
then he said, *“O God, I complain to You about what is being done to the
son of the daughter of Your Prophet.”*

Then he returned to his position, while his thirst had become (even
more) severe.

Meanwhile the people had surrounded al-Abbas and cut him off from (al
Husayn). Single-handed he began to attack them until he was killed, may
God have mercy on him. The two who took part in killing him were Zayd
Ibn Warqa al-Hanafi and Hahm Ibn al-Tufail al- Shabsi, after he had been
covered with wounds and could not move.

(The account of al Abbas death is missing from Tabari) When al Husayn,
peace be on him, came back from the dam to his tents, Shamir Ibn Dhi
al-Jawshan advanced towards him with a group of his followers and
surrounded him. The fastest of them was a man called Malik Ibn al-Nusayr
al-Kindi. He cursed al Husayn, peace be on him, and struck him on the
head with his sword. (Al Husayn) was wearing a cap. (The sword) went
through it right into his head and made it bleed. The cap was filled
with blood.

Al Husayn, peace be on him, said to him, *“May you never eat or drink
with your right hand! May God gather you (on the Day of Judgement) with
those people who are wrong-doers.”*

Then he threw away the cap and called for a cloth which he tied around
his head. Then he called for another cap, put it on and bound it (in
place).

(The above portion is missing from the account of Tabari)

Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan and those who were with him had withdrawn from
him to their (earlier) positions. After a short delay they came again
against him and surrounded him. 'Abd Allah Ibn al- Hasan Ibn ‘Ali peace
be on them, came out against them, he was only a boy, not yet mature
enough to leave the women. He rushed forward until he stood beside his
uncle, al Husayn, peace be on him. Then Zaynab, the daughter of ‘Ali,
peace be on him, came after him to stop him, and al Husayn, peace be on
him, told her to stop him. However he refused (to take any notice of
her) and determinedly prevented her (from taking him away). He said,
*“By God, I will not leave my uncle.”*

(At this) Abjar Ibn Ka'b rushed towards al Husayn, peace be on him. With
sword (in hand), the young lad said to him, *“Woe upon you, you son of
an impure woman, are you trying to kill my uncle?”* Abjar struck at him
with his sword. The boy tried to fend off (the blow) with his arm. The
sword cut through (his arm) to the skin (on the other side). There was
the arm hanging (by the skin). The boy cried out, *“O my mother!”* Al
Husayn took hold of him and embraced him. He said to him, *“My nephew,
try to bear what has come to you and be comforted with the news that God
will unite you with your righteous ancestors.”*

Then al Husayn, peace be on him, raised his hand and said, *“O God, even
as You have made life pleasant for them for a time, divide them into
factions and make them follow the ways of factions and let their rulers
never be pleased with them. They summoned us so that they might support
us and then they became hostile to us and killed us.”*

(Abjar is mentioned as Bahr in Tabari) The foot-soldiers launched an
attack from right and left against those who were left with al Husayn,
peace be on him, until only a group of three or four remained with him.
When al Husayn, peace be on him saw that, he called for a pair of
dazzling Yemen trousers (sarawil). He tore them and put them on. He tore
them so that he should not have them plundered after he had been killed.
When al- Husayn, peace be on him, was killed, Abjar Ibn Kab set on him,
plundered him of the trousers and left him naked. After that the two
hands of Abjar Ibn Ka'b, may God curse him, became so dry in the summer
that they were like sticks and then soaking wet in the winter so that
they sprinkled drops of water and puss, until God destroyed him.

When nobody except a group of three members of his family was left with
al Husayn, peace be on him, he moved against the people, while the three
protected him until (all) three were killed. Al Husayn, was left alone.
Despite being weighed down by wounds in his head and body, he began to
strike against them with his sword and they scattered, to right and
left, away from him.

Then Humayd Ibn Muslim said, *“By God, I have never seen such
persistence. His sons have been killed, and the members of his household
and his followers, yet he is still as brave as ever and he has not
allowed his spirit to leave him. When the soldiers attack him, he fights
back with his sword and scatters them to right and left of him like
goats when a wolf comes upon them.”*

When Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan realised (the position), he called for
the cavalry and they came up at the rear of the foot-soldiers. He
ordered the archers to shoot at (al Husayn) and they showered him with
arrows until he became (quilted with arrows) like a hedgehog (with
spikes).

He drew back from them and they stood facing him. His sister Zaynab,
came to the door of the tent and called out to 'Umar Ibn Sad Ibn Abi
Waqqas, *“Woe upon you, Umar. Is Abu Abd Allah being killed while you
(stand by and) watch?”* But Umar did not answer. Then she called out,
*“Woe upon you (all), is there not a Muslim among you?”* But no-one
answered.

Then Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan shouted at the foot soldiers and the
Calvary, *“Why are you waiting for the man? May your mothers be deprived
of you!”* So they attacked him from every side.

Zura Ibn Sharik struck him on the left shoulder-blade and cut into it.
Another of them struck him on the shoulder. He fell prostrate on his
face. Sinan Ibn Anas al-Nakhai stabbed him with a spear and killed him.
Khawali Ibn Yazid al-Asbahi hurried to him and bent down to cut off his
head but he trembled (too much). Shamir said to him, *“May God crush
your arm why are you trembling?”* Then Shamir bent down and decapitated
him. He lifted the head (and handed it) to Khawati saying, *“Take it to
the commander 'Umar Ibn Sa'd.”*

Then they began to plunder (the body of) al Husayn, peace be on him.
Ishaq Ibn al-Hayat al-Hadrami, may God curse him, took his shirt. Abjar
Ibn Ka'b, may God curse him, took his trousers. Akhnas Ibn Marthad, may
God curse him, took his turban. One of the Banu Darim took his sword.
They plundered his saddle and his camel and they looted his womenfolk.

(The name of the plunderers and the plundered objects are different in
Tabari)

Humayd Ibn Muslim reported:

By God, I did not see one of his women or daughters or the women of his
family who did not have her clothes ripped from her back, taken away and
removed from her forcibly. Then we came to ‘Ali Ibn al Husayn, peace be
on them both. He was stretched out on a bed and he was very ill. Shamir
had a group of foot-soldiers with him and they asked him, *“Shall we
kill this sick one?”* I said, *“Praise be to God, will boys be killed
(too)? This is only a youth even though he is what he is.”* And I went
on (arguing) until I had moved them away from him.

Then 'Umar Ibn Sa'd arrived and the women cried out and wept in his
face. He ordered his followers, *“None of you should enter the tents of
these women nor disturb this sick boy.”* The women asked him to return
what had been taken from them so that they could clothe themselves
again. So he commanded that whoever had taken any of their belongings
should return them to them. But by God, none of them returned anything.
He then entrusted charge of the main tent and the tents of the women to
a group (of men) who were; with him. He said, *“Guard (the women) so
that none of them may leave and do not harm them.”*

After this, he returned to his tent and called out to his followers,
*“Who will volunteer (to go) to al Husayn and make his horse trample on
(al Husayn's body)?”* Ten volunteered. Of these, Ishaq Ibn Hayyat and
Akhnas Ibn Marthad trampled on (the body of) al Husayn with their horses
until they had broken and bruised his back. Umar Ibn Sad despatched on
that day-it was the day of 'Ashura', - the head of al Husayn, peace be
on him, with Khawali Ibn Yazid al-Asbahi and Humayd Ibn Muslim al-Azdi,
to Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad. Then he ordered the heads of the remainder of
his followers and members of his House (who had been slain) to be cut
off. There were seventy-two heads. He sent Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan,
Qays Ibn Ash'ath and Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj with these. They journeyed until
they brought them to Ibn Ziyad.

He ('Umar Ibn Sad) remained there for the rest of that day and the next
day until just after midday. Then he summoned the people for the
journey, and set out towards Kufa. He took with him the daughters and
sisters of al Husayn, peace be on him, together with '‘Ali Ibn al
Husayn, peace be on him. The latter was still sick with a dysentry and
was almost on the point of death.

When Ibn Sad departed, some of Banu Asad, who had been staying at
al-Ghadiriyya went to al Husayn, peace be on him, and his followers.
They performed the funeral prayer over them. Then they buried al Husayn
at the place where his tomb still is, and they buried his son '‘Ali Ibn
al Husayn al-Asghar (the younger) at the foot of the body. They dug
around the area next to the two feet of al Husayn, peace be on him, for
the martyrs from his House and his followers.

They gathered them together and buried them all together. However, they
buried al-Abbas Ibn '‘Ali, peace be on them both, in the place where he
was killed, on the road to al-Ghadiriyya, where his tomb still is.


