Muslim Ibn Aqil in Kufa
=======================

In the morning the call was made among the people: “*Al Salat jamia (the
prayer is a general prayer which all should gather for).”*

The people gathered and he went out to them. He praised and glorified
God and said: “*The Commander of the faithful (Yazid) has appointed me
to be in charge of your town and your frontier-station and the
distribution of your booty (fay). He has ordered me to give justice to
the oppressed among you, to be generous to those of you who are
deprived, and to treat the obedient among you with generosity like a
good father, but to use the whip and the sword against those who abandon
my commanus and oppose my appointment. Let each man protect himself.
True belief (sidq) should declare itself on your behalf, not the threat
of punishment (wadis).”*

Then he went down, he took the group leaders (arifs) and (some of) the
people forcibly and he said:

“*Write to me about the strangers, those among you who supported the
Commander of the faithful (i.e. '‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib), those among you
who support the Haruriyya (i.e. Kharijites), and the trouble-makers
whose concern is discord and turmoil. Whosoever of you makes these lists
for us will be free from harm. But those of you who do not write anyone,
will have to guarantee that there is no opponent in his group (irafa)
who will oppose us, and no wrongdoer who will try to wrong us. Anyone
who does not do so, will be denied protection and his blood and his
property will be permitted to us. Any group leader (arif) in whose group
is found anyone with partisanship for the Commander of the faithful, who
has not been reported to us, will be crucified at the door of his house,
and I will abolish the pay (atal) of that group (irafa).”*

When Muslim Ibn Aqil heard of the coming of Ubayd Allah to Kufa, of the
speech he had made and his treatment of the arifs and (other) people, he
left the house of al-Mukhtar and went to the house of Hani' Ibn Urwa and
went in (to stay) there. The Shia began to visit Hani's house secretly
to keep it hidden from Ubayd Allah and they enjoined that it should be
kept secret.

Ibn Ziyad summoned a retainer (mawla) of his called Maqil.

“*Take three thousand dirhams,”* he told him, “*and look for Muslim Ibn
'Aqil and search out his followers. If you get hold of one or a group of
them, give them these three thousand dirhams. Tell* *them to use it to
help in the war against your enemy. Let them know that you are one of
them. For if you give them it, they will be sure of you and have
confidence in you, and they will not keep any of their information from
you. So go (looking) for them and continue until you find where Muslim
Ibn 'Aqll is staying and you have met him.*”

He did that. He came (to a place where) he sat near Muslim Ibn Awsaja
al-Asad; in the great mosque. The latter was praying, and he (Maqil)
heard some people saying that this (was one of those who) had pledged
allegiance to al Husayn. He went up and sat right next to him until he
had finished praying.

“*O servant of God,”* he said, “*I am a Syrian whom God has blessed with
love for the House and love for those who love them.”*

He pretended to weep (in front of) him. Then he continued:

“*I have three thousand dirhams with which I want to meet a man from
them (the House) whom I have learnt has come to Kufa to receive pledges
of allegiance on behalf of the son of the daughter of the Apostle of
God, may God bless him and his family. I have been wanting to meet him
but I have not found anyone who will direct me to him and I don't know
the place (where he is staying). While I was sitting (here), I heard a
group of the faithful saying that this is a man (i.e. Muslim Ibn Awsaja)
who is acquainted with this House. Therefore I have come to you so that
you may take this money from me and introduce me to your leader (sahib);
for I am one of your brethren and someone you can trust. If you wish,
you may receive my pledge of allegiance to him before my meeting him.”*

“*I thank God for you meeting me,”* replied (Muslim) Ibn 'Awsaja, “and
it gives me great joy to get (you) what you desire, and that God should
help the House of His Prophet, peace be on them, through you. Yet the
people's knowledge of my (connection) with this affair before it is
finished troubles me, because of (my) fear of this tyrant and his
severity.*”*

“It would be better (if) you took the pledge of allegiance from me
(now)*,”* Maqil told him. So he took his pledge of allegiance and
testaments heavily supported by oaths that he would be sincere and keep
the matter concealed. He (Maqil) gave him whatever would make him
content in that way.

*“Come to visit me at my house for (a few) days,”* said (Muslim Ibn
'Awsaja), *“for I will seek permission for you (to visit) your master.”*

He began to go to visit him frequently with the people (i.e. the other
members of the Shia) and sought permission for him (to visit).

Permission was given and Muslim Ibn Aqil received (Maqils) pledge of
allegiance. He told Abu Thumama al Saidi to take the money from him. The
latter was the one who collected money from them and what could be used
to help each other, and he used to buy their arms.

He was a perceptive man and one of the knights (faris) of the Arabs and
one of the notables of the Shi'a.

That man (i.e. Ma'qil) began to visit them regularly. He was the first
to enter and the last to leave, in order to become acquainted with
(everything of) their affairs which Ibn Ziyad wanted. He used to keep
him informed about that at regular intervals.

Hani' Ibn Urwa began to fear for himself and he stopped attending Ibn
Ziyad's assembly (majlis). He pretended to be sick. Ibn Ziyad asked
those who did attend, *“Why is it I don't see Hani'?” “He is sick,”*
they replied.

*“If I had been informed of his illness, I would have paid him a sick
visit,”* said Ibn Ziyad. Then he summoned Muhammad Ibn al-Ashath, Asma'
Ibn Kharija and 'Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj al Zubaydi. Ruwayha, daughter of 'Amr
was married to Hani' Ibn Urwa, she was the mother of Yahya Ibn Hani'.

*“What prevents Hani' from coming to visit us?”* he asked them.

*“We don't know,”* they replied, *“but it is said that he is sick.”*

“I have learnt*,”* replied (Ibn Ziyad), *“that he is better and that he
sits at the door of his house. Go and tell him that he should not
abandon his duty towards us. For I do not like one of the Arab nobles
like him to ill-treat me.”*

They went until they stood before his (house) in the evening. He was
sitting at his door.

*“What is stopping you from seeing the governor?”* they asked, *“For he
has mentioned you and said that if he had been told you were ill, he
would have paid you a sick-visit.”*

*“An illness has stopped me,”* he answered.

*“He has been informed,”* they said, *“that you sit at the door of your
house every evening. He finds you tardy and tardiness and churlish
behaviour are things which the authorities will not tolerate. We adjure
you to ride with us.”*

He called for his clothes and got dressed. Then he called for a mule and
rode (with them). When he got near the palace, he began to feel some
apprehension. He said to Hassan Ibn Asma' Ibn Kharija, *“Nephew, by God,
I fear this man. What do you think?”* *“Uncle, by God, I do not fear
anything for you. Why do you invent a reason (for blame) against
yourself?”* he answered, for Hassan did not know why Ubayd Allah had
sent for him. (So) Hani' went on until he came to 'Ubayd Allah Ibn
Ziyad. With him was a group (of people).

When he looked up, 'Ubayd Allah said (to himself), *“The fool's legs
have brought him to you.”* Then, when Hani' had drawn near Ibn Ziyad who
had the qadi Shurayh, with him, Ibn Ziyad turned towards him and
recited, *“I want his friendship but he wants my death. The one who
makes excuses to you is one of your own bosom friends from the tribe of
Murad.”*

He was referring to his earlier kindness and gentleness to him (Hani').

*“What is that, governor?”* asked Hani'.

*“Yes, Hani', what are these matters which you have been plotting in
your house against the Commander of the faithful and the general
community of the Muslims?”* asked Ibn Ziyad. *“You have brought Muslim
Ibn Aqil and taken him into your house. You have gathered arms and men
for him in houses around you. You thought that was hidden from me.”*

*“I have not done that and Muslim is not with me,”* he replied.

*“Oh yes (you have),”* was the answer.

After the argument between them had gone on for some time and Hani'
persisted in contradicting and denying (the accusations), Ibn Ziyad
summoned that spy, Maqil. He came and stood before him.

*“Do you know this man?”* (Ibn Ziyad) asked him.

*“Yes,”* he replied.

At that (moment) Hani' realised that he had been a spy against them and
had brought (Ibn Ziyad) all their information. For a moment he was
bewildered, and then his spirit returned to him.

*“Listen to me,”* he said, *“and believe what I say. I swear by God that
I do not lie. By God, I did not summon him to my house. I did not know
anything about his business until he came to me asking to stay with me.
I was too ashamed to refuse him. As a result of that, the duty of giving
(him) protection fell upon me. Therefore I gave him lodging and refuge.
Then his affair developed as you have been informed. If you wish, I will
give you strongly sworn testaments that I will not do you any harm and
danger, and I will come to you and put my hand in your hand. If you
wish, I will give you a guarantee which will be in your hand until I
return to you. Then I will go to him and order him to leave my house for
wherever in the land he wants to go. Then he will leave his right of
protection.”*

*“You will never leave me unless you bring him,”* answered Ibn Ziyad.

*“No, by God, I will not bring him to you,”* (the other) declared.

After the argument between them had gone on for some time, Muslim Ibn
'Amr al-Bahih rose (to speak). There was no other Syrian or Basran in
Kufa except him.

*“May God make you prosper, governor,”* he interjected, *“(please) leave
me with him (for a time) so that I can speak to him.”* He arose and took
him (Hani') aside from Ibn Ziyad. They were (standing) where he could
see them and when they raised their voices, he could hear what they were
saying.

*“I adjure you before God, Hani',”* said Muslim, *“you are killing
yourself and bringing tribulation on your clan. By God, I hold you too
precious to be killed. This man is the cousin of (your) tribe so they
will not fight against him, nor harm him. Therefore give him (i.e.
Muslim Ibn Aqil) to them (the authorities). There will be no shame and
failure for you by that for you would only be handing him over to the
authorities.”*

*“By God, indeed there would be shame and disgrace for me,”* answered
Hani', *“were I to hand over one who has come under my protection and is
my guest, while I am still alive and sound. I can hear; I see well; I
have a strong arm and many helpers. By God, if I was the only one
without any helper, I would not hand him over until I had died on his
behalf.”*

He began to shout at him saying, *“By God, I will never hand him over to
him.”*

Ibn Ziyad heard that. *“Bring him to me,”* he said. They brought him.
*“Either bring him to me or I will have your head cut off,”* demanded
Ibn Ziyad.

*“Then there will be much flashing (of swords) around your house,”*
replied Hani, thinking that his clan would prevent him (from being
killed).

*“Come near me,”* demanded (Ibn Ziyad). He came nearer and Ibn Ziyad
struck his face with his cane and went on beating at his nose, forehead
and cheeks so that he broke his nose and the blood flowed from it on to
his face and beard and the flesh of his forehead and cheeks was
sprinkled over his beard. Eventually the cane broke.

Hani' stretched out his hand towards the hilt of the sword of one of the
armed attendants but the man pulled it away and prevented him.

*“You have been behaving like one of the, Haruri (i.e. Kharijites) all
day long!”* yelled Ibn Ziyad, *“so your blood is permitted to us. Take
him away!”* They took him and threw him into one of the rooms in the
building.

They locked the doors on him. He had told them to put guards on him and
that (also) was done. However Hassan Ibn Asma' arose and said, *“Are
(we) messengers of treachery now? For you told us to bring the man to
you. Yet when we brought him to you, you smashed his nose and face, and
his blood flowed on his beard. Then you claimed that you would kill
him.”*

*“You will be for it here (and now),”* cried 'Ubayd Allah and he ordered
him to be struck, shaken, and pushed aside.

*“We are satisfied with the governor's attitude on our behalf and
against (those of) us (who are wrong); the governor is only punishing
(those who are wrong),”* declared Muhammad Ibn al Ashath.

However when it was reported to Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj and he learnt that
Hani' had been killed, he advanced with Madhhij and surrounded the
palace. He had a great crowd with him.

*“I am 'Amr Ibn al-Hajjaj,”* he called out, *“and these are the knights
of Madhhij, and their leading men. We have not broken away from
obedience, nor have we separated from the community.”*

-----

Ref:  
 - The History of al Tabari, Volume 19 The Caliphate of Yazid Ibn
Muawiyah, Pages 22 - 65 ( Abu Mikhnaf's Account on Muslim Ibn Aqil ),
Translated by I.K.A Howard, Paper back - ISBN 0-7914-0041-7  
 - Kitab al Irshad, Shaykh al Mufid, Pages 305 – 326, Translated by
I.K.A Howard  
 - Tahrike Tarsile Quran, Paper back - ISBN 0-940368-11-0


