The betrayal of the Kufans
==========================

It had been reported to them that their colleague had been killed, and
they regarded that as a great crime. Ubayd Allah was told that Madhhij
were at the gate. He told the qadi Shurayh, *“Go in to their colleague,
look at him and then go out and inform them that he is still alive and
has not been killed.”*

Shurayh went in and looked at him. When Hani' saw Shurayh, he said, with
blood flowing down his beard, *“Oh what a God! Oh what Muslims! Has my
clan been destroyed? Where are the people of religion? Where are the
people of the town?”* When he heard the tumult at the door of the palace
he said, *“I think those are the voices of Madhhij and my group of the
Muslims. If ten of them got in, they would be able to rescue me.”*

After Shurayh had listened to what he had to say, he went out to them
and told them, *“When the governor learnt about your attitude and your
statements concerning your collegue, he ordered me to go and see him. I
went and I saw him. Then he ordered me to meet you and inform you that
he is still alive and that the report that he had been killed was
false.”*

*“Praise be to God since he* *has not been killed,”* answered Amr Ibn
al-Hajjaj and his colleagues. Then they went away.

Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad went out and went up on the pulpit. (He had
brought) with him the nobles of the people, his bodyguard (shurat) and
his entourage. He said, *“O people, seek refuge in obedience to God and
your Imams. Do not cause division, for you will be destroyed,
humiliated, killed or harshly treated and deprived. Your brother is he
who speaks the truth to you. He who warns is excused.”*

After he had finished, he was about to go down but had not gone from the
pulpit, when the look-outs at the date-sellers' gate of the mosque
rushed in yelling, *“Muslim Ibn Aqil has come!”* Ubayd Allah quickly
went into the palace and locked the gates.

Abd Allah Ibn Hazim reported:

By God, I was Ibn 'Aqil's messenger at the palace to see what was done
to Hani'. When he was beaten and imprisoned I mounted my horse and was
the first to enter the house to bring information of him to Muslim Ibn
Aqil. There the women of Murad had gathered and they were crying out,
*“O tears of grief for him! O bereavement of him!”*

I went in to see Muslim and gave him the news of him (Hani'). He ordered
me to summon his supporters. The houses around him were full of them;
there were four thousand men there. He told his messengers to cry out,
*“O victorious, kill!”* so I cried out, *“O victorious, kill!”* Then the
Kufans gathered and assembled before him. Muslim, may God have mercy on
him, appointed leaders over the quarters, over the tribes of Kinda,
Madhhij, Tamlm, Asad, Mudar and Hamdan. The people had answered the call
and gathered, except for a few who had delayed so that the mosque and
the market place were full of people. They were full of enthusiasm until
the evening.

Ubayd Allah's situation was grim. All his energy was concentrated on
holding the door, for he only had thirty members of his bodyguard with
him in the palace, twenty nobles of the people, and his family and
entourage. The nobles who had not been with him began to come to him
through the door which adjoined the building of the Romans. Then those
of the nobles who were with Ibn Ziyad began to look down on them (the
people outside). (These) were looking at them, while they hurled stones
at them and cursed them and abused 'Ubayd Allah and his father.

Ibn Ziyad summoned Kathir Ibn Shihab and ordered him to go out among
those of Madhhij who obeyed him and to go round Kufa and make the people
desert Ibn Aqil; he should make them afraid of (the possibility of) war
and threaten them with the punishment of the authorities. Then he
ordered Muhammad Ibn al-Ashath to go out among those of Kinda and
Hadramawt who obeyed him; he should raise a standard which would
guarantee security to those people who came to him. He gave similar
instructions to al-Qa'qa al-Dhuhli, Shabath Ibn Rib'i al- Tamimi, Hajjar
Ibn Abjar al-'Ijli and Shamir Ibn Dhi al-Jawshan al- Amin. He kept the
rest of the nobles of the people with him, not wishing to be without
them because of the small number of people who were with him.

Kathir Ibn Shihab went out (and began) making the people desert Muslim.
Muhammad Ibn al-Ashath went out until he reached the houses of the Bana
Umara. Ibn 'Aqil sent 'Abd al- Rahman Ibn Shurayh al-Shibami to Muhammad
Ibn al-Ashath from the mosque. When Muhammad Ibn al-Ashath saw the great
number of those who had come to him (Muslim), he lingered where he was
(i.e. he did not carry out Ibn Ziyad's instructions). Then he- Muhammad
Ibn al-Ashath- Kathir Ibn Shihab, al-Qaqa Ibn Shawr al- Dhuhli, and
Shabath Ibn Ribi began to make the people withdraw from their close
adherence to Muslim for they made them afraid of the authorities so that
a great number of their tribesmen and others gathered to them and they
went to Ibn Ziyad through the house of the Romans. The tribesmen went in
with them.

*“May God make the governor prosperous,”* said Kathir Ibn Shihab, *“you
have many of the nobles of the people with you, (as well as) your
bodyguard, family and servants. Let us go out against them.”*

Ubayd Allah refused but he gave Shabath Ibn Ribi a standard and he sent
him out. The people with Ibn Aqil remained numerous until evening.

Their situation became strong. 'Ubayd Allah sent for the nobles and he
assembled them. They (went up to the roof to) look down on the people.
They offered additional (money) and kind treatment to those who would
obey and they terrified the disobedient with (threats of) dispossession
and (dire) punishment. They told them that the army from Syria was
coming against them. Kathir Ibn Shihab spoke until the sun was about to
set.

He said, *“O people, stay with your families. Do not hurry into evil
actions. Do not expose yourselves to death. These are the soldiers of
the Commander of the faithful Yazid, who are approaching. The governor
has given God a promise that if you persist in fighting him and do not
go away by nightfall, he will deprive your children of their (right to
a) state allotment of money fate') and he will scatter your soldiers in
Syrian campaigns. He will make the healthy among you responsible for the
sick and those present responsible for those who are absent until none
of those rebellious people will remain who has not tasted the evil
consequences of what their hands have earned.”*

The (other) nobles spoke in a similar vein. After the people had heard
what they had to say, they began to disperse. Women began to come to
their sons and brothers (saying), *“Go, the people will be enough
(without) you.”* Men were going to their sons and brothers and saying,
*“Tomorrow, the Syrians will come against you. What are you doing,
causing war and evil? Come away.”* Thus (a man) would be taken away or
would leave.

They continued to disperse so that by the time evening came and Muslim
Ibn Aq'il prayed the evening prayer, he had only thirty men with him in
the mosque. When he saw that it was evening and he only had that group
with him, he left the mosque and headed for the gates of Kinda. He
reached the gates with only ten of them (left) with him. When he left
the gate, there was no one with him to guide him. He looked around but
could see no one to guide him along the road, to show him to his house
and to give him personal support if an enemy appeared before him.

He wandered amid the lanes of Kufa without knowing where he was going
until he came to the houses of the Banu Jabala of Kinda.

He went on until he came to a door (at which was) a woman called Tawa.
She had been a slave-wife (umm walad) of al-Ashath Ibn Qays and he had
freed her. She had, then, married Usayd al-Hadrami and had borne him (a
son called) Bilal. Bilal had gone out with the people and his mother was
standing at the door waiting for him.

Ibn 'Aqil greeted her and she returned the greeting.

*“Servant of God, give me water to drink,”* he asked her. She gave him a
drink and he sat down. She took the vessel inside and then came out
again.

*“Servant of God, haven't you had your drink?”* she asked.

*“Yes,”* was the answer. *“Then go to your people,”* she said. But he
was silent. She repeated it but he was still silent. A third time she
said, *“Glory be to God, servant of God, get up - may God give you
health - (and go) to your people. For it is not right for you to sit at
my door and I will not permit you to do it.”*

(At this) he got up and said, *“Servant of God, I have neither house nor
clan in this town. Would you (show) me some generosity and kindness?
Perhaps I will be able to repay it later on.”*

*“What is it, servant of God?”* she asked.

*“I am Muslim Ibn Aqil,”* he replied. *“These people have lied to me,
incited me (to action) and then abandoned me.”*

*“You are Muslim,”* she repeated.

*“Yes,”* he answered.

*“Come in,”* she said and he was taken into a room in her house but not
the room she used. She spread out a carpet for him and offered him
supper but he could not eat.

Soon her son returned. He saw her going frequently to and fro between
the rooms and exclaimed: *“By God, the number of times which you have
gone into and come out of that room this evening, makes me suspect that
you have something important (there).”*

*“My little son, forget about this,”* she answered.

*“By God, tell me,”* he replied.

*“Get on with your own business and don't ask me about anything,”* she
retorted. However he persisted until she said, *“My little son, don't
tell any of the people anything about what I am going to tell you.”*

*“Indeed,”* he answered and she made him take an oath. When he swore
(not to do) that, she told him. He went to bed without saying anything.

After the people had deserted Muslim Ibn 'Aqil, a long time passed for
Ibn Ziyad without him hearing the voices of the supporters of Ibn Aqil
as he had heard them before. He told his followers to look down at them
and see whether they could see any of them. They looked down and did not
see anyone. Then he told them to see whether they were in the shadows
and were lying in ambush for them.

They removed the (bamboo) roof covers of the mosque and began to lower
the torches of fire in their hands, and to look. Sometimes the torches
gave light for them and sometimes they did not give (as much) light for
them as they would have wished. They let down the torches and sticks of
cane tied with rope on which was fire. They were let down until they
reached the ground. They did this in (places in which was) the deepest
darkness, (as well as) those parts which were closer and those which
were in between. They (also) did that in the darkness around the pulpit.

When they saw that there was nothing, they informed Ibn Ziyad that the
people had dispersed. Then he opened the gateway which (went) into the
mosque. He came out and went up on the pulpit. His followers had come
out with him. He told them to sit for a little while before the night
prayer.

He ordered 'Amr Ibn Nafi to call out that there would be no guarantees
of security for any man of the bodyguard, the arifs, the supporters and
the fighters who prayed the night prayer (anywhere) except in the
mosque. Not an hour passed before the mosque was full of people. After
ordering his caller (to call for prayer), he rose for the prayer. His
guard rose behind him but told them to guard him against anyone coming
in (to try) to assassinate him.

After praying with the people, he went up on the pulpit, When he had
praised and glorified God, he said, *“Ibn 'Aqil, stupid and ignorant
(man as he is) has attempted the opposition and rebellion which you have
seen. There will be no security from God for a man in whose house we
find him. Whoever brings him, will have the reward for his blood. Fear
God, you servants of God, and keep to obedience and your pledge of
allegiance.* *Do not do (anything which will be) against yourselves.
Husayn Ibn Numayr, your mother will lose you, if any of the gates of the
lanes of Kufa is open or this man gets away, and you do not bring him to
me. I give you authority over the houses of the inhabitants of Kufa.
Send lookouts (to inspect) people on the roads. Tomorrow morning clear
out (the people from) the houses and search them thoroughly so that you
bring me this man.”*

Al Husayn Ibn Numayr was in charge of the bodyguard and was of the Banu
Tamim. After this, Ibn Ziyad went back into the palace. He gave Amr Ibn
Hurayth his standard and put him in charge of the people. In the morning
he held an assembly and gave permission for the people to come to him.
Muhammad Ibn al-Ash'ath approached.

*“Welcome to one of those whose loyalty is above suspicion,”* he said to
him and sat him by his side.

That same morning the son of that old woman went to 'Abd al- Rahman Ibn
Muhammad Ibn al-Ash'ath and told him about Muslim Ibn 'Aqil being with
his mother. 'Abd al-Rahman went to his father who was with Ibn Ziyad. He
went to him and Ibn Ziyad learned his secret.

*“Get up and bring him to me immediately,”* said Ibn Ziyad to (Muhammad
Ibn al-Ashath), poking a cane into his side. He sent (Amr Ibn ) Ubayd
Allah Ibn Abbas al-Sulam, with him, together with seventy men from the
tribal group of Qays.

----- References:  
 - The History of al Tabari  
 Volume 19 The Caliphate of Yazid Ibn Muawiyah  
 Pages 22 - 65 ( Abu Mikhnaf's Account on Muslim Ibn Aqil )  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-7914-0041-7

Kitab al Irshad  
 Shaykh al Mufid  
 Pages 305 - 326  
 Translated by I.K.A Howard

Tahrike Tarsile Quran  
 Paper back - ISBN 0-940368-11-0


