Masjid al-Nabawee
=================

Prophet Muhammad (SAW) was born in Makkah on 17th Rabi-ul-Awwal. He was
born an orphan and when he was five years old, his mother Amina Binte
Wahab died. His grandfather Abdul-Muttalib who also passed away when the
Prophet was only eight years old and then his uncle Abu Talib, became
his guardian then brought him up.

At the age of 25 he married Bibi Khadija who was a widow of forty years
of age.

When he was 40 years old, revelation came to him from Allah (SWT)
ordering him to ‘read in the name of Allah’ and the first to know about
this was Bibi Khadija and his cousin Imam Ali A.S.

During his last pilgrimage to Makkah, the Holy Prophet of Islam
proclaimed at Ghadeer al-Khum that Imam Ali A.S., would be his
successor, in accordance with the wishes of the Almighty Allah.

The Prophet of Islam passed away on the 28th Safar in 11 AH and is
buried in the Masjid al-Nabawee.

If you follow the sketch of the Masjid al-Nabawee as shown on Page 27
you will notice that there are many pillars and places of importance,
which will be explained briefly.

Bab al-Jibra’el
---------------

This is the door through which Jibra’el used to come to the chamber of
Janabe Fatimah Zehra A.S.

Maqam al-Jibra’el
-----------------

Whenever Jibra’el came to the Prophet of Islam with a Wahee
‘revelation’, he came through this door.

Stage of Suffa
--------------

The poor new Muslims who use to come to Medina from different parts of
the world use to stay at this stage till they found their own shelter.

Riyadhul Jannah
---------------

The Prophet of Islam was heard saying that a piece of Jannat is between
his mimber and his Zaree. Some historians say that Bibi Fatima A.S. is
also buried here.

It is also said that the Prophet of Islam was heard saying that this
piece of land would be raised to meet Jannat on the day of Quiyamat.

Mimber al-Rasul
---------------

This is the same mimber that the Holy Prophet (SAW) used to give khutbas
from.

Mehrab al-Nabawee
-----------------

Just before the mimber is the Mehrab al-Nabawee. It is from this Mehrab
that the Prophet of Islam used to conduct Salaat al-Jamaat.


