Umra al-Mufradah
================

1. To wear Ihram and Talbiya at Masjid al-Shajarah.

2. To do Tawaaf of Khane al-Ka’aba at Makkah.

3. To recite 2 Rakaat Salaat of Tawaaf at Makkah.

4. To perform Saee’ at Makkah.

5. To do Taqseer at Makkah.

6. To perform Tawaaf-un-Nissa at Makkah.

7. To recite 2 Rakaat Salaat of Tawaaf at Makkah.

This Umrah is Mustahab (Sunnat). Therefore, your Niyyat while wearing
the Ihram will be Mustahab, but all other A’amaals which you have to
perform for completing the Umra must be done with a Wajib Niyyat.

1) Ihram And Talbiya
--------------------

**Ihram for men -** consists of two pieces of white cloth and for
**ladies** their usual daily wear is their Ihram, but it is highly
recommended that it be white as it is the sign of purity.

a. For men the loins clothe covering oneself from the navel (around
waist) to the knees. The second piece covers one self from the shoulders
to the elbows. It is not necessary to have the clothes of Ihram on you
all the time when you are in the state of Ihram. For example, one may
remove the upper piece provided it is not done in front of the ladies.
The Recommended size of cloth of Ihram is two and half yards in length
and about 42/44 inches in breadth.

b. The cloth used for Ihram must be **Tahira.** If it becomes Najis at
any time during Ihram, it must be replaced or made Tahira.

c. It must not be made of silk or golden threads.

d. It must not be Ghasbi. This means it must not be the one usurped from
its rightful owner or belonging  
 For men the Ihram must not be sewn.

e. It must not be made of animal hide or skin.

f. Ihram can be purchased in Medina for about Saudi Riyals 30/45 per
set, which is much cheaper than buying one from North America.

g. Men are allowed to wear a money belt around their waist, to secure
their money, traveler’s cheques and other documents. These are made of
plastic and are available for about 15/30 Saudi Riyals. Ladies should
either sew or buy a white pouch to wear round their neck in order to
keep their money and other valuables. These are available in North
America for about $8/12, depending on the quality.

h. One should try to wear your Ihram at the prescribed **Meeqat** after
Dhohar prayers, or when that is not possible, after any **Wajib
prayers**. But if none of the Wajib prayers precede your Niyyat for
Ihram, then a minimum of two Rakaats and a maximum of 6 Rakaats (by way
of 2 Rakaats in each set, like the morning Salaat) is Mustahab.

• **Niyyat: “I am wearing Ihram for Umra** **al-Mufradah Qurbatan
Illallah”.**

After wearing the Ihram immediately proclaim Talbiyya. Men must recite
loudly but women **should not** recite loudly. Talbiyya must be recited
in Arabic as under

**“Labbaik, Allahumma Labbaik, Labbaik La**

**Sharika Laka Labbaik, Innal Hamda Wan**

**Ne’amata Laka Walmuka La Sharika Laka Labbaik”**

“Here I am, O Lord, here I am, You indeed have no partner, here I am. No
Doubt, all praise and bounties are Yours, and so is the absolute Domain.
You indeed have no partners, here I am”.

With Talbiyya recited, the process of wearing Ihram is now completed.
**Twenty-five** things become **Haraam** and forbidden for you as long
as you are in Ihram. They are applicable to both, men and women.  
 These are:

The Following 25 Things Become Haraam
-------------------------------------

1. **Hunting:** Remember that hunting within the sacred area around and
in Makkah, known as the **Haram**, is always forbidden. It is not
confined to Ihram. When in Ihram, hunting anywhere also is forbidden.
You are allowed to kill scorpions, pythons, poisonous snakes and rats.
You are allowed also to slaughter domestic fowls such as goats, sheep,
camels, etc.

2. **Sexual intercourse:** Sexual intercourse, or any acts of courtship
which would arouse sexual desire are forbidden. Even lustful glance at
ones own wife or husband or any other lady or man who is **Na-Mahram**
is forbidden. The expiation is one camel or a cow or a sheep in that
order of affordability.

3. **Masturbating:** This includes all methods of self-abuse. It has the
same precept as sexual intercourse.

4. **Marriage contract:** To read **Nikah** for oneself or for others
regardless of whether the other person is in Ihram or not. This applies
to **Muta’a** as well. The expiation is ihtiyatan (precautionary) one
sheep.

5. **Perfumes:** To use perfume or apply it on ones clothes. Perfumes
like **Saffron, Camphor, Cloves, Cardamom, Amber and** all their uses
are forbidden. Sweet smelling fruits like apples etc., may be eaten, but
it is forbidden to smell them.

6. **Smell or odor:** To close ones nose or nostrils from bad smell or
**odor** is not allowed. The expiation of doing so is one sheep.
However, there is no objection if one hastily passes away from the
unpleasant odour.

**7.** **Sewn clothes:** It is **Haram** for men to wear sewn or
stitched clothes in **Ihram*****.*** Their clothes must not have sleeves
or seams. However, belts with sewn pockets for keeping money, traveler’s
cheques, passports and other valuables, slung around the shoulders or
worn around the waist are allowed. Similarly, **Hernia** belts can be
worn. One is not allowed to fasten the Ihram with pins or a needle or
anything of that sort. You can not even tie a knot. Ladies are allowed
to wear all types of sewn clothes during **Ihram**, except for the hand
gloves and wear a **veil.** The expiation for violation of this rule is
one sheep.

**8.** **Surma:** To apply black surma (eyeliner) in the eyes for
cosmetic purposes are strictly forbidden for men and women. If it is
neither black nor for any cosmetic or beautifying purposes, then it is
allowed. The expiation of violation is one sheep.

9 **Mirror:** To look into a mirror for cosmetic reason, which means to
appreciate ones looks and features, including combing hair etc., is
forbidden. The expiation of this violation is one sheep. If a driver
wearing Ihram has to refer to the mirrors of his car or bus as he
drives, there is no objection. Spectacle glasses are allowed provided
they are not worn for fashion or beautification, though this should be
avoided if possible.

10. **Lying and abusing:** To tell lies or abuse and scorn is always
forbidden but when in Ihram it becomes all the more undesirable and
Haraam. Similarly, it is Haraam to boast or brag about ones own
superiority or excellence, with an intention to belittle or under
estimate the others.

**Note:** This means one has to be very careful not to use abusive, foul
or obscene language in ordinary conversation. If this is done the
expiation is one cow for violation of this rule.

**11.** **Shoes and socks:** It is forbidden for men to cover the upper
part of the feet from the toes to the ankle. So, men must not wear socks
or full shoes. Women can wear them, (although), it is better for women
to avoid wearing socks. The expiation for men violating of this rule is
one sheep.

**12.** **Swearing:** To take an oath or to swear in any form,
particularly saying LaWallah, Balaa Wallah (no, by God or yes, by God)
is Haraam. The expiation is **Istegfaar*****,*** (repentance) for the
first and second time, and a sheep for the third time.

**The following cases are exceptional.**

a) That it is intended to prove thereby some right or to make the wrong
public to others.

b) That is not meant to swear thereby, but is merely expressing respect
and love.

There is no expiation (kafara) for a right swearing, provided, it is not
more than twice, otherwise, the expiation is one sheep. If it is a wrong
swearing, the expiation is one sheep for the first time, for the second
time two sheep and a cow for the third time.

**13.** **Killing insects:** It is forbidden to kill insects or
brush-off an insect originating from one’s own body e.g. lice. There is
no harm to transfer them from one place to another and the expiation for
this rule being violated is to give a handful of food to the poor.

**14.** **Make up:** All methods of self-beautification, either by use
of cosmetics or by ornaments are forbidden. A ring worn for the Niyyat
of thawab, like a **Firoza** **or Aqeeq or Dhoor** **al-Najaf** is
permissible. Ladies must also refrain from wearing ornaments, except
those they usually wear. But even these must not be displayed to men,
even to the husband.

**15.** **Henna:** To apply henna is Haraam during Ihram. The expiation
for the violation is ihtiyatan (precautionary) one sheep.

16. **Pulling out of a tooth:** To have your tooth extracted even if
there is no bleeding due to it. **(Marhum** **Ayatullah** **Abul Qassim
El Khui did not lay emphasis on this. He said this is permitted).**

**17.** **Blood:** To take out blood from ones own body, or to cause any
bleeding by scratching or brushing the teeth etc., is Haraam. However,
if this becomes in evitable for relief from any distress, it is allowed.
The expiation for ignoring this rule is one sheep.  
**Note:** One should use salt to brush teeth rather than scented
toothpaste.

**18.** **Covering of the face:** In the state of Ihram, women are not
allowed to cover their faces with a mask or veil, not even partly. While
saying her Salaat, they may cover part of their forehead etc., in an
effort to cover her head and hair fully, but after Salaat, she has to
see that her face is not covered even partially. She can cover her face
while sleeping. She must also refrain from immersing her head in water.
Men are not allowed to cover their face at all, their ears must also be
visible.

Men must not carry any baggage on their heads, nor dip themselves in
water. However, a handkerchief or strip of cloth tied on the forehead
for relief from a headache is allowed. The expiation for this violation
is one sheep.

**19.** **Ointment:** It is forbidden to apply any kind of ointment to
the body, whether it has a sweet smell or not. If however, it becomes
necessary for medical reasons it is allowed.

20. To remove or pluck hair from ones own body, or from another's body,
regardless of whether the other fellow is in Ihram or not. The expiation
for this is a handful of grain. There are four exceptions to this.

i) If hair falls itself, while doing Wudhu or Ghusl, there is no
objection.

ii) If one’s hair has grown to his/her eyelid and is causing distress
and agony, one may remove it.

iii) If the removal of hair becomes inevitable for any good reason and
valid reason. But if due to the hair, there are too many lice on the
body, and it becomes necessary to remove the hair so as to be relieved
of the parasite.

iv) You are allowed to stroke your hair or beard or slowly scratch your
body, if you know that by so doing no hair would fall, and no bleeding
would be caused.

20. **Travel:** Men are not permitted to travel under any kind of shade
or shadow, be it the hood of a car, an umbrella or walking in the shadow
of a car, bus, caravan or aircraft. All travelling must be under the
open sky. Shades are permitted at the time of resting or taking a
respite on the way. You can ward off sunrays by cupping one hand. The
meaning of refraining from shade or shadow is that men must not protect
themselves from sunrays, cold, heat or rain. So it is not only the head,
which must not go into shade, it is the whole body. Once you are in
Makkah, you are allowed to go under shade or shadow, even before you
have found your accommodation or place of abode. Women, children and
such men who fear that exposure would disable them or render them very
sick, are exempted. But for such men, the expiation (Kafara) will have
to be given inspite of the valid excuse they may have. The expiation for
this violation is one sheep.

**According to Ayatullah Sayyid Seestani, he allows men to travel in
closed bus during the night. Men may follow his rulings if they are
doing his Taqleed.**

21. **Cutting of nails:** Cutting of nails either whole or partly is not
allowed unless the nail is causing pain. The expiation (Kafara) for each
fingernail being cut is a handful of food. If all nails of the hands are
cut in the same place, the expiation (Kafara) will be one sheep. The
same is true of feet. If the nails of both the hands and feet are cut in
the same place, the expiation will be one sheep. If one cuts the nails
of his hand in one place and the feet in another place the expiation
will be two sheep.

**23.** **Carrying of weapons:** One is not allowed to carry any
weapons, unless it is absolutely necessary. There is no harm in carrying
a knife, etc., for cutting fruits, etc.

**24.** **Uprooting trees:** To uproot, pluck or cut the grass, leaves
of the trees and all that grows from the earth in Makkah and around it;
is not allowed. This is forbidden during Ihram and also without Ihram.

**25.** **Nikah:** To be witness to somebody's Nikah.

**Note: All the expiation can be paid in Makkah or after returning home
or even by sending money to a third world country for the same purpose
with the exception of hunting which must be paid in Makkah.**

**The above rules are according to Marhum Ayoutallah Abul Qassim Al
Khoei. If you are a Muqaleed of another Ayatullah please make sure you
check his rulings with an A’alem.**


