Makkah
======

Upon arrival in Makkah you will check into your hotel where you are
booked to stay (and after refreshing yourself and having your dinner)
you will then Inshallah proceed to the Holy Haram to perform all the
A’amaal of Umrah al-Mufradah.

Conditions Before Tawaaf
------------------------

Wudhu is Wajib for Tawaaf, as is Ghusl, if necessary due to its known
causes, (Janabat, Haiz or Nifas). One must be free of all these states
before Tawaaf.

If for any justifiable excuse, Ghusl or Wudhu cannot be performed, then
you have to do **Tayammum** instead before performing Tawaaf. Women in
Istehaddha would follow the rules, as in Salaat, that is, they would do
Tawaaf after performing Ghusl and Wudhu. When Wudhu becomes Batil during
Tawaaf, (or when a woman finds that her menses etc., have commenced,
there are rules to follow.

a. If Wudhu is Batil before or just at half of the total Tawaaf, that is
three and half rounds, Tawaaf is Batil. Do your Wudhu again and repeat
the Tawaaf.

b. If Wudhu is Batil unintentionally at the completion of the **fourth**
round, you have to do Wudhu and continue further. There is no need to
repeat the whole Tawaaf.

c. If one makes his/her Wudhu Batil intentionally at any state, he/she
will do Wudhu and repeat the Tawaaf, making **Niyyat** that he/she is
completing the circuits, which are due.

**For ladies only:** When a lady experiences menses while performing
Tawaaf, she must come out of Masjid-ul-Haraam immediately. If she has
then completed half of the Tawaaf, which is three and half rounds, those
are valid. When she becomes **Tahira**, after her Ghusl, she will
complete the balance. Agha Khui had said that it is Ahwat (recommended)
that she make a new Tawaaf of seven rounds with a Niyyat to relieve her
of whatever is incumbent upon her.

If a woman completes Tawaaf and she sees blood before she can say her
Salaat al-Tawaaf, she will come out of the Masjid-ul-Haraam immediately.
Her Tawaaf will remain valid, and she will wait until she is Tahira, and
after Ghusl, she will say her Salaat al-Tawaaf. In case there is no time
and she must go to Arafah, Muzdhalifah etc., then will do Saee' and
Taqseer, complete her Hajj A'amaal upto Munna, and before the Tawaaf of
Hajj al-Tamattu', she must first pray the Salaat of Tawaaf which she had
left.

If a woman is not sure whether her menses began after the Tawaaf and
its' Salaat or during or before, her Tawaaf and Salaat, will be deemed
correct.

A woman who is not able to perform Tawaaf and its' Salaat because of
Haiz or Nifas, and is also unable to do Ghusl, will do **Tayammum**
instead of Ghusl and perform the Tawaaf and its' Salaat.

It is Ahwat (recommended) that she appoint a Naib who would do these
A'amaal on her behalf.

The body and clothes must be Tahira. Even small stains or dots of blood
that are permissible in daily prayers are not allowed in Tawaaf.

However, if you have a boil or a wound, which persistently bleeds, and
it cannot be removed from the body or the dress, then it is permissible.

Private parts must be adequately covered during Tawaaf, the same as is
done in Salaat. The clothes of Ihram must not be Ghasbi (as already
explained under Ihram).

**For men only:** Men must have been **circumcised** before Tawaaf can
be valid. This includes sensible boys as well. It is Ahwat (recommended)
that younger boys, who are not even able to wear Ihram by themselves be
also circumcised.

Mustahab (Sunnat) Acts of Tawaaf
--------------------------------

1. To recite Dhikar Quran, Salawaat or Dua during Tawaaf.  
 2. To be barefoot.  
 3. To take short steps, walking with total calm and composure,
portraying full reverence.  
 4. To avoid useless talks and movements.  
 5. To close your eyes during Tawaaf (if possible).  
 6. To do Tawaaf at dhohar time (mid-day hours if possible).  
 7. To remain nearer to Ka'aba.  
 8. To salute **Hajarul Aswad** in every round, by raising your palms
towards it and reciting **"Bismillahi, Allahu Akbar"** and after your
Tawaaf is complete to try and kiss Hajarul Aswad without causing
inconvenience to other people by way of pushing etc.  
 9. At the **Mustajar,** the back wall of Ka'aba near Rukne Yamani, it
is Mustahab to stand there on the seventh round and raise your hands in
dua and supplication, to touch the wall with your cheek and body, in all
humility and with confessions of sins, seeking forgiveness. It is also a
place to pray Haajat.

There will be thousands of people doing Tawaaf and the best place to
enter into the crowd is from somewhere near Hajre Ismail and slowly
working your way into the crowd.

The first cycle will commence from Hajarul Aswad. Try to be as close as
possible near the walls of the Ka'aba. When you reach Rukne Yamani, you
should start making your Niyyat.

2) Tawaaf of Khana al-Ka’aba
----------------------------

**Niyyat: “I am going round this Ka’aba seven times for Umra al-Mufradah
Qurbatan Ilallah.”**

### How to do Tawaaf

1. The starting and ending point of each circuit during Tawaaf is
Hajarul-Aswad.

After making your Niyyat, stand just parallel to Hajarul Aswad and start
the Tawaaf. Each round is completed when you return to the starting
point.

2. At all the time during Tawaaf, the Ka'aba must remain to your left.
Your left shoulder should **not** turn away from the Ka'aba, otherwise
that particular sector of movement will not be included in Tawaaf. You
will have to return to the place where you were distracted and continue
from there. The Ka'aba is in a cubical shape, it has four corners. As
you come to a corner of the Ka’aba, you will make a gradual turn
exercising care, as much as possible, that your shoulder remains
parallel to Ka'aba.

3. There is a small arc shaped wall shape adjoining Ka'aba on one side.
This is **Hijre Ismail**. (The graves of Hazrat Ismail, his mother
Hajira and other Prophets). While making Tawaaf, this Arc must be
included in the round. If you pass between the Ka'aba and Hijre Ismail
during Tawaaf, that particular circuit will be void. So, you will have
to repeat the circuit. It is Ahwat, (recommended) to not touch Hijre
Ismail. It is Ahwat (recommended) not placing your hands on Hijre Ismail
during Tawaaf.

4. The area of Tawaaf is defined as one between Ka'aba and Maqam
al-Ibrahim. This is about 40 feet or 26 and half arm lengths. Tawaaf
must be carried out within this area, and not beyond. As mentioned
earlier, Hijre Ismail is adjoining Ka'aba. It covers nearly 31 feet of
space left. So, when you reach here, you find only 9 feet of open space
on the left. You will keep yourself within this area during Tawaaf. Agha
Khui had said that Tawaaf beyond its area would not be correct. But if
it becomes extremely difficult to do so due to the great number of
people, or other disabilities, then Tawaaf beyond the described area
would be deemed sufficient.

5. Around the Ka’aba near its foundation, there are small supporting
walls. During Tawaaf, one must not pass over them. If one passes over
them, or touches them during Tawaaf, it will be necessary to repeat the
part of the circuit which was done on the said walls, and then, it would
be Ahwat to repeat the whole Tawaaf all over.

6. The number of circuits in each Tawaaf is **Seven.** Each round begins
from Hajarul Aswad and ends there. A Tawaaf of less or more then seven
rounds is Batil.

Simple rule to remember when you are in doubt about the number of circuits or rounds:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The following doubts should be ignored:**

• All doubts after the completion of Tawaaf or after having moved from
the place of Tawaaf, should be ignored.

• When you are certain of having completed the seven rounds, but are
doubtful whether you went round more than seven times, such doubts
should also be ignored.

• If you were doing Tawaaf that is Wajib, all doubts during Tawaaf would
render Batil. When in doubt whether the round is third or fourth, for
example you will decide that it is third, complete the Tawaaf, and do it
all over again. So the rule is that, determine the lesser number,
complete the doubtful Tawaaf, and then repeat the whole set again.

• If your Tawaaf is Mustahab, determine the lesser number and complete
your Tawaaf. It would be correct.

• You can rely on your friend or companion who is doing Tawaaf with you.
For example, if he/she tells you that the particular round is fifth, and
if he/she says so with certitude, you can accept it.

• **Muwalaat** is necessary in Tawaaf. This means that all seven rounds
must follow each other in sequence. However, if one wishes to take a
brief respite or rest during Tawaaf, one may do so provided that it is
not too long to disrupt Muwalaat.

3) Salaat of Tawaaf
-------------------

**Niyyat: “I am offering two Rakaat Salaat for Tawaaf of Umra
al-Mufradah Qurbatan Ilallah”.**

**Salaat of Tawaaf:** Two rakaats of Salaat of Tawaaf becomes Wajib
immediately after completion of Tawaaf.

This Salaat must be said behind Maqame-Ibrahim, or at a place nearest to
it. The method of this Salaat is exactly like the morning Salaat. But in
this, you may recite the suras loudly or silently, as you prefer.

4) Saee’
--------

The Niyyat should be made at the hill of Safaa. Your walk will start
from Safaa and end at Marwa.

**Niyyat: “I walk between Safaa and Marwah, seven times for Umra
al-Mufradah Qurbatan Ilallah”.**

Saee” means to walk between the two mountains **Safaa** and
**Marwaa*****.*** It begins from Safaa and ends at Marwaa.

Each Saee' consists of seven trips. As you walk from Safaa ending at
Marwaa, this is counted as first, your return from Marwaa to Safaa will
be second and so on and you will end your seventh round at Marwaa.

### Mustahab acts of Saee'

a. Although Wudhu or even Ghusl is not a pre-requisite for Saee' it is
Mustahab to be in a purified state.

b. To do Saee' with a minimum of delay after Salaat al-Tawaaf.

c. To Kiss or Salute Hajarul Aswad before when you are proceeding for
Saee', (of course if this is possible).

d. To drink from Zam Zam before going for Saee'. It is also Mustahab to
pour the water upon ones head and body

e. To go to Safaa through **Babus Safaa**, the door facing Hajarul
Aswad.

f. To proceed with humility, reverence and composed frame of mind.

g. To climb the steps of Safaa.

h. To kiss the corner of the Stone in Safaa.

i. To utter words of praise and gratitude for Allah, remembering His
bounties, blessings, signs and kindness.

j. To stand longer at Safaa.

k. To conduct the Saee' calmly and with reverence.

l. It is Mustahab for men to do Harwala (jogging or trotting) between
the two green lights. For ladies, it is Mustahab to quicken the pace.

### Points to remember:

a. Saee' is Wajib, and must be performed immediately after Salaat of
Tawaaf.

b. Wudhu or Ghusl is not necessary for Saee’ though it is better to be
with.

c. While walking from Safaa to Marwaa, and similarly from Marwaa to
Safaa, you must walk forward facing the rocks. If you walk in reverse,
then the distance covered this way will have to be retraced. There is no
harm if you look sideways or behind during the walk.

d. To rest at Safaa or Marwaa is allowed during Saee', it is Ahwat not
to rest between the rocks.

e. Saee' can be performed walking or on the back of an animal, or on
somebody's shoulders, or on a wheelchair or cart etc. When all these
alternatives are not possible you have to appoint someone as Naib, who
will do the Saee' on your behalf.

f. The distance between Safaa and Marwaa must be crossed on the route
that is fixed. Your walking may not strictly be in a straight line but
you cannot deviate from the given route.

g. In between Safaa and Marwaa, there are two pillars, which are meant
for Harwala. In these days, they are built of green stones,
distinguishing them from the others. When one reaches these, one has to
trot or jog. This is Mustahab for men only.

h. When one is in doubt the number of trips one has made, Saee' would be
Batil. The rule to be followed is exactly like that of doubts during
Tawaaf.

5) Taqseer
----------

**Niyyat: “I am performing Taqseer so as to be relieved of Ihram for
Umra al-Mufradah Qurbatan Ilallah”.**

Taqseer means cutting off some hair or nails. Taqseer had to be done
after completion of your Saee’ at Marwa (it can be done at your hotel).

**PS In Ihram one cannot cut his or another person’s hair until and
unless one has got his/her Taqseer done first by a person who is already
out of the Ihram.**

6) Tawaaf-un-Nissa
------------------

**Niyyat:** **“I am doing Tawaaf-un-Nissa by going round this Ka’aba
seven times for Umra** **al-Mufradah Qurbatan Ilallah”.**

7) Salaat of Tawaaf-un-Nisa
---------------------------

**Niyyat:** **“I am offering two Rakaat Salaat for Tawaaf-un-Nissa for
Umra** **al-Mufradah Qurbatan Ilallah”.**

Points to Remember Regarding Tawaaf-un-Nissa

This Tawaaf is Wajib for each and every person, whether you are a man, a
woman, or a child. If it were omitted, sexual relations between married
partners would be Haraam. Those who are doing Niyyabat must remember
that while doing this Tawaaf, their Niyyat, would not be for themselves,
but for the person, whom they are representing as a Naib.

If somebody avoids Tawaaf-un-Nissa purposely, or because of not knowing
the law, he/she has too later perform it himself/herself, and as long as
he/she has not done it, his wife/husband would remain Haraam to him/her.
Naib for this Tawaaf is only allowed if it was omitted forgetfully, or
for ladies who due to their menses etc., are unable to do it. This
Tawaaf is Wajib for children as well, if they have worn Ihram.

During your entire stay in Makkah you should try and visit the Holy
Haram as much as possible to Sunnat Tawaaf as many as you can for your
deceased parents, relatives and friends. You do not need to be in Ihram.
But if you wish to do Umra for your passed away parents, relatives or
friends then you must to go to Masjid al-Umra just outside of Makkah, do
your Niyyat, go to Masjid-ul-Haraam and do the Umrah, (exactly the same
A’amals that you did when you arrived from Medina).


