Hajj al-Tul Islam
=================

Hajj al-tul Islam or Wajib Hajj is obligatory once in a lifetime upon
all Muslims and the following conditions must be obtained before Hajj
becomes Wajib.

**1.** **Baligh,** means age of puberty, girls 9 years of age and boys
15 years of age.

**2.** **A'Aaqil,** means being sane and of sound mind.

**3.** **Istita'ah.** Means capability. This means one must be able to
defray all the necessary expenses during Hajj, including the return
passage.

• If he has dependents, he must be able to maintain himself and his
family.

• Upon his return, he must have enough means to maintain himself and his
family.

• The journey to Hajj and returning from it must not involve any danger
to the security of his life, wealth and family.

• One intending to go to Hajj must be healthy. If he is infirm or old or
has any other justifiable excuse Hajj would not be Wajib, though if
other conditions were fulfilled, however, he must send someone as his
**Naib (agent representative).**

• Ample time must be there for one to prepare to go to Hajj, and to
perform all the obligatory acts. If other conditions of Hajj are met,
while time is limited or extraordinary effort is involved, one has to
keep the money unused until the following year for the purpose.

When above conditions are fulfilled, Hajj, becomes Wajib immediately. To
postpone it without any reasonable excuse is among the major s**ins**.
Hajj, must be performed in the same year of Istita'ah, and it continues
to remain obligatory in the ensuing years as long as it has not been
performed.

Important
---------

Before leaving for Hajj, make sure that:  
 a) You fully understand the rules of **Taqleed.**

b) Your money is clean, and you have paid your obligatory debts like
**Khums** and **Zakat.** These essential, long term debts like house
mortgages, business loans, car loans, furniture loans, etc., are not
considered as debts for **Hajj** purposes, provided the installments are
met by you without any hardship.

c) Your intention is purely for **Hajj**. The **Niyyat** must be to
perform Hajj for the sake of seeking nearness to Allah, Qurbatan
Illallahi.

d) You have prepared your **Will,** and given some "**sadaqa*****"***
for your safe journey.


