Hajj al-Tamattu’
================

01. Makkah – Ihram & Talbiya  
 02. Arafah  
 03. Muzdhalifah  
 04. Munna - Hitting of the big Shaitaan  
 05. Munna - Qurbani  
 06. Munna - Taqseer or Halaq  
 07. Munna - Mabeet on 10th & 11th Dhulhijja  
 08. Makkah - Tawaaf of Khan al-Ka’aba  
 09. Makkah - Two rakaats Salaat for Tawaaf  
 10. Makkah - Saee’  
 11. Makkah - Tawaaf-un-Nissa  
 12. Makkah - Two rakaats Salaat for Tawaaf  
 13. Munna - Hitting all three Shaitaans on  
 - the 11th & 12th Dhulhijja

Optional but Highly Recommended
-------------------------------

14. Makkah - Tawaaf-ul-Wida  
 15. Makkah Two rakaats Salaat for Tawaaf

Makkah/Arafah - 8th Dhulhijja
-----------------------------

Most of the Hujjaj depart Makkah for Arafah before Maghrib depending on
the circumstances. This is the toughest part of Hajj. Most of the groups
have air condition buses. In Arafah all Hujjaj stay in tents and Jamaat
Salaat, A’amaal, duas and majlisi are organized. No matter, how hard we
may plan, things could still go wrong and again the key words here are
**“patience and tolerance.”**

Sandwiches and drinks served usually by the organizer of your group
during your stay in Arafah and Munna if **possible and available.**
Therefore**,** Hujjaj are requested to carry (some snacks) with them in
case sandwiches cannot be provided.

**All of the above items must fit in the Hajj travelling bag (except for
the sleeping bag). Please make sure to keep your cash and your ID card
with you at all times.**

Hajj al-Tamattu’- 8th Dhulhijja At Makkah
-----------------------------------------

Mustahab Ghusl for wearing the Ihram.

**Niyyat:** “I am doing Ghusl for wearing Ihram for Hajj al-Tamattu’ for
Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”. Late in the evening you will
Inshallah proceed to Arafah and spend the night in duas and A’amaal.

### 1) 8th Dhulhijja Ihram and Talbiya

You will put your Ihram on at Makkah either at Makam al-Ibrahim, or
anywhere in the Holy Haram or at your place of residence, then
immediately proclaim Talbiya - and the 25 things become Haraam.

Late in the evening you will proceed to Arafah and spend the night in
duas and A’amaal.

During your journey and your stay at Arafah, Muzdhlifah and Munna you
should refrain from worldly talks and occupy yourself in remembering
Allah (SWT) and to thank Him for his blessings that He has bestowed on
you. Also do not forget to pray for your deceased parents, relatives and
friends.

### 2) 9th Dhulhijja - Arafah

**Niyyat:** “I am staying in Arafah from Dhohar to sunset, for Hajje
al-Tamattu’, for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

Inshallah, A’amaal, Duas, Jamaat Salaat, Ziyarat and Majlis are
organized by your group organizer.

### 3) 9th Dhulhijja – Arafah/Muzdhalifah

Inshallah, late in the evening all Hujjaj will proceed to Muzdhalifah
where you will stop and pick up the 70 pebbles for hitting the Shaitaan
at Munna.

It is recommended that you pray Maghrib & Isha Salaat here but if your
group decides to pray at Arafah before leaving for Muzdhalifah, then you
should their instructions.

You will spend the night at Muzdhalifah. Ladies, sick, old people,
children and volunteers usually go to Munna after picking the pebbles.

**There are two Niyyat, a) is Mustahab and b) is Wajib.**  
 • a) “I am spending this night in Muzdhalifah for

Hajj al-Tamattu’ for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.  
 • b) “I stay in Muzdhalifah from Subh al-Sadiq to sunrise for Hajj
al-Tamattu’, for Hajje-tul-Islam,

Qurbatan Ilallah”.

#### 10th Dhulhijja – Muzdhalifa/Mina

After sunrise, the men Hujjaj will Inshallah cross the border and enter
into Munna depending on the traffic your group leader may decide to walk
which will take about 45 minutes whereas the bus may take about 5 to 7
hours.

After settling down in your place of residence you will Inshallah
proceed to hit the big Shaitaan only, followed by Qurbani (sacrifice of
a sheep) and performance of Taqseer or Halaq. The night must be spent in
Munna.

### 4) 10th Zilhajj – Munna

#### Hitting Of The Big Shaitaan

**Niyyat:** “I am hitting the big Shaitaan Aqba seven times for Hajj
al-Tamattu” for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan IIallah”.

### 5) 10th Dhulhijja – Qurbani At Munna

**Niyyat:** “I am doing Qurbani for Hajj al-Tamattu’, for
Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan, Ilallah”.

### 6) 10th Dhulhijja – Taqseer/Halaq At Munna

**Niyyat:** “I am doing Taqseer or Halaq (whatever the case may be) for
Hajj al-Tamattu’ for Hajje-tul- Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

### 7) 10th And 11th Dhulhijja – Mabeet At Munna

You have to spend the nights in Munna. It is known as Mabeet. You can
spend the first part of the night or the second part. An A’alem of your
group will guide you.

**Niyyat:** “I am spending the night in Munna for Hajj al-Tamattu’’, for
Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

Some Hujjaj prefer to return to Makkah on the 10th Dhulhijja after
mid-night which is permitted by Shariah and after refreshing themselves
at their place of residence in Makkah, they proceed to the Holy Haram to
perform the A’amaal of Hajj al-Tamattu’ but they must return to Mina on
the 11th Dhulhijja before Maghrib in order to hit the three Shaitaans.

#### A’amaal to be performed in Makkah as under

### 8) Makkah - Tawaaf-ul Hajj

**Niyyat:** “I am performing Tawaaf for Hajj al-Tamattu’ for
Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”,

### 9) Makkah - Salaat of Tawaaf

**Niyyat:** “I am offering 2 Rakaat Salaat for Tawaaf  
 of Hajj al-Tamattu’, for Hajje-tul-slam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

### 10) Makkah – Saee’

 **Niyyat:** “I am doing Saee’ by walking seven times between Safa and
Marwa for Hajj al-Tamattu’ for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

### 11) 11TH & 12TH Dhulhijja At Munna – Hitting All Three Shaitans on Each Day

It is Wajib on these two days to hit at all the three Shaitaans, each
with pebbles seven times. The sequence as shown here must be maintained.
The first Shaitaan to be hit at must be OOLA the small one, the one
nearer to Mash'ar. The next will ALWUSTA, the middle one, and the last
one is AQBA the big one closer to Makkah. For those who have a
justifiable excuse, like infirmity or sickness, a Naib must be
appointed.

Ladies are allowed to perform this act at night, but they are not
permitted to appoint a Naib if they can perform it themselves.

• **First Niyyat:** “I strike Shaitaan of OOLA (small) seven times, for
Hajj al-Tamattu’, for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

• **Second Niyyat:** I strike Shaitaan of WUSTA (middle) seven times,
for Hajj al-Tamattu’ for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan, Ilallah”.

• **Third Niyyat:** “I strike Shaitaan of AQBA seven times for Hajj
al-Tamattu’, for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah”.

Agha Khui says that the pebbles must hit the old, original part of the
structure of Shaitaan or known as Jamarat.

Many Hujjaj prefer to return to Makkah on the morning of 11th Dhulhijja
after hitting the three Shaitaans, which is permitted by Shariah and
after refreshing themselves at the hotel to proceed to the Holy Haram to
perform the A’amaal of Hajj al-Tamatu’. You are required to return to
Munna before Maghrib.

### 12) Makkah - Tawawaaf-un-Nissa

**Niyyat:** “I am performing Tawaaf for Tawaaf-un-Nissa for Hajj
al-Tamattu’ for Hajje-tul-Islam, Qurbatan Ilallah'.

### 13) Makkah - Salaat of Tawaaf

**Niyyat:** “I am offering 2 Rakaat Salaat for Tawaaf-un-Nissa, Qurbatan
Ilallah.”

### 14) Tawaaf-ul-Wida (optional but recommended)

**Niyyat:** “I am performing Tawaaf-ul-Wida Qurbatan Ilallah”.

### 15) Salat of Tawaaf

**Niyyat:** “I am offering 2 Rakaat Salaat for Tawaaf-ul-Wida, Qurbatan
Ilallah”.

**Please make sure that all the A’amaal of Hajje-Tamattu’ are completed
before you depart Makkah.**

Mustahab Acts at Arafah
-----------------------

1. To remain in the state of Taharat.

2. To make Ghusl (Mustahab) preferably near the time of Dhohar.  
 3. To keep the mind frees from worldly thoughts and concentrate on
prayers and Duas. The famous A’amaal al-Arafah by Imam Husayn A.S. on
this day, is the best. See page 91.  
 4. To pray Dhohar, immediately followed by Asr, with one Adhaan and two
Iqamahs.  
 5. To remember Allah, thank Him, praise Him and seek forgiveness for
your sins.  
 6. You should spend your time in Tasbeehat and Duas and avoid useless
talks.

Mustahab Acts at Muzdhalifah
----------------------------

1. To stay in the middle part of the plain of Mash'ar.

2. To pick 70 pebbles from here for Rami of Jamarat (for Shaitaan).

3. To leave Arafah with clean body and calm mind, proceeding with
Istighfar.

4. To travel with ease, causing trouble to no-body. If it is difficult
to reach Mash'ar before midnight, do not let your Maghrib and Isha
prayers be Qadha. Pray on the way.

5. It is Mustahab to pray Maghrib and Isha on the plains of Mash'ar,
with one Adhaan and two Iqamahs, even if one-third of the night away.

6. Duas, prayers, dhikr and all acts of worship are recommended in this
night, which you have to spend here. If possible try and pray Salaat
al-Shaab.

7. After Fajr Salaat, it is Mustahab to remain in the state of Taharat.

Conditions of Qurbani at Munna
------------------------------

**The animal offered for sacrifice may be a camel, a cow, a goat or a
sheep. But the conditions are as follows:**

1. The animal must not have any defects in it's limbs. It must not be
very old, sick or emaciated. If the ears are partly torn or have holes,
it would not matter, but if

the ears, horns or testicles have been severed or crushed, it would not
be sufficient.

2. The age limit prescribed for animals are as follows:

**Camel** - must have completed it's 5th year and entered the sixth.

**Cows and goats** - Must be three years old.

**Sheep** - must have completed eight months, better still if it has
completed one year and entered the second. If the person purposely and
knowingly selects a young animal in age than above, his Sacrifice would
not be sufficient and acceptable. He has to slaughter again.

3. Every person must offer his own Qurbani. There can

4. be no sharing of funds or animal. Ladies, sick or old people can
appoint a Naib.

5. Qurbani must be carried out during daytime, unless there is a fear of
security. Agha Khui, had said that if due to change in place, it becomes
impossible to slaughter in Munna, one must wait and stay, if one can,
even till the end of Dhulhijja to complete the Qurbani in Munna, but if
this is not at all possible, then Qurbani outside Munna will be valid.

Conditions of Hitting the Shaitaan
----------------------------------

The time for Rami Jamarat (hitting of the Shaitaan) is from sunrise to
sunset. Ladies are permitted to hit the Shaitaan during the night. You
must strike seven times and each time the pebble must hit the Jamarat.
If you miss, you must repeat. Nothing, but pebbles or small stones can
be used. Hitting with objects like shoes, tins, etc. is not acceptable.

Haram, or better yet from Mash'ar. Each pebble must be a fresh one; you
cannot strike with a pebble that has already been used for Shaitaan.

It is Mustahab that the pebble is small in size, just about the size of
a finger head, slightly colored and spotted. It is also Mustahab to be
in Wudhu, and to recite "Allahu Akber" with every throw.

![](/sites/default/files/40.png)


