The Ziyarat of Medina
=====================

Idhn al-Dukhul means permission to enter the Prophet’s mosque for the Ziyarat of the Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

O Allah, I am standing at the door of one of the houses of Your Prophet
and the family. You have prohibited the people from entering his house
except by the permission of Your Prophet and You said: “O You who
believe do not enter the house of the Prophet unless permitted to do
so”. O Allah, I believe in this in his absence just as I believe it in
his presence and I know that Your Prophet and Your vicegerents upon whom
be peace, are alive in your presence, they are being nourished, they see
my position and hear my speech and they return my greetings and (I
believe) that You have covered my ears from hearing their speech and
have opened the door of perception of their secret conversations (with
You); I seek Your permission, O my Lord firstly; then I seek the
permission of Your Prophet, peace be upon him and his family secondly
and I seek the permission of Your vicegerent, the Imam whose obedience
is incumbent upon me and (the permission of) Your angels entrusted over
this blessed site thirdly. May I enter, O Prophet of Allah, may I enter
O the proof of Allah, may I enter, O angels of Allah who are stationed
close to this shrine, so permit me O my master to enter the best of way
that You have permitted any of Your friends, if I am not deserving of
that then You surely are deserving of that.

Whilst putting your right foot in the Haram read this
-----------------------------------------------------

In the name of Allah and by Allah in the path of Allah and on the
religion of the Prophet of Allah peace be upon him and his family. O
Allah forgive me and have mercy on me and turn repentant towards me for
You are most forgiving and merciful.

**Then say ‘Allaho Akber’ Allah is greatest 100 times and two Rakaat
Namaz with the Niyyat of ‘Tahiyat al-Masjid’.**

Recited the Ziyarat of the Prophet of Allah as follows:
-------------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah. Peace be upon you, O Prophet of
Allah. Peace be upon you, O Muhammad the son of the ‘Abd Allah’. Peace
be upon you, O seal of the Prophets; I bear witness that you proclaimed
the message and established the prayer and paid the zakat and enjoined
the good and forbade evil and worshipped Allah with all sincerity until
death overtook you; so may the blessings and mercy of Allah be upon you
and on your pure family.

Facing the Ka’aba towards the Mimbar Read:
------------------------------------------

I bear witness that there is no god except Allah. He is unique, there is
no partner unto Him and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and
Prophet.

I bear witness that you are the Prophet of Allah and that you are
Muhammad, the son of ‘Abd Allah’ and I bear witness that you proclaimed
the messages of your Lord and that you advised your people and strived
in the path of Allah and you served your Lord with wisdom and beautiful
preaching until death overtook you; and you fulfilled the duty imposed
on you and that you were kind to the believers and severe on the
disbelieves. Allah has made you attain the highest position of honour
and nobility. Praise be to Allah who, through you, has saved us from
polytheism and from going astray; O Allah send Your blessings and the
blessings of Your close angels and

Your Messengers and those of Your upright slaves and the people of the
heavens and the earth and those who have glorified You, O Lord, from the
beginning to the end, on Muhammad Your slave and Messenger and Your
Prophet and Your trustworthy and saved one, Your beloved and Your chosen
one; Your special, pure and most virtuous one from Your creatures.

O Allah, grant him an elevated status and make him a means to heaven and
raise him in a praiseworthy status which the first and the last people
will wish to attain. O Allah, You have said: “If they wrong themselves
and come to you and seek forgiveness from Allah, and if the Prophet
seeks forgiveness for them, they will find Allah forgiving and
merciful”. I have come to you seeking forgiveness, repenting my sins and
I seek your mediation with Allah, who is my Lord and Your Lord that He
forgives my sins.

At Maqame Jibra’il, recite the following:
-----------------------------------------

I ask You O generous one, O noble one O close one O distant one that You
bestow Your favours on me again.

The Ziyarat of Bibi Fatima Zehra (peace be upon her)
----------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you O daughter of the Prophet of Allah, peace be upon you
O daughter of the Messenger of Allah. Peace be upon You O daughter of
the beloved of Allah, Peace be upon you O daughter of the friend of
Allah, Peace be upon you O daughter of the chosen one by Allah, Peace be
upon you O daughter of the trustworthy one of Allah, Peace be upon you O
daughter of the best of creation of Allah, Peace be upon you O daughter
of the best of the Prophets and Messengers and angels of Allah. Peace be
upon you O daughter of the best of creation. Peace be upon you O leader
of all women in the world, from the beginning to the end,

Peace be upon you O wife of the friend of Allah and the best of Allah’s
creation after the Prophet of Allah. Peace be upon you O mother of
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, the two leaders of the youths in paradise. Peace
be upon you O truthful martyr, Peace be upon you O peaceful and tranquil
one. Peace be upon you O excellent and pure one. Peace be upon you O one
who has traits of an angel. Peace be upon you O virtuous and pure one;

Peace be upon you O learned one who heard angels speak, Peace be upon
you O oppressed one and one whose rights were usurped; Peace be upon you
O one who was suppressed and overpowered; Peace, mercy and blessing be
upon you O Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet of Allah, May Allah bless
you and your soul and body.

I bear witness that you passed away well informed by your Lord and that
one who has pleased you has pleased the Prophet of Allah peace be upon
him and his family; and one who has displeased you has displeased the
Prophet of Allah peace be upon him and his family, and one who has
harassed you has harassed the Prophet of Allah peace be upon him and his
family and one who establishes links with you establishes links with the
Prophet of Allah peace be upon him and his family and one who has cut
relations with you has cut relations with the Prophet of Allah peace be
upon him and his family because you are part of him and his spirit
within him.

I bear witness by Allah and His Prophets and his angels that I am
pleased with one whom you are pleased and am angry with one whom you are
angry, I dissociate myself from one whom you have dissociated yourself,
I befriend myself with one whom you have befriended and am an enemy of
one with whom you are an enemy; I detest one whom you detest, I love
whom you love, Allah is sufficient as a witness and as one accounting
for deeds and as one who repays and rewards.

Recite Salawat followed by two Rakaat Namaaz of Ziyarat and supplicate to Allah:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Ziyarat of the Imams buried in Janat-ul-Baquee:
---------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you O Imams of guidance, Peace be upon you O people of
piety, Peace be upon you O proofs of Allah on the people of the earth;
Peace be upon you who were steadfast in dealing with people with
justice. Peace be upon you O people of the chosen one.

Peace be upon you the family of the Prophet of Allah, Peace be upon you
O people of secret conversations (with Allah), I bear witness that you
proclaimed and advised and persevered for the sake of Allah and that you
were belied and evil was done to you and you forgave and I bear witness
that you are the rightly guided leaders and that obedience to you is
incumbent and that your speech is correct and that you invited (to the
truth) but were not answered and you commanded but were not followed.

I bear witness that you are the pillars of religion and support of the
earth, you were always under the (caring) eyes of Allah who was
transferring you from the wombs of the pure ones, the era of ignorance
did not contaminate you; the sedition of desires has not partaken of
you, you have become pure; your origin is pure.

Through you He has favoured us (with His religion). He has created you
in houses in which Allah has allowed His name to be elevated and
remembered. He has made our salutations to you to be mercy for us and
expiation of our sins for Allah has chosen you for us and has made our
creation pure because He has favoured us with your affection.

We are named in front of Him due to your Gnosis and because we
acknowledged and believed in you. This is the position of one that has
been extravagant and has erred; He has submitted and acknowledged what
he has committed and hoped of his sincere position and through you he
will be saved from destruction so be my intercessors. I have come to you
for the people of the world have turned away from you and have taken the
signs of Allah as jest and have become arrogant.

O One who is upright and does not over look; O Eternal One who does not
disregard and covers all things You have favoured me with Your help and
have shown me the path which You established for me; for Your slaves
have turned away from it and have become ignorant of its knowledge and
have belittled its rights and have inclined to others; it is Your favour
on me with the people that be to You for I am in front of You in this
position remembered and subject to (Your) decree so do not deprive me of
what I hoped for and, by the sanctity of Muhammad and his pure family,
do not disappoint me what I have asked from You, send Your blessings on
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad.

Ziyarat of Janab al-Fatima Binte Asad, mother of Imam Ali A.S.
--------------------------------------------------------------

Peace be on the Prophet of Allah, Peace be on the Messenger of Allah,
Peace be on Muhammad the leader of the Messengers, Peace be on Muhammad
the leader of the foremost ones. Peace be on one whom Allah sent as a
mercy to the universe. Peace be on you, O Prophet and the mercy and
blessings of Allah be upon you. Peace be on Fatima, the daughter of
Asad, the Hashimite, Peace be upon you O truthful and contented one;
Peace be upon you O virtuous and pure one; Peace be upon you O virtuous
and pure one; Peace be upon You O noble and contented one; Peace be upon
you O one who looked after Muhammad, the seal of the Prophets.

Peace be upon you O mother of the leader of the successors. Peace be
upon you who showed compassion to the Prophet of Allah, seal of the
Prophets; Peace be upon you O one who raised the trustworthy friend of
Allah; Peace be upon you, on your soul and on your pure body; May peace,
mercy and blessings be upon you and on your son.

I bear witness that you supported in the best manner possible and
fulfilled your obligation and strived for the pleasure of Allah and
exerted yourself in protecting the Prophet of Allah, being aware of his
status; believing in his truthfulness; acknowledging his prophecy,
perceiving his blessings; taking responsibility of his upbringing,
dealing with him affectionately; ready to serve him; choosing what
please him, preferring what he like; I bear witness that you spent your
life on the (true) faith and adhering to the most noble religion, being
pleased and contented, pure, clean, guarded and virtuous.

May Allah be pleased and satisfied with you; may He make heaven as your
house and permanent abode. O Allah, send y our greetings on Muhammad and
the family of Muhammad and make my visiting her beneficial to me and
make me firm in my love for her and do not deprive me of her
intercession and the intercession of the Imams from her loins; so grant
me her company and gather me with her and with her pure children;

O Allah, do not make it my last visit to her and grant me another visit
to her as long as You keep me alive and if You cause me to die then
gather me with her ranks and include me amongst those receiving her
intercession by Your mercy, O Most Merciful of the Merciful ones. O
Allah, I ask You by her status and high position in front of You,
forgive me and my parents and all believing men and women and grant us
goodness in this and the next world and save us, by Your mercy, from the
punishment of the fire.

The Ziyarat of Hazrat Hamza, the uncle of the Prophet (SA.W) at Ohud:
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you O uncle of the Prophet of Allah peace be upon him and
his family; Peace be upon you O best of the martyrs; Peace be upon you O
lion of Allah and the lion of His Prophet. I bear witness that you
fought for Allah, the Most Mighty and Glorious and you exerted yourself
and advised the Prophet of Allah and desired (the rewards) available
through Allah the Most Glorious.

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/45.png)

May my father and mother be sacrificed for you, I have come to you
seeking closeness to Allah the Most Mighty and Glorious by visiting you,
and seeking nearness to the Prophet of Allah peace be upon him and his
family; through that desiring from (your) intercession; seeking from my
visiting you freedom of myself and seeking refuge, through you, from the
fire; those like me deserve it for the wrong I have done to myself.

(I come) fleeing from my sins which I have committed; fleeing to you
hoping g for the mercy of My Lord; I have come to you from a distant
land seeking freedom from the fire, my back is loaded with my sins. I
have committed what angers my Lord. I did not find anyone more worthy to
flee to than you, the Ahl Al-Bayt of mercy, so be my intercessors on the
day of my poverty and need. I have traveled to you in a sad state and in
distress.

I shed tears in front of you, crying I have come to you lonely; you are
amongst those whom Allah has commanded to join with and has urged me
towards piety and guided me to His grace and love; He urged me to come
to you and inspired me to ask my needs to Him; You are the Ahl Al-Bayt
no one befriends you is miserable; one who comes to you is not
disappointed and one who is inclined towards You does not lose nor does
one who shows enmity towards you become happy.

**Recite Two Rakaat Namaaz and say Duas**

Ziyarat of Martyrs (Shuhada) of Uhud:
-------------------------------------

Peace be on the Prophet of Allah, Peace be on the Messenger of Allah;
Peace be on Muhammad the son of ‘Abd Allah’; Peace be on you, O people
of the house of belief and unity; Peace be on you, O helpers of the
religion of Allah and helpers of His Prophet and his family, Peace be on
you for the patience which you have exercised for what a wonderful abode
that is! I bear witness that Allah has chosen you for His religion and
chosen you for His Prophet.

I also bear witness that you truly strove for Allah and defended the
religion of Allah and His Prophet and you gave yourselves for him. I
bear witness that you were killed on the path of the Prophet of Allah so
may Allah grant you the best reward of (your services to) His Prophet
and for Islam and its followers. May Allah make us see your faces in
places of His pleasure and His honour with the Messengers and the
truthful ones and the martyrs and the upright ones; for they are the
best friends.

I bear witness that you are the party of Allah and that one who wages
war against you wages war against Allah. I also bear witness that you
are the close, victorious ones to Allah who are living in the proximity
of their Lord and are being nourished. May the curse of Allah and the
angels and all the people fall on those who killed you.

I have come to visit you, O people of tawhid, knowing your rights and
the merits of visiting you seeking closeness to Allah and because of my
knowing (your) past honourable deeds and good acts so may the peace,
mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you; may the curse, anger and wrath
befall on one who killed you O Allah, make my visit to them beneficial
to me and make me firm in my resolvement (for them) and make me die (for
the same goal) as you made them die and gather me and them in the same
abode of your mercy. I bear witness that you have preceded us and we
will join you.

When leaving Medina, recite the following Ziyarat Al-Wida’a (farewell Ziyarat) of the Prophet
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you O Prophet of Allah I bid you farewell and I ask you
(for help) and I send you my salaams. I believe in Allah and in what you
have brought and guided me towards. O Allah, do not make it my last
visit to the grave of Your Prophet. If You take me away before that I
bear witness in my death as I bear witness in my life that there is no
god but You and that Muhammad is Your slave and Your Messenger Peace be
upon him and his family.

When leaving Jannat-ul-Baquee for the last time, recite this farewell Ziyarat (Ziyarat Al-Wida’a)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you of leaders of guidance, may the mercy and blessings of
Allah be showered upon you; I bid you farewell and send you my
salutations. We have believed in Allah and in the Prophet and in what
you have brought and guided towards.

O my Allah, count us amongst those who bore witness (to this testimony).
Peace be on the Prophet of Allah, Peace be on the Messenger of Allah,
Peace be on the beloved of Allah, Peace be on the chosen one of Allah,
Peace be on the saved one by Allah, Peace be on Muhammad the son of ‘Abd
Allah’, the master and seal of the Prophets and the chosen one by Allah
amongst all His creatures on the earth and skies.

Peace be on all His Prophets and Messengers; Peace be on the martyrs and
upright prosperous one. Peace be on us and on the upright slaves of
Allah. Peace be on you O pure soul; Peace be on you O noble self; Peace
be on you, O one with pure descent; Peace be on you, O pure soul, Peace
be on you, O son of the best creatures; Peace be on you O son of the
chosen Prophet, Peace be on you O son of one sent to all the upright
ones; Peace be on you, O son of the bringer of good tidings and warner;
Peace be on you, O son of the lamp and light.

Peace be upon you, O son of one supported by the Qur’an; Peace be on you
O son of one sent to human beings and Jinns; Peace be on you O son of
the bearer of the flag and sign; Peace be on you O son of the
intercessor on the day of judgement; Peace be on you O son of one whom
Allah drew closer with honour. Peace be on you, and may the mercy and
blessings of Allah descent upon you I bear witness that Allah has chosen
for you the abode of his blessings before He prescribed His laws or
imposed His halal and haraam so he took you towards Him as you were
good, pure, contented and purified from all impurity, sanctified from
all filth and He has allocated heaven as your resting abode and elevated
you to a high station;

May the blessings of Allah be upon you, blessings through which the eyes
of His Prophet are delights and his greatest hopes realized. O Allah,
send your best, pure and choicest and complete blessings on Your Prophet
and Messenger and Your choicest of creatures Muhammad the seal of the
Prophets and on the loins of his pure sons and on those succeeding him
from his pure family, by Your mercy, O Most Merciful One.

O Allah, I ask You by the right of Muhammad Your chosen one and by
Ibrahim, the Progeny of Your Prophet that make my striving to them
accepted, due to them, forgive my sins and make my life, due to them,
upright and my end, due to them, praiseworthy, my needs, due to them,
fulfilled and my actions, due to them pleasing (to You) and my affairs,
due to them prosperous and my matters, due to them, commendable.

O Allah, make my success complete, and free me from all troubles and
constraints. A Allah, remove Your punishment from me and grant me Your
rewards; make me live in Your paradise, grant me Your pleasure and Your
safety; include in my upright supplication my parents and my children
and all the believers, men and women, those alive or dead, for You are
the master of the actions which survive after the doer passes away,
A’amin, O Lord of the universe.


