Du’a for Entering Masjid-ul-Haraam
==================================

**It is better to enter from Bab-ul-Salaam and recite the du’a while
near the pillar.**

May Peace, mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you O Prophet. In the
name of Allah and by Allah, and by what Allah wishes, peace be on the
Prophets and Messengers of Allah. Peace be upon the Prophet of Allah
(SAW) peace be upon Ibrahim the friend of Allah. Praise be to Allah the
Lord of the Universe, In the name of Allah and by Allah and from Allah
and to Allah, by whatever Allah wishes and in accordance to the religion
of the Prophet of Allah, peace be upon him and his family all the best
names belong to Allah, praise be to Allah.

Peace be to the Prophet of Allah, peace be upon Muhammad the son of ‘Abd
Allah. Peace, mercy and blessings be upon you, O Prophet of Allah. Peace
be upon the Prophets and Messengers of Allah. Peace be upon Ibrahim the
friend of the Merciful One. Peace be upon the Prophets, praise be to
Allah the Lord of the Universe.

Peace be upon us and on the upright slaves of Allah. O Allah send peace
on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and bless Muhammad and the family
of Muhammad and have mercy on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad just
as You sent peace and blessings and had mercy on Ibrahim and the family
of Ibrahim, You are the most Praiseworthy, most Glorious.

O Allah send peace on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad Your slave and
Messenger. O Allah send Your blessings on Ibrahim, Your friend and on
Your Prophets and Messengers and grant them peace, and peace be upon the
Messengers. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Universe. O Allah open
for me the doors of Your mercy, and make me perform, deeds of Your
obedience and pleasure.

Protect me through the protection of faith as long as You make me live,
all Praise be to You. Praise be to Allah who has made me amongst His
guests and His visitors and amongst those who enlivens His mosques and
made me amongst those who converses with Him. O Allah, I am Your slave,
visiting Your house; whoever comes and visits there has rights (to ask)
and You are the best of hosts, and most noble to visit.

I ask You O Allah, O Merciful One, You are Allah there is no Lord but
You; You have no partners You are One, Unique, Independent. You did not
beget nor were You begotten nor is there anyone like You; and I bear
witness that Muhammad is Your slave and Messenger, peace be upon him and
family, O Generous One, O Noble One, O Glorious One, O All-Conquering, O
Noble One. I ask You that Your first gift to me of my visiting You be
that You grant me freedom from the fire.

**Then say this three times:**

O Allah, free me from the fire.

**And then recite this:**

O Allah, increase my sustenance from You, granting me halaal and pure
sustenance, remove the evils of Satan amongst the men and jinn, and the
evils of the Arabs and the non-Arabs.

**Enter the mosque and say as follows:**

In the name of Allah and by Allah, on the religion of the Prophet of
Allah peace be upon him and his family.

**Then face the Khana al-Ka’aba and raise both hands and recite the
following:**

O Allah, I ask You in my present position and in my first (stages of) of
rituals to accept my repentance and overlook my faults and remove my
burden. Praise be to Allah who made me reach His sacred sanctuary.

O Allah, I bear witness by You that this is Your sacred sanctuary which
You have made a place of return, place of safety and blessing for the
people, and a source of guidance for the universe.

O Allah, the slave is Yours, the land is yours, the sanctuary is Yours,
I have come seeking Your mercy and I agree to obey You, obeying Your
commands, pleased with Your decree. I ask You like a poor person coming
to You, scared of Your punishment. O Allah, open the doors of Your mercy
for me and me perform deeds of Your obedience and pleasure.

**Then invoke the Ka’aba and say this:**

Praise be to Allah who has made you great and honoured you and made you
noble and a gathering place for the people and a place of safety and
blessings, and a source of guidance for the universe.

**When you see the Hajr-al-Aswad, say the following:**

Praise be to Allah who has guided us to this, had it not been for
Allah’s guidance, we would not have been guided. Glory be to Allah,
praise be to Allah, there is no god but Allah; Allah is the greatest,
Allah is greater than His creatures, Allah is greater than what I can be
scared and be cautious of. There is no god but Allah, He is unique,
there is no partner to Him, to Him belongs the kingdom and praise, He
gives life and death, He gives death and life, He is for ever living, He
does not die, all goo originates from Him, He is powerful over
everything.

O Allah, send peace on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and bless
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad just as you sent peace and blessings
and mercy on Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahiim. You are the most
praiseworthy and most glorious. And peace be upon all Prophets and
Messengers, praise be to Allah, the Lord of the universe. O Allah, I
believe in Your promise and attest to Your Prophets and I follow Your
book.

**After this, keeping the thought of Allah’s wrath in mind, slowly
proceed forward and on reaching Hajr-al-Aswad raise both hands and
praise Allah and send salawat on Prophet Muhammad (SAW) and his Progeny
and then recite the following:**

O Allah , accept this from me.

**If possible, kiss Hajr-al-Aswad; if not, point at it and recite the
following:**

O Allah, I have fulfilled my trust, and have accomplished my covenant so
that You may witness that I have fulfilled my promise; O Allah, in
accordance with Your book and the practice of Your Prophet, may Your
blessings be sent upon him and his family.

I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, He is unique, there is no
partner to Him, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and
Messenger, I believe in Allah and disbelieve in Jibt (an idol) and the
rebels and al-Lat, al-’Uzza (names of idols) and the worship of Satan
and the worship of any rival who is believed in except for Allah.

O Allah, to You I have extended my hands and my need for what You have
is great, so accept my glorification (of You) and forgive me and have
mercy on me. O Allah, I seek Your protection from disbelief and poverty
and (any) situation of disgrace in this world and the hereafter.

**Recite the following du’a whilst doing the Tawaaf:**

O Allah, I ask You by Your name through which one can walk on the waves
of the water just as one can walk on the streets of the earth; and I ask
You by Your name through which the feet of Your angels tremble; and I
ask you by your name through which Musa supplicated on the mountain of
Tur, and You answered him and You showered him with love; and I ask you
by Your name through which You have cleansed Muhammad peace be upon him
and his family from his past and future accusations; and through which
You have completed Your favours on him, I ask You to **.....ask for your
needs (Haajat) from Allah and read the following supplication during the
Tawaaf:**

O Allah, I am a poor person in front of You, I am scared, asking for
protection, do not alter my body (by being disabled) nor change my name
(poor reputation).

**During the Tawaaf, on reaching the door of the Ka’aba in each round
recite this du’a commencing with Salawat:**

Your needy person is asking from You, Your poor person and beggar is at
Your door, so grant him heaven. O Allah, this is Your house, Your sacred
sanctuary, I am Your slave; in this is a position of one who seeks Your
protection and refuge from the hell-fire, so free me and my parents and
my family and my children and my believing brothers and sisters from the
fire, O most Generous and Noble one.

**On reaching Hijre Ismail, look up at the (Ka’aba) golden water spout
which is at the roof and recite the following du’a:**

O Allah, grant me heaven and through Your mercy protect me from the fire
and keep me away from sickness, expand (the scope of) my halaal
sustenance and remove the evil corruption of the Jinn and men and the
evil corruption of the Arabs and the non-Arabs from me.

**Recite this du’a when reaching the back of the Ka’aba:**

O possessor of favors and power, O most Generous and Noble one, indeed
my (good) acts are a few so increase them and accept them from me, for
You are the most Hearing, most Knowing.

**At Rukn al-Yamani, raising both hands, recite this:**

O Allah, O master of health and giver of health and bestower of
blessings through health, grant benefits with health to me and to all
Your creatures; O Most Merciful and Most kind One of this world and the
hereafter; send Your blessings on Muhammad and his family, grant us
complete health in its perfect form and the ability to thank You for the
health in this world and in the hereafter, O Most Merciful and the
Merciful ones.

**Then facing the front of the Ka’aba raising both hands say this:**

Praise be to Allah who has honoured You and deemed you great, praise be
to Allah who sent Muhammad as Prophet and made Ali the Imam. O Allah,
guide through him the best of Your creatures and remove from him the
evil of Your creatures.

**Read the following between Rukn al-Yamani and Hajr-al-Aswad:**

O my Lord, grant us virtue in this world and in the hereafter and save
us from the punishment of the fire.

In the 7th round at Mustajar (behind the Ka’aba and a little before Rukn
al-Yamani), it is recommended to stop a little and spread both hands on
the walls of the Ka’aba and, with the face and body touching the wall,
recite the following du’a: O Allah, this is Your house, Your slave; in
this position I am seeking Your protection from the fire. O Allah, from
You is the comfort, relief from suffering and health (comes from You). O
Allah, indeed my (good) actions are few so increase them for me and
forgive what You know about me which You have hidden from Your
creatures, I seek protection by Allah from the fire. O Allah, I have
(committed) multitudes of sins and multitudes of slips; You have
multitudes of mercy and multitudes forgiveness. O One who answered His
most detestablecreatures (Satan) when he said: “Give me respite until
the day they are raised”, (O Allah), answer me **(ask for your Haajat,
confess your sins etc).**

**On reaching Hajr al-Aswad, recite the following:**

O Allah, make me contented with what You grant me and bless what You
grant me.

**After completion of Namaaz al-Tawaaf, say the following:**

O Allah, accept this from me, do not make it my last visit from me. All
praise and all adoration be to Allah for all His blessings until the
praises reach the (level) He loves and is pleased with. O Allah, send
Your blessings on Muhammad and his family; accept my (supplications),
and purify my heart and make my actions righteous. O Allah, through my
obedience to You and Your Messenger, peace be upon him and his family,
have mercy on me. O Allah, prevent me from transgressing Your boundaries
and make me amongst those who love You and Your Prophet, peace be upon
him and his family and on Your angels and the upright slaves.

**Then prostrate (do sajda) and recite:**

My face has prostrated to You in obedience and submission. There is no
god but You, truly, truly, You are the foremost before everything, the
last one after everything and I am here in front of You, my forehead is
in front of You; so forgive me for no one but You forgives the immense
sins; forgive me for I confess my sins against myself, no one can
overlook the great sins apart from You.

**At the well of Zam Zam, after pouring water on the face and back and
drinking it, recite:**

O Allah, make it (the water a source) of beneficial knowledge and vast
sustenance and cure from every illness and sickness.

**After this, perform the Saee' and at Safa facing the Khana al-Ka’aba
say 7 times:**

Allahu Akbar - (There is no god but Allah)

**and say three times:**

There is no god but Allah He is Unique, there is no partner unto Him; to
Him belongs the sovereignty and praise, He gives life and death, He
gives death and life and He is Ever-living, He does not die, and He is
powerful over everything.

**Then read Salawat three times and read the following du’a also three
times:**

Allah is the greatest due to His guidance to us, Praise be to Allah for
what He has bestowed upon us, Praise be to Allah, the One who is the
Ever-existent, the Ever-lasting; Praise be to Allah the Ever-existent,
the Eternal-One.

**And then say this three times:**

I bear witness that there is no god except Allah and I bear witness that
Muhammad is His slave and Messenger. We do not worship anyone but Him,
sincerely in religion even though the polytheists may hate that. O
Allah, I ask you for forgiveness, health and certitude in this world and
the hereafter. O Allah, give us virtue in this world and in the
hereafter and save us from the hell fire.

**Then say 100 times - Allahu Akbar La Ilah Illa Allah**

(Allah is Great, there is no god but Allah).

**Then say 100 times: Alhamdu Lillah** (Praise be to Allah)  
**Then say 100 times: Subhana’allah** (Glory be to Allah)

**Then recite this:**

There is no god but Allah, the Unique One, He has fulfilled His promise
and helped His slave, He has overcome the parties, the Unique one, to
Him belongs the kingdom and the praise, the Unique one. O Allah, bless
me in death and after death. O Allah, I seek Your protection from the
darkness and loneliness of the grave. O Allah, shelter me with the
protection of Your throne on the day when there will be shelter except
Yours.

**Then recite this:**

I entrust my religion and myself and family and property and my children
to Allah, the most Merciful and Kind. He does not abandon what is
entrusted to him. O Allah, make me act according to Your book and
practice of Your Prophet and make me die on his religion and protect me
from strife.

**Then say Allahu Akbar 3 times and recite this du’a:**

O Allah, forgive all my sins I have ever committed, if I repeat them
then please turn to me in forgiveness again for You are most Forgiving,
most Merciful. O Allah, deal with me according to ho You are, for if You
deal with me according to how You are You will have mercy on me and if
You punish me then You are free from my punishment whereas I am in need
of Your mercy.

O One whose mercy I am in need of, have mercy on me and not deal with me
according to how I am, for if You deal with me according to how I am You
will punish me without being unfair to me. I have become fearful of Your
justice, I do not fear Your oppression, O One who is just but does not
oppress, have mercy on me. O One who does not disappoint the one who
asks Him and does not exhaust His gifts send Your blessings on Muhammad
and his family, through Your mercy, save me from the fire.

**On the fourth step at Safa facing the Ka’aba recite the following
duas:**

O Allah, I seek our protection from the punishment of the grave and it’s
trials and it’s strangeness and loneliness and it’s darkness and it’s
narrowness and it’s straits. O Allah, shelter me with the shelter of
Your throne on the day when there will be no shelter except Yours.

**On the bottom step recite:**

O Lord of forgiveness, O One who commanded through forgiveness O One who
is foremost in forgiveness, O One who rewards through forgiveness, I
seek forgiveness, forgiveness, forgiveness, O Most Generous and Noble, O
blessings on me again and make me do deeds of obedience and pleasure to
You.

**When reaching the green pillars of Harwala, recite the following:**

In the name of Allah and by Allah and Allah is the greatest, send Your
blessings on Muhammad and his family. O Allah, forgive me, have mercy
and overlook what You know, for You are most Mighty and Noble and guide
me to that which is most firm. O Allah, indeed my (good) acts are few,
so increase them for me, and accept them from me. O Allah, for you I
strive, my power and strength is due to You, so accept my deeds O You
who accept the actions of the pious ones.

**When going beyond the second green pillar say the following:**

O You who bestow favours and grace, has power, nobility, blessings and
generosity; forgive my sins, for no one forgives sins except You.

**On reaching the hill of Marwa, recite all the duas which have been
mentioned for Safa and recite this du’a too:**

O Allah, O one who has commanded through forgiveness, O one who loves
forgiveness, O one who gives through forgiveness, O one who forgives
through forgiveness, O Lord of forgiveness, I ask for forgiveness,
forgiveness, forgiveness.

**Whilst crying, recite this throughout the Saee':**

O Allah, I ask You to grant me good thoughts of You at all times and
pure intention in my depending on You.

**For Hajj al-tul Islam On the eve of 8th of Dhulhijja when one leaves
for Arafah and when nearing Munna recite the following:**

O Allah, I have placed my hopes in You only, I ask from You only, so
make me attain my hopes and put my affairs in order.

**During the journey, make yourself busy with tasbih and the remembrance
of Allah (SWT) and when nearing Arafah recite the following.**

O Allah, I have turned to You and I have depended on You and I desire
You; I ask You to bless me in my journey and to fulfill my needs and
make me amongst those whom You can boast of today in front of those who
are better than me.

**On the day of Arafah after saying your Dhoharan Salaat on time say
whilst facing the Qibla:**  
 Recite Ayatal-Qursi, Salawat, Sura Inna Anzalna, La hawla wala quwwata
illa bi’llah and also sura Tawhid. It is recommended to recite each of
these 100 times, and together with the duas recommended for the day,
recite the following:

Allah is greatest, Praise and Glory be to Allah, and there is no god but
Allah. O Allah, I am Your slave so do not make me amongst the
disappointed guests. Have mercy on my travelling to You from distant
areas. O Allah, the Lord of all holy places, free me from the fire and
grant me halaal sustenance and remove the evil corruption of Jinn and
human beings from me. O Allah, do not plot against me and do not deceive
me and do not test me. O Allah, I ask You by Your power, generosity,
nobility and bounties and grace, O best of those who hear, O best of
those who see, O quickest in reckoning, O most Merciful of the merciful
ones, send Your blessings on Muhammad and his family and do for me
[**Raise your both hands and ask for needs].**


