Namaz al-Shab
=============

It can be prayed anytime after midnight (Midnight is the exact half
between sunset and sunrise). It is better and more preferable to pray
during the last hours of the night and just before dawn so that one can
stay awake and pray morning prayers before retiring.

Short Way of Praying Namaz al-Shab
----------------------------------

There are a total of 11 rakaats in Namaz al-Shab.  
 Start with praying 8 rakaats i.e. 4 prayers of 2 rakaats each like the
subh prayer to be prayed with the Niyat of

**Salaat** **al-Shab.** In both the rakaats recite Sura al-Hamd followed
by any other Sura. Then recite 2 rakaats with the Niyyat of **Salaat**
**al-Shafa, which** is to be prayed like the morning prayer. After that
pray 1 rakaat Salaat with the Niyyat of **Salaat** **al-Witr.** It is
prayed like the second rakaat of Salaat al-Subh. This one rakaat is the
most important of the whole Salaat al-shab. Details of how to pray are
described.

How To Pray Salaat al-Witr:
---------------------------

Take Tasbeeh in your hand and stand up. Make Niyyat of salaat al-witr,
say Takbeer and recite Sura al-Hamd followed by Sura
al-Qul-Huwallahu-Ahad three times then

Sura al-Qul-Audhu Bi-Rabbil Falaq and Sura al-Qul-Audhubi-Rabbin-Naas
each once.

Qunuut
------

Then say Takbeer and raise your hands for Qunuut in which any Dua may be
recited. It is preferable to recite the following Dua.

“Lailaha Illalahul Haleemul Kareem; Lailaha Illalaahul Aliyyul Adheem;
Subhanallahi Rabbi-s-Samawaati-s-Sab’e, Wa Rabbil Aradheena-s-Sab’-e;
Wamaa Feehinna Wamaa Baina-Hunna; Wa Rabbil Arshil Adheem; Wal
Hamdulillahi Rabbil Aala Meen; Waswallalahu Alaa Muhammadin Wa Aalheit
Twaahereen.”

Then hold the Tasbee in your right hand for counting and raise your left
hand pray for **40 Momineen** **and Mominaat** whether dead or alive in
the following manner:

**“Allahum-Maghfirli and the name of the Momineen or Mominaat”.**  
 Then recite 100 times **“Astagh-Firul-Laha Rabbi Wa Atuubu Ilayh”**

Then recite 7 times: **“Hadha Maqaamul Aaedheebeka Minan-Naar”.**

After that recite 300 times. **“Alafv”.**

Finish the prayer in the usual way by going into Rukuu and Sajdah
followed by Tashahud and Salaam. After finishing recite Tasbee al-Fatima
Zehra A.S. Then make Sajda al-Shukr.


