Ziyarat of Shaam
================

Please refer to page numbers 5 to 14, which are very important except
for a few changes for Ziyarat in Syria, which are mentioned below.

Information For Syrian Visa
---------------------------

They are very strict especially Zuwars holding Tanzanian, Kenyan,
Ugandan, Indian, Pakistani and Shri Lankan passports.

You must obtain your Visa from the country of your residence before you
proceed to Syria. If you are going to go to Iran then please make sure
that you have a multiple visa for Syria otherwise you will have a
problem on your return from Iran.

If you have joined a group then your group organizer will be responsible
for obtain your visa.

Hotels & Restaurants
--------------------

In addition to five star hotels mentioned in this booklet, there are
also many 2 and 3 star hotels at the city centre, known as the MERGE
which are less expensive and affordable.

There are also many restaurants at the MERGE but we will recommend two,
ALI BABA and ABU KAMAL the food is also very reasonable.

Transportation
--------------

Taxis are very cheap in Damascus. From the city centre to Raudhah of
Bibi Zainab may cost you about Fifty Syrian Pounds.

Traveller’s Cheques
-------------------

It is very difficult to cash your traveler’s cheques and we advise you
to carry US Dollars bills in large denomination.

Currencies
----------

There is an exchange control in Syria and Zuwars are advised not to cash
their currency in stores but to go to the banks. It is difficult to cash
Traveler’s cheques and we recommend you carry US Dollars bills with you
in large denomination for better rate. If you have joined a group then
the group leader can assist you in exchanging your currency. Exchange
only what you think you will need. You will not be able to reconvert the
Syrian Pounds into US Dollars.

The rate of exchange fluctuates against the American Dollar and the rate
in December 1997 was about 35/40 Syrian Pounds to one US Dollar.

Weather
-------

During the months of December, January and February are very cold and
you will require thermal undergarments, winter coat and winter gloves.

March, April, August, September and October and are pleasant months.

June and July are very hot.

Damascus – Raudhah of Bibi Zainab A.S.
--------------------------------------

You will visit the Raudhah of Bibi Zainab A.S. in the town of As-Sayyida
Zainab. Bibi Zainab A.S. was the daughter of our first Imam Hazrat Ali
A.S. and Bibi Fatima Zehra A.S.

She was born in Medina on 1st Shabaan in the year 6 A.H. and she died in
the year 62 A.H. When she was born, the Holy Prophet (Saw) gave her the
name of ‘Zainab’ by the order of the Almighty Allah (SWT). Bibi Zainab
A.S. was a very clever, intelligent and pious lady. She devoted her
whole life in spreading and saving Islam. She used to teach Quraan with
the meanings to the ladies of Kufa. Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S.’s mother
died when he was very young and Bibi Zainab A.S. used to take care of
him. In the year 60 A.H. she went with Imam Husayn .A.S. to Karbala’. On
every occasion in Karbala’, Imam Husayn A.S. used to take the advice of
Bibi Zainab A.S. On the day of Ashura, her two sons, Ibrahim and Aun
Muhammad sacrificed their lives for the sake of Islam. On the 11th
Muharram, 60 A.H. they were taken captives and marched through the towns
of Kufa and Shaam.

For one year they stayed captives in Damascus. Bibi Zainab A.S. faced
Yazid after the Tragedy of Karbala’ and told him of the wrongs he had
done. She also gave very good lectures whenever she got a chance, she
therefore enabled the people to know the principles and practices of
Islam and the wrong and merciless killings of the followers of Imam
Husayn A.S. in Karbala’ by Yazid and his army. Due to her honesty,
bravery and truthfulness, Islam spread through Shaam.

When they were released from prison, she, along with the rest of the
members of Ahlul Bayt went to Medina. Even in Medina, she continued
preaching. Islam spread rapidly. The governor of Medina became very
frightened and wrote to Yazid that Bibi Zainab A.S. was in Medina and
was spreading Islam quickly and that she would break his empire. Yazid
gave orders that Bibi Zainab A.S. should leave Medina and settle in a
village outside Medina. Later on from there she was sent to a town
called Misar which is in Egypt.

She continued spreading Islam there as well. Yazid became very scared so
he once again ordered that she be taken prisoner and brought to Shaam.
When she arrived at a small village on the boundary of Shaam, she
remembered where Imam Husayn A.S. head had been kept on a farm under a
tree. When she found the tree, she started crying.

A man of Shaam, who was a follower and friend of Yazid, saw her and hit
her with a spade on her head. She collapsed and died. Imam Zainul
Abedeen A.S. buried her there. That is how this small town came to be
known as As-Sayyid Zainab. According to historians, Bibi Zainab’s A.S.
husband - Abdullah Ibnne Ja’far at-Tayyar was a very rich man. He bought
the surrounding land and made the Raudhah especially in the name of Bib
Zainab A.S.

In the town of Misar in Egypt, there is another Ziyarat of Bibi Zainab
and the place is known as Masjid al-Zainabia. This Bibi Zainab is the
daughter of Yahya, Yahya binte Zayed, Zayed Binte Zainul Abedeen. She is
the great granddaughter of our 4th Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S. The Bohoras
go to Cairo to the Ziyarat of this Bibi Zainab.

Hajar Bin Udai And His Sons
---------------------------

He was the companion of our Prophet of Islam (SAW) and Hazrat Imam Ali
A.S. He was the Commander-in-Chief of Imam Ali’s army in the battle of
Siffeen. He, together with his sons and other people, was sent by Imam
Ali A.S. to see Moaviya on a special project. At the border he was
recognized and was arrested along with his people including his two
sons. Moaviya asked them to renounce their allegiance to Imam Ali A.S.,
but they refused and stood steadfast in their faith for Imam Ali A.S.,
They were killed. He witnessed his two sons being killed. They are
buried here. This place is known as MAKAME ADRA, which is about 40 km
from the city.

It is narrated that Bibi Zainab A.S. has said that ‘anybody who comes
for my Ziyarat and does not perform the Ziyarat of Hajar Bin Udai then
his/her Ziyarat is incomplete.

Raudhah of Hazrat Janab al-Ruqayya A.S.
---------------------------------------

She was the young daughter of Imam Husayn A.S. She was also present in
Karbala’. (From Karbala’ along with the rest of the family of Imam
Husayn A.S.) she was taken prisoner and taken to Shaam. It is here that
she passed away.

Raudhah of Bibi Kulthum A.S.
----------------------------

She was the sister of Imam Husayn A.S. She was born in 7 A.H. and died
in 62 A.H. She was the youngest daughter of Bibi Fatima A.S. She was
also taken prisoner and brought to Shaam along with the others. When
Bibi Zainab A.S. was martyred, Bibi Kulthum A.S. was with her in Shaam.
She used to live in Shaam and it is here that she passed away and is
buried. Her husband’s name was Mohamed Ibne Ja’far at-Tayyar who was the
brother of the husband of Bibi Zainab A.S., but he passed away before
the incident of Karbala’.

Raudhah of Bibi Umm al-Salma Wife of Our Prophet of Islam (Saw)
---------------------------------------------------------------

She was the wife of the Holy Prophet (SAW). She used to love the
children of Bibi Fatima A.S. The Holy Prophet (SAW) had already told her
about the death of Imam Husayn .A.S and the incident of Karbala’. When
Imam Husayn A.S. was killed in Karbala’, Umm al-Salma saw the Holy
Prophet in her dream and she told him that his grandson, Imam Husayn
A.S. had been martyred. The first majlis of Imam Husayn A.S. (and his
sacrifice) was conducted by Umm al-Salma in Medina. She used to cry a
lot when recalling the incident of Karbala’ and one year later she
passed away. In Makkah, when Bibi Khadija A.S. passed away, the Holy
Prophet (SAW) kept her with Bibi Fatima A.S. Umm al- Salma used to say
that Bibi Fatima A.S. had a lot of knowledge and did not need to learn
anything but instead Umm al-Salma learned a lot from her.

Raudhah of Bibi Fizza A.S.
--------------------------

She was the daughter of a king in Ethiopia. She left her father and went
to work as a maid of Janab al-Fatima Zehra A.S. She was only 11 years of
age when she came to serve Bibi Fatima A.S. It is believed that she knew
how to make gold and she also knew the Holy Quran by heart. Once she
invited the Ahlul Bayt for dinner and with her dua, the food was sent to
her from Heaven by the order of Allah (SWT).

After the death of Bibi Fatima A.S. she continued to stay with the Ahlul
Bayt, even though she had sons who were very rich. Imam Husayn A.S. even
took her to Karbala’. On every occasion in Karbala’, she was with Bibi
Zainab A.S. Imam Husayn A.S. respected her very much. She died in Shaam
and is buried there.

It is said that when Yazid was misbehaving in the Darbar of Shaam
against the Ahlul Bayt A.S. When she stood in front of Bibi Zainab A.S.
Yazid gave ordered that Bibi Fizza should whipped. Bibi Fizza came
forward and gave a daring speech addressing the African slaves who were
the bodyguards. She told them it was a shame on them that in their
presence Yazid was ordering her to be whipped. The slaves were very much
affected by her speech and they immediately turned towards Yazid and
told him that if Bibi Fizza was whipped they would attack with their
swords already drawn. Yazid ordered the slaves to stop.

Raudhah of Janab al-Abdullah Ibne Ja’far at-Tayyar A.R.
-------------------------------------------------------

He was the son of Janabe Ja’far at-Tayyar and the grandson of Janabe Abu
Talib and Bibi Fatima Binte Asad. He was the husband of Bibi Zainab A.S.
he was a very rich and a successful businessman. He used to help the
poor and needy from far and wide. Everyday, he used to have guests at
his place. After the death of Bibi Zainab A.S. he continued living in
Shaam and it is here that he passed away.

Raudhah of Obais Ibne Kaab A.R.
-------------------------------

He was the husband of Bibi Halima and was a resident of Makkah. When the
Holy Prophet (SAW) was five years old, he stayed in Makkah with Obais.
Later he came with the Holy Prophet (SAW) to Medina and embraced Islam.
At that time, He used to live in Shaam and passed away here. This
Raudhah has since been closed.

Raudhah of Hazrat Bilal A.R. – Moazzin
--------------------------------------

He was a resident of Ethiopia. He was a slave when he first came to
Makkah. The Holy Prophet (SAW) bought him and then freed him from
slavery. The Prophet of Islam used to love him very much and used to
treat him like a brother.

In Medina in the year 1 A.H., they built the Masjid and called it Masjid
al-Nabawee and Hazrat Bilal used to give Adhaan there. In the year 8
A.H. he was ordered by the Prophet of Islam to climb on the top of Khan
al-Ka’aba and give Adhaan. Hazrat Bilal used to love the Prophet (SAW)
very much so after the death of the Prophet of Islam he migrated to
Shaam. One night Hazrat Bilal saw the Prophet of Allah (SAW) in his
dream. The Prophet asked Bilal “why did you leave our home”? So Hazrat
Bilal returned to Medina.

He went to pay his respect to Bibi Fatima A.S. who asked him to please
recite Adhaan. Bilal agreed at once and as soon as he started the
Adhaan, Bibi Fatima A.S. fainted. She remembered her father, the Prophet
of Islam. Bibi Fizza went immediately to Hazrat Bilal and asked him to
stop the Adhaan because Bibi Fatima A.S. had fainted.

He returned to Shaam because the people of Medina used to bother Hazrat
Ali A.S. and Bibi Fatima A.S. and Hazrat Bilal felt very badly. Bilal
passed away in Shaam.

Raudhah of Hazrat Abdulla Ibne Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S.
-------------------------------------------------------

He was the son of our 4th Imam. He migrated from Medina and came to live
in Shaam. He was the grandson of Imam Hassan A.S., his mother was the
daughter of Imam Hassan A.S. He was a very brave, clever and religious
man and used to a lot of ‘ibadat’. He was the younger brother of our 5th
Imam - Imam Mohamed Baqir A.S. He passed away in Shaam and is buried
there.

Raudhah of Bibi Fatima Sughra Binte Imam Husayn A.S.
----------------------------------------------------

She was the daughter of Imam Husayn A.S. Due to the fact that she was
very ill, she was unable to go to Karbala’ with her father. It was when
Bibi Zainab A.S. was taken prisoner the second time and taken to Shaam
that Bibi Fatima Sughra went with her, it was here in Shaam that she
passed away. **This** **Raudhah** **has since been closed.**

Ganje Sar al-Shohada al-Karbala’
--------------------------------

This is situated in the compound of the Ummayad mosque. This is the
place where the heads of the Martyrs of Karbala’ were kept. In the year
60 A.H. Yazid released the members of the Ahlul Bait from the prison,
according to one historian, Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S. buried all the head
of the martyrs of Karbala’ Here. According to another historian it is
said that he went to Karbala’ and buried them there. Altogether there
are 16 heads here including Hazrat Hur’s.

Musalla of Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S.
-----------------------------------

This is situated just outside Sar al-Shohada and it is narrated that the
Imam prayed here before he took the heads to Karbala’.

This place is locked but if you are lucky the guard may open it for you
and you can say your two rakaats Salaat.

### Place where they imprisoned the 4th imam

According to one historian, Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S. was imprisoned
separately by Yazid.

Raudhah of Bibi Sakina Binte Imam Husayn A.S.
---------------------------------------------

She was the daughter of Imam Husayn A.S. and the sister of Ali Asghar
A.S. Her mother’s name was Umme Rubab. Bibi Sakina had gone to Karbala’
with Imam Husayn A.S. She faced severe hardship after the tragedy of
Karbala’. She was also taken prisoner with the rest of Imam Husayn’s
family and taken to Kufa and then to Shaam. Yazid Maloon tied her neck
and she was also slapped.

She died when she was sill in prison and was first buried in the prison
near Bani Ummayad but after many years, one A’alem, saw Bibi Sakina A.S.
in his dream. She asked him to remove her body from the grave and bury
her elsewhere because water was seeping in her grave. So, with the
advise of other A’alems, the man had the grave opened. They saw that
indeed the water was filling the grave. When they brought the body out
the grave they found it to be intact. The A’alem held the body in his
hands till another grave was dug at another location and buried her
there and the Raudhah is now known as Bibi Ruqaya A.S.

Place Where Bibi Zainab A.S. Gave Khutba
----------------------------------------

This is in the courtyard of the Ummayyad mosque or Jami Amawi where
Yazid used to hold his court and give his orders.

Well of Prophet Hood A.S.
-------------------------

Prophet Hood A.S. was the next Prophet after Hazrat Nuh A.S. He was a
very handsome man. He was 6 feet tall. He preached for many years but
the people of that time were very wild. They refused to listen to him
and to believe in Allah. At last Allah (SWT) punished them.

All the mountains turned in sand. The people turned into stones and were
buried beneath the sand. After thousands of years by the order of Mansur
Dawaniki, during the time of our 7th Imam, a well was dug in this place.
But instead of water, they found stones in the shape of human beings.
Mansur Dawaniki and the other people were very surprised. They went to
our 7th Imam, Imam Musa al-Kadhim A.S. and asked him about this . Our
Imam revealed that these are the people of Hood and because they
disobeyed Allah (SWT), He punished them by turning them into stones.

Mimber of Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S.
----------------------------------

This mimber is in the Masjid al-Bani Ummaya where Yazid used to hold his
orders. This is what we call DARBAR al-SHAAM. It was here that the
members of Ahlul Bayt were held captive and Yazid used to mistreat them
and ask them all types of questions.

One day, Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S. got a chance to give a sermon. He
climbed on the Mimber and narrated the true story of how Imam Husayn
A.S. and his followers were martyred and how Yazid used to mistreat
them. Our 4th Imam preached the sermon in such a way that all the people
present in Yazid’s court started to cry. When Yazid saw that it was
getting out of hand, he gave an order for Adhaan and stopped the Imam
from preaching. This is why this Mimber is known as Mimber al-Imam
Zainul Abdedeen A.S.

Musalla of Prophet Khizer A.S.
------------------------------

Allah (SWT) has given him a stick with a lot of Barkat (blessings). If
he puts the stick in the water, it will become a ship and if he puts it
in the earth, it will turn into a fruit-bearing tree. Prophet Khizer
A.S. came into the world 300 years before Prophet Issa A.S. and he is
still alive today. He has visited al the Imams and greeted them with
salaams. He also goes and greets our 12th Imam, Hazrat Mahdi Sahebuz
Dhaman A.S. now and then. It is narrated the he will re-appear with our
12th Imam A.S.

Allah (SWT) has given Prophet Khizer a gift he touches a dry stick or
plant with his hands, it at once turns green.

Raas ul-Husayn A.S.
-------------------

This is the place where the head of Imam Husayn A.S. was kept.

Raudhah of Prophet Yahya Bin Zakaria A.S.
-----------------------------------------

Prophet Yahya A.S. was martyred due to the lies of one sinful woman and
his head was kept in the same place where the head of Imam Husayn A.S.
was kept.

A Fourteen Hundred Year Old Door in Bazar Of Shaam Knonw A. S. “Bab al-Faraj”
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is from this door that the members of Ahlul Bayt entered when they
were taken to Shaam. They had to wait for 36 hours so that the court
could be decorated before they entered.


