Amman/Baitul-Muqaddas
=====================

It is about a one and half-hour drive from Amman to the Jerusalem
border. It is advisable to proceed early in the morning after breakfast.

Information for Jordanian Visa
------------------------------

They are very strict especially with those visitors holding a Tanzanian,
Kenyan, Ugandan, Indian, Pakistani or a Shri Lankan passport. You must
obtain your visa from the country of residence before you proceed to
Baitul-Muqaddas. You must make sure that they do not stamp your passport
with the Israeli Visa or else you will not be able to enter any Arab
country except Jordan. Usually we get them to give us Visa on a piece of
paper.

Canadians and Americans can obtain their visa at the Israel border, but
we still recommend that you make arrangements with any Tour Operator in
Amman to obtain for you the Israeli Visa on a piece of paper.

If you have joined a group then the organizer of your group will be
responsible for obtaining your Visa.

Hotels & Restaurants
--------------------

There are many five star hotels in the Jewish area of Jerusalem but
Muslim Tour Operators in Amman are very reluctant to accommodate Muslims
at these hotels. They will accommodate Muslims in 3 or 4 star hotels in
the Muslim section of Jerusalem.

Traveller’s Cheques
-------------------

Traveler’s cheques can be easily cashed at shops and hotels.

Credit Cards
------------

All major credit cards are acceptable in all shops and hotels in Jordan.

Weather
-------

During the months of December, January, February and March are very cold
and you may require thermal undergarments, winter coat and winter
gloves.

March, April, August, September and October and are pleasant months.
June and July are very hot.

If you intend to go to Bait-ul-Muqaddas then make sure you make
arrangements with a Tour Operator before your arrival in Amman otherwise
it may day you days before you can obtain a visa from Amman. Usually the
Tour Operator makes arrangements to drive you to the Israeli border
where you have to clear Immigration and Customs. There are no problems
with Canadian and American Passport holders. Others Nationalities could
be a problem.

Please make sure you tell your Tour Operator that the Israeli Visa
should not be stamped in your passport otherwise you will not be able to
visit any Arab Countries.

The Tour Operator who will be responsible looking after you in Israel
will come and pick you up at the border and drive you to
Bait-ul-Muqaddas.


