Ziyarat of Iraq
===============

Please refer to page numbers 10 to 14, which are very important except
for a few changes for Ziyarat in Iraq, which are mentioned below.

Information for Iraq Visa
-------------------------

You must obtain your Visa from the country of your residence before you
proceed to Iraq. If you are going to go to Iraq from Amman, Jordan, then
please make sure that you have multiple visas for Jordan otherwise you
will have problem when you return from Iraq.

At the Iraqi border you will have to take an Aid test and you will have
to pay US$50 cash for it. Some groups include this in their cost.

We highly recommend that you join a group for going to Iraq for Ziyarat.

The United States has a Presidential decree that no American citizen is
permitted to go into Iraq, if they do so and the government comes to
learn of it they may be denied entry into the United States. Therefore,
Zuwars are cautioned that the groups they are joining do not get the
Iraqi visa stamped in the passport; it should be obtained on a piece of
paper, which does not present a problem.

Even the Canadian Government will not be able to help Canadians if they
get stuck in Iraq. So it is important to join a respectable and
well-known group.

Items to Take With on Your Iraq Trip
------------------------------------

### List of items

01) One bottle of Shampoo and soap.  
 02) One can dusting powder.  
 03) One toothbrush and toothpaste.  
 04) One hairbrush or comb.  
 05) One travelling money pouch for safe keeping your valuables.  
 06) Four shirts, two pants, two pajamas and some undergarments for
men.  
 07) Four sets of Shalwaar Kurta or long dress and some undergarments
for women.  
 08) One Janamaaz (Mussalla).  
 09) One travelling alarm clock.  
 10) One pair of rubber slippers and one pair of **very comfortable
shoes for daily wear.**  
 11) You should take enough prescription medicine to last you during the
entire trip and you should carry them in your hand luggage. Also please
make sure to take some **Tylenol** and cough drops like **‘Bradasol’ for
sore throat.**

12) A First Aid Kit.

13) If you wear prescription glasses then it is highly recommended to
carry (with you) an extra pair.  
 14) Packages of soup, dry snacks, tea, coffee, coffee mate, cookies,
chevda, Ghanthia, chewing gum, candies, and chocolates etc. To buy these
from Iraq is difficult.  
 15) There is a lot of poverty in Iraq so if you can then take some
clothes and medicine to give them away to the needy. You might want also
to take some candies and chocolates for the children near the Haram.

Hotels
------

The quality of hotels in Iraq is not very high standard. Most of the
Hotels in Karbala’ and Najaf are poorly equipped and do not have English
style bathrooms in all the rooms, so if you are disabled please make
sure you carry (with you) a portable toilet.

Currencies
----------

There is exchange control in Iraq and Zuwars are advised not to cash
their currency in stores but to ask their group organizer to exchange
their money for them through the Tour Operator. We recommend you carry
US Dollars bills (with you) in a mix denomination. Have some dollar
bills to give away as ‘Baqshees”.

The exchange rate varies from month to month. You will not be able to
reconvert the Iraqi Dinar to US Dollars. Last December 1997 the rate was
about 1600 Iraqi Dinar to one US Dollar.

Weather
-------

During the months of December, January, February and March are very cold
and you will require thermal undergarments, winter coat and winter
gloves.

March, April, September and October are pleasant months.

May, June, July and August are very hot months.

Amman/Najaf
-----------

Najaf is about 53 miles from Karbala’. It has been narrated that there
was a huge mountain where the city of Najaf is now. When Prophet Nooh
A.S. son refused to  
 get in the ark, he got on that mountain thinking it would save him from
drowning.

Prophet Nooh A.S. prayed to the Almighty Allah to save his son but
Allah’s reply was that he could not accept his prayers as his son had
disobeyed Allah’s instructions to get into the ship.

The mountain suddenly fell to pieces and an ocean gushed out. This ocean
was called NAY. After several years the ocean dried up and the place was
then called NAY-JAFF (Dry Ocean). Later it came to be known as NAJAF.

It is also the city of Madressas for Ulemas and many renowned Ulemas
like Ayatullah Burujardi, Ayatullah Mohsin Hakim, The Grand Ayatullah
Abul Qassim El Khoue are buried in and around the Holy Haram of Imam Ali
A.S.

### Hazrat Imam Ali A.S.

He was the son of Hazrat Abu Talib and Bibi Fatima Binte Asad. The
Prophet of Islam (SAW) raised him. He was always protecting the Holy
Prophet during his Prophetic Mission.

He was married to the only daughter of the Prophet of Allah (SAW), Bibi
Fatima Zehra A.S. and he was the proud father of Imam Hassan A.S., Imam
Husayn A.S., Bibi Zainab A.S. and Hazrat Abbas A.S.

He was the hero of many the battle of Islam. It is narrated that the
Prophet on many occasion said that “Ali is never separated from the
truth and the truth is never separated from him”

At Ghadeer the Prophet proclaimed Imam Ali A.S. to be his brother and
the leader of Muslims after him, but the people of the time ignored this
and chose another leader whilst Imam Ali A.S. was busy with the burial
rituals for the Prophet.

When the third elected leader was killed the people of the time begged
Imam Ali A.S. to be the ruler. He accepted and ruled with justice and
truth in the Islamic way.

On the 19th of Ramadhan, in the Masjid of Kufa, (while he was praying
Fajr Salaat), he was struck by Abdul Rehman Ibne Muljim (may the curse
of Allah fall upon him) with a sword. He died two days later and is
buried in Najaf where Inshallah you will visit to pay your respect.

### Prophet Adam A.S.

The first Prophet of Allah, was Prophet Adam A.S. who was created from
clay by the spirit of Allah (SWT).

As soon as he was created, all the angels were ordered to prostrate to
him. All obeyed except Shaitaan. Shaitaan was then ordered to leave
Heaven, which he did. However, requested Allah to allow him to live as
long as human beings live on the earth. His wish was granted.

One day Shaitaan came and fooled Prophet Adam A.S. and Bibi Hawwa A.S.
to eat a fig from a tree. They ate the fig, which Allah (SWT) had
ordered them not to touch. go near that tree. Immediately they realised
their mistake and asked Allah (SWT) to forgive them. They were forgiven
but were asked to leave Jannat and live on the earth.

Hazrat Adam is buried next to Prophet Nooh A.S. and Imam Ali A.S. is
buried next to Prophet Nooh A.S.

### Prophet Nooh A.S.

The people were giving Prophet Nooh A.S. a very hard time and were not
prepared to accept that they should believe in one God. So, Allah (SWT)
asked him to build an ark (ship) on which only the believing people
could board with various kind of animal. The disbeliivers including one
of his sons refused to board the Ark stayed behind on the mountain. The
mountain crushed and all the bad people who took refuge on it were
drowned.

### Allama Hilli A.R.

He derived the name ‘Hilli’ from the village in the out -skirt of Najaf
where he was born. He became a Mujtahid before he was baligh. He was one
of the greatest “Uremia” and he died in Hilla. He is buried in the
“Sahan” of Imam Ali's A.S. Raudhah.

### Muqaddas Ardebilli A.R.

It is narrated that he once went to get water to perform wudhoo from a
well. Instead of the water a he treasure came out. He put them back
saying that he wanted water for wudhoo not treasures. He is buried in
Najaf and his real name is Mullah Ahmed bin Mohamed. He too is just
buried in the ‘Sahan’ of Imam Ali A.S. Raudhah.

### Makam al-Imam Zainul Abedeein A.S.

This is the place where Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S. used to spend hours in
prayers. He like this place because if faces the Raudhah of Imam Ali
A.S. Zuwar visit this place and recite munajats.

### Prophet Hood A.S.

The people of his time were very rich and due to their wealth they were
very strong and worshipped idols.

Prophet Hood A.S. repeatedly warned them to give up worshipping the
idols and to turn towards one God but they did not listen. Allah (SWT)
punished them and they  
 were all killed except Prophet Hood A.S. and a few believers. His tomb
is at Wadius Salaam, in Najaf.

### Prophet Saleh A.S.

Allah (SWT) sent Prophet Saleh A.S. to Thamood. Allah sent a she-camel
and instructed Prophet Saleh A.S. to tell the people of Thamood that
they should not kill it. They did not listen and killed the she-camel.
Allah (SWT) punished them by sending an earthquake and fire and they
were all destroyed. His tomb is at Wadius Salaam.

Some 400 km from Medina in Saudi Arabia there is a city known as “Madain
Saleh”. Many foreigners go to visit the ruins of this city. Allah (SWT)
brought his curse on this city and the people there in.

### Makam al-Saheb-Ul Asr A.S.

It is narrated that Saheb-ul Asr visits this place which is in the
boundaries of Wadius Salaam.

### Makam al-Imam Ja’far Sadiq A.S.

This is also in the boundaries of Wadius Salaam.

### Tomb Hazrat Kumail A.R.

He was one of the favorite companion of Imam Ali A.S. IMAM ALI A.S
taught the famous dua Kumail that is recited on every Thursday to him.

### Tomb of Hazrat Rashid Hijri A.R.

He was the companion of Imam Ali A.S. who had come from Yemen to Kufa.
He was one of the most important friend of our Imam. One day Imam Ali
A.S. asked him “what will you do if Bani Ummayah asks you to leave me?”

Rashid Al Hijri in turn asked our Imam “that if I do not leave you what
will be my fate?” The Imam, replied “in that case you will be with me in
Jannat”, to which Rashid Al Hijri replied, “so I will not leave you.”

It is narrated that after the Shahadat of our Imam, Abidalla Ben Ziad
sent for Rashid Al Hijri and asked him to curse Imam Ali A.S. and his
sons. When he refused to do so his hands and feet were cut off. Rashid
Hijri continued to praise Imam Ali A.S. and Abidalla asked him to stop,
but he would not, so his tongue was cut off.

### Masjid al-Hannaana

This Masjid is between Kufa and Najaf. The fazilat of this Masjid is
that when Hazrat Imam Hassan A.S. and Hazrat Imam Husayn A.S. together
with others carried the ‘Janaza’ of Hazrat Imam Ali A.S. from Kufa to
Najaf they passed near this Masjid. At that time the pillars of this
Masjid inclined for “ta’azim.”

It is narrated that Hannan use to be a Church. When IMAM HUSAYN A.S. was
martyred on the 10th of Muharram, Bani Ummayah carried his head on a
plate. When Bani Ummayah passed by this church, now Masjid, the priest
noticed that the face of Imam Husayn A.S. was shinning with light (noor)
was coming out and was reciting an Ayah from the Holy Quran. So, the
priest asked Bani Ummayah to leave the head with him for one night and  
 he addressed the head "who are you?" and the head replied I am Husayn
Bin Ali and my grandfather is Prophet Muhammad (SAW) and Bani Ummayah in
Karbala’ killed me. The priest was moved with the reply and he
immediately accepted Islam.

Ziyarats in Hilla
-----------------

### Hazrat Hamza A.S.

One of Hazrat Abbas A.S. son’s whose name was Ubaydullah was a resident
of Medina. He was a great scholar of his time and he left a son named
Hassan who also was a great scholar and Hazrat Hamza A.S. happens to be
one of his sons. So he is the great grandson of Hazrat Abbas A.S.

### Raudhah Of Muhammad Bine Imam Ali A.S.

He is also known as Baqar.

### Raudhah Of Prophet Hazrat Ayub A.S.

### Masjid Marad-Us-Shams

It is narrated that Imam Ali A.S. was nursing one of his sick son and
the time of Asr passed and started entering into Maghrib. The Imam was
very sad and looked at the sun. Through the mercy of Allah (SWT) the sun
reverted to Asr time and the Imam said his Asr Salaat.

### Raudhah Of Janab al-Qasim Bin Imam Moosa al-Kadhim A.S.

He is the brother of Imam Ridha’ A.S. who was heard saying that if you
cannot visit me in Mashad then you should visit my brother in Iraq.

Karbala’ – There Are Many Ziyarats
----------------------------------

Karbala’ al-Moa’lla, started as a small village to grow into a famous
city in Iraq and is known worldwide since the martyrdom of Hazrat Imam
Husayn A.S. It is situated six miles from Baghdad. In the centre of the
city is the sacred Raudhah of Hazrat Imam Husayn A.S. Within a walking
distance one may visit the sacred Raudhah of Hazrat Qamar al-Bani
Hashim, Hazrat Abul Fadhilil Abbas A.S. The dome and minarets of Imam
Husayn’s Raudhah are covered with gold. It is the same field on which he
was martyred on the 10th Muharram 61 AH under extremely cruel
circumstances with his family and friends after suffering three days of
thirst and hunger.

This great sacrifice ensured the survival of Islam as long as the world
exists. It is highly recommended (Makhsusi) to be in Karbala’ on a
Thursday Night for the Ziyarat of Imam Husayn A.S., and his companions.

Under the Dome and just touching the Zaree of our Imam is a piece of red
coloured stone where we are told that we should recite two rakaat Salaat
and ask for our Haajat which Inshallah will be fulfilled.

There are only four places where you can recite full Salaat even though
the condition of ten days is not met. They are in Medina, Makkah,
Raudhah of Imam Husayn A.S. under the Dome and Masjid al-Kufa.

### Hazrat Ali Akbar A.S.

He was Imam Husayn’s A.S. eldest son. He was 18 years old when he gave
his life for Islam on the fields of Karbala’. It is narrated that
whenever Imam Husayn A.S. wanted to do Ziyarat of the Prophet of Allah,
he would look at Hazrat Ali Akbar A.S. because of his resemblance to the
Holy Prophet.

On the morning of Ashura at the time of Fajr Salaat, Imam Husayn A.S.
asked Ali Akbar A.S. to recite Adhaan.

He is buried next to Imam Husayn A.S.

### Ali Asghar A.S.

He was the youngest son of Imam Husayn A.S. who was only 6 months old.
He is also known as Abdullah Tiflan al-Ardhia). When all the relatives
and the companions were martyred, Imam Husayn A.S. went to fetch Ali
Asgher A.S. and told him something in his ears. Immediately the baby
jumped into the Imam’s arms.

The Imam covered him with his Aba and took him towards the army of
Yazid. Yazid thought that the Imam had brought the Holy Quran and was
going to ask for mercy, but instead the Imam put the baby on the hot
sand of Karbala’ and spoke to the army loudly and told them that if he
(the Imam) was at fault then the 6 months old baby was not and that they
should come and give the baby some water.

They did not but instead Hurmala (may curse of Allah on him) pulled a
three headed arrow and aimed at the baby piercing his little neck and
the arm of Imam Husayn A.S.

He too is buried next to our Imam.

### Ganj al-Shohada

This is a mass grave where all the Shohad al-Karbala’ are buried. It is
narrated that even Shah Qassim the son of Imam Hassan A.S. is buried in
here.

### Qatlagha

This is the place where Shimr Maloon (may the curse of Allah be upon
him) sat on Imam Husayn’s A.S. chest and martyred him..

### Hazrat Habib Ibne Mazahir A.S.

He was the childhood friend of Imam Husayn A.S. When he reached Karbala’
and so that the army of Yazid surrounded him he sent a letter to Habib
informing him of the situation and asking him to come to Karbala’ to
help the Imam. Immediately, Habib came to Karbala’ and went to fight for
Islam and was martyred on the day of Ashura.

His tomb is just outside one of the doors to the Raudhah of Imam Husayn
A.S.

### Hazrat Ibraheem Bin Musa Kadhim A.S.

At one time he was the governor of Yemen. He was the grandfather of
Sayyid Murtaza A.R. and too was martyred by the Abbaside Caliph.

His tomb is just outside the Raudhah of Imam Husayn A.S.

### Till al-Zainabia

This is a small hill facing the Raudhah of Imam Husayn A.S. and it is
from this hill that she was witnessing the fight of her beloved brother
Imam Husayn A.S., his family and companions.

### Khaimagah

This is just behind Tille-Zainabia. Here all the tents of Imam Husayn
A.S., his family and companions were pitched.

### Raudhah Of Hazrat Abbas A.S.

He was the stepbrother of Imam Husayn A.S. and his mother’s name is
Ummul-Banin. When Imam Ali A.S. was on his death bed he called Hazrat
Abbas A.S. and put his hands in the hands of Imam Husayn A.S. and told
Hazrat Abbas that this, pointing to Imam Husayn A.S. is your master and
that you are like his slave so on in Karbala’ on the day of Ashura you
must help him and fight for Islam until death. Hazrat Abbas A.S. just
proved that on the day of Ashura.

It is said that the distance between the Raudhah of Imam Husayn A.S. and
Hazrat Abbas A.S. is the same as the distance between Safa and Marwa in
Makkah.

Under the Raudhah of Hazrat Abbas A.S. there is a river running and is
called Al-Kamma, though they have closed the entrance and is opened only
to high dignitaries coming to Iraq from other countries.

It is narrated that a King by the name of Al-Kamma had stopped at
Karbala’ and was very sad. So he tried to find out what this place was
and why it looked very sad to him. The people told him that this place
is called Karbala’ and one of the son’s of Prophet Muhammad (SWT) and
his family will be martyred here on the day of Ashura and they will be
denied water of the river Euphrates which we call ‘Furat”

The king felt sorry and ordered that a canal be dug from the river
Euphrates to the place where now stands the Raudhah of Hazrat Abbas A.S.
unfortunately this did not help Imam Husayn A.S. on the day of Ashura.

### Kafl Abbas

Kafl Abbas means the arm of Hazrat Abbas A.S. There were two spots near
by outside the Haram of Hazrat Abbas A.S. One was destroyed during the
Persian Gulf war and the second one is still there.

### Hazrat Hurr

He was the commander of one of the Yazid’s battalion and he was sent by
Yazid to stop Imam Husayn A.S., his family and companions from going to
Kufa unless and until Imam Husayn A.S. gives ‘Bayat” (allegiance) to
Yazid. When he arrived at the Imam’s camp, he (Hurr) and his entire
battalion including horses were dying of thirst. Immediately Imam Husayn
A.S. gave orders to Hazrat Abbas A.S. that they be given water until
their thirst including the horses are quenched, though the were the
enemies of the Imam.

On the night of Ashura Hurr could not sleep after hearing the cries of
small children from Imam Husayn’s camps crying for water. Early in the
morning he asked his servant to tie his hands behind his backs and he
went straight to Imam’s camp. When he was near the came he came down his
horse and walked to where the Imam was and fell on his knees asking for
forgiveness. Imam raised him up and told him that Allah (SWT) has
forgiven you.

Hurr asked permission from the Imam to go and fight for Islam which he
did but after sometime he was martyred and he is buried about 3 miles
away from the city of Karbala’.

### Raudhah of Janab al-Aun A.S.

He was the son of Bibi Zainab A.S. and he too was killed on the day of
Ashura. He is buried some 10 miles from the city of Karbala’.

### Raudhah of Mohamed & Ibrahim

They were the two sons of Hazrat Muslim Bin Aqeel A.S. and they were
going to Imam Husayn A.S. to give him the message that their father had
been killed. They were caught by Haris (may Allah send His curse upon
him).

They are buried about 25 miles from the city of Karbala’ in the Musayyab
area.

Ziyarat in Madayan
------------------

### Mazaar of Salman al-Farsi A.R.

His original name of Rozeba and he was an Iranian from Iran formerly
known as Persia. The Prophet of Allah (SAW) changed his name to Salman.

IMAM ALI A.S. made him a governor of Madayan but he died at the age of
88 years, a few weeks after his arrival in Madayan.

### Mazaar Huzaifa al-Yemani A.R.

He was one of the companions of our Prophet and it is narrated that when
he used to recite Munajats, the Angels used to come from heaven to
listen to him.

### Mazaar of Jabir Bin Abdallah Ansari A.R.

He was also one of the close companion of the Holy Prophet. It is
narrated that the Holy Prophet told him that we would see the 5th Imam,
Muhammad Baqir A.S., and to give his is salaams.

It is said that when he came to Karbala’, he first went to Nehr
al-Furat, did Ghusl wore Ihram and then visited the graves of the
Shohada al-Karbala’.

In the year 1934, Nuripasha the Vazir (Vice-President) of Shah Faisal
the king of Iraq at that time, so a dream for three continuous days
whereby Jabir told him that water was coming into his grave and that of
Huziafa’s. He asked him to transfer them to another grave.

Nuripasha narrated the dream to Shah Faisal who said that he also had
the same dream.

It was decided to transfer the bodies to another grave, which was
announced. On 26th March 1934 and it was announced in the PTI News
Agency worldwide. Some Germans reports also came to witness the transfer
of the bodies. When the bodies were taken out of the graves they were
intact with the same Kafan. Even the eyes were wide open with so much
‘noor’ and the hair of beard was still wet as if the bodies had just
been given Ghusl. t. Salaat al-Mayyat was prayed again. The army saluted
and the bodies were transferred to another gravesite next to Hazrat
Salaman al-Farsi A.R. Many Germans reporters when witnessing this
accepted Islam.

### Tak al-Kisra

This used to be the summer palace of the King of Persia whose name was
Nausherwaan. Because it can get very cold in Iran during winter. He
built this some 1700 years ago and used to come and stay there during
the severe winter months.

It is narrated that when the Prophet of Allah (SAW) was born, the famous
arch in it, which is known as the Arch of, Catesiphon, developed cracks
in it. Visitors can still see the arch as well as the cracks in it.

Masjid al-Kufa
--------------

It is narrated that many Prophets have visited this Masjid and have
performed Salaat, that is why there are many places where Zuwar recite
Ziyarat and perform two rakaat Salaat. You will find the sketch of the
Masjid on page number 139.

1. Main Entrance

2. Makam al-Hazrat Ibrahim a.s.  
 This is the same Prophet that built the Ka’aba in Makkah and was ready
to sacrifice his son Hazrat Ismaeel at Munna.

3. Makam al-Hazrat Khizr A.S.  
 He is still arrive and one of his miracles is that when leans on a dry
stick it becomes fresh green.

4. Place of Miracle  
 It is narrated that during the time Imam Ali A.S. a group of people
wanted to stone a woman to death because they thought that she had
committed adultery as her stomach was bulging just like that of a
pregnant woman.  
 Imam Ali A.S. had happened to be present at this place and he was asked
to give his decision. Imam Ali A.S. asked them to bring a big tub and
told them to fill it with water and put a curtain round it. Then she
asked the woman to go and sit in this tube, which she did and after  
 some time her stomach returned to her normal shape and it was proved
that she was not pregnant.

5. Court of Imam Ali A.S.  
 This is the place where Imam Ali A.S. used conduct his daily court.

6. Well of Hazrat Nooh A.S.  
 Hazrat Nooh A.S. had also visited Masjid al-Kufa. In fact inside the
Masjid there is a place where the arc of Nabi Nooh stood.

7. Entrance to the Well

This used to be the entrance to the well of Hazrat Nooh A.S.

8. Makam al-Hazrat Muhammad A.S.  
 This is the place where the Prophet of Islam used to stay and pray when
visiting visit Masjid al-Kufa.

9. Makam al-Hazrat Adam A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Adam A.S. used to stay and pray when
visiting Masjid al-Kufa.

10. Makam al-Jibra’el A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Jibra’el A.S. used to stay and pray when
visiting Masjid al-Kufa.

11. Makam al-Imam Ja’far Sadiq A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Imam Ja’far Sadiq A.S. used to stay and
pray when visiting Masjid al-Kufa.

12. Makam al-Zainul Abedeen A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Imam Zainul Abdedeen A.S. used to stay
and pray when visiting Masjid al-Kufa.

13. Makam al-Hazrat Nooh A.S.  
 This is the place inside Masjid al-Kufa where the ark of Hazrat Nooh
A.S. stood.

14. Shahadat Place of Imam Ali A.S.  
 Inside Masjid al-Kufa our Imam was struck by a poisoned sword by Ibn
al-Muljeem on the 19th day of Ramadhan.

15. Place Where Imam Ali A.S. Used To Pray During The Night

16. Ruaza of Hazrat Muslim-Ibne-Aqil A.S.  
 Just outside the boundary of Masjid al-Kufa is the Raudhah of Hazrat
Muslim Ibne Aqil A.S. He was the cousin of Imam Husayn A.S. who had sent
him to Kufa as his deputy before him but was killed by Yazid’s men.

17. Mazaar of Mukhtar A.R.  
 He was the first person to took the revenge of Imam Husayn A.S.

18. Mazaar of Hazrat Hani Ibne Urwa A.R.  
 Hazrat Muslim A.S. stayed at Hani’s House when he arrived in Kufa. Hani
too was then killed by Yazid’s men.

### Raudhah Of Khadijatul Kubra Binte Imam Ali A.S.

Just outside Masjid al-Kufa and across the road is the Raudhah of
Khadijatul Kubra.

### House of Imam Ali A.S.

Behind Masjid al-Kufa is the house of our Imam and inside the house
there is a place where Imam Ali A.S. lay on his deathbed in the presence
of his family members.

There is also a room where it is said that Imam Ali A.S. was given Ghusl
at the place.

Further up there is a well and Zuwar take the water for Tabaruk. It is
better to put on your arms and forehead and just touch the tongue for
Shafa.

### Matham Bin Tammar A.R.

He was a close companion of Imam Ali A.S. and also was his business
partner running a date shop. The name Tammar is derived from Tamr that
means dates. He too was killed for his love of Imam Ali A.S.

It is narrated that a wealth businessman came to Najaf from Karachi with
his son who had blood cancer. He visited Imam Ali’s A.S. Raudhah in
Najaf he cried, prayed and made a wish that if his son is cured then he
will get any kind of work to be done at the Imam’s Raudhah. With the
blessings of Allah (SWT) and the dua of Imam Ali A.S. his son recovered
completely and as he had made a wish he went back to Najaf and asked the
Mutavallis if there is any work that has to be done or completed at the
Imam.s Raudhah.

The Mutavallis replied that off hand they do not know but they will
think about it. At night when the Mutavalli was sleeping he dreamed that
Imam Ali told him that do not do any work in my Raudhah, but instead,
build the Raudhah of Maytham’s properly because it is in very bad shape.
So the work was done on Maytham’s Raudhah.

### Raudhah of Zaid Bin Ali Bin Alhussain Bin Imam Ali A.S.

![](/sites/default/files/84.png)

Al Hajjaj asked Zaid Bin Ali to curse Imam Ali A.S. otherwise he will be
killed. He refused, so he was killed and his body was hung on the palm
tree for four years till he was dried and the palm tree started growing
branches besides the main trunk of the tree, which is unusual, but it
grew and is still there until this day. We have been told there is no
such kind of a tree anywhere in Iraq. If the palm tree with all it’s
extension is cut it at the top, it will be noticed that it forms a
letter ‘Allah” in Arabic. This can be witnessed in one of our Ziyarat
videocassette.

Sketch of Masjid al-Kufa
------------------------

1. - Main entrance 10. - Makam al-Jibra’el A.S.

2. - Makam al-Hazrat Ibrahim A.S. 11. - Makam al-Imam Ja’far Sadiq A.S.

3. - Makam al-Hazrat Khizer A.S. 12. - Makam al-Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S.

4. - Place of Miracle 13. - Makam al-Hazrat Nooh A.S..

5. - Court of Hazrat Imam Ali A.S. 14. - Shahadat Place of Imam Ali A.S.

6. - Well of Hazrat Nooh A.S. 15. - Night prayers place of Imam Ali A.S.

7. - Entrance to the well 16. - Raudhah of Hazrat Muslim Bin Aqil A.S..

8. - Makam al-Hazrat Muhammad A.S. 17. - Mazaar of Hazrat Mukhtar A.R.

9. - Makam al-Hazrat Adam A.S. 18. – Mazaar of Hazrat Hani Ibne Urwa
A.R.

![](/sites/default/files/85.png)

Sketch of Masjid al-Sahla
-------------------------

1. – General entrance 06, - Makam al-Hazrat Idris A.S.  
 2. – Place for Wadhu 07. - Makam al-Hazrat Khizer A.S.  
 3. – Main entrance 08. - Makam al-Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S.  
 4. – Makam al-Saleheen 09. - Makam al-Imam Ja’far Sadiq A.S.  
 5. – Makam al-Hazrat Ibrahim A.S. 10. - Makam al-Imam Hujjat A.S.

Masjid al-Sa’asa Ibne Sanhan A.R.
---------------------------------

It is believed that here too the head of Imam Husayn A.S. was kept when
Yazid was taking the heads of the Shoahada and the Bibi from Karbala’ to
Damascus via Kufa.

Masjid al-Sahla
---------------

It is the second most important Masjid after Kufa. It is also the house
of Prophet Idrees A.S., Prophet Ibrahim A.S. and Prophet Khizer A.S.

At all places mentioned on page 140 Ziyarat is recited and two rakaat
Salaat is prayed by all Zuwar.

1. General Entrance to the Masjid

2. Place for Doing Wadhoo

3. Main Entrance To The Masjid

4. Makam al-Saleheen  
 This is the general place for saying your prayers.

5. Makam al-Hazrat Ibrahim A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Ibrahim A.S. used to visit and say his
prayers.

6. Hazrat Makam al-Hazrat Idris A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Ibrahim A.S. used to visit and say his
prayers.

It is narrated that Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq A.S. said that he had a vision
and saw Imam Al Mahdi A.S. coming down in Al Sahla Masjid with his
family and children and it is his place of residence.

It is also narrated that all the Prophets who were sent to this earth by
Allah (SWT) had prayed in this Masjid and any Momineen who prays in this
Masjid will come back to visit it again. There is also a rock there
which has all the names of all the Prophets. It is also said that if one
asks for Haajat here with a clean heart will Inshallah be fulfilled.

It is also believed that the Angles come to pray in this Masjid and also
Imam Saheb-ul-Dhaman is always present in this Masjid for Ziyarat on
Tuesday nights between Salaat al-Maghribain and Isha.

There are many Musallas where many Prophets and Imam have prayed and you
can follow the sketch of Masjid al-Sahla given on page 142.

7. Makam al-Hazrat Khizer A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Khizer A.S. used to visit and say his
prayers.

8. Makam al-Zainul Abedeen A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Imam Zainul Abedeen A.S. used to visit
and say his prayers.

9. Makam al-Ja’far Sadiq A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Imam Ja’far Sadiq A.S. used to visit and
say his prayers.

10. Makam al-Imam Hujjat A.S.  
 This is the place where Hazrat Imam Hujjat A.S. visits and say his
prayers. It is the practice of Zuwar to recited dua Tawasool at this
place.

Samarrah
--------

Samarrah used to be the capital of Iraq and is situated on the banks of
river Tigris. The old city has, however, turned into ruins. The new city
is located around the Raudhah that contains four tombs.

### Raudhah of Imam Ali Naqi A.S.

He is our 10th Imam and he was the one that completed the rules of
Taqlid to prepare believers for the occultation of 12th Imam.

### Raudhah of Imam Hassan Askari A.S.

He is our 11th Imam and was kept under house arrest for a very long
time. He was kept there because the ruler of the time did not want him
to have a son, just like at the time of Hazrat Mussa A.S.

He was married to Bibi Nargis Khatun A.S. who gave birth to our 12th
Imam. He became an Imam at the age of about four and half years when his
father Imam Hassan Askari A.S. passed away. He led the Salaat al-Mayyat
of his father.

### Bibi Hakima Khatun A.S.

She taught Bibi Nargis Khatun A.S. about the rules of religion. She was
present when the 12th Imam was born.

When our 11th Imam was put in jail, Bibi Hakima Khatun A.S. used to
answer all the masaels, which the Shia Umah used to ask her. She was a
very learned and pious lady.

### Bibi Nargis Khatun A.S.

She was a princes from Roman who became a Muslim after seeing Bibi
Fatima Zehra A.S. and the Holy Prophet (SAW) in her dream. She was the
mother of our 12th Imam Mahdi A.S.

Our 11th Imam told Bibi Nargis Khatun A.S. that the army will enter our
house to check whether any child is born to which Bibi Nargis Khatun
A.S. told Imam, “Please pray for me that I die before they enter our
house and make me their captive. She died before our 11th Imam’s
shahadat.

### Imam Mahdi A.S. – Our 12th Imam

Our Imam has many titles like, Sahebul Asr - Lord of the period of time,
Sahebuz Dhaman - Lord of the age, Mahdi - Guide.

He has the same name as our Holy Prophet that is Muhammad. He was born
in Sammarrah and was under his father’s care until his father was
martyred. He became the Imam at the age of four and half years and went
into occultation. He was only available to his deputies who were Uthman
bin Saeed, Muhammad bin Uthman, then Husayn bin Rooh and finally Ali bin
Muhammad Samarri. When the last of them was to die, Imam wrote to tell
him that there would be more deputies after him and that he (Imam) was
going into occultation until Allah (SWT) willed him to re-appear.

### Makam al-Ghaibat of our 12th Imam A.S.

This is in the basement of the house of the 11th Imam A.S. where the
shrine now stands. The entrance has been opened from the courtyard. It
is said that this was the house of Bibi Nargis and our 12th Imam was
last seen here.

### Sayyid Muhammad Ibne Imam Ali Naqi A.S.

He was the son of Imam Ali Naqi A.S. the place where his Raudhah is used
to be the cemetery of Shias. During the time of Hajjaj bin Yusuf
thousands of shias were imprisoned here and when they died were buried
there. No Shia was allowed to leave the area and because of the torment
thousands of them died.

This Raudhah is very famous for couples who come to make a Nadr (wish)
that they be blessed with a child. It is in Balad a small village near
Samarrah.

Kadhmain
--------

It is a twin city of Baghdad and just a bridge between them separates
these two cities.

### Raudhah of Imam Musa Kadhim A.S.

Zuwar usually enter through the gate which is known as ‘Bab al-Murad’
which means the gate of fulfillment of wishes.

He is our 7th Imam and he was given the title of Kadhim that means one
who swallows his anger. He also has another title that is Baabul Hawaaj,
which literally means the door of fulfillment of wishes.

Harun Rashid had imprisoned our Imam and then poisoned him and left his
body on the bridge of Baghdad. His body stayed on the bridge for three
days then his followers buried him.

If you are lucky to be present in Kadhmain on a Thursday night you will
see that it is difficult to even touch the Zaree of the Imam.

### Raudhah of Imam Muhammad Taqi A.S.

He is our 9th Imam and he became an Imam at the age of  
 9 years and even at this age he answered all questions of religion to
all including the learned ones.

His Raudhah is next to the Raudhah of Imam Musa Kadhim A.S.

### Tomb of Sheikh Mufeed A.R.

He was given title Mufeed means one who brings benefit. His real name is
Muhammad bin Numan. Even our 12th Imam A.S. addressed him in the name of
‘Mufeed’. It is said that he was the author of hundreds of books and one
of the most important one being ‘Kitabul’Irshaad’ which is the life
history of our 12 Imams.

His tomb is within the boundary of the Raudhah of our two Imams in
Kadhemain and one can read the Marshia written

on his grave that was the same Marshia recited by our 12th Imam when
‘Mufeed’ died.

### Tomb of Khwaja Nasiruddin Toosi A.R.

It is narrated that our 12th Imam A.S. taught Dua al-Tawassul in a dream
to bin Muhammad bin Hasan that is his real name. Residents of Khademain
and its surrounding usually bring their sick relative and tie them with
his Tomb and ask for Allah for Shifa.

### Tomb of Sayyid Murtadha A.R.

He was a great scholar and wrote many books and was the student of
Sheikh Mufeed A.R.

### Tomb of Sayyid Radhi A.R.

Sayyid Radhi A.R. compiled the sermons of Imam Ali A.S. and the
collection is known as Nahjul Balagha. He too was the student of Sheikh
Mufeed A.R.

### Tomb of Sayyid Ismail Safrudin A.R.

He too was a great scholar and wrote many books.

Baghdad
-------

Just over the bridge from the Holy City of Khademain lies  
 Baghdad. It is a modern city and all around it are many Mazaar of great
scholars.

### Masjid al-Buratha

This Masjid is between Khademain and Baghdad and it is a very famous
Masjid.

It is narrated that this was a church before at the time of Imam Ali
A.S. and when the Imam A.S. returned from the battle of Naherawan, the
Christian priest invited our Imam to rest here, which he did for three
days.

During his stay he saw the people of the church go out very far to fetch
water and Imam Ali A.S. asked the priest why he does not dig a well in
the church compound? The priest replied, that they tried but got salt
water.

Imam Ali A.S. just hit the ground with his heel and water gushed out
which was cold and sweet. There is a black stone at this miracle place.
Also there is a white stone with Ayat-tul-Kursi written on it.

### Mazaar of Hazrat Uthman Bin Saeed A.R.

He was the first Chief Duputy of our 12th Imam A.S. who used to be in
contact with him. He was also a close companion of our 10th and 11th
Imam A.S.

### Mazaar of Hazrat Muhammad Bin Uthman A.R.

He was the son of Hazrat Uthman Bin Saeed and after his father passed
away he took up the duties as the second Chief Deputy of our 12th Imam
A.S.

### Mazaar of Husayn Bin Rooh A.R.

He was the third deputy of our 12th Imam A.S.

### Mazaar of Ali Bin Muhammad A.R.

He was the fourth and the last of the deputies of our 12th Imam A.S. He
received a letter from our Imam telling him that there would be no more
deputies after his death.

### Mazaar Of Hazrat Qambar A.R.

During the time of Imam Ali A.S. he was a slave and the Imam bought him
and freed him. Hazrat Qambar A.R. told Imam Ali A.S. that I will agree
to be freed only if you promise me that as long as I live I will be
living at your house and helping you and your family.

There is a famous story that one day Hazrat Qambar A.R. was sitting on a
camel leading the caravan when a needy person came to Imam Ali A.S. and
told him that he was very poor and asked the Imam to help him. Imam Ali
A.S. told him to take the whole caravan of camels. On hearing this
Hazrat Qambar A.R. jumped from the camel and when Imam Ali A.S. asked
him why he did that, to which he replied he gave away the whole caravan
to the needy person and as I was sitting on one of the camel that would
have included me too.

### Mazaar Of Hazrat Haafiz Muhammad Bin Yakub Al- Kulyani A.R.

He was a famous narrator of hadiths of the Prophet of Allah (SAW) and
the Imams.

### Marja at- Taqleed

You should visit Ayatullah al-Odhma Sayyid Ali Husayni Seestani his
residence is just behind the Raudhah of Imam Ali A.S. and you will need
to make an appointment. You can pay him Khums, Sadaqa, nadr and other
huqooq money also medicine and used clothes for the poor and he will
issue you a receipt with his seal and signature.

**We hope that this booklet has**

**been a help to you during your**

**trip to ‘Umra, Hajj and/or Ziyarat**

**of the Fourteen Ma’soomeen and**

**you are requested to remember**

**all momineen and mominaat**

**who have passed away and also**

**those who are living in your**

**prayers.**

***Mahmud & Zehra Habib***

***Organizer***


