Other Useful Information
========================

Insurance
---------

Hujjaj are recommended to take out **Medical and Accidental Insurance**
coverage by Blue Cross or similar kind in other Provinces and USA for
the entire trip as per their own personal needs.

Travelers Cheques
-----------------

Hujjaj are advised to carry **American Express Traveler cheques** in US
Dollars; they are accepted in stores in Saudi Arabia.

Currencies
----------

Hujjaj are recommended to carry a minimum of US $500 in large bills (US
$100 bill, which will fetch a better, rate than smaller bills and is
easy to cash). **The bills should not be dated prior to 1990.** Please
take more if you intend to do some shopping. Utmost care should be taken
in hotels, whilst travelling and particularly in the Haram.

One person in a family should not keep all the money. It is advisable to
make special zipped pockets on the inside of garments for safe keeping
of money and valuables.

All five star hotels in Medina and Makkah offer safe deposit boxes and
are available to you at no charge unless you lose your key, then it will
cost you US $1000.

Credit Cards
------------

All major credit cards are accepted in most of the stores.

Video Filming
-------------

Video filming and photographing in Saudi Arabia is prohibited,
especially near the Holy Harams both in Medina and Makkah. It is better
not to take with you Video or camera equipment with you.

Weather
-------

In Saudi Arabia the temperature will vary between 20 to 248 degrees
Celsius during December and January. It is particularly hot during
Dhohar time. Nights in Medina are a little cooler.

Electric Current
----------------

The electric current is 220 Volts so please make sure you carry a travel
adapter if you are planning to take any electrical equipment (kettle,
iron, electric razor) with you an electric kettle to use on the trip.

Baggage
-------

You must try to travel as light as possible. All baggage must be tagged
with your name, full address both inside and outside and should also be
locked for security purposes. The size of the suitcase should be limited
to 28 inches maximum.

Laundry Facility
----------------

All hotels offer laundry facilities, which are reasonably priced. There
are also many dry cleaning stores at every corner of the city and much
cheaper than the hotels.

ID Card
-------

Each person must carry an ID card showing his/her name, photograph,
passport number and nationality plus some medical information and
telephone numbers of the hotels they will be staying.

Respect of Holy Places
----------------------

Respect and dignity of the holy places should be maintained especially
while performing various rites of Ziyarat. Care should be taken to see
that other Hujjaj are not inconvenienced. You are also advised not to
occupy a certain place for a long time where others would like to pray.
Calmness should be maintained in the **Holy** **Haram** and worldly
talks and arguments should be avoided. While in Haram, Holy Quran,
Salawat, Tasbih,Dhikar, Duas and Istighfar should be recited as much as
possible.

Religious Books
---------------

Hujjaj wishing to carry duas and A’amaal books i.e. **Mafatihul-Jinan
and Tohfatul Zaireen etc.** may do so by making photo copies to avoid to
take the originals. Those who cannot read Arabic, you will find many
Ziyarat in English in this booklet, which have been compiled with the
assistance of other compilers.

Hijab
-----

Women must wear Hijab at all times and avoid make-up during the Umra
trip especially in Medina and Makkah.

A’adab
------

It is recommended for one to perform Ghusl (Mustahab) and be in Wudhu
all the time when going to the Holy Haram.


