Items to take with on Your Umra Trip
====================================

Some Hujjaj have the tendency to take many unnecessary items with them.
We, therefore, have prepared a list of items to be taken. Some of these
items can be shared between couples and friends.

List of Items
-------------

01) One bottle of unscented Shampoo and soap.  
 02) One can (unscented) of dusting powder.  
 03) One tooth brush and toothpaste.  
 04) One hair brush or comb.  
 05) One travelling money pouch for safekeeping.  
 06) Four shirts, two pants, two pajamas and some undergarments for
men.  
 07) Four sets of Shalwaar Kurta or long dress and some undergarments
for women.  
 08) One Janamaaz (Mussalla) made of straw available in Medina. You are
not allowed to use openly Sajdagha (Mor) when saying your Salaat  
 09) One travelling alarm clock.  
 10) One pair of rubber slippers and one pair of **very** **comfortable
shoes for the daily wear.**  
 11) You should take enough prescription medicine to last you during the
entire trip and you should carry them in your hand luggage. It is also
advisable to carry a prescription of all your medication in case you
have to buy them. Also please make sure to take some **Tylenol** and
cough drops like **‘Bradasol’ for sore throat.**  
 12) If you wear prescription glasses then it is highly recommended to
carry an extra pair with you.

New York/Jeddah
---------------

During Umra season, it is advisable to fly by Saudi Airlines from New
York which flies non-stop to Jeddah and arrives at about 4:30 PM. This
will give you enough time to clear immigration and customs and catch
your flight to Medina which departs from Jeddah at about 8:30 PM.

Once you arrive in Medina and have collected your baggage, you will go
outside the terminal and take a taxi to your hotel, which will cost you
approximately SR40.

Medina
------

If you are staying near the Holy Haram then every morning at about 4:30
AM you should go to the Holy Haram for Salaat al-Shab also called Salaat
al-Lail. Two Adhaan are given in the morning and one Ehkaam for the Fajr
Salaat.

If you wish to pray inside the Haram then you should carry (with you)
the straw mat because you will be able to do your prostration on it.

Also there are many small places in the Haram where there are no carpets
so you can pray at these places.

After morning Salaat men proceed to Janat-ul-Baquee. The ladies will
stay outside Masjid al-Nabawee waiting for the Masjid to be opened for
them for Ziyarat, which is normally at about 7:00 AM.

You should try and return to your Hotel for breakfast and rest during
the day and if you wish to go for Salaat at the Masjid during Dhohar and
Asr, you may do so.

The Holy Haram is closed after Isha Salaat.

Salaat
------

Hujjaj who are required to pray **‘kasar’** under normal circumstances,
are recommended to pray full Salaat in Makkah and Medina, if you are
staying in a Hotel near the Holy Haram.

It is highly recommended that when entering ***any Masjid*** for the
first time then 2 rakaat Salaat be offered with the **"Niyyat of
Tahiyyat** **al-Masjid"**


