Religious Motivation and Justification for Compassion and Violence
==================================================================

It is well known historically that religion can be the springboard for
love, acts of kindness and social compassion, but that it can also be
used as a justification for evil deeds and violence. It has been one of
the greatest forces in the history of human beings for positive and for
negative ends. Let us briefly look at an example of each.

**Osama Bin Laden** led his al Queda fighters to destroy the World Trade
Center and Pentagon on September 11, 2001, resulting in several thousand
deaths, bringing fear and terror world wide and an unprecedented
international cooperation to inhibit such acts on a global scale.
Although the goals themselves were apparently political, one of the
stated justifications for them was religious.

**The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr.** (1929–1968) was one of this
century’s most important figures in the United States. The son of a
preacher, he received religious training himself, eventually being
awarded a doctorate in theology from Boston University. As an African
American minister in the South during the 1960s, King became actively
involved in efforts to ease the plight of African Americans in such
areas as housing, jobs, voting rights, equal access to education, and
other civil rights issues. In the 1950s, he organized a bus boycott in
Montgomery, Alabama, as a way of protesting forced racial segregation in
the city’s bus system. The boycott lasted 381 days, during which time
his home was bombed, he received death threats, and he was jailed. At
the end of it all, King’s efforts made an important difference: The
United States Supreme Court ruled that it was illegal to have forced
segregation in public transportation in the city.

Martin Luther King, Jr., became a renowned civil rights leader who led
marches, rallies, and legal actions to promote racial equality. He won
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964 for these efforts. Among the most
important of his teachings was the concept that people should be judged
not by the color of their skin but rather by their character. In 1968,
at the height of social upheaval in the 1960s, King was shot and killed
in Memphis, Tennessee. A hundred thousand people attended his funeral in
Atlanta, Georgia. His birthday is now a national holiday.

Martin Luther King, Jr., was a religiously motivated man. What was the
nature of this religious motivation? Sometimes people use their religion
as a means to an end. For King, religion might have been a motivational
springboard for seeking greater social equality between people from
diverse ethnic backgrounds.

Most people’s religious lives do not make the news headlines as
dramatically as the above two examples. But most people’s lives are
involved in or affected by religion or religious issues in one way or
another. This chapter will help you understand the psychological
processes that explain how this works.


