The Scope of Religion and Links Between Psychology and Religion
===============================================================

How many religious people are there?  Looking at news events and casual
observation of various peoples and cultures would seem to suggest that
people believe in and follow many diverse religions and faith
traditions.  What do the data tell us?

The Scope of Religion
---------------------

One psychologist commented that religion is gradually disappearing from
the face of the earth, and that what remains of it exerts little
influence in most cases (Beit-Hallahmi, 1989). How accurate is this
belief? Probably not very accurate. In one recent survey of a diverse
sample of Americans, 78 percent rated themselves as religious and 90
percent said they were spiritual (Zinnbauer & others, 1999). About 60
percent of individuals attend religious services and 95 percent say they
believe in God. Seventy-five percent say they pray (*Religion in
America* , 1993). Religion also is an important dimension of people’s
lives around the world - 98 percent of the population in India, 88
percent in Italy, 72 percent in France, and 63 percent in Scandinavia
say that they believe in God (Gallup, 1985). Of the world’s 6 billion
people, approximately two-thirds are either involved in religion or have
been affected by religion in important ways.

Interestingly, females have shown a consistently stronger interest in
religion than males have (Bijur & others, 1993; Francis & Wilcox, 1998;
Miller & Hoffman, 1996). They participate more in both organized and
personal forms of religion, are more likely to believe in a higher power
or presence, and feel, more than men do, that religion is a very
important dimension of their lives. In one recent study, men viewed God
as more controlling than women did (Krejci, 1998).

The worldwide interest in religion suggests that knowledge of the
psychological dimensions of religion would improve our understanding of
human behavior and mental processes. A psychology of mental processes
and behavior would be incomplete without an exploration of the
psychology of religion.

The History of Psychology of Religion
-------------------------------------

Psychology of religion is among both the oldest and the newest research
areas in psychology. It was part of the field of psychology from the
beginning. The famous psychologist William James wrote*The Varieties of
Religious Experience* in 1902, shortly after*The Psychology of Religion*
(Starbuck, 1899) was published. One of the first journals on any topic
in psychology was titled*The American Journal of Religious Psychology
and Education* , and books were written about adolescent religious
awakening and conversion.

Psychology of religion flourished until the 1930s but then remained
dormant for about three decades. In the last several decades, a renewed
interest in psychology of religion has emerged. A number of books and a
host of empirical studies suggest that it is once again a viable area in
the discipline of psychology (Batson, Schoenrade, & Ventis, 1993; Hood &
others, 1996; Paloutzian, 1996; Wulff, 1997). Psychologists involved in
the psychology of religion today work in a wide variety of settings,
including colleges and universities, hospitals, clinics, counseling
centers, churches and synagogues, schools, research institutes, and
private practice.

Psychology of Religion and General Psychology
---------------------------------------------

Areas in the study of psychology of religion and the study of psychology
in general are directly linked. The main areas of inquiry in general
psychology are the physiological mechanisms underlying behavior,
sensation and perception, learning, cognition, human development,
personality, social influences on behavior, and abnormal behavior. In
psychology of religion, research is being conducted on the physiological
or brain mechanisms that underlie religious experiences, and even on the
possible genetic basis of religiousness (D’Onofrio & others, 1999;
Waller & others, 1990); on self-perception of one’s own religious
motivation and feelings (Hill, 1998); on how individuals can use the
principles of cognition to understand their religious experience
(McCallister, 1995); on the social psychological mechanisms involved in
interpreting life circumstances in a religious way, such as attributing
an event to God (Spilka & McIntosh, 1995); on links between personality
and religion (Emmons, 1999; Piedmont, 1999); on stages of religious
growth and development (Fowler, 1996); on whether religiousness promotes
or impairs mental or physical health (Koenig, 1998; Plante & Sherman,
2001); and on the nature of religious persuasion (Rambo, 1993). Thus,
for every main topic in general psychology, there is a parallel line of
research in the field of psychology of religion (Paloutzian, 1996).

Psychological Models and Religion
---------------------------------

Psychology of religion draws on a number of psychological models to
explain religious thought and behavior (Miller & Jackson, 1995). Four
such models are the behavioral model, the psychoanalytic or
psychodynamic model, the humanistic model, and the sociocultural model.
The behavioral model of religion emphasizes the importance of analyzing
a person’s learning history to determine the extent to which, for that
person, religious behavior has been and is being rewarded, punished, and
imitated. By evaluating an individual’s learning history, we can
determine the pattern of rewards and punishments the person has
experienced for various aspects of religiousness. For example, a person
who has been rewarded for attending church is more likely to attend
church in the future than if she or he has been punished for attending.
Similarly, if children imitate parents’ prayer behavior and this
imitation is approved by the parents, the probability that the children
will engage in prayer behavior as adults is increased.

The psychoanalytic (or psychodynamic) model of religion emphasizes that
the key to understanding religiousness resides deep within the
unconscious mind. Individuals are believed to have instinctual needs
that they are not aware of, such as needs for safety and security, which
can be met by relating to a higher power. For example, individuals who
as children were not nurtured in a secure, loving way by their parents
might develop an unconscious insecurity as adults. One way to satisfy
this insecurity is to identify with God as a protector and provider. In
ways like this, human unconscious needs can be met through religion.

The humanistic model of religion emphasizes that a person’s most
important needs include needs for growth, purpose, and self
actualization. Humans have innate tendencies to fulfill their potential
and express their values. Religion serves as an important vehicle for
fulfilling potential and expressing values.

The sociocultural model of religion emphasizes that individuals adopt a
particular religious stance because of the experiences they have in the
culture in which they live. Most people learn religion from the cultural
group into which they are born. For example, someone who grows up in
Rome is likely to be Catholic, while someone who grows up in Iran is
likely to be a Muslim.

Does one of the aforementioned models provide a better model for
psychology of religion than the others? Not necessarily. Like virtually
all areas of psychology, the psychology of religion contains many viable
approaches that can be used in combination to better understand the
nature of religious life.


