Defining Religion and Exploring the Psychology of Religion
==========================================================

Can we define what religion is? What are the dimensions of religious
commitment? Are science and religion incompatible? What is the nature of
religious orientation?

Defining Religion
-----------------

Defining religion is an inordinately difficult task, complicated by the
wide range of religions in the world, their complex histories, and their
cultural meanings (Pargament, 1997).

One way to define religion is in terms of its functional nature. For
example, psychology of religion scholar Daniel Batson and his colleagues
(Batson, Schoenrade, & Ventis, 1993) stated that religion is what a
person does to answer the basic existential questions of life (questions
having to do with the nature of human beings’ existence). Such questions
include these:

**•Why am I here?**

**•What does life mean in general?**

**•What does my particular life amount to?**

**•What happens when I die?**

Batson believes that people can answer these questions in many ways.
Some answers emphasize institutional religious affiliation (such as
being a member of the Catholic or Baptist church); others emphasize
unique meanings of religion to the individual. Although Batson’s
functional, existential definition is instructive, it is inadequate as a
comprehensive definition of religion, because many people are religious
for reasons not having to do with existential issues. For example, some
individuals grow up being taught a specific religion, such as
Catholicism or Islam, and believe in their faiths without ever
concerning themselves with existential questions. Thus, if we adopted
Batson’s definition of religion, someone like this - who practices
Catholicism or Islam without exploring existential questions - would
have to be labeled “nonreligious” even though they believe in and
practice a major world religion.

According to Finnish researcher Kalevi Tamminen (1991), religiousness
also involves a conscious dependency on a deity or God. Tamminen argues
that this dependency or commitment is reflected in an individual’s
experiences, beliefs, and personality, motivating the individual to
engage in a variety of behaviors, such as devotional behavior and moral
behavior. This definition encompasses individuals’ thoughts and feelings
about their beliefs, as well as the beliefs themselves. However, this
definition is also somewhat inadequate because not all religions are
theistic (a term that means believing in a God or deity), and some
psychologists - especially those of a psychoanalytic persuasion -
emphasize the unconscious rather than the conscious bases of human
religiousness.

The psychology of religion emphasizes the importance of operationally
defining the aspects of religiousness that are being studied (Johnson,
Mullins, & Burnham, 1993; Spilka, 1993). An*operational definition* is a
statement of what a construct is in terms of the procedures or methods
used to assess it. For example, the construct of intelligence might be
operationally defined in terms of scores on an IQ test. Aggression might
be operationally defined as the number of times a person yells or hits
in a specified period of time. There are many ways to operationally
define religiousness, including frequency of church attendance, degree
of belief in religiously orthodox doctrinal statements (such as
statements about the virgin birth, the resurrection of Jesus, the
authority of Muhammad, the literality of the Exodus), degree of
intrinsic versus extrinsic religious motivation, and degree of spiritual
well-being.

In one recent study, the link between religion and sexuality was
confirmed (Fehring & others, 1998). In college students, guilt, prayer,
organized religious activity, and religious well-being were associated
with fewer sexual encounters.

Are religion and spirituality the same or different? Some psychologists
of religion use the terms religion and spirituality interchangeably
(Spilka & McIntosh, 1996). More often, however, spirituality and
religion are teased apart (Emmons & Paloutzian, in press; Wulff, 1997).
Two contrasts are common (Pargament, 1997). In the first, religion is
defined as the institutional, the organizational, the ritual, and the
ideological, whereas spirituality is defined as the personal, the
affective, the experiential, and the thoughtful. This contrast includes
the idea that an individual can be spiritual without being religious or
religious without being spiritual. A second contrast between religion
and spirituality involves reserving the term spiritual for the loftier
side of life with spirituality - the search for meaning, for unity, or
connectedness, for transcendence, and for the highest level of human
potential. The term religion is correspondingly reserved for
institutionalized activity and formalized beliefs, things that can be
seen as peripheral to spiritual tasks. The trend in defining religion is
moving away from a broad conceptualization of the institutional and the
individual toward a more narrow definition in terms of the institutional
side of life. The trend in defining spirituality is to describe it in
terms of individual expression that speaks to a person’s highest level
of human functioning (Emmons, 1999). Despite such trends, there is still
a great deal of controversy about how to define religion and
spirituality. Many psychologists of religion still believe that religion
can be expressed both institutionally and individually, and that
spirituality is a core dimension of the psychology of religion
(Pargament, 1997; Zinnbauer, Pargament, & Scott, 1999).

Dimensions of Religious Commitment
----------------------------------

Our exploration of the definition of religion suggests that the concept
of religion is multifaceted and multidimensional. The dimensions of
religious commitment include religious belief, religious practice,
religious feeling, religious knowledge, and religious effects (Glock,
1962).

*Religious belief* is the ideological dimension and doctrine of
religious commitment - the content of what someone believes. For
example, one person might believe that Jesus was the Messiah and rose
from the dead, whereas another person might believe that the Messiah has
not yet come. These individuals’ theologies differ in doctrinal content.

*Religious practice* is the ritualistic dimension of religious
commitment - the behaviors someone is expected to perform as part of a
particular religion. The religious practice could include singing,
chanting, scripture reading, going to confession, or bowing to a stick
or a stone. It is important to note that these acts are part of what
defines religion rather than merely consequences of it.

*Religious feeling* is the experiential dimension of religious
commitment, which consists of the emotions, states of consciousness, or
sense of well-being, dread, freedom, or guilt that are part of a
person’s religiousness. For example, the sense of awe that people might
feel when thinking about the supernatural, the sense of purpose that
individuals might experience when they believe that their life is
directed by God, and the sense of guilt persons might feel when they
violate religiously taught moral requirements are all aspects of the
experiential dimension of religious feeling.

*Religious knowledge* is the intellectual dimension of religious
commitment - what a person knows about the belief. Common sense suggests
that the belief dimension has two simple categories - those who believe
and those who do not - but it might also be conceived as a continuum.
Similarly, the knowledge dimension stretches along a continuum of
possibilities that range from those who know a great deal about a
particular religion to those who know absolutely nothing. Crossing
religious belief categories with religious knowledge categories
generates some intriguing portrayals. For example, consider the
knowledgeable believer and the ignorant believer. Imagine also someone
who has “blind faith” - that is, someone who claims strong belief yet
has little knowledge about what he or she claims to believe. Such people
do exist. And think about someone who is highly knowledgeable about a
religion, yet rejects it. These people also exist.  Much can be learned
by exploring the various combinations that can be achieved by crossing
religious belief and religious knowledge.

*Religious effects* refer to the consequential dimension of religious
commitment - the behaviors a person engages in during everyday life that
are due to her or his religious beliefs. Religious prescriptions for
everyday morality fit this category. For example, consider a man who
experiences a religious conversion and as a consequence alters his
behavior from abusing his wife to not abusing her. Consider also that,
in repeated Gallup surveys, individuals who attend church or synagogue
services on a weekly basis report more than twice as many volunteer
hours spent in helping the poor and the sick, compared to individuals
who never or infrequently attend services. And in one recent study, a
commitment to religion was associated with giving to the poor (Regnerus,
Smith, & Sikkink, 1998).

An important final point about religious commitment needs to be made.
Religious commitment has both positive and negative aspects (Hill,
1998). It is a consistent negative predictor of drug abuse (Gorsuch,
1995), has consistent positive links with marital adjustment and family
stability (Hansen, 1992), and is associated in many ways with how people
construct a life that they feel is meaningful (Silberman, in press).
However, certain types of religion appear to be related to prejudice and
discrimination (Hunsberger, 1995) and to some forms of child abuse
(Bottoms & others, 1995). Some experts on the psychology of religion
argue that the negative effects of religion occur mainly when a religion
is too rigid or is misused, as when it is used to manipulate and control
others (Koenig & Larson, 1998). Some clinical psychologists, such as
Albert Ellis (1962), argue that excessive religion can produce
depression or other mental disorders in some individuals. Others say
religion can saddle people with too much guilt. A century ago, William
James (1902) distinguished between sick-souled and healthy-minded
religion. Today, experts in the psychology of religion continue to
believe, like James did a century ago, that religion cannot be given the
simple label of good or bad.

The Science-Versus-Religion Problem
-----------------------------------

It is important to notice that psychology (like any other science) is
not necessarily in conflict with religion (Jones, 1994). Some
scientists’ conclusions might appear to be in conflict with some
specific religious beliefs (as in the evolution-versus-
creation controversy), but such differences are the exception. For the
most part, scientists’ views are compatible with, rather than in
opposition to, religious teaching. Consider the views of leading
neuroscience researcher Candace Pert (1986), who says that she sees
constant signs of God’s presence in the beauty of the brain and its
order. Contemporary research on the brain and cognition is yielding a
portrait of human consciousness that is compatible with spiritual
conceptualizations (Hill, 1998; Sperry, 1988).

With regard to psychology and religion, it is not unusual to hear
someone say, “Either God did this, or it was psychological, but it was
not both.” For example, some might argue that religious conversion is
due to God and therefore cannot be explained psychologically. Such
reasoning is incorrect, according to psychology of religion scholars
(Paloutzian, 1996). There is nothing in psychology’s theories or methods
as a scientific discipline that somehow makes psychology automatically
contrary to religious teaching. Take religious conversion as an example.
It is entirely legitimate to say that religious and psychological
explanations can both be correct (or incorrect) at the same time. In
other words, religious teachings about the possible supernatural cause
of conversion could be true in principle and, likewise, psychological
statements about the mental and emotional processes involved could be
accurate as well. Thus, the either/or view (either a religious
explanation or a psychological one, but not both) is inaccurate.

As you study the psychology of religion in this chapter, it will be
helpful to remember that psychology can neither prove nor disprove
either religion in general or any particular religion. However,
psychology of religion can tell us much about how religion works in
people’s lives.

Religious Orientation
---------------------

One of the most important concepts in psychology of religion research
since the 1960s is the concept of intrinsic and extrinsic religious
orientation. The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic religious
orientation is intellectually related to the distinction between
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in general motivational theory (Deci,
1975).

*Intrinsic religious orientation* involves religious motives that lie
within the person; the person lives the religion. By contrast,*extrinsic
religious orientation* involves personal motives that lie outside the
religion itself; using the religion for some nonreligious ends. To
better understand the distinction between these two religious
orientations, consider the following two physicians. Physician Jones, as
a consequence of her religious teachings about helping needy people in
Third World countries, becomes a medical missionary and receives little
money for doing so. Indeed, even the small amount she does receive has
to be raised from individual supporters. In contrast, physician Smith
practices medicine in Hollywood for movie stars and receives large fees
for doing so. To which physician should we attribute an intrinsic,
altruistic motive (her only desire is to help someone) and to which
should we attribute an extrinsic, monetary motive? In this situation, we
would infer that physician Jones’s behavior is intrinsically motivated
and physician Smith’s is extrinsically motivated.

A sampling of questionnaire items that are designed to measure intrinsic
and extrinsic religious motivation can help to clarify these concepts.
Intrinsically motivated individuals are more likely to agree with
statements like these:

•“I try hard to carry my religion over into all my other dealings in
life.”

•“My religious beliefs are what really lie behind my whole approach to
life.”

Extrinsically motivated individuals are more likely to agree with
statements like these:

•“Although I believe in my religion, I feel there are many more
important things in life.”

•“The primary reason for my interest in religion is that my church
provides congenial social activities.”

A close examination of these statements reveals that intrinsically
motivated religious individuals tend to agree with statements that
involve a consistency between beliefs and behavior, whereas
extrinsically motivated religious individuals tend to agree with
statements that underscore using religion to get something out of it
(Allport & Ross, 1967; Hill & Hood, 1999).

The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic ways of being religious
was initially seen as a way of describing genuine (intrinsic) and
ingenuine (extrinsic) religiousness. It was said that intrinsically
religious individuals live their religion while extrinsically religious
individuals use it. The notion also included the idea that religion is a
master motive in life for the intrinsically religious individual
(Allport, 1966). As such, religion is an umbrella under which other
motives operate. The concept of a master religious motive becomes
especially important in mixed-motive circumstances. For example, imagine
a circumstance in which a person’s religious motivation conflicts with
his or her sexual or economic motivation. According to the original
master-religious-motive conceptualization, the intrinsically motivated
individual would be more likely to follow the teachings of his or her
religion in mixed-motive situations, whereas the extrinsically motivated
individual would be more likely to compromise the religious teachings.

So far, we would seem to have a clear-cut case that having an intrinsic
religious orientation is good while having an extrinsic religious
motivation is bad. However, religious orientation is not so simple.
Later in this chapter we will discuss the complexity of intrinsic and
extrinsic religious orientations and learn that people can be both
intrinsically and extrinsically religious in a variety of ways.

At this point we have discussed many different ideas about the scope of
religion and linkages between psychology and religion, and we defined
and explored the psychology of religion. A summary of these ideas is
presented in the first half of summary table at the end of the chapter.

Religious Development and Conversion
------------------------------------

What is the nature of religious development in children and adolescents?
What might a life-span view of religious development be like? What is
the nature of spirituality and religiousness in older adults? How does
religious conversion unfold?

Religious Development in Children and Adolescents
-------------------------------------------------

Many children show an interest in religion, and religious institutions
created by adults are designed to introduce children to certain beliefs
and ensure that they will carry on a religious tradition. For example,
societies have invented Sunday schools, parochial education, tribal
transmission of religious traditions, and parental teaching of children
at home so that children will come to hold the same beliefs and values
as their parents.

Does this indoctrination work? In many cases it does. In general, adults
tend to adopt the religious teachings of their upbringing. For instance,
if individuals are Catholics by the time they are 25 years of age, and
were raised as Catholics, they likely will continue to be Catholics
throughout their adult years. If a religious change or reawakening
occurs, it is most likely to take place during adolescence.

Religious issues are important to adolescents. In one recent survey, 95
percent of those 13 to 18 years old said that they believe in God or a
universal spirit (Gallup & Bezilla, 1992). Almost three-fourths of
adolescents said that they pray, and about one-half indicated that they
had attended religious services within the past week. Almost one-half of
the youth said that it is very important for a young person to learn
religious faith.

### Developmental Changes

###

Adolescence can be an especially important juncture in religious
development. Even if children have been indoctrinated into a religion by
their parents, because of advances in their cognitive development they
may begin to question what their own religious beliefs truly are.

During adolescence, especially in late adolescence and the college
years, identity development becomes a central focus (Erikson, 1968).
Youth want to know answers to questions like these: “Who am I?” “What am
I all about as a person?” “What kind of life do I want to lead?” As part
of their search for identity, adolescents begin to grapple in more
sophisticated, logical ways with such questions as “Why am I on this
planet?” “Is there really a God or higher spiritual being, or have I
just been believing what my parents and the church imprinted in my
mind?” “What really are my religious views?”

The cognitive developmental theory of famous Swiss psychologist Jean
Piaget (1952) provides a theoretical backdrop for understanding
religious development in children and adolescents. For example, in one
study children were asked about their understanding of certain religious
pictures and Bible stories (Goldman, 1964). The children’s responses
fell into three stages closely related to Piaget’s theory.

In the first stage (up until 7 or 8 years of age) - preoperational
intuitive religious thought - children’s religious thoughts were
unsystematic and fragmented. The children often either did not fully
understand the material in the stories or did not consider all of the
evidence. For example, one child’s response to the question “Why was
Moses afraid to look at God?” (Exodus 3:6) was “Because God had a funny
face!”

In the second stage (occurring from 7 or 8 to 13 or 14 years of age) -
concrete operational religious thought - children focused on particular
details of pictures and stories. For example, in response to the
question about why Moses was afraid to look at God, one child said,
“Because it was a ball of fire. He thought he might burn him.” Another
child voiced, “It was a bright light and to look at it might blind him.”

In the third stage (age 14 through the remainder of adolescence) -
formal operational religious thought - adolescents revealed a more
abstract, hypothetical religious understanding. For example, one
adolescent said that Moses was afraid to look at God because “God is
holy and the world is sinful.” Another youth responded, “The awesomeness
and almightiness of God would make Moses feel like a worm in
comparison.”

Other researchers have found similar developmental changes in children
and adolescents (Long, Elkind, & Spilka, 1967; Oser & Gmünder, 1991).
For example, in one study, at about 17 or 18 years of age adolescents
increasingly commented about freedom, meaning, and hope - abstract
concepts - when making religious judgments (Oser & Gmünder, 1991).

### Religiousness and Sexuality in Adolescence

###

One area of religion’s influence on adolescent development involves
sexual activity. Although variability and change in church teachings
make it difficult to characterize religious doctrines simply, most
churches discourage premarital sex. Thus, the degree of adolescents’
participation in religious organizations may be more important than
religious affiliation as a determinant of premarital sexual attitudes
and behavior. Adolescents who attend religious services frequently may
hear messages about abstaining from sex. Involvement of adolescents in
religious organizations also enhances the probability that they will
become friends with adolescents who have restrictive attitudes toward
premarital sex. In one study, adolescents who attended church frequently
and valued religion in their lives were less experienced sexually and
had less permissive attitudes toward premarital sex than did their
counterparts who attended church infrequently and said that religion did
not play a strong role in their lives (Thornton & Camburn, 1989). In one
recent study, the link between religion and sexuality was confirmed
(Fehring & others, 1998). In college students, guilt, prayer, organized
religious activity, and religious well-being were associated with fewer
sexual encounters. However, while religious involvement is associated
with a lower incidence of sexual activity among adolescents, adolescents
who are religiously involved and sexually active are less likely to use
medical methods of contraception (especially the pill) than are their
sexually active counterparts with low religious involvement (Studer &
Thornton, 1987, 1989).

Fowler’s Developmental Theory
-----------------------------

James Fowler (1986, 1996) proposed a theory of religious development
that focuses on the motivation to discover meaning in life, either
within or outside of organized religion. Fowler proposed six stages of
religious development that are related to Erikson’s, Piaget’s, and
Kohlberg’s theories of development (Torney-Purta, 1993).

Stage 1. Intuitive-projective faith (early childhood). After infants
learn to trust their caregiver (Erikson’s formulation), they invent
their own intuitive images of what good and evil are. As children move
into Piaget’s preoperational stage, their cognitive worlds open up a
variety of new possibilities. Fantasy and reality are taken as the same
thing. Right and wrong are seen in terms of consequences to the self.
Children readily believe in angels and spirits (Wagener, 1998).

Stage 2. Mythical-literal faith (middle and late childhood). As children
move into Piaget’s concrete operational stage, they begin to reason in a
more logical, concrete, but not abstract way. They see the world as more
orderly. Grade-school-age children interpret religious stories
literally, and they perceive God as being much like a parent figure who
rewards the good and punishes the bad. What is right is often perceived
as fair exchange.

Stage 3. Synthetic-conventional faith (transition between childhood and
adolescence, early adolescence). Adolescents now start to develop formal
operational thought (Piaget’s highest stage) and begin to integrate what
they have learned about religion into a coherent belief system.
According to Fowler, although the synthetic-conventional faith stage is
more abstract than the previous two stages, young adolescents still
mainly conform to the religious beliefs of others (as in Kohlberg’s
conventional level of morality) and have not yet adequately analyzed
alternative religious ideologies. Someone’s behavior that involves a
question of right and wrong is seen in terms of the harm it does to a
relationship or what others might say. Fowler believes that most adults
become locked into this stage and never move on to higher stages of
religious development. The faith of adolescents often involves a
personal relationship with God. God is thought of as “always there for
me” (Wagener, 1998).

Stage 4. Individuative-reflective faith (transition between adolescence
and adulthood, early adulthood). Fowler believes that, at this stage,
for the first time individuals are capable of taking full responsibility
for their religious beliefs. Often precipitated by the leaving-home
experience, young people begin to take responsibility for their lives.
Young adults now start to realize that they can choose the course of
their lives and that they must expend effort to follow a particular life
course. Individuals come face-to-face with such decisions as these:
“Should I consider myself first, or should I consider the welfare of
others first?” “Are the religious doctrines that were taught to me when
I was growing up absolute, or are they more relative than I had been led
to believe?” Fowler believes that both formal operational thought and
the intellectual challenges to an individual’s values and religious
ideologies that often develop in college are essential to developing
individuative-reflective faith.

Stage 5. Conjunctive faith (middle adulthood). Fowler believes that only
a small number of adults ever move on to this stage, which involves
being more open to paradox and opposing viewpoints. This openness stems
from people’s awareness of their finiteness and limitations. One woman
Fowler placed at this stage revealed the following complex religious
understanding: “Whether you call it God or Jesus or Cosmic Flow or
Reality or Love, it doesn’t matter what you call it. It is there”
(Fowler, 1981, p. 192).

Stage 6. Universalizing faith (middle adulthood or late adulthood).
Fowler says that the highest stage in religious development involves
transcending specific belief systems to achieve a sense of oneness with
all being and a commitment to breaking down the barriers that are
divisive to people on this planet. Conflictual events are no longer seen
as paradoxes. Fowler argues that very, very few people ever achieve this
elusive, highest stage of religious development. Three who have, he
says, are Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mother Teresa.
Figure 4 portrays the six stages in Fowler’s theory of religious
development. To read about the exemplary religious life and advanced
religious thought of Mother Teresa, see Explorations in Psychology
describing the exemplary life of Mother Teresa.


