EXPLORATIONS IN PSYCHOLOGY: The Exemplary Religious Life and Advanced
=====================================================================

Religious Thought of Mother Teresa
----------------------------------

Occasionally someone progresses to a stage of religious thought that
serves as a superior example for others. One such example of highly
developed religiousness is Mother Teresa (1910–1997) of Calcutta, India.

Mother Teresa was born Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu, in Albania. She became a
Roman Catholic nun and founded the Missionaries of Charity after having
entered the order of the Sisters of our Lady of Loreto at the age of 18
while in Ireland. After taking her vows in 1937, she served in Calcutta
in a Roman Catholic high school. While in Calcutta, she became grieved
by the extensive sickness and dying of people on the city’s streets. She
began to minister to these impoverished people and opened a home for
them in 1952. Though Mother Teresa died in 1997, her home and ministry
continue today, on five continents. In 1979, Mother Teresa was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize.

*Why is Mother Teresa’s religious thinking considered to be at such an
advanced level?*

Religion and Spirituality in Older Adults
-----------------------------------------

In many societies around the world, the elderly are the spiritual
leaders in their churches and communities. For example, in the Catholic
church, more popes have been elected in their eighties than in any other
10-year period of the human life span.

The religious patterns of older adults have been increasingly studied
(Kimble & others, 1995; Levin, 1994). In one analysis, both older
African Americans and older Whites showed reasonably high levels of
religiousness, attended religious services several times a month, said
religion was important in their lives, read religious materials,
listened to religious programs, and prayed frequently (Levin, Taylor, &
Chatters, 1994). Also, in this analysis, older women had stronger
interest in religion than did older men.

When the significance of religion in people’s lives has been assessed,
individuals over 65 years of age are more likely than younger people to
say that religious faith is the most significant influence in their
lives, that they try to put religious faith into practice, and that they
go to church (Gallup, 1988). In this survey, adults in old age were more
likely than younger adults to have a strong interest in spirituality and
to pray.

Is religion related to a sense of well-being and life satisfaction in
old age? In one study of 836 elderly persons, it was. Religious
practices - such as prayer and Bible reading - and religious feelings
were associated with a sense of well-being, especially for women and
individuals over 75 years of age (Koenig, Kvale, & Ferrell, 1988).

Religion can fulfill some important psychological needs in older adults,
helping them face impending death, find and maintain a sense of
meaningfulness and significance in life, and accept the inevitable
losses of old age. Socially, the church can provide a number of
functions for older adults, such as social activities, social support,
and the opportunity to assume teaching and leadership roles. Older
adults can become deacons, elders, or Sunday school teachers, assuming
leadership roles that they might not have been able to take on before
their retirement (Cox & Hammonds, 1988). In sum, religion can play an
important role in the lives of elderly adults.

Religious Conversion
--------------------

Religious conversion is one of the most profound and perplexing
phenomena that can happen in a person’s life. The individual might never
be the same because of it.  If so, in what ways is the person different
and in what ways is the person*not* changed due to religious
conversion?  How can such events be explained psychologically?

### Defining Conversion and Types of Conversion

###

Conversion means change. Religious conversion refers to the change from
having no religious belief to accepting a religious belief system as
one’s own, or to the process of changing from one religious belief
system to another.

Two types of conversion are usually distinguished - sudden conversion
and gradual conversion. Sudden conversion is a religious change that
occurs all at once with no prior warning. When asked if they remember
how their conversion experience occurred, sudden converts can point to a
specific place and set of life circumstances involved in the conversion.
By contrast, gradual conversion is a religious change that takes place
over a period of time, ranging from several weeks or months to years. In
gradual conversion, people think through and evaluate issues and options
before arriving at a religious choice. There might be a decision point
similar to that in sudden conversion, but the slower evaluative process
is what distinguishes the two types. Both types of conversion contrast
with religious socialization, a lifelong process in which individuals
cannot remember not having a religious faith. In lifelong religious
socialization, the individual is brought up with a religion and never
deviates from it.

### Conversion Processes

###

Psychological efforts at explaining conversion have evolved from fairly
simplistic accounts to more complex models (Paloutzian, Richardson, &
Rambo, 1999; Zinnbauer & Pargament, 1998). Religious conversion used to
be explained as something that happened to someone more or less against
the person’s will. In this view, conversion is due to either (a) a
psychological need of which the person is unaware (such as a need for
safety or security or to reduce guilt) - that is, the person is
unconsciously driven to accept God and forgiveness, even though at the
conscious level the person might be fighting it (Richardson, 1985,
1989); or (b) social pressures operating on the person that are so
strong that the person cannot say no to the recruiting efforts of a
religious group. In other words, in the old model, whether due to
unconscious or social pressures, the person was viewed as a passive
responder to forces in the conversion process.

More recently, individuals who become converted are perceived as active
and religion-seeking rather than as being buffeted by forces beyond
their control (Kilbourne & Richardson, 1984; Richardson, 1985, 1989).
Whether traditional or nontraditional religious beliefs are adopted,
they are viewed as more consciously chosen.  Individuals might have
motives that lead them to seek out different kinds of religious
teachings or groups to satisfy their different needs (Glock & Stark,
1965). For example, someone who is suffering from a physical or mental
illness might be attracted to a religious healing group. Someone who
perceives or personally suffers from ethical deprivation (such as
differences between ideal values and actual performance) might gravitate
toward social reform movements. Someone suffering from a psychological
deprivation or a lack of meaning in life might adopt a religion that
teaches a new value system.

More cognitively oriented explanations of conversion have also been
offered. One such view links conversion with the mental processes
involved in creative thinking, in which the person reorganizes
information and sees it in a new way (Batson, Schoenrade, & Ventis,
1993). Similarly, conversion has been described as a cognitive
restructuring in which the individual’s portrayal of self and the world
undergoes a major shift (Brown & Caetano, 1992).

### Conversion and Personality Change

###

We know that something about a person is different (sometimes radically
different) following a religious conversion, but exactly what is it?
That is, is it he person’s basic personality traits, the person’s
motivations and goals, or the persons self-definition that has changed?

The answer to these questions becomes clear when seen in light of what
constitutes the structure and levels of human personality. *Level 1* of
personality is made up of basic traits.  Five traits are said to
comprise the basic dimensions of personality according to one important
line of research – these are Openness to experience, Conscientiousness,
Extroversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism (these are call the Big
Five traits, OCEAN; McCrae, 1992).  A person can be high or low in
varying degrees on any combination of these traits. *Level 2* of
personality refers to goals and motivations for which the person
strives, such as receiving a B. A. Degree in Psychology, being a good
person, other pursuits of a global or specific nature. *Level 3* of
personality is a matter of  self-definition, purpose in life, and world
view.  The whole person includes at least these levels in an interactive
blend that guides how the person thinks, feels, and acts.

Research on religious conversion shows that there is little noticeable
affect of conversion on basic traits.  A person who is open and
extroverted before religious conversion is likely to be the same
afterwards.  But levels 2 and 3 of the person’s personality can change a
great deal.  A new convert may adopt radically different goals, have
different motives that he or she had before, and can adopt a new purpose
in life and hold a new definition of who he or she is in the world
(Paloutzian, Richardson, & Rambo, 1999).

Religious Experience, Attitudes, Behavior, and Health
-----------------------------------------------------

How can we evaluate people’s religious experiences? What is the nature
of people’s religious attitudes and behavior? How is religion involved
in health?

Religious Experience
--------------------

We can consider religious experience from the inside and from the
outside. You, and only you, can see your religious life from the inside;
your experiences are conscious only to you. If you say, “I see the
Virgin Mary standing on a hill,” you are the only one privileged to this
view. Technically speaking, even if others say that they see the same
vision, it is only an assumption that the images in your minds are
identical.

The other way of evaluating religious experiences is from the outside -
whether a person’s behavior is in accord with the person’s beliefs (“Do
you practice what you preach?”). As is well known, if someone claims to
have certain religious beliefs but behaves inconsistently with those
beliefs, others are critical of the person. A person’s religion cannot
escape being evaluated in public arenas. This is partly what William
James (1902) meant when he said that religion should be judged by its
“fruits,” not by its “roots.”

The phenomenon of religious experience is an intriguing area of inquiry
in psychology of religion. People who have such experiences say they are
timeless and profound. In one survey, 43 percent of individuals reported
that they have “been aware of, or influenced by, a presence or a power -
whether you call it God or not - which is different from your everyday
self” (Gallup & Jones, 1989).

What factors increase the likelihood that individuals will have such
religious experiences? Two general classes of factors can be identified
that facilitate such experiences:*dispositional factors* (the personal
style of one’s religiousness) and*situational factors* (environmental or
momentary states that seem to trigger the experiences).

Religious orientation is an example of a dispositional factor. Earlier
in this chapter we introduced the concept of religious orientation and
discussed intrinsic and extrinsic religious orientations. Researchers
have found that intrinsically motivated individuals are more likely to
report having various religious experiences than are extrinsically
motivated individuals (Hood, 1970). Individuals with a high intrinsic
religious orientation often endorse such statements as “The prayers I
say when I am alone carry as much meaning and personal emotion as those
said by me during services.” One type of religious experience associated
with an intrinsic religious motivation can be expressed like this: “The
highest experiences I have had of God’s presence have been rare and
brief flashes of consciousness that have compelled me to exclaim with
surprise - God is here!”

Situational factors that have been studied as possible facilitators or
triggers of religious experience include floating slightly submerged in
a tank of water, experiencing nature, becoming immersed in a religious
group, developing a preparatory mental set, and being in an appropriate
setting such as a religious service or ritual (Fredrickson & Anderson,
1999; Hood, 1995).

Let’s explore one of these situations - floating underwater - to see how
it might facilitate religious experiences.

In one study, individuals were floating underwater to attain maximum
sensory deprivation (Hood & Morris, 1981). Half of the individuals were
told to imagine cartoon characters while they were submerged; the other
half were told to imagine religious figures during their submersion. The
experimenters’ rationale was that the preparatory mental set and
expectations of imagining religious figures would facilitate religious
experience or increase the probability that whatever was experienced
would be attributed to religious meaning. The results supported the
hypothesis: Individuals instructed to imagine religious figures while
submerged reported more religious experiences than did those who were
told to imagine cartoon characters. Interestingly, the effect of
preparatory mental set was greatest for individuals with an intrinsic
religious orientation. Possibly the kind of experience attained by the
intrinsic subjects while they were underwater was similar to what they
experienced while in prayer in their daily life.

Religious Attitudes and Behavior
--------------------------------

Whether we feel comfortable with it or not, other people evaluate our
religion by our attitudes and behavior. Perhaps the most common question
the layperson asks about a person’s religion is “Do you practice what
you preach?” In social psychological terms, this question focuses on
whether people’s actions are consistent with their attitudes. Although
there is no simple answer to whether religious individuals’ behavior
matches their attitudes, we can explore this issue further by examining
attitudes toward ethnic groups.

### The Religion-Prejudice Paradox

###

Gordon Allport (Allport & Ross, 1967) discovered the grand paradox -
that individuals who attend church tend to be more prejudiced in ethnic
matters than nonchurchgoing individuals. This is a paradox because it
does not fit with common sense, which would dictate the opposite: that
people who go to church and presumably are taught about love and human
community should be more tolerant toward ethnic minorities than
nonchurchgoers are. Furthermore, the great religious leaders of the
world, such as Jesus, were themselves examples of being nonprejudiced.
Thus, Allport wondered how it was that those who purported to be
religious were so prejudiced. Allport probed further and developed the
concept of intrinsic and extrinsic religious orientation that we
discussed earlier. Recall that an intrinsic religious orientation
involves internalized religious motives, whereas an extrinsic religious
orientation involves motives that lie outside the religion itself.

Allport reasoned that not all churchgoers are the same. Some individuals
attend church regularly, others sporadically. He found that prejudice
was lowest for consistent churchgoers, highest for sporadic churchgoers.
Allport also found that the consistent churchgoers were more likely to
have an intrinsic religious orientation, the sporadic churchgoers an
extrinsic religious orientation. Other researchers have found that
individuals with an intrinsic religious orientation have a higher sense
of meaning in life (Bolt, 1975) and greater spiritual well-being
(Paloutzian & Ellison, 1982).

### Quest, and Means and Ends

###

Two lines of research that followed from Allport’s work have focused on
the concepts of quest and means and ends.

#### Quest

####

Daniel Batson and his colleagues (Batson, Schoenrade, & Ventis, 1993)
define quest as searching and exploring religious issues while being
satisfied in not finding answers and being aware of one’s limitations in
the face of existential questions. Questing individuals are satisfied
with incompleteness although they would like to have answers to basic
religious questions. Batson calls these existential questions. Examples
of existential questions include these:

•“What is the meaning of my life?”

•“How do I handle the fact that I am going to die?”

Individual quest is assessed by agreement with statements like these:

•“It might be said that I value my religious doubts and uncertainties.”

•“As I grow and change, I expect my religion to grow and change.”

Batson and his colleagues found that high-quest individuals are less
likely to be prejudiced and less likely to discriminate against ethnic
minority individuals than are low-quest individuals. They also revealed
that individuals with an intrinsic religious orientation were similarly
likely to be low in prejudice, but, dissimilarly, were likely to
discriminate against ethnic minority individuals. His conclusion:
Intrinsics tend to answer questions in a way that makes them look good,
but they do not necessarily enact those attitudes in their everyday
behaviors.

### Means and Ends

###

The traditional conceptualization of intrinsic and extrinsic religious
orientation has been challenged by Kenneth Pargament (1997). Remember
that Allport said that intrinsics live their religion while extrinsics
use it. In that conceptualization, extrinsic religious motivation has
blatantly negative connotations, conjuring up such images as the
insurance salesperson who attends church services and goes through the
motions of appearing to be a religious person just to make business
contacts. Pargament argued that such blatant utilitarian religion might
be the exception rather than the rule. More often, he said, it might be
a sign of maturity when individuals both live and use their religion,
because all of life is a matter of combining means and ends. According
to Pargament, all religion involves the simultaneous interaction of
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, pathways and destinations, means and
ends. Intrinsic motivation involves what a person believes and where one
is going; extrinsic motivation involves the pathway, how one is trying
to get there. Neither can exist without the other, and a mature
religious life involves blending the two, in Pargament’s perspective.

This recent conceptualization rejects the earlier, simplistic
compartmentalization of religious orientation into intrinsic and
extrinsic categories and raises the possibility that the most mature
religious orientation is a fusion of the two orientations. For example,
a mature intrinsic-extrinsic religiously oriented individual might use
religious means (such as church resources) to accomplish a goal defined
by his or her own spiritual values (such as feeding the poor).

Religion and Physical Health
----------------------------

What might be some of the negative effects of religion on physical
health? One example is cults or religious sects that encourage behaviors
that are damaging to health (Stotland, 1999). For example, some
religious sects ignore sound medical advice or refuse pain-relieving
medication (Koenig, 1992). For individuals in the religious mainstream,
there is generally either no link between religion and physical health
or a positive effect. For example, in one review, five studies
documented that religious commitment had a protective influence on blood
pressure or hypertension rates (Levin & Vanderpool, 1989). Also, a
number of studies have confirmed a positive association of religious
participation and longevity (Gartner, Larson, & Allen, 1991).

Why might religion promote physical health? There are several possible
answers (Hill & Butter, 1995):

•Lifestyle issues. For example, religious individuals have lower drug
use than their nonreligious counterparts (Gartner, Larson, & Allen,
1991).

•Social networks. The degree to which individuals are connected to
others affects their health. Well-connected individuals have fewer
health problems. Religious groups, meetings, and activities provide
social connectedness for individuals (Collins & others, 1993).

•Coping with stress. Religion offers a source of comfort and support
when individuals are confronted with stressful events (Pargament, 1990).
Although research has not clearly demonstrated prayer’s positive effect
on physical health, some investigators argue that prayer might be
associated with such positive health-related changes as a decrease in
the perception of pain and reduced muscle tension (McCullough, 1995).

It also has been stressed that religious organizations might have a
stronger influence on physical health by providing more health-related
services. For example, they could sponsor community-based health
education and health-testing programs.

Religion and Mental Health
--------------------------

A common stereotype is that religion is a crutch for weak people and
that unconscious feelings of guilt are the reasons that people become
religious. Just because some religious individuals show signs of a
mental disorder does not mean that their religious beliefs caused the
disorder or that they adopted their beliefs as an escape. Similarly,
just because individuals with a severe mental disorder, such as
schizophrenia, use the word God or have a vision that they are Jesus or
another charismatic religious leader does not mean that religion caused
their severe mental disorder or that they became religious to try to
cure themselves. All that such illustrations do is inform us that
aspects of religion and mental disorder co-occur in a small number of
individuals. They tell us nothing about religion causing mental
disorders or mental disorders causing religiousness.

### Coping

###

What is the relation between religion and the ability to cope with
stress? Some psychologists have categorized prayer and religious
commitment as defensive coping strategies, arguing that they are less
effective in helping individuals cope than are life-skill,
problem-solving strategies. However, recently researchers have found
that some styles of religious coping are associated with high levels of
personal initiative and competence, and that even when defensive
religious strategies are initially adopted, they sometimes set the stage
for the later appearance of more-active religious coping (Pargament &
Park, 1995). In one recent study, depression decreased during times of
high stress when there was an increase in collaborative coping (in which
people see themselves as active partners with God in solving problems)
(Brickel & others, 1998). Also, in general, an intrinsic religious
orientation tends to be associated with a sense of competence and
control, freedom from worry and guilt, and an absence of illness,
whereas an extrinsic orientation tends to be associated with the
opposite characteristics (Ventis, 1995).

Instead of disintegrating during times of high stress, religious coping
behaviors appear to function quite well in these periods (Koenig, 1998).
In one study, individuals were divided into those who were experiencing
high stress and those with low stress (Manton, 1989). In the high-stress
group, spiritual support was significantly related to personal
adjustment (indicated by low depression and high self-esteem). No such
links were found in the low-stress group. In a study of 850 medically
ill patients admitted to an acute-care hospital, religious coping was
related to low depression (Koenig & others, 1992). In John Clausen’s
(1993) analysis of individuals in the Berkeley Longitudinal Studies, the
more-competent women and men in middle age were more likely than their
less-competent counterparts to have a religious affiliation and
involvement.

In sum, various dimensions of religiousness can help some individuals
cope more effectively with their lives (Miller & Thorensen, 1999).
Religious beliefs can shape a person’s psychological perception of pain
or disability. Religious cognitions can play an important role in
maintaining hope and stimulating motivation toward recovery. Because of
its effectiveness in reducing distress, religious coping can help
prevent denial of the problem and thus facilitate early recognition and
more appropriate health-seeking behavior. Religion also can forestall
the development of anxiety and depression disorders by promoting
communal or social interaction. Houses of religious worship are a
readily available, acceptable, and inexpensive source of support for
many individuals, especially the elderly. The socialization provided by
religious organizations can help prevent isolation and loneliness
(Koenig & Larson, 1998).

### Happiness

###

Are people who have a meaningful faith happier than those who do not?
Reviews of the happiness literature suggest that happy people do tend to
have a meaningful religious faith (Myers & Diener, 1995). Remember,
though, that knowing that two factors correlate does not mean that one
causes the other (just as in the case of religion and mental disorder
co-occurring in a few individuals). A number of researches have found
that religiously active individuals report greater happiness than do
those who are religiously inactive, but does this connection mean that
faith enhances happiness? Or does it mean that happiness is conducive to
faith? Psychology of religion research helps us answer such questions.

Some people who are not happy with their lives seek fulfillment outside
of the mainstream of religion. Next, we will explore the nature of
individuals who seek to find a more meaningful life by joining a cult.

Religion and Cults
------------------

Cults have been defined in various ways, ranging from “dangerous
institutions that cause severe emotional harm” to “marginal and deviant
groups” to “fringe, often new, religious movements.” Cults have been
described as being controlled by a charismatic leader, as fostering the
idea that there is only one correct set of beliefs and practices, as
demanding unquestionable loyalty and obedience, as using mind-control
techniques, as using deception and deceit in recruiting and interacting
with the outside world, and as exploiting members’ labor and finances.

What is the difference between a cult and a church, a service club, or
groups like Alcoholics Anonymous? There are many differences, but one
major one involves the ultimate goal of the group (Cialdini & Rhoad,
1999). Established religions and altruistic movements focus outward,
attempting to better the lives of members as well as nonmembers. Cults
serve the purposes of the cult’s leader. Their energies are directed
inward rather than outward. Also, religions and altruistic movements
usually do not involve overbearing authoritarian control by a leader,
the use of deception in recruiting members, coercive influence
techniques, and the replacement of one identity with a new identity that
would not have been freely chosen by the individual before joining the
group.

Who joins cults? For the most part, normal, average people.
Approximately two-thirds of cult members are psychologically healthy
individuals who come from normal families (Cialdini & Rhoad, 1999). The
remaining one-third often have depressive symptoms, in many cases linked
with personal loss such as a death in the family, a failed romantic
relationship, or career problems. Only about 5 percent of cult members
have major psychological problems before joining the cult. Cults prefer
intelligent, productive individuals who can contribute money and talent
to “the cause,” whatever that might be.

Many individuals who become cult members are in a transitional phase of
life. They have moved to a new city, lost a job, dropped out of school,
or given up traditional religion as personally irrelevant. Potential
cult members might find their work boring or stressful, their education
meaningless, their social life not going well, their family remote or
dysfunctional, their friends too busy to spend time with them, or their
trust in government lost. Cults promise to fulfill most of a person’s
individual needs and to make their life safe, healthy, caring, and
predictable. Cult leaders offer followers simple paths to happiness.

Some cult leaders have total authority over their disciples in both
spiritual and material matters (Saliba, 1996). These leaders might
portray themselves as inspired by, and receiving special revelations
from, God. Some cults are based on a book by the cult leader that is
believed to be revealed or inspired. The writings of L. Ron Hubbard,
founder of the Church of Scientology, are an example.

One all-powerful cult leader was Marshall Herff Applewhite, who
recruited followers to the Heaven’s Gate cult, a blend of New Age
occultism and science-fiction fantasy. In 1997, 39 cult members died
when they swallowed pudding laced with barbiturates and washed it down
with vodka. After swallowing the lethal concoction, they reclined on
their beds so their spirits could ascend to the “Level Above Human,” as
Applewhite called it. He had convinced the followers that a UFO was in
the Hale-Bopp comet’s slipstream and that the comet’s appearance was a
sign that it was time to go home. Applewhite wasn’t the first
charismatic leader to have such powerful control over his followers. In
the text chapter on “Social Psychology,” we discussed the social forces
and group processes that lead to such things as the mass suicide of more
than 900 followers of the Reverend James Jones, the leader of the
People’s Temple cult. To read about another such cult leader, see
Explorations in Psychology.

What makes cults dangerous? Philip Zimbardo (1997) believes it depends
to some degree on the kind of cult, since they come in so many sizes,
purposes, and disguises (at last count there were more than 2,500 cults
in the United States). Some cults are in the business of power and
money, needing members to give money, work for free, or beg and to
recruit new members. Some cults require members to turn over exorbitant
amounts of money or property, some require exhausting labor, most demand
that members sever ties with former friends and family (which creates
total dependence on the cult for one’s identity), and many cults destroy
the individual’s freedom of thought. The potential for abuse is highest
in cults that are physically and socially isolated from the outside
community.

At this point, we have discussed a number of ideas about religious
development and conversion, religious experience, attitudes, behavior,
and health, and religion and cults. A review of these ideas is presented
in the second half of the summary table at the end of the chapter.


