EXPLORATIONS IN PSYCHOLOGY:
===========================

David Koresh and the Branch Davidians
-------------------------------------

SOME CULT  LEADERS gain extraordinary power over their followers. One
such recent cult leader was David Koresh, who led the members

of his Branch Davidian cult to violent deaths. Koresh, whose original
name was Vernon Howell, was born in 1959 and attended school in Texas.
He was reported to have memorized large portions of the Bible, although
he had been indifferent to schoolwork. As a young man he

became attracted to the Branch Davidian offshoot of the Seventh Day
Adventist religion. He became its leader and gradually established
himself as the absolute authority over all of its affairs and its
members.

How do such leaders gain such complete control over their followers? In
Koresh’s case, he defined himself as an equal to God, convincing his
followers that he had divine insight. He taught an exclusive “us” versus
“them” approach by saying that “we” (he and his followers) were God’s
chosen people and “they” (everybody else) were controlled by Satan.
Koresh convinced members to disconnect themselves from the evils of the
outside world and established a group of “lieutenants” to enforce his
dictates.

In addition to control tactics like Koresh’s, characteristics of
followers also need to be taken into account to understand how cults
come about. Koresh’s followers were religious seekers who followed him
because they were dissatisfied with the ordinary religious options in
their world. Step by step, as they developed the habit of going along
with Koresh’s and the group’s expectations, their conformity to the cult
became more established. Eventually, Koresh gained control of the entire
group.

Two tragic events occurred to Koresh and his followers. On February 28,
1993, agents from the U.S. Department of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
decided to invade the sect’s compound just outside of Waco, Texas,
because they thought the group had illegal weapons. (In fact, it turned
out that the sect had stored a large supply of weapons, some of which
were illegal, and ammunition.) A gun battle ensued in which four federal
agents were shot to death. A 51 day standoff followed. After weeks of
discussion and failed negotiations, the federal officials decided to end
the conflict by attacking the compound. As the military vehicles of the
federal agents approached the compound, it and its people were swiftly
engulfed in flames. The fires apparently were set by Koresh and/or his
followers. There were few survivors.

Discussion: Religion, Spirituality, and Cults
---------------------------------------------

EARLIER IN THE CHAPTER, we described the nature of spirituality and
religion, and now we have discussed the nature of cults.

In our exploration of religion and spirituality, we indicated that some
psychologists of religion believe that the terms spirituality and
religion can be used interchangeably, whereas others think their
meanings are different. We also learned that many social scientists
differentiate between religion and cults but that some argue that cults
are fringe, often new, religious movements. What do you think? Get
together with several students and discuss similarities and differences
among religion, spirituality, and cults.

Exploring your Spiritual Well-Being
-----------------------------------

The Spiritual Well-Being Scale\*  was developed in order to measure how
people percieved their sense of well-being as they defined it in either
religious or existential terms (Paloutzian & Ellison, 1982).  Below are
10 of the 20 items from the scale, some slightly modified from the
original.

In order to take the scale, the person first is given the following
instructions:

For each of the following statements, assign a score from 1 to 6
according to how strongly you agree or disagree with it.

2. I don’t know who I am, where I came from, or where I am going.

3. My spiritual life makes me feel loved and connected.

5. I feel disconnected from a spiritual force in my daily situations.

6. I feel unsettled about my future.

7. My spiritual life offers me personally meaningful relationships.

8. I feel very fulfilled and satisfied with life.

9. I don’t get much personal strength and support from my spiritual
practices.

10. I feel a sense of well-being about the direction my life is headed
in.

18. Life doesn’t have much meaning.

19. My spiritual relationships contribute to my sense of well-being.

\*Copyright Craig W. Ellison and Raymond F. Paloutzian.  Used and
adapted by permission of the authors.  Not to be duplicated, copied, or
transferred without expressed written permission of the authors.  See
www.lifeadvance.com.

Scoring and Interpretation
--------------------------

The spiritual well-being scale measures two main areas: (1) religious
well-being and (2) existential well-being. The religious scale refers to
religion and one’s relationship to spirituality, the existential scale
to meaning in life and questions about the nature of one’s existence. In
the above list of statements, items 5, 9, and are summed; the scores for
items, 3, 7, and 19 are reversed (that is, change the 1 to a 6, the 2 to
a 5, the 3 to a 4, and so on). These two subtotals are  combined to get
an overall religious well-being score. To obtain an existential
well-being score, the responses to items 2, 6, and 18 are summed; the
scores for items 8 and 10 are reversed and then summed. Combine these
two subtotals to obtain the overall existential well-being score. One’s
overall score on each of these two sub-scales can range from 10 to 60.
On each of the sub-scales for the full test, a score of 40 or higher
reflects well-being (religious or existential).
