GLOSSARY
========

**behavioral model of religion** : A model that emphasizes the
importance of anaylzing a person’s learning history to determine the
extent to which, for that person, religious behavior has been and is
being rewarded, punished, and imitated.

**extrinsic religious orientation** : Personal motives that lie outside
the religion itself; using religion for some nonreligious ends.

**gradual conversion** : A religious change that takes place over a
period of time, ranging from several weeks or months to even years.

grand paradox: The paradox that individuals who attend church tend to be
more prejudiced in ethnic matters than nonchurchgoers.

**humanistic model of religion:** A model that emphasizes that a
person’s most important needs include needs for growth, purpose, and
self-actualization. Humans have innate tendencies to fulfill their
potential and express their values. Religion serves as an important
vehicle for fulfilling potential and expressing values.

**intrinsic religious orientation** : Religious motives that lie within
the person; living the religion.

**operational definition** : A statement of what a construct is in terms
of the procedures or methods used to assess it.

**psychoanalytic (psychodynamic) model of religion** : A model that
emphasizes that the key to understanding religiousness resides deep
within the unconscious mind. Individuals are believed to have
instinctual needs they are not aware of, such as needs for safety and
security, which can be met by relating to a higher power.

**Quest** : Searching and exploring religious issues while being
satisfied in not finding answers and being aware of one’s limitations in
the face of existential questions.

**religious belief** : The ideological dimension and doctrine of
religious commitment - the content of what someone believes.

**religious conversion** : The change from having no religious belief to
accepting a religious belief system as one’s own, or the process of
changing from one religious belief system to another.

**religious effects** : The consequential dimension of religious
commitment, which includes the behaviors a person engages in during
everyday life that are due to religion.

**religious feeling** : The experiential dimension of religious
commitment, which consists of the emotions, states of consciousness, or
sense of well-being, dread, freedom, or guilt that are part of a
person’s religiousness.

**religious knowledge** : The intellectual dimension of religious
commitment - what a person knows about the belief.

**religious practice** : The ritualistic dimension of religious
commitment - the behavior someone is supposed to perform as part of a
particular religion.

**religious socialization** : A lifelong process in which individuals
cannot remember not having a religious faith.

**sociocultural model of religion** : A model that emphasizes that
individuals adopt a particular religious stance because of the
experiences they have had in the culture in which they live.

**sudden conversion** : A religious change that occurs all at once with
no prior warning.


