Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ ص:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ: كِتَابَ اللهِ وَعِتْرَتِي أهْلَ
بَيْتِي، مَا إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِمَا لَنْ تَضِلُّوا بَعْدِي أبَداً،
وَإنَّهُمَا لَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) said:  
 “Verily, I am leaving among you two precious things [*Thaqalayn*]: The
Book of Allah and my progeny [*‘itrah*], the members of my Household
[*Ahl al-Bayt*]. If you hold fast to them, you shall never go astray.
These two will never separate from each other until they meet me at the
Pond [*hawd*] (of *Kawthar*).”

**Some of its references**:

Al­Hakim an­Nayshaburi, *Al­Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut), vol.
3, pp. 109-110, 148, 533.  
 Muslim, *As-Sahih*, (English translation), book 31, *hadiths* 5920-3.  
 At­Tirmidhi, *As-Sahih*, vol. 5, pp. 621-2, *hadiths* 3786, 3788; vol.
2, p. 219.  
 An-Nassa’i, *Khasa’is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib*, *hadith* 79.  
 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, *Al-Musnad*, vol. 3, pp. 14, 17, 26; vol. 3, pp. 26,
59; vol. 4, p. 371; vol. 5, pp. 181-182, 189-190.  
 Ibn al­Athir, *Jami ‘al­Usul*, vol. 1, p. 277.  
 Ibn Kathir, *Al­Bidayah wa’n­Nihayah*, vol. 5, p. 209.  
 Ibn Kathir, *Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim*, vol. 6, p. 199.  
 Nasir ad-Din al-Albani, *Silsilat al-Ahadith as-Sahihah* (Kuwait:
Ad-Dar as-Salafiyyah), vol. 4, pp. 355-358.

****

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

The invaluable legacy of the Household [*Ahl al-Bayt*] of the Prophet
(may peace be upon them all), as preserved by their followers, is a
comprehensive school of thought that embraces all branches of Islamic
knowledge. This school has produced many brilliant scholars who have
drawn inspiration from this rich and pure resource. It has given many
scholars to the Muslim *ummah* who, following in the footsteps of Imams
of the Prophet’s Household (*‘a*), have done their best to clear up the
doubts raised by various creeds and currents within and without Muslim
society and to answer their questions. Throughout the past centuries,
they have given well-reasoned answers and clarifications concerning
these questions and doubts.

To meet the responsibilities assigned to it, the Ahl al-Bayt World
Assembly (ABWA) has embarked on a defense of the sanctity of the Islamic
message and its verities, often obscured by the partisans of various
sects and creeds as well as by currents hostile to Islam. The Assembly
follows in the footsteps of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and the disciples
of their school of thought in its readiness to confront these challenges
and tries to be on the frontline in consonance with the demands of every
age.

The arguments contained in the works of the scholars belonging to the
School of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) are of unique significance. That is
because they are based on genuine scholarship and appeal to reason, and
avoid prejudice and bias. These arguments address scholars and thinkers
in a manner that appeals to healthy minds and wholesome human nature.

To assist the seekers of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt World Assembly has
endeavored to present a new phase of these arguments contained in the
studies and translations of the works of contemporary Shi‘ah writers and
those who have embraced this sublime school of thought through divine
blessing.

The Assembly is also engaged in edition and publication of the valuable
works of leading Shi‘ah scholars of earlier ages to assist the seekers
of the truth in discovering the truths which the School of the Prophet’s
Household (*‘a*) has offered to the entire world.

The Ahl al-Bayt World Assembly looks forward to benefit from the
opinions of the readers and their suggestions and constructive criticism
in this area.  
 We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist
us in propagating the genuine Islamic teachings as preached by the
Prophet Muhammad (S).

We beseech God, the Most High, to accept our humble efforts and to
enable us to enhance them under the auspices of Imam al-Mahdi, His
vicegerent on the earth (may Allah expedite his advent).

We express our gratitude to Professor Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah
Yazdi, the author of the present book,[^1] and Mansoor Limba, its
translator. We also thank our colleagues who have participated in
producing this work, especially the staff of the Translation Office.

***Cultural Affairs Department***  
**The Ahl al-Bayt** **(*****‘a*****) World Assembly**

[^1]: Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi, Nazariyyeh-ye Siyasi-ye Islam
(Qanunguzari), compiled and edited by Karim Subhani (Qum: Imam Khomeini
Educational and Research Institute, Summer 1380 AHS (2001)), vol. 1, 335
pp.


