Session 8: An Elucidation of the Structure and Form of Government
=================================================================

Status of elemental and evidential definition
---------------------------------------------

In this session our discussion is about the structure and form of the
Islamic government. Along this line, I deem it proper to narrate a
recollection from the Great Leader of the Islamic Revolution in Iran,
Hadhrat Imam Khomeini (*q*). During the beginning of the Revolution
foreign reporters asked the Imam, “After overthrowing the monarchical
government, what government and regime will you establish?” He replied,
“A government like that of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)”.

Defining and describing the Islamic government to reporters with a
particular culture and social fabric and no mental preparation to grasp
Islamic concepts in view of their fundamental differences with us in
this context, required many hours. Yet, the Imam gave them a complete
and convincing answer in one sentence, because by knowing the
distinctive features of the government of the Commander of the Faithful
(*‘a*)—which is known to both friends and foes, and to know which does
not require much extensive study and examination—the model of our
government could also be known.

This type of explanation and definition, i.e. evidential definition, is
the simplest way of describing the nature of a thing to the masses
because understanding intricate concepts is difficult for them, so by
indicating external manifestations and samples, they understand better.
For example, in order to explain electricity, we show them an electric
light or an electric device. In this type of definition, the
characteristics, properties and salient features of a thing are not
mentioned. In the academic and scientific circles, however, the
definition must be derived from the principal or secondary features
which describe the genus and quality mentioned in logic. In this kind of
definition, initially the general and broad meaning is mentioned and
then the specific meaning that excludes other types.

Another way of identifying the nature of a thing is to consider the
elements. That is, the essentials and features of a thing are examined
and their totality serves as the definition of that thing. In view of
the number and scope of the essentials and features, any person will
conclude that any thing having those features has the nature under
consideration.

Islam and theory of separation of powers
----------------------------------------

The macrostructure of the Islamic government and its basic features, or
the Islamic theory on politics can be defined in one sentence. The
Islamic theory on politics is: all aspects of politics and government
are divine, and inspired by the Source of revelation. This point
determines the Islamic nature of the system and government.

In describing comprehensively the Islamic government it is necessary to
consider the theory of separation of powers mentioned in the philosophy
of law. During the last centuries there were intense disputes and
conflicts among legal philosophers over concentration or separation of
powers. These were on whether all powers should be in the hands of an
individual or group, or powers should be separated from one another and
every person or group should be concerned with only one power.

Finally, after the Renaissance, particularly after Montesquieu—who wrote
a major treatise entitled “The Spirit of the Laws” (1748) in which he
emphasized separation of powers—legal philosophers arrived at a
consensus on separation of powers and their three divisions, viz. the
legislative, the judicial and the executive. These were considered as
the main branches of democratic and popular governments.[^1] For each of
the powers a distinct realm and area was taken into account so that none
of the powers was authorized to interfere and meddle in another’s domain
and their independence officially recognized. After the separation of
powers, a definition was presented for each of them. We shall briefly
mention their functions below:

### 1. Legislative power

One of the important pillars of government is the legislative. In view
of the continuous change in social life and the need to formulate
appropriate laws for every change, a group of individuals sit together,
and, after discussion and deliberation, enact laws and regulations for
the management of society, which are official and binding.

### 2. Judicial power

After the codification of laws and their official recognition and
accreditation, there is a need to consider a branch of government and
apparatus to adapt general laws to particular cases, to identify rights
and duties, and to remove differences and disputes. In case of a dispute
among citizens, or among organs, or between the citizens and the
government, as well as in relation to the violation of the rights of
people, the only authorized agency to adjudicate, attend to and adapt
laws to those cases is the judicial power. Mere ratification of laws in
parliament cannot solve any problem, because in times of dispute and
discord, everyone deems himself rightful and interprets the law in his
favor.

### 3. Executive power

Undoubtedly, In order to achieve its objectives, society is in need of
law, but all people do not observe the laws. In fact, there are various
motives to violate them. The law needs an executive power which
possesses sufficient clout to implement the rules and regulations. The
executive power is expected to implement laws, deter violations and
implement judicial decrees passed in judicial courts. Along this line,
if naked force is needed to implement laws and punish violators and
criminals, disciplinary forces can be employed.

We briefly stated the theory of separation of powers in democratic and
popular systems. We do not intend to explain the Islamic viewpoint on
the theory of separation of powers but we deem it necessary to note that
in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the principle of
separation of powers has been accepted, while the principle of *wilayah
al-faqih*, which emanates from the Islamic nature of the system, serves
as the point of connection between the powers. Legitimacy of powers in
the Islamic system lies in the Islamic and divine structure, and in a
sense in their connection to the Origin of creation, but *wilayah
al-faqih* is the system’s link to God and its basis of legitimacy.

Once we talk about the enactment and implementation of laws in the realm
of Islamic political system and claim that the aggregate of approved
laws and rules should be Islamic and religious, we make it clear that
Islam is concerned not only with issues pertaining to prayer and
fasting, worship and supplication, but it is a comprehensive code of
life that embraces social law, corporate law, civil law, commercial law,
international law and other laws needed by society.

Thus, as principle and rule, we have accepted that Islam has social laws
that bind the government to regard them as credible and strive to
implement them. According to Islam if a government neither regards the
laws of Islam as credible, nor strives to implement them, it is an
illegitimate government.

Skepticism on alleged impotence of Islam in social administration
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Here the expressed skepticism is that man is increasingly in need of
ample new laws. Indisputably, in the text of the Qur’an, the *Sunnah* of
the Prophet (*s*) and the sayings of the pure Imams (*‘a*) not all the
laws addressing the needs of the day can be found. Nowadays, man needs a
set of laws whose subjects did not exist during the early period of
Islam, for which specific rulings need to be issued.

For example, let us consider the laws pertaining to airspace and the air
jurisdiction of countries. Does an airplane have the right to enter the
air jurisdiction of another country with the permission of its
authorities or not? Such laws basically do not exist in the Qur’an, the
Prophet’s *Sunnah* and sayings of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) because at
the time, there was no airplane to be discussed.

The same applies to traffic and driving rules as there was no car at the
time as well as laws on seas and outer space and other subjects and
there is a need for legal experts and legislators to enact appropriate
laws for them after thorough examination and contemplation.

Given the fact that the said laws that address all needs of society do
not exist in the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*, how can it be claimed that
Islamic and divine laws must be implemented in society when in fact
Islam has no law in so many areas?!

Society is in dire need of such laws, which we cannot find in Islamic
sources. What options do we have? How can we consider ourselves as bound
by Islamic laws?

What has been mentioned made those who have no faith in Islam express
skepticism in religious laws as impractical and insufficient to
administer society, and suggest more efforts be exerted on enacting and
implementing man-made laws. In order to portray the subject as confusing
and complicated, they expressed the above skepticism in various forms,
and people also exacerbated it for different motives.

Undoubtedly, their goal is to undermine the Islamic government and to
inculcate the notion that Islam cannot administer society. Therefore,
the plant if the Islamic Revolution and Islamic government and emphasis
on it is futile and the idea of “Islamization” of the government should
be forgotten, because it is not feasible. Unfortunately, some
sympathizers of the Islamic Revolution and followers of Islam have also
been influenced by this skepticism. It is necessary to present an
appropriate reply so that, they remain faithful to Islamic laws, and
find solutions to cases in which society needs a law which has no
precedence in Islamic sources.

Types of laws and necessity of enacting variable laws
-----------------------------------------------------

In reply to the above skepticism, it is necessary to explain at the
outset that law has a general and broad meaning which also includes
*natural laws* such as laws on physics, Lavoisier’s[^2] law on
chemistry, Newton’s law of gravity and Einstein’s law of relativity.
This group of laws that exist in nature and can be empirically proved
are discovered by scientists and are not enacted. These fixed and actual
laws are related to natural phenomena, and have nothing to do with
legal, political and social laws.

Similarly, we are not referring to *rational laws* such as laws on
logic, philosophy and mathematics. We are referring to *enacted laws*
which are technically called “conventional laws” [*qawanin-e i‘tibari*].
Of these laws those that are credible and can be implemented, provided
they are enacted by a credible authority, can be divided into three
types:

### 1. The constitution

Constitution means a set of relatively permanent laws codified by
competent authorities for a country in accordance with its culture and
traditions. These relatively permanent laws are binding for a long
period and considered as the basis and foundation of managing society.
In view of their relative permanence and immunity from regular changes,
these laws are general and limited; thus, the constitution of every
country consists of some basic and important articles.

As such, in the constitution there is no room for detailed and specific
laws which cover extensive and diverse needs, and are subject to
amendment with the emergence of new circumstances. The Constitution is
general and permanent in nature and detailed laws are not included in it
except those detailed and limited laws which, on account of their
importance and special status, give stability to it.

### 2. Laws ratified by parliament

The second type refers to the laws ratified in the Majlis or parliament.
Since some countries have another house of legislation called senate or
any other term, in addition to parliament, the laws ratified by the said
house of legislation are also included in this type of laws. In our
country, apart from the Islamic Consultative Assembly (Majlis) which
passes bills needed to administer the country, the Council of Guardians,
which is similar more or less to the Senate in other countries and to a
constitutional court and consists of a group of jurists and legal
experts, conforms the bills ratified by the Islamic Consultative
Assembly with the Constitution and religious law. In case of
inconsistency with the Constitution and the religious law, it refers
these ratified bills back to the Majlis for review.

### 3. Laws ratified by cabinet

In addition to the laws ratified by parliament, in every country there
are binding rules and regulations ratified by other organs, for example,
the executive orders issued by the cabinet (executive branch). The
constitution has rested authority to the cabinet to ratify laws in
specific cases. Similarly, in certain cases the president can also
personally take decisions. These executive orders and presidential
decrees need not be submitted to parliament for ratification as they are
automatically deemed legally binding. Also, bylaws and circulars
approved by concerned authorities and officially communicated to offices
and executive offices are also called laws and the government is bound
to implement them.

Thus, in our country as in some other countries there are three types of
laws: (1) constitutional, (2) legislative; laws ratified by the Islamic
Consultative Assembly (Majlis) or parliament, and (3) executive orders,
presidential decrees, bylaws and circulars approved by authorities
legally authorized to do so.

At no time and nowhere in the world are these laws and bylaws ratified
all at once; in view of changing circumstances, statutory laws and
executive orders are amended and reviewed. Today, circumstances may
require the Islamic Consultative Assembly to enact a law, and tomorrow
circumstances may change and the said law might be amended and reviewed.
In this manner, executive orders have to be amended and reviewed with
change of circumstances. Also, when a new president assumes office, it
is his prerogative to amend or annul previous executive orders.

Of course, those whose primary concern is the interest of society try
their best to codify orders with utmost care to ensure that they are
devoid of all possible errors. Naturally, when we say that the laws must
be Islamic, it does not mean that all laws ranging from the Constitution
to the statutory laws and executive orders must be explicitly derived
from the Qur’an.

Meaning of Islamic nature of laws
---------------------------------

In explaining the meaning of the Islamic nature of laws and orders, it
is important to pay attention to the process of enacting common laws.
For example, in codifying and approving bylaws and orders the cabinet or
executive power must act within the perimeter determined for it by the
Islamic Consultative Assembly and not go beyond it. In other words, the
extent of the executive power’s prerogatives has been stipulated by the
Constitution and the Majlis’s statutory laws, and the executive orders
should be within this framework.

These orders should manifest the generalities reflected in the
Constitution and the laws ratified by the Majlis. Thus, initially,
generalities are described in the Constitution and statutory laws whose
meanings the cabinet or the concerned authority in certain cases has to
interpret within the framework of executive orders. The cabinet cannot
act unconditionally on its own without any frame of reference. In fact,
its executive orders must be within the framework of the Constitution
and laws ratified by the Majlis.

The laws ratified by the Majlis, in turn, must be approved and endorsed
by the Council of Guardians. That is, the Majlis must also act within
the framework of the Constitution and in this way, its ratified laws
will be considered credible, enjoying executive guarantee. Therefore,
the credibility of executive orders and their being binding depend on
their conformity with the Majlis’s statutory laws and the credibility of
statutory laws means that they are within the framework of the
conditional law of the country.

The credibility of the Constitution of the Islamic system is based on
its consistency with the legislative will of God the Exalted. As such,
the entire laws and decrees have a linear relationship and they are
credible, provided that this hierarchy is observed in such a manner that
it ends up in Islam and the legislative will of God. It is not in the
sense that all the executive orders, circulars and statutory laws can be
explicitly found in the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*.

Since God delegated certain prerogatives to the Holy Prophet (*s*) to
promulgate specific laws and decrees in certain cases, these laws and
decrees are credible and binding because they are based on the
permission and will of God. It is obligatory to obey and act upon them
on account of the decree of God on the necessity of obeying and
following him. Under the aegis of this decree of God, the laws and
orders promulgated by the Messenger of Allah (*s*) are credible and, at
the same time, it is obligatory on others to obey and act upon them;
otherwise, merely to obey the orders of the Messenger of Allah (*s*)
without divine sanction is not obligatory.

So, the laws which God, the Exalted, has directly enacted and explicitly
mentioned in the Qur’an occupy the foremost degree and are intrinsically
credible. The laws enacted by the Holy Prophet (*s*) in certain cases by
God’s leave occupy the next degree and their credibility is equal to
that of God’s command. Similarly, the credibility of the laws which the
infallible Imam (*‘a*) enacts and the orders he gives emanate from the
decree of God because God and the Prophet (*s*) consider it obligatory
to obey the Imam.

Now, assuming that we were living in an Islamic territory under the
reign of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), we would have considered
it incumbent upon us to obey him. If the Imam (*‘a*) appointed a person
like Malik al-Ashtar as the governor in our region saying, “Act upon his
orders and do not defy them, for whoever obeys him actually obeys me,”
the mere orders of Malik al-Ashtar would not be binding for the people
because he was like other people, but obedience to him would have been
obligatory and his orders binding because he was designated as governor
by the infallible Imam (*‘a*) who, in turn, had been designated by God
through the Prophet (*s*), and to obey him would be *wajib*.

However, laws and orders issued by a governor, designated by an
infallible Imam, are considered laws of a third degree. As an analogy,
the governor is like an appointed official whom the Islamic Consultative
Assembly has granted powers on the basis of which he has authority to
issue circulars and instructions, and on account of those delegated
powers, his orders are binding. Similarly, the Majlis has acquired its
credibility from the Constitution and its statutory laws acquire
credibility under the auspices of the Constitution.

The credibility of the constitution in other countries emanates from the
will of the people. But we believe in a higher station and reference
with respect to the Constitution. We believe that the credibility of the
constitution should emanate from the will of God, and the Prophet (*s*),
an infallible Imam (*‘a*) or any person like Malik al-Ashtar, designated
by one of the infallible Imams (*‘a*), has to endorse it. Therefore, the
credibility of law should emanate from the words of God, the Prophet
(*s*), an infallible Imam (*‘a*), and then any person designated by an
infallible Imam. This is the logic and theory of Islam.

In the time of occultation [*ghaybah*] of the infallible Imam, since the
*wali* *al-faqih* has been chosen through a general designation by the
infallible Imam, his *wilayah* is endorsed by the Imam and acquired
credibility, thus, his approval is the source of credibility of the
constitution; otherwise, the constitution by itself is questionable. It
is debatable as to where its credibility emanates from and who has the
right to amend it. On what basis does a minority that has not voted for
a certain law abide by it? And there are many other questions. However,
when we say that this law has been declared credible by one formally
designated by the infallible Imam, there is no room for any more
questions.

Process of legislation in the Islamic government
------------------------------------------------

It is clear in the theory of Islamic government that the original
credibility of law comes from God, and the words of anyone, like the
Prophet (*s*), who is credited by God, become binding. In turn, the
words of anyone who is designated by the Prophet (*s*), or the Commander
of the Faithful (*‘a*), are equally binding. Similarly, the laws and
decrees issued by anyone who is designated by the infallible Imam (*‘a*)
through a general or specific appointment shall be Islamic and sacred
because they have been approved by God.

Of course, as we have said, in the Islamic government this approval may
take different intervals. The credibility of approval of the *wali*
*al-faqih* emanates from the approval of and endorsement by the
infallible Imam (*‘a*) and the credibility of decrees and approval of
the infallible Imam, in turn, emanates from the approval of and
endorsement by the Prophet (*s*). Finally, credibility of the Prophet’s
approval is confirmed through an explicit text [*nass*] of the Qur’an
where God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you...”***[^3]

and in another verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet is closer to the faithful than their own souls….”***[^4]

Thus, the aforementioned link has a perfectly logical foundation for the
members of an Islamic society and those who believe in the truthfulness
of God, the Prophet *(s)* and the infallible Imams (*‘a*). As we have
expounded earlier, we have to talk on the basis of our audience’s
convictions and beliefs and through their language. For this reason, if
a person does not believe in God and in the truthfulness of the
Messenger of Allah *(s)*, or is doubtful of the infallible Imam (*‘a*),
we need to discuss this issue in a different way.

Initially, we have to deal with the fundamental and essential principles
of Islam, and then after proving them, tackle other subjects, including
political and administrative issues, on the basis of those principles.
Of course, this form of legislation, or the other usual forms can also
be examined on the basis of their value for the benefit of society.

Legal status delegated in the Islamic government
------------------------------------------------

In the Islamic political theory, besides the fact that all principles of
law must be enacted by God, all laws and orders be approved by Him, the
Messenger of Allah (*s*), an infallible Imam, or his general or specific
successor, the implementer of the law also has to be designated by God
to acquire credibility through this system of guardianship. (The
judicial organ also has an executive function; it must be regarded a
righteous reference authority in cases of disputes and differences and
check the law prior to its implementation. Therefore, an independent and
special status has been given to it.)

At the time when the Prophet (s) or an infallible Imam was present, he
had to personally hold the reigns of government or designate someone to
implement the law; for example, Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) appointed Malik
al-Ashtar as the governor of Egypt in order to implement the law there.
However, in this period of *ghaybah* when the people have no access to
the infallible Imam (*‘a*), the responsibility of implementing the law
lies on the shoulders of the one who has been appointed by the
infallible Imam through a general designation, and this will lead us to
the theory of *wilayah al-faqih* about which we will discuss later, God
willing.

It should now be clear that in Islamic political theory and
administrative structure, just as the law should be linked to God, the
implementer of the law should also be linked to God and be appointed by
God either through a general or specific designation.

The judicial organ should be equally linked to God and the judge should
be appointed by God either through direct, or indirect and general
designation. In either case, if the judge has no link whatsoever to God,
his decree shall have no credit at all. The Holy Qur’an has pointed out
God’s direct designation of Hadrat Dawud (David) (*‘a*) to judge among
men:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَاحْكُم
بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O David! Indeed We have made you a vicegerent on the earth. So judge
between the people with justice….”***[^5]

And regarding the Prophet of Islam (*s*), it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ لِتَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ
النَّاسِ بِمَا أَرَاكَ اللّهُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have sent down to you the Book with the truth, so that you
may judge between the people by what Allah has shown you.”*** [^6]

It also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلاَ وَرَبِّكَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىَ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But no, by your Lord! They will not believe until they make you a
judge in their disputes.”***[^7]

In sum, in the Islamic political theory, sovereignty, legislation and
the administration of society in all its dimensions and aspects must
emanate from the legislative will of God.

[^1]: Sometimes, in contrast to the common term “government” applied to
the three powers, “government” is only applied to the executive power.
Of course, this is a specific term which is used in limited cases.
Usually, “government” is used in its common and broad meaning.

[^2]: Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743-1794): French chemist, who is
considered the founder of modern chemistry. [Trans.]

[^3]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^4]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:6.

[^5]: Surah Ṣad 38:26.

[^6]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:105.

[^7]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:65.


