Session 9: An Examination of the Status of Laws in the Religious System
=======================================================================

Principles of Islamic political theory
--------------------------------------

In relation to philosophy and the Islamic political theory, it must be
borne in mind that there are some people who accept all its principles,
some who acknowledge some of them, and, some who accept none of them.
Nonetheless, in a bid to elucidate and establish this theory, it is
imperative to explain these principles. Since some of these principles
are self-explanatory, we shall mention and explain them briefly, and
only explain other principles which require more space for discussion
and examination.

### 1. Law

One of the principles and presumptions of the discussion is society’s
need for law. As it was said earlier, another principle in the Islamic
political theory is that law must be sanctioned by God. Its implementer
must also have the permission of God. To say that law must be divine is
that God Himself enacts the law and reveals it in the Qur’an, or the
Prophet (*s*) or an infallible Imam (*‘a*) is given the authority to
enact the law**,** or those who are vested with authority by the Prophet
or an infallible Imam (*‘a*) enact different orders in diverse
circumstances.

Therefore, we shall have three types of divine law:

1. The law which God Himself has enacted; in which the Prophet (*s*) or
any infallible Imam (*‘a*) does not have any role;

2. The law which the Prophet (*s*) or an infallible Imam (*‘a*) has
enacted by the authority vested in him by God;

3. The variable orders which certain individuals enact with the
permission of an infallible Imam (*‘a*) and will be binding for the
Islamic society because their source can finally be traced to the will
of God.

Thus, God Himself directly enacts the law and His decrees are mentioned
in the text of the Qur’an. However, with respect to the implementation
of the law, God is not the agent or implementer. The implementer must be
the one who is present in society and can be seen by the people, bids
and forbids, and implements the laws.

It refers first and foremost to the Prophet (*s*) or an infallible Imam
(*‘a*), and at the second level, to the person who is granted executive
authority by the Prophet (*s*) or an infallible Imam (*‘a*); i.e. those
who at the time of the Prophet (*s*) or in the presence of an infallible
Imam (*‘a*) were sent as governors and rulers to Islamic territories and
provinces to implement those laws. During the period of *ghaybah*, the
*fuqaha*, who are appointed through general designation, are responsible
for implementing the laws.

What has been mentioned so far broadly deals with the macrocosm of the
Islamic government viz. legislation and implementation. The judicial
organ in reality is part of the executive body and because of its
special importance it enjoys an independent status.

#### Status of natural laws and statutory laws

One of the principles and presumptions of our discussion is the need of
codifying law for society. The second principle is, according to our
view, the *binding law* is that which is directly or indirectly enacted
by God. Those opposing this view say that society is not in need of law
whether it is enacted by God or anybody else. This theory has no
proponent today because nobody can deny this need of society. Nowadays,
even in a village where only a few people live, the existence of laws
and orders to be followed by people is regarded imperative.

In the past, however, when living conditions were simple, some believed
that they were not in need of statutory laws. According to them, the
intellect alone could discern a set of natural laws by knowing the
natural law, and there was no need of special people to enact laws. In
the past, the theory of natural right and natural law was initially
presented to human societies in such a way that if they were asked,
“Which law should we abide by?” they would answer, “Look at your self or
look at the universe to learn which law is prevailing, and the same law
will prevail in society,” proving that even the theory of natural law
has clearly accepted the principle of the need for law.

 No thinker has ever claimed that mankind is not in need of any law,
even natural laws. The bone of contention among philosophers is: which
is sufficient—rational, natural, or divine law? That is, are laws which
all people can discern by their intellect sufficient for society? Or, do
we also need specific statutory laws?

As we have said, if ever it was imagined in the past that natural laws,
rational laws, or ‘rational independents’ [*mustaqillat-e ‘aqliyyeh*]
were sufficient to meet the needs of society, today the said assumption
is unacceptable. Neither is there any point of raising and examining it.
Nowadays, by just looking around, every person realizes that he needs
hundreds of social and international laws in his complex domestic,
external and international situation.

Among social and domestic laws are laws related to traffic and
transportation. If there are no traffic laws what will be the state of
transportation and traffic in every city and town? If the speed of a
vehicle and its right of way (whether left or right) and all the other
traffic and driving rules are not determined, what will happen? In which
part of the world are a group of people leading a safe and sound life in
spite of non-observance of these laws?

It is true that driving rules are not uniformly codified in all
countries. In countries like Britain and Japan the driving seat is on
the right side while driving on the left side of the road, while in all
other countries including Iran, it is the opposite—but driving rules are
codified anyway and the drivers are aware of the rules, knowing on which
side of the road to drive. The above example is among the cases that
shows the indispensability of law in society. Certainly, this necessity
can also be felt in other issues such as family and international law.

One of the instances which show the exigency of the enactment of
international laws is the issue related to the Caspian Sea, which is a
source of dispute on the exploration of its natural resources among
littoral states. It cannot be accepted that every state can exploit the
Caspian oil, gas and other resources without any law. In fact, there has
to be a sort of regime that stipulates the extent of exploitation of
Caspian air, sea and underground resources by every littoral state. The
problems existing among the littoral states on account of the absence of
a governing regime have paved the way for the need to enact laws and
rules for the just division of resources.

So, the imperative of enacting laws and rules in the light of human
needs is being felt. For example, there had been no conventions,
agreements and laws on the seas, air space, deserts and others until
recently, because mankind was not in need of them yet. However, as a
result of more interaction among people, groups, nations, and countries,
the need for such laws was felt.

Since law defines the extent of rights of every person and society, the
Noble Qur’an has specially mentioned the need of law in social life. It
should be noted that existence if law in a general sense is not confined
to the social life. In fact, if a person wants to lead a humane life and
achieve excellence in it, he needs law.

Moral laws are sufficient for personal life but social, national,
international and political issues need laws to ensure justice between
conflicting groups. For example, if a state takes more than its share of
the Caspian, war and conflict will ensue, so the need to codify
socio-political laws becomes clear. The collective need of law is thus
axiomatic.

Every intelligent, sane person knows that in the absence of law, social
life, human comfort, and human prosperity are endangered. In view of the
instances we have mentioned, it is evident that natural law is not
sufficient. We are in need of statutory laws because reason [*‘aql*]
enjoins the observance of justice and fairness, but, to determine an
approach that will guarantee justice and fairness we need another law.

For example, reason dictates that the Caspian natural resources should
be justly divided among the littoral states. The question will then be
raised: How should one ‘justly divide’ them? Does ‘just division’ mean
that a country with the largest area, littoral area, or most littoral
residents along the Caspian have the lion’s share? The reply to such
questions should be given by a legal reference authority. In most cases,
the existence of a legislator is necessary. Now, let us see who should
be the legislator.

### 2. Laws possessing divine and religious source

The claim of Islam is that God has enacted laws and revealed them to the
Prophet (*s*). So, after accepting the first principle which is the need
for law, the second principle is to accept religion as the source of
legislation. At this stage, there might be people in a Muslim country
who do not accept Islam. In the same manner, there might be a person in
a non-Muslim country who accepts the same.

A person who doubts the existence of God also does not accept His
religion and law. In the first stage, it can not be proved for him that
the law should be enacted by God and basically for a person who denies
God, the idea that “The law should be divine” is unacceptable. We have
to first prove the existence of God through scholastic and philosophical
arguments and then the existence of the Prophet (*‘a*) and true religion
theologically. Finally, we need to prove that a law which God directly
or indirectly enacts becomes binding on the believer.

We have stated earlier that a person might believe in God and the
essence of religion and apostleship [*nabuwwah*], but might not accept
that social law has to be enacted by God. According to him, man has to
engage in supplication, worship and litany with God and go to the mosque
or any house of worship, but his social life has nothing to do with God
for which He must himself enact a law. Such a belief is unacceptable in
Islam. A person cannot claim that he accepts the basis of religion, viz.
the Qur’an, sayings of the Prophet (*s*), authentic narrations, and the
conduct of the Prophet (*s*) and the Imams (*‘a*), but not the social
laws of Islam.

Need to acknowledge essentials of religion
------------------------------------------

Any set of ideas and beliefs has integral elements which are technically
called “essentials” [*dharuriyyat*]. Anyone who is familiar with this
set—whether he accepts it or not—knows that it consists of parts. In
other words, hundreds of parts may be added to or taken from a set but
its basic parts remain in order to keep it distinct from other sets. As
such, whoever accepts religion as a set should accept it as having
permanent, definite and fixed parts which distinguish it from other
sets.

Regrettably, some people say that they accept Islam but do not accept it
has a fixed principle, and regard all its parts as having diverse and
different interpretations. They say that they do not oppose Islam but
its acceptance does not require that everybody should pray. They believe
that prayer exists and some are used to performing it, but every Muslim
does not necessarily have to pray and regard it a permanent part of
Islam!

Regarding fasting and other social decrees, they believe that the
Prophet (*s*), Imams (*‘a*) and other pioneering Muslims used to
practice them. They do not accept, however, that the existence of Islam
depends on them or that without them Islam will cease to exist. At this
point, this question comes to the fore: If that is the case, what is
Islam founded upon without which it will not exist? Do you accept that
monotheism [*tawhid*] is a principle of Islam, and that whoever does not
believe in it is not a Muslim?

In reply, they say that this interpretation, based on their
understanding of Islam, is correct. Another person may have a different
interpretation of Islam and we cannot say that only our understanding of
Islam is correct! Another person may have such an understanding of Islam
that there are two or a thousand gods, or that in Islam there is no god
at all, and we cannot cite a proof to prove that our understanding of
Islam is more correct! Even if we claim that our understanding of Islam
is correct, we cannot say that others have no right to interpret Islam.
At most, it can be said that “In my opinion, my understanding of Islam
is better” and this is also true of the opinion of others.

Undoubtedly, such people have no intention but to deceive and beguile
others; for, in no science or field of knowledge can the parts of two
identical sets be distinguished from each other. Two sets are
distinguishable from each other when the constituent parts of one set
are different from that of another, or at least, some parts cannot be
found in the other set. If all parts of a set can be replaced by that of
another set—for example, element A in this set can be replaced by
element A of that set; likewise, element B in this set can be replaced
by element B of that set, etc.—the two sets cannot be regarded as
distinct from each other.

If a set called “Islam” is recognized, it should have some distinctive
features in order to distinguish it from other religions. That is, there
should be fixed principles in it on which Islam is founded. Now, if we
believe in such principles as *tawhid*, *nabuwwah* and *ma‘ad*, and the
essence of prayer and worship [*‘ibadah*], but at the same time, regard
all of them changeable and subject to diverse interpretations, we cannot
prove any fixed element and claim that it is one of the principles of
Islam. Therefore, we have to say that a specific set called Islam does
not exist! In this case, what are we defending?

How can we invite others to Islam if we do not teach them how to become
a Muslim and act upon Islam in whatever way or form they understand it?
If you arrive at the conclusion that one should pray, you have to pray
and if you arrive at the opposite conclusion, act accordingly. You are
free to practice Islam according to your understanding! What is the
difference between this kind of understanding of Islam and Christianity,
or any other religion? What is the point in inviting people to Islam?

If everyone is supposed to practice Islam according to his or her own
understanding and there is no definitive and permanent principle and
axis, our invitation to Islam is actually only lip service. From this
perspective, it makes no difference if we invite people to Islam,
Christianity, or even deny religion!

Islam’s fixed principles and precepts
-------------------------------------

It is sheer deception and hypocrisy to say that one accepts Islam but
believes that there is no specific interpretation of Islam and that all
its principles are subject to change and various interpretations. As
such, Islam may be interpreted the way Christianity is interpreted and a
Muslim cannot be distinguished from a Christian. So, we cannot say
so-and-so is a Muslim, or not a Muslim!

Every building is constituted of elements such as foundations, wall and
roof, and can be distinguished from a ruined structure. It cannot be
claimed that building has no constitutive elements. Neither can it be
said that a building will remain a building with or without foundations,
wall and roof. It will remain a building whether it is constructed in
the ground, air or sea, and it has neither specification nor fixed
elements. Similarly, assuming that Islam has no fixed and fundamental
principles, we cannot say that a certain set is Islam while another set
is not Islam.

Therefore, once a person accepts Islam, he ought to accept an array of
specific elements as integral parts of the set. Of course, a set may
also have suspicious and contingent parts, or an open-ended one to which
parts may be added or subtracted. It is nonsense to say that a set has
no specific parts, and yet remains a distinct set.

Friends and foes alike know the fundamental and essential elements of
Islam. Apart from *tawhid*, *nabuwwah* and *ma‘ad*, Islam has other
fundamental elements which are known to all including those who deny
God. For instance, ritual prayer and *Hajj* are recognized as basic
elements of Islam. All people of the world know that during a certain
period Muslims perform *Hajj* pilgrimage. Now, could somebody say that
the “Islam” he knows has no *Hajj*? Everyone knows that there are ritual
prayers in Islam.

Now, if someone says that he accepts Islam but, according to his
understanding of the religion, ritual prayer is not an essential part of
it, has he really understood Islam, or is he a deceiver who falsely
introduces himself as a Muslim so as not to be deprived of the benefits
of being a Muslim or be isolated from Islamic society? It is clear that
*Hajj*, prayer and fasting are integral parts of this set and the
essentials of the religion accepted by all Muslims.

If a person claims to know Islam, can he say that Islam has no penal law
to prevent theft while the Qur’an explicitly affirms it in the verse,
*“As for the thief, man and woman”*?[^1] The same is true in the case of
others which are affirmed by explicit texts [*nass*] of the Qur’an. The
essentials of Islam are fixed and there is no more need for us to sit
together and prove them one by one. As such, if it is proved that the
basis of Islam is the Qur’an, truly revealed by God, we have to accept
that whatever the Qur’an states is right and that it encompasses an
array of fixed, essential and definite elements.

Of course, some verses may have different interpretations but the mere
existence of two different interpretations of a verse does not suggest
that no fixed and definite element can be inferred and deduced from the
Qur’an, and that anyone can interpret it in whatever way he likes.

Once a person who is acquainted with the Arabic language refers to the
Qur’an, he will find therein a series of specific themes which have
nothing to do with different human interpretations and are not dependent
on presumptions, mindsets and laws that we have learned from science.
For example, regarding the verse on prayer or the amputation of the
thief’s hand, a person who lived at the time of the Aristotelian “four
elements” and Ptolemaic “seven spheres” would have interpreted it just
as the one who is living in this age of Einstein’s law of relativity. It
cannot be said that since Einstein’s law of relativity is the order of
the day, the meaning of the verse has also changed.

There may be a verse whose words are related to certain sciences due to
the lexical development and other factors, but there are some subjects
that their understanding has no thing to do with different sciences.

Fixed essential laws and decisive concepts of the Qur’an
--------------------------------------------------------

Both Muslims and non-Muslims know that Islam has a set of fixed
essential laws. A set of definite concepts can be deduced from the
Qur’an and understood by a person, whether he believes in the Qur’an or
not. Understanding those concepts depends on one’s familiarity with the
Arabic language and not on his being a Muslim. However, not all subjects
of the Qur’an are of this kind. Some Qur’anic verses are such that
different meanings can be inferred.

Another salient feature of the Qur’an is that it has many levels of
meaning; explicit [*zahir*], implicit [*batin*] and esoteric [*batin al-
batini*], but our focus is on the essentials of religion, on elements
that never change and in spite of the difference in approach and
interpretation, their meanings remain fixed, definite and unchangeable.
For example, the passage *“**And maintain the prayer**”*[^2] indicates
the performance of prayer as *wajib* while this passage points to
fasting as *wajib*: *“**Prescribed for you is fasting**.”*[^3]

Regardless of the impending multiplicity of scientific theories and
scientific investigations, the import of those verses will never change.

Whenever we talk about the essentials of religion, we regard them fixed,
definite and unchangeable because they are among the most fundamental
and decisive sources of Islam. That is, we consider the Qur’an and the
*Sunnah* as authoritative with clear evidence. Those who deny the
essentials of religion, saying that one cannot have a definite and
absolute understanding of Islam are ignorant, erroneous, or egocentric,
having no faith in Islam and only duping the Muslims.

Undoubtedly, one of the essentials and fundamental principles in Islamic
political theory is that the law should be enacted by God. Those who
deny divine law actually deny one of the essentials of religion. Just as
the obligatory nature of prayer can be deduced from the Qur’an, the
decree on the adulterer and the adulteress can also be discerned.

With the same clarity that the ruling about prayer and fasting can be
confirmed in the Qur’an, obedience to the Prophet (s) is also made
obligatory, and in the religious law of Islam, the station of the
Prophet (s) is recognized as a station that requires absolute obedience
[*muftarad’ut* *-ta‘ah*]. In this regard, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you.”***[^4]

God also says, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ
فَانتَهُوا...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take whatever the Apostle gives you, and relinquish whatever he
forbids you...”***[^5]

Islam cannot be accepted without accepting the purport of verses that
mention the essential features of Islam, or by acting upon them
selectively. Such a superficial acceptance of Islam is the practice of
those who are referred to by God in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they say, ‘We believe in some and disbelieve in some’.”***[^6]

Thereafter, regarding such people, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ حَقًّا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is they who are truly faithless.”***[^7]

Thus, whoever has faith in Islam should accept the entire set of Islamic
laws and decrees and believe that the essentials of Islam are
independent of scientific developments or new scientific theories. As
such, whoever regards the verse related to prayer as true also regards
as such the verse related to the ruling on theft. In the Qur’an one can
find allegorical and contingent cases as variable parts of Islam as
well, but one must believe that the Qur’an and Islam must have fixed and
definite parts that make it distinct from other religions.

Removing skepticism on the existence of contradictory interpretations of Islam
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Islam there are thousands of definite decrees about which all the
Islamic schools of thought [*madhahib*] have a consensus of opinion.
Many of the differences between the Sunni and the Shi‘ah are related to
secondary matters that constitute an insignificant part of Islamic laws.
There is no difference between the two schools in most subjects of
jurisprudence [*fiqh*].

Similarly, in the Shi‘ah school of thought the difference among the
religious edicts of jurists [*fuqaha*] on some laws does not mean
difference of opinion on all cases. In the same vein, the difference of
prescription of two doctors for the treatment of a specific ailment does
not imply that there are no fixed and definite elements in the science
of medicine.

Therefore, in Islam we have an array of certainties [*yaqiniyyat*] in
which there is neither dispute nor doubt. The existence of difference in
some cases should not make us skeptical about the definite principles,
and set Islam aside. Regrettably, nowadays, whenever Islam is talked
about, the sick-hearted who, in the language of the Qur’an are *“those
in whose hearts is deviance,”*[^8] say: “Which Islam? Islam of the
Shi‘ah or Sunni? Islam of the *fuqaha* or the university-educated
intellectuals?

Notwithstanding the existence of one set of unanimously agreed upon
moral precepts, personal decrees and social rules in matters of beliefs
and fixed principles and commercial and international laws, why do they
focus on the disputable and debatable issues? Whenever it is said that
the university must be Islamic, why do these sick-hearted and
crooked-minded ask, “Which Islam?”

In reply to them, it is the same Islam which says that God is One; it is
the same Islam which enjoins prayer; it is the same Islam which forbids
the violation of others’ rights and promotes the implementation of
justice. Are these points disputable among Muslims? Implement in the
university the same indisputable tenets about which the Sunni and Shi‘ah
have consensus of opinion, and you will earn the utmost pleasure of all.
It is natural that whenever they do not want to follow the dictates of
Islam, they find excuses such as “Who says that the Islam of the
*fuqaha* should be implemented and not the Islam of the intellectuals?”

Questioning Islam’s capability of meeting all human needs
---------------------------------------------------------

After proving that Islam has social laws and decrees, certain skeptical
questions are raised: Is it rationally possible for all human needs in
different eras to be contained in a single set? Can Islam whose sources
are the Qur’an and authentic traditions, encompass all the elements
needed by mankind throughout the different epochs and periods? The above
questions have both theoretical and practical aspects and can be
examined in both ways. Of course, it must be acknowledged that these
questions are worthy of consideration. At the outset, it seems that
answering them is not easy. However, in view of the explanations we have
presented before, replying is not that difficult.

### 1. Examining the theoretical dimension of questions

The reply to the theoretical dimension of the question, “How can a set
of laws be responsive to all human needs in all aspects of life?” is
this: Certainly, human beings cannot enact a set of perfect laws for
mankind in different epochs and periods because on account of their
defective knowledge and intellectual limitation, they cannot examine all
the facets and dimensions of human life and take into account an
appropriate law for every case.

However, the One who has created human beings, knows “what was” [*ma*
*kana*] and “what will be” [*ma* *yakun*], to whom yesterday, today and
tomorrow are the same, is Omniscient of thousands of years before and
after, it is possible to enact such a code of laws. Thus, it cannot be
said that it is impossible to enact a code of perfect laws for all
humanity throughout history that encompasses all aspects of human life,
because the One who has full knowledge of the past and future and is
well informed of all dimensions of man’s existence throughout history
can do so.

### 2. Examining the practical dimension of questions

The practical dimension of the questions is this: “How can the essential
elements attributed to God as mentioned in the Qur’an and authentic
traditions—given their limited magnitude—meet all human needs throughout
these epochs and periods?” The reply is this: It is impossible for us to
present a specific law for every case in which all particular conditions
of time and space are perfectly observed. This is because legal cases do
not need limited laws. They favor laws of a general nature.

We cannot determine all legal cases as special and definite cases. It
can thus be said: “Innumerable cases do not have innumerable
categories.” Every set of these cases can have a general heading and the
said heading can have a specific decree. So, “The general decree is
fixed and limited but its cases are innumerable and varied.”

A case at a particular time may consist of a decree and assume a
different form in a different time and condition and the ruling for it
may change. So, issues and changes that take place in them are diverse
and numerous, but the limited general headings are fixed. It is true
that the aspects of human life are vast and regularly increasing on a
daily basis. With the advancement and progress of human civilization and
social living, new issues and concerns emerge all of which are in need
of specific laws which address all needs. Yet, all these variable laws
can have specific criteria. With the permission of the One who has sent
down the general laws and taught their general criteria, those who
recognize these criteria in fixed expressions can enact specific laws on
specific cases.

By saying that the laws of Islam must be implemented in society, we do
not only mean laws directly revealed by God in the Qur’an because these
laws in the Qur’an are mentioned in general and absolute terms. What we
mean is that the Prophet (s), the infallible Imams (*‘a*) and those who
are acquainted with the spirit of these laws, are well-informed of the
criteria and can distinguish the general laws from particular cases and
determine the manifestations, ways of application and rulings of these
general divine laws.

[^1]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:38.

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:43.

[^3]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:183.

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^5]: Surah al-Hashr 59:7.

[^6]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:150.

[^7]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:150-151.

[^8]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:7.


