Session 10: Law and the Difference in Outlook and Origin
========================================================

As explained in the last session, the above theory is based on an array
of statutory principles. The first principle is the exigency of law for
society while the second principle is that the law must be divine. After
these two stages comes the issue of the implementer of law. Proving this
theory to Muslims who accept those principles and believe in the Islamic
fundamentals is not difficult. However, in dealing with those who reject
those principles and the Islamic fundamentals, or those who wish to
delve into the issue in order to be able to reply to the opponents, each
of the principles must be explained in more detail.

Exigency of discussing law at the present stage
-----------------------------------------------

In this age we are faced with various theories in the context of
political issues, so we must engage in theoretical discussions on
government and politics so as to present the Islamic view vis-à-vis
opposing theories, considering the relentless efforts of the Global
Arrogance in besmirching the Islamic viewpoint on government. In
addition, we are in a revolutionary period and living at a time when an
Islamic system has been established and therefore, for elucidating
viewpoints at Islamic, we should use logical and scientific means.

In view of the demand of rule of law by the country’s honorable
officials, the people must pay attention to the issue of law and its
foundations, credibility and extent, and know why and to what extent we
should abide by the law. These factors augment the necessity of
addressing political and governmental questions in Islam. As such, the
discussion must be carried out in a scientific and academic manner.

Two contradictory views determining domain of laws
--------------------------------------------------

Today’s human society is dealing with a variety and multitude of laws.
If we take a look at books written about law fifty years ago, we will
realize that the increase in volume is approximately geometrical in
progression. Compared to the laws existing today, the number of laws
existing five decades ago was insignificant. In addition, especially
because of office circulars, executive orders and regulations, the
number of laws increases everyday. Whenever society feels the need for
new rules the concerned authorities try their best to make these laws
and thereafter, implement them.

Yet, in academic circles around the world this question is raised in a
very serious fashion: Should only the least necessary social laws be
codified, or, should social laws be all-encompassing and regulate all
facets of human affairs? This question is addressed in political
philosophy and legal philosophy at the highest level of academic forums.
In this connection, two conflicting approaches face each other.

On one hand, a group is of the opinion that people must be free in their
activities and that the legislative organ should make minimum laws and
not limit the activities of people beyond what is necessary. This is
liberalism, which believes that every individual in society be allowed
to behave the way he or she likes. Regulations must be formulated in
order to restrain people’s activities only as much as is necessary and
not beyond it.

The legislative organ and the government should not regularly make laws
and persistently interfere in the activities and lives of people.
Opposed to this is the holistic outlook (holism) which holds that
everything must be encompassed by law and all human actions—social,
political, economic, etc.—must have specific and definite laws. Also,
the government must strive to implement these laws. The above question
is not a simple and casual question. In fact, it is a very delicate one,
dealing with the scope and limit of law—the kind of laws that should be
made, and quantitatively, the extent and domain of the lives of people
they should encompass.

Status of law in democratic systems
-----------------------------------

The question about the extent and domain of laws is related to different
schools of thought on the philosophy of legislation which offer
different theories and views on the right of legislation and the
determination of its criteria. A well known perspective maintains that
those who have the right of legislation for the people are the ones who
are chosen by the people themselves to do so.

Thus, in reality, the right of legislation belongs to the people
themselves and they are the ones who enact laws for themselves. The
political system which is formed on the basis of this perspective is
called “democratic”.

After the acceptance of the democratic system this question is posed:
Would whatever the majority of the elected representatives of the
people—i.e. 50% plus one—like and agree upon be regarded a binding law?
Are there also other rulings needed for legislation, and should certain
laws that specify the extent of authority of the representatives in
legislation be enacted earlier? The reply is that the constitution
determines the scope and right of legislation, rules over statutory laws
and judges the extent and scope of legislation.

At this point, another question is raised and that is: various countries
have their respective constitutions which are more or less subject to
change. Sometimes, with the change of political system or regime, the
constitution is also changed. There are also times when the constituent
assembly is convened and amendments to the constitution are made. In any
case, in view of the changes to be made in the constitution, is there
any institution or entity above the constitution which specifies the
scope of the constitution?

That which is above the constitution is the institution of human
rights—also called the natural law or the basic rights of men—which
rules over the constitution and determines its scope. Members of the
constitutional committee cannot reflect whatever ‘they like’ in the
constitution, let alone make common laws.

Basis of credibility of human rights
------------------------------------

Again, another question is posed: Who enacts the law which is above and
determines the extent and scope of the constitution, and on the basis of
which changes can be made in the constitution? Who has codified the
“human rights” reflected in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights or
mentioned in the books of legal philosophy, and from where does their
credibility emanate? The answer given is that according to the
international customs, their credibility emanates from the signatures of
those who approved the Declaration, and it is binding because it is
ratified by all states of the world. It can be asked: Is this
Declaration binding for a state that has not approved it? If it is not
binding, it follows that no one has the right to condemn those, who have
not approved the Declaration and thereby, refuse to act upon it, for
“not observing human rights”.

Again, the answer will be given that the rights and laws described in
the Declaration are not enacted laws that become binding after their
enactment and approval. They are rather real laws which can be discerned
by human reason and are binding whether people accept them or not. Of
course, at the present time there are numerous people who hold such an
opinion, regarding human rights a real and extrinsic fact. An absolute
majority of legal and political philosophers believe that the
credibility of these laws, conventions, declarations, and charters
emanates from the approval of the states’ representatives, and not
because they are an extrinsic reality.

Finally, this serious objection is raised: What justification do all
states have to accept these laws and what is the proof for
non-signatories? The root of this objection and question cannot be
deracinated in any way. For this reason, this question is addressed in
legal philosophy: What is the source of credibility of laws? However,
for us who have faith in the religion of Islam, God and the Qur’an,
there is a simple answer. Once we say that the laws have been codified
based on the decree of God, the case is closed and there are no more
questions.

But those who refuse to tread this path and want to describe everything
through a contract will finally end up in an impasse because they regard
human rights as the source of credibility of every law and the reason
behind also needs to be investigated. In addition, why is the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights codified in about 30 articles only, and not
more or less than that? These are questions posed to the crème of legal
philosophers and a convincing answer is yet to be offered by them.

Once we say that we are law-abiders, we ought to know where the
credibility of law emanates from, and why and to what extent we have to
abide by the law. Today, there are many related discussions in speeches,
periodicals and newspapers. Some of our educated, especially the
university-educated and those who are engaged in studying and teaching
social sciences and humanities, particularly the authorities in legal
philosophy and political philosophy are encountering these questions.

Thus, in order to improve the cultural level of our society, we have to
state the results of the academic inquiries in a simple and concise
manner. If we want to deal with these issues meticulously and
elaborately, we have to refer to at least four fields in social sciences
or four branches of philosophy, viz. philosophical sociology, legal
philosophy, moral philosophy, and political philosophy. And if we want
to pursue it, we need to study other philosophies, and of course,
epistemology, which is considered the mother of philosophy. It is very
useful to point out the achievements in these fields of social science
and the relationship existing between them for the educated class and
wary people who have been trained in the lap of the Islamic Revolution
and its culture.

Real, intrinsic laws and status of man’s freewill
-------------------------------------------------

It is worth mentioning that the term “law” is a term with two basic
meanings. The first meaning of the term is applicable in the
experimental sciences, exact sciences and mathematics. In these
sciences, law refers to the actual relationship existing among
phenomena. For example, the laws of phenomena specify the metallic point
of metal, when water will turn into vapor, at what temperature it will
evaporate or under what conditions it will turn into ice. So, freezing
point or boiling point exists as a law of nature, and man needs to be
acquainted with these laws of chemistry, physics and other experimental
sciences. Evidently, these laws are fixed, persistent and numerous.

With the advancement of human knowledge, more laws will be discovered,
and with every new discovery in every science, hundreds of questions and
answers will be raised. Proportionate to the number of these questions,
new laws will be discovered in order to answer them. For this reason,
the number of questions increases everyday and mankind is in pursuit of
discovering more laws to answer them. In other words, in the universe we
are in the domain of a set of innumerable laws: ranging from laws
related to the elements, chemical compositions and living creatures to
space laws and others, whose existence is yet to be discovered by
scientists.

At this point, this question comes to the fore: If, in this universe, we
are confined in this narrow and constricted sphere of innumerable laws,
what then is the role of our freewill and volition? This question is
treated seriously, and as such, in philosophical anthropology it is
asked: What is the truth of man? Is he totally determined or free? Or,
does he have conditional and limited freedom? Assuming that his freedom
is limited and conditional, what is its extent? Similarly, today, the
question of predestination and freewill or *tafwid*[^1] and the like are
still seriously discussed among philosophers in the world as before.

Among them are existentialists who believe that man has unlimited
freedom and may do whatever he likes. As Jean-Paul Sartre[^2] used to
say, “If I wish, the Vietnam War will come to an end!” That is, man is
such a powerful creature that he can put a stop to a bloody war that has
taken millions of human lives. Of course, it is an exaggerated claim but
the point is that such an outlook which upholds human freewill and
unlimited power exists.

Opposed to the existentialists are those who consider human freewill
mere illusion, believing that man subsists within the framework of a set
of fatalistic laws though he imagines that he has freewill. The last but
not least, are the religious beliefs which can be located in between the
above- mentioned two, maintaining that man has freewill limited by
various laws governing the universe. That is, if we try to draw circles
of the set of laws governing the universe, human freewill can be
exercised within those circles and not beyond that.

On saying that, we are intrinsically subject to a set of laws, this
question spontaneously arises: Do we have the power to break those laws
and defy them? Can we make nature subservient to us and limit the extent
of laws and live in such a way that the laws of nature do not govern us?
The answer is that such an imagination is sheer fancy because
manipulation of nature necessitates the discovery of another law of
nature itself. For example, if we succeed in the field of medicine in
controlling a disease or totally eradicating it, we have to discover
another law of nature and follow it.

In reality, we have not succeeded in digressing nature from its course;
rather, we have discovered a law of nature and acted accordingly.

Hence, it is impossible to go beyond the domain of intrinsic laws, and
in order to live one needs to recognize and benefit from these laws—the
same laws God has set in the universe—and to go against them is
tantamount to going against man’s intrinsic servitude [*‘ibadat-e
takwini*]. As we have said earlier, within the circles which constitute
the set of intrinsic laws, we can move to a certain extent. Among the
diverse scientific and intrinsic laws, there are limited spaces for
man’s exercise of freewill and the power to choose by means of which he
can make use of a law vis-à-vis another law. These limited spaces
constitute the domain of man’s freewill.

Legislative and divine laws that guarantee man’s felicity and perfection
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Within the limited extent of freewill and the power to choose, morally
speaking, can man behave in whatever way he likes? Or, should he
demonstrate a certain deal of restraint? Are there any laws in this
sphere which are mandatory for man to obey? The answer is that there are
also laws in that sphere but not intrinsic laws; rather, legislative and
extrinsic laws, or moral laws. In the language of our predecessors who
used to deal with them for thousands of years, they are laws in the
realm of practical wisdom [*‘aql-e ‘amali*] in contrast to the real laws
in the realm of theoretical wisdom [*‘aql-e nazari*].

That is, practical wisdom has to judge anything related to the voluntary
actions of man. Undoubtedly, implementing the divine laws upon which it
is within the power of man to act, will lead to the attainment of the
ultimate aim and goal, viz. the aspired perfection, and deviation from
which will result in man’s fall, making him baser than any animal. The
Qur’an also confirms the same fate, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإِنسَانَ فِي أَحْسَنِ تَقْوِيمٍ ٭ ثُمَّ
رَدَدْنَاهُ أَسْفَلَ سَافِلِينَ ٭ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ فَلَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We certainly created man in the best of forms; then We relegated him
to the lowest of low, except those who have faith and do righteous
deeds. There will be an everlasting reward for them.”***[^3]

By using the innumerable talents God has endowed man with, he can attain
the pinnacle of divine proximity and nearness to God. On the contrary,
by opposing and rising against the divine laws, he can fall to the
lowest ebb and be baser than any animal. So, to obey or defy the
legislative, extrinsic and moral laws, are within the freewill of man.
If a person accepts and follows these laws, he will attain spiritual and
psychological loftiness, tranquility and wellbeing; otherwise, he will
fall. It is like health tips and recommendations offered by medical
science to us. Observance of them guarantees our wellbeing while
heedlessness to them results in ailments and endangers our health and
life.

Now, since man is free to observe or not observe these health and
medical tips, if he values his health and wants to remain alive and
kicking, he has to observe them. On the other hand, if he is not
concerned with his health and it does not matter to him if he gets sick,
he should not pay attention to these tips. So, the truth of the matter
is that wellbeing is impossible without observance of health tips. Of
course, such an affair is not fatalistic in nature because observance or
non-observance of health and medical tips is within the control of man.
Of his own freewill, he may observe these tips and thus remain healthy,
or not observe them and expose himself to danger and sickness and even
death.

That which is said about the body is also true about the spirit and
soul. Just as the physical body has wellbeing and sickness, so does the
soul. The observance of certain spiritual values and laws, guarantees
the perfection, tranquility and wellbeing of man’s soul; otherwise, his
soul gets sick. In this regard, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَرَضٌ فَزَادَهُمُ اللّهُ مَرَضاً...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is a sickness in their hearts; then Allah increases their
sickness...”***[^4]

Man, who is always on the verge of falling, sometimes moves so quickly
that he loses control of himself, and gets relegated to the lowest of
low and plunges into perdition. On the contrary, if he wants to remain
sound he has to move carefully and with such self-restraint that he can
make a stop whenever he smells danger. There are also real orders, and
by obeying the divine laws, man can attain spiritual wellbeing and
eternal bliss. Of course, man is free and autonomous; he may not want to
attain bliss but want hell instead. No one can stop him.

*Intrinsic freedom has endowed him the right to choose.* However, if he
wants to attain felicity and nearness to God, he has to obey the
commands of God. He should not follow his own desires, because following
one’s carnal desires leads to misguidance and deviation from the truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلٰهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأَضَلَّهُ اللَّهُ
عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلَىٰ سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَىٰ
بَصَرِهِ غِشَاوَةً فَمَن يَهْدِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ اللَّهِ أَفَلاَ
تَذَكَّرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you seen him who has taken his desire to be his god and whom
Allah has led astray knowingly, and set a seal upon his hearing and his
heart, and drawn a blind on his sight? So who will guide him after
Allah? Will you not then take admonition?”***[^5]

Whoever is subservient to his carnal desires and dictates of the heart
becomes deaf and blind and cannot discern the truth and reality. Even if
he has acquired much learning, a veil will cover his eyes and he will
not see the truth. In this context, the story of Bal‘am ibn Ba‘ur[^6] is
an instructive moral lesson for us all. Notwithstanding the gnostic
station he acquired and being the most learned of his time, he
experienced a fall and a fate about which God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ الَّذِيَ آتَيْنَاهُ آيَاتِنَا فَانسَلَخَ
مِنْهَا فَأَتْبَعَهُ الشَّيْطَانُ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ ٭ ...
فَمَثَلُهُ كَمَثَلِ الْكَلْبِ إِن تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْهِ يَلْهَثْ أَوْ
تَتْرُكْهُ يَلْهَث...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Relate to them an account of him to whom We gave Our signs, but he
cast them off. Thereupon Satan pursued him, and he became one of the
perverse… So his parable is that of a dog: if you make for it, it lolls
out its tongue, and if you let it alone, it lolls out its
tongue...”***[^7]

In light of the freedom that God has given man, he can experience fall
to such an extent. However, if man wants to be blissful, he should
observe an array of lows. The divine set of laws cannot be confined to a
single domain; rather, they can be divided into different domains and
types. As such, we are in need of some types of law in our lives.

Difference between legal and moral laws
---------------------------------------

That which is known as “law” to us refers to legal laws. The said laws
are a set of rules enacted by a credible authority, and the so-called
executive power (the government or cabinet) guarantees their
implementation. In case of necessity, it imposes these laws upon the
people by resorting to the use of naked force to prevent any violation.
Legal laws in a general sense also include penal laws. In this context,
if a person says that the duty of the government is only to recommend
the law to the people—to urge them not to steal and violate others’
sanctities—, but it cannot punish the violators on the pretext that
doing so is contrary to the freedom of man, certainly none will accept
his argument.

To say that “Since man is free, if he opposes legal laws no one should
punish him” means that the existence or non-existence of legal laws
means the same. This is why the raison d’être of legal laws is that
there should be a guarantor of their implementation. This is their
fundamental difference with moral laws besides other differences. In
ethics, for example, it is said: “Keep your pledge and do not breach
it.” This is a moral injunction.

Now, if a person breaches a trust, he will neither be punished nor
imprisoned for committing such an immoral act. But for violating a legal
law he will be apprehended and imprisoned. In the case of penal laws, a
specific punishment shall be given to him for fraud. There will be a
police force to deal with the violators and forcefully implement the
laws as far as they are concerned. The use of force is a requirement of
legal laws, the absence of which renders the existence of these laws
meaningless. Moral laws, however, are not in need of naked force unless
they acquire legal dimension.

In religion there is undoubtedly a set of divine laws pertaining to
man’s relationship with God, such as the rulings on ritual prayer,
fasting, *Hajj*, and the like. Such ordinances are mentioned only in
religions. Here, the question is: Can religion also have legal laws, or
should it only elucidate the relationship between man and God? This is
the skeptical question which is widely talked about in universities and
periodicals, nowadays.

All of us, whether the university students who are directly confronted
with this question or their parents and relatives, should pay heed to
this kind of skepticism, because these questions will finally find their
way into other strata of society through the educated class and exert
influence on our public culture. One day these young students will take
the place of their parents, and as influential forces, they will
constitute the main sectors of society. Now, if the cultural orientation
of this great sector is changed, after one generation the culture of our
society will totally change. So, we should be vigilant; we should be
aware about the current cultural orientation that is taking form in our
society

Difference between Islamic and liberal approach
-----------------------------------------------

One of the issues discussed nowadays is that only minimum effort must be
made in the enactment of law. This is the liberal approach which
believes that the legislature is not supposed to interfere in the life
and affairs of people because the less the interference, the more
society will progress.

The above approach has a sociological underpinning based on one of the
two viewpoints discussed in sociology. The first viewpoint maintains
that laws must be comprehensive and encompass all spheres of human life
and that freedom must be at minimum level. The second viewpoint
propounds that the individual should enjoy maximum freedom and social
laws must be at minimum level in order to limit their infringement on
man’s freedom. That which is prevalent in Western society today is
exactly this individual-oriented approach from which liberalism has
emanated which holds that laws should be at the minimum level while
people enjoy maximum freedom and do whatever they like.

Before stating the Islamic viewpoint, it is worth mentioning that the
issue of maximum or minimum scope of law has something to do with some
fields of social sciences such as philosophical sociology
(individual-oriented or society-oriented), moral philosophy (the
criterion of moral values, morality and its values above law or
determined by law), legal philosophy, and political philosophy.

According to Islam, all aspects of human life are connected to their
ultimate destiny. That is, any effort exerted in this life will affect
our eternal bliss or perdition. The Islamic perspective is that “This
world is the sowing field for the hereafter.” In other words, whatever
man sows in this world will be reaped in the hereafter and will either
lead to his success, or wretchedness and damnation.

If we take this perspective as authentic, is there anything in the life
of man which is not in need of law? Here, law has to show the way,
method and approach that will enable man to reach his goal. That is, if
society yearns for security, no one should have the right to encroach
upon the property and dignity of people; otherwise, his property and
dignity will also be assaulted. It should not be that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ببرى مال مسلمان و چون مالت ببرند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
داد و فرياد برآرى كه مسلمانى نيست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You take away Muslim property, but when they take yours,*  
*Raise a hue and cry, “This is not a Muslim practice!”*

Man is selfishly profit-oriented by nature. He leaves no stone unturned
by hook or by crook to gain profit, but once his interests are
threatened, he seeks refuge in law. So, in order to remove
contradictions and conflicts and foster cooperation and security in
society there should be law that deters us from oppressing and
encroaching upon others, defines the rights of everyone, specifies the
bounds of justice and oppression on the basis of which people know which
acts are considered just and iniquitous. Otherwise, all rights will be
violated by all, and as a result, neither security nor tranquility,
peace of mind nor otherworldly felicity will remain, and no one will
achieve his innate goals.

In the Islamic perspective, therefore, all our movements and pauses,
whether in individual and family life or social life and even
international relations, follow an order and rules. Islam has a legal
code for all aspects of human life, legal and social laws included.
Islam even has a law regarding man’s imagination and thought, saying
that a person has no right to keep in his heart whatever he or she
likes, entertain any fancy in his or her mind, and think ill of
others—*“**Indeed some suspicions are sins.**”*[^8]

Just as non-observance of health tips leads to sickness, endangering the
wellbeing of individuals and society, society will also be destroyed for
not observing Islamic rules.

What has been said is that no aspect of human life is beyond the scope
of Islamic laws and that man should control even his heart and mind but
it does not mean obstruction of man’s freedom. It rather means showing
him the correct use of freedom and lighting a torch along his path so
that he can rightfully enjoy his freedom. Of course, as long as they are
not related to man’s social life, these laws do not stipulate penalty in
this world but only chastisement in the hereafter. However, if there is
a violation of social rules and laws, and social interests are trampled
upon, penalty in this world shall be taken into account.

In reality, penalty in this world is a requisite of all legal laws and
it is not confined to the legal laws of Islam only. Every legal system
that wants to enact laws for the maintenance of order and social
security has no option but to consider a set of penalties for violators
and offenders. This is because social life can not be established
without laws that restrict individual freedom and liberty. As social
relations increase and expand, the need for social laws and their
guaranteed implementation will also increase.

[^1]: Tafwid: the belief that after creating all beings, God has left
them to administer their own affairs and follow their own wills. In
other words, it is the upholding of freewill [ikhtiyar] vis-à-vis
predestination. [Trans.]

[^2]: Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-80): French philosopher, dramatist,
novelist, political journalist, and leading exponent of existentialism
whose writings reflect his vision of the human being as master of his or
her own fate, with each life defined by a person’s actions: “Existence
precedes essence.” [Trans.]

[^3]: Surah at-Tin 95:4-6.

[^4]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:10.

[^5]: Surah al-Jathiyah 45:23.

[^6]: Bal‘am ibn Ba‘ur refers to the man at the time of Pharaoh who knew
the Greatest Name of God [Ism al-A‘zam], through which anything and
everything sought for is immediately granted by God and it is a very
closed secret. Pharaoh urged him to pray that Moses might fall into his
clutches. Bal‘am agreed and mounted a donkey but the animal would not
move. However much he beat the poor donkey, the animal did not stir from
its place at all. At last the animal raised its head toward heaven and
cried in clear cut words, “Why do you beat me Bal‘am? O man, woe unto
you! Do you want me to take you to curse an Apostle of God and the
faithful ones with him? Yet, Bal‘am did not relent and beat the faithful
animal to death, consequently causing himself to forget the Holy Name of
God whereupon he became an infidel. See Mir Ahmad ‘Ali’s commentary of
Surah al-A‘raf 7:175. [Trans.]

[^7]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:175-176.

[^8]: Surah al-Hujurat 49:12.


