Session 11: Criterion of Credibility of Law
===========================================

Exigency of delving into major political issues
-----------------------------------------------

In elucidating the Islamic political theory, we have made some
discussions during the previous sessions and pointed out that the
subject can be approached in two ways. One approach is argumentative
[*jadali*], in which the fact that the addressee is a Muslim who adheres
to Islam and Shi‘ism or believes in other ideological and moral
fundamentals is disregarded; basic principles and foundations agreed
upon by the two sides are taken into account as the principles and basis
of discussion.

By sticking to those preliminaries, the discussion continues till
conclusion. The second approach is evidential [*burhani*] in which the
discussion is made by organizing and presenting profound rational proofs
and all groups of the discussion examine even the principles of the
subject. By basing the argument on axiomatic truths, each one tries to
present indisputable rational evidence.

Evidence-oriented discussions are wearisome and appropriate for the
academic and scientific circles. It must be noted, however, that our
society has taken quantum leaps in cultural advancements and acquisition
of knowledge. Today, the achievements of our youth, especially in the
field of religious and political matters, are greater than those of some
scholars in the past.

As such, it is necessary to continuously engage in profound evidential
discussions so as to improve the intellectual and cultural level of our
society, particularly in areas related to the principles of the system
and pristine Islamic doctrines, and acquire the capability to confront
and respond to skepticism and not be influenced by others.

At this point, we will try to present the subjects related to the
principles of the subject under discussion in a simple manner devoid of
intricate scientific and philosophical terms. We will also try to
strengthen the rational roots of these doctrines in minds so as to make
them more resilient to the prevailing wave of skepticism.

The distinctive function of the government and political system is to
support and guarantee the implementation of legal laws in society. The
difference between moral laws and legal-political laws is that being
ethical, they have no external force guaranteeing their implementation.
Every person adheres to them based on his/her religious beliefs and
orientation. Legal laws, on the other hand, have an external support
guaranteeing their implementation.

The salient feature of legal laws is that they are imposed on the people
by society and the executive organ. Even if a person has no conviction
in these laws, he is still duty-bound to follow them. In case of
violation by individuals, the government is obliged to implement these
laws by resorting to the use of naked force, and in case of necessity,
even by the use of arms.

After the victory of the Islamic Revolution, especially after the
internal disturbances and arbitrary assassinations, government officials
have consistently chanted the slogan of ‘the rule of law’. Even one of
the initial years after the Revolution was called “Year of Law”, and
till this day, all our presidents have pursued it. It must be taken into
account that one of the main valuable slogans of the government is the
implementation of law at the national level and prevention of its
violations. It is, therefore, expedient that there must be a discussion
about law and its credibility, and due response be given to relevant
skepticism and questions.

Scope and criterion of credibility of law
-----------------------------------------

The most common skeptical questions for many people are the following:
To what extent can a law be binding and where does its credibility
emanate from? Why is it necessary for individuals to submit to law?
Which law has such absolute credibility to which one has to submit
absolutely? Before continuing the discussion and addressing these
questions, it is worth pointing out that according to us Muslims who
adhere to the Islamic system and to whom the words of the Imam and the
Supreme Leader are considered proof, there is no room for doubt and
ambiguity that laws of the Islamic government—whether they are ratified
bills of the Islamic Consultative Assembly, or laws ratified by cabinet
and even circulars communicated from ministries to offices—are all
binding, and according to the statement of the Imam (*q*) when he says
that laws of the Islamic government are binding, we are bound to act
upon them.

I personally strive to faithfully observe the minutest details of laws
and orders of the Islamic government including even those points that
are contrary to my personal juristic view and edict.

Observance of decrees and orders of the Islamic government and obedience
to the *wali* *al-amr* is obligatory upon us, and we have no doubt in
this regard. If we discuss the criterion of their credibility, it should
not be imagined that we want to cast doubt upon the exigency of acting
upon government laws. Our goal is to strengthen the intellectual roots
and foundations of adherence to the Islamic government.

Our attempt is to clarify why we have to obey the orders of the Islamic
government. When the government declares a certain day as a public
holiday, or levies a certain sum as tax to those for whom taxation laws
and rules are applicable, or issues certain orders on a certain
situation, calls for public participation under exceptional
circumstances like war, and implements special laws, the people should
know why they should abide by those laws and orders. The mere presence
of the one who gives orders is not sufficient reason for the people to
follow and act upon his orders.

Our discussion is related to political philosophy, and the issue of law
and its credibility and the exigency of following it is among the
fundamental issues of all political systems and not only confined to the
Islamic system. Those who are familiar with the subjects in political
philosophy and legal philosophy know that scholars and experts in these
two fields of human knowledge have tried to elucidate this issue and
present different views substantiated by reasons and arguments.

So far, however, they have not arrived at a definite view fully
substantiated and defensible. We can summarize the most important views
and ideas presented by these scholars on the criterion of credibility of
law under three headings.

### 1. Justice theory

Some believe that justice is the criterion of the law’s credibility. If
a law is enacted based on justice and the rights of people, it shall be
credible for the people to follow it. But if it is not anchored in
justice and enacted unjustly, it has no credibility.

### 2. Providing for social needs

The second view is that it provides for the needs of society. Members of
society have particular needs which have no individual or personal
dimension. Everyone by himself or herself may have such a sense of needs
but these needs are social in essence and emerge in the context of
social life. For example, maintenance of public health is a social need.
In his/her personal life within his/her home, a person may maintain
personal hygiene if he/she wants to, but, with respect to the
maintenance of public health, persuading each person to maintain public
health is difficult and problematic.

There should be an institution above individual decision and action to
provide for these public needs. For instance, when a disease like
cholera or plague becomes rampant in a society, individual measures to
control it can do nothing. There should be a government body whose
function is to control it and maintain public health through programs,
such as vaccination and others. By means of enacting rules and
regulations—including common rules and regulations—it is the duty of the
government to ensure the vaccination of people during that period of
time. (As said earlier, we are referring to law in its general sense
which also includes binding instructions, circulars and orders.)

Since public health is a need of society and its observance is a social
necessity, pertinent laws have been enacted and all are obliged to
observe them. Similarly, in relation to environmental protection,
keeping the biosphere clean and providing for public needs, the
government has instituted certain bodies to address those problems,
while the people are obliged to obey the orders and instructions issued
by them.

So, the totality of laws and institutions taken into account by the
government, such as the Ministry of Training and Education, Ministry of
Health and Medical Treatment, and other ministries as well as their
orders and instructions are all geared toward addressing social needs
and safeguarding the interests of society, and as such, they are
legitimate.

### 3. Will of the people

Some regard the will of the people as the criterion and basis of
credibility of law. According to them, law is meant to address the
demands of society. When people want something from the government or
legislature, the cabinet and the parliament ratifies a law in accordance
with the people’s will. Since the law is inspired by the people’s will,
it is binding, and the people have to strive to implement it.

In reality, the actual realization of the people’s will is expressed
through the election of the members of parliament who enact laws
according to the will and need of people. Accordingly, if the deputies
elected by the people have no right of legislation, their election by
the people will be useless. If they have the right to enact laws but
their statutory laws are not binding, legislation will become an
exercise in futility.

What has been mentioned is a summary of views of legal and political
philosophers on the issue of the source of credibility of law. Muslims
regard the will of God as the criterion of credibility of law and we
believe that whatever God commands is considered a law and is binding.
Of course, the latter view is accepted only by those who have faith in
religion and God.

(In examining and criticizing the abovementioned views, we shall refrain
from an extensive scientific and academic analysis. We shall do so in a
manner commensurate to the people’s common level of understanding.)

Objection to the first view
---------------------------

It was stated in the first view that the law’s credibility emanates from
the observance of justice. In this connection, a fundamental question
which has also been dealt with by many great scholars of international
repute is this: What is justice and how can it be materialized? The
concept of justice is clear to all, but legal and political theorists
have spent much time over it because of the existence of different
interpretations of justice.

If all people equally benefit from the wealth of society, will it be
considered justice implemented? That is, if a political system provides
such conditions and facilities that all people equally acquire lodging,
clothing and transport, is justice implemented, and is its opposite
injustice? Such a Marxist approach led to the emergence of the communist
theory.

The architects of this theory stated that they were working toward the
emergence of a classless society in which everyone worked according to
his capacity and enjoyed the fruit of labor according to his need. They
realized that this aspiration could not be achieved in practice because
the above approach had many challenges along its way, like the conflict
between justice and freedom. As such, by modifying and regulating their
slogans, they satisfied themselves with a socialist government, though
they still regarded a communist government as the ideal.

When Marx observed that a majority of people, particularly the workers
and farmers, were being oppressed, he said that this oppression and
injustice must come to an end and efforts must be made to make all
people enjoy equal rights. It was actually meant to achieve a classless
society that would enjoy the perfect and ideal equality of paradise on
earth. Then, those who had eclectically Islamic inclinations added an
Islamic adjunct and thus emerged the “*monotheistic* classless society”.
It needs to be clarified whether or not justice means that all people
are equal and the same.

Some believe that justice means that every person should enjoy the
benefits of society according to the effort he puts in. That is, if a
person does something, he should receive a payment commensurate to the
value of his work. So, if a person is lazy and does nothing, he should
only be provided with social security in a bid to create perfect
equality, and thus, justice be realized. Justice is realized when those
who work get compensation for it. If a person provides surplus value
through his efforts and production and does not get its fruit, his right
is violated.

Superiority of Islamic laws
---------------------------

Undoubtedly, the above two interpretations of justice—which are cited as
an example—are in total conflict and disharmony with each other in
practice. They seem to be intolerant, inconsistent and discordant with
the divine laws and monotheistic beliefs. For example, we have a set of
laws in Islam which, according to our ideological principles, are the
best and most beneficial laws for society and certainly concordant with
justice.

However, these laws are unacceptable to many people in the world who
regard them as unjust and oppressive. For instance, in many cases of
inheritance the Islamic laws have set differences between the share of
man and woman, though in some cases their share is the same. The
difference is based on an explicit text of the Holy Qur’an which
stipulates that the share of woman is half that of man:

***“Then for the male shall be the like of the share of two
females.”***[^1]

Undoubtedly, those who are not familiar with the ideological and
intellectual foundations of Islam regard such a law as unjust because
according to them God has discriminated against women. On the other
hand, in relation to the conjugal life of husband and wife, Islam makes
it incumbent upon the husband to provide all the family expenses
including food, clothing and lodging of his spouse and children.
According to the Islamic perspective, the wife has the right to save all
her earnings.

Her income and inherited property belong to her and she is not required
to contribute even a small sum for the family expenses. She even has the
right to ask payment for the services she is rendering at home, such as
washing clothes, cooking food and even feeding her infant child.
However, those who are not exactly acquainted with Islam, when they take
such an order into consideration, even if they deal with it impartially
they will say that Islam has nit enacted a just law.

In order to dispel the accusation and prove that such laws are just, we
have to see which interpretation and definition of justice we have. If
justice means equality, then all laws are unjust because equality is not
observed in them. If justice has another interpretation, it must be seen
what that interpretation is. Of course, it is not easy to know the
essence of justice and the way to implement it. For this reason, great
philosophers have conducted extensive research on the relationship
between justice, freedom and law.

In sum, if we take justice as the criterion of credibility of law, the
problem will not be solved. The first question we shall encounter is
this: To which interpretation of justice shall we refer? Interpretations
of justice are subjective. What is just and credible for one is unjust
and incredible for another.

Inapplicability of the second view
----------------------------------

The second view is that a certain law is credible because it provides
for the needs of society. Of course, this view is clearer and more
acceptable because all, more or less, understand what the needs of
society are. This is especially true if we consider that in the society
we live in and our predecessors lived before us, a lawgiver or ruler was
supposed to understand the needs of society and know how to provide for
them.

The question and objection to this view is: The needs of society can be
provided for in different ways, and this fact leads to the difference of
opinion on the codification of law. For example, the beautification and
cleanliness of a city is a public need and must be provided for. But
from where should its budget be allocated? Should its budget be secured
through the individual accounts of families—that is, to oblige every
family to shoulder a part of the expenses for the city’s beautification
and cleanliness? The second option is that the current expenditure of
the city should be secured from the general budget that is mainly
secured through the taxes which are levied from the rich, while the poor
are exempted from it.

The third option is to expect the government to provide for the needs of
society from the exploitation of underground resources such as oil,
copper and iron and their revenue. Now, considering that providing for
the needs of society is taken into account as the criterion of
credibility of law and that each of the abovementioned options is meant
to provide for the needs of society, which of them must be regarded as
credible? Which of them do the people regard as the most proper and
just? The answer will again be subjective. It shows that this criterion
alone is not sufficient to determine the law’s credibility.

Defects of the third view and extent of needs according to Islam
----------------------------------------------------------------

According to the third view, only the will of people is credible and
whatever the people want should become law and be implemented. The
question to be asked in this regard is: Does the criterion demand that
all the people want the thing in question? Such a thing cannot be
realized in the world. Among millions of laws there is not a single law
which is unanimously approved by all people. A law may be accepted by
the public but at least one or two percent of the people oppose it. As
such, what is the criterion of credibility for those who oppose?

The other point is that if that which is liked by the people is
repugnant to the spirit of justice, is it credible or not? Also, if what
the people want is opposed to the second criterion; that is, what the
people want is not meant to provide for the needs of society, does it
still have credibility? If a law requires the collection of money from
the people, maybe most of them oppose it, just as when a new tax is
levied, people accept it out of compulsion.

Nowhere is taxation warmly welcomed by people, and whenever the
government wants to collect money to provide for the needs of society,
the people accept it uneasily. In this case, if we want to act upon the
will of people, the needs of society will not be addressed while it is
assumed that one of the criteria of credibility is providing for the
needs of society. When the people’s will is in conflict with providing
for the needs of society, should the interests of society be upheld or
the will of the majority? Undoubtedly, legislators and those whose
function is to provide for the needs of society (executive officials)
can actually observe that if they try to abide by the will of people in
these cases, they cannot make any progress. (Of course, this issue can
be traced to the discussion about democratic models which must be
examined in another session.)

In any case, such objections to the criteria of credibility of law
exist. Of course, in our opinion, the more fundamental and serious
objection is that the abovementioned interests and needs are only
material interests and needs. The general notion is that only these
human needs must be provided for in society. Is the government obliged
to address only the things related to the material and worldly affairs
of people? Or, does the government also have a duty beyond them?

In clearer terms, we Muslims and all those who follow one of the
revealed religions believe that man has two components: body and soul.
In addition, the view of most or all religions is that the soul is
nobler than the body and the latter serves the former. These religions
maintain that just as the body needs good health, its getting sick needs
to be prevented and cured, the human soul also needs sound health, must
be prevented from getting sick, and be cured in case of sickness. If we
compare material needs with spiritual needs, we will find that spiritual
and religious needs are more important.

Sickness of the body is less dangerous and serious compared to sickness
of the soul because humanity and human merits and attributes are related
to the soul, and if a person’s soul gets sick, his humanity will also
fade away.

All animals have bodies and different physical conditions and are in
constant pursuit of material and physical enjoyments. What makes man
special and constitutes the essence of humanity is his soul. Now, if
that which is the criterion of humanity faces danger, man will
experience real death. As God says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَوَ مَن كَانَ مَيْتًا فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا
يَمْشِي بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ كَمَن َ مَثَلُهُ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ
بِخَارِجٍ مِنْهَا كَذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ مَا كَانُواْ
يَعْمَلُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is he who was lifeless, then We gave him life and provided him with
a light by which he walks among the people, like one who dwells in
manifold darkness which he cannot leave? To the faithless is thus
presented as decorous what they have being doing**.”*[^2]

In view of this fact, should the government which is in pursuit of
securing the interests of society not pay attention to the spiritual and
religious affairs of people? Is it the duty of government to provide
only for the material needs of people? Or, is addressing the spiritual
welfare also part of its duties and should it strive hard to provide it?

The Islamic Revolution and superior station of spiritual interests
------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the intricate questions raised is: If in a case material progress
conflicts with spiritual advancement, which should take precedence? If
under specific circumstances of time and space, the material progress of
society demands the setting aside of spiritual advancement and there is
a conflict between material/economic progress and spiritual interests,
is the government duty-bound to limit material progress in order to
protect the spiritual interests of society? Or, is securing the
spiritual interests not the concern of the political system and
government? Or, is the duty of government to only provide for the
material needs and securing the spiritual interests is a personal
responsibility of the people themselves?

This is a very serious question, and it has practical results in our
social life. Nowadays, it is widely brought up in periodicals and the
mass media and dispute arises over it. There are those who say that the
government’s duty is to deal with political, economic and cultural
development. The manifestations of cultural development for others are
preservation of national heritage, sports and music. For us they are
spiritual interests.

Those who are fond of Islam and support the Islamic Revolution give
special importance to spiritual interests. We believe realization of
that the main motive behind the Islamic Revolution was maintenance at
spiritual interests. Of course, we are of the opinion that under the
auspices of Islam material interests—in due time—will be secured, but in
a short period some material interests maybe arbitrarily affected. In
spite of this, along the path of their firm conviction in divine
spiritual values and the protection of spiritual interests, our people
actually proved that they were ready to endure economic sanctions,
inflation, and scarcity of consumer goods.

They were ready to sacrifice their beloved ones on the battlefield and
become widows and orphans in order to keep Islam and the spiritual
values firmly grounded. For instance, the last testaments of martyrs
show that their objective was the protection of Islam and preservation
of spiritual values. In view of what has been said, at least for us
there is also another criterion apart from materials interests, and that
is securing the spiritual interests. If securing the interests is one of
the criteria of credibility of law, in our opinion “interests” include
both material and spiritual interests.

To examine the interests of society and determine their indicators is a
more insightful and profound endeavor than that which is discussed in
political philosophy and legal philosophy. The axis of the discussion
revolves around these questions: Does man truly have real interests
apart from the material ones? Or, are his interests the same material
interests plus a set of customs and traditions that sometimes change?
Does he have no other interests within the context of spiritual and
ideological needs?

Are the real interests and needs the same material things which can be
contained within scientific experiments and be identified through
material indicators such as medical, economic, industrial and
technological developments? Or, are there also spiritual and ideological
interests above them which cannot be experienced by the senses?

We believe that the real interests are the same spiritual and
ideological interests which are related to the metaphysical world, and
so to speak, are not part of scientific issues and cannot be proved
through the scientific method which is no other than the empirical one.
So, before saying that spiritual interests must be secured in society
and that the government is duty-bound to secure them—if we only want to
engage in an evidential discussion—we will have to deal with this
question: Do we really have interests other than material ones?

[^1]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:176

[^2]: Surah al-An‘am 6:122.


