Session 12: The Different Views of Islam and the West on Values
===============================================================

The best law according to Islam and the danger of eclecticism
-------------------------------------------------------------

The reason behind the emphasis on this subject and the discussion in
this regard is the deviation among different levels of people as a
result of intellectual eclecticism. To cite an example, if a scientist
formulates a theory in the field of physics, only someone occupying a
high station in the said field, like Albert Einstein, can express his
opinion about the theory. However, the same scientist (Einstein) will
not express his opinion on a theory in psychology.

If he ever wants to affirm or reject the said theory, he will refer to
an authority in psychology because the field of science in question is
beyond his expertise. Similarly, other scientists affirm and endorse a
theory outside their expertise based on the affirmation of concerned
authorities. There are times, however, when after studying the views of
scientists in various fields a person accepts some views and inclines
toward them without assessing them as being harmonious together or not.

Will his views and opinions constitute a coherent set of human values?
He has neither thought about this approach nor has any intention of
doing so. He merely says that in his opinion, so-and-so psychologist,
sociologist, or lawyer has a better view, and this attitude leads to
intellectual eclecticism.

The people of insight and research, however, collect all the views and
analyze whether they are compatible or not. If they want to accept the
theory of a certain psychologist, they compare it with another theory in
sociology in order to know whether they are compatible or not. They also
carry out the same comparison regarding other views in other fields and
subjects.

The ground for eclecticism is more fertile in the lower academic levels
where people study a book in any field without investigating the
credibility of the author and the consistency of his ideas with other
ideas and views in other subjects tend to be influenced by it. The
result is intellectual eclecticism.

Intellectual eclecticism in realm of religious thought
------------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, in our Islamic society, particularly during the last
fifty years, many eclectic ideas have emerged. In a certain stage of
their lives, people accept certain doctrines of Islam through their
parents, environment and religious leaders. Then in the next stage, on
entering high school and university they become acquainted with other
views and beliefs from different sciences and subjects and also accept
them without considering whether these views and beliefs are consistent
or not; for example, whether a philosophical theory they have accepted
is compatible with a certain religious theory or theory in biology,
physics, or mathematics. When observed carefully, we find out that in
some cases these views are incompatible and they do not constitute a
coherent set. This form of thinking is called eclectic thinking.

Nowadays, many individuals in our religious society are afflicted with
eclectic thinking because on the one hand, they have inherited family
beliefs of the Islamic society which they do not want to abandon. On the
other hand, ideas from different fields of social sciences are presented
to them which they also accept and attach to the religious beliefs
without knowing that these different ideas and views are incompatible
with each other and that we have to accept either the religious beliefs
or those ideas which are incompatible with religion.

Therefore, if we want to accept ideas and views in the fields of
sociology, law, political science, and the like which are compatible
with our religious beliefs, we have to set aside the schools of thought
presented to us through the translation of foreign books and their
propaganda, and advance new ideas in social sciences which are
scientifically, foundationally and essentially compatible with our
religious beliefs. Otherwise, we will either have to abandon our
religious beliefs or set aside those ideas and views which are
incompatible with our religious beliefs. The two cannot be combined
together just as one cannot accept that it is day and night at the same
time!

Without paying attention to the fundamental point we have mentioned, one
cannot deal with all ideas and views and take something from each of
them and adopt intellectual and religious eclecticism because in this
case, the extremist idea of pluralism in knowledge and understanding
will emerge in us which believes that whatever a person says is correct;
nothing is absolutely false; every person tells a part of the truth; and
every school of thought has part of the truth.

With the support of agnosticism in philosophy, which is also very
popular today in the West, this approach ends up in skepticism. This
approach asserts that the views of different sciences possess a portion
of the truth. We cannot say that we have a definite and certain belief
in something. So, it is better for us to have no definite and absolute
belief in anything and only consider as probable the correctness and
incorrectness of a theory. With regard to religion also, we have to
accept religious pluralism, according to which we have to accept as
correct the viewpoints of both the Muslims who believe in the Oneness of
God and the beliefs of someone whom the Muslims regard deserves eternal
damnation.

We have to equally accept as correct the faith of Christians who believe
in the Trinity and the Zoroastrians who believe in the god of good and
the god of evil, because none of these beliefs is definite and certain.
Possibly, each of them is correct or incorrect and we are not supposed
to confront any of them because all of them can be good and correct.

Tolerance of all beliefs and different conflicting views is anchored in
the foundation of skepticism, agnosticism and pluralism, which reject
the absoluteness of any belief. Social indulgence and negligence gain
strength in the absence of prejudice, partisanship and violence, and
they say, it is better not to be prejudiced but assume whatever another
person says as possibly correct. This approach successfully creates a
sense of indifference to religious, philosophical and scientific beliefs
in a person.

Today this agnosticism of the Western world is also offered to us. There
is an endeavor to make our society negligent and insensitive to
religious, philosophical and scientific beliefs, and become skeptical
about every viewpoint and theory, and believe that it could possibly be
correct and so could its contradiction. Sometimes, it is also said that
we should not regard our understanding as absolute and say that it is
totally correct and there is no correct but this. We should not have
such certainty. We should have our own beliefs and hold them
respectable. Others should have also their own beliefs.

This culture adopted by the Western world for itself today, is being
promoted so that the whole world should come under the influence of this
culture. This culture negates the certainty of beliefs, negates the
religion of truth, negates the belief that the true *madhhab* and
correct theory are one, and inculcates the idea that the correct theory
may be multiple so no one should have certainty of belief in anything.
There should be no fanaticism in discussion. Religious zeal and
sectarian fanaticism should be eliminated.

The people’s inclination to one religion, one *madhhab* and one idea
should be eliminated so that all could live together and have no
conflict over religious issues because these very religious disputes are
the source of wars and mass murder. All sects, religions and ideas
should be considered correct and truthful in order to pave the ground
for peace, security and happiness.

Concept of religious pluralism
------------------------------

We do not intend to deal with the issue of pluralism in particular, but
let us clearly say that we actually believe that we should deal
respectfully, calmly and properly with followers of different religions
and authorities in different philosophies and sciences. They should be
allowed to express and defend their views and participate in dialogues,
discussions and investigations in various spheres.

In today’s world we can witness Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians living
together in peace, there being no room for conflict, dispute,
fratricide, and genocide in their midst. This is something which
receives more attention in Islam than in any religious, sectarian or
political group, and followers of religions have not been accorded as
cordial a treatment as offered by Islam. In Islam the cornerstone of
beliefs is monotheism [*tawhid*] and struggle against the Trinity and
polytheism [*shirk*] is regarded necessary in propagating and fortifying
*tawhid*, yet in Islam, Christianity and Judaism are officially
recognized religions.

Followers of these religions are under the protection of Islam. Their
lives, property and honor are protected, and no one has the right to
commit the least act of harassment and aggression against them.

This kind of treatment and attitude toward the followers of other
religions is inspired by the conduct of the *awliya’* of religion
including the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*). In one of his sermons
recorded in *Nahj al-Balaghah*, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)
says: “I have come to know that every one of them entered upon… women
under the protection of Islam and took away ornaments from their legs,
arms, necks, and ears… If any Muslim dies of grief after all this he is
not to be blamed but rather there is justification for him before
me.”[^1]

This is because in the Islamic territory and under the protection of the
Islamic state a non-Muslim woman has been oppressed. Such an attitude
toward followers of other religions is among the merits and sources of
pride of Islam and according to an explicit text of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى كَلَمَةٍ سَوَاءٍ
بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللّه َ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘O People of the Book! Come to a word common between us and
you: that we will worship no one but Allah...**”*[^2]

Also, another verse invites us to the best manner of disputation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلاَ تُجَادِلُوا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ إِلا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not dispute with the People of the Book except in a manner which
is best**.”*[^3]

If that is the meaning of pluralism, then we have to say that it is one
of Islam’s sources of pride. However, if pluralism means that we say to
ourselves that Christianity is also like Islam; Judaism is also like
Islam; there is no difference between being a Muslim and a Jew because
each of them has a segment of the truth; neither Islam nor Judaism is
the absolute truth; or both of them are the truth, like two ways that
end up in a single point of destination whichever way one treads,
undoubtedly, such a notion and understanding is inconsistent with the
spirit of every religion and the dictates of reason. Can it be claimed
that belief in *tawhid* is identical with the belief in Trinity? In
other words, is there no difference between the belief in the Oneness of
God and the belief in Trinity and many gods? The religion of Islam says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ ثَلاَثَةٌ انتَهُواْ خَيْرًا لَكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not say, ‘[God is] a trinity.’ Relinquish [such a creed]!
That is better for you.”***[^4]

In dealing with the untoward attributes given to God such as His having
a child, the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنشَقُّ الْأَرْضُ
وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدًّا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The heavens are about to be rent apart at it, the earth to split
open, and the mountains to collapse into bits!”***[^5]

Now, when Islam has such a firm approach toward polytheistic beliefs,
how can we say that if you like you can be a Muslim and if you don’t,
then worship idols, and these two faiths have no differences and are
among the “straight paths” leading to the same goal! I think it is
improbable for a rational person to accept this. In any case,
intellectual eclecticism is one of the plagues and predicaments of our
age which must be given attention to and the ways of purging the mind
and acquiring a pure and pristine mentality must be identified and acted
upon.

Magnificence of servitude to God and its conflict with absolute freedom
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Consistent with our discussion is the fact that there are those who, by
taking inspiration from Western culture, accept the principle of freedom
as the greatest of human values for man. They claim adherence to Islam
and its traditions and commandments and consider themselves religious,
but they are so passionate in advocating Western values that they become
more Western than the Westerners. Undoubtedly, this is a kind of
eclecticism. If we were to logically discuss with this group, we would
say that the foundation of Islam is the worship of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَّسُولاً أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We raised an apostle in every nation [to preach:] ‘Worship
Allah, and keep away from the Rebel’...**”*[^6]

The pillar of every religion with heavenly origin is sincere servitude
to God, and a Muslim, Jew or Christian does not understand religion as
other than this. We believe that Islam is similar to other monotheistic
religions in the general principles of belief, but different in laws
that have been promulgated in consonance with the exigencies of time and
space. The differences observed in this regard, are the result of
distortions that have taken place in other religions with heavenly
origin. The loftiest value of Islam is that man should be a sincere
servant of God. It is a truth which has been expressed by God in many
verses of the Qur’an such as the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَما اُمِرُوا إِلاّ لِيَعْبُدُوا اللهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّين...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Yet they were not commanded except to worship Allah, dedicating
their faith to Him...”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلّاَ لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[Only] exclusive faith is worthy of Allah...”***[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَن يُسْلِمْ وَجْهَهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَى...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever surrenders his heart to Allah and is virtuous has certainly
held fast to the firmest handle…**”*[^9]

Once man recognizes himself as a servant of God and regards servitude to
God as the greatest value and considers himself totally at the disposal
of God, can he believe in absolute freedom and regard as valuable
whatever he likes? Are these two compatible and concordant? If I really
believe that Islam is the true religion of God which must be accepted,
and that I have to worship God, surrender everything and submit to His
will, how can I believe that I can be absolutely free to do whatever I
want? How can these two ways of thinking be concordant?

Those who claim this is possible have unconsciously succumbed to
eclecticism, have actually no belief in Islam in their hearts, make this
claim in order to deceive others, or, are incapable of realizing that
these ways of thinking are not concordant. Otherwise, how could man, on
the one hand, say that he is totally subservient to the will of God and,
on the other hand, believe that he has absolute freedom and can do
whatever he wants?!

This way of thinking, i.e. belief in the absolute freedom of man is a
product of Western thought. In the West a group of believers of
Christianity, while keeping their religion—perhaps because of their
innate inclinations or the environment and type of their religious
upbringing could not abandon their religion—inclined toward ideas like
the absolute freedom of man as the result of certain arguments, reasons
or doubts.

Undoubtedly, one who makes such a claim does not do so without any proof
and justification. In fact, he starts with a point and speaks eloquently
on it. For example, his opening salvo is this: “Is it better to place a
bird inside a cage and place the cage inside another iron cage, or to
open the cages so that the bird can fly and go wherever it likes?” It is
obvious that the flying and freedom of a bird is far better and
desirable. Then, he says: “This is exactly the freedom we are talking
about!”

In our society, a complete set of laws based on religion has been
codified. Embedded in it is a set of laws related to the *wilayah
al-faqih,* within which are the statutory laws of the Islamic
Consultative Assembly and the Expediency Council. Finally, the Council
of Guardians reviews the ratified laws. Such a structure is actually
placing a cage inside a cage! The best law is that which gives
permission to people to do and say whatever they like, and as a whole,
gives absolute freedom. Evidently, the first law is a cage while the
second one is freedom!

In dealing with beliefs, ideas and views derived from other cultures, we
should try to trace their roots and see whether they are compatible with
Islamic thought or not. If they are compatible, well and good, and if
not, we need to discard them. We should refer to the rudimentary
principles of our religion and take them as the foundation and basis of
our thoughts, beliefs and culture.

The West and elimination of alleged contradiction between science and religion
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a bid to eliminate the alleged contradiction between science and
religion, Western religious figures, doubtful of their religion, said
that the real jurisdiction of religion is distinct from that of science
and philosophy. A philosophical, moral, or human value is compatible or
incompatible depending on whether they both meet at a certain point,
because when we assume one line to be inclined toward another line, the
two lines will meet at a certain point. However, if the two lines are
parallel, they will never meet nor oppose each other because each of
them ends up at a point which is distinct from that of the other.

In explaining and justifying the relationship between science and
religion, they say that there should be reconciliation between religion
and science, religion and philosophy, religion and reason, religion and
moral values, and two distinct realms created for them. That is,
separating the realm of religion from other subjects. The realm of
religion is man’s connection with God such as, praising God, prayer,
supplication, and a set of issues which are totally personal and have
nothing to do with others.

In this realm, there is no room for science, philosophy or any other
subject; it is only related to the heart. If there is anything
associated with religion in this realm, it is mysticism [*‘irfan*],
because religion and mysticism are of the same class and share the same
goal. Thus, science, philosophy and rationality have no place in the
realm of religion. In fact, the realm of each of them is distinct, each
having its specific function.

Ethics, values, praying, and do’s and don’ts related to God, is related
to religion, and in this realm it does not conflict with science.
However, if these dos and don’ts are related to man’s social life, like
the proper treatment of a thief, traitor or any other criminal—to punish
him or not—they say that whoever commits a crime or offence is sick, and
thus, he must be cured. He should be nursed and treated with kindness
and understanding in a suitable place so that he desists from committing
crime!

We do not know any country or place in the world where a criminal or
offender is treated like a patient and not punished. But in presenting a
theory, they say: “The criminal should not be punished because
punishment is neither appropriate for man nor consistent with human
dignity.” As a general principle, they advance the proposition that man,
even if he commits the most horrendous of crimes, should not be punished
at all because this kind of approach is repugnant to the dignity and
station of man. Contrary to this idea, we Muslims believe that religion
has jurisdiction over all aspects and dimensions of life and has
promulgated relevant laws. Regarding the thief, for example, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَالسَّارِقُ وَالسَّارِقَةُ فَاقْطَعُواْ أَيْدِيَهُمَا...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the thief, man and woman, cut off their hands...”***[^10]

Those who have separated social matters from the realm of religion say
that religion has no right to interfere in such domains. Religion can
only urge you to pray or teach you how to praise God. But treating a
criminal has nothing to do with religion. Certainly, empirical science
has also nothing to do with such cases because empirical science
describes the laws that govern phenomena.

In other words, science expresses “being” and it cannot determine the
“dos and don’ts”. Moral laws cannot be derived from science. So, in the
context of moral and social values, including legal, civil and penal
laws and purely ethical issues in which moral dos and don’ts are
involved, religion and “empirical science” cannot interfere.

Station of people’s will in liberalism and Islam
------------------------------------------------

As neither religion nor science can get involved in the realm of moral
issues and dos and don’ts, the question arises: Which reference
authority should get involved in these domains? The reply given by
Western culture today is that values and dos and don’ts are a set of
extrinsic affairs which are not real and essential truths and should
depend upon the will of the people. Thus, in their opinion the
value-oriented dos and don’ts are extrinsic concepts; that is, they are
not based an objective and external truths and are only dependent on the
people’s tastes. In order to know what to do and what not to do, we
should not refer to religion, science, or philosophy. Instead, we should
consult the people only and see what the people want.

The foundation of Western democracy in the context of legislation is
that there is no reality separate from the will of the people on the
basis of which dos and don’ts should be discovered. In worldly affairs,
dos and don’ts which belong to empirical affairs and are related to the
empirical sciences must be proved in the laboratory. But in relation to
God, dos and don’ts belong to the realm of religion, so religious orders
must be followed. Do’s and don’ts related to social life are related to
people themselves. Neither God nor science has any right to interfere
therein.

In Western culture the emphasis is on people’s will and public vote.
Now, if a person believes that religion encompasses all aspects of human
life; all dos and don’ts related to our social behavior come from God,
and we cannot follow the will of the people, then who should be obeyed
if God enjoins a thing which the people oppose?

In all societies, more or less, there is this contradiction between what
the people want and what is enjoined by religion. But we have nothing to
do with other religions which have been distorted. In fact, our subject
of discussion is a country whose majority of people are Muslims who have
accepted a religion which has explicit and specific laws on all aspects
of individual and social lives including family affairs like choosing a
spouse and child upbringing, as well as social and international
affairs, which have been presented in most verses of the Qur’an, the
*Sunnah* of the Messenger of Allah (*s*), and the traditions and conduct
of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

Those who are people of insight, are not merely blind followers and want
to consciously make a choice, have to settle their stand regarding the
religion which claims to have programs for all aspects of man’s life,
civil, legal and international. They cannot accept the said religion and
at the same time claim the people’s vote as the criterion of credibility
of law, especially in cases where there is contradiction between them?

Today, unfortunately, all the things highlighted in the West are
published in our periodicals. Religion regards homosexuality as the
worst and filthiest practice, can people’s will takes precedence over
God if people voted in favor of its permissibility?! Can these two be
reconciled?

The Western world has solved such problems and cases of conflict between
religion and popular will, maintaining that religion has no right to
interfere in such affairs and disregard the will of people. Accordingly,
religion is related to the church in which the sins of individuals are
forgiven through confession and performance of a set of rituals and then
the church sends them to heaven!

However, religion has no responsibility or jurisdiction in the realm of
social issues in which the deciding factor is the will and vote of the
people. In Canada a religious leader who had founded a new Christian
sect was asked in a television program about his opinion about
homosexuality. He said, “Presently, I cannot express a definite view,
but I tell you that the Bible must be interpreted anew!”

Democracy and legislative authority in Islam and the West
---------------------------------------------------------

By separating the realm of religion from that of social issues, the West
found a self-satisfying way to solve the problem of the alleged
contradiction between religion and the people’s will. Are Muslims also
looking for such a solution? The separation of religion from worldly
life and affairs—social, legal, political, and familial is known as
“secularism”. There are also some individuals who have written many
articles and delivered numerous talks for the sake of “service to the
Iranian culture”.

In order to advance the notion that the realm of religion is separate
from politics and social, legal and economic issues, they are struggling
and offering sacrifices day and night along this way. Do we also hold
such a belief? As we do not have such a belief, then we should be
careful not to be deceived and know that whatever they say and what we
believe in are incompatible. We should be aware that in case of conflict
between the will of God and that of the people, we should consider what
the religion of God has promulgated above that of the people.

I do not intend to advance anything that will be misconstrued to mean
opposition to freedom. The people are free in their choice, but they
should see to it that they consciously and freely make a choice. They
have to know what they are choosing. They should be aware that what is
described today as “democracy in legislation” is the notion of
superiority of the people’s will over that of God. That is, setting
religion and God’s will aside. If the people are about to make a choice,
they should be vigilant and not be deceived. They should be aware that
the acceptance of Islam as a set of laws and rules governing society is
in no way consistent with the acceptance of democracy in legislation.

Those who are busy deceiving people and promoting eclecticism in society
and deviating from the subject matter are agitated by my words and
examples because their intentions and conspiracies are exposed. Of
course, some do not like these words due to political or partisan
reasons. Whether these words are pleasant or unpleasant to them, I am
willing to strive till my last breath to explain and defend the
integrity of religion and to endure all the unpleasant consequences.
Neither am I afraid of any threat nor will I fall into the snare of
applause.

Here we do not intend to pass judgment but to remind the people to be
careful not to be deceived by Western terminologies and concepts for
them to abandon their religion. They have to identify the intellectual
foundations of mentioned theories. For example, when it is said that the
criterion of the acceptance of law is the will of the people and
“democracy in legislation” is promoted, they have to think whether man
is only physically constituted and only possesses a set of animalistic
desires.

If this is the case, only the people have the right of legislation as
the West asserts. Or, as perceived in Islamic thought, if man also has a
lofty dimension and spiritual value, spiritual interests, in addition to
observing material interests and social order and security, must also be
considered in legislation. In this case the criterion of the law’s
credibility should be the will of God.

The presumption mentioned earlier will now be raised again. Does man
really have a spiritual and metaphysical constitution? Does he have
another dimension apart from the physical body and animal instincts? Is
there really a life after death for man? Is there really a relationship
between this material life and life after death? The reply to this
question is clear for Muslims and followers of religions, but we have to
bear in mind that our sociopolitical outlook should be consistent with
our religious beliefs and there should be no trace of any form of
eclecticism in our thoughts and deeds.

If we really believe in the existence of God, the Resurrection,
reckoning, and book of account, we have to decide whether to act upon
man-made laws or not—assuming that the people’s will is the basis of
law—which really have a negative effect on our eternal life. This
question demands a definite and specific answer and the problem cannot
be solved by doubt, uncertainty, and skepticism.

In the West this problem is solved either through the negation of the
spiritual world, or by inculcating doubts and uncertainties in minds by
suggesting that values and dos and don’ts are not based on real,
external truths which are certain, but are merely a set of conventions
and contracts based on the will of the people and have nothing to do
with religion.

Then, our Westernized intellectuals reflect the same ideas in their
books and present them to our dear youth, and the state of affairs
reaches such a proportion that skepticism is sanctified and they are
proud of it! According to religion, however, that is not the case. We
have to desist from doubt, bewilderment and uncertainty. We should
consciously and certainly make the correct selection just as the Qur’an
emphasizes certainty [*yaqin*] in the beginning and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَبِالآخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And are certain of the Hereafter.”***[^11]

God says that the God-wary [*muttaqin*] are those who are certain of the
hereafter and it does not say, “They doubt it”. So, anyone who wants to
benefit from the Qur’an should be certain of the hereafter. It says in
another place:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَفِي الأَرْضِ آيَاتٌ لِلْمُوقِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the earth are signs for those who have conviction.”***[^12]

On the other hand, in dealing with those who are influenced by Western
culture and say that logically man cannot be certain of any matter
especially whatever is beyond matter. The Qur’an describes the state of
doubt and uncertainty as the worst state of downfall and disgrace for
them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَهُمْ فِي رَيْبِهِمْ يَتَرَدَّدُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So they waver in their doubt.”***[^13]

The Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَؤُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا بَلْ هُمْ فِي شَكٍّ مِنْ
ذِكْرِي...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Has the reminder been sent down to him out of [all of] us? Rather
they are in doubt concerning My reminder.**”*[^14]

The Qur’an wants us to be people of certainty especially regarding the
roots of religion, viz. belief in God, apostleship [*nabuwwah*] and the
hereafter. Now, we have to choose one of these two options: Either we
accept the school of thought which says that basically man cannot have
certainty and will always be in doubt and uncertainty, or the school of
thought which invites us to make a conscious choice, saying that unless
you are people of certainty, you cannot benefit from the Book of Allah.

The difference between the two cultures is that Islam regards the state
of doubt, uncertainty and bewilderment as the worst state and likens the
person who is in doubt and uncertainty to the one who is situated in a
frightening desert and everybody is inviting him toward a different
direction and he is bewildered as to which direction to choose. On the
contrary, Western culture considers doubt and uncertainty of great
value, claiming that man is not a human being unless he doubts and is
skeptical. We have to choose one of the two—Islam or skepticism. One
cannot accept both of them because it cannot be admitted that it is day
and night at the same time just as monotheism and trinity together
cannot constitute a logical thought.

An admonition to the youth
--------------------------

I would like to advise our dear youth who are in pursuit of scientific
knowledge to have a clear mind and solve these fundamental problems at
the outset, and assess whether they should be among the people of doubt
or the people of certainty, secular or religious, God-worshippers or
free from the bondage of servitude to anyone, including God. We have to
accept one of the two. We cannot incline to one sometimes and incline to
another at other times. Such a course of action is dangerous and draws
us to infidelity [*kufr*] and eternal damnation in hell.

If we really believe in the truthfulness of the Qur’an, can we accept
the absolute freedom of man? Can we believe in religion, liberalism and
secularism at the same time? For example, should we regard man as a mere
physical being and find his happiness only in animalistic pleasures? By
freedom, should we only mean freedom in carnal desires? Or, is humanity
essentially metaphysical and the spirit of God, while the body only an
instrument for the soul’s perfection, and our real life the eternal one?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِنَّ الدَّارَ الآخِرَةَ لَهِيَ الْحَيَوَانُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But the abode of the Hereafter is indeed Life!**”*[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَما الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلاَّ مَتَاعُ الْغُرُورِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The life of this world is nothing but the wares of
delusion...”***[^16]

Since our real life is in the hereafter, we should exert all our efforts
and focus all our attention in this world to that which will draw us
toward that great felicity. Contrary to the schools of thought which
hold that otherworldly bliss and this world cannot be combined together
and whoever wants felicity in the hereafter should seclude and isolate
himself from all things worldly, Islam fortunately regards it possible
for man, especially in the social dimension, to attain both prosperity
and welfare in this world and eternal bliss in the hereafter.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 27. This refers to the attack of Sufyan
ibn ‘Awf (a commander of Mu‘awiyah) on the city of Anbar that took place
at the time of Imam ‘Ali’s (‘a) rule. One of the soldiers stopped two
women, one a Muslim and the other a dhimmi and robbed them of their
anklets, bracelets and earrings. [Trans.]

[^2]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:64.

[^3]: Surah al-‘Ankabut 29:46.

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:171.

[^5]: Surah Maryam 19:90.

[^6]: Surah an-Nahl 16:36.

[^7]: Surah al-Bayyinah 98:5.

[^8]: Surah az-Zumar 39:3.

[^9]: Surah Luqman 31:22.

[^10]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:38.

[^11]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:4.

[^12]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:20.

[^13]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara‘ah) 9:45.

[^14]: Surah Ṣad 38:8.

[^15]: Surah al-‘Ankabut 29:65.

[^16]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:185.


