Session 13: Fundamental Difference in the Approach to Law between Islam and the West
====================================================================================

Law is not supposed to endanger the interests of society—material or
spiritual, worldly or otherworldly. Once a law is detrimental to any of
these interests, it is not ideal and cannot meet the needs of man and
society. Discussions have been held, but since there are still doubts in
the minds of some professionals and authorities, it is expedient to
further explain certain concepts in this regard.

Relationship between law and individual freedom
-----------------------------------------------

Mass media and public discourses today emphasize individual freedom as
an issue above law and consider any law which restrains individual
freedom as not credible. In order to clarify the issue further, we shall
deal with some subjects as preliminaries to the main topic. By doing so,
it will be easier to grasp the authentic views of Islam.

Western culture is based on a set of elements. The first pillar of this
culture is a trend called “humanism”. Inclination toward humanism in
Europe and in the latter part of the Middle Ages was brought up through
renowned writers and literary men of the time, such as Dante[^1] of
Italy. In reality, it was a return to the pre-Christian era. As we know,
Christianity was born in the East, in Palestine in particular.

Prior to the coming of Christianity in Europe, European societies were
idol-worshippers. The most important empire at the time was the Roman
Empire consisting of the Byzantium (present-day Turkey) and Western
Roman Empire (Italy). With the exception of Jews, these people were all
idol-worshippers. After the coming and dominance of Christianity in
their society, distortions entered Christianity and, in one way of
another, elements of idol-worship were adopted and European society
accepted such a form of Christianity. An example of distortions in
Christianity is the Doctrine of Trinity and erecting of statues of
Hadrat Maryam (Saint Mary) and angels in the churches. As a result,
these churches are very similar to the idol-temples of the past.

Thus, Christianity in the Western world became a distorted form of
Christianity which replaced polytheism. In reality, the government there
was a worldly government devoid of spiritual values, though established
in the name of Christianity, under the garb of divine rule for a
heavenly and celestial mission. Under this guise with ‘celestial’ and
‘heavenly’ slogans, they committed such heinous crimes, that people
feeling suffocated by these injustices and crimes, eventually returned
to the life prior to Christianity.

The humanist thought, in truth, emanates from this return to man in
place of God, this return to earth in lieu of heaven, and this return to
worldly life in place of the otherworldly.

This is the kernel of humanism, which insists that we have to replace
God with man. With the spread of the prevalent literature of the time,
and through the efforts of the pioneering humanist writers such as
Dante, the famous Italian poet and author, this trend gradually gained
currency in all Western countries, and was propounded as a pivot with a
wide array of dimensions and angles. Therefore, humanism is the mother
of all other trends, which collectively constitute Western culture.

When we say “Western culture”, we do not only mean the west in the
geographical sense, nor all the people living in the Western world,
because there are those who have wholesome religious inclinations and
other schools of thought. What we call “Western culture” is the culture
of societies that stride toward non-divine values and atheism, for in
some Eastern countries like Japan the same culture may also be dominant.
So, we will focus on “westernized societies”.

Law in the humanist and liberal approach
----------------------------------------

The root of Western culture, thus, is atheism and disbelief in God who
has been removed from the mind of man. God is replaced by ‘man’ who has
become the epicenter of all values. Anchored in this thought, values are
created by human beings and cannot have any reality beyond the ideas of
human beings. The law becomes something enacted by man and none else has
the right to determine it. It is not God but human beings who chart
their own destiny.

These are the main elements of humanism which led to the emergence of
other trends that gradually grew from the same root. Two of its
extremely important trends presently pitted against Islamic culture are
secularism and liberalism. Naturally, when God is removed from the life
of man, religion as a matter of course will have no role in the serious
issues of life. Therefore, religion must be removed from the social
scene and the realm of political and legal matters.

On the basis of this thought, even those who intend to formulate values
in the name of religion, have to consider them only for their houses of
worship and personal life. That is, in reality, these values belong only
to the private and personal lives of individuals and not to their social
lives. This separation of religion and politics is among the serious
issues of social life and is called “secularism”. Following in its wake
is the other product of Western culture called “liberalism”.

Once the axis of all values is man and no one else determines his
destiny, it must be stated that man can do whatever he likes, and this
is absolute freedom or liberalism. However, since there will be chaos if
every person has absolute freedom in life so the need for law in society
is accepted to prevent chaos due to extremism in following desires.
After the establishment of order and the elimination of chaos, there
will be no more need for law and every person will be able to do
whatever he wants.

The onslaught of Western culture and its confrontation with Islamic culture
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

It can be observed that humanism finally ends up in secularism and
liberalism, and these two constitute the main elements of Western
culture. Whenever there is the reminder, “Beware of the cultural
onslaught of the West against your culture,” it refers to secularism and
liberalism. This culture is flourishing in the West, and with the
industrial and technological advancements, it is continuously and
extensively attracting different societies and other countries.
Sociologists rightly propound that Western culture is also exported with
the export of its technology. This is a fact which must be noted by
developing countries.

At this point, the question is: Can technology be accepted without the
acceptance of its underlying culture? Presently, it must be stated
briefly that along with the export of technology, Western culture is
also exported to other countries, and more or less, all societies have
been influenced by this culture. Even our Islamic society and other
countries are not immune from this influence. (Of course, this external
influence has been the result of complacency in preserving pristine
Islamic values, and not because of the impossibility of distinguishing
the two sets of values from each other.)

Unfortunately, we witness today forms of eclecticism in different
classes of intellectuals which have paved the way for an eclectic
synthesis between Islamic and atheistic cultures. This synthesis,
however, assumes different forms at all levels. Western culture
dominates in some cases, while Islamic culture dominates in others.
Western culture has unfortunately fostered a musty cultural atmosphere
and the clear cultural atmosphere of pristine Islam cannot be seen in
any part of the world.

In our opinion, the cultural space of the Islamic Republic of Iran can
and must clearly exemplify the Islamic culture and remove the dust of
alien cultures. Such a capability exists in this political system and
since the people offered everything they had for the sake of Islam and
the Islamic culture, the Islamic Revolution poses as the greatest threat
against Western culture. The Research Department head of the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, recently said, “The Islamic Republic of
Iran is an ideological threat with an exceptionally strategic location.”

Obviously, what they are afraid of and regard as a serious threat for
them is not economic in nature because their economy is stronger than
ours. It is not a military threat either because they have a military
power the like of which, quantitatively and qualitatively, does not
exist in other countries. Instead, they are afraid of the intellectual,
ideological and cultural potential of the Islamic Republic of Iran why
they explicitly declare the Islamic Republic of Iran as a threat with
unlimited and unique geographical advantages. As such, they leave no
stone unturned in undermining this system, explicitly declaring that the
*wilayah al-faqih* system cannot be penetrated unless *wilayah,* which
is its axis, is toppled down.

The clergy and structural framework of Islamic culture
------------------------------------------------------

The essence of Islamic culture is God-centeredness in contrast to
man-centeredness. Let us ask a few basic questions here: Should God be
the criterion of values, or the desires of man? Does real sovereignty
belong to God or the people? Does the process of thinking, thought,
politics, law, and other aspects of our lives belong to God, or are
related to the carnal desires of man?

I know that stating this point has some unpleasant repercussions, but
the greatest responsibility of the *‘ulama’* today is to elucidate the
fundamentals of Islamic thought, so that by studying different views
reflected in books and periodicals, people can distinguish the views
derived from Islam and Islamic sources from others, and thus, the
boundary line between infidelity [*kufr*], polytheism [*shirk*] and
Islam become clear, and the proponents of atheistic and eclectic
thoughts be distinguished from Islamic scholars.

This is the basic and main task of the *‘ulama’*, and in this regard the
Holy Qur’an says that should learned men not expose religious
innovations and reveal the truth, they will incur the curse of God, the
angels and those who are entitled to curse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أُولَـئِكَ يَلعَنُهُمُ اللّهُ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّاعِنُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They shall be cursed by Allah and cursed by the cursers.”***[^2]

So, our main duty is to clarify the concepts and identify the boundary
between Islam and *kufr* and those ideas which contain eclectic and
synthetic elements. The same eclecticisms and syntheses between truth
and falsehood led to the occurrence of tragic events such as the event
of ‘Ashura, and prior to it, wars and conflicts between the Commander of
the Faithful (*‘a*) and others. Basically, throughout history the same
eclecticisms, syntheses and ambiguities have been the source of
corruption in Muslim society until the time when a man from the lineage
of *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) rose up and clarified so many Islamic concepts
which people accepted and responded positively to his call and the
glorious Islamic Revolution took place in Iran.

Obviously, as long as the zealous youth who sacrificed everything they
had for the sake of Islam are present, they will never allow the ideals
of Islam to be undermined. Thanks to Allah, our Muslim people have a
considerably high level of political and social awareness, are true to
their duty and know what to do. We have not come forward to determine
for them their practical duty. Our only duty is clear the intellectual
and ideological atmosphere.

We only want to throw light on the theoretical and practical foundations
of Islam. We want to show what Islamic culture is and how different it
is from Western atheistic culture. We want to tell the people that
humanism, secularism and liberalism are the main elements of the culture
of atheism and infidelity, and in contrast, God-centeredness, nobility
of religion, *wilayah al-faqih*, and legal limitation of the action of
man within the parameter of obedience to the One and Only God are the
main elements of Islamic thought.

These two cultures are at odds with each other. The first culture
invites man to absolute freedom including freedom from obedience to God
while the second culture invites him to pure obedience to God. The first
culture strives hard to remove God from the mind and life of man while
the second, our culture endeavors to hoist the banner of monotheism and
preserve the idea of unity in the life of man.

Nature of law and its special function in Islam and liberalism
--------------------------------------------------------------

According to Islam, law must also serve man’s spiritual interests and
welfare, and not only maintain social order and security. According to
the liberal point of view, law has no other function but to provide for
means of enjoyment. As long as enjoyments and utilization of power do
not endanger the freedom of others, law has nothing to do with it. So,
the philosophy of law is only protecting the freedom of others,
providing the needs of people and allowing them to fulfill their
desires.

This is the goal of law in the humanist and liberal thought of the West,
according to which the scope of law is very limited, and the government
interferes nominally in the lives of people because the principle is
that they should be free to do whatever they like. As such, it would be
correct to say that the preservation of freedom is above law.

According to Islam, however, law is meant to institute the correct path
of human life and guide society toward material and spiritual evolution.
Also, the Islamic ruler is he who tries to materialize these interests
in society and prevents whatever threatens them. Thus, there is a wide
difference between the duty of the Islamic ruler and that of the
democratic and liberal ruler, because the latter has to pave the ground
for the people to fulfill their wishes and desires. He has to prevent
chaos and disorder only and he cannot impose any other restrictions.
Those who say that freedom is above law, particularly people of
knowledge, education and research who regard themselves as authorities,
should be more careful and examine meticulously and precisely the
subject at hand.

In essence, law determines a right for a person and a corresponding duty
for others. The law is an instrument to restrict freedom. If every
person is supposed to do whatever he or she likes, there will be no more
need for law. Law comes to the fore whenever people have to dispense
with some of their personal desires. If every person is supposed to do
whatever he or she likes, what need do we have for law? So, the essence
of law is that it determines a right for a person and its corresponding
duty for others. Even if we have a law which proves a right for all
people, it will still encompass a duty.

For example, if we have an international law which stipulates that every
person has the right and freedom to reside wherever in the world he
likes, its purpose is to prove a right for all people, but it is
impossible to do so without determining a duty for others, because if
everyone has the right to reside wherever he likes then the others have
to respect that right and not disturb him. Thus, the law implicitly or
explicitly contains dos and don’ts. Even in cases where it proves a
right for everybody, its purpose is that the others are duty-bound to
respect and observe this right.

Any law which stipulates that we have to do a certain thing implies that
we should not act otherwise and this is an infringement of freedom and
presentation of dos and don’ts. So, any law which says that no freedom
should be limited contains a contradiction. Law is that which limits
freedom. Therefore, freedom cannot be above law, unless we want to
define a certain kind of freedom. In this case, we say that this freedom
should be observed as a law that is above other laws.

However, if a law states that no restriction should be imposed on any
freedom, it is void and inherently contradictory and no reasonable
person will ever accept it. Since the function of law is to limit
freedom absolute freedom is a contradiction. But if they mean legitimate
freedom, our question is: What do you mean by “legitimate freedom”? Who
should determine which freedom is legitimate and which not?

Relativity of legitimate freedom
--------------------------------

Every system regards certain things as legitimate and rational on the
basis of its particular culture even when others regard the same as
illegitimate. So, absolute freedom is meaningless and no law can
incorporate absolute freedom. Whenever it is stated in a legal text that
the law has to guarantee legitimate freedom, the reference authority has
to identify legitimate freedom and what determines a form of freedom as
legitimate, rational and beneficial. In reply, it is said that it is the
function of law to identify legitimate freedom.

At any rate if a person says that all kinds of freedom are permissible
in society, it means that no law is necessary for the society. No
reasonable person can talk as such, unless he or she is not aware of
what he or she is talking about.

So, anyone who talks about freedom is referring to limited freedom. The
question here is: who determines the scope of freedom and on what basis?
If the determination of the scope of freedom depends on the whims of
individuals, chaos will surely follow because everyone wants to secure
his or her own interests. So, there must be someone to determine the
scope of freedom. All laws need to be determined by a legislator.

Obviously, if the decision of the legislator is based upon the will of
people and the criterion and basis of law is the will of people, the
sensually indulgent will actually dominate. That is, it is the main axis
of humanist and liberal thought because according to it the utility of
law is nothing more than prevention of chaos and disorder and fulfilling
popular demands. According to Islam, however, this line of argument is
unacceptable because it has fundamental problems.

Tension between Islam and liberalism
------------------------------------

After accepting Islam, we cannot afford to accept liberalism. Once we
accept that law guarantees the interests of people, we can no longer say
that every person can do whatever he or she likes because these two
premises are irreconcilable. Either God or man should be the axis. In
other words, we should either be Allah-ist or humanist. One cannot be
both man-centered and God-centered. Acceptance of these principles,
apart from being contradictory and conflicting, is a form of *shirk* and
once we reject God, it is *kufr* and atheism.

The West’s humanist culture is atheistic because Islam, *kufr* and
atheism, fundamentally conflict with each other. This is the reason why
the American statesmen are of the opinion that as long as the Islamic
system is prevalent in Iran, they cannot afford to reconcile with Iran,
because these two views are contradictory; these two political systems
are irreconcilable.  
 So, the main question is this: What is the salient feature of ideal law
in different thoughts?

Should law only establish order in society and fulfill individual
demands and freedom as long as they do not infringe upon the freedom of
others? Or, should law secure the real interests of people whether the
majority of them agree or not? Of course, it will be implemented and
executed once the people accept it, and if not, it shall only remain in
paper. So, the people are in charge of the affairs but they should know
the basis of the law’s legitimacy.

Is ideal law the one which is based on the will of people and fulfills
their demands, or is it the one that guarantees the welfare of people?
These two views are irreconcilable and to mix them together is
tantamount to creating a misty cultural atmosphere so that those who
intend to take advantage of it can catch fish in troubled waters. We
have to clarify which is Islam and which *kufr*, so that everyone can
choose whichever he or she likes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...فَمَن شَاء فَلْيُؤْمِن وَمَن شَاء فَلْيَكْفُرْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Let anyone who wishes believe it, and let anyone who wishes
disbelieve it**...”*[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متاع كفر و دين بي مشترى نيست گروهى اين گروهى آن پسندند
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The merchandise of kufr or religion is not without customer.*  
*A group could choose this while another group could choose that.*

In any case, the people have to know which merchandise belongs to
religion or *kufr* so as to choose one of them. It is incumbent upon us
to clarify these notions and to cleanse these dusts from the foggy
cultural atmosphere so that the people can choose consciously. There are
those who have created such an atmosphere and want to make democracy and
freedom prevail in place of religion. We should be vigilant; we should
be very careful in what we say and what we do.

Legislation in Islam and democracy
----------------------------------

We mentioned in the last session that conciliation between Islam and
democracy in legislation cannot be established. Democracy means populism
or government of the people. In other words, it means upholding the
people’s will and view. Now, the question is: Is credibility based on
the will of people limited or not? When we say that the criterion and
basis is the people’s will, is it so even if it is against the will of
God? Or, is the credibility of the will of people so perfect that it is
not in conflict with the law and will of God? What is intended by this
concept and terminology in the West is that the people’s view is the
main criterion and no other power in heaven and earth has the right to
interfere in people’s destiny and legislation for them. The law is what
the people want.

At this point, this question is relevant: Is the consensus of opinion of
all people the criterion of the law’s credibility, or is majority vote
enough? The consensus of opinion of all people is impossible in
actuality, and if the majority vote is enough, what will be the duty of
the rest, and should the majority vote be binding on them? In reality,
today’s democracy is a mixture of democracy and elitism. That is, the
people elect an elite group to enact laws for them.

Now, if there is a conflict between the view of the majority of people
and their elected representatives, which view shall prevail? Of course,
the representatives usually enact laws in accordance with the will of
the people; otherwise, they will not be elected in the next round of
elections. Since they have to fulfill the wish of the people, they enact
laws as per the desire of the people. There are also cases,
nevertheless, when the people’s view differs with that of the majority
of representatives.

There are those who have explained that their aim is to replace the
Islamic government—the government of the clergy and *wilayah
al-faqih*—with a democratic government in Iran. “Democratic” implies
that apart from the will of the people, nothing has a say in determining
the law. Can the Muslims accept it or not?

Meanwhile, to those who claim that Islam is harmonious with democracy,
this question is posed: Is the vote of the people binding even if it
were against the definite decree of God, or not? If it is not binding,
it follows that democracy has not been established. If the criterion of
the law’s credibility is the vote of the people even if it were contrary
to the definite decree of God, in this case democracy is not harmonious
with Islam. Is Islam other than obeying God and the Apostle (s)? Do we
have another Islam?

Nowadays, it is said that there are many interpretations of Islam but
the interpretation on the basis of which this Revolution has come into
being is that the decree of God and divine values must prevail in
society. The interpretation of those who staged this Revolution, have
defended it up to the last drop of their blood and will do the same in
future.

Thus, if democracy in the legislative dimension means giving precedence
to the will of people even if the enacted laws were against the decree
of God, such a democracy from the viewpoint of Islam and the Muslims is
unacceptable. However, if democracy has another meaning such that while
preserving the Islamic foundations, principles and values, the people
could get involved in the legal and social issues of their society by
electing their representatives and enact specific laws for certain
circumstances of time and space. This is something which exists in our
country. That is, the people elect their deputies in the Majlis.

The Majlis’ deputies engage in a debate and deliberate about a bill and
afterwards ratify it. However, the ratified bills are credible provided
that they are not against the laws of Islam.  
 In any case, for the people to elect their representatives to determine
the variable laws according to specific circumstances of time and space
is something existing in our country. The Imam endorsed the same process
and our Constitution also approved it. If democracy in legislation
refers to it, such a democracy exists and nobody opposes it.

The binding law in the Islamic government
-----------------------------------------

An important question is that when the people’s representatives ratify a
bill in the Islamic Consultative Assembly, is this ratified bill
credible because the people’s representatives have ratified it and in
principle the people have elected their representatives for this
purpose, or is it because the ratified bill is in a sense confirmed by
the *wali* *al-faqih*? Theoretically, we believe that the foremost right
that man should observe in his life is the right of Allah [*haqq
Allah*].

If we are supposed to observe certain rights, the right of Allah takes
precedence and the foremost right of Allah over the people is the right
of Lordship [*haqq-e rububiyyat*] which has two types, viz. cosmic
Lordship [*rububiyyat-e takwini*] and legislative Lordship
[*rububiyyat-e tashri‘i*]. Legislative Lordship denotes that whatever
God commands is obligatory upon man. So, if God prohibits a thing, it
must not be done, and violation of the divine laws and decrees is an
infringement upon the divine right of Lordship, and denying and
regarding it as non-binding is a form of *shirk*.

As such, the law which is pleasant to God will be credible in Islamic
society. If God prohibited a law, it shall not be binding because the
right of Allah is violated and by violating the right of Allah, the
rights of men will also be violated. Does God acquire any benefit from
legislation? In bidding and forbidding us and enjoining a decree, does
God want anything other than the welfare of man? So, whenever an act is
against the dictum of God, it is also against the welfare of man. In
conclusion, the main pillar of the law’s credibility is that once the
preservation of the interests of man is endangered, the right of Allah
is also violated.

As such, such a law shall not be binding. It is on this basis that after
the ratification of the bill by the people’s representatives, there is
another filter, and that is, certain lawyers and *fuqaha* have to adapt
a bill to the religious standards and check whether it is against the
law of God or not. This is the function of the Council of Guardians.

If the credibility of law depends only on the people’s vote, what are
the *fuqaha* of the Council of Guardians then supposed to do? The people
have cast their vote. Their representatives have ratified and enacted
the law they requested and the said law has become binding! In the
Islamic Republic system, the first and foremost function of the Council
of Guardians (and of course, they have other duties) is to check the
conformity of the statutory laws of the Majlis with Islam; that is, what
the people have voted for through their representatives.

One reason why you see the Westernized elements, and those who pour
water into the enemy’s watermill, talk about the abolition of the
Council of Guardians is that they want the absence of a filter that
checks the conformity of laws with Islam. Today, I am making this
statement for you to be informed—perhaps you cannot believe, and God
willing, it will not happen—that the liberals and Westernized elements
are trying to remove Islam and *wilayah al-faqih* from the Constitution.
By His will, God will not give such a chance to the enemies of Islam and
the Islamic system.

[^1]: It refers to Dante Alighieri (1265-1321), the Italian poet and
writer well known for his epic poem La divina commedia (The Divine
Comedy). [Trans.]

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:159.

[^3]: Surah al-Kahf 18:29.


