Session 15: The Islamic Government, Challenges and Cultural Plots
=================================================================

A review of the previous discussions
------------------------------------

Our concern was to elucidate the Islamic political theory which states
that the law which is either directly stipulated by God the Exalted in
the Holy Qur’an or enacted by the Holy Prophet (*s*) and the infallible
Imams (*‘a*), or by a person designated by an infallible Imam (*‘a*), is
binding in society. In any case, the law must be pleasing to God and in
accordance with Islamic standards.

Those who oppose the idea that religious laws must rule and be
implemented in society can be divided into three. The *first* group
essentially does not accept religion. Such people do not want particular
religious laws to be implemented in the country. Thank God such people
are very few in our society.

The *second* group is of the opinion that the jurisdiction of religion
is separate from that of society and politics. It regards religion as
concerned with personal affairs and the relationship between God and
man, saying that problems pertaining to social life have nothing to do
with religion. This trend is generally called “secularism” or the
separation of religion from the problems of life.

The *third* group really believes that Islam has sociopolitical laws but
it is unconsciously influenced by eclecticism and Western culture. Some
of its views are inconsistent with Islam.

The clergy and its crucial duty of guidance
-------------------------------------------

In any case, in accordance with the duty set by God, the Exalted, we
need to point out these truths as much as possible in order to clarify
the Islamic stance and prevent intellectual, ideological and religious
deviations. Some of our friends and well-wishers think that engaging in
these discussions in these particular sociopolitical conditions is
unnecessary, while others think that it is harmful, as it encourages
differences in opinion and conviction.

They imagine that the more we strive for intellectual and ideological
unity and avoid issues that lead to dispersion and separation is
beneficial for society. Out of good intention, there are also some who
say, “Instead of holding such discussions, engage in more positive
activities in society, assume positions of authority and render services
which are beneficial for society.”

Let me say to these colleagues most of whom are well-wishers and with
good intentions: Our concern is the religious duty which God, the
Exalted, has placed upon our shoulders. It is incumbent, first and
foremost, upon the prophets and infallible Imams (*‘a*) and then upon
the *‘ulama’*.

It is a tortuous path full of dangers, not mere verbal opposition, but
accompanied by abuse, calumny, foul language, and at times, exile,
imprisonment, torture and libel, and sometimes, even assassination.
These difficulties have been experienced throughout history by the
prophets and infallible Imams (*‘a*). On our part, we have no choice but
to tread this path even if our friends reproach and criticize us. As
God, the Exalted, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَالْهُدَى مِن بَعْدِ مَا بَيَّنَّاهُ لِلنَّاسِ فِي الْكِتَابِ
أُولَـئِكَ يَلعَنُهُمُ اللّهُ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّاعِنُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed those who conceal what We have sent down of manifest proofs
and guidance, after We have clarified it in the Book for mankind—they
shall be cursed by Allah and cursed by the cursers.**”*[^1]

Those who are aware of the truth of religion and conceal it on account
of personal gains and group interests will incur the curse of God, the
angels and holy saints [*awliya’*]. As mentioned in the noble *hadith*,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا ظَهَرَتِ الْبِدَعُ فِي أُمَّتِي فَلْيُظْهِرِ الْعَالِمُ عِلْمَهُ
وَ إِلاَّ فعَلَيْهِ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When innovation in religion [bid‘ah] emerges in my* *ummah, it is
incumbent upon the scholar [‘alim] to reveal his knowledge (of the
religion) otherwise the curse of Allah shall be upon him…”*[^2]

Based on this, we have two options: Either we endure the reproaches and
criticism of friends and the calumny of enemies, and in return, seek the
pleasure of God, or prefer the praise of some people and thus, incur the
curse of God. We prefer to endure slanders and not incur the curse of
God. Thus, this crucial responsibility is placed upon our shoulders and
for the likes of us, dealing with these matters is more urgent than
anything else.

It is true that today we have problems along our borders, and, in future
military dangers may arise. It is true that members of our consular
staff and 35 drivers are held captive by the deviant and retrogressive
Ṭaliban in Afghanistan, which has upset our nation and government and
prompted public demonstrations, protests and been referred to
international commissions.

In our opinion, however, the danger of the capture of 40 to 50 Iranians
by enemies is not greater than the danger of the capture of thousands of
our Muslim youth in universities by the agents of America. The bondage
of our youth by the agents, functionaries and proponents of Western
culture is far more dangerous than the capture of a number of Iranian
citizens by a deviant group. It is true that they are experiencing
difficulties and tribulations but they shall be rewarded by God.

When our dear youth, especially the children of martyrs and freed
prisoners of war, however, are on the verge of intellectual and
religious deviation and bondage, what could be more serious? Should no
one feel a sense of responsibility in this regard?

(Some people may say, “You are thinking erroneously.” Well, if man is
free to express his views, at least as a person who is engaged in
religious and Islamic sciences for more than 50 years I also have the
right to express my views.)

Our concern is their opposing our claim that Islamic and divine laws
must govern society, and raising doubts already mentioned in previous
discussions. They say that implementing the laws of Islam in society is
discordant with the natural rights of man. One of the natural rights of
man is freedom which is manifested in freedom of thought, expression,
religion and political views.

By nature, every person has the right to choose whatever religion he or
she likes, change his or her religion; express and promote any view and
belief he or she has. If Islamic laws must govern this country, there
will be some who do not want these laws. They all have the right to
express their views, cast their vote and say that “We do not want these
laws”. Those who totally reject religion to express such a view is not
surprising, but unfortunate when the same is sometimes expressed by
those who claim to be religious, and worse, even use an Islamic
appellation for themselves, and introduce themselves as followers of the
Imam!

Promotion of destructive Western freedom in the national press
--------------------------------------------------------------

This state of affairs has reached a point where it is posed in
newspapers—sometimes with a serious tone and at times as humor,
sometimes as a quotation from a certain writer, a young man or a
woman—Why, in principle, a man can have many wives while a woman cannot
have many husbands. They also suggest that a communal wedding be held
and a number of men share a single wife!

It is worth noting that these issues are not from periodicals of
communist countries. Instead, such issues are presented in newspapers of
the Islamic Republic! There is also someone who delivers a speech in an
Islamic university, which he describes as an Islamic institution, in
which he says, “Today, opposing a leader or the Prophet is nothing. Even
if people want to demonstrate against God, no law has the right to
prevent them!”

If these words are uttered in a non-Muslim country or by a person who is
an infidel or a polytheist, it will not surprise. But in reality, these
words have been uttered in the Islamic Republic, under the sovereignty
of Islam and under the rule of *wilayah al-faqih,* in universities, and
no one is confronting them. Sometimes, a student protests but it is of
no avail. It is for this reason that I feel a sense of responsibility
and I hereby declare that these utterances are dangerous innovations in
religion and are repugnant to the foundation of Islam.

If there are people who want to make these utterances in their speeches,
at least they should not do so in the name of Islam, so that the
difference between Islam and *kufr* remains clear. This freedom of
religion and freedom of expression is a fruit of Western culture which
is deceitful and ostensibly pleasant but innately venomous. It might be
appropriate for Western culture, but certainly not to this extent for
our Islamic culture.

Religion in Western culture today, is a matter of taste, like
inclination toward a political party. If for example, in a country a
number of political parties are already functioning and the following
day, another party is registered and announces its existence,
transferring from one party to another, is not surprising. The same
applies to religion in the West, especially in America, where every day
a new religion or sect is founded. This is astonishing for us. More than
a century ago, someone named “Bab” emerged saying, “I founded a new
Islam and the Imam of the Time expected by the Shi‘ah has already
appeared.”

This set everybody wondering how someone could claim that a new religion
had emerged. (Of course, outside Iran particularly in America, this
corrupt sect is publicized as “modern Islam”, where it is not surprising
at all.) But every year, a number of religious sects are founded in
Canada, America and European countries. For instance, the main Christian
denominations are Orthodox Christianity, Catholicism and Protestantism.
Protestantism alone has more than 500 sects officially registered in
Western countries.

Last year, I visited some Latin American countries. I noticed that
several new sects were founded whose preachers were busy propagating
their respective sects. Such innovations are very common there. It is
announced in a newspaper that a priest has founded a new religion or a
new sect, and people easily transfer from one sect to another. This is
what they called “freedom of religion”.

“Islamic Protestantism” as a conspiracy against Islam
-----------------------------------------------------

Some expect that there shall also be freedom for the religion in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Thus, for a long time they have suggested the
emergence of “Islamic Protestantism”. As far as I know, it was Fath-‘Ali
Akhundzadeh (Akhundof) who first proposed that there should be a
“protestant sect” in Islam. After him, other “intellectuals” promoted
this in their speeches and books, suggesting that “Islamic
Protestantism” should come into being in Iran.

Today, in America, it is propagated that there should also be a new
“Martin Luther” in Iran, a new “protestant religion” and a “modern
Islam” which is consistent with modern conditions, insisting that the
Islam which came into being 1,400 years ago is of no use in life today!

One should not be surprised if America makes such a suggestion because
their goal is to obliterate Islam. They themselves have said that for
this task they have a particular program and allotted a specific budget.
They have confessed repeatedly that their Archenemy at this stage is
Islam.

But what is surprising is that gradually this propaganda is gaining
ground in our country, and there are those who explicitly question the
essential and fixed laws of Islam in newspapers and magazines. For
instance, they question the injustice between man and woman in laws of
inheritance, woman given no right to have many husbands, or the like,
and sometimes, they ridicule the essential laws of Islam.

As you may recall, during the initial years after the victory of the
Islamic Revolution, when the bill regarding the law of retaliation
[*qisas*] was passed, they said, “The bill regarding *qisas* is
inhuman,” and the Imam (*q*) said that if they had made this utterance
consciously, their Muslim spouses would be *haram* for them and the
right of ownership for their property would be transferred to their
Muslim inheritors and their lives would no more be held in honor. Of
course, laws pertaining to apostasy [*irtidad*] are not only confined to
the person who denies *qisas* and its laws.

Denial of any essential law is tantamount to apostasy. But we can
observe today, that without any shame and hesitation, individuals
explicitly reject the essential laws of Islam in newspapers and
magazines of the Islamic Republic, and sometimes in newspapers founded
through grants from the Muslims’ public treasury. Some people should
remind them that the decree of the Imam pertaining to the deniers of
*qisas* is not only confined to the issue of *qisas*.

It can sometimes be observed that laws unanimously accepted by the
Shi‘ah and Sunni *fuqaha* and are not opposed even by the Sunnis are
questioned and mocked! Should the concerned authorities not address
these problems?

Should they not be reminded that such dangers pose threats to our young
generation? Those who have neither heard the speeches of the Imam nor
studied his lectures can be influenced by the questions raised in
newspapers published in the Islamic Republic and think that the Islamic
political system and the Islamic state also agree with these ideas and
that the same are Islamic ideas! There should at least be a venue to
announce that these ideas have nothing to do with Islam.

The notion that religion is a matter of taste and that man can choose
whatever religion he likes and then change it once he no longer likes
it, is dangerous. In Western countries, sometimes a teenager goes to the
church with his friend who says, “I like so-and-so church more,” and
thus changes his religion.

The said teenager will also be influenced and in following his friend,
he will also change his religion. They think that religion is like a
garment which a person can wear today and change tomorrow. Islam does
not endorse the view. “Choose whichever you accept for the state
guarantees this freedom as a natural right of the people.” Islam regards
religion as the most important matter in the life of man and that
felicity and perdition in this world and the hereafter depends on
‘choosing the right religion.’

So, the reason behind these discussions is the existence of such dangers
which we can feel, discern and even witness sometimes, and by struggling
against them discharge our duty.

Real meaning of natural right
-----------------------------

The best definition of “natural right” is that it is a need demanded by
the nature of man and no one should deny it. So, talking and expressing
views are among the demands of man’s nature and no one should prevent
them. We have said that eating and drinking are also among the demands
of man’s nature. In fact, it is the most natural right of every man to
eat, but merely because eating is a demand of man’s nature, does a
person have the right to eat anything that belongs to others? Is there
no law that specifies which is *halal* and which is *haram*, and whose
property a person has the right to consume and whose property a person
has no right to consume?

Is there any reasonable person who can accept the notion that man is
free to take whatever he likes from anybody. Talking is also a natural
right of man, but it does mean that he can express anything everywhere
and for whatever reason and motive. How can the law afford to dictate
what things to eat or not to eat, and how can religion decree that pork
and alcoholic beverages should not be consumed, when eating and drinking
are natural rights of man? The same is the case with talking: The
subject of talk, its time, place, and limitation are determined by law.

More or less, this idea has been accepted everywhere in the world.
Regarding religion, however, the Westerners say, “You can say whatever
you like because religion is a personal matter of taste which is
irrelevant to the serious concerns of life and at most, it is related to
the relationship between man and God and this relationship assumes
different forms. Choose whatever form of relationship with God you like.

This religion is a straight path; that religion is another straight
path. Idol-worship is a straight path; Islam is also a straight path!”
But what Islam states is something else; of course, we mean Islam which
has been propagated by Hadhrat Muhammad (*s*) and not the “modern Islam”
to be brought by Babs and Martin Luthers. We are referring to Islam
which Hadhrat Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah (*s*) introduced.

Traditional interpretation as the only authentic interpretation of Islam
------------------------------------------------------------------------

They say, “Yes, we also accept the same Islam but it has diverse
interpretations. You express a particular interpretation of it.” One of
the products of Western culture is to advance different interpretations
and understandings of religious texts. As I have mentioned before,
sometime ago a Christian sect was founded in Canada. The founding priest
of the said Christian sect was asked, “What is your opinion about
homosexuality?” He replied, “For the meantime, I do not want to express
my opinion but I tell you that the Bible should be interpreted anew!”
This is because homosexuality is explicitly condemned in the Torah and
the Gospel just as it is condemned in Islam. These gentlemen also say,
“Islam and the Qur’an must be interpreted anew!”

We declare that we are among those who regard as credible the 1,400
year-old interpretation of Islam by the Shi‘ah and Sunni *‘ulama’*. The
“Islam” we are talking about is that which has been interpreted by the
pure Imams (*‘a*) and thereafter by the *‘ulama’* of Islam for the past
fourteen centuries. We take that interpretation as the criterion. If new
interpretations arise according to which Islam and all its laws must be
changed and a new “Islam” be formulated, we do not accept and have
nothing to do with that “Islam” and also, I don’t think that our Muslim
people would be attached to such “modern Islams” to be brought by Babs
and Martin Luthers.

The Islam which we know, talk about and adhere to is the one whose
sources are the Qur’an and the *Sunnah* of the Prophet (s) and the pure
Imams (*‘a*) and whose essential and definite laws have been elucidated
by the Shi‘ah and Sunni *fuqaha* for the past fourteen hundred years,
especially those laws about which the Shi‘ah and Sunnis have no
difference of opinion.

This Islam tells us, “Just as you have to observe limitation and
regulation in eating and drinking, limitation and regulation must also
be observed in talking.” Religion is not a garment to be worn today and
be removed tomorrow. One must conduct research and accept the religion
of truth.

In the domain of Islam, there is ample proof to establish its
truthfulness and no one can say that the issue has been obscure for him
and that he failed to identify the truth unless there were shortcomings
in his research. If a person in a Micronesian island says, “I failed to
grasp the truthfulness of Islam,” he might be excused. But living in the
domain of Islam, in which for the past fourteen hundred years the
greatest *‘ulama’* of Islam have written the most valuable and important
books about Islam, if a person says, “I failed to identify the truth,” I
don’t think that he can be excused.

In any case, the Islam we know states, “Just as you need to observe
limits in eating and drinking, you need to do likewise in talking. You
have no right to say whatever you like. You must follow the Islamic
rules. Once you act beyond the Islamic rules, it is to the detriment of
Islamic society. As you know, one of the prohibited acts mentioned in
the treatises on practical laws of Islam [*risalah al-‘amaliyyah*] is to
buy and sell deviant books. Islam does not grant the right to anyone,
especially the one who does not possess the power to distinguish truth
from falsehood, to go everywhere, listen to any talk or read any
writing. As this noble verse explicitly states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ الَّذِينَ يَخُوضُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا فَأَعْرِضْ
عَنْهُمْ حَتَّى يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When you see those who gossip impiously about Our signs, avoid them
until they engage in some other discourse**…”*[^3]

And regarding the faithful, the Qur’an forbids them to mingle and sit
together with those who put religion into question:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الْكِتَابِ ان إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ
اللّهِ يُكَفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلاَ تَقْعُدُواْ مَعَهُمْ
حَتَّى يَخُوضُواْ فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا مِّثْلُهُمْ
إِنَّ اللهَ جامِعُ المُنَافِقينَ وَ الْکَافِرينَ فی جَهَنَّمَ
جَمِيعاً...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly He has sent down to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah’s signs being disbelieved and derided, do not sit with them until
they engage in some other discourse, or else you [too] will be like
them. Surely Allah will gather hypocrites and disbelievers, all
together, into hell…**”*[^4]

Thus, those who talk about Islam but establish relationship with the
enemies of Islam and promote their words are the same hypocrites
[*munafiqun*] whose abode, together with the infidels [*kafirun*], is
hellfire.

Once again, I emphasize that Islam commands: “Go and search for the
truth and argue with the enemies of Islam. With the truth that Islam
teaches, you shall overcome them. However, as long as you have not
acquired enough capability to defend your doctrines and values, you
should not accompany and mingle with the misguided and wicked ones.”

It is like the advice given to an athlete to undergo training before
participating in wrestling. A youngster who has not yet undergone enough
training should not challenge a veteran wrestler as he shall surely be
defeated and his backbone broken. This does not mean campaign against
freedom. This is an admonition to a youngster to learn Islamic sciences
and teachings and then argue with the enemies.

In any case, the Islam we know has limited freedom, and regards as
untenable the argument that since talking is a natural necessity of man,
talking must be free because man also has other instincts such as the
sexual instinct; eating and drinking can also be considered as natural
rights that should not be restricted. Just as the consumption of every
food is unacceptable to a reasonable person, the same is true of
talking. Being an innate necessity does not justify its unbridled use.
Reason and religion should determine its limits based on the material
and spiritual interests of society which have been specified and
introduced by religion.

Legitimate freedom
------------------

While interpreting my petitions, there are those who have said,
“So-and-so commits a fallacy because we have not said that freedom must
be absolute. Our point is that there should be legitimate [*mashru‘*]
freedom.” I ask: What do you mean by *mashru‘*? Do you mean that which
is acceptable to religious law [*shar‘*]? In lexicography, there are two
meanings of the word “*mashru‘*”. Its first meaning is what religious
law [*shari‘ah*] has declared as lawful. (Of course, it is improbable
that they refer to this meaning of *mashru‘* because those raising these
issues are not attached to the *shari‘ah*.)

So, if *mashru‘* is that which *shari‘ah* permits, it means that freedom
must be within a framework permitted by the *shari‘ah*. The other
meaning of *mashru‘* is that which is legal. According to this meaning
also, in the Islamic Republic of Iran, as stipulated in the
Constitution, the law must be concordant with Islam. Our Constitution
consistently points out that all rules and decrees must be concordant
with Islam, and in essence, the raison d’être of the *fuqaha* in the
Council of Guardians as reflected in the Constitution is to examine the
bills to be ratified by the Islamic Consultative Assembly—whether they
are consistent with Islam or not.

Even assuming that all the people and deputies in the Majlis (apart from
the deputies of minority groups whose rights are also protected) are
Muslim, religious and devoted, they may sometimes tend to be negligent
and approve a bill which is against Islam. In keeping with the
Constitution, the ratified bills of the Majlis are examined by the
Council of Guardians—whether they are consistent with the Constitution
and Islam, or not. The *fuqaha* of the Council of Guardians confirm the
Islamic nature of the ratified bills while the lawyers of the Council
confirm the consistency of these bills with the Constitution.

If our Constitution does not regard it necessary for all laws to be
Islamic, then what is the raison d’être of the Council of Guardians? And
for what purpose is all the emphasis on the sovereignty of Islam and the
absolute guardianship of the jurist [*wilayat-e mutlaq-ye faqih*]
stipulated in provisions of the Constitution? One should not be
surprised if so-called lawyers say, “Since the Constitution stipulates
that freedom must be observed, no religion or law has the right to limit
that freedom!”

Does the Constitution clearly stipulate that freedom should be
*mashru‘*, or not? It is you who say “*azadiha-ye mashru‘*” [legitimate
freedom]. What do you mean by “legitimate freedom”? If *mashru‘* is
derived from *shar‘* [religious law], then “legitimate freedom” means
freedom which the religious law endorses. And if *mashru‘* means “legal”
[*qanuni*], then according to the Constitution, freedom which has been
approved by the religious and canonical laws are “legitimate freedom”.

Religion and law as restrainers of freedom
------------------------------------------

Freedom cannot be above law. Those who claim that freedom is above
religion and law should answer these questions: In principle, what is
the purpose of religion and law? What is the essence of law? Is law
meant to point out that an action should be done in a specific manner?
Does it permit and forbid certain acts or not? I have no option but to
repeat some of the previous points. Every law explicitly or implicitly
says actions should be restricted and must be done within a certain
framework.

Thus, in principle, the essence of law is to restrict freedom. If law
and religion do not permit the restraining of freedom, their existence
is useless. As it includes sociopolitical laws, religion filters and
restricts the social and political actions of man and decrees that
certain actions should be done within a specific framework. If religion
means other than this, what is the purpose of its existence?

If religion has been revealed so that everyone should behave in whatever
way he or she likes, what then is its function? And what is its role?
The existence of religion and law has no meaning other than limiting the
liberties of man. Hence, to say that freedom is above both religion and
law is absurd. Yes, under the name of religion some people may suppress
the legitimate freedom of people and prohibit what God has made lawful
through superstitions and ethnic customs.

For example, in some parts of our country, some ethnic tribes
unfortunately still prohibit what God has made lawful and in the culture
of our present society some lawful things are also still considered
abominable. Had it not been for such an attitude in society, so many
types of sexual corruption would have been prevented. The Commander of
the Faithful (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ لا ما سَبَقَ مِنِ ابْنِ الخَطّابِ فِي الْمُتْعَةِ ما زنى اِلاّ
شَقِىّ.ُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Had (‘Umar) ibn al-Khattab not prohibited fixed-time marriage
[mut‘ah],*[^5] *no one would ever commit adultery and fornication [zina]
except a wretched person.”*[^6]

Regrettably, in our culture this thing made lawful by God, which is a
key solution for many problems, is still considered abominable. Yes, if
there are those who under the name of religion want to declare lawful
that made unlawful by God, it is abominable. Apart from being
abominable, it is also unlawful [*haram*] and it is a kind of religious
innovation [*bid‘ah*]. The same is true for its opposite. Forbidding the
lawful is also an innovation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ اَنْ يُؤْخَذَ بِرُخِصِهِ كَما يُحِبُّ اَنْ يُؤْخَذَ
بِعَزائِمِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily, God loves people to benefit from the permissible [mubahat] and
lawful [halal-ha] things just as He loves them to perform the
compulsories [wajibat] and shun the unlawful [muharramat] things.”*[^7]

Thus, under the name of religion, or under the name of tribalism or
local, ethnic and clannish prejudices nobody has the right to declare
unlawful what has been made lawful by God. In the same manner, setting
limits on freedoms is unlawful and an innovation. But if what is meant
by “freedom” is illegitimate freedom, no one should expect religion not
to oppose it!

This is because freedom can either be legitimate or illegitimate. If
legitimate, both religion and law declares it lawful and is not opposed
to it, and there is no point in saying that religion or law has no right
to deprive society of legitimate freedom. If a religion permits
something, how can it prohibit what it has permitted?

This is contradictory in itself. But if a certain freedom is
illegitimate and religion has prohibited it, it is meaningless to say
that religion has no right to prohibit it. This is another form of
contradiction.

Necessity of restraining freedom
--------------------------------

It can thus be deduced that we also regard freedom as a very noble
element permitted by God and a prerequisite for the material and
spiritual exaltation, advancement and perfection of man. We believe that
if man does not possess the gift of freedom, he cannot consciously
choose a religion and act upon its commandments, for his conviction will
have no value. The advancement and perfection of man lies in his
conscious acceptance of religion. This is also the meaning of *“There is
no compulsion in religion.”*[^8] We believe that freedom is one of the
greatest gifts of God, but is most beneficial when used within limits
specified by the Giver of the gift:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿...وَمَن يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللّهِ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And whoever transgresses the bounds of Allah—it is they who are the
wrongdoers.”***[^9]

Transgressing the bounds set by Allah leads to wretchedness and
deprivation of the divine gift. The same thing which leads to man’s
felicity will result in his misery. Once a person consumes food beyond
limit, he will get sick and it may even cause his death. Once
gratification of the sexual instinct which is a divine gift goes beyond
limits, it will bring about social corruption and inflict dangerous
diseases and sometimes even the extinction of society. The Islamic state
not only guarantees legitimate freedom but at the same time, it has to
prevent illegitimate freedom.

The skepticism expressed in newspapers is that by holding these
discussions, I allegedly want to omit the article on national
sovereignty from the Constitution. They say, “According to the
Constitution, the people are masters of their own destiny. So, if they
are compelled to follow religion only, they will no longer be masters of
their own destiny!” This skepticism is so deceptive. I say to them: Is
this the only thing mentioned in our Constitution? Is it not stipulated
in the same constitution that sovereignty belongs to God the Exalted?

Does not the same constitution say that the laws to be implemented in
the country must be in agreement with Islam? Are these facts not
mentioned in the Constitution with the article that people shall be the
masters of their own destiny? It may be said that these two articles of
the Constitution are contradictory and are in need of interpretation and
solution. But if we try to analyze them carefully, we will understand
the purpose of the two articles. Once it is stated in the first article
that sovereignty belongs to God and then it is stated that the people
are masters of their own destiny, it means that under the aegis of God’s
sovereignty, the people are masters of their own destiny.

Thus, those who are outside Islamic society and not among the people of
this country have no right to impose their own ideas, preferences,
religion, and law on us. America has no right to impose its law on us.
It is the people of this country who are supposed to vote for their own
desirable law and they have already voted in favor of Islamic law.

In his speech at Ahwaz University, a certain person has said: “Even if
the people demonstrate against God, the law is not supposed to prevent
them!” Is this what the sovereignty of the people means? Does the
Constitution say so? If a certain person who is unfamiliar with the
Constitution makes such utterances, it is understandable.

What is surprising is that a certain person who regards himself a legal
expert makes such a claim! He may say, “We do not accept your
interpretation of the Constitution.” In reply, it must be said that if
there is an ambiguous point in the Constitution, its authorized
interpreter is the Council of Guardians. If you accept this
constitution, you will see that it does not give you the authority to
interpret it. If you really believe in this law, you have to seek its
interpretation from the Council of Guardians. It is this Council of
Guardians which is the guardian of Islam and the Constitution and is
composed of Muslim jurists whose function is to guard and protect
Islamic laws. Once your view is approved, you have the right to trample
Islam under your feet!

[^1]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:159.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 57, p. 234.

[^3]: Surah al-An‘am 6:68.

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:140.

[^5]: For information on the issue of mut‘ah, see, among others, Sayyid
Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i, Al-Mizan: An Exegesis of the Qur’an, trans.
Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi (Tehran: World Organization for Islamic
Services, 1992), vol. 8, under the commentary on Qur’an 4:24, pp.
104-111; Sayyid ‘Abdul-Husayn Sharafuddin Musawi, Questions on
Jurisprudence, trans. Liyakatali Takim (Ontario: Hydery Canada Ltd.,
1996), chap. 4, http://www.al-islam.org/masail/4.htm; Sachiko Murata,
“Temporary Marriage in Islamic Law,” Al-Serat 13, no. 1,
http://www.al-islam.org/al-serat/al-serat\_muta/title.htm. [Trans.]

[^6]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 12, p. 253.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 360.

[^8]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:265.

[^9]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:229.


