Session 17: Relationship between Religious Legislative Lordship (rububiyyat-e tashri‘i), and Sovereignty and Legislation
========================================================================================================================

Necessity of determining thematic principles
--------------------------------------------

In proving the claim that a correct and wholesome social system must be
harmonious with the above description of government, we pointed out that
if we want to prove this point to those who believe in our juristic and
ideological foundations, we shall do so by presenting religious proofs
foremost of which are noble verses of the Qur’an.

But there are those who do not believe in the truth of the religion of
Islam or other rudimentary principles which are the foundation of this
theory. Thus, if we want to prove this theory to such individuals, we
have to first point out the thematic principles of the subject and prove
them. Thematic principles refer to a series of points which begin in the
preliminary axioms and end up in this theory.

Those who are familiar with the argumentative account or method of
proving geometrical cases know that a case is stated as the main subject
on the basis of which the second case is proved. The second case has the
same function with respect to the third case, and so with the third and
fourth cases, and the trend continues gradually. If we want to prove the
20th case, the 19th case should have been proven beforehand, and
similarly, proving the 19th case necessitates proving the preceding
case. In considering the person who is our addressee and to whom we want
to prove a geometrical case, we have to see to what extent he has
accepted the previous cases so that we can set them as the thematic
principles and basis of the discussion.

On the contrary, if in proving every case we only repeat the previous
cases—for example, the definition of a straight line as the shortest
distance between two points, or the definition of parallel lines as
lines that will never intersect each other—we cannot move ahead. Thus,
to prove a rational case, we have to point out its thematic principles
which must be proven earlier in another discussion. Once we assert that
the law must be divine, the existence of God must be proved earlier.

Thus, if a person says that he does not accept the existence of God, we
have to engage in a scholastic theological [*kalami*] discussion with
him in order to prove the existence of God the One and Only and His
right of Lordship [*rububiyyah*], and thus, prove the necessity of
linking the government to God.

Therefore, if we want to begin with the preliminary principles, the
discussions will become repetitive and wearisome. As such, we have to
raise the closest acceptable principles and leave remote subjects to
their relevant fields of science. This means that once we commence
solving the 10th principle in a geometrical case, we can prove all the
previous cases, having proved them beforehand and on their basis arrive
at the next conclusions. I have mentioned this point because some people
can be heard saying, “You are dealing with these subjects on the basis
of your own criteria which are unacceptable to others.” Thus, it is
necessary that our addressee agree with us on certain principles and
cases so that based upon those principles and cases other cases can be
proved. If he or she does not accept the preliminary principles, we have
to return to the basic and prove those preliminary points in a different
field of science.

Some have complained that we have based Western culture on humanism and
liberalism and presented it as an atheistic culture whereas there are
people in Western countries who also believe in God. I have stated time
and again that those who say “Western culture” do not refer to the
geographical west. It does not mean that all those who live in the West
think like that. Of course, there are also religious individuals there
who believe in God and are attached to moral values and we respect them.

But what is actually prevalent in Western societies is based upon these
principles. Some consciously reject that culture. Similarly, it was
stated in the previous discussions that the eclectics are those who
gather ideas from different schools of thought and mix them together
without proving beforehand the rational foundation of each of them, and
at times, these ideas are inconsistent and incongruent with one another.
As a whole, it is necessary to point out that if a person pays attention
to the totality of our subjects, he or she will never encounter such
problems.

In any case, we shall engage in argumentation in order to prove that the
political system endorsed by Islam is the most rational and judicious
system. Here, we naturally assume the principle of the existence of God
and His Attributes to be axiomatic, and base our argument on this
principle. Those who reject the existence of God and do not believe in
some of His Attributes have to refer to scholastic theology [*‘ilm
al-kalam*] because our present discussion is not scholastic. It is
related to political philosophy and, therefore, we cannot engage in
scholastic discussions here.

Divine sovereignty and legislative Lordship
-------------------------------------------

The political system of the Islamic government stands on the edifice of
God’s sovereignty which necessitates the legislative Lordship
[*rububiyyat-e tashri‘i*] of God. In explaining this point, we have to
note that undoubtedly, monotheism [*tawhid*] is the slogan of not only
Islam but all the religions with heavenly origins. The formulae “There
is no god but Allah” [*La* *ilaha illallah*] which has been the prime
slogan of the Prophet (*s*) also exists in all other religions, albeit
distortions have taken place. The question now raised is: What does
“*La* *ilaha illallah*” mean?

Some think that *tawhid* means that a person should believe that the
Creator and Sustainer of this universe is the One and Only Allah. But
does *tawhid* only mean that there is no creator except Allah? Is the
Oneness of Allah in creation and nourishment the only basis of
monotheism in Islam? In a series of talks I had some years ago at this
same venue under the theme “Monotheism in the Ideological and Value
Systems of Islam”, I stated that *tawhid* does not only mean that a
person has to believe in the Oneness of the Creator of the universe. The
monotheism accepted by Islam is not only confined to this meaning. The
polytheists of Mecca also believed in ‘monotheism in creation’. For
example, God indicates this point, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you ask them, ‘Who created the heavens and the earth?’ they will
surely say, ‘Allah’…”***[^1]

Similarly, Satan believes in the existence of God and monotheism in
creation, but God still enlists him among the infidels.[^2] The dialogue
between Iblis and God as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an, shows that he
believed in monotheism in creation and cosmic Lordship [*rububiyyat-e
takwini*], as well as in the hereafter and the Day of Judgment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنظِرْنِي إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ ٭ قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ
مِنَ الْمُنظَرِينَ ٭ إِلَى يَومِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ ٭ قَالَ رَبِّ
بِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي لَأُزَيِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ
وَلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said, ‘My Lord! Respite me till the day they will be
resurrected.’ Said He, ‘You are indeed among the reprieved until the day
of the known time.’ He said, ‘My Lord! As You have consigned me to
perversity, I will surely glamorize [evil] for them on earth, and I will
surely pervert them.”***[^3]

Thus, Satan also believes in monotheism in creation and the cosmic
Lordship of God as well as in the Resurrection. What needs to be
examined is the factor that led to his *kufr*. In order to recognize the
source of Satan’s *kufr*, it is necessary to identify the foundation of
monotheism in Islam. According to Islam, to be recognized as a
monotheist [*muwahhid*] is belief in the Oneness of the Creator, Oneness
of the cosmic and legislative Lord and Oneness of the Worshipped Being.

That is, man has to regard the Creator as One and Only, as well as, the
Sole Authority and Agent in the universe, and, the Original Legislator.
In addition, he has to believe in monotheism in divinity [*uluhiyyah*]
and servitude [*‘ubudiyyah*] and to recognize God as the only Being
worthy of being worshipped. In view of the foundation of ‘*tawhid’*, it
becomes clear that the source of Satan’s ‘*kufr’* was denial of the
legislative Lordship and not denial of the cosmic Lordship.

Also, God, the Exalted, commands His Messenger (*s*) to invite the
People of the Book [*ahl al-kitab*] during the dialogue with them to the
common platform of belief in the Unity of God and worship of His Unique
Essence. Then, God makes a statement to dissuade them from believing in
the legislative lordship of other-than-God and save them from becoming
infidels:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْاْ إِلَى كَلَمَةٍ سَوَاءٍ
بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ
بِهِ شَيئاً وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضاً أَرْبَاباً مِن دُونِ
اللّهِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘O People of the Book! Come to a word common between us and
you: that we will worship no one but Allah, and that we will not ascribe
any partner to Him, and that we will not take each other as lords
besides Allah’...**”*[^4]

The meaning of some traditions in commentary of the above verse is that
the People of the Book do not regard human beings like them as their
creators. Instead, they recognize their priests and clerics as their
legislative lords and consider their decrees as equal to that of God.
The Qur’an describes unconditional and unwavering obedience to the
priests and clerics as equivalent to taking them as lords: *“And that we
will not take each other as lords besides Allah.”*

That is, do not make unconditional and unwavering obedience to your
leaders for this is a form of polytheism. But this form of polytheism is
not polytheism in the creative power and cosmic Lordship. It is not
polytheism in divinity and servitude either because they do not worship
their priests and clerics per se. It is rather polytheism in the
legislative Lordship. That is, apart from God, they also believe in the
existence of other legislators. They say that other beings including us
have the right to enact law; and not only is the law of God binding,
that one should obey whatever He commands.

For example, when Iblis denied the legislative Lordship of God, he said:
“I am better than him”. That is, “I am not supposed to bow down to
Adam.” Although God commanded him to bow down to Adam, he said: “I will
not bow down to Adam because I am better than him.” That is to say that
Satan did not comply with this decree and command of God. In other
words, he did not regard the right of sovereignty as exclusive to God.

This was the same source of Iblis’ *kufr* for, as we have said, he was
not a denier of God’s Lordship and the Day of Resurrection. The source
of Iblis’ *kufr* was the denial of God’s absolute sovereignty. That form
of *kufr* which Islam ascribes to some of the People of the Book—calling
upon them to relinquish it and return to *tawhid*—is *legislative
polytheism*. As the Qur’an says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اتَّخَذُوا أَحْبَارَهُمْ وَرُهْبَانَهُمْ أَرْبَابًا مِن دُونِ اللّهِ
وَالْمَسِيحَ ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَمَا أُمِرُوا إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُوا
إِلَـهًا وَاحِدًا...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have taken their scribes and their monks as lords besides
Allah, also Christ, Mary’s son; though they were commanded to worship
only the One God…”***[^5]

Never did they bow down on earth in front of their leaders, or prostrate
and worship them. Their taking of their scribes and monks as lords means
unconditional, unwavering and blind obedience to them, and in reality,
it means not considering legislation as solely belonging to God.

Meaning of pure monotheism
--------------------------

Therefore, pure monotheism is that which is not tainted and mixed with
any form of polytheism; neither the polytheism of Iblis nor that of the
People of the Book. The foundation of monotheism in Islam, apart from
belief in the Oneness of the Creator, the cosmic Lord and the Worshipped
Being, is the belief in the Unity of the legislative Lord. These four
elements constitute the pillars of monotheism in Islam. If any one of
them becomes defective, real monotheism will not be realized.

If a person believes that other than God there is another creator or
cosmic lord who independently administers the world or has the right of
sovereignty or being worshipped, he is expelled from the realm of
Islamic *tawhid*. Thus, belief in the legislative Lordship is one of the
pillars of Islamic monotheism, and without it Islamic monotheism cannot
be realized.

A person may ostensibly recite the testimony to God and Prophet Muhammad
(*s*) [*shahadatayn*] and even be considered ritually pure [*tahir*],
but this is apparent purity. Its only impact is that he shall be
included among the Muslims in this world.

If ever in the treatise on the practical laws of Islam [*risalah
al-‘amaliyyah*] it is written that he who recites the *shahadatayn* is a
Muslim, ritually pure, permissible to marry, and whose slaughtered
animal is *halal*, it does not mean that anyone who recites the
*shahadatayn* shall definitely be admitted to paradise and be saved from
the chastisement of hellfire. He also has to accept the obligatory
things in religion and be bound to them; otherwise, recital of the
*shahadatayn* is not the end of the story. Is he who denies the
Resurrection a Muslim? Or, is he who rejects prayer and *zakat* a
Muslim?

So, recital of the *shahadatayn* is only a symbol and indication that he
believes in “what Allah has revealed” and is apparently considered as a
Muslim. But if he has no faith in God in his heart, denies the
Resurrection, or does not heartily accept the essentials of Islam, he is
actually an infidel no matter how ostensible a Muslim he might be. As
such, outward Islam is one thing while real faith which saves one from
the chastisement in the hereafter is another. When it is said that one
of the criteria of *tawhid* is monotheism in the legislative Lordship,
it refers to the source of one’s otherworldly bliss and protection from
eternal damnation; otherwise, to establish outward laws, recital of the
*shahadatayn* is enough.

Righteous reference authorities of legislation and sovereignty in Islam
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Hence, according to the Islamic perspective and legislative Lordship, it
accrues that the Legislator in principle must be God and beside Him, no
one has the right of legislation. Now, the question here is: Is there no
other type of legislation which is legitimate? In reply, it has been
stated before that subordinate to God’s legislation and not parallel to
Him, there are those who have the right to enact law by God’s leave, and
that law is credible and binding with the permission of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلاَ تَقُولُوا لِمَا تَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُكُمُ الْكَذِبَ هَـذَا حَلاَلٌ
وَهَـذَا حَرَامٌ لِِِتَفْتَرُوا عَلَى اللّهِ الْكَذِبَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ الْكَذِبَ لاَ يُفْلِحُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not say, asserting falsely with your tongues, ‘This is lawful,
and this is unlawful,’ to fabricate lies against Allah. Indeed those who
fabricate lies against Allah will not be felicitous.**”*[^6]

As such, one should not say to himself, “This is *halal* and that is
*haram*” for *halal* and *haram* do not depend on your opinion and
preference. This is a form of polytheism. You have to see what God has
said. In another place, the Qur’an thus states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ ءَاَللّهُ أَذِنَ لَكُمْ أَمْ عَلَى اللّهِ تَفْتَرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘Did Allah give you the sanction [to do so], or do you
fabricate a lie against Allah?**’”*[^7]

Yes, God gave the Prophet (*s*) authority to legislate and to bid and
forbid the people, saying: *“Obey Allah and obey the Apostle”*[^8] and
*“Whoever obeys the Apostle certainly obeys Allah.”*[^9]  
 Of course, the Messenger of Allah (*s*) would not act according to his
own desire. Rather, his action was based on divine inspiration and
revelation. At times when a verse would not be revealed to him, he used
to receive divine inspiration [*ilham*] and non-Qur’anic revelation
[*wahy*] by the legislative will of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا يَنطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوَى ٭ إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا وَحْيٌ يُوحَى﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He does not speak out of [his own] desire: it is just a revelation
that is revealed [to him].**”*[^10]

Therefore, if a person is authorized by God to enact laws, any law he
enacts becomes respected and binding. The Shi‘ah believe that such an
authority granted to the Holy Prophet (*s*) is also granted to the
infallible Imams (*‘a*). Of course, in scholastic theology [*‘ilm
al-kalam*] clear proofs substantiating this claim have been presented.
One of these proofs is the tradition about the two weighty things
[*hadith* *ath*-*thaqalayn*] in which the pure Imams (*‘a*) are treated
as partners [‘idl] of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ: كِتَابَ اللهِ وَعِتْرَتِي أهْلَ
بَيْتِي، مَا إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِمَا لَنْ تَضِلُّوا بَعْدِي أبَداً .
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily, I am leaving among you two weighty things [thaqalayn]: The
Book of Allah and my progeny [‘itrati], the members of my Household [Ahl
al-Bayt]. If you hold fast to them, you shall never go astray.”*

Here we are not in pursuit of presenting and proving the Shi‘ah
doctrines but to point out that those who believe in this principle
acceptable to the Shi‘ah regard the infallible Imams (*‘a*) besides the
Holy Prophet (*s*) to also have such authority. On the contrary, there
are also those who say that only the Messenger of Allah (*s*) was
infallible and incumbent upon us to follow. But this difference in
opinion does not make such a difference as far as our subject is
concerned.

Assuming that we were living at the time of the Holy Prophet (*s*) who
appointed a governor of a city and asked us to obey the governor, was it
obligatory to obey the governor under the aegis of obedience to the Holy
Prophet (*s*), or not? Was obedience to him inconsistent with obedience
to the Prophet (*s*) and God and the sovereignty of Allah? The answer is
negative because that person was the representative and envoy of a
prophet who in turn had been designated by God. Our belief is that the
infallible Imams (*‘a*) also have the same prerogative.

For the present time, they have also designated individuals on the basis
of quality and not personality, and the one who is closest to the
Infallibles (*‘a*) and the most righteous is appointed by them to rule.
Now, sometimes this belief can be proved through the *Maqbulah*[^11] of
‘Umar ibn Hanzalah,[^12] *Marfu‘ah*[^13] of Abu Khadijah[^14] and other
traditions, and at times through rational proofs. Through various
statements *fuqaha* have engaged in proving it.

Thus, the essence of the theory is that just as the Holy Prophet (*s*)
during his lifetime appointed a person to rule and govern a region of
the Islamic land and obedience to him was incumbent upon the people of
the region, or just as the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) during his
caliphate appointed individuals as governors and rulers of Islamic
territories such as Bahrain, Ahwaz, Egypt, and others and obedience to
them was obligatory, during this period of occultation [*ghaybah*] those
who are like Malik al-Ashtar in political acumen and knowledge of
jurisprudence and have the competence, merit and capability to lead and
administer the Islamic society are designated to take charge of the
government according to the principle of *wilayah al-faqih* and
obedience to them is incumbent upon us.

This is not in conflict with the legislative Lordship of God. In fact,
their sovereignty is under the auspices of Divine Lordship. Since God
has commanded His Prophet (*s*), and the Prophet (*s*) in turn,
appointed them as governors, or since the infallible Imam (*‘a*)
designated his specific or general deputies, it is incumbent upon us to
obey them. In other words, obedience to the governor is obedience to the
Prophet (*s*) and God. On the contrary, opposition to him is tantamount
to opposition to the Prophet (*s*) and opposition to the Prophet (*s*),
in turn, is tantamount to opposition to God.

In the same vein, obedience to the *wali* *al-faqih* is obedience to the
infallible Imam (*‘a*) and the Prophet (s), and thus, to God, and
disobedience to him is disobedience to the infallible Imam (*‘a*) and
the Prophet (*s*), and thus, to God. This point has been categorically
stated in the *Maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah when Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْظُرُ إِلىٰ مَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ قَدْ رَوىٰ حَدِيثُنَا وَ نَظَرَ في
حَلاَلِنَا وَ حَرَامِنَا وَ عَرَفَ أَحْكَامَنَا فَلْيَرْضُوا بِهِ
حَكَمًا فَإِنّي قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاكِمًا. فَإِذَا حَكَمَ
بِحُكْمِنَا فَلَمْ يَقْبَلْهُ مِنْهُ فَإِنَّمَا إِسْتَخَفَّ بِحُكْمِ
اللهِ وَ عَلَيْنَا رَدَّ وَ الرَّادُّ عَلَيْنَا الرَّادُّ عَلىٰ اللهِ
وَ هُوَ عَلىٰ حَدِّ الشِّرْكِ بِاللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“They must seek out one of you who narrates our traditions, who is
versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden, who is well
acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as judge and
arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you. So, anyone who rejects his
judgment is as if* *he belittles the judgment of Allah and rejects us,
and anyone who rejects us is as if he rejects Allah, and rejection of
Him is tantamount to associating partners with Him.”*[^15]

The Imam (*‘a*) said that it “is tantamount to associating partners with
Him” because polytheism is the opposite of monotheism, and one of the
pillars of monotheism is belief in the legislative Lordship. Now, if we
accept the sovereignty of God, and under His auspices, the sovereignty
of the Prophet (*s*) and the Imam (*‘a*) and those who are designated by
God through the Imam (*‘a*), it follows that we have accepted monotheism
in the legislative Lordship.

And if we reject it, it means that we are committing polytheism in the
legislative Lordship. Thus, “rejection of them” means that if a person
rejects the *fuqaha* designated to rule over the people it is as if he
has rejected the Imams (*‘a*). That is, if a person says, “I do not
recognize *wilayah al-faqih*,” he is saying, “I do not recognize the
infallible Imam” and if a person does not accept the Imam (*‘a*), he has
in a sense associated partners with God because he has rejected an
aspect of His legislative Lordship. Of course, this is spiritual and
esoteric polytheism and it does not render a person ritually impure
[*najis*].

As such, it is established that if a person accepts that sovereignty
intrinsically belongs to God alone, he has to accept also that at a
lower level, it also belongs to the Messenger of Allah (*s*). It is
under the auspices of God’s sovereignty that the sovereignty of the
Messenger of Allah (*s*) and that of the Imams (*‘a*) and their deputies
are realized and acquire legitimacy. If we uphold the legitimacy of rule
in a different way, we have actually upheld a form of polytheism in
sovereignty.

Therefore, the rational reason why the Islamic system must be based on
divine laws and under a ruler designated by God is the legislative
Lordship of God. If we try to properly understand *tawhid*, we will
arrive at the same conclusion, and if certain people reject this
conclusion, their faith is essentially weak and their [state of belief
in] *tawhid* is impure and tainted with *shirk*.

One may ask, “Why must laws of society be divine”? If certain people do
not believe in God and His law and enact and implement laws by
themselves, will the society not be reformed? If so, how have certain
societies in the world reached a certain stage of life without acting
upon God’s law? This is a skepticism raised by many “intellectuals” who
ask, “Why should law be promulgated by God?” They are of the opinion
that by using their intellect people can make laws and act upon them,
without arising any problem.

Reasons behind God’s legislative monopoly
-----------------------------------------

In order reply to this skepticism, it must be noted that man is a
unitary being but he has various organs, senses and dimensions, and
these dimensions are linked and knitted together. Man does not have an
economic dimension alone. So long as one enacts laws for the economy and
administers the economic dimension of his society, his condition shall
be in order. His economy is related to his polity. His polity is related
to his civil and social laws. His civil laws are related to his criminal
laws, and all these are related to the international law. Their totality
is firmly connected to man’s spiritual, psychological and moral
dimensions.

Man does not constitute ten beings. He does not have ten souls either.
Man has a divine spirit which has different dimensions and aspects, all
interconnected. So, if there is a defect in one dimension, it will
naturally affect the others. God who has created man and ordained social
life for him has endowed his natural disposition [*fitrah*] with
elements which naturally and innately draw him toward the establishment
of social life. Therefore, God has a purpose in the creation of man
which is to attain human perfection under the aegis of social life, and
advance all dimensions of his existence which are at the service of the
spiritual and religious dimension toward perfection, and finally,
achieve the ideal:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I did not create the jinn and humans except that they may worship
Me.**”*[^16]

What is said must take place under the auspices of worship [*‘ibadah*]
which is inextricably interwoven with *tawhid* and *rububiyyah*;
otherwise, human perfection will not materialize. Of course, through
another way, outward order may also be established in society which is
worthy of reflection; for example, the “order” which exists today in
countries whose symbol is America. It can be observed that in all high
schools in the model of “civilized” countries in the world armed
policemen must be stationed. Notwithstanding the presence of armed
units, killing and crimes take place daily in these high schools. This
is the order established by mankind. The same is true in cases of other
corruption and crimes.

Even assuming that without acting upon divine laws and paying attention
to the spiritual dimension of man, outward civil order can still be
established in society, yet the ultimate purpose of his life can not be
ensured. Is the life of man that of a termite? Or, is human society
similar to bees which can be established through an outward order? All
these systems, security measures, advancement, growth, science,
industry, and technology are means to evolve the human soul and get
closer to God. Who can grasp this relationship?

Who can identify which type of food or manner of living will contribute
toward achieving proximity to God? Who ascertains whether eating pork
and drinking wine will contribute toward the achievement of happiness?
Notwithstanding their progress in the science of medicine, medical
scientists of the world conclude that excessive consumption of alcohol
may be harmful for the brain cells, but they do not know whether it
affects the eternal bliss of man because they have no experience in this
regard being beyond empirical observation.

Man’s life must be codified in such a manner that all dimensions are
taken into account and the focus is not only on his physical health and
wellbeing and political-economic condition. The interrelationship of all
dimensions must take place in a cohesive and harmonious system. No one
except God the Creator, with his all-embracing knowledge can establish a
relationship between these dimensions and guide them toward ultimate
perfection. This is the reason why it is God who must enact the law.
Furthermore, which legislator will set his personal interests aside at
the moment of legislation? It is clear that any group that gains power
tries to enact and implement laws which serve its interests. For
instance, in Muslim countries, as soon as an administration assumes
office, it enacts new rules and regulations which are mostly in favor of
the ruling party. It makes no difference whether it is leftist or
rightist. This is human nature, and by the way, most human beings are
fallible.

Only God is immune from individual or group favoritism and His interest
is not served in any way. The laws of God are neither favorable nor
unfavorable to Him. His only concern is what is good or bad for human
beings. Thus, on one hand, His knowledge is boundless, and on the other
hand, He has no personal interest in enacting laws. Moreover, He has the
right of Lordship over His creatures. If man wants to attain perfection,
he has to observe the right of Divine Lordship. This is another subject
that requires explanation which is not possible in this limited time.

Human beings have rights over one another and they know of latitudinal
rights [*huquq al-‘Ardht*] like the right of the farmer over the worker
and vice versa, or the right of the ruler over the people and vice
versa. The people know these rights, yet do they know the right of God
over the people and the manner of granting it? The hallmark of the
Islamic outlook is that above all rights is the right of Allah [*haqq
Allah*].

Therefore, it must first be granted so that the rights of people can be
given under the aegis of God’s right. Can the rights of men be
considered in statutory laws without taking the right of God into
account? It is certainly unjust if not cruel, to deny the rights of God!
With this ingratitude, can one attain human perfection?

Which ingratitude is greater than ingratitude to God which the Qur’an
points out:

**“*****Polytheism is indeed a great injustice”*****?**[^17]

The greatest of injustices is injustice toward Divine Lordship. As such,
if we do not take into account the right of God, we will commit a great
injustice. How then will we be just to others? How can a person be just
who is unjust to his Creator? As we have said, one of the forms of
*shirk* is the belief in *other than God’s* having the right of
legislation.

Since God is perfectly aware of our interests, gains no benefit in
legislation and has the right of legislative Lordship over man, the law
of God must be observed, and rules obeyed which have been introduced by
those who are designated by God as far as they are authorized, so that
man is not guilty of what the following verse describes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُم مََا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ لَكُم مِّن رِزْقٍ فَجَعَلْتُم
مِنْهُ حَرَامًا وَحَلاَلاً قُلْ ءَاَللّهُ أَذِنَ لَكُمْ أَمْ عَلَى
اللّهِ تَفْتَرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘Have you regarded what Allah has sent down for you of [His]
provision, whereupon you made some of it unlawful and [some] lawful?’
Say, ‘Did Allah give you the sanction [to do so], or do you fabricate a
lie against Allah?’**”*[^18]

And in another verse, it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلاَ تَقُولُوا لِمَا تَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُكُمُ الْكَذِبَ هَـذَا حَلاَلٌ
وَهَـذَا حَرَامٌ لِتَفْتَرُوا عَلَى اللّهِ الْكَذِبَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ الْكَذِبَ لاَ يُفْلِحُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not say, asserting falsely with your tongues, ‘This is lawful,
and this is unlawful,’ to*** ***fabricate lies against Allah. Indeed
those who fabricate lies against Allah will not be felicitous.**”*[^19]

Therefore, in order to observe the right of legislative Lordship of God,
one should first refer to the law of God and then examine whom He has
granted the authority to enact laws or whom He has granted the authority
to implement them. The reason for this is that if the implementation of
those laws is beyond His command, exercise of authority [*tasarruf*]
over the servants of God without the permission of their Master will
again take place.

In the divine perspective, exercise of authority even on oneself is not
permissible if it is against the pleasure of God, let alone exercise of
authority over others. As such, man has no right to commit suicide. In
Western liberalism, it may possibly be said that since man owns himself,
he has the right to commit suicide if he wants to, but in the divine
system it is not so. Man has no ownership of himself as he belongs to
God. Thus, he has no right to commit suicide because God has not
permitted him to do so. The authority over the life and soul of man is
with Him and with none else. Hence, how can one who has no right to kill
himself, grant permission to others to kill him?

None has the right to amputate his hands or blind his eyes because the
Owner of these body limbs is God who has not given him that permission.
How can a person give authority to another to amputate the hand of a
thief or imprison a person? No one has such a right because others are
also servants of God and without the permission of God, one cannot
exercise authority over them.

Thus, in legislation as well as in the implementation of laws, the
permission of God is binding. In a nutshell, the Islamic political
theory in this regard stands on the proposition that God’s legislative
Lordship is a pillar of *tawhid* and he who does not observe this pillar
commits *kufr* similar to that which is committed by Iblis.

[^1]: Surah Luqman 31:25.

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:34: “He was one of the faithless.”

[^3]: Surah al-Hijr 15:36-39.

[^4]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:64.

[^5]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara‘ah) 9:31.

[^6]: Surah an-Nahl 16:116.

[^7]: Surah Yunus 10:59.

[^8]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^9]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:80.

[^10]: Surah an-Najm 53:3-4.

[^11]: Maqbulah: a hadith to which one may make acceptable reference.
[Trans.]

[^12]: The maqbulah tradition is the tradition of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah who
asked Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) whether it was permissible in the event of a
disagreement between two Shi‘ah concerning a debt or a legacy to seek
the verdict of the ruler or judge. He replied: “Anyone who has recourse
to the ruler or judge, whether his case is just or unjust, has in
reality had recourse to the taghut (i.e., the illegitimate ruling
power). Whatever he obtains as a result of their verdict, he will have
obtained by forbidden means, even if he has a proven right to it, for he
will have obtained it through the verdict and judgment of the taghut,
that power which God Almighty has commanded him to disbelieve in: “They
desire to seek the judgment of the Rebel, though they were commanded to
defy it” (Surah an-Nisa’ 4:60).” Imam as-Sadiq then advised the Shi‘ah
to refer to one of the fuqaha, i.e. one learned in the principles and
ordinances of Islamic law or, more generally, in all aspects of the
faith. See Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 18, the section on the attributes of
judges, pp. 98-99. [Trans.]

[^13]: Marfu‘ah: ‘traceable’ – refers to any tradition that can be
traced back to a Ma‘sum (infallible – referring specifically to the
Prophet (s) and the Imams (‘a)), regardless of the continuity in its
chain of transmission.

[^14]: Abu Khadijah, one of the trusted companions of Imam as-Ṣadiq
(‘a), relates: “I was commanded by the Imam (‘a) to convey the following
message to our friends (i.e., the Shi‘ah): ‘When enmity and dispute
arise among you, or you disagree concerning the receipt or payment of a
sum of money, be sure not to refer the matter to one of these
malefactors for judgment. Designate as judge and arbiter someone among
you who is acquainted with our injunctions concerning what is permitted
and what is prohibited, for I appoint such a man as judge over you. Let
none of you take your complaint against another of you to the tyrannical
ruling power’.” Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 18, p. 100. [Trans.]

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 67; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 18, 98.

[^16]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:56.

[^17]: Surah Luqman 31:13.

[^18]: Surah Yunus 10:59.

[^19]: Surah an-Nahl 16:116.


