Session 19: Distinctive Feature of Islam in the Realm of Politics and Government
================================================================================

Three views on determining the special function of government
-------------------------------------------------------------

Once we say that government is meant to implement law in society, or in
other words, the two main pillars of government are legislation and
implementation, law must have some criteria and authority on the basis
of which rules and regulations are enacted. As such, this fundamental
question is raised in political philosophy—what is the aim of forming a
government? It was briefly touched upon in previous discussions. In this
session, we shall examine it elaborately. Initially, we shall mention
the three views on the purpose of forming a government so as to identify
the logical connection between government and law. Then, we shall delve
into the subject.

1. Individuals such as Thomas Hobbes, from among political philosophers
after the Renaissance, are of the opinion that the objective and
function of government is only to establish peace and order in society.
In a broader sense, the objective is to establish domestic and external
security. That is, the main duty of the government is to implement rules
and regulations that prevent chaos and disorder in society and have a
defense force against external threats so as to ensure the country’s
survival and territorial integrity.

2. Some have said that apart from maintaining and guaranteeing security,
law and government need to implement justice in society. A profound
debate on the relationship between law, justice and freedom, especially
among the political sociologists, has started and many books have been
written in this regard.

Once we accept that in addition to the maintenance of security, the duty
of the state is to implement justice, the question arises: What does
justice mean by itself? Many interpretations on the nature of justice
and its manifestations have been offered by Muslim and non-Muslim
scholars. Among them, the comprehensive and generally agreed upon
concept of justice is that everyone must be given his or her rights.
However, they differ on definition and scope of “rights”. Since the term
“rights” is included in the definition of justice, we have no option but
to embark on another discussion, and that is the relationship between
freedom, law, rights, and justice.

For example, what is the relationship between rights and justice?
Finally, the discussion concludes that the right of every person is that
his or her natural interests and welfare should be ensured, and the just
law is that which ensures the rights of individuals, i.e. what their
natural needs demand, under the aegis of social life.

Now, this question is raised on the issue of rights: Who are those who
have rights in social life? Do all the human beings have similar rights
in social life? Or, who are those who have the right to share social
benefits? In other words, some handicapped people cannot render any
service to society. They are confined to hospitals and sanatoriums and
cannot play any role in social life nor contribute anything to society.
Do they have any rights? If rights emanate from services rendered by
members of society, then such individuals have no right at all.

Of course, possibly some handicapped people can contribute to society
intellectually, but do the handicapped, who since birth, have been
deprived of all physical and mental capabilities have any rights?
Another case is that of a person who, while strong, offered valuable
services to society and later became physically disabled and could not
render any form of service to society anymore. Does he have any right in
society anymore?

According to some sociological tendencies, such individuals do not have
any right in society and the state does not have any duty toward them.
In the Marxist regime ruling the ex-Soviet Union, such individuals who
made no contribution to society were eliminated under a certain pretext.
Such tendencies also exist in other societies. Are rights linked with
services individuals render to society?

Does the handicapped have any rights for being a human being, born and
living among other human beings? Unfortunately, those who say that right
is commensurate with the service rendered to society do not consider any
rights for such individuals, saying that if out of compassion and
humanitarian feeling, some people want to serve this stratum of society
and build sanatoriums for them, they may do so. Yet, no one shall be
responsible for their death!

3. The third viewpoint on the purpose of forming a government and state
is the Islamic viewpoint which emphasizes—apart from maintaining
security, implementing justice and providing material welfare—the
satisfying of spiritual and religious needs.

Difference between the special function of the Islamic government and that of other governments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Islam, maintenance of security, defense against foreign enemies,
establishment of justice, and ensuring the rights of those rendering
services to society are considered a part of government obligations. In
addition, benevolence [*ihsan*], i.e. service to the indigent and those
who lack any potential to offer any service to society, is also a duty
of the government. As God says in the Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإِحْسَانِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed Allah enjoins justice and kindness**...”*[^1]

The duty of Muslims is not only to observe justice. Beyond that, they
should also be benevolent. On account of their being human, the
indigent, the disabled, and the handicapped, especially those born
handicapped, have their legitimate rights in human society, and the
Islamic state has to provide for their primary needs.

The other difference between Islam and other schools of thought is that
Islam does not confine itself to material and physical needs but
considers psychological, spiritual and otherworldly needs also. The
burden of responsibility on the Islamic state is far heavier than that
of liberal states. Logically, apart from providing the needs of
individuals offering services to society, liberal states have no other
responsibility. However, the Islamic state, in addition to satisfying
the needs of those rendering service in the society, should help the
handicapped.

As such, laws must be enacted and implemented in the Islamic state to
ensure the provision of individual and social, material and spiritual,
worldly and otherworldly needs of human beings, and not only provide the
material needs for the active members of society.

The next question raised is: What is the proof of correctness of the
Islamic theory and how can we know that the other theories are not
correct? In a bid to reply to this question, there is a need to go a
step backward and pose this question: What essentially is the reason
behind the formation of human society?

Islam’s view on the essence of human society
--------------------------------------------

Before examining the reason behind the formation of human society, let
me ask: Is man, like the termite or the bee, inherently a social being?
Is social living something that man has selected and chosen by himself?
There are many views but I shall touch upon two basic views in this
regard. One is that social life has an optional humane objective. The
second view is that social life has no purpose. For instance, it cannot
be said why the bee has a social life and what its purpose in social
life is.

Obviously, the bee has a natural and instinctive purpose and that is to
produce honey and live. There is no other purpose of the bee’s social
life. Of course, God, the Exalted, has a purpose in creating these
creatures, one of which is to serve mankind. However, setting aside the
creational and divine aspect, the bee is not pursuing a volitional
objective in its social life. Is the social life of man also a natural
process which has spontaneously arisen without having any purpose? Or,
does it have a purpose which necessitates relations which, in turn,
require orders?

From the religious point of view, the purpose of social life is human
progress under the blessings of social living and getting closer to
their objective. Then, you may ask: What is the purpose behind the
creation of man? According to the divine perspective, the ultimate goal
of man is nearness to God and this is the zenith of human perfection.

If we accept that the purpose behind creation is perfection attained
under the auspices of nearness to God, then social life is a means for
man to achieve this goal in the best way possible. In the absence of
social life, human beings cannot acquire necessary knowledge and perform
necessary acts of worship, nor attain ultimate perfection.

Therefore, it is under the blessings of collective life that teaching
and learning are done; human beings identify better ways to live;
conditions to continue on the way are provided; and as a result, human
perfection becomes attainable. Once we accept these preliminary proofs,
we can conclude that the objective of social living is to pave the way
for human advancement and perfection not only in the material dimension
but in all dimensions of man’s existence.

Man is a multi-dimensional being who has diverse facets and dimensions.
Therefore, the perfection of all dimensions constitutes true perfection;
not only material perfection, industrial advancement, social progress,
and economic growth. So, the best law is that which paves the way for
the growth of man in all these dimensions and gives priority to the
ultimate goal which is nearness to God.

Necessary qualities of the legislator
-------------------------------------

The Islamic government has to implement laws that encompass all
dimensions of man’s existence and ensure his interests in all
dimensions, because such laws need perfect awareness of all aspects of
man’s existence. Depending on his expertise, each of the human beings
that we know is aware of only some aspects of his existence. Earlier the
philosophers made such claims, but nowadays, the ignorance of man has
become manifest to him. In some cases, economic progress may conflict
with spiritual or religious advancement.

Of course, we believe that the great divine system guarantees all human
interests. But it is possible that in a certain society at a given time
or place, a sort of conflict among the interests of people might emerge.
As such, these interests must be categorized so that in case of
conflict, the concerned authorities know what needs priority. Thus, it
is the duty of the legislator also to identify the priorities, and it is
here that the impotence of man to discern such a law manifests itself.

Apart from having a complete knowledge of all dimensions of man’s
existence, the more important quality of the legislator is that he
should empty himself of all personal and group desires, and give
priority to the interests of society over individual, group or factional
interests. Nobody can do this. In case of conflict between his and
others’ interests, and between his group’s interests and that of
others’, any great man would overlook his personal and group’s interests
and voluntarily give priority to the interests of society over his
personal interests. To find such persons from among members of society
is problematic, and perhaps impossible. So, the legislator should also
have the capability of giving preference to the interests of society
over his own.

It is here that the superiority of divine law over all man-made laws
becomes clear because, firstly, God, the Exalted, is the One fully aware
of all the interests of human beings. Secondly, God does not acquire any
benefit or loss from the actions of human beings for His interest to
conflict with that of others. In Islam, however, we say that assuming
that all the interests of human beings are ensured in their mundane life
and social relations, still that society is not desirable and ideal
because the ultimate and loftier perfection is under the auspices of
nearness to God. This nearness to God can materialize only through
worship, devotion, servitude, and obedience to God.

Physical wellbeing, peace and order of society, defense against enemies,
justice, and social rights of individuals are a prelude to man’s
communication with God. The essence of humanity lies in this
communication with God, and unless it is established, true humanity
cannot materialize. Proximity to God is not a mere slogan. Rather, it is
the true and spiritual communion of people with God. Human beings pass
through different stages of life, traverse and ascend until they attain
this station. Common people cannot discern that such a station exists
for man, or that they can attain such a spiritual and celestial station.

Now, as God is not in need of our worship, why did He create man for
worship and say,

***“I did not create the jinn and humans except that they may worship
Me”*****?**[^2]

The answer is that the ultimate perfection of man cannot be achieved
except through the worship of God. So, one should recognize God and obey
Him so that man can tread the path toward true perfection. It is through
attention to these preliminaries that we say that the law desirable is
that which, apart from ensuring the material needs of the active members
of society, also guarantees the needs of those who make no contribution
to society, such as the impotent, disabled and handicapped for, they
also have rights. The Islamic state has to provide their needs for they
are also servants of God and born in society. It is for this reason that
in addition to justice, the Qur’an mentions kindness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإِحْسَانِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed Allah enjoins justice and kindness.”***[^3]

This injunction of God is not only a moral admonition. Rather, it is an
obligatory command which must be obeyed. Thus, just as the observance of
justice in society is obligatory, so is the observance of kindness
because rights are not only established by rendering service. Rather,
there is a series of rights that God has considered for every person.
Even the one who is in the worst condition, deprived of eyes, ears and
mobility has rights for the mere fact that he is alive. And the Islamic
state must guarantee these rights.

So, we should not think that the sole responsibility of the state is the
thing mentioned by Hobbes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and other Western
thinkers for, either they have not paid attention to the sublime
stations of man, or they have imagined man to be wolf-like or an insect
like the bee and termite. According to Islam, however, man is far ahead
of such animals though they also live collectively.

Thus, law has to consider all the needs of man along his pursuit of
ultimate perfection. Now, if law were to consider all interests, could
it give man every kind of freedom? Can man move along any path and
achieve this objective? Can those who have not recognized God, denied
Him, stood up against Him and His worshippers, attain human perfection?
Is not the worship of the One God the way to attain human perfection? If
the duty of the Islamic state is to pave the ground for human perfection
in all dimensions, the spiritual and religious dimension in particular,
then the desires should, in a sense, be regulated, restrained and
controlled, and a framework for them determined which does not conflict
with sublime human interests.

Difference between Islamic laws and liberal laws
------------------------------------------------

The difference between Islamic laws and man-made laws —especially laws
of the liberal societies that consider right for the people in lieu of
the services they render in the society— can be examined through the
following perspectives:

1. Liberal societies, do not consider any rights of individuals who, due
to physical disabilities or social deprivations, cannot contribute to
society. Islam, however, gives rights to them as well. In order to
guarantee these rights, the desires of others need to be restrained and
a portion of public wealth allocated for these individuals, which is not
liked by other people. So, their dislike should be restrained.

2. In social life, rights are given to society, which prevail in case of
conflict with rights of individuals. The question on which rights should
prevail in case of conflict is based on individual-oriented and
society-oriented tendencies existing in Western societies today. Of
course, the dominant and ruling tendency in the Western world is
individualism; however, socialistic tendencies, more or less, exist. In
Western societies today, socialist and social democratic governments are
gaining momentum compared to other forms of government.

In contrast to the individualistic tendency in liberal societies, Islam
gives preference to the rights of society. Liberal governments are
willing to burn or throw millions of tons of foodstuff into the sea in
order to prevent the market price from breaking down and the capitalists
from incurring loss. They are willing to let millions of people die of
hunger only to protect their material interests. Yet, Islam can never
permit such a thing. The desire of such elements should be restricted
according to Islam. Economic freedom must not be ensured in any manner
or any way, it should be limited. Just as the interests of the deprived
stratum of society and the handicapped restrict the interests of
society, similarly individual desires must be limited for the sake of
ensuring the general interests of society.

3. In Islamic society, there are concerns which are basically related to
the individual, but since it leaves an imprint on society, it is
reckoned as part of social concerns. For example, if a person commits a
sin in isolation at home while no one else is informed or a witness,
obviously his sin is personal in nature, and the laws that restrict this
kind of action are “moral laws” (without considering whether the use of
the term “moral” in this context is correct or not).

That is, the jurisdiction of the state is related to society and not to
the individual. But if the individual action is done in such a manner
that it more or less affects others, at least encourages others to
commit such a sin, it acquires a social dimension. If a person commits a
sin in the street or in front of other members of the family, its
hideousness will diminish and people will be encouraged and inclined to
commit it, his action will no more be personal in nature. Do we have no
right to interfere because it will only harm him? According to Islam
showing of perversion is a social act. If a person commits a sin in
front of others, it becomes a legal crime (in contrast to moral
turpitude), and the state may interfere. The law that prevents such a
sin is an administrative law backed by the state’s police force.

4. Damaging material interests of society is a crime. Morally damaging
acts are also crimes. In every society, an attack on the integrity and
honor of others, even if it is not a physical attack (libel, insult and
mockery) is considered a crime and the state has the right to pursue the
offender and penalize him. In such cases, the executive guarantee is
law. In Islamic society, insult to religious sanctity is the most
serious violation of the rights of Muslims. In Islamic society there is
nothing more valuable than religious sanctity. Muslims are willing to
sacrifice everything they have for its sake.

It is on this basis that the decree against apostasy [*irtidad*] and
insult to religious sanctity can be justified and understood. This is
why anyone who insults the Holy Prophet (*s*) and other religious
sanctities is condemned to death by Islam. That is because he has
committed the greatest of crimes. There is nothing more sacred than
these sanctities for *Muslim* people and insult to these sanctities is
the worst of crimes. This is also a fundamental difference between
Islamic and liberal perspectives.

Offence against Islamic sanctities is not an offence against an
individual for it to require a private complainant. Anyone who insults
the Islamic sanctities in newspapers and speeches is condemned according
to Islamic law. It is not a personal and individual issue but rather
criminal and penal. No one can pardon this crime because it is a right
that belongs to all Muslims, nay it is a right related to God.

These are issues which Muslim scholars, especially the students, should
pay attention to and not imagine that the political and legal issues of
Islam follow the limited and monolithic Western framework that only pays
attention to the material, mundane and individual concerns in this
world. According to Islam, the rights of society take precedence over
individual rights.

In view of what has been discussed, we can assess the distinctive
features of Islamic law and the reason behind its superiority over other
laws.

We can understand why individual desires are more limited in Islamic
society than in secular and liberal societies. It is because in those
societies the only thing that limits individual desires are individual
and material interests. But in Islamic society spiritual and
otherworldly interests require particular limitations. This is something
which the nature of the Islamic government anchored in religious belief
demands, and we shall defend these beliefs with utmost clarity and
courage.

[^1]: Surah an-Nahl 16:90.

[^2]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:56.

[^3]: Surah an-Nahl 16:90.


