Session 20: A New Perspective on the Station of Law and Government
==================================================================

An organic perspective on society
---------------------------------

In previous sessions, the main subjects of legislation in Islamic
political establishment and government were discussed. In order to know
the station of political and government organs in society according to
Islam, we shall mention some similarities and analogies, to better
comprehend the essence of the subject.

Since time immemorial, scholars have likened society to the human body,
saying: Just as the human body is composed of various members and organs
and enormous cells, society consists of various entities and
institutions with numerous parts. Each part is made up of individuals
each of which is equivalent to a cell of the human body. Of course, this
analogy is sometimes exaggerated.

Usually, in theoretical and practical works and activities, it is
difficult to identify the correct and moderate extent of this above
analogy. Some say: Just as the human body is composed of diverse organs
which are different in their natural constitution and can perform only a
specific function, so are members of society different from one another
in accordance with their essence of creation. Every member of society
has been created for a specific function and has to perform only that
function and not go beyond that.

For instance, we know that in the beginning all cells of the body come
into being from a single cell and it is through the mutation of that
cell that different types of constructive cells come into being. Some
cells have delicate and tender structures that compose organs such as
the eye and brain. Some have strong structures that compose the bones.
The cells of bones can never be used in lieu of cells of the eye.
Neither can the function and duty of the eye be performed by the bone.
They have come from the same single cell but after mutation, the mutated
cells become so varied that each of them can perform only the function
determined for it, and they cannot be interchanged.

They say that essentially, members of society are created diversely for
various tasks. One member cannot perform another’s function. Since time
immemorial, thinkers and philosophers have believed that the races and
classes of society have specific frontiers, and each of them has been
created for a certain work—for example, the black race has been created
for heavy physical work and the white or yellow race for mental work.
They imagined that the difference of color and race makes each person
perform a specific function. This analogy is an exaggeration, which
neither science nor philosophy and religion confirm or believe it
anymore.

Islamic approach on organic perspective of society
--------------------------------------------------

From the Islamic viewpoint, all people in terms of their physical and
psychological constitution can render diverse works in society. Of
course, talents and capabilities are divergent and not of the same
level. But it is not true that a boundary has been drawn between two
races which they can not go beyond, and that the black can not perform
the functions of the white and vice versa.

According to Islam, there are similarities between society and the human
body that can be used in explaining the conditions of groups and
individuals, but to compare society with body organs with diverse
natural compositions and conclude that members of society are naturally
and structurally different from one another is not correct. Among the
new sociologists there are also those who say that society is also an
organism and the different strata and echelons of society resemble the
organs of a body, and its natural relationship, unites individuals.
Seemingly, this is also an extreme view.

Is the relationship among members of a society exactly like the
relationship of cells that compose an organ in a body? Is this analogy
between the cells and members of society acceptable?

To prove that society has such a relationship is extremely onerous.
However, there are similarities between society and individuals that can
be used to know the social standings of individuals. In his famous poem,
Sa‘di has described these similarities in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنى آدم اعضاى يكديگرند كه در آفرينش ز يك گوهرند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ﭼو عضوى به درد آورد روزگار دگر عضوها را نماند قرار
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Children of Adam who are of one essence in creation are parts of
one another.*  
*When one part feels pain, the other parts do not remain at ease.*

Undoubtedly, this similarity establishes the need for cooperation among
members of society and awakens man’s emotions to strengthen his
relationship with other individuals, sympathize and cooperate with them,
and not deprive them of the resources he may acquire. This reasonable
similarity that can prove very useful and is rooted in traditions
reported from the Noble Messenger (*s*) and Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*). The
tradition of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْمُؤْمِنُونَ في تَبَارِّهِمْ وَ تَرَاحُمِهِمْ وَ تَعَاطُفِهِمْ
كَمِثْلِ ٱلْجَسَدِ إِذَا ٱشْتَكىٰ تَدَاعىٰ لَهُ سَائِرُهُ بِالسَّهَرِ
وَٱلْحُمّىٰ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In performing acts of kindness, sympathy and benevolence, the faithful
are like a single body. When one part feels pain, the other parts remain
restless without sleep day and night.”*[^1]

As you see, His Holiness compares the Islamic society and the faithful
to a body and Sa’di has generalized it and likened the human to a body.

An analogy is meant to highlight that aspect in one being whose
existence in the other is not well known. Therefore, not all attributes
and qualities of one thing [*mushabbahun bih*] should be passed to the
thing likened [*mushabbah*]. For example, if we describe a brave man as
a lion, it means that we want to highlight his quality of bravery. It
does not imply that he also has a mane, or walks on all fours!

Ways of comparing society to the human body
-------------------------------------------

Society and an individual can be compared to the human body as
possessing diverse yet well-coordinated systems and organs that are
contributory in the subsistence and growth of man. Society also has
various institutions that generally facilitate its movement. For
example, there is a system in the body called circulatory system which
facilitates the circulation of blood in the body and whose center is the
heart. The heart pumps the blood which is produced through the activity
and coordination of the spleen, stomach and liver. In the end, through
the veins, arteries and finally aorta, the blood reaches the cells and
makes their subsistence possible.

The circulatory system has organs such as the heart, veins and arteries,
which transmit the blood throughout the body. The blood that flows in
the veins must have oxygen so as to ensure the subsistence of cells. As
such, the lungs and other organs of the respiratory system provide
oxygen to the body which, together with the blood, is distributed
throughout the body. Similarly, the food nutrients produced by the
digestive system are transferred to the blood. So, by the coordination
and connection of the three systems—circulatory, respiratory and
digestive—it becomes possible for us to survive.

Apart from the abovementioned systems, there are also other systems that
guide, organize and control the activities and processes of the
digestive system. For example, in the body there is a set of glands with
specific functions and activities; a set of nerves that conduct their
activities under the command of the mind and stimulate organs such as
the stomach and others which function with the help of the nervous
system.

As you can see, the steadfastness, consistency and subsistence of the
body depends on the activity of various systems which engage in their
own activities through a particular order and coherence and in full
coordination with one another. We can compare society’s institutions and
organs to the body’s systems and organs and create an analogy. For
instance, the process of production of food and its distribution to the
whole body is similar to the economic institutions of society. They
produce the materials needed by society and then distribute them by
means of distributing agents. This is exactly like the blood that is
produced in the body and then sent to the organs by means of the heart
and blood-vessels.

If there is malfunctioning in the circulatory system, due to the
obstruction in some veins and the blood cannot circulate easily, the
body will get sick. Sometimes, a part, which is deprived of food,
experiences decay and is eliminated. In so many cases, it must be
removed from the body, and in so many cases also, malfunctioning of
blood circulation paralyzes the body. So, in order to maintain the
wellbeing and life of the body, the blood must flow in the veins easily
and without difficulty. Similarly, in society capital and needed items
should always be available.

If the capital is confined and forestalled somewhere and its flow
obstructed, the economic system—which includes the production and
distribution of agricultural and industrial products and administrative
services—malfunctions in such a manner that society’s needed items do
not easily flow in society, making it ill, lethargic or even bankrupt.
This analogy is correct and reasonably acceptable.

Likewise, the government apparatus can also be likened to the body’s
nervous system which is actually the body’s commander and comprised of
two parts, viz. sensory and motor. Like the body, society is in need of
the brain to take decisions and give commands as well as workers to
execute the command within the organs of society and stir them to
action. For this reason, government apparatus consists of two vital
branches: (1) the legislative branch which enacts/makes rules after
identifying society’s interests and means of providing them, and (2) the
executive branch which implements the rules and regulations.

Our sensory nerves and organs pave the ground for cognition while our
motor nerves pave the ground for execution in our body. The
preliminaries of the senses are provided by the sensory nerves while the
brain is the tool for thinking and judgment. Of course, the soul of man
has the power of thought, but its tool is the brain.

By means of the brain, the mental operation is conducted and commands
executed by the motor nerves. One is the mental force of the soul which
engages in acquiring knowledge and information while the motor nerves
constitute the soul’s activating force. This system is similar to the
government apparatus, and its status and role in society can be
assessed.

Elucidating the station of government in society through the organic perspective
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once we look at our body organs and their coordinated activities we
realize clearly that we have no hand in making those organs and in
organizing their activities. Scientifically speaking, nature has created
them and stimulates them to move and function. But in religious
parlance, we say that it is God who has created those organs with
specific features, capabilities, talents, and potentials. He is capable
of bringing about a body with such magnificence, complexity and
elegance. And higher than that, the nature of our soul is much more
complex, magnificent and far-reaching than that of the body.

Since God has placed this body at our disposal, we should know the
proper way of using it. We should use our body in such a manner that we
enjoy a long life replete with good health and happiness, and not injure
it. If we eat or drink unwholesome foods, and not abstain from drinking
liquor and using narcotic drugs, can we have a healthy body and a long
prosperous life? Obviously, the answer is negative. That is, we have to
limit freedom in actions which we like and not eat just anything we
desire. We have to pay attention also to the type, quality and quantity
of food we eat, determine the time of eating, follow health
prescriptions for, if we do not our lives will be seriously endangered.

Regarding what we pointed out on the systematic system of the body organ
and the need to observe the health prescriptions, a doctor or medical
expert tells us, “Do not eat such-and-such and do not consume alcohol
and narcotic drugs because these will cause your nervous system to
malfunction and destroy your kidneys and liver,” how should we react to
him? Shall we thank him for guiding us and showing us the way to sound
health, or shall we complain to him for minding our business? The one
who places the health prescriptions at our disposal is rendering a very
valuable service and showing us the way to sound health and prosperity.
So, we need to be grateful.

The case is similar in connection with society. If someone says, “I
cannot understand the meaning of life at all and I do not want to live,
or it makes no difference to me whether I am alive or not!” he will
certainly be treated as unintelligent. If he did not want to observe the
instructions, according to the law of cause and effect his actions will
end up in either ailment or death. If a person has no aim in life, he
should consign his fate to the turn of events.

He should eat whatever he likes and do whatever he wants, and thus,
whatever is supposed to happen will happen, and he will get sick and
die. But anyone who has an aim in life and wants to live long, enjoy his
health to the fullest, so as to acquire spiritual growth and perfection
cannot afford to be indifferent to medical instructions. That is, he
will have to limit his desires in accordance with the instructions
dictated by medical experts.

If we assume that society is like an aimless person for whom life and
death are meaningless, who wants neither survival nor autonomy, nobility
nor honor, identity nor integrity, and believes in neither spirituality
nor the hereafter, such a society can certainly do whatever it likes,
has absolute freedom and does not need to observe any rules.

No purposeful work is possible without rules, and to achieve an aim is
impossible with absolute freedom. If there is any aim in an activity,
there will also be limits. The preliminaries of every activity must be
done according to specific laws and orders, even if the aim is death.

If a society has any aim, it should observe rules. That is, it must
restrict its freedom and restrain its desires. If it does whatever it
likes, it will never achieve its aim. If it has no aim, it will not be
in need of any regulations, and such a society is like the very aimless
individual who will be condemned to death after a short while.
Therefore, if a society wants to survive, grow, advance and possess
honor and eternal bliss, it must have precise rules and regulations.

The question here is this: How should these rules be enacted? Who should
enact them? Are these rules a set of real things that must be
discovered? Or, are they merely a set of conventions and traditions that
must be enacted and credited? This question is very important in the
philosophy of government.

In nature we have a series of real rules which have been discovered by
scholars. That is, a certain microbe causes a certain disease is based
upon a real relationship that exists between a real cause and effect
which scientists have discovered and arranged in the form of a law and
placed it at the disposal of all mankind. In a bid to remain immune from
the disease, you have to avoid the microbe. In case the disease becomes
rampant, people should be vaccinated to become immune to that disease.

Similarly, if society wants to survive it has to observe certain rules.
Do those rules really exist in nature which must be discovered by
certain people? Or, are they conventional, extrinsic and imaginary
things that can be changed in order to win the approval of people? This
question is fundamental and vital.

Real benefit and harm as the bedrock of law
-------------------------------------------

Is there really a relationship between security and the prevention of
stealing? That is, if we want to have security, should there really be
no stealing? Or, is there a conventional relationship between the two
and is it possible to have security and stealing take place at the same
time? Does killing have a real relationship with insecurity? That is, if
a person has the right to kill anybody he likes, will it really lead to
insecurity or, is it a conventional relationship? Does faith really
cause tranquility of the heart or, is this also a conventional thing?
Will sexual freedom really cause the breakdown of families or, is it
also a conventional thing? One day, it is said in a society that sexual
relationship is free because the people there accept it.

Another day, it is said there that it is restricted because some or a
majority of people do not approve it. So, is the status of this law only
a matter of preference and must the law be enacted according to their
preference? Or, is it based upon a real relationship? That is, if there
is sexual freedom, physical and psychological ailments will become
rampant. The family unit will break down. Psychological diseases in men
and women will become rampant. Undisciplined, unwanted, corrupt, and
delinquent children will be born.

Some believe that social contracts are based on real benefits and harm.
It is not true that they are based on public preference. In case the
consumption of alcohol is unchecked, nervous and heart diseases will
become widespread. If smoking is widely practiced, related sicknesses
will also increase. The same is true in the case of social problems. If
the relationship between man and woman is free, unconditional and
unrestricted, it will have dire consequences for society, ample examples
of which can be witnessed in Western countries.

So, in enacting the law we should pay attention to its real outcome and
impact. It is not that we have to act upon the demand of people and see
whether the majority want sexual freedom or not, or whether the majority
vote for the legalization of narcotic drugs or not. Should the law be
enacted in this manner? Or, should we discover what harms the narcotic
drugs really bring to man even though a majority of people agree on
their consumption? In your opinion, which way is correct? Should the
social laws be based on the majority vote or, should they have a real
and true foundation? That is, is social benefit and harm real and true,
or is it merely conventional and subjective thinking?

Since the time of Hume in the Western world, epistemology says that dos
and don’ts and moral concepts do not have external reality and are
devoid of rationality and argument. “Good” and “bad” are preferences of
people. If a person likes pink, he cannot be questioned why he likes it
because one person likes a color while another person likes another.
Social issues are not as subjective as choice of colors.

There is a real relationship between the actions of people and their
impact upon their individual, social, material and spiritual life, and
in reality, they are cause and effect. Actions of people in the
individual and social context bring about felicity or perdition. As
such, it must be seen which action causes felicity so as to be
permitted, and which action causes perdition and misery so as to be
prohibited and law be enacted accordingly. Then, this question will be
posed: Who knows best the real benefit and harm? We Muslims believe that
God knows best.

In the dimension of legislation, therefore, the view of Islam is that
there is a cause-and-effect relationship known as “benefit” and “harm”
between the actions of people in the individual and social context and
their outcome, as prosperity or wretchedness in this world and the
hereafter. This benefit and harm must be identified and law enacted
accordingly, and not according to the whims of the majority of people.

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 12, p. 424.


