Session 21: Islam and Democracy (Part 1)
========================================

Law enforcers’ need for the permission of God
---------------------------------------------

Some may ask, “Once we accept law, identify the channels and grounds for
its implementation and are certain that in a certain case, for instance,
a given law must be implemented, what is the difference between Zayd and
‘Amru being the law enforcer? We accept that divine law must be
implemented in society, but why should God authorize the law enforcer?

If the above objection is expressed in the area of jurisprudence, it
must be addressed through a juristic method and approach. But if in
public, certain people express skepticism without considering the
juristic foundations and research methodology in the subjects of Islamic
jurisprudence and want to receive a reply which is for the average man,
understandable and discernible by common people, we can reply to such
people by citing instances from our social life. For example, in family
life and environment, there are rules for family members.

For instance, one should not encroach upon the property of others. This
rule should be observed even by children in relation to their toys and
stationery. If one member of the family encroaches upon the property of
another, he or she shall be reproached. Or, in relation to two families
or neighbors, if one of your neighbors enters your house without your
permission and uses some of your belongings, even if it does not bring
about any harm to you, you will complain against his action. Even if he
serves you, you still deem it your right to complain against him.

As another example, let us assume that a law or circular is to be
implemented in an office, but the decree of the head or manager of the
unit supposed to implement it is not yet issued. If a person comes, says
he is a trustworthy and good man who knows the law well, takes a seat in
the office, and engages in implementing the law, no one will allow him
to do so even if he is the same person whose letter of appointment is on
its way. This is because all men of wisdom have accepted the principle
that as long as a competent authority does not authorize a person, he
has no right to exercise legitimate or legal authority.

We can easily understand why in a society whose people have acknowledged
His Lordship, a person who wants to rule without the permission of their
Lord, is exactly like the one who wants to head a certain office without
obtaining the permission of a competent authority. Even if his work is
proper and good, he shall be reproached and even prosecuted. The people
are also not obliged to obey him. According to Islam, the people are
subjects and creatures of God and without the permission of their Master
no one is authorized to interfere in their affairs, so only the person
authorized by God has to implement His law.

It is for this reason that in accordance with the knowledge he acquired
from Islam and Islamic sources, the eminent Imam (*q*), the founder and
architect of this Revolution and political system, would always
explicitly write: “By virtue of the divine guardianship [*wilayat-e
ilahi*] I have, I do hereby designate you to this position.” In one
case, he even further stipulated: “Do not listen to those who are
against the path of Islam, who regard themselves “intellectuals” and
want to reject the *wilayah al-faqih*. If there were no such *faqih*; if
there were no *wilayah al-faqih*, there would be *taghut*. If it were
not the command of God; if the president were not designated by the
*faqih*, then he is not legitimate, it means that he is *taghut*. To
obey him is to obey the *taghut*.”[^1] This is not a personal opinion
but rather something deduced from the noble verses of the Qur’an and
*ahadith*, and at any rate, it is the opinion of the person who has
founded this Islamic system.

Therefore, the law enforcer, even if he implements all the laws
according to the Islamic standards must be authorized by God. This
authority is sometimes specific in form just as in the case of the
Messenger of Allah (*s*), the infallible Imams (*‘a*), those who have
been personally designated by the Holy Prophet (*s*), those who were
appointed by the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) during his caliphate
as governors and rulers of the Islamic territories, and the designated
special deputies of the Imam of the Time (may Allah, the Exalted,
expedite his glorious advent) during the period of minor occultation
[*ghaybah as-sughra*].

In these cases, through specific designation and personal authorization,
certain individuals were commissioned to declare and implement divine
decrees in the realm of their responsibility. Yet, at other times, the
permission or designation is general. That is, during the period of
occultation and even at the time of the Imams (*‘a*) from whom the helm
of government was taken away, through general designation and
authorization, competent individuals were introduced to implement the
law of God. For example, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) authorized the Shi‘ah
*fuqaha* to implement divine commandments and engage in administration
in regions where people had no access to the Imam. This fact is
necessarily established during the period of occultation because when
the Imam of the given time was under surveillance or practicing
dissimulation [*taqiyyah*],[^2] he would generally designate individuals
to address administrative affairs of people on his behalf. Is this
practice not then necessary for the period of occultation when the
people have no access to the Imam (*‘a*) for centuries?

I do not intend to expound religious proofs and juristic basis for this
subject. I only want to justify why in Islam the law enforcer must be
designated by God and how God authorizes the law enforcer. We have
stated that this authorization is either specific as in the case of
certain personalities, or general as in the case of the duly competent
*fuqaha*.

Regarding this theory, whether in the dimension of legislation or
implementation of law, objections were expressed, the most important of
which was that it is allegedly repugnant to the essence of human
freedom. We refuted this argument in previous discussions. Another
objection was in relation to implementation as the *wilayah al-faqih*
system was considered inconsistent with democracy. Democracy is a system
which has been accepted by all sensible people throughout the world. In
practice, even the socialist countries failed to challenge democracy and
had no option but to accept it. So, mankind today, at least in our age,
has no option but to embrace democracy. The Islamic government project
which is known as the government of *wilayah al-faqih* is, however,
considered inconsistent with democracy.

Meaning of democracy and its functional shifts
----------------------------------------------

At the outset, I deem it necessary to explain the term “democracy”. The
literal translation of “democracy” is “government of the people” or
“populism”. It means that the people themselves are involved in
administration, legislation, implementation of law and the political
affairs of society, and no one else is involved in enacting and
implementing law. This is the meaning of the word “democracy”.

Democracy throughout history has been expressed in many forms. In the
beginning, as far as history indicates, approximately five centuries
before the birth of the Holy Messiah (*‘a*), in Athens, the capital of
Greece, this theory was advanced and put into action for sometime in
such a manner that all people, with the exception of slaves and minors
below the age of 20 used to be directly involved in their sociopolitical
affairs. Of course, it was not compulsory and the people were free to
engage or not in such an important activity.

At that time, the people used to live in big cities and express their
opinion about the issues and concerns of their city. Debates and
discussions used to take place on the basis of which, decisions would be
taken and put into practice. This form of government in which no
specific person or group was in charge of the administration but the
people themselves was called democracy or government of the people. This
form of democracy was implemented for sometime in Athens, the capital of
Greece. Apart from the fact that philosophers and thinkers strongly
campaigned against this method, describing it disparagingly and branding
it as “the government of the ignorant”, it also faced numerous problems
in practice. As such, it did not last long.

Such a method is impractical for big countries and populous cities
because it is impossible for all the people to constantly get involved
in social affairs. This method may temporarily be implemented in small
cities, but in cities with a population of millions, all the people
cannot decide the daily affairs of their city? This method was rejected
until after the Renaissance another form of democracy was presented in
which the people would elect their own representatives to take charge of
the administrative affairs and the latter would rule on behalf of the
former because direct involvement of the people was unfeasible. Since
then, this theory earned many advocates and was gradually implemented in
some countries until finally, during the 19th century this method of
governance was accepted by almost all countries of Europe and other
continents, and governments were established on this basis.

In our country also, this form of democracy is implemented. Practically,
in all government organs and institutions the people get involved by
participating in various elections and selecting of their own
representatives, such as participation in presidential elections and
elections of the Islamic Consultative Assembly, and selection of
deputies by people to enact and approve bills, and also local council
elections and the rest provided for in the Constitution. So, according
to the second form of democracy which has distinct features in every
political system, the people get involved in their sociopolitical
affairs by means of their vote and selection of the legislators and
implementers.

Meaning of democracy today
--------------------------

Nowadays, democracy has earned a more specific meaning and a regime in
which religion has no role to play is regarded as “democrat”. Of course,
this form of democracy does not negate religion but hinders it from
getting involved in sociopolitical affairs. It does not allow the law
enforcers, while implementing the law, to talk about religion, and no
executive order or circular to be issued on the basis of religious
decrees and values. In reality, this form of democracy is anchored in
the secular system which totally separates religion from sociopolitical
issues.

Of course, sometimes, the legislators and executives themselves may be
religious individuals, go to church every week and make a vow to the
church. They may possibly be members of religious groups and engage in
specifically religious activities in a private national or local
capacity beyond the official government jurisdiction. But, in government
and administrative affairs, legislation or judiciary, in managing the
country or implementing laws, nowhere must religion have any role or
function.

It can be heard in a country like France—which is known as the bastion
of freedom and democracy—that any girl wearing the Islamic modest dress
[*hijab*] is proscribed from entering a school or university, because
alienating religion is regarded as one of the features of democracy.

They say “Our system is secular and no symbol of religion should be seen
in public institutions. Wearing a headscarf is a sign professing a
religion and it must be disallowed in government institutions such as
public schools. If a school is affiliated to the church or is private,
there is no problem even if everybody wears a headscarf. However, in
public schools and universities under the supervision of the government
which give official diplomas, as well as in public offices and
ministries, no symbol of religion must be seen.” This is a new
interpretation of religion on the basis of which religious symbols and
values are deemed in conflict with democracy.

According to the traditional interpretation and second form of democracy
which means government of the people, if certain people are religious
and want to practice their religious rites in offices, they should not
be opposed because this practice is consistent with the desire of the
people and based on the law enacted and implemented by the people
themselves. Democracy demands that wherever they are, including schools,
offices and ministries, the people must be free in their manner of
dressing.

If the absolute majority of people are supporters of a religion and
based on their religious inclination, want to choose a certain garment
or want to perform their religious rituals, no one should hinder them.
Once a law is passed by the will and desire of the people which makes
performance of prayer in offices, ministries and universities mandatory,
this is not in conflict with democracy because the people enact the law
and they themselves implement it. According to the new interpretation of
democracy, however, religious inclination of the people should not be
manifested in sociopolitical matters.

Hegemonic system’s exploitation of new concept of democracy
-----------------------------------------------------------

According to the new interpretation offered and implemented by
imperialist states to advance their interests and objectives, democracy
is synonymous with a secular regime—a regime which never allows religion
to interfere in its sociopolitical affairs. Even if the people
themselves say, “We profess this religion and want to practice our
religious rites in public institutions,” that will of the people is
considered inconsistent with democracy.

It is for this reason that when an election was held in Algeria in which
an Islamist party won and on the basis of the principles of democracy
and laws of the country, it wanted to form a government and implement
Islamic laws, the oppositionists, who felt that the said party was about
to rule and establish an Islamic government in future, staged a coup
d’état and after declaring the election null and void, apprehended and
imprisoned the leaders of the party and abolished the party and declared
it illegal. After many years, the party is still not permitted to
operate. This is in spite of the fact that this Muslim country obtained
independence from a colonial government by sacrificing millions of
people for the preservation of its Islamic identity. Nowadays, it is in
a miserable state. As we read in newspapers, everyday tens of people are
brutally murdered in that country.

The unelected ruling clique is still more acceptable to the arrogant and
imperialist countries than the rightfully elected government of the
people. This is due to fear that another country would be established in
the name of Islam. “If people accept Islam and elect an Islamic
government through their vote, that is not ‘democratic’ because the
people have an inclination toward religion,” it is argued. So, in the
new interpretation of democracy, religion should in no way interfere in
the sociopolitical affairs of people even to the extent that schoolgirls
must not wear a headscarf. The same democracy can also be observed in
Turkey.

The agents of imperialism in Muslim countries are inculcating the notion
that all Muslim countries must be administered through this democratic
method. That is, no more room would be left for religion in the national
administrative affairs including legislation and implementation. Through
cultural onslaught and penetration of universities, even in countries
with strong and deep-rooted Islamic inclination they are trying to
undermine the spirit of religious fervor and propagate democracy in this
sense. By doing so, they imagine that after a few decades when the
revolutionary generation will be replaced by the youth who do not know
the principles of the Revolution, they will make the new concept of
democracy prevail.

There are, thus, three interpretations and concepts of democracy:  
 (1) direct involvement of people in administrative affairs practiced in
one of the Greek cities;  
 (2) involvement of people in government through election of their
representatives, existing today in many countries including ours; and  
 (3) all dimensions of government, including legislation and
implementation, separated from religion.

That is, to be democratic means to be secular.

Islam’s ideal form of democracy
-------------------------------

As to which of these administrative forms is acceptable to Islam, we
have said earlier that if democracy in legislation means that whatever
is approved by the majority of people—that is, 50% plus 1—is a credible,
official and binding law even if it were against the text of the Qur’an,
then Islam does not accept such democracy in legislation. Islam that has
its own explicit laws in various administrative affairs, judiciary,
economics, management, and related to other organs of the country does
not allow a law against the explicit text and fixed decree of the Qur’an
to be recognized officially. To officially recognize such a law is
tantamount to rejection of Islam.

What needs further explanation and which I promised to discuss is the
executive dimension of democracy, the role of the people in electing
those who want to enact the laws within the framework of Islamic
foundations, viz. the deputies in the Islamic Consultative Assembly. In
cases where Islam has not enacted fixed and permanent laws, there is the
need to enact new laws for new issues and needs, Islam has authorized
the legitimate government apparatus to enact necessary laws for this
domain while observing the general principles and standards of Islam and
not contradicting the framework of Islamic laws, labeled by the late
Shahid (Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Baqir) Sadr as “free zone” [*mantaqah
al-firagh*]. The driving and traffic laws stipulate the side to
move—right or left—and the speed of a vehicle. Evidently, the Qur’an and
traditions have no text in this regard.

The people’s role in determining the legislators and executives that
enact and implement temporary laws can be materialized by observing
Islamic standards. In other words, democracy and the vital role and
participation of people are practiced in our country observing limits
and conditions set by Islam by electing those who qualify. Electoral
candidates must be Muslims committed to Islamic laws and observe Islamic
standards in enacting laws and rules. In addition to the conditions set
for deputies in the Islamic Consultative Assembly, with the exception of
a few deputies of religious minority groups, the rest of the
representatives must be Muslims committed to observe Islamic laws.

Lest there were negligence and shortcomings and Islamic laws were not
observed in enacting laws, a number of experts constituting the
so-called Council of Guardians are duty-bound to conform the ratified
bills of the Majlis to the Constitution and religious standards and then
validate them. In the case of their nonconformity, the said bills are
returned to the Majlis for review. This is the type of legislative and
executive mechanism accepted in our country and no one opposes it.

Similarly, executives with the President at top must observe Islamic
laws and standards. First of all, the President must possess the
conditions, qualities and merits mentioned in the Constitution which are
taken from Islamic laws, and in taking charge of the government he must
be, so to speak, authorized by God, the Exalted in the sense that after
garnering the majority vote and endorsement of the people, he must be
designated by the *wali* *al-faqih*. In this case, his government shall
be legitimate and credible. This is something which is implemented in
our country.

With the aim of understanding the role of the people and the domain of
their involvement in the Islamic system, let me cite an example. Let us
assume that we were living during the caliphate of the Commander of the
Faithful(*‘a*) and in our own city we knew of a righteous person who
deserved to be the city ruler and we endorsed him to the Imam (*‘a*).
After receiving the endorsement, the Imam (*‘a*) possibly designated him
as the new ruler. Now, if the majority of people had such endorsement,
the Imam(*‘a*) would highly regard their view and designate the said
person as governor of one of the regions under his jurisdiction.

So, the role of the people in the government structure and
administrative decision-making, in terms of theory and legitimacy, is
that people decide who is the most meritorious in enacting or enforcing
the law and then cast their vote in his favor. The vote of the people is
equivalent to a recommendation to the leadership. In reality, it is a
pact they forge with the *wali* *al-faqih* that if he designates the
recommended person to the presidency, they will obey him. It is on this
basis that during the time of the eminent Imam (*‘a*), when the majority
of people elected a person to the presidency, he would say, “I do hereby
designate him, who is endorsed by the people, to be the President.” That
is, “the vote of the people is like an endorsement for me to accept
him.”

This is the theory of the Islamic government which has no contradiction
whatsoever with the second meaning of democracy. It is functioning in
our country since the Revolution and no (theoretical) problem has ever
emerged. Yet, if democracy means that religion should have no role in
the affairs of society and none of the religious symbols be seen in the
government institutions, such a thing is incompatible with Islam!

Democracy in its third sense, as interpreted by the Global Arrogance
that wants to impose it on others is absolutely opposed to Islam, for it
means the negation of Islam. However, democracy in its second sense has
been accepted by observing the conditions set by Islam for rulers,
legislators, implementers, and judges. That is why the people should
seriously elect individuals who deserve to legislate and implement laws,
and thus, prove their cooperation and support for the Islamic state and
regard themselves as participating in the affairs of the country. This
form of democracy is accepted in Islam and practiced in our country. If
there are violations in some cases, they are also committed elsewhere,
and one should be vigilant lest they are repeated.

[^1]: Ṣahifeh-ye Nur, vol. 9, p. 251.

[^2]: Taqiyyah: prudential dissimulation of one’s true beliefs under
conditions of acute danger to one’s life, property, or honor, a practice
based on Qur’an, 3:28. As its observance depends on certain terms and
conditions, it may be obligatory [wajib], recommended [mustahabb],
abominable [makruh], or forbidden [haram]. For a discussion of taqiyyah,
see Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, Taqiyyah (Dar es Salaam: Bilal Muslim
Mission of Tanzania, 1992), http://www.al-islam.org/taqiyyah;
Al-Taqiyya/Dissimulation,
http://www.al-islam.org/encyclopedia/chapter6b.html; and ‘Allamah
Tabataba’i, Shi‘ite Islam (Albany, N.Y., 1975), pp. 223-225,
http://www.al-islam.org/anthology. [Trans.]


