Session 23: An Examination of the Essence of Unity in Humanity and the Citizenship of Citizens
==============================================================================================

Islam’s view on root of emergence of rights
-------------------------------------------

Discussions in political philosophy have proximity with that of legal
philosophy and are integrated in some areas. Common and similar issues
are discussed; for example, a legal issue is examined in a political
discussion. On this basis, in the previous session we mentioned an issue
in legal philosophy, i.e. the essence of unity in humanity. We said that
it is true that all human beings are common in humanity and according to
Islam we do not have first class or second class human beings, but it
does not necessarily follow that all people are equal in social matters
in terms of rights and duties.

In this context, those who are pursuing mischievous motives by
portraying themselves as revolutionary Muslim people and utilizing the
achievements of the Revolution in favor of their motives are acting
against the Revolution by saying that since we do not have first class
or second class human beings, all people in society must have the same
rights, such as forming a party and acquiring civil and military posts.

According to them, any person, irrespective of his conviction and
ideology, can be the president or prime minister. He may form any party
he wants. Their argument is that since all human beings are equal, it
follows that in spite of their non-acceptance of the Revolution or the
Constitution they have the right to enjoy all rights. In refutation of
this fallacy, let us say that it is true that we do not have first or
second class human beings, but the source of all rights and duties are
certain qualities other than the essence of humanity.

Some have not properly understood this fact or out of wicked motives
have interpreted it wrongly. Someone says, “We have first class and
second class citizens. The first class citizens are the clergy while the
rest are considered second class citizens!” We have no option but to
allocate this session to an examination of this allegation and its
refutation.

In order to clarify this matter, one needs to pay attention to one of
the serious debates among legal philosophers of the world on what is
essentially the origin of rights? On what basis can we say that a person
has the right to do a certain thing? Each of the different approaches in
legal philosophy such as historical rights, positivism, natural law, and
others, have given their own reply.

Islam also has its own distinct view. According to Islam, the source of
all rights must be traced back to God, the Exalted, because all creation
belongs to Him. Whatever anybody possesses comes from Him. In cosmic
affairs, our existence and whatever we have belong to God—“Verily, we
belong to Allah” [*inna* *lillah*]—and everything is “from Allah” [*min
Allah*]. Similarly, legislative affairs must also derive from God the
Exalted. This is our general perspective on the origin and source of
rights which can be summarized as follows: It is God who grants rights
to others. Does God equally and evenly grant rights to all human beings?

Or, does He grant certain rights to some of His servants which He does
not grant to others? Generally, we know that God has granted rights to
the prophets (*‘a*) which He has not given to others; a certain right to
parents and another right to children. Is the divine will senseless,
does God give a right to a person without any basis and deprives another
person of the same, or a certain criterion is actually taken into
account? If there were any basis, what is it?

The basis of rights granted by God to His servants is the station and
position they have in the universe. Conditions necessitate that they
should have such rights for the specific duties they have. We have all
been created to move by our willpower and freewill toward true and
ultimate perfection. So, we have a general obligation to move along the
path of perfection, which in Islamic culture is called “worship of God”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَنْ لَا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُُبِينٌ ٭ وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي
هَذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did I not exhort you, O children of Adam, saying, ‘Do not worship
Satan. He is indeed your manifest enemy. Worship Me. This is a straight
path’?”***[^1]

In another verse, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَأَرْسَلْنَا فِيهِمْ رَسُولاً مِنْهُمْ أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We sent them an apostle from among themselves, saying, ‘Worship
Allah!’…”***[^2]

So, the kernel of the call of all prophets (*‘a*) is the worship of God,
and this universal obligation of all mankind has legal implications.
That is, whenever man wants to move along the path of perfection and
proximity to Allah, the necessary facilities and capacities must be at
his disposal. Similarly, there must also be laws in society that
facilitate this movement. Whenever man wants to move toward God, he must
be alive. So, the right to life as the foremost of rights emanates from
this. The second right is the freedom of movement because this wayfaring
is not compulsory. He must be free in his choice to choose his way.

The third right is the enjoyment of material blessings of this world
because if he does not make use of them, he cannot live and subsist. In
order to survive and procure the provisions for this journey, he has the
right to make use of clothing and food in this world. He has the right
to use the instincts that God has endowed him with, including the sexual
instinct. So, he must select his own spouse. As you can observe, rights
are accompanied by obligations.

In previous discussions we also pointed out the relationship between
rights and duties. Since we are bound to move toward God and obey Him,
we must have certain rights, by exercising which we can continue
treading this path. On this basis, anything in society and public life
that hinders this movement for perfection of human beings must be
controlled by an Islamic government. The government must thwart elements
that obstruct and hamper this movement of an Islamic society toward God.
In his personal life, the individual concerned is also bound to procure
the effective and influential instruments in removing obstacles on his
way. The basis of possession of rights is the capability of individuals
and capacity of growth and perfection. Duties and obligations will be
placed on their shoulders for which they will possess certain rights.

Impact of natural and acquired differences on rights and duties
---------------------------------------------------------------

We are all essentially one in humanity but human beings have enormous
differences that can be classified into two. The first category consists
of natural and predestined differences and distinctions. The main
category of differences among human beings can be traced to natural
biological differences like gender differences between men and women.
Physiologically, biologically, psychologically, and emotionally, there
are differences between the two genders that are the very reason behind
the difference in their respective rights and duties.

That is, it is true that man and woman are humans and they are both
“first class” human beings, but because of the unique constitution of
her body and her psychological makeup, woman must shoulder certain
obligations. The role being played by woman in reproduction and
breastfeeding can never be played by man. Therefore, certain obligations
are set upon her. She is bound to play her pivotal role in bearing the
fetus for nine whole months. Then, for two years she has the obligation
to feed and foster the child. Correspondingly, special rights must also
be considered for her.

If, on account of her natural and inherent characteristic, woman is
supposed to bear a child, and then feed and foster it, and at the same
time, work like man and be obliged to provide for her sustenance, she
cannot discharge her main obligations, and this is an act of injustice
against her. So, she must have special rights. That is, man is made
responsible to provide for her sustenance and remove from her shoulder
the burden of looking for her daily bread. If a woman was obliged to
work, so many kinds of work would lead to her miscarriage or delay in
her feeding.

Emotionally also, if the woman had no economic security and was
concerned about her sustenance, her worry and stress would indirectly
affect the child. It is scientifically proven that the more peace of
mind the woman has, the greater are her chances of nurturing a healthier
baby. For this reason, Islam has accorded special rights to women. For
example, economically, the life of woman must be ensured by man. For
breastfeeding her child, the wife could even ask for a stipend from her
husband. That is, she must have privileges in the domain of family for
her efforts and sacrifices.

Thus, concerning the rights and duties of man and woman, the notion that
since both are human their rights and duties must also be the same is
wrong. Woman has her own distinctions and so does man. These
distinctions are the source of difference in duties as well as rights.  
 Therefore, one difference is natural and predestined. That is, no one
has the choice of being male or female. This has something to do with
the divine will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَهَبُ لِمَنْ يَشَآءُ إِنَاثًا وَيَهَبُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ الذُّكُورَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He gives females to whomever He wishes, and gives males to whomever
He wishes**.”*[^3]

So, the willpower and freewill of individuals has no hand in determining
their own and their children’s gender. Therefore, these differences and
distinctions which lead to differences in rights and duties are natural
ones.

The other category of differences in human beings is voluntary in nature
and applied to those who acquire special skills in life. For example, a
person who acquires education will have to assume an obligation in
society which cannot be assumed by an illiterate or ignorant person.

Also, if an uneducated person uninformed of political issues says, “I
also have the right to be president,” he will be told, “To be president
you have to qualify for the post. If you have the essential capability,
you can file your candidacy and if people vote for you, you can become
President.” He can not say, “Since there is no first or second class
human being, it means that I also have the right to become president.”
It is not legally correct for any person, who goes against the goals of
a nation and does not accept its constitution, to say: “I want to be
president of this country since I am also a human!”

For merely being a human being, you have no right to occupy any post in
the country. A post demands certain qualifications. For instance, in the
Islamic republic, the president must be a Muslim. A
non-Muslim—notwithstanding all the honor we accord him and the right
accorded him by the Constitution—cannot be the president.

Determining different classes of individuals in laws of citizenship
-------------------------------------------------------------------

All countries of the world have special conditions for sensitive posts.
Among such affairs is the issue of citizenship. Throughout the world
citizenship is not identical and uniform. Anyone who has basic knowledge
of private international law can understand this point. For example, if
a certain Iranian wants to acquire citizenship of one of the European or
American countries, first of all, the acceptance of his application for
citizenship will have certain conditions. Even after the acceptance of
his application for citizenship, he shall not be allowed to become
president because he is a second class citizen.

Possibly, through a series of tests, he might acquire first class
citizenship. In any case, it is not true that anyone who is a citizen of
a country has all the rights enjoyed by all the people of that country,
because citizenship has numerous classes. By merely stating that there
is no first or second class humanity, we cannot conclude that there is
also no first or second class citizenship or nationality. Every country
has set certain conditions for its citizens. In Islam certain conditions
have also been considered. So, the fact that all human beings are
identical in humanity does not mean that they are also all equal in
citizenship.

Thus, although all the people in every country are considered citizens
of the said country, they do not possess the right to occupy all posts
and positions as their rights are not the same. The basis and criterion
of determining their rights are different. We believe that all of these
must be traced to divine authorization. Those who live in liberal or
democratic countries and do not accept divine laws assert that only the
will of people must be followed, but we argue that apart from the will
of people, there must also be divine permission. The will, vote and
right must not be against divine permission and the law of God.

In any case, no country grants identical citizenship to all individuals,
or negates second class citizenship merely on account of the absence of
second class humanity. This issue is also mentioned in our Constitution.
I wonder why our critics have missed out the legal provision which
stipulates, thus: “Those who shall adopt Iranian citizenship shall enjoy
all rights accorded to all Iranians except the right to be President,
minister, deputy minister, or any foreign political officer.” That is,
anyone who is granted Iranian citizenship has no right to be a political
envoy, ambassador, chargé d’áffaires, consul, or minister. He may have
adopted Iranian citizenship and Iran may also have granted it, but he
will not have those rights. This is the text of our law.

First and second class citizenship according to Islam
-----------------------------------------------------

We shall concisely state here that the main priority in the legal theory
of Islam for the classification of countries is the belief system,
geographical boundaries having no genuine basis. The agenda of Islam is
the establishment of a global Islamic government, which will be
realized, God willing, by the advent of the Master of the Age (may Allah
expedite his glorious advent), in which the geographical boundaries will
be removed and all members of the Islamic *ummah* will be citizens of a
single country and subjects of a single government with Islam as the
basis of their citizenship.

In that government, rights and duties of a non-Muslim will be different
from those of a Muslim. Non-Muslims do not perform all the duties of a
Muslim, neither do they enjoy all the rights. Under certain
circumstances the *wali* *al-faqih* and Islamic government can
temporarily recognize geographical boundaries. As such, if today we
recognize geographical boundaries, it is not based upon the agenda of
Islam.

It is rather due to an exigency realized in the light of regional and
international laws, which shall become binding on us by means of a
decree issued by the *wali* *al-faqih*. In reality, those boundaries
will be determined and confirmed by the *wali* *al-faqih*.

So, in Islam, one of the conditions of citizenship is being a Muslim in
order to have first class citizenship while a non-Muslim has second
class citizenship.

Functional difference between wilayah al-faqih and other systems
----------------------------------------------------------------

Those who always talk about popular and democratic governments and feel
ashamed that their government is based upon *wilayah al-faqih* are
heedless of the services rendered by *him* in this country. They are
heedless that based on the theory of *wilayah al-faqih* laws and decrees
of the Islamic state and statutory laws of the Islamic Consultative
Assembly after confirmation by the Council of Guardians are religiously
incumbent upon Muslims because they are authorized by the *wali*
*al-faqih,* and his authority, in turn, is based on the authority of
God.

This is a great merit that this system has. But if we do not accept the
*wilayah al-faqih* system, then obedience to laws and decrees is based
on the commitment of people to laws in accordance with their demand.
They can withdraw from their commitment, review their demand, and change
an article of law as they like. So, in the democratic system there is no
religious underpinning of the people’s obedience to laws.

In an Islamic government, laws become binding with the authorization and
approval of the *wali* *al-faqih*. Apart from enjoying people’s
commitment and customary requirement backed by their vote, there is also
the religious underpinning going against which is a sin that invites
divine wrath. This is the difference between abiding by the laws of the
Islamic government and obedience to laws whose legitimacy and
credibility are only supported by the majority will. Since majority of
the Majlis deputies are elected by the people, they deem it incumbent
upon themselves to obey these laws.

Now, rationally speaking, to what extent are deputies who have not voted
in favor of the laws, or the minority who have not voted for the
deputies who approved those laws, obliged to abide by those laws? When a
law is approved by the deputies of the majority of people, should the
minority who opposed the law psychologically and emotionally be obliged
to obey it? How can they be bound by majority will?

Obedience to Islamic laws which are ratified by the Majlis deputies and
approved by the *wali* *al-faqih* has been made obligatory by God, and
even those who have not voted in favor of those laws are religiously
bound to abide by them. Of course, the Muslims are aware of this fact
and are sincerely committed to obey the laws of the Islamic state that
have divine legitimacy. They do not oppose these laws because they are
familiar with the structure and rules of the divine Islamic government.
This level of obedience and acceptance of laws and rules is among the
merits and salient features of the divine system which has materialized
in our country under the label of *wilayah al-faqih* system.

Through a survey of the Islamic movement and Revolution, we realized
that widespread obedience of people to the Leader- Jurist-Guardian, and
sincere submission to His Eminence’s commands and instructions was the
key factor in our advancement and victory during the Revolution and
after its victory. Also, the same factor was the reason why our nation
emerged victorious with honor in the unequal war (imposed by Iraq).

Is there anyone in the world who does not know that one of the important
factors of the victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran was the
people’s religious belief in the exigency and indispensability of
obeying their religious leader? Then, as an injustice of the highest
order, in a country where the Islamic system is established by the
sacrifices and selflessness of martyrs who struggled and waged *jihad*
by the order of their leader and religious reference authority, some
elements write and claim, thus: “The Imam sailed smoothly over the wave
of the people’s movement and portrayed it as the Islamic movement and
Revolution!”

Is this claim true? If the Muslims of Iran had not been present on the
scene of the Revolution and discharged their spiritual and religious
obligations and opened their breasts vis-à-vis the bullets, could the
Revolution succeed? Had it not been for the order of the Imam, would
they have done these things? It is unfair for us to forget and deny
these realities.

The truth is that religion and the Imam’s leadership played the leading
and crucial role in the occurrence of the Revolution, its continuity,
and then victory in the war after enduring all adversities, difficulties
and problems. God willing, through the leadership of the competent
successor of the eminent Imam (*q*) and his astute policies, these
standings will continue as before under the auspices of the unity and
solidarity of the self-sacrificing people of Iran, and under the shadow
of the *wali* *al-faqih*’s leadership (may Allah, the Exalted, protect
him), the people will reach further stages and degrees of perfection and
advancement.

Summing up, categorization of citizenship is something accepted by all
political systems of the world and the difference in classes of
citizenship is not something we have originated. This difference in
classes of citizenship has nothing to do with their essential humanity.
From the perspective of their being human, all people are in the same
class.

However, either they naturally possess certain qualities that may be a
source of difference in duties and rights, or they have acquired
qualifications, qualities, capabilities, and talents which are the
reason why they have to discharge certain duties, and likewise, to enjoy
certain rights. So, the source of difference in rights and duties is
either natural differences or differences arising from individual choice
and freewill. For example, professing a certain religion, or acquiring
necessary qualities and capability for the assumption of a post or
position, including the acceptance of certain principles and
foundations, can be contributory in the status of their citizenship or
nationality.

[^1]: Surah Ya-Sin 36:60-61.

[^2]: Surah al-Mu’minun 23:32.

[^3]: Surah ash-Shawra 42:49.


