Session 1: The Most Important Questions in the Realm of Islamic Policy
======================================================================

Introduction
------------

Undoubtedly, one of the achievements of our Revolution and political
system is the Friday congregational prayer [*salat al-jum‘ah*], which
has innumerable blessings for the Islamic *ummah*. Among its secondary
benefits is the communication of necessary teachings and information to
the people during the two sermons and the lectures before or between the
sermons in different cities and towns. Throughout the years after the
Revolution, scholars and orators have presented to the Friday prayer
congregation, and the rest of people through the media, valuable
information on belief, education, economic issues and other academic
needs.

I also have the honor of lecturing on the subject, “Monotheism in the
Ideological and Value System of Islam” whose transcription has been
published as a book and offered to esteemed readers.[^1] On the
insistence of my colleagues, I am here to deliver a series of lectures
on “Islamic Political Theory”. I hope that God, the Exalted, helps me in
this important task and inspires me with that which is pleasing to Him
and beneficial for the Islamic *ummah*, so that I might eloquently
convey the same to this martyr-rearing and honorable nation.

The subject of our discussions is comprehensive and broad in nature,
covering many topics on different levels and in various forms—ranging
from the easy and simple to the profound and academic. Of course, from
the beginning of the movement of the eminent Imam (*q*), i.e. 1341 AHS
(1962), up to now, these discussions have been presented in different
forms. Articles and books have been written, speeches delivered and
talks held. Yet, only a few systematic discussions beneficial for the
average person, responsive to the needs of the youth and various strata
of people have been undertaken. Thanks to Allah, our nation occupies an
eminent cultural position. In recent years especially, it has improved
and progressed considerably, understanding many profound and complex
issues very well.

Nevertheless, the scientific and technical language is confined to the
academic centers, universities and seminaries. The language of
conversation with the masses must be devoid of scientific and
complicated terminology so that a majority of people can benefit from
the discussions. Of course, it must be noted that a discussion under the
title, “The Political Philosophy of Islam” can be so extensive that it
cannot be covered even in a hundred sessions. As such, considering our
time constraint and the sessions taken into account, we have no option
but to choose topics for discussion which are needed by society and in
connection with which questions and doubts have been raised.

Since the topic “The Political Philosophy of Islam” consists of three
terms, each of them could be studied and examined separately. “Political
philosophy” has numerous equivalent terms such as “the philosophy of
political science” and “political philosophy vis-à-vis political
science”. However, in brief, what we mean by “political philosophy” in
these discussions is the elucidation of the Islamic theory on government
and politics that is based on specific principles, and the Islamic
philosophy of the Islamic government can only be explained and justified
according to these principles.

Islam and Political Theorizing
------------------------------

Once we say that Islam has a particular point of view about politics and
governance founded on principles acceptable to Islam, this question is
posed: Must religion have a particular viewpoint about politics and
government for which Islam has to present a political theory? This is
the same serious and known question which has been posed for centuries
in various countries and societies. In our country this question has
also been raised since the time of the Constitutional Movement[^2]
onward and many discussions have been conducted along with it.

Of course, the statements of the late Imam (*‘a*) and the famous slogan
of the late Martyr Mudarris[^3]—“Our religion is our politics and our
politics is our religion”—played a role in fortifying our political
thought, and this question has already been answered for our people.
However, to elucidate the political theory of Islam and the manner of
involvement of religion in politics requires in-depth study and
discussion.

In Western culture, religion is not comprehensive in nature; it is
defined in a manner that does not encompass the domain of sociopolitical
issues; it only bespeaks of the relationship between man and God, and
depicts the personal and individual communion of the former with the
latter. Accordingly, sociopolitical and international issues,
state-people relationship and international relations are beyond the
domain of the relationship between man and God, and are therefore alien
to religion. On the contrary, according to Islam, religion is universal
in nature; encompassing all individual and social issues of man,
including man’s relationship with God and his fellow creatures; and all
domains of sociopolitical and international issues.

The reason for this is that according to Islam, God is the Ruler of the
world and mankind. Thus, the political, economic, educational, and
administrative spheres and other issues related to the life of man are
within the totality of the laws and values of religion.

Islamic Political Theory being “founded” by Islam
-------------------------------------------------

After accepting that Islam has a viewpoint about governance and politics
and attributing a specific theory about it to Islam, some questions
regarding the nature of this theory can be raised. Is this political
theory of Islam initiated, i.e. “founded” [*ta’sisi*] by Islam, or
something just approved and emulated by Islam? In other words, has Islam
itself initiated this theory and presented it as a theory revealed by
God like religious ordinances, “sent down by Allah”? Or, has Islam only
approved a theory in this context?

Replying to the above question, we have certain cases where the conduct
and behavior of certain men of wisdom has been approved by Islam.
Technically, Islam’s approval here is called “approval of the way of the
wise”. For example, there are transactions which people
undertake—including buying and selling, renting, trading and others
which are recognized as rational behavior conceived by the people and
approved by religious law.

We need to know whether men of wisdom have compiled their views on
governance and politics which Islam has approved and affirmed, or,
presented and advanced its own theory formulated on divinely ordained
Islamic rules vis-à-vis other theories and views. In reality, Islam has
initiated and founded a theory in relation to politics and governance
with a set of sociopolitical principles and modes of application, and
not merely approved and affirmed the views and opinions of the wise.

Those who are familiar with the various problems related to government
and political philosophy know that there are different opinions in this
regard. One of them is called “theocracy”, which means “divine rule”.
This theory was utilized during the Middle Ages in Europe by the Church.
The Church, Roman Catholic in particular, claimed that it was ruling the
people through authority granted by God. On the contrary, some Christian
sects held that the religion of Hadhrat ‘Isa (Jesus Christ) (*‘a*) had
nothing whatsoever to do with political issues, and so they advocated
the separation of church from state.

However, the Catholic establishment, in particular during the Middle
Ages, was a proponent of the involvement of religion in politics and
governance, regarding the government as rightfully belonging to the
Papacy. They believed that the Church had been given the authority by
God to rule over people according to divine ordainment, while the people
were duty-bound to obey the orders of the Pope as authorized by God.
This form of government was called “theocratic government”.

When it is said that except the governments established by people, dose
Islam have a particular theory and point of view and when it proposes
the divine government, does the Islamic government mean the same
“theocratic government” established in the West, and does “divine rule”
also mean the same?

Has God granted extensive prerogatives to the ruler to rule over people
however he likes, and are people obliged to act upon his will and
desire? According to the divine rule and guardianship of Islam, Islamic
political thought, and, the theory of *wilayah al-faqih*, can the
jurist-guardian [*wali* *al-faqih*] rule over people in whatever way he
likes? Does he have the right to propose and implement any law and
decree according to his opinion? Are people obliged to act upon his
orders? This is a very serious question which requires proper study and
analysis so as to avoid misunderstanding and misinterpretation.

In brief, the reply to the above question is that the divine rule we
believe in and Western theocracy are poles apart. It is hereby repeated
that divine rule according to Islam is not the same theocratic
government which Christianity, Catholicism in particular, held as
granted to God and the ecclesiastical authorities.

Most of political theorists divide governments into two types, viz.
dictatorial and democratic each of which has different variation. The
first type refers to a government in which the ruler interferes in all
affairs whenever he wishes; authoritatively orders; resorts to various
means based on terror, violence and military force in order to exact
obedience from the people. Opposed to this type of government is the
democratic government, which is formed according to the will and
approval of the people. People choose rulers of their own freewill,
while rulers are duty-bound to act upon the will and desire of the
people. In fact, their legitimacy emanates from the will and desire of
the people.

The Nature and Essentials of Islamic Government
-----------------------------------------------

Those who have accepted the above classification by the West and believe
that governments are classified only into two—either dictatorial, or
democratic and popular, ask: Is the Islamic government dictatorial? Does
he who attains power, e.g. in our time the *wali* *al-faqih*, impose his
authority on the people by force and rule according to his whims and
caprice? Or, is it the democratic government of the West which is the
opposite of dictatorship? Or, is it a third form of government?

According to the twofold classifications that have been accepted, the
Islamic government is one of the two above mentioned types which is
either dictatorial or popular. In case it is a popular government, it
has to follow the same methods and ways existing and acted upon in
Western countries and democratic governments. Or, it is not an Islamic,
popular government and it is dictatorial and is based on the desire and
will of an individual, and there is no third option. It is expedient for
us to answer this important question and declare whether the Islamic
government is dictatorial, akin to Western democracy, or follows a third
option.

Among the questions being raised are the following: What are the
preliminaries and main pillars of the Islamic government? Which elements
must be preserved and observed in ruling and managing society so as to
actually realize the Islamic government? Those who are familiar with our
culture and jurisprudence know, for example, that there are some
essentials of prayer which if abandoned intentionally or
unintentionally, invalidate the prayer, for, without them, the essence
and identity of prayer cannot be realized.

The Islamic government is also founded on certain pillars. In the
presence of those pillars and columns, we call a government “Islamic”.
If there is some defect or deficiency in those pillars and columns, the
Islamic government will not be realized. Now, in view of the vital role
of these pillars and columns, it is necessary for us to be aware of
them, because unless we recognize the criterion and basis of the Islamic
nature of government will be not be able to distinguish the form and
nature of an Islamic government from non-Islamic governments. It is
therefore necessary to answer to this serious question.

The form of Islamic government and the scope of prerogatives and duties
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Another question raised is: Has Islam determined a specific form of
government? As you are aware, there are many forms of government extant
today, e.g. absolute and constitutional monarchy, presidential and
parliamentary republic, and theocracy.

Has Islam accepted one of these forms, determined a specific form of
government which is different from the abovementioned forms, not
determined a specific form, or only determined a set of values and
criteria of government which must be observed anytime and in every form
of government? Islam has ordained that a government must observe
justice, but the form observed depends upon the circumstances of time
and space. Islam is not concerned with a specific form, as the proper
form of government, according to Islam, depends on the observance of the
criteria.

Assuming that Islam has determined a specific form of government, is
this form of government according to Islam fixed and unchangeable, or a
form which is more or less changeable? These kinds of questions are
raised in relation to the form of Islamic government which must not
remain unanswered.

Another question which is posed in connection with the philosophy of
government is: What are the prerogatives and responsibilities of the
ruling body or the ruler, in the Islamic government? Governments differ
from one another in terms of prerogatives and responsibilities. In some
governments, the prerogatives and duties of the government are limited.
The government is only obliged to perform certain functions. The overall
function of preserving the system is delegated to the government while
other functions are given to the people.

In some forms of government, however, the government has vast
prerogatives and equally heavy responsibilities. It assumes important
responsibilities which it has to discharge. It can neither delegate them
to the people nor shirk its duties because it is the people’s right to
demand the performance of those responsibilities and duties from the
government. It must be clarified that in the political philosophy of
Islam, what prerogatives and duties dose Islam have set for the
government. Undoubtedly, the performance and duties must be
proportionate and balanced. It is not correct to delegate a duty to a
person without providing him the necessary grounds to discharge the
duty. So, the next question is: What duties and prerogatives does the
Islamic government have?

The role of people in Islamic government and some other questions
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Among the very serious questions which are raised today in society and
periodicals is this: What is the role of the people in the Islamic
government and what are their duties and prerogatives? Finally: What was
the form and structure of the government during the early period of
Islam, such as the time of the Holy Prophet (*s*),[^4] the time of the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) and the initial part of Imam Hasan
al-Mujtaba’s (*‘a*) time? Similarly, to what extent were the governments
of the Umayyads and the ‘Abbasids that ruled over Muslim territories
Islamic; and, which of the abovementioned governments we can present as
the Islamic government? How has the formative course of Islamic
governments throughout history led to this form of Islamic government,
which finally materialized in Iran by the blessings of the Islamic
Revolution?

Of course, alongside the aforesaid questions, secondary questions are
also raised, some of which are as follows: Is our government one hundred
percent Islamic, and does it fulfill all Islamic standards and
essentials of an Islamic government? In case this government possesses
all the essentials of an Islamic government, has it discharged all its
duties, fulfilled its mission and faithfully observed all values?
Finally, what are the defects and deficiencies of this government?

Methodology of discussing Islamic political theory
--------------------------------------------------

Before answering questions, clarifying doubts and discussing the
political philosophy of Islam, it is necessary to state which mode and
method we shall choose to examine and tackle the subject. Technically
speaking, what shall be the methodology of this discussion? Since this
discussion is introductory in nature it must be addressed at the outset.
Will the method of our discussion be intellectual [*ta‘aqquli*] with us
offering rational foundations and proofs to elucidate the Islamic
theory?

Or, will the method of discussion be purely devotional [*ta‘abbudi*] and
narrative [*naqli*]? In other words, shall the presentation of the
structure, principles and policies of the government be based on a set
of religious accounts, Qur’anic verses and traditions [*ahadith*]? Or,
is Islamic polity also basically a trial-and-error phenomenon whose
correctness or otherwise must be examined in the practical experience?
Our method of discussion will be an empirical one and the criterion of
judgment and opinion will be the experience of Islamic governments.

Since our discussion has rational and intellectual dimensions, its
method and manner can be divided into two, viz. (1) polemical method
[*shiveh-ye jadali*], and (2) evidential method [*shiveh-ye burhani*].
Once we want to examine an issue from a rational point of view, we agree
upon a set of preliminary principles and discuss it on the basis of the
same commonly accepted principles so as to solve the issue.

On the contrary, in the evidential method all the preliminary points are
utilized in the argument so that the discussion is based on original
cases, certainties and axioms for which firm argument and solid proof
are established. Undoubtedly, to choose this method will prolong the
discussion. For example, if we try to prove the need to observe justice
in an Islamic government by using the evidential method, we will begin
by explaining the essence of justice, which will instantly be followed
by a long list of questions: How will justice be implemented? Is justice
reconcilable with freedom or not? Who is supposed to determine the
criterion of justice? Should the criterion of justice be determined by
God or the people’s intellect?

After addressing the above questions, it will be asked: In these cases,
to what extent does the intellect have the right to judge? Are the
judgments of the intellect relative or absolute? The discussion will
continue in this manner until finally the primary principles and
epistemological issues will also be raised which will need settling,
too. For example, what in essence is intellect? What is its approach and
indication? In what method does the intellect make inference? To what
extent are justice and its decree credible? Naturally, if we want to
address all these issues as well as primary issues, we have to discuss
and examine an array of different sciences.

The evidential method of discussion is honorable, certain and
respectable, but as we have said, in applying it many issues pertaining
to numerous sciences must be referred to. In addition to the fact that
only a few individuals are well-informed of a set of sciences, and
experts in every field can master only a set of limited information, it
is an onerous task and many years would be spent in examining each of
these issues via this method. In examining and explaining our subjects
also, choosing the evidential method in all cases and following up each
of the issues until we arrive at the axiomatic foundations and
principles, will not be possible within the limited time we have.

As such, we shall resort to the evidential method only in cases where it
is possible to present simple, uncomplicated and less extensive proofs,
and employ the polemical method in other cases. The polemical method is
the most appropriate method and in reality it is the shortest way to
obtain results. It is a general and comprehensive method to convince
others. In some places of the Qur’an, God, the Exalted, has resorted to
it in convincing the enemy by presenting His firm and solid proofs, and
He has also invited us to talk and dispute with others by using the same
method:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ٱدْعُ إِلِىٰ سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ
الْحَسَنَةِ وَجَادِلْهُم بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good advice and
dispute with them in a manner that is best.**”*[^5]

[^1]: Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi, At-Tawhid or Monotheism in the
Ideological and Value Systems of Islam, trans. N. Tawhidi (Tehran:
Islamic Propagation Organization, n.d.). [Trans.]

[^2]: Instigated by a proclamation issued by two religious authorities
(Ayatullah al-‘Uzma Muhammad Kazim Khurasani and Ayatullah al-‘Uzma ‘Abd
Allah Mazandarani) which reads, “The constitution of each country limits
and conditions the will of the ruler and the offices of government so
that the divine ordinances and common laws based on the official
religion of the country are not transgressed,” what has become known as
the Constitutional Movement, Constitutional Revolution or simply
Constitutionalism (1905-11) took place due to the chaotic situation in
Iran at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the
twentieth century, the popular protest over the tyranny of the governors
and agents of the dictatorial regime and the unruly officials of the
government, the weakness and ineptitude of the then king Muzaffariddin
Shah, and finally the rising awareness among the people and revolt of
the clerics and ‘ulama’. Years of struggle by the people culminated in
the victory of the Constitutional Revolution in 1906. [Trans.]

[^3]: Sayyid Hasan Mudarris (1859-1938) was one of the greatest
religious and political figures in the recent history of Iran. He
received his elementary education in Isfahan and then traveled to the
cities of the holy shrines (in Iraq) where he received further education
from prominent scholars and after attaining the level of ijtihad, he
returned to Isfahan and began teaching Islamic jurisprudence [fiqh] and
its principles [usul]. In 1909, at the time of the Second National
Assembly, he entered Parliament having been chosen by the maraji‘
at-taqlid and the ‘ulama’ of Najaf as one of the five mujtahids who were
to oversee the law-making procedures. At the time of the Third National
Assembly, he was chosen as a Member of Parliament. When Rida Khan
carried out his coup d’état, Mudarris was arrested and sent into exile,
but after being freed he was again chosen by the people and again
entered the Parliament. In the Fourth National Assembly, he headed the
opposition majority against Rida Khan. At the time of the Fifth and
Sixth National Assemblies, he opposed the proposal for the establishment
of a republic, which Rida Khan was in favor of, to replace the
constitutional government, and he dissuaded the Parliament from
approving it. He was resolute in his stand against the stubborn Rida
Khan, such that the Shah hired an assassin to kill him and when he
escaped the attempt, he sent him first into exile in the remote town of
Khaf near the Afghan border, and later in Kashmar, where eleven years
later in Ramadan 1938, the agents of the Shah poisoned him. In this way,
one of the greatest political and religious personalities of Iran was
martyred in the way of Allah. Mudarris possessed outstanding qualities,
and even though he was a man of great political and religious influence,
he led a very simple life. [Trans.]

[^4]: The abbreviation, “s”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallahu ‘alayhi wa alihi wa sallam [may God’s salutation and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is used after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (s). [Trans.]

[^5]: Surah an-Nahl 16:125. In this volume, the translation of Qur’anic
passages is adapted from Sayyid ‘Ali Quli Qara’i, The Qur’an with a
Phrase-by-Phrase English Translation (London: Islamic College for
Advanced Studies Press, 2004). [Trans.]


