Session 3: Station of Politics in Religion (Part 1)
===================================================

Definition of politics and the three powers in Islam
----------------------------------------------------

In order to make clear whether or not the Qur’an talks about politics,
we present an unequivocal definition of politics. Politics means the
method of administering or organizing the society in such a manner that
its interests and desires are realized. In simpler terms, politics means
the rule of statecraft. What we mean by politics is not ‘real politic’,
the concept with negative connotations, which is linked with chicanery,
trickery, scam, and deception.

In the sphere of politics and statecraft, since the time of
Montesquieu[^1] the administrative body has been seen to be composed of
three powers, viz. the legislative, executive and judicial. The function
of the legislative body is the enactment of laws and decrees for the
administration of society and formulation of rules of behavior for the
people under different circumstances, in such a manner that justice is
implemented, order prevails in society, and the rights of individual is
not trampled upon. In general, society moves toward reform. The function
of the executive body, the cabinet, is the implementation of laws and
regulations enacted by the legislative body. The function of the
judicial body is to adapt general laws and cases to particular and
special cases and adjudicate and pass judgment on the disputes and
differences among people.

Considering the above classification and functions mentioned for each of
the powers, the opinion of Islam and the Qur’an about the station and
legitimacy of the three powers must be examined. Do the Qur’an and Islam
have specific orders and laws in these domains? It must, however, be
noted that by “laws” we mean social laws and decrees, (not personal
laws) whose existence in religion no one doubts.

The social laws include civil, penal, commercial, political and
international laws. Once we take a glance at the Qur’an, we discover
that all kinds of laws in the world for the administration of society,
and the management of international relations can be found therein.
Apart from the fact that civil laws; decrees on marriage and divorce;
laws on trade, transactions, mortgage, loan and the like can be found in
the Qur’an (which proves that issues on statecraft, like enactment and
presentation of laws for the administration of society are taken into
account in Islam), a special right for the Prophet (*s*) has been
stipulated in the Qur’an to enact laws and decrees on particular cases
based on circumstances of time and space, and the faithful are
duty-bound to act upon the laws issued by the Messenger of Allah (*s*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلاَ مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْرًا أَن يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A faithful man or woman may not, when Allah and His Apostle have
decided on a matter, have any option in their matter.**”*[^2]

In this noble verse, the faithful have been deprived of the option to
violate the decision of God and His Prophet (*s*).

Thus, apart from the orders of God and fixed divine laws, laws enacted
by the Prophet (*s*) are also binding on all those living within the
jurisdiction of the Islamic government. No one has the right to question
these laws because whoever opposes them does not regard the Prophet as
an emissary of God. We have no business with such a person. He who
believes in the Prophet’s (*s*) right of legislation being delegated to
him by God, but disputes about a truth, we will argue with him according
to verses of the Qur’an.

Therefore, the Qur’an does not say, *“An unbelieving man or woman may
not…”* but rather *“A faithful man or woman may not…”*As such, just as
every ‘faithful’ living under the Islamic government acknowledges the
apostleship of the Prophet (*s*) and regards the laws of God as
necessary to follow, he should equally regard the orders of the Prophet
(*s*) as necessary to follow. The necessity to follow God and His
*wilayah* over all the faithful is established by such noble verses as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet is closer to the faithful than their own
souls...”***[^3]

According to the Qur’an, therefore, both the highest level of
implementation of law and the right of legislation have been delegated
to the Messenger of Allah (*s*). Whether or not such a right and station
is also established for anyone other than the Messenger of Allah must be
dealt with elsewhere. Presently, our concern is whether Islam has an
opinion about politics or not.

Judicial laws in the Qur’an
---------------------------

Meanwhile, concerning the issue of judging after adapting general divine
laws to cases where there is a dispute and discord among people, God
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلاَ وَرَبِّكَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىَ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لاَ يَجِدُواْ فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُواْ تَسْلِيمًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But no, by your Lord! They will not believe until they make you a
judge in their disputes, then do not find within their hearts any
dissent to your verdict and submit in full submission.”***[^4]

In the above verse, not only is the right of adjudication confirmed for
the Messenger of Allah (*s*), but the acceptance of and acting upon his
adjudication and verdict has been regarded as a requisite of faith. This
point is accompanied by a very emphatic oath—“In their disputes the
people must definitely make you the judge and arbiter, and after you
pass a judgment they should not nurse any dissent and dissatisfaction in
their hearts but should accept the judgment with full submission and
obedience. Otherwise, they will not be truly faithful.

The true faithful is one who, if the Islamic court issues a decree
against him, accepts it with open arms, realizing the possibility that
his right is violated because the judge passes the verdict on the basis
of external means of rendering justice, which the Messenger of Allah
(*s*) explained thus: “Verily, I judge among you on the basis of proof
and testimony.”[^5] The testimony of a witness who is outwardly just is
accepted although he might have lied in his testimony or committed an
error therein. If everyone does not act upon the verdict of the judge,
no progress can be made and the system will collapse.

What can be deduced from the Qur’an on penal matters, such as
blood-money [*diyah*], *qisas*,[^6] *ta‘zirat*,[^7] and the like,
testify that Islam is highly involved in politics, administrative
affairs and society. Islam has gone to the extent of taking into account
*hudud*[^8] for criminals and corruptors in certain cases and of
authorizing the judge to implement them even if there is no specific
complainant. In such cases divine limits and rights have been violated
and sometimes punishments are difficult to endure and accept. For
example, the Qur’an says that in an Islamic society if an illegitimate
relationship between a man and a woman is proved before the judge
through the statements of four witnesses, both of them must receive a
hundred lashes, and the Qur’an particularly admonishes the judge not to
be influenced by emotion and have pity on them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ٱلزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِي فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمَا مِئَةَ
جَلْدَةٍ وَلاَ تَأْخُذْكُم بِهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فِي دِينِ اللَّهِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the fornicatress and the fornicator, strike each of them a
hundred lashes, and let not pity for them overcome you in Allah’s
law...”***[^9]

Undoubtedly, by implementing such a punishment the person will be
disgraced, but society will acquire immunity. Regarding theft the Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَالسَّارِقُ وَالسَّارِقَةُ فَاقْطَعُواْ أَيْدِيَهُمَا جَزَاءً بِمَا
كَسَبَا نَكَالاً مِنَ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the thief, man and woman, cut off their hands as a requital
for what they have earned. [That is] an exemplary punishment from Allah
and Allah is All-mighty, All-wise.”***[^10]

We conclude that the Noble Qur’an mentions adjudication, enactment of
rules and regulations to preserve social order and secure the interests
of society, and implement the *hudud* and *ta‘zirat*[^11] rights of the
Messenger of Allah (*s*). For a fair-minded person there will remain no
doubt about Islam’s involvement in sociopolitical issues if he refers to
the Qur’an as well as the authentic traditions of the Prophet (*s*) and
the infallible Imams (*‘a*). Those who stubbornly deny these truths have
chosen to do so no matter what the proof.

Universality of Islam and station of Islamic ruler
--------------------------------------------------

Apart from clearly explaining major political issues, the rule of
statecraft, enactment of laws, their adaptation to particular cases, and
their implementation, the Qur’an also clearly explains secondary and
minor issues such as mentioning the months of the year, for example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ عِدَّةَ الشُّهُورِ عِندَ اللّهِ اثْنَا عَشَرَ شَهْرًا فِي
كِتَابِ اللّهِ يَوْمَ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَات وَالأَرْضَ مِنْهَا
أَرْبَعَةٌ حُرُمٌ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed the number of the months with Allah is twelve months in
Allah’s Book, the day when He created the heavens and the earth. Of
these, four are sacred. That is the upright religion…”***[^12]

In the above verse, the division of the year into twelve months has been
mentioned as an intrinsic and fixed affair in harmony with the system of
creation. Mentioning such affairs in religion has been regarded as a
symbol of its firmness, correctness and reliability. Regarding the
sighting of the crescent moon, the Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَهِلَّةِ قُلْ هِيَ مَوَاقِيتُ لِلنَّاسِ
وَالْحَجِّ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They question you concerning the new moons. Say, ‘They are
timekeeping signs for the people and [for the sake of]***
***Hajj’...”***[^13]

Social and devotional laws are in harmony with the system of creation.
In addition, many legal laws have connected the beginning of the lunar
month of Ramadhan, commencement of the *Hajj* season and other
devotional laws with the sighting of the new moon. These are because the
Qur’an basically presents religion as concordant with the nature
[*fitrah*] and system of creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set your heart on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of Allah according to which He originated mankind. There is
no altering Allah’s creation...”***[^14]

Once the divine and religious laws are divinely codified, they are
unchangeable. There are also changeable laws that depend on particular
circumstances of time and space. To identify and deal with these laws
has been delegated to the duly competent jurist who has acquired his
legitimacy and authority from God. In the Qur’an this privilege and
designation has been considered for the Messenger of Allah (*s*).

According to the Shi‘ah creed, the pure Imams (*‘a*) who have also been
indicated in the Qur’an, have the same designation, which has been
passed on to the *wali al-faqih*, which issue will be tackled at its
appropriate time. Of course, a religion may exist in the world which is
concordant with the above notion and outlook, but it is not within the
scope of our discussion. We are talking about a religion which is even
expected to state and determine the months of the year. In the area of
transactions and financial relations among people, it clearly states
that if a person gives a loan to another, he must ask for a receipt from
him and give the loan in the presence of two witnesses.

If it is not possible to get a receipt and find witnesses, he has to
take a retained pledge or mortgage a valuable thing in lieu of the
loan.[^15] We believe that such a religion has a program concerning
politics and statecraft besides meeting the material and spiritual needs
of people.

During the previous session, while rejecting that religion is only
concerned with organizing the relationship between man and God, we said
that religion, in its true sense, means the divine manifestation of
human life. Such religion encompasses not only a portion of human life
and behavior such as worship and the performance of devotional rites,
but it embraces the totality of human life and the entire aspect of his
existence.

He is created to organize his life in such a way that he attains eternal
felicity by conforming all aspects of his life to the Divine will and
commands. Thus, direct worship of God and conventional devotion are only
a part of our religious duties. Our other mental and behavioral aspects
of life must be in line with the will of God and they must somehow
assume a form of worship [*‘ibadah*] so that the sublime and lofty goal
of human creation can be realized:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I did not create the jinn and humans except that they may worship
Me.”***[^16]

The purport of the verse is that the perfection of man is only possible
under the aegis of worship and devotion to God. Therefore, all his
movements and pauses must be within this framework. Even his breathing
must be according to this program. If the life of a person acquires this
divine baptism and color, and is attuned with this program, it means
that he is truly religious. On the contrary, if he totally refuses to
worship God, he is certainly irreligious and an infidel. Between these
two frontiers, viz. the frontier of true religiosity and the frontier of
infidelity, there are those, a portion of whose lives is not in
conformity with the will of God and are, therefore, not truly
worshipping God.

The religion of this group is surely defective. In view of the variety
of religious deficiencies, it must be acknowledged that those who are
truly religious and observe the divine laws in all facets of their
lives, and those who observe only a portion of the laws are not on equal
footing. Also, religiosity and faith has basically different levels and
can grow and be perfect. As the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَالَّذِينَ اهْتَدَوْا زَادَهُمْ هُدىً وَآتَاهُمْ تَقْواهُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who are [rightly] guided, He enhances their guidance,
and invests them with their God-wariness.”***[^17]

Elsewhere, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِرَ اللّهُ وَجِلَتْ
قُلُوبُهُمْ وَ إِذَا تُلِيَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُهُ زَادَتْهُمْ
إِيمَانًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The faithful are only those whose hearts tremble [with awe] when
Allah is mentioned, and when His signs are recited to them, they
(Allah’s signs) increase their faith.**”*[^18]

Yes, there are those, whose faith is constantly moving toward perfection
and they reach the highest level of faith and come closer to the station
of the *awliya’* [saints] of Allah, and even be included among the
*awliya’* of Allah. On the contrary, there are those who are moving
backward from the station of religiosity. By listening and paying
attention to the doubts spread by the foreigners and their admirers in
the cultural domain of society, many abandon the religion they learned
from their father, mother and teacher. This is because paying attention
to the doubts will lead willy-nilly to misguidance of those who do not
possess the ability to assess and study matters. In this regard, the
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الكِتَابِ إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ
اللّهِ يُكَْفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلاَ تَقْعُدُوا مَعَهُمْ
حَتَّى يَخُوضُواْ فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ إِنَّكُمْ إِذاً مِثْلُهُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly He has sent down to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah’s signs being disbelieved and derided, do not sit with them until
they engage in some other discourse, or else you [too] will be like
them.”***[^19]

Man has to first increase his learning as well as intellectual and
rational foundation and empower himself with experience, analysis and
response. He may then listen to doubt and skepticism. But the person who
does not have the power to deal with the doubts should not place himself
in the danger of misguidance by listening to doubts. Islam does not say
that you should not enter the arena of wrestling. It says that you
should wrestle with an opponent of equal weight and if you want to
wrestle with a heavyweight opponent, you should first increase your
weight and extend your training. Islam does not say that you should not
listen to others’ words and misgivings.

It rather says that the attention paid to them should commensurate with
the extent of your experience, analysis and discernment. First of all,
one has to acquire divine gnosis [*ma‘rifah*] and learn the art of
responding to doubts. Thereafter, one should discuss religion with
others and listen to their statements so that they do not disarm you and
impose their opinion on you.

[^1]: Charles Louis de Secondat Baron de la Brede et de Montesquieu
(1689-1755): French writer and jurist, who explored in depth in his The
Spirit of the Laws (1748; trans. 1750) the modern idea of the separation
of powers as well as the checks and balances to guarantee individual
rights and freedoms. Albeit not using the term “separation”, Montesquieu
outlined a three-way division of powers in England among the Parliament,
the king, and the courts, though such a division did not in fact exist
at the time. [Trans.]

[^2]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:36.

[^3]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:6.

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:65.

[^5]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 27, p. 232.

[^6]: Qisas (literally means retribution or retaliation) in the Islamic
jurisprudence is to be executed against a criminal who committed such
crime as murder, amputation of a body limb, or laceration and beating
according to legal decree when the victim or his guardians seek
retribution in lieu of receiving a fine or blood money. [Trans.]

[^7]: In Islamic jurisprudence ta‘zirat applies to punishments the limit
of which is entirely up to the judge and competent jurist. [Trans.]

[^8]: Hudud (literally means boundaries or limits) in the Islamic law is
generally applied to penal law for punishments prescribed for particular
crimes whose extent is determined by law. [Trans.]

[^9]: Surah an-Nur 24:2.

[^10]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:38.

[^11]: In Islamic jurisprudence ta‘zirat applies to punishments for
crimes not specified by the sacred law the limit of which is entirely up
to the judge and competent jurist. [Trans.]

[^12]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara‘ah) 9:36.

[^13]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:189.

[^14]: Surah ar-Rum 30:30.

[^15]: See Surah al-Baqarah 2:282-283. [Trans.]

[^16]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:56.

[^17]: Surah Muhammad 47:17.

[^18]: Surah al-Anfal 8:2.

[^19]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:140.


