Session 4: Station of Politics in Religion (Part 2)
===================================================

Separation of religion and politics an extra-religious outlook
--------------------------------------------------------------

In propounding the separation of religion and politics, they say that
they have consulted the Qur’an and are examining it through
extra-religious lens. Before examining the sources of Islam and
considering what the Qur’an says about politics, they pose this
question: In essence, what is man’s need for religion? In what issues
does he need religion to guide him? Regarding this matter, they have
considered two hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that in everything
and in all aspects of life man is in need of religion. Things such as
the way of preparing and consuming food, the way of acquiring and
building a house, the way of contracting marriage, and forming a society
and government are all the same.

They ask: Should religion solve all these problems and man no longer
engage in scientific research? Should we have maximum expectation from
religion and consult it for all information? Whenever we want to buy
clothes, we need to see what Islam says about it. Whenever we want to
eat food, we have to check which food Islam suggests. Whenever we want
to consult a doctor, we need to know what Islam advises. Also, we have
to find out what religion says about forming a government. Their other
hypothesis is that religion has limited jurisdiction and we should have
minimum expectation from it. Obviously, religion has an opinion in all
matters needed by man, but no religion ever claims that it provides for
all the needs of man.

After finding out that religion does not teach us the methods of
cooking, curing diseases, engineering, and building airplanes and ships,
the distinction between the issues dealt by and not dealt by religion
must be examined, and in which areas and spheres religion has been
involved. They arrive at the conclusion that religion is concerned only
with affairs related to the hereafter and has nothing to do with worldly
affairs, and that we should have the least expectation from religion.
From religion we should only search for the path of eternal salvation
and the means and ways that will make us enter paradise and save us from
hell. We should learn from religion how to pray, how to fast, how to
perform the *Hajj* pilgrimage, and other matters related to the
hereafter.

They assume that they have solved the issue concerning the relationship
between religion and politics by demarcating them and separating the
jurisdiction of religion from that of politics. It has been stated that
politics belongs to mundane affairs while religion is only related to
the hereafter. Neither should religion interfere in the domain of
politics nor should politics interfere in the domain of religion. Only
knowledge and human accomplishments should interfere in politics which
deals with the jurisdiction of this world and science. Fields such as
physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, psychology, and sociology belong
to the domain of science. Religion has nothing to do with them. Religion
is only involved in matters pertaining to the hereafter.

The origin of this issue can be traced back to many centuries in the
West. When there was conflict and dispute between the ecclesiastical
authorities and the men of science and politics it led to wars and
clashes between them, and finally to an unwritten peace. They agreed
amongst themselves that religion should deal solely with otherworldly
affairs and the relationship between man and God; the sole jurisdiction
of mundane affairs i.e. political, social and academic, should be left
to statesmen and scientists.

This happened in the West. Those who are impressed with the West suggest
that such a division of labor also be done in our Islamic country.
Religion should only be in the hands of religious scholars and interfere
in otherworldly affairs only. Religion and the religious scholars should
not meddle in worldly affairs. Politics should, therefore, be entrusted
to the political scientists and statesmen, and not to the *fuqaha* and
*‘ulama’*. In this regard, many speeches are being delivered and lots of
articles being written. In proving their theory, they leave no stone
unturned in inculcating this notion in the minds of our youth, that the
religion and politics are apart.

Unfortunately, some of those who are engaged in cultural affairs are
unconsciously influenced by this notion and other cultural waves of the
West. It is gradually being accepted that religion is the opposite of
politics. Religion solves a part of human problems but worldly problems
have nothing to do with religion. Erroneous and deviant ideas of our
writers, orators and cultural figures pose serious threats to our
religious culture.

Close-knit connection between this world and the hereafter
----------------------------------------------------------

The fact of the matter is that our life is divided into this world and
the hereafter. That is, we have a period of life which commences at our
birth and ends at our death. Then, the second part of our life begins on
entering purgatory [*‘alam al-barzakh*] and facing resurrection.[^1]
This division of life does not necessarily mean that our actions and
behavior in this world shall be divided into two and viewed from two
perspectives. At any rate, we are in the world of action. Religion is
revealed to guide our actions in the world, through a series of
commandments and ordinances.

Thus, the religious commandments are not only for after death. It is not
correct to say that a portion of our fifty or sixty year-long lives is
related to the hereafter while another portion is related to this world.
Rather, we have nothing in this world which is not related to the
hereafter. All our actions in this world automatically assume an
otherworldly form. That is, our actions here may be beneficial or
harmful for us in the hereafter. Since our actions affect our
otherworldly lives, the religious and Islamic view is that life in the
hereafter is settled in this very world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْيَوْمَ عَمَلٌ وَ لاَ حِسَابَ وَ غداً حِسَابٌ وَ لاَ عَمَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Today is the time for action and not for reckoning while tomorrow is
the time for reckoning and not for action,”*[^2]   
 And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلدُّنْيَا مَزْرَعَةُ ٱلأَْخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This world is the sowing ground for the hereafter.”*[^3]

So, we will reap in the hereafter the fruit and product of whatever we
sow in this world. It is not correct to say that our worldly life is
alien to our otherworldly life; that a part of our actions are related
to the life in this world while another part is related to the
hereafter; and that we have two distinct spheres of life for this world
and the hereafter. Instead, all our actions in this world such as
breathing, blinking, walking, sitting, rising, looking, social
intercourse, speaking, listening, eating, marital relationship, and
government-people relationship can be such that ensure our felicity in
the hereafter, or bring harm to us. It is true that the style of cooking
and consumption of food are related to this world but the same act of
eating can send us to paradise, or throw us into hellfire:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ الْيَتَامَى ظُلْمًا إِنَّمَا
يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ نَارًا وَسَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِيرًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed those who consume the property of orphans wrongfully only
ingest fire into their bellies, and soon they will enter the
Blaze.”***[^4]

Anyone who fills his stomach with the property of orphans eats food and
enjoys doing so, but the food he eats will become chastisement of the
hell for him. Similarly, if a person eats food for the sake of
worshipping God, the same act of eating will have a spiritual reward.
The same word that a person utters for the sake of pleasing God will be
a tree growing in paradise for him. The Holy Prophet (*s*) said to his
companions: “For anyone who recites *tasbihat al-arba‘ah*[^5] God gives
him a tree that grows in paradise.” Some said: “So, we shall have many
trees in paradise because we recite this *dhikr* [remembrance of God]
frequently.” He said, “Yes, provided that you do not kindle fire to
consume them.”

Thus, once our actions are done for the sake of pleasing God, they will
bring about eternal felicity and rewards, and if they are done against
the order of God, they will be the cause of perdition and chastisement
in hell. It is not correct to say that our lives have two distinct
divisions; one of which is related to the hereafter and is spent in the
mosque, church, synagogue, and temple, while another part is related to
this world and to ourselves and has nothing to do with the hereafter.

As we have said, this erroneous thinking was prevalent for the past
centuries in the West among the followers of certain religions and
occupied the minds of many in spite of the fact that neither Islam nor
any other revealed religion ever endorsed such a notion. The contention
of true religion is that man is created in order to secure his own
felicity or perdition, and that his eternal felicity or perdition, as
the case may be, lies in his behavior in this world. If his behavior is
consistent with the command of God, he will attain eternal bliss, and,
if otherwise, he will incur everlasting damnation.

The “minimalist” view on the question of expectation from religion is
the result of a fallacy they committed. They imagined that expecting the
maximum from religion meant they would have to seek all the information
about everything from religion, including the style of cooking food and
building a house, which information religion could not provide, so they
said that they should not expect the maximum from religion. This is
fallacious because the above issue does not have only two options. It
has a third option which is the correct one, and that is, we do not
expect that religion to say something about everything, including the
manner of eating food, wearing clothes and building a house. No one has
such a claim. However, since religion has left many issues to the realm
of non-religious sciences, the same issues actually belong to the
jurisdiction of religion. In this way, they acquire ideological value.

Ideological baptism of actions in this world
--------------------------------------------

Once we consider the life in this world as linked to the life in the
hereafter and believe that the totality of man’s actions and behavior
plays a role in his perfection or downfall, it will acquire ideological
value and we will give religion the right to judge each action. In
simpler terms, religion informs us about the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of our actions and not the manner of performing them.

Religion says that eating certain foods is unlawful [*haram*] and
sinful. For example, eating pork and drinking wine are *haram*, but to
say something about the manner of making wine and breeding pig is none
of the business of religion. The reason behind religious permissions and
prohibitions is their positive or negative effects in the otherworldly
life of man, and it states the moral value of every action.

In other words, the path of man toward perfection begins from a point
toward infinity. That which is useful for our perfection and provides
the ground for the spiritual advancement of man is proportionate to the
degree of *wajib*, *mustahabb* [recommended] or at least *mubah*
[permissible] acts performed. The performance of *haram* and, to a lower
degree, *makruh* [abominable] acts will keep him away from his true
perfection and God. So, religion does not say what food to eat or how to
cook it and how to build a house.

However, it says that you should not build a house on usurped land or
you should not build a house in such a way that it overlooks the house
of another and invades his privacy. It also says that you should build
your house with *halal* income and not out of money earned through usury
[*riba’*]. In reality, religion mentions the ideological manner of
building a house. It also invites us to consume foods that are effective
in our human and spiritual growth and avoid unlawful foods, alcoholic
beverages, and narcotic drugs, which are unhealthy for us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ
وَالأَنصَابُ وَالأَزْلاَمُ رِجْسٌ مِنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ
فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ ٭ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ
أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاء فِي الْخَمْرِ
وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ اللّهِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Indeed wine, gambling, idols and the divining
arrows are abominations of Satan’s doing, so avoid them, so that you may
be felicitous. Indeed Satan seeks to cast enmity and hatred among you
through wine and gambling, and to hinder you from the remembrance of
Allah.**”*[^6]

Hence, the permission and prohibition of religion is meant to expound
the ideological value of all actions. To sum up apart from the worldly
outcome of actions, religion also speaks about every action’s
contribution to the doer’s admission to paradise or entrance to hell.

Radiant capability of intellect in discerning value of actions
--------------------------------------------------------------

The ideological value of action from the perspective of permissibility
or prohibition is sometimes so clear and unambiguous that the human
intellect can discern it well and there is no longer need for religion
to state its ruling about it. In fact, the intellect alone can identify
the decree of God. As such, concerning “rational independence”
[*mustaqillat al-‘aqliyyah*], the *fuqaha* have said that in some cases
the intellect can independently give a judgment and know the goodness
[*husn*] or badness [*qubh*] of actions. Through the use of the
intellect, we discern that the will of God is in the performance or
abandonment of an act; we discern that God is pleased or displeased with
a certain act.

Our intellect understands that taking out a slice of bread from the
mouth of an orphan is an abhorrent act. In this regard, there is no need
to state the religious ruling of law, though sometimes, in addition to
the discernment of the intellect, the Qur’an and *ahadith* have also
mentioned the religious rulings which actually confirm the judgment of
the intellect. In most cases, nonetheless, the intellect does not
possess the capability to understand that a certain action (depending on
its being positive or negative, and how valuable) is obligatory
[*wajib*], prohibited [*haram*], recommended [*mustahabb*], abominable
[*makruh*], or permissible [*mubah*]. It is at this point that religion
has to state the type and degree of impact of a certain act on our
ultimate perfection.

Jurisdiction of Religion
------------------------

Once we observe the commandments of religion, we will realize that the
jurisdiction of religion is not restricted to personal matters. It
rather deals with social issues such as those related to family,
marriage, divorce, and commerce, and states the scope of *halal* and
*haram* and their ideological values. By stating the ideological value
of those things, religion actually explains their orientation—which form
will lead toward God and which will incline toward Satan. This is
something which science is incapable of dealing with.

Science mentions the amount and kind of elements needed to form
different things and enumerates the physical and chemical properties,
but it does not state how to use things in order to secure the real
success of man. In this case, religion has to judge. Therefore, just as
our personal action affects our felicity or wretchedness, our action in
sociopolitical affairs has greater effect.

Meanwhile, in connection with the main axis of our discussion, which is
social administration, can it be said that the mode of managing society
has no relation with the ultimate success or failure of man and that the
people in society are free to choose whatever form and method of
administering their society, and religion has nothing to do with it? Who
does not know that observance of justice in society gives success to man
and that justice has a very strong positive value?

In this context, even if there is no pertinent Qur’anic verse or
*hadith*, our intellect will discern that the observance of justice
contributes toward the perfection, advancement and exaltation of man.
When people do not regard their intellect as sufficient to discern
ideological issues in these contexts, they have to resort to the Qur’an
and the *Sunnah*. Of course, we believe that the intellect can
understand many of the ideological issues in sociopolitical affairs.
This does not mean, however, that whatever the intellect understands is
outside the realm of religion.

We have mentioned earlier the “discoverer” of the will of God, which
expresses the divine will and wisdom and conveys to us what is pleasing
to God. It makes no difference how we discover this thing. What matters
is that we discovered the divine legislative will.

Sometimes, this discovery is through the agency of the Qur’an and the
*Sunnah* while, at other times, through the intellect, for these three
are the proofs and discoverers of divine decrees and religious laws. As
such, the intellect [*‘aql*] is considered as a source of divine law.
The *fuqaha* regard the intellect as among the proofs in proving
religious decrees and settling religious issues.

So, there is no demarcation between the intellect and religious law
[*shar‘*]—some matters belong to the intellect while some others belong
to religious law. Rather, the intellect is a light which, owing to its
luminosity, can also discover the will and pleasure of God, and whatever
can be discovered by the intellect in this regard is a religious matter.

Relationship between Religion and Government
--------------------------------------------

In view of the different forms of government existing in the world,
especially the so-called Islamic governments formed during the Islamic
period, it cannot be said that Islam has neither a positive nor negative
view on the forms of government. If we try to compare the corrupt and
oppressive government of Mu‘awiyah[^7] and Yazid[^8] with the just
government of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), can we claim that
the religion of Islam treats the two equally and does not make any
distinction between the government of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and that of
Mu‘awiyah?!

Can it be said that everybody is free to choose any form and system of
government he likes, and religion cannot interfere; that the performance
of neither the government of ‘Ali (*‘a*) nor that of Mu‘awiyah has any
effect on the ultimate fate of man because the form of government is
related to politics and this world and has nothing to do with religion?!
Could any reasonable person accept such a contention? Can it be said
that the two types of government are equal in the sight of religion and
that religion neither recommends nor discourages any of them?

The fact of the matter is that involvement in sociopolitical affairs is
among the most evident areas in which religion must get involved.
Religion has to explain the appropriate structure of government.
Religion has to explain that the ruler has to think about the deprived
and the downtrodden as well as about the consolidation of the pillars of
his rule from the very beginning of his assumption of office.

Thus, the station of sociopolitical issues in religion, especially in
Islam, is clear and eminent. One cannot consider them outside the
jurisdiction of religion and believe that they have no effect in the
felicity and wretchedness of people. Assuming that the hereafter, the
Reckoning, the book of account, reward and punishment really exist, can
it be said that the behavior of Mu‘awiyah, Yazid and the like has no
effect on them?! Of course, even if some of our Sunni brothers have not
yet resolved the issue of Mu‘awiyah’s uprightness, there are many
tyrants and oppressors who have blackened the pages of history.

Can it be said that these tyrannical rulers are ideologically on the
same footing as the just rulers? Today, are those who are butchering and
bombing innocent women and children equal to those who are totally in
the service of the deprived and the oppressed, and will live together in
paradise? Which religion or nation supports this view? How then can
sociopolitical issues be considered as outside the realm of religion? If
religion were supposed to give its opinion about reward and punishment,
*halal* and *haram*, positive and negative values, then sociopolitical
issues are the most important issues about which religion must give its
opinion.

Based on what has been stated, the scheme on the basis of which
religious issues are separate from that of the world and religious
issues are just related to God and the hereafter and are outside the
realm of worldly affairs, is totally erroneous and inadmissible, and in
no way consistent with Islam. The worldview presented by Islam and the
life to which it invites us are repugnant to this way of thinking. This
is not to mention the fact that those who are uttering such words
essentially believe in neither God nor the Day of Resurrection. They are
doing so with the aim of expelling religion from the scene. But we have
nothing to do with their personal conviction.

Our only point is that separating mundane affairs and temporal issues
from the jurisdiction of religion will lead to the denial of Islam and
has no other outcome. As we have said, every action contributes to our
felicity or wretchedness, as the case may be. So, we have to acknowledge
that religion can give its opinion on all matters in our lives and state
their ideological value. As the Prophet (*s*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَىءٍ يقرّبكم إلىٰ الْجَنَّة وَ يباعدكم عَنِ النَّار إلاَّ
وَقَدْ أمرتكم به و مَا مِنْ شَىءٍ يقرّبكم مِنَ النَّار وَ يباعدكم من
الْجَنَّة إلاَّ وَقَدْ نَهَيْتَكُم عَنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is nothing that would draw you toward paradise and keep you away
from hell except that I commanded you and there is nothing that would
draw you toward hell and keep you away from paradise except that I
prohibited you.”[^9]

In the Islamic perspective, felicity without paradise has no meaning and
wretchedness without being thrown into hellfire simply does not exist:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ شَقُواْ فَفِي النَّارِ... وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ
سُعِدُواْ فَفِي الْجَنَّةِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the wretched, they shall be in the Fire*****…** ***And as for
the happy, they shall be in Paradise*****.”**[^10]

Universality of Religion
------------------------

In view of the statement of the Prophet (*s*), the other assumption is
refuted, and to say that it is true that religion can state the value of
actions and say what is *halal* and *haram* but it was the Prophet (*s*)
himself who stated the values of some actions while some were delegated
to the people, i.e., he stated whatever was related to his own time,
delegating the rest to the people to identify what is *halal* and what
is *haram* according to the circumstances of their time.

This statement means that the Prophet (*s*) did not state all that would
give us felicity. This is what he said: “There is nothing that will
ensure your felicity except that I have stated it.” Of course, this
statement does not mean that he has stated all the minute details. He
has rather stated the general rulings, so that, in all times after him,
those who have authority can deduce from them specific laws; what is
*halal* and *haram* according to the evidence, and present them as
primary and secondary rulings or government decrees.

Undoubtedly, to identify the specific laws and evidence, which is called
religious edict [*fatwa’*], is in accordance with the general principles
mentioned in the Qur’an, the *Sunnah* of the Messenger of Allah (*s*)
and sayings of the infallible Imams (*‘a*).

[^1]: Of course, another part of life prior to the life in this world
can also be considered and that is the life in the womb.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 32, p. 354.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 225.

[^4]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:10.

[^5]: Tasbihat al-arba‘ah: literally, the four tasbihs; it refers to the
recital of “Subhan Allahi wa’l-hamdulillahi wa la ilaha illallahu Allahu
akbar” [Glory be to Allah; praise be to Allah; there is no god but
Allah; Allah is greater]. [Trans.]

[^6]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:90-91.

[^7]: Mu‘awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan was the first caliph of the Umayyad
dynasty (40 AH/662 CE), which ruled the Muslim world after the martyrdom
of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and the five-month
rule of the second Imam, Hasan ibn ‘Ali (‘a). As the founder of the
Umayyad dynasty, Mu‘awiyah revived hereditary monarchy and aristocracy
in sharp contrast and opposition to the rudimentary precepts of Islam.
[Trans.]

[^8]: Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah (26-62 AH) succeeded his father to occupy the
office of the caliphate in the year 60 AH. He was a young man devoid of
knowledge and virtues and was well known for his debauchery and other
vices. Yazid ruled for three and a half years. During his first year he
killed Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and his votaries at Karbala’ and made the
latter’s surviving kith and kin captives. In his second year as Caliph,
he ransacked Medina (the seat of the Prophet’s rule and his burial
site), and in his third year of rule he invaded Mecca. [Trans.]

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 96.

[^10]: Surah Hud 11:106, 108.


