Session 6: Freedom in Islam (Part 2)
====================================

Expressing skepticism on the foundation of historical development of man
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This skepticism is formed based on the historical development and
diversity of human culture and civilization and the transformation of
social orders. It must be acknowledged that the social life of mankind
throughout history has passed through many critical stages and moments.
In a certain period in human history, slavery was the issue of the day,
and the preservation of human civilization and advancement required that
weaker and inferior human beings would be slaves of others and subjected
to forced labor by the latter.

It is natural that consistent with that period, the relationship between
man and God used to be described within the framework of master-servant
relationship because some were masters and sovereigns while some were
their servants and slaves, and human relations used to be assessed
within the framework of the master-servant relationship. As such, just
as the weak were considered slaves and servants of the strong and
mighty, all human beings were recognized as servants of God, He being
the Master. However, as the system of slavery is now abolished,
comparisons to that period are no longer relevant.

Nowadays, man does not feel obedient and subservient. He feels he is his
own master. So, he says that we are servants and God is the Master, but
regards himself as the vicegerent of Allah. He who is the vicegerent of
God has no feeling of servitude and is not inclined to receiving orders
and obeying God. Rather, he has a feeling of Lordship. God is dismissed
and he replaces Him. He does whatever he likes. This is the age of
modernism and the dominance of a new civilization over mankind.

We have attained a level of awareness, growth and advancement in which
we cannot afford to accept mandatory order, subservience, obedience, and
submission to a great entity. We are in pursuit of lordship and
mastership. We have gone through the period of obligation and sense of
responsibility. Even if orders, commands and duties are mentioned in the
Qur’an as they are, these are related to the age of slavery because when
the Prophet (*s*) began his apostleship [*risalah*], a great system was
prevalent, and the initial structure of Islam and the relationship of
God and the Prophet (*s*) with the people consistent with that system.

Sometimes they say that today man is not looking for duties. He is
rather seeking his rights. It is no longer inculcated in his mind that
he has any duty, responsibility and obligation to perform. He has to
demand his rights and claim them from others as well as God. In short,
those who talk from the religious perspective about the exigency of
obeying and following the Prophet (*s*), the infallible Imams (*‘a*) and
their deputies are doing so in consonance with the social system
fourteen hundred years ago.

The social system, however, has been transformed, and it is no longer
relevant to talk about obedience, submission and duty. Instead one needs
to talk about human rights. The people have to be informed that they
have the right to live in whatever way they like. They have the right to
wear whatever style of dress they like, and to appear in public in
whatever manner they like.

Reply to the above skepticism
-----------------------------

We shall approach the reply to the above skepticism from the ontological
[*takwini*] and legislative [*tashri‘i*] angle as we are facing these
two stances. In other words, it is the stance of “beings” and realities
and the stance of “dos and don’ts” and duties. From another perspective,
it is the world of realities while the other one is the world of values.
(Of course, the above expressions are equal in substance but because of
different levels of understanding various expressions have been
presented.)

Now, ontologically, it must be examined what our relationship to God is,
because if a person does not believe in God in principle, to assume any
relationship with God will be senseless in his view. But if a person has
faith in God, he, at least, accepts that it is He who created him. He
acknowledges the Creatorship [*khaliqiyyah*] of God, which is the lowest
level of faith in God, and regards himself as among His creatures and
phenomena. (Of course, in Islam mere belief in the Creatorship of God is
not enough for a monotheist [*muwahhid*]. In fact, belief in the
ontological and legislative Lordship [*rububiyyat-e takwini* *wa
tashri‘i*] of God is also necessary for belief in monotheism
[*tawhid*]).

Based on monotheistic belief in creatorship [*tawhid fi’l-khaliqiyyah*],
the statement of one who claims that he is not a servant and slave of
God is inconsistent with the belief in the Creatorship of God. The first
step in monotheism is to accept that we are God’s creatures and that we
owe our existence to Him. This is the same as servitude [*‘ubudiyyah*]
to God. *‘Abd* [servant] means to be a slave and in possession of
another. So, if a person regards himself a Muslim who believes in God
but refuses to accept servitude to Him is in explicit contradiction,
because the requisite of belief in God is to regard oneself as His slave
and servant. It is for this reason that in their most essential and
eminent forms of worship, viz. the *salah* [ritual prayer], all Muslims
say: “I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and apostle” [*Ashhadu
anna Muhammadan ‘abduhu* *wa rasuluh*].The most outstanding and
honorable station of the best human personality is to be a servant of
God. As such, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَى بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلاً مِّنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الأَقْصَا…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Immaculate is He who carried His servant on a journey by night from
the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque**…”*[^1]

Yes, because of the lofty position of servitude to God, in the Qur’an
God has repeatedly used the elegant term “*‘abd*” and its derivatives,
regarding utmost servitude as the loftiest station of human perfection
when He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ ٭ ارْجِعِي إِلَى رَبِّكِ
رَاضِيَةً مَّرْضِيَّةً ٭ فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O soul at peace! Return to your Lord, pleased, pleasing! Then enter
among My servants!”***[^2]

From the legislative angle, to say that freedom of man is inconsistent
with subservience to law and assumption of responsibility will lead to
savagery, barbarity and chaos. This notion that being free man can do
whatever he likes and even defy the law he himself approved of is
inapplicable even in the jungle because there also are certain laws
observed by the animals! We, beating the drum of civilization and
civility, have to accept that the first pillar of civility is the
acceptance of responsibility and observance of law. Through
unconditional non-acceptance of restrictions and responsibility, one can
not claim modern civilization. Rather, he should find himself drowned in
the lowest firm if barbarity.

In other words, the most eminent human faculty is reason, which insists
that man should accept responsibility and regard himself bound ‘to do’
and ‘not to do’ certain things. Based on this, if a person wore a dress
as he pleased, or appeared naked in public, uttered gibberish nonsense,
who would treat him as being in the right frame of mind? Will he not be
considered insane, stupid or even savage? If asked, “Why are you
behaving thus?” he replies, “I am free and freedom is the hallmark of
humanity. I just feel like that,” is there anyone who will accept him?

It follows that the hallmark of humanity is the intellect and the
corollary of rationality is the acceptance of responsibility and
observance of law, for there is no civility without legality. If there
is no sense of responsibility, humanity will also not be realized. That
man is free, i.e. to have the power to choose, does not mean that
legislatively he should not submit to laws, decrees and mandatory orders
and not accept any limits and boundaries in his social life. As such, it
should not be imagined that religion’s assumption of *wilayah* is
opposed to human freedom, because freedom is the most eminent feature of
man and a requisite for being the viceroy of Allah!

Expressing the above skepticism through a different approach
------------------------------------------------------------

Some say that considering the development and evolution in the various
stages of human life as well as new beliefs, outlook, ways of thinking,
and requisites of the present civilization, today’s religion should be
concerned with human rights, and not duties and mandatory orders.  
 In reality, modernism and the modern civilization have created a tall
wall between us and the past people who were servants and slaves serving
others.

As such, modern man has wound up the case of acceptance of duty and
responsibility which belonged to the age of barbarity and intransigence,
and is striving to reclaim his rights. Nowadays, to talk about duty and
discharging of responsibility is retrogression and a return to the
pre-modern age. In this age of human rights, when by the blessings of
democracy, man was released from the bondage of slavery and colonialism,
the time has come for us to abandon the ancient religions which were
consistent with the age of slavery and turn our attention to new
religions that talk about human rights.

In a bid to realize their statement and objective and draw the attention
of society, especially the youth, to such statements, the skeptics
utilize various means. But we shall reply to them on the basis of
correct and firm logic.

Reply to the above skepticism
-----------------------------

The claim that today’s man is only looking for rights without duties is
an idle and false claim. As legal philosophers say, “No right can be
established for a person without there being a duty established for
others. For example, if the right of using clean and fresh air is
established for a citizen, other citizens are duty-bound not to pollute
the air. So, if everybody has the right to pollute the air, the right to
use clean air loses meaning.

Similarly, if a person has the right of possession to his properties,
others must be obliged not to embezzle them; otherwise, the right to
benefit from one’s possession will not be actually realized. In the same
vein, every right established for a person has a corollary duty he has
to discharge toward others. If a person has the right to benefit from
public utilities as he really has, he is obliged in return to serve the
society, accept duties and responsibilities, and not to burden others.
Therefore, rights and duties—in both senses—are correlative and to say
that people demand rights without responsibilities is inadmissible.

Considering that all religious and non-religious scholars as well as
legal philosophers, in general, acknowledge the existence of duty and
commitment, we conclude that what is meant by duty in the statements of
the skeptics is divine duty. The essence of their statements is that God
should not set any duties for us. On the contrary, according to them,
social duties are not within the framework of rights that individuals
possess because these duties are acceptable to all rational people. This
confirms that the master-servant relationship, the master’s issuance of
an order, and, the exigency of obeying him, are consistent with the
culture of slavery and, therefore, irrelevant today.

Disobedience to God in the past
-------------------------------

It is not only modern man who refuses to submit to God, religion and
divine duty. Many people throughout history did not submit to divine
duties but engaged in rebellion and violation of law. To say that man is
looking for his rights and not duties is not new. In the very beginning
Qabil (Cain), the rebellious son of Adam (*‘a*) openly disobeyed divine
ordinances. His violation of law and selfishness led him to murder his
own brother Habil (Abel):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ ابْنَيْ آدَمَ بِالْحَقِّ إِذْ قَرَّبَا
قُرْبَانًا فَتُقُبِّلَ مِن أَحَدِهِمَا وَلَمْ يُتَقَبَّلَ مَنَ الآخَرِ
قَالَ لَأَقْتُلَنَّكَ قَالَ إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللّهُ مِنَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Relate to them truly the account of Adam’s two sons. When the two of
them offered an offering, it was accepted from one of them and not
accepted from the other. [One of them] said, ‘Surely I will kill you.’
[The other one] said, ‘Allah accepts only from the God-wary’.**”*[^3]

The historical accounts of the prophets of Allah (*‘a*) mentioned in the
Qur’an indicate that most people used to belie their own prophet. Not
only did they reject his prophetic call but also wrongly accused him.
They used to ridicule and mock their own prophet and even kill or expel
him from their city. If a prophet would say something beneficial for
them by prohibiting them from doing wrong, for e.g., weighing
wrongly—*“And do not cheat the people of their goods”*[^4]—they would
say to him in return:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالُواْ يَا شُعَيْبُ أَصَلاَتُكَ تَأْمُرُكَ أَن نَتْرُكَ مَا
يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُنَا أَوْ أَن نَفْعَلَ فِي أَمْوَالِنَا مَا نَشَاء...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They said, ‘O Shu‘ayb (Jethro), does your worship require that we
abandon what our fathers have been worshipping, or that we should not do
with our means whatever we wish?... ’”***[^5]

It may possibly be said here that the opposition and hostility to the
prophets and saints [*awliya’*] of Allah throughout history has been the
result of idol-worship, polytheism and satanic rebellion. Our point is
that man should neither wear the yoke of servitude to every object of
worship [*ma‘bud*] nor follow the idols and Satan.

But this statement is unwise from the authentic viewpoint of revelation
[*wahy*], because according to it, man is situated between two
ways—servitude to God or servitude to the *taghut*[^6]—and it is
impossible not to choose one of them. If a person chants the slogan that
“I am nobody’s servant,” in reality he is a servant of the *taghut* and
his own carnal desires. As such, the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اللّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ يُخْرِجُهُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ
إِلَى النُّوُرِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَوْلِيَآؤُهُمُ الطَّاغُوتُ
يُخْرِجُونَهُم مِّنَ النُّورِ إِلَى الظُّلُمَاتِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is the Master of the faithful: He brings them out of darkness
into light. As for the faithless, their patrons are the Rebels [taghut],
who drive them out of light into darkness…”***[^7]

In another place, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَنْ لا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُبِينٌ ٭ وَأَنْ اعْبُدُونِي هَذَا
صِرَاطٌ مُّسْتَقِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did I not exhort you, O children of Adam, saying, ‘Do not worship
Satan. He is indeed your manifest enemy. Worship Me. This is a straight
path’?”***[^8]

The verse does not mean that after abandoning the worship of Satan, man
is no longer in need of obeying and worshipping another being. In fact,
he has to worship God. Just as in the formula of monotheism, “There is
no god” [*la* *ilaha*] is followed by the phrase, “but Allah”
[*illallah*]. Therefore, those who have woken up from the slumber of
negligence by the light of revelation and have realized that they have
to worship God for He is their real Creator and Master, in His hand is
life and death, youth and old age, wellbeing and ailment. For them, to
worship Him is the highest honor. His ordained duties stem from the
spring of infinite wisdom and mercy, and acting upon them bring human
felicity and perfection.

Realizing that refusal to accept the truth, duty and responsibility are
caused by man’s lack of nurture [*tarbiyyah*], bestiality and following
of Satan, and have always existed in history and not only found in
modern man. In fact, it is modern man who has desisted from the
essentials of civility and turned toward the age of ignorance and
savagery, and become the intransigent. On the contrary, those who have
been trained in the school [*maktab*] of the prophets (*‘a*) have
desisted from bestiality and savagery and have chosen civility through
the rule of law and acceptance of duty and responsibility in the true
sense of the word.

Civilization and civility are the opposite of savagery and their main
requisite and condition is the recognition of law. There fore, how can
some people say that modern civilization demands that man should not
accept any duty?! Is this civility, or savagery? Basically civilization
is based on the acceptance at limitation, law and assuming
responsibility; otherwise it has no difference with savagery.

Thus, he who refuses to accept the law, duty and responsibility actually
advocates a return to savagery and barbarism. Certainly, he who has such
an idea and disposition can never be the saintly vicegerent of Allah,
who is our model. (It is necessary to note that the slogan of civility
and the rule of law prevalent nowadays in our society, means the
attainment of the peak of civility and the rule of law in which there is
no violation whatsoever. It is a fact that something new has happened,
and our society since the past 19 years,[^9] after the victory of the
Islamic Revolution, is now moving toward civility. In fact, our
Revolution occurred on the basis of the perennial civility and
civilization of Islam, and one of its principal mottos and objectives
was the observance of divine law in all affairs.)

Following God and freedom
-------------------------

Again, the axis of the prophets’ call is to obey and worship God and not
follow the *taghut*. God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَّسُولاً أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We raised an apostle in every nation [to preach:] ‘Worship
Allah, and keep away from the Rebel’…”***[^10]

Given this, it cannot be accepted that Islam is based on non-obedience
to others including God. Essentially, any religion that calls upon us to
disobey God is false. As indicated earlier, the essence of the prophets’
call is absolute obedience to God from whom entire creation emanates and
who is the Beginning, the End and Real Master—

***“Indeed we belong to Allah, and to Him do we indeed return.”***[^11]

Now, once we recognize God as the Real Master of the universe and
ourselves, how can it be accepted that He has no right to give orders
and issue decrees to us? Is ownership other than that the owner can use
his property in whatever way he likes? Therefore, it is inadmissible to
claim that we have accepted Islam yet we have not subjected ourselves to
the bond of servitude to God; for, absolute freedom is condemned by both
religion and the intellect. Islam and religion are proclaimers of
freedom. This is freedom from worship, and obedience of the *taghut*s
and other than God, and not a deliverance from obedience to God. Man is
created free and autonomous but he is legislatively and legally bound to
follow God. He has the right to freely choose to obey or disobey God.
Essentially, in the world of creation the seal of servitude is put on
every phenomenon. Intrinsically, no creature exists without the mark of
servitude to God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالأَرْضُ وَمَن فِيهِنَّ
وَإِن مِن شَيْءٍ إِلاَّ يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدَهِ وَلَـكِن لا تَفْقَهُونَ
تَسْبِيحَهُمْ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The seven heavens glorify Him, and the earth [too], and whatever is
in them. There is not a thing but celebrates His praise, but you do not
understand their glorification.**”*[^12]

In connection with the servitude and worship of creatures, God also
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ وَالطَّيْرُ صَافَّاتٍ كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلَاتَهُ
وَتَسْبِيحَهُ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not regarded that Allah is glorified by everyone in the
heavens and the earth, and the birds spreading their wings. Each knows
his prayer and glorification.”***[^13]

Yet, due to the possession of reason and intellect, man has been created
free and autonomous. God, the Exalted, has shown him the way to guidance
or misguidance, but he is free in choosing his way. Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have guided him to the way, be he grateful or
ungrateful.”***[^14]

He has to take into account the purpose and philosophy of his creation
and know that he has to engage in servitude and submission to God. The
legislative law of God does not permit him to move along the path of
obedience to Satan and other than God. Man has to worship God and
perform his duties to Him because God has created him for such a
purpose:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ ما خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَ الإِْنْسَ إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُونِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I did not create the jinn and humans except that they may worship
Me.”***[^15]

Now, since worship of God is harmonious with the system of creation,
discharging of divine duties, acting upon one’s obligation and
responsibility toward Him and being thankful to the All-merciful Creator
who gives us life and endows us out of His grace and favor with
wellbeing and innumerable blessings is necessary—just as God says in the
tongue of Hadrat Ibrahim (Abraham) (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي خَلَقَنِي فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ. وَ الَّذِي هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِي وَ
يَسْقِينِ. وَ إِذا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ. وَ الَّذِي يُمِيتُنِي
ثُمَّ يُحْيِينِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(It is God) who created me, and it is He who guides me, and provides
me with food and drink, and when I get sick, it is He who cures me; who
will make me die, then He will bring me to life”***[^16]

how can we afford to refuse to follow Him. Is it fair and righteous for
us to say that modern man does not believe in duty and obedience and is
only interested in his rights? Does Islam accept this logic?
Undoubtedly, such thinking is devoid of rationality and far from
humanity, let alone having an Islamic basis.

[^1]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:1.

[^2]: Surah al-Fajr 89:27-29.

[^3]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:27.

[^4]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:138.

[^5]: Surah Hud 11:87.

[^6]: The term taghut applies to any idol, object, or individual that
prevents men from doing what is good, and leads them astray. The term
has been used eight times in the Qur’an. Prior to Islam, taghut had been
the name of one of the idols of the Quraysh tribe. This name is used
also to mean Satan. Moreover, the term is used to indicate one who
rebels against lofty values, or who surpasses all bounds in his
despotism and tyranny and claims the prerogatives of divinity for
himself whether explicitly or implicitly. [Trans.]

[^7]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:257.

[^8]: Surah Ya-Sin 36:60-61.

[^9]: It is now almost three decades. [Trans.]

[^10]: Surah an-Nahl 16:36.

[^11]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:156.

[^12]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:44.

[^13]: Surah an-Nur 24:41.

[^14]: Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76:3.

[^15]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:56.

[^16]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:78-81.


