Session 7: Freedom, Its Limits and Boundaries
=============================================

Islamic political theory and skepticism on alleged restriction of freedom
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since Islamic society must be administered on the basis of Islamic laws
and decrees, the law-implementers must not go beyond the bounds of
Islamic decrees and orders since people are bound to act upon Islamic
laws. A skeptical voice questions: Is this concordant with human
freedom? In making rules and regulations for his life and the manner of
implementing them, man has to be free. For us to say that he has to move
within the framework and observe the rules and regulations is
inconsistent with human freedom, which is one of his inalienable rights.

Before dealing with the above skepticism and question, I deemed it
necessary to state a point as an introduction which is also beneficial
in other discussions and which must be given close attention. Once we
are dealing with essential and joint concepts, for example, in natural
sciences it is not difficult to understand essential concepts, like
“water,” “movement” and “lightning”; in medical affairs, “eye,” “ear,”
“hand and foot,” “stomach,” “lung,” and “liver,” because everyone knows
what these terms mean.

However, understanding intricate concepts—like philosophical concepts
and concepts used in social sciences and humanities such as psychology,
law, political science, and the like—is difficult. Some times terms have
many definitions which can easily confuse. While discussing such terms,
people do not arrive at definite and certain conclusions.

For example, all of us are familiar with the term “culture”. This term
has often been used in educational systems, poems, literary works and
daily conversations. Yet, if one is asked what culture is, not a single
person in one thousand could define culture correctly. Even the experts
who have come up to define the term “culture” believe that this term has
fifty to five hundred definitions! Naturally, when the commonly used
term ‘culture’ can be so ambiguous in its definition, the ambiguity will
consequently influence everything associated with it, especially social
issues.

When there will be talk about cultural development, it will be pertinent
to ask what cultural development is, what its manifestations are, and,
in what form and way it takes place. If a budget for cultural
development is approved by the Islamic Consultative Assembly but
specific expenditures and clear manifestations of it are not taken into
account, there will be difficulty in defining this term, only certain
manifestations will become the object of attention, and the ground for
abuse by exploiters will be opened.

Different outlook on concept of freedom
---------------------------------------

Intricate concepts like freedom have no specific manifestations and are
difficult to define. Whenever freedom is mentioned, the listener feels
pleased. Almost all peoples and nations believe in the sanctity of
freedom because man inherently wants to be free.

If we try to examine the set of articles, books and treatises relevant
to the concept of freedom, especially works published in recent years,
we will find out that there is no common and specific concept about
freedom among authorities and writers. A person defines freedom in a
certain way and defends it while another person defines it in a
different way and criticizes the other definition. Given this difference
and divergence of opinion, they cannot arrive at a consensus on which
the discussion can be concluded. Once we know what freedom means we can
reply to the question whether freedom is harmonious with Islam or not.

Regarding a term which has numerous meanings—such that Western writers
have mentioned as many as about two hundred definitions many of which
are close to one another, their difference being only a matter of
commission or omission of one or two words, there also being cases where
the definitions are inconsistent with one another—how can they judge
whether it is harmonious with Islam or not?

Similar to the term “freedom” is the term “democracy”, which is a
Western term. It is sometimes defined as “populism” as well as “the
government or sovereignty of the people”. But an exact and specific
meaning of it has not yet been presented. It is not clear whether
democracy is a form of government or a set of social behavior. Is it
related to the realm of government and political issues, or to the realm
of sociology or management? There are many discussions in this regard.
In addition, the translation of such terms from one language to another
exacerbates the ambiguity and problem.

Similar is the case of the term “liberalism” which was formerly
translated as “freedom-loving” and like the term “freedom”, possesses
distinct attractiveness, sanctity and desirability. As such, during the
final decades of the Pahlavi rule, parties described as “freedom-loving
parties” were formed.

So, in view of the ambiguities existing in such intricate concepts, the
discussion will be problematic because the concepts tend to become
error-prone. It cannot be said with certainty that this is the limit of
the meaning that will no longer be changed. Such concepts are extensive,
have no definite limits and boundaries and being broad in meaning.
Naturally, these difficulties make the discussion ambiguous and
complicated.

Now, in view of these problems, ambiguities and difference in
understanding and outlook on freedom, if we want to compare each of
these definitions with Islam, such a work in the academic environment
will be onerous and complicated, let alone in a public discussion meant
for a diverse strata of people. As the only option, we will have to use
the empirical and comparative approach to see what notion the proponents
of freedom hold about it and what they want from it. Then we will see
whether what they want from it is harmonious with Islam or not.

What do those who advocate and defend freedom, and claim that there is
no freedom in this country (Iran) want from freedom? Is there no freedom
of the press? Or, do the people have no individual freedom? Do they have
no political, social and economic freedom? Or, do they have no freedom
of expression? Basically, it must be seen in what condition and way
these claimants regard the people as free.

Freedom as not absolute and rejection of freedom’s predominance over religion
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Usually, individuals exploit intricate and ambiguous concepts such as
“freedom” to serve their motives. They mention these concepts
equivocally so that the addressee understands it in a certain way while
they mean something else, and thus they advance their sinister motives.
For example, in the discussions, speeches and articles, some magazines
and newspapers have posed this question: Has religion predominance over
freedom, or vice versa? Is freedom the basis while religion follows it,
or vice versa?

Undoubtedly, this question seems to be scientific and great curiosity is
aroused to know whether religion or freedom predominates. But in actual
discussion, if we say that religion predominates, they will say, “Since
a person should be free to accept religion, as long as he is not free
how can he choose a religion and predominates it? So, it becomes clear
that freedom predominates over religion.” They then conclude that
religion cannot restrict freedom because freedom is the basis of
religion! So, man can do whatever he likes and think in whatever way he
wants! As you can see, this fallacious argument seems to be reasonable
because if a person is not free, how can he accept Islam?

It thus follows that freedom predominates religion, is the basis of
religion, gives credence to religion, and is essentially the reason
behind the existence of religion. In this case, religion can no longer
remove or restrict its producing and constructive element. In the end,
they conclude that in every religious environment, every person should
have ultimate freedom!

Others argue that when man is created, he is not a slave but free. So,
he should also remain free all his life. They also argue that to have
autonomy and freewill is an unequal value. As such, if at the time of
coming to this world the hands and feet of man are paralyzed and he is
dumb, what is his value? His value lies in his being free to go wherever
he wants, do and say whatever he likes. Since man has been created
intrinsically free, it follows that he should also be legislatively
free! This is the same fallacy that incorrectly deduces “dos and don’ts”
from “being”. But if we try to deal with these subjects seriously, we
need to present precise academic philosophical discussions before
arriving at any conclusion.

As stated earlier, if we try to discuss the definition of freedom, we
have to examine tens of definitions. As such, it is better to deal with
its manifestations and ask those who are shouting for freedom: “Will you
allow somebody to slap you and agree that he is free to do so?” They
will say, “Obviously, we do not mean a violation of the rights of
others.” We thus conclude that freedom is desirable as long as it does
not violate the rights of others and thus it is not absolute. Now, if we
ask them, “Will you allow anyone to say anything about your family and
chastity? He will not beat you. He will only insult you, revile you and
abuse you.”

Naturally, they will not allow it because this act is also a violation
of the integrity and chastity of every respectable person in society.
Thus, it is clear that attack on one’s integrity and chastity is not
only confined to physical violation.

Now, if someone wants to write something in the newspaper against a
person and besmirch his reputation, there is no physical contact and
there is no verbal insult and defamation, will that person allow him? He
will certainly not allow him. He will regard this act as a violation of
his reputation and integrity. He will not allow others to besmirch his
reputation and trample upon his rights. Thus, so far three main
conditions of freedom have been confirmed. If these conditions are not
observed, the rights of others will be violated.

Need to observe the values and sanctities of every society
----------------------------------------------------------

Another point which we have to deal with is that values and sanctities
are different in every society and considered relatively. For example,
in some societies there is no problem if a person wants to have a
relationship with the sister or daughter of another person. As, in
European and American countries, if a person wants to establish a
friendly relationship with any woman there is no restriction if it is
with the consent of the two parties. But if the woman is forced she goes
to court to say that he had sex with her without her consent, and the
court will examine her claim. But there is no problem if a man and a
woman have a voluntary sexual relationship! If a person tells another,
“Your sister is my girlfriend and last night we were together in a
certain place,” this statement is not strange in Western culture. In
fact, some would even be pleased to hear it. In our society and
environment, however, it is uncalled for and treated as an abuse, and no
one has the right to say so.

From this, we can deduce another thing and that is, every society has
its own values and regards certain things as respectable and sanctified
which another society does not. Now, what is the source of these values
and sanctity? Undoubtedly, it is the culture, social environment and
beliefs of every society. Obviously, these values are defined according
to the culture and social environment of every person in every country.
Hence, if in a certain place something is sanctified and respected
according to the specific culture of those people, it should not be
violated and slighted. No person has the right to say whatever he likes
anywhere. He has to speak carefully, so that the values of those people
are not violated. In our society, however, being different from that of
the West, freedom does not allow anyone to say anything about people.

Thus, freedom, as some have imagined is unacceptable to any rational
person. In Islamic society, no one has the right, under the pretext of
freedom, to disrespect the sanctity of Islam and those that are dearer
to people than their own lives.

Our people proved that they were willing to sacrifice hundreds of
thousands of their dear ones for the sake of Islam. When a person is
insulted in the West in any way—for example, it is said to him that he
is ugly and big-nosed—he has the right to go to a court of law and file
a complaint. In our culture, if a person abuses something which is
dearer to the people than their mothers, fathers, spouses, and children,
do the people not have the right to protest against him for expressing
his disrespect for their most valuable possession, under the name of
freedom?

Illegitimate motives in exercising freedom
------------------------------------------

What do those who talk about freedom and allege its absence in Iran,
want to say? Some of them yearn for the Western lifestyle. In Iran this
practice is not allowed. Why? Is it because the Islamic government
receives orders from Islam, God and the Prophet (*s*)? They do not want
to accept the decree of God, so they object to the orders of the *wali*
*al-faqih*, while the *wali* *al-faqih* does not say anything from
himself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَإِنَّهُمْ لاَ يُكَذِّبُونَكَ وَلَكِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بِآيَاتِ
اللّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Yet it is not you that they deny, but it is Allah’s signs that the
wrongdoers impugn.”***[^1]

Does the duly competent *faqih* and *marja‘ at-taqlid* [source of
emulation] say something about himself? Whatever he says is taken from
the Qur’an and *a hadith,* words of God and the Prophet (*s*), but they
do not want to acknowledge this fact. In open spaces at prestigious
American universities, male and female students behave in a manner that
we are ashamed of mentioning. It is obvious what must be taking place in
the places of pleasure of such a society. If a film taken in one of
these places of pleasure is placed at the disposal of the youth in this
country, you might guess what impact it will have!

Naturally, a youngster who watches such a film will have no peace of
mind when he goes to the university in the morning because he remained
awake the night before. There is already an intense sexual urge in him,
which watching such a film will intensify and deprive him of tranquility
and peace of mind. When such a youngster shouts that there is no
freedom, it means that “You do not allow me to do the thing I wish to
do” and all the allegations against the Islamic government stem from the
desire to gratify the sexual urge. So you need to know what you want
from freedom.

If you want permission from an Islamic government to do whatever is
permitted and practiced in the environment of unbelief and atheism, rest
assured that it will not be allowed, because the people sacrificed their
beloved ones for the sake of implementing the values of Islam, and not
allowing Western debauchery and corruption to become rampant.

Some people might say that we are indeed Muslims, have voted for this
system, believe in the Imam and the Leader, and we do not want the kind
of freedom prevalent in the West. Rather we want to have the freedom of
expression, freedom of the press and freedom of action. Grant this
freedom to us and allow us to say whatever we want. This point of
request is reasonable.

In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, one of the primary rights
considered for all human beings is the freedom of expression and the
freedom of the press as democratic principles. They will be told, “You
are free to write and express your opinion regarding the performance of
the implementers of laws. But, if you want to write something about the
Islamic principles and values and negate everything, or insult religious
sanctities, you will have to question yourself, not the government.

Limits of freedom of expression
-------------------------------

If freedom means speaking and writing freely about things that are not
permissible in action, it is clearly paradoxical. When somebody utters a
single offensive word against you, you are ready to go to a court of law
and file a complaint? How come you do not allow somebody to publish
certain personal matters about you in a newspaper yet demand the freedom
to divulge the secrets of a nation? How come divulging personal secrets
of a person is not permissible, but divulging the secrets of a nation is
permissible?!

In your opinion, when a person turns into seventy million people,
divulging his secrets becomes permissible! Should it not be proper to
observe a limit with respect to a society both in speech and writing,
and realize that everything cannot be uttered and written? Every society
has its sanctity, rights and values, which must be preserved, not
violated.

How can one allow the abuse of the religious sanctity of a society of
sixty-million people which has offered hundreds of thousands of martyrs
for its preservation? Do you think that there should be no limitation?
Under the pretext of freedom, you demand no legal restrictions and
limitations? Is freedom absolute? If freedom were really absolute, it
follows then that I also have the right to say anything I want about a
person!

When the reputation and sanctity of a seventy-million strong nation are
violated and a complaint lodged against you, you cry ‘freedom of
expression’?! Which fallacy is more serious: tarnishing the reputation
of a person or a nation of seventy million, nay a society of one billion
Muslims? What kind of logic is this? The fact that the freedom of
expression and the press has been stipulated in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, is defamation of religious sanctity also
permissible?! One ambiguous word—“freedom”—is used, interpreted and
exploited by whoever pleases to do so.

Need to explain concept and manifestation of terms
--------------------------------------------------

Instead of using ambiguous and confusing terms, I will focus on their
manifestation to decide whether a demand is permissible or not. For
example, instead of asking whether Islam is compatible with democracy or
not, you have to ask, “What do you want and what do you wish to do? If
you want to disregard God and His decrees, then this is not permissible
in Islam. If democracy means that the people have the right to enact any
law even if it is against the law of God, we will not accept such a
democracy even if the whole world backs it up.

However, if by democracy it means that the people have the right to
chart their own destiny without compulsion, provided they uphold the
sanctity of Islamic values, laws and foundations, then this is something
that has been functioning in our country from the beginning of the
Revolution. If we claim that in no country in the world is the vote of
the people respected as much as in Iran, it is perhaps not an
exaggerated claim. Since I have no sufficient documents and evidence at
my disposal, I say “perhaps” but I personally believe that such freedom
does not exist in any other place in the world.

So, instead of debating on the word “democracy whether Islam is
compatible with it or not, it would be wiser for you to specify its
manifestations. For example, does Islam permit legalizing homosexuality?
Islam will never allow it even if all the people unanimously approve it.
If democracy is so unrestricted and unlimited, we do not accept it.

However, if by democracy you mean that the people should have free
elections, freely elect the members of parliament and the president, and
have the right to call to account the members of parliament and other
government officials, this freedom must surely exist as it does, and we
totally support it. So, instead of using terms equivocally and disputing
over them, it is better for us to discuss manifestations. Concepts such
as freedom, democracy, liberalism, civil society, civilization, and
culture are ambiguous and elicit various interpretations. To dispute
over them is in no way reasonable. Instead, you have to say what you
want so that we can say that it is consistent or inconsistent with
Islam.

[^1]: Surah al-An‘am 6:33.


