An Introduction to the Holy Qur'an
==================================

The Most Glorious Qur'an is the last of the Holy Books to be revealed by
the Almighty Creator of existence through His Holy Prophet to serve as a
testament and guidance for all mankind. We see in history that this
great revelation, through the Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him
and his progeny) took place gradually in a period of twenty-three years.
The revealed holy verses exceeding 6,000 in their final arrangement of
one hundred fourteen surahs (chapters) are the exact expression of the
will of Allah uttered by His Holy Prophet.

As we know, the Holy Qur'an is the only Holy Book mankind has today
which can still claim to be the exact and authentic expression of the
norm and structure of a perfect life for social man as foreseen by Allah
the Almighty, with His exact and encompassing knowledge of creation – a
system of law and order through which a full fulfillment of life will be
attainable for all.

The Holy Qur'an knows no limits in its capacity to bewilder and attract
the mind of man except the limits imposed by the human mind itself, and
it holds so much potential meaning and knowledge that each person
according to his own capacity feels the limitlessness of this
supernatural and holy record in expressing the meaning and philosophy of
life . . ., so that, those sensitive to the social sciences not only
find the most exact expression of the motivating forces of social
history, but find the answers and the means of effecting social
behaviour.

Through the study of the inerrable images of related historic facts, in
the Holy Qur'an, the historian can study with a feeling of historic
certainty and find the answers to the innumerable questions and doubts
with which the limited knowledge of the realm of social sciences today
most certainly still leave him.

The bewildered governor and legislator (though privately) aware of his
hopelessly limited capacity to understand the frail and complicated
structure of social man, not only finds the answer to his problems, but
sees pictured the parts both he and his subjects might fruitfully and
rewardingly play in the dramatic play of social life. For the political
participator and leader torn apart by the strong contradictions between
his political responsibilities and his self-consciousness of right and
wrong, the unerring answers and solutions are given by the Holy Qur'an
to national and international relationships and serves as a definite
guide.

For those sensitive and responsible to human conduct and morals, the
most beautiful expression and image of personal and social conduct are
to be found; and lastly (though not of least importance) for all of us
who just love to hear of the eternal struggle between the good and the
evil, the beautiful and the ugly - the Holy Qur'an contains the most
beautiful and dramatic of human episodes.

The Holy and most Glorious Qur'an, has been able to prove its status as
an everlasting "Living Miracle" by remaining for all times the inerrable
and unlimited source of human guidance to personal and social life. A
feat it has attained by expressing its intentions through two types of
verses with different literary addresses: the one direct and clearly
understandable by all acquainted with the language even though of
different scholastic standing "muhkamat ".

The other, the expression of the intended truth through such a structure
of words as to keep it forever alive, the possibility of an ever growing
meaning and a more complicated interpretation "mutashabihat" which may
only be interpreted fully by the Living Imam (personage of Divine
Guidance) to whom Islam has left the heavy and most necessary
responsibility of correctly and fully interpreting the meaning of these
holy verses according to the mental capacities and social needs of their
own times.

A responsibility has been endowed by Allah the Almighty through the
recorded speeches of the Holy Prophet, upon a determined line of
personalities from the descendants of the Holy Prophet himself — Ahlul
Bayt.

World Organization for Islamic Services,  
 (Board of Writing, Translation and Publication)  
 4th Muharram, 1392  
 20th February, 1972  
 Tehran — IRAN.


