Permanent Marriage
==================

**In Islam** the word most commonly employed for marriage is *nikah,*
which means literally 'sexual intercourse'. As a legal term it denotes
the situation resulting from a particular contract, entered into by a
man and a woman, by which sexual intercourse between them becomes
legitimate in the eyes of God and society. The only other mode of
legitimizing this sexual relationship is by a man's purchasing a female
slave, but this is a complicated discussion that cannot concern us here.

Marriage as a legal institution is defined and described in terms of a
number of 'pillars' *(arkan)* and 'statutes' *(ahkam),* which are
discussed in what follows. The pillars are those elements of the
marriage contract whose absence nullifies the contract. The statutes are
the rules and regulations that govern the contract. A brief account will
also be given of certain other legal points relating to marriage, namely
divorce, the waiting period, forswearing, sworn allegation, *zihar,* and
inheritance.

I. The Pillars of the Marriage Contract
---------------------------------------

Marriage has a set number of pillars, two according to the Shi’a , three
according to the Malikis and Hanafis, and four according to the Hanbalis
and Shafi'is. All schools agree on the first two pillars, 'formula' and
'persons'.

### A. The Formula (sigha)

Marriage is legalized by a contract ('*aqd),* which, like all other
contracts in Islam, consists of a declaration *(ijab)* and an acceptance
*(qabul).* The woman declares that she is entering into a relationship
of marriage with the man, and he accepts her as his wife.

The schools differ as to the exact words that may be employed in the
woman's declaration. The Shafi'is and Hanbalis hold that a formula
derived from the words 'I have married you' *(ankahtu-ka)* or 'I have
espoused you' *(zawwajtu-ka)* are valid. The Malikis maintain that if
the amount of the dower to be paid to the wife (see *II A* below) has
been specified, the woman may also say 'I give myself to you'
*(wahabtu-ka)*[^1]*.*

The Shi’a do not include the verb 'to give', but they add the formula,
'I surrender myself to your pleasure' *(matta'tu-ka).*[^2] The Hanafi
School is the freest in respect of the formula, allowing any number of
expressions to be employed, and even certain indirect formulas.

All schools agree that the man may show his acceptance by employing any
word which denotes his satisfaction with the contract.

The Hanbali, Maliki, and Shi'i schools hold that the verbs for both
declaration and acceptance must be in the perfect tense. According to
the Hanafis, the present tense may be employed as long as what is meant
is directed toward the future, i.e., does not denote the seeking of a
promise of marriage;[^3] according to the Shafi'is, the present tense
may be used if it excludes the possibility of being interpreted as a
promise of marriage, e.g., by adding the word 'right now' *(al-an).*[^4]

All agree that both declaration and acceptance must be uttered at a
single session. It is not necessary for the declaration to precede the
acceptance, except according to the Hanbalis.[^5] A person who knows
Arabic must pronounce the formula in that language, but those who do not
know Arabic may employ equivalent terms in their own language. A mute
may employ sign language.

### B. The Persons (mahall)

The man and woman must be free of all *shar'i* hindrances to their
marriage, as explained below. The identity of the spouses must be
clearly specified. Thus, for example, if the guardian (below, C) should
say: 'I give one of my two daughters to you in marriage', and the man
should accept, the contract is invalid.

A woman may not marry a husband who is not 'equal' *(kafa)* to her.
According to the Shi’a , this means only that the woman's husband must
be a Muslim.[^6] The Sunni schools add equality in terms of various
social considerations. Not only must the man be a Muslim, he must also
have a social standing at least equal to the woman's.

In other words, she may not marry anyone below her rank in society,
though a man may do so. 'Equality' here is defined in terms of a number
of factors which differ slightly among the four schools. The Hanafis
mention Islam, lineage, profession, liberty (as opposed to slavery),
piety, and property. The Shafi'is list lineage, religion, and
profession, differing only slightly in the words employed from the
Hanbalis. The Malikis mention piety and freedom from physical defects
detrimental to marriage.[^7]

A man and woman may be forbidden from marrying for several reasons:

1. Blood relationship *(qaraba).* A man may not marry the following
women: (a) His mother or any of his grandmothers; (b) His daughter or
granddaughters, no matter how far removed; (c) His sister; (d) His
nieces, his aunts, or his great aunts.

2. Relationship by marriage *(musahara).* A man may not marry: (a) The
mother or grandmothers of his wife; (b) The daughter, granddaughter,
etc., of a wife with whom his marriage has been consummated; (c) The
ex-wife of his son, grandson, etc.; (d) The ex-wife of his father,
grandfather, etc.

3. There are certain women whom a man may marry singly, but not at the
same time. These are (a) two sisters, and (b) a woman and the sister of
her mother or father. In the second case, the Shi’a take exception to
the four Sunni schools by saying that if the aunt agrees to share her
husband with her niece, the contract is valid.[^8]

Except for the daughter of his wife, in the three other instances of
relationship by marriage, the women become forbidden to the man as soon
as the marriage contract is concluded; consummation of the marriage is
not necessary. But if a man wants to marry the daughter of a wife with
whom he has not consummated his marriage, he can do so if he first
divorces the wife.

Once the marriage has been consummated, the wife's daughter is forbidden
to him forever, whether or not the marriage contract is valid. If a man
should marry both a woman and her daughter or two sisters in a single
contract, both marriages are invalid. In both cases, should he first
marry one and then the other, the first contract is valid and the second
void.

The schools of law differ as to what exactly establishes the
unmarriageability of a woman as the result of a relationship by
marriage. For the Hanafis, unmarriageability is established by a valid
marriage contract, sexual intercourse in whatever context (i.e. whether
as the result of a valid contract, an invalid one, or fornication), love
play, or looking at the private parts of a person of the opposite
sex.[^9]

The Shafi'is hold that unmarriageability is established only by a valid
marriage contract or by the consummation of an invalid marriage
contract. They do not consider any other factors, such as fornication or
love play, as sufficient to establish unmarriageability.[^10]

The Maliki position is the same as the Hanafi, except in the case of
fornication; like the Shafi'is, the Malikis hold that no honor or
respect can be paid to fornication.[^11] In the Hanbali view an invalid
contract, like a valid one, results in unmarriageability, as does sexual
intercourse.[^12] The Shi’a hold the same position as the Shafi'is
except that the opinion of the *'ulama's* split on fornication; one
group says that it results in unmarriageability, another group says it
does not.[^13]

4. Foster relationships because of suckling *(rida').* In establishing
unmarriageability, a foster mother who suckles an infant is considered
exactly as the infant's real mother, provided that all the *shar'i*
conditions for this relationship are fulfilled, as detailed below. In
other words, the children of the foster mother are considered as the
child's siblings and all of her other relatives are considered exactly
as if they were truly the child's relatives by blood or marriage.

The Shi’a and Hanbalis hold that the mother's milk must have been the
result of pregnancy from marriage.[^14] The Shafi'is hold that the mere
physical possibility of pregnancy is sufficient. Thus, for example, if a
married nine year old girl should have begun menstruation and her
breasts produce milk, and if she should provide milk for a foster child,
the *shar'i* foster relationship is established.[^15]

The Malikis and the Hanafis maintain that it is only necessary for the
woman to have given milk for the relationship to be established; it
makes no difference if she should also be an unmarried virgin, or if she
is too young to marry or too old to bear children.[^16]

According to the Hanbali and Shafi'i schools, if the foster mother
should have become pregnant through fornication, the relationship of
unmarriageability is established only with the mother's blood relatives,
not with the father's, since he has no legitimate relationship with the
mother. The Hanafi and Maliki schools say that unmarriageability is
established also with the father's relatives. [^17] The Shi’a hold that
in the case of fornication no relationship of unmarriageability is
established whatsoever, since fornication deserves no respect.[^18]

According to four of the schools, the foster child must have been
suckled before it reaches two years of age for unmarriageability to be
established. The Malikis set the age at two years and two months.[^19]

According to all the schools, the milk must have entered the infant's
stomach.

The Shi’a hold that the infant must have suckled at the breast of the
foster mother. Hence, if the milk is placed in a container and fed to
the child, the foster relationship is not established.[^20] The Sunni
schools hold that the means of drinking the milk is irrelevant.

The schools differ as to how many times milk must be drunk. The Shafi'i
and Hanbali schools hold that the infant must suckle at least five
times.[^21] The Shi’a hold that it must suckle over a period of
twenty-four hours or at least fifteen times, and each time it must drink
a quantity of milk that would customarily be called a 'feeding'.[^22]
According to the Hanafis and Malikis, a single act of suckling, even if
the infant drinks only one drop of milk, is sufficient to establish the
relationship.[^23]

The Shafi'is and the Shi’a add that the foster mother must be alive when
the milk is drunk.[^24] The other schools hold that even if for some
reason an infant should suckle at the breast of a corpse, the foster
relationship will be established.[^25]

5. Religious difference. A woman may not marry a non-Muslim. In Sunnism,
a man may marry a woman who is one of the 'People of the Book' *(ahl
al-kitab,* i.e., Christians, Jews, and other religions with revealed
scriptures). But in Shi’a m a man may not contract a permanent marriage
with a non-Muslim, though he may marry one of the People of the Book
temporarily.[^26] If either of the spouses should become an apostate,
the marriage is automatically annulled.

6. Maximum number of wives. A man may not have more than four wives at
one time. If a man should divorce one of his wives, he cannot remarry
until her waiting period (below, IV) is completed, unless the divorce
should be of the irrevocable type *(ba'in,* see below under III).

7. Divorce. If a man should have divorced his wife irrevocably, she is
forbidden to him forever, unless she should marry another man and obtain
a divorce from him. Once the woman's waiting period has expired, she may
remarry her first husband. The woman's husband is known as the
*muhallill,* 'he who makes [marriage to her first husband] lawful'. The
marriage with the *muJ:tallil* must be consummated.[^27]

8. Sworn allegation. Having annulled his marriage through 'sworn
allegation' *(li'an,* below, VII), a man may never remarry the woman.

### C. Guardianship (wilaya)

The legal guardian in the marriage contract may be the father, the
father's father (Hanafi, Shafi'i, Shi'i), the executor of the father's
will concerning the marriage (w*asi),* the governor of the town
*(hakim)* in case of the nonexistence of the others (Hanbali), and the
owner of a slave (Maliki). The mother has no guardianship except in the
Hanafi School, which holds that if there is no close male relative,
close female relatives may assume the guardianship and conclude the
marriage contract. [^28]

In the Maliki and Shafi'i schools, the participation of the legal
guardian is one of the pillars of the marriage; in the Hanbali School it
is a condition *(shart*) of the contract, which means that if the
contract is concluded without the guardian, it will be valid only on
condition that the guardian gives permission afterwards.[^29] Hence in
these three schools the woman does not have the right to conclude a
marriage contract without the participation of her guardian.[^30]

In the Shi'i and Hanafi schools the presence of the guardian is required
only at the marriage contract of a girl not of age, that is, one who has
not yet reached puberty *(saghira),* or of an incompetent or insane girl
or woman of age.

In both these schools a girl who is physically mature may marry
whomsoever she wishes, and the validity of the contract is not
conditional upon the presence of the guardian.[^31] However, the Hanafis
add that since social equality *(kafa')* is a condition for a valid
contract, a guardian may annul a contract concluded by a woman on her
own behalf with an unequal man.[^32]

In the Maliki, Hanbali, and Shafi'i schools, the guardian may give a
virgin in marriage without her consent, whether or not she is of age.
But a woman or girl who has been married before may not be given in
marriage without her permission.[^33] The Hanafis and Shi’a hold that
only a girl not of age may be given in marriage without her
consent.[^34] The Shafi'is add here that if an underage girl has already
been married, she may not be given in marriage again until she comes of
age.[^35]

The regulations of guardianship also apply to boys not of age *(saghir)*
and mentally incompetent men.[^36]

### D. Witnesses (Shahid)

The Shafi'i, Hanbali, and Hanafi schools hold that the presence of two
witnesses is a pillar of marriage and that without their presence, the
contract is invalid.[^37] The Malikis hold that the presence of two
witnesses is necessary at the time of the marriage's consummation
*(dukhul),* but not during the contract, when their presence is merely
recommended.[^38] The Shi’a maintain that the presence of one or more
witnesses is not a pillar of the contract, so a man and woman may
conclude a contract secretly if they so wish.[^39]

II. The Statutes Of Marriage
----------------------------

### A. The Dower (mahr)

Whenever a man marries a woman, he must give her a dower in return for
the sexual gratification he is to receive. The dower must consist of a
specified amount of property, cash, or profit. It must be ritually pure
and owned by the husband. All schools agree that the dower does not have
to be mentioned in the contract. If it is mentioned and does not fulfill
the conditions required for dowers, the contract is valid but the dower
must be corrected.

There are two kinds of dower. The 'specified dower' *(al-mahr
al-musamma)* is one upon which the man and the woman agree. The 'normal
dower' *(a!-mahr a!-mathal)* is what the woman receives if she cannot
come to an agreement with her husband over the specified dower, or if
for some reason the specified dower should be invalid. The normal dower
is the amount of property, in cash or kind, which other women of the
same social status, age, beauty, etc., are receiving in the society of
the time.

According to four of the schools, as soon as the marriage contract is
concluded, the woman becomes the owner of the whole dower; the Malikis
maintain that only one-half of the dower belongs to her at this
point.[^40] Should the wife demand the dower from her husband
immediately, he must pay it to her; but if he should divorce her before
consummation and she has not yet taken the dower, he only has to pay her
one-half.

In all schools, consummation of the marriage or the death of one of the
spouses necessitates payment of the full dower. The Malikis add that if
the wife should live with her husband at least one year, there being no
hindrance to consummation of the marriage, he must pay the full
dower.[^41] The Hanafis maintain that it is sufficient for the man to be
alone with his wife on one occasion when there is no hindrance to
consummation.[^42] According to the Hanbalis, being alone with the wife,
love play, and seeing her private parts are all sufficient cause for the
payment of the whole dower.[^43]

Before consummation of the marriage, payment of all or part of the dower
may be nullified for the following reasons:

1. One-half is nullified through divorce.

2. If the woman should become an apostate, she loses the whole dower.

3. If the man should become an apostate, the marriage is void, but he
still must pay one-half the dower.

4. If the man or woman should annul the marriage because of physical
disability or deception by the partner, she forfeits the whole dower;
however, the Shi’a hold that if the woman should annul the marriage by
reason of the man's impotence, she will be entitled to one-half the
dower.[^44]

5. If a man and woman should suddenly become forbidden to each other
through the establishment of some relationship, e.g. a foster
relationship, where the woman is not at fault, she receives one-half the
dower; if she is at fault she loses all of it.

According to the Maliki, Hanbali, and Shi'i schools, if the marriage
contract should be invalid but copulation takes place, the woman is
entitled to the specified dower.[^45] The Shafi'is hold that in such a
case, she receives the normal dower.[^46] The Hanafis rule that she will
receive whichever of the two dowers is less.[^47] In a case of 'mistaken
intercourse' *(waty a!-shubha),* where copulation takes place because
the man and woman mistakenly believe themselves to be husband and wife,
the woman is entitled to the normal dower.

The woman may refrain from sexual intercourse as long as she has not
received the dower. In such a case the man may not claim conjugal rights
unless it was explicitly stated in the marriage contract that the dower
would be paid at some later date.

But if the woman should accept intercourse before receiving the dower,
from then on she may not refuse her husband, unless it is proven that he
has no ability to pay the dower; here the Shi’a take exception, holding
that once the marriage is consummated, the wife may not refuse
intercourse because of the husband's inability to pay the dower.[^48]

The Hanbalis, Shafi'is, and Malikis say that if the husband's inability
to pay is proven before consummation, the woman may annul the marriage;
with the exception of the Hanbalis, they hold that she may not do so
after consummation, since her willingness to engage in sexual
intercourse proves that she accepted the marriage's validity; the
Hanbalis say the woman may annul the marriage even after
consummation.[^49] The Hanafis and Shi’a hold that the woman may not
annul the marriage, but she may refuse to engage in intercourse.[^50]

If the woman should decide to return part or all of her dower to her
husband, he is then free from the obligation to pay it to her.

### B. Support (nafaqa)

Once the woman has taken up residence with her husband, he must support
her in a mode corresponding to the support received by her equals.
Support includes such things as food, clothing, shelter, and other
necessities. Payment of the dower becomes incumbent on the husband as a
result of the marriage contract, but payment of support only becomes
incumbent as a result of the contract *and* the wife's obedience to her
husband. If the wife does not obey her husband, he is not obliged to
support her.

Here it should be kept in mind that in Islamic society a wife must
'obey' her husband only within the *shar'i limits,* which is to say that
the woman obeys the man on condition that he is obeying God. Should he
tell her to do something not sanctioned by the *sharia* her duty is to
follow God, not her husband.

A woman who is in the 'waiting period' (below, IV) after having been
divorced, but not irrevocably, by her husband, is entitled to support,
since she is still his wife. A woman who is in the waiting period of
irrevocable divorce must be supported only if she is pregnant.

According to the Hanbalis, Malikis, and Shafi'is, if it is proven that
the man does not have the ability to support his wife with the
necessities of life, she has the right to seek to annul the marriage
through a *qadi (shar'i* judge). The Hanafis and Shi’a maintain that a
woman not adequately supported by her husband may complain to a *qadi,*
who must then take whatever action he thinks necessary to rectify the
situation, e.g., pursuading the husband to take employment.[^51]

### C. Annulment (faskh)

Any time a spouse has certain specified physical or mental disabilities
which make continuation of the marriage difficult, the other spouse may
annul the marriage. These disabilities vary according to the different
schools.

All schools except the Hanafi list insanity, emasculation, and impotence
for the men, and insanity, leprosy, and a blocked vagina for the wife;
each of them except the Hanafi then adds various other disabilities of
the same sort. In the Hanafi school the wife has the right to annul the
marriage only for the three grounds listed, while the husband has no
grounds for annulment on the basis of disabilities.[^52]

The spouse who discovers a disability in the other spouse must exercise
the right of annulment immediately or lose the right. Similarly, if
there was knowledge of the disability before the marriage, the marriage
is in effect an expression of satisfaction with the disability, so there
is no grounds for annulment; however, the Shafi'is and Malikis hold that
a woman's knowledge of the man's impotence before marriage does not
effect her right to annul the marriage.[^53] If the annulment takes
place before consummation, the wife receives no dower; if the marriage
has been consummated, she receives the full dower.

All schools agree that disabilities which existed before the marriage
are grounds for annulment, but there is a difference of opinion about
disabilities which appear after the marriage. The Malikis hold that in
the case of such later disabilities, the wife-but not the husband-has
the right to annulment before consummation, so long as the husband was
healthy before the marriage; however, in the case of insanity and
leprosy, the husband has one year in which to undergo treatment, If he
is not cured in one year, the annulment takes place,[^54]

All schools agree that a full year is needed before the man can be
judged impotent; after a year, the annulment takes place, The Shafi'is
and Hanbalis maintain that both spouses retain the right to annulment,
whether before or after consummation, The Sunni schools agree that the
annulment should be declared by a *qadi.*

The Shi’a say that disabilities occurring after marriage do not
establish grounds for annulment, with the exception of the husband's
insanity, which is grounds for annulment even after consummation; as for
impotence, the wife should seek the *qadis* pronouncement of the one
year period, but then she herself annuls the marriage.[^55]

III. Divorce (Talaq)
--------------------

The pillars of divorce differ according to the schools. The Hanafis and
Hanbalis hold that there is only one pillar, i,e., the formula through
which it takes place. In the view of the Shafi'is and Malikis, the
pillars are (I) the existence of the husband and the wife, (2) the
formula of divorce, and (3) the intention.[^56]

The Shi’a maintain that the pillars are (1) the husband and wife, (2)
the formula, and (3) two witnesses,[^57] The husband may divorce the
wife, but not the reverse. In contrast to marriage, the wife's consent
is not necessary.

The man must be in possession of his rational faculties, have reached
physical maturity (except in the Hanbali view), and be acting of his own
free will (except according to the Hanafis). The Hanbalis maintain that
a youth who has not reached puberty but who understands the meaning of
divorce and its consequences may divorce his wife of his own accord; the
Hanafis say that even if the formula is pronounced under duress, it is
still valid.[^58] To the views shared with the other schools, the Shi’a
add that the husband must pronounce the formula with the intent of
divorcing his wife, although unlike the Shafi'is and Malikis, they do
not make this a pillar of divorce.[^59]

The wife must be a free woman, a permanent wife, and faithful, since
there is no divorce in the case of a slave woman, a temporary wife (in
Shi’a m), or an adulteress.

The man must employ words in the formula that denote divorce directly or
indirectly, though the Shi’a hold that the word 'divorce' itself must be
employed. A dumb man may divorce his wife through gestures. The Malikis
and Hanafis hold that a man may divorce his wife in writing.

The formula must be pronounced three times in the manner described
below.

Divorce has two general categories depending on the time the man chooses
to pronounce the formula: 'traditional' *(sunni)* divorce, which is
permitted, and 'non-traditional' *(bid'i)* divorce, which is prohibited.

Whether divorce is traditional or non-traditional depends upon the
woman's state of ritual purity when the man pronounces the formula and
his manner of reciting the formula. During menstruation and confinement
after childbirth a woman is ritually impure, and she does not become
pure again until her situation changes and she performs the major
ablution *(ghusl).*

 For the traditional divorce to take place, she must be in a state of
ritual purity and her husband must not have had sexual intercourse with
her during her last menstrual period (this condition is added for
reasons of precision, even though sexual intercourse during that time is
forbidden) or from the time she performed the major ablution after her
period or confinement.

According to the Shi’a , if the woman is in the state known as
*mustaraba* (i,e., she is approaching menopause, her menstrual period is
delayed, and she mayor may not be pregnant), the husband must wait three
months in order to determine her condition, and only then can he divorce
her.[^60] The man must pronounce the formula on three separate occasions
separated by a specific period of time, as explained below.

Although non-traditional divorce is forbidden with certain exceptions in
the view of some schools, it may still take place. It is divided into
several kinds: A divorce given while the woman is in (I) her menstrual
period or (2) confinement, (3) A divorce given by pronouncing the
formula three times on a single occasion; here the Shafi'is maintain
that this form of divorce is permissible.[^61] (4) Divorce when the
woman is ritually pure after menstruation, but sexual intercourse has
taken place; the Malikis hold that this form of divorce is not
forbidden, only reprehensible *(makruh* ).

In spite of the fact that non-traditional divorce is forbidden, the
Sunnis hold that the formula pronounced under any of the above
conditions is still valid. However, the Hanafis and Malikis say that the
man must return to his wife and consider himself as her husband; if he
still desires to divorce her; he must wait until she has purified
herself after her second menstrual period from the time he originally
pronounced the formula and then pronounce it once more. If the man does
not return to his wife, the divorce is valid, but the man has then
definitely sinned against the *shari'a;* however, no punishment is to be
inflicted in this world before the Day of Judgment,[^62]

The Shi’a maintain that non-traditional divorce is invalid, with the
exception of the form in which a man pronounces the formula three times
at once; such a divorce is then irrevocable.[^63]

In certain cases, the temporal categories delineated by 'traditional'
and 'non-traditional' do not apply. Thus a man may divorce at any time a
woman with whom he has not consummated the marriage, a girl who has not
reached puberty, a woman who has reached menopause, and a pregnant wife.
In three of the schools, these types of divorce are considered
traditional, while the Shafi'is and Hanbalis hold that they are outside
the classification.[^64]

According to three of the schools, divorce initiated by the wife
*(khul'* and *mubarat,* discussed below), divorce as a result of
'forswearing' *(I'la,* below V), and divorce ordered by a *qadi* have no
temporal conditions. The Malikis and Shi’a hold that these are types of
traditional divorce with the same temporal conditions.[^65]

For a divorce to become final, in most cases the man must pronounce the
formula on three different occasions, as described below. Technically,
his first and second pronouncements are also divorces, but they are
'revocable' *(rij'i).* Hence, divorce may be divided into the revocable
and irrevocable *(ba'in)* forms. In the following cases, divorce is
irrevocable:

I. The divorce of a wife with whom marriage has not been consummated.

2. The divorce of a wife who has not yet reached puberty.

3. The divorce of a wife who has reached menopause.

4. Divorce initiated by the wife *(khul'* and *mubarat* ).

5. The third divorce after two revocable divorces.

Once an irrevocable divorce has taken place, a man may not remarry his
wife unless she first marries another man and consummates the marriage;
having been divorced irrevocably from her second husband, she may then
remarry her first.

The second husband is known as the *muhallil,* as mentioned above. In
such a situation, it would be normal practice for some sort of agreement
to be made between the wife and her second husband. However, it is not
permissible for a condition of subsequent divorce to be entered into the
marriage contract. Outwardly the contract must be the same as for any
permanent marriage.[^66]

A woman who has been revocably divorced keeps the status of wife, and
the husband may return to her and have sexual intercourse with her if he
so wishes. But according to the Malikis, he must make the mental
intention of returning to her before doing so; and according to the
Shafi'is, he must express the intention verbally to his wife.[^67]

It is permissible to include a condition of divorce in the marriage
contract in certain cases. Hence, for example, a wife may stipulate that
if her husband should marry a second wife, she will have the right to be
divorced.

Although only the man has the right to pronounce the formula of divorce,
the woman may take the initiative in *khul'* and *mubarat.* These two
terms are almost synonymous, but in the case of *khul',* the wife must
have an aversion to her husband; in *muharat,* there should be mutual
aversion. In each case the wife agrees to pay her husband a certain
amount of property in cash or kind if he divorces her.

According to the Shi’a , the amount in *muharat* must not exceed the
amount of the dower, while in *khul'* there are no conditions on the
amount, These divorces are irrevocable, except according to the Shi’a ,
who hold that during her waiting period the woman may take back her
property from her husband, in which case he has the right to conjugal
relations.[^68] The Hanbalis maintain that *khul'* is a form of
annulment, not divorce.[^69]

Since these types of divorces are in reality a kind of contract, they
require a declaration *(ijab)* and an acceptance *(qabul).* The woman
must say something like: 'Divorce me in exchange for such and such',
while the man must answer something like: 'I accept' or 'I divorce you'.
The Sunnis hold that the husband may employ any number of words in the
formula, such as 'divorce' or words derived from the same roots as
*khul'* and *muharat.* The Shi’a say that the word 'divorce' itself must
be employed.[^70]

According to the Sunni schools, a third party may initiate a *khul'*
divorce. In other words, he may offer the husband a sum in exchange for
which the husband will divorce his wife. The Shi’a maintain that this is
forbidden.[^71]

The schools discuss in detail the nature of the property which may be
exchanged in *khul'* and *mubarat,* differing on many minor points. In
general it must be lawful and intrinsically valuable, like the property
which constitutes the dower. If not, the divorce will be valid, but
there is then a difference of opinion as to whether it is revocable or
irrevocable.

IV. The Waiting Period ('Idda)
------------------------------

When a woman is divorced or her husband dies, she must wait for a
prescribed period of time before she can remarry.

If the woman's husband has died, the waiting period differs according to
whether or not she is pregnant; if she is not, she must wait four months
and ten days. Such things as her physical maturity, whether or not she
has reached menopause, and whether or not the marriage has been
consummated are irrelevant.

If the woman is pregnant, according to the Sunnis her waiting period
terminates when she gives birth to the child; according to the Shi’a ,
she must wait either four months and ten days or the term of her
pregnancy, whichever is longer.[^72]

If a woman's husband should be away on a journey when she hears of his
death, according to the Sunni schools her waiting period begins on the
date of his death; the Shi’a hold that it begins on the day she receives
the news.[^73]

The waiting period for divorce differs according to circumstances and
the views of the different schools. A woman with whom the marriage has
not been consummated has no waiting period. A girl less than nine years
old has no waiting period according to the Hanbalis and the Shi’a; but
the Malikis and Shafi'is hold that if she was mature enough to
participate in sexual relations, she must wait three months; the Hanafis
hold that in any case her waiting period is three months.

A woman who has gone through menopause must wait three months in the
view of the Sunni schools, but the Shi’a say that she has no waiting
period. A woman who menstruates and who is not pregnant must wait either
three *tuhrs* (periods of purification after menstruation) according to
the Shi’a , Malikis, and Shafi'is, or three menstrual periods according
to the Hanafis and Hanbalis. A woman who is old enough to menstruate but
who does not or who is in the state of *mustaraha* must wait three
months. A woman who is pregnant must wait until she has delivered her
child.[^74]

V. Forswearing (Ila')
---------------------

'Forswearing' means to swear an oath in God's name not to have sexual
relations with one's wife, either absolutely, or for a period of more
than four months. Since the *sharia* forbids a husband from refraining
from sexual intercourse with his wife for more than four months, once
the four months have passed, the wife has a valid reason to have
recourse to a *qadhi.*

If the husband should break the oath, he must pay the expiation
*(kaffara)* set by the law for the breaking of an oath. If he holds to
his oath and the four months pass, the wife may go before a *qadi* and
request that he clarify her marital situation. According to the wife's
wishes, the *qadi* will either order the husband to return to his wife
or to divorce her.

If the husband is ordered to return to her but refuses, the *qadi* will
then order him to divorce her. If he also refuses that, the *qadil* will
grant her a revocable divorce.

The Shi’a differ here by holding that the *qadi* does not have the right
to grant divorce in the husband's stead; however, he can force the
husband-by imprisonment or other means at his disposal-to take one of
the two courses open to him, i.e., to return to her or divorce her.[^75]
The Hanafis say that once the period of the husband's oath comes to an
end, the woman is divorced irrevocably, without any need for the
husband's pronouncement of the formula.[^76] The Shi’a hold that
forswearing may not take place in the case of a virgin.[^77] The Sunni
schools disagree and add that if her husband divorces her, the divorce
is irrevocable.

VI. Zihar
---------

In pre-Islamic times the Arabs practiced a form of divorce which
amounted to the husband's reciting the formula, 'You are to me as my
mother's back *(zahr)',* a practice referred to as *zihar.* Although
Islam forbids *zihar* (cf. Qur'an 33:4, 58:2), if a man should recite
this formula to his wife--or an equivalent formula, by substituting a
reference to any other female forbidden to him-sexual intercourse with
his wife is forbidden to him. Z*ihar's* conditions are the same as those
of divorce; hence in Shi’a m two witnesses must hear the formula
recited.

VII. Sworn Allegation (Li'an)
-----------------------------

'Sworn allegation' is a procedure whereby a man may take his wife before
a *qadi* and either accuse her of infidelity or deny his fathering her
child. The man then pronounces this formula four times: 'I testify
before God that I speak the truth concerning what I say about this
woman.' The *qadi* will then counsel the man concerning the gravity of
his accusation. If he should repent of his words, he will receive the
punishment for false accusation (eighty lashes). If he maintains the
truth of his accusation, he must repeat a second formula four times:
'God's curse be upon me if I am a liar'.

The judge then turns to the wife. She may either face the penalty for
adultery (stoning to death) or repeat this formula four times: 'I
testify before God that he is a liar'. The judge will counsel her
concerning the gravity of falsely swearing before God. If she continues
to maintain her innocence, she must pronounce a second formula four
times: 'God's wrath be upon me if he is telling the truth '. If she
refuses to pronounce the formula, she will suffer the penalty for
adultery.

After sworn allegation, the man and woman are forbidden to each other
forever, without divorce. If the husband denies the parentage of a
child, the child is illegitimate. If the man should ever repent of his
allegation, he must suffer the penalty for false accusation. In case a
child is involved, its legitimacy will then be restored; according to
the Sunnis, in such a case the father and the child inherit from each
other, but according to the Shi’a , the father may not inherit from the
child.[^78] The woman continues to be forbidden to the man.

VIII. Inheritance (Mirath)
--------------------------

Husband and wife inherit from each other according to set rules. The
only condition for inheritance is a valid marriage contract, not
consummation of the marriage.

If the wife should die childless, the husband inherits one-half of her
property; if she had a child or children, he inherits one-fourth. If the
husband should die childless, the wife inherits one-fourth of her
property; if he had children, she inherits one-eighth.

If the deceased wife should have no other relatives, all property goes
to the husband. If the deceased husband should have no other relatives,
the wife will inherit one-half the property and the rest will go to the
*bayt al-mal* (the community treasury), except according to one of two
Shi'i opinions, which holds that she inherits all the property.[^79] If
the deceased husband had more than one wife, the wife's share is divided
among them equally.

The husband inherits from everything left by the wife. According to the
Sunni schools, the wife also inherits from everything left by the
husband; in general the Shi’a hold that if she does not have any
children from the husband, she inherits from all property except land,
though she does inherit from the value of property situated upon the
land, such as buildings, trees, implements, etc.[^80]

If a woman should be in a period of revocable divorce when she or her
husband dies, her situation is the same as that of an ordinary wife. But
when irrevocable divorce has taken place, there is no inheritance, with
the exception of divorce during illness.

If the husband should be ill and divorce his wife irrevocably, and if
she should then die, he does not inherit from her; but if the husband
should die as a result of the illness, the schools differ as to the
situation.

The Hanbalis hold that the wife inherits as long as she has not
remarried. The Hanafis say that she inherits as long as she is still in
her waiting period. The Malikis hold that she inherits in any case. The
Shafi'is have two opinions, one that there is no inheritance, the other
that the situation is as the Hanafis say. The Shi’a maintain that she
may inherit within one year of the divorce provided she has not
remarried.[^81]

[^1]: 'Abd al-Rahman al-Jaziri, al-Fiqh 'ala al-madhahib al-arba'a
(hereafter cited as Fiqh), Cairo, 1969, IV, 24.

[^2]: Al-Shahid al Thani (Zayn al-Din Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-Jab'i
al-'Amili [d. 965/1558]), al-Rawdat al-bahiyya fi sharh al-lum'at
al-Dimashqiyya (hereafter cited as Sharh al-luma), Beirut, 1967, v, 108.

[^3]: Fiqh, IV, 13.

[^4]: Ibid., 18.

[^5]: Ibid., 25.

[^6]: Sharh al-lum'a. v. 234.

[^7]: Fiqh, IV, 54-60.

[^8]: Sharh al-lum'a, V, 181; Muhammad 'Ali al-Tabataba'i (d.
1231/1816), Riyad al-masail (also known as al-Sharh al-Kabir), Tabriz,
1308/1890-9 1,II, 94.

[^9]: Fiqh, IV, 63.

[^10]: Ibid.,65.

[^11]: Ibid.,66.

[^12]: Ibid.,67-68.

[^13]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 176-82; Riyad, II,96-97.

[^14]: Fiqh, IV, 268; Riyad, II, 86.

[^15]: Fiqh, IV, 256.

[^16]: Ibid.,253-55.

[^17]: Ibid.,268-69.

[^18]: Riyad, II, 86.

[^19]: Fiqh, IV, 253.

[^20]: Riyad, II, 86.

[^21]: Fiqh,lv,257.

[^22]: Riyad, II, 87.

[^23]: Fiqh,IV, 257.

[^24]: Ibid., 256; Sharh al-lum'a, II, 63.

[^25]: Fiqh, IV, 254,255, and 261.

[^26]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 156; Riyad, II, 105-06.

[^27]: Fiqh, IV, 77-84; Riyad, II, 181; Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 46.

[^28]: Fiqh,IV, 27.

[^29]: Ibid., 46--47.

[^30]: The major sources for this ruling are two hadith: 'If any of your
women marry without the permission ofher guardian, the marriage is
invalid (batil)' (Abu Dawud, Nikah 19; al-Darimi, Nikah 11). 'A woman
may not be given in marriage by a woman, nor may a woman give herself in
marriage' (Ibn Maja, Nikah 15 Malik, Nikah 5).

[^31]: Fiqh, IV, 46--47; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 112; Muhammad b. al-Hasan
al-Hurr al-'Amili (d. 1104-1693), Wasa'il al-shi'a, Tehran,
1385/1965-66, XIV, 220-221, hadith 1-3.

[^32]: Fiqh, IV, 46.

[^33]: Ibid.,51-52.

[^34]: Ibid., Sharh al-lum'a, v, 116.

[^35]: Fiqh, IV, 51-52.

[^36]: Ibid.,51.

[^37]: Ibid.,25.

[^38]: Ibid.

[^39]: Sharh al-lum'a, V, 112; Riyad, II, 70.

[^40]: Fiqh, IV, 108.

[^41]: Ibid.,109.

[^42]: Ibid., III.

[^43]: Ibid.,115.

[^44]: Sharh al-lum'a, II, 101; Riyad, II, 135.

[^45]: Fiqh, IV, 120-21; Sharh al-lum'a, II,101; Riyad, II, 135.

[^46]: Fiqh, IV,118.

[^47]: Ibid.,116.

[^48]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 371-72; Riyad, II, 149

[^49]: Fiqh, IV, 165.

[^50]: Ibid., 163; Riyad, II, 109-10.

[^51]: Fiqh, IV, 581; Sharh al-lum'a, v, 237-38; Riyad, II, 109-10.

[^52]: Fiqh, IV, 189-92.

[^53]: Ibid.,197.

[^54]: Ibid.,181-98.

[^55]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 387; Riyad, II, 132-35.

[^56]: Fiqh,IV, 280.

[^57]: Sharh al-lum'a,vi, 11; Riyad,II, 168-75.

[^58]: Fiqh, IV, 284

[^59]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 14-21; Riyad, II, 172.

[^60]: Riyad, II,171.

[^61]: Fiqh,IV,297.

[^62]: Ibid.,310.

[^63]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 31-32; Riyad, II, 176.

[^64]: Fiqh, IV, 305, and 307.

[^65]: Ibid., 302; Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 36-37; Riyad, II. 176.

[^66]: The necessity for the muhallil is established by Qur'an 2:230.
And if he divorces her finally, she shall not be lawful to him after
that, until she marries another husband. If he divorces her, then it is
no fault in them to return to each other.'

[^67]: Fiqh, IV, 435-41.

[^68]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 104-07; Riyad, II, 196.

[^69]: Fiqh, IV, 424.

[^70]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 87-89, and 111-13; Riyad, II, 107.

[^71]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 90-95.

[^72]: Ibid., 62-63; Riyad, II, 187.

[^73]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 65-66; Riyad, II, 188.

[^74]: Fiqh, IV, 540-52; Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 57-65; Riyad, II,183-86.

[^75]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 160; Riyad, II, 123.

[^76]: Fiqh, IV, 485.

[^77]: Riyad, II,122.

[^78]: Sharh al-lum'a, VI, 210-12; Riyad, II, 217-18.

[^79]: Sharh al-lum'a, VIII, 65-66; Riyad, II, 366.

[^80]: Sharh al-lum'a, VIII, 172 74; Riyad, II, 367.

[^81]: Sharh al-lum'a, VIII, 172; Riyad, II, 367, 369.


