The Four Pillars Of Mut'a
=========================

The Arabic dictionaries define *mut'a* as 'enjoyment, pleasure,
delight'. The root form, *m-t:* signifies, 'to carry away, to take
away'. A 'marriage of *mut'a'* is a marriage which the contract
stipulates will last for a fixed period of time. This 'marriage of
*mut'a'* is referred to both in the *hadith* literature and, in much
more detail, in the books on jurisprudence *(fiqh*).

In the *hadith* and in other sayings related from early Muslims the word
*'mut'a'* itself is usually employed. The Shi’a hold that this
particular term is the preferred name for temporary marriage because the
Qur'an itself refers to this kind of marriage employing a term derived
from the same root. In the following verse, the word *istimta',* the
tenth verbal form of the root *m-t-',* is translated as 'enjoy':

***'So those of them [women] whom you enjoy, give to them their
appointed wages' (4:24).***

In general the word *mut'a* was more commonly used than other terms for
temporary marriage both during the lifetime of the Prophet and
afterwards during the time of the Shi'i Imams and other Muslim leaders.

Both its proponents and opponents preferred this word and its
derivatives. In *Wasa'il al-shi'a,* the comprehensive and definitive
reference work for Shi'i *hadith* concerning all branches of
jurisprudence, the word *mut'a* is employed in the headings of all
sections on temporary marriage.

In books on jurisprudence the terms *mut'a, al-nikah al-munqati'*
('discontinued marriage'), and *al-nikah al-muwaqqat* ('temporary
marriage') are all employed. Al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli[^1] still employs the
term 'discontinued marriage' in his writings,[^2] and hence his
commentators use the same expression, although in sections of the
statutes relating to this kind of marriage they also employ the terms
*istimta'* and the related word *tamattu'.* Al-Shahid al Thani[^3]
employs the same term as al-Hilli[^4] , but others, such as al-Shahid
al-Awwal,[^5] al-'Allama al-Hilli[^6] and al-Shaykh al-Ansari[^7] prefer
the term *mut'a.*[^8]

Among Sunni jurisprudents there is a discussion concerning whether or
not the marriage of *mut'a* is the same as 'temporary marriage'. Most of
them have agreed that they are synonymous.[^9]

In some works a special term is applied to women who participate in
*mut'a: musta'jara,* or 'rented woman'. *Mut'a* is considered a kind of
'rental' because in general a man's basic aim in this kind of marriage
is the sexual enjoyment of a woman, and in return for his enjoyment the
woman receives a certain amount of money or property.

In defining 'rental' the jurisprudents say: 'It is to gain possession of
a benefit in exchange for a specified sum.'[^10] This definition applies
equally to temporary marriage. In this connection a number of *hadith*
have been recorded in which the word *musta'jara* is employed.[^11]

Shi'i jurisprudence discusses temporary marriage with all the care it
bestows upon permanent marriage. Like permanent marriage, *mut'a* has
'pillars' and 'statutes'. To the two pillars of permanent marriage-the
formula and the persons-are added the time period and the dower .

I. The Formula
--------------

Since it is a contract, *mut'a* requires a declaration and an
acceptance. As in permanent marriage, the declaration is the
prerequisite of the woman. It must consist of one of three Arabic
formulas, the same three which are employed by the Shi’a in permanent
marriage. Al-Sayyid al-Murtada[^12] is said to have added that a slave
girl may employ the formula 'I have allowed you' *(abahtu-ka)* or 'I
have considered you lawful' *(hallaltu-ka),*[^13] but his words have not
been confirmed by others.

Al-Shahid al Thani writes: 'To me it seems more correct to limit
ourselves to the first three phrases.' [^14] Apparently there is no
disagreement on the point that the woman may not employ expressions
like: 'I have given you possession', 'I have given to you as a gift', 'I
have rented to you', 'I have lent to you', etc.

The 'acceptance' is made by the man after the woman has made her
declaration. His words must demonstrate that he is satisfied with the
declaration. For example, he may say: 'I will accept the marriage', or
'I accept the *mut'a.'* If he should say only: 'I accept' or 'I am
satisfied', the contract is valid.

That the declaration should precede the acceptance is not a condition of
the contract, since a contract consists of a declaration and an
acceptance, in whatever order the two may occur. It is claimed that
there is a consensus on this point.[^15] Al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli states
explicitly that if the man says: 'I have married you', and then the
woman says the same thing to him, the contract is sound.[^16]

According to al-'Allama al-Hilli, the formula of the contract must be
recited in the perfect tense.[^17] But the majority of the *'ulama'*
hold that it is permissible for it to be recited in the imperfect tense,
as long as there is the intention of contracting the marriage.[^18] Many
*hadith* have been related showing that the imperfect tense is
acceptable.

For example, the Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq was once asked what formula should
be recited when a *mut'a* is contracted. He replied: 'I marry thee in
*mut'a* according to the Book of God and His prophet's *sunna* without
inheritance from me to thee or vice versa, for so many days, for so many
dirhams. .....'[^19]

The legal discussions of contracts assert that the persons who make the
declaration and acceptance must be 'worthy of the contract' *(ahl al
'aqd).* In the question of *mut'a* this means that those who conclude
the contract must be the man and woman themselves, or their
representatives *(wakil),* or their fathers. Hence, for example, it is
permissible for the father to say: 'I give my daughter in *mut'a* with
her agreement.' If anyone other than the above persons should conclude
the contract, it is 'uncommissioned' *(fuduli)* and therefore invalid.

II. The Persons
---------------

A man can conclude a contract *of mut'a* only with a Muslim or one of
the 'People of the Book'. It is not permissible to engage in temporary
marriage with an unbeliever or an enemy of the Household of the Prophet
*(Ahlul Bayt,* i.e., the Imams), such as a follower of the Khawarij. A
Muslim woman cannot marry a non-Muslim.

If the man has a free, permanent wife, he cannot contract a *mut'a* with
a slave without his wife's permission. Should he do so, the contract is
invalid or in abeyance pending her permission. If the slave should
belong to someone else, a *mut'a* cannot be contracted without her
master's permission. Several *hadith* have been recorded on this point,
For example, the Imam Ja'far says: 'There is nothing wrong with marrying
a slave [temporarily] with the permission of her master.'[^20]

A man is not permitted to marry the daughter of his sister-in-law or
brother-in-law without his wife's permission. Should a contract be
concluded without her permission it is invalid or in abeyance until she
gives her permission.[^21] With these two exceptions, the relatives to
whom marriage is not permitted are the same as in permanent marriage.

It is recommended that a Muslim man conclude a temporary marriage only
with a chaste Muslim woman. Here by 'chaste' (*afifa)* the classical
authors have in mind someone who has never committed fornication and who
follows the *shari'a* in her activities. More specifically, the
adjective denotes a woman who has observed the *shar'i laws* concerning
marriage and in general is honest and upright.

The two attributes 'Muslim' and 'chaste' are derived from sayings by two
of the Imams: the Imam al-Rida was asked: 'Is it possible for a man to
conclude a temporary marriage with a Jew or a Christian?' He answered:
'I would prefer that he engage in *mut'a* with a free Muslim
woman.'[^22] To a question about performing *mut'a,* the Imam Ja'far
replied: 'It is permissible. So marry none but a chaste woman, for God
says,

***" And those who guard their private parts" (23:5).***

Hence you should not put your private parts where you do not feel safe
with your dirhams.'[^23]

If someone makes an accusation against a woman, it is recommended that
before concluding the contract of *mut'a* with her the man inquire from
her about her situation, i.e., as to whether or not she has a husband
and whether or not she is chaste. But asking is not a condition of the
contract.[^24] According to the 'Principles of Jurisprudence',[^25] the
principle of 'correctness' as applied to the acts of a Muslim [^26]
demands that one consider the act of a woman who has declared herself
ready to enter into *mut'a* as correct.

According to this principle, whenever we are in doubt concerning the
correctness of the act of a Muslim, we preserve the social and legal
order by judging that his act was correct. For example, if we are in
doubt concerning the legality of a couple's marriage, we judge that it
was legal. Otherwise we would also have to doubt the legitimacy of their
children, the application of the laws of inheritance, etc.

In a different area of the law, the canonical prayer provides a good
example: If, after finishing his prayer, a person doubts as to whether
or not he said the correct number of cycles, he assumes the number was
correct, Otherwise he would spend a good deal of his time repeating acts
of worship he has already performed. The slightest doubt would be
sufficient to cause him to repeat the same act.

On the basis of this principle, one must dismiss the possibility that a
potential wife might be unchaste, so it is unnecessary to ask her.
Several *hadith* are related which demonstrate the reprehensibility of
asking about the woman's situation *after* the contract has been
concluded. For example, a man once said to the Imam Ja'far: 'I married a
woman temporarily, and then it came to my mind that she might already
have a husband. I investigated the matter and found out that it was so.'
The Imam said: 'And why did you investigate?'[^27]

It is reprehensible for a man to conclude a marriage of *mut'a* with a
fornicatress, by reason of the Qur'anic verse:

***'The fornicator shall marry not but a fornicatress or an idolatress,
and the fornicatress- none shall marry her but a fornicator or an
idolator; that is forbidden to the believers' (24:3).***

If a man should contract a temporary marriage with a fornicatress, it is
his duty to command her not to perform adultery. But this is not a
necessary condition of the marriage, by reason of the 'principle of
correctness' as applied to the Muslim's act.[^28]

It is also reprehensible, without any exceptions, to contract a
temporary marriage with a virgin, by reason of the words of the Imam
Ja'far: 'It is reprehensible, because it is a stain upon her
family.'[^29] If a contract should nevertheless be concluded, it is not
permissible for the man to consummate the marriage, unless the marriage
took place with the permission of her father-a condition almost
impossible to imagine in Muslim society. 'A virgin may not be married
temporarily without her father's permission' (the Imam al-Rida).[^30]

III. The Time Period (Mudda)
----------------------------

The time period of a temporary marriage must be delineated in a manner
which allows no possibility of increase or decrease. According to the
Imam al-Rida, '. *..(mut'a* must) be a stipulated thing for a stipulated
period.'[^31] In addition, the Imam was once asked if it is possible to
conclude a contact of *mut'a* for 'one or two hours'. He replied, 'No
time limit is understood from "one or two" hours.'[^32]

According to al-Shaykh al-Ansari, all of the *hadith* indicate that it
is permissible for the agreed upon time period either to be joined to
the moment of concluding the contract or to be postponed.[^33] The
situation here is the same as with a contract concluded for purposes of
rental, since-as was pointed out above-the woman takes on certain legal
characteristics of rented property.

In the case of a temporary marriage which begins after a period of
postponement, there arises the question of whether or not the woman may
marry a second man in the period between the conclusion of the contract
and the beginning of the marriage period.

Here there are two possibilities: that it is not permitted, because the
woman already has a husband; or that it is permitted, because of the
existence of all the 'requisites of a contract' and the absence of an
impediment. Apparently the ruling here is that a second temporary
marriage would be permissible provided that the woman has enough time
before the beginning of the first marriage to conclude a second marriage
and then to observe her waiting period.

As for the possibility of postponing the beginning of *mut'a,* this is
conditional upon the stipulation of the day and the month in which it is
to begin. For example, if the man should state that the contract will be
for one month but fail to stipulate exactly when that month is to begin,
the contract is invalid because the time is not stated.

In contracts of rental, such instances are always invalid.[^34] But if
the contract should be unconditional, without any mention of a
postponement, then the marriage begins as soon as the contract is
concluded, since, according to the accepted standard, when a contract
has been concluded, the transaction has taken place.[^35]

The most authoritative view holds that if the stipulated period is not
mentioned in the text of the contract, the marriage cannot take place
and the contract is invalid.[^36] The consensus of the community has
established that one of the two pillars that differentiate *mut'a* from
permanent marriage is mention of the time period; whenever this pillar
is not present, everything that depends on it is invalidated.

In addition, a contract follows the intentions of those who conclude it,
Thus, if the time period is not mentioned, the marriage cannot be
transformed into a permanent one, since that was not the intention. In
this connection a *hadith* has been related from the Imam Ja'far: 'There
will be no *mut'a* without two things: a stipulated period and a stated
dowry.'[^37]

In spite of this opinion, the majority of the *'ulama'* hold that if the
time period is not mentioned, the contract is not invalidated; rather,
the marriage becomes a permanent one. These scholars argue that a
marriage contract is concluded either for temporary or permanent
marriage. If a time period is mentioned, the contract is for *mut'a;*
but if it is not mentioned, the contract is for permanent marriage.

Hence, whenever the contract of *mut'a* is invalidated because the time
period has not yet been stipulated, the contract will be one of
permanent marriage. Here they cite the principle of 'correctness' in
relation to the contract, In order to corroborate their argument, they
mention a *hadith* of the Imam Ja'far: 'If a time period is stated, the
marriage is *mut'a;* if it is not stated, it is permanent,'[^38]

In opposition to those who hold that a temporary marriage is transformed
into a permanent marriage if the time period is not mentioned, al-Shaykh
al-Ansari writes that temporary marriage and permanent marriage are two
different realities. Although the word 'marriage' is employed for both,
this does not make them share in the same nature. The difference between
the two does not lie in saying that one is an unconditional marriage and
the other conditional.

No, the relationship between them is like that between purchasing
something and receiving a gift. In both cases, 'ownership' is the
result. But the fact that purchasing an object and receiving a gift have
a common measure does not mean that they have the same nature. We cannot
say that the only difference between the two is that receiving a gift
entails 'unconditional ownership' and purchasing entails 'ownership
conditional on payment'.

No one would ever claim that when someone says: 'I have transferred
ownership' and forgets to mention a price, the purchase is immediately
transformed into a gift. The relationship between temporary and
permanent marriage is similar.[^39]

In *Sharh al-Ium'a* al-Shahid al Thani adds that the *hadith* which is
quoted from the Imam Ja'far in support of the position of the majority
of the *'ulama' does* not state explicitly that the desire of the two
parties to the contract is to conclude a marriage of *mut'a*, but then
they fail to mention the time period. On the contrary, the purport of
the hadith is that marriage with a stated period is *mut’a,* while
marriage without a stated period is permanent marriage.[^40]

There is no upper or lower limit to the duration of the time period. It
makes no difference if the period is extremely long, so that one doubts
whether the parties will survive its duration; or if it is extremely
short, so that there is no possibility of consummation. In other words,
any time period is permissible, so long as both sides are aware of the
situation and are satisfied.[^41]

Once the contract is concluded the wife receives the whole dowry,
whether or not the husband consummates the marriage before the time
period expires. The wife is entitled to the dowry as long as she places
herself at her husband's disposal and does not present him with any
obstacles to consummating the marriage. The situation is exactly the
same as renting a house, but then choosing not to take up residence
before the rental period has expired. When the time period is over, the
wife is freed from the obligations of the contract.[^42]

It is not permissible for the parties to stipulate in the contract 'one
act of intercourse' or the like without mentioning a time period, since
such an expression cannot take the place of a stipulated period of time.
In the view of most of the *'ulama',* if such a contract were to be
concluded, it would not be transformed into that of a permanent
marriage, since the time period has been mentioned incorrectly. The fact
that the contract has been concluded in an improper manner and is thus
invalid as a contract carries more weight than the failure to mention
the stipulated period.

However, if the time period is mentioned along with the condition that
the marriage will entail only a certain number of sexual acts, the
contract is correct, Here the juridical principle that comes into play
is enunciated in the Prophet's saying: 'The believers hold fast to their
conditions [when they stipulate them in agreements]. '[^43]

In such a situation, as soon as the man has performed the agreed number
of sexual acts, further sexual intercourse with the woman is forbidden,
even if the time period has not elapsed. There is no contradiction
between the continuation of the marriage and the interdiction of sexual
relations.

A complication would arise in the above situation if, after the woman
has been forbidden to the man, she gives him permission to engage in
further acts of sexual intercourse. Is the man allowed to have
intercourse or not?

Here there are two opinions. According to the first, there is a definite
obstacle to sexual relations. For the contract does not allow any
further sexual acts, so the permission of the woman is immaterial, since
it is not sufficient to override the stipulations of the contract and
legitimize relations.

According to the second opinion, intercourse is permitted. Since in
*mut'a-in* contrast to permanent marriage-a woman does not have the
right to initiate a sexual act, the obstacle to sexual relations in the
present situation is the woman's unwillingness to permit anything more
than what was agreed upon in the contract. But the contract itself
establishes the permissibility of intercourse. So if the obstacle is
removed, the result will be that the contract as such will come into
play.[^44]

If the role of the time period is to contain a stipulated number of
sexual acts, whenever the number is finished, the woman is free of any
further obligation to the man. It goes without saying that if the
stipulated number of sexual acts is not performed by the end of the time
period, the marriage still comes to an end.[^45]

IV. The Dower
-------------

The contract must mention a dower of known property, whether in cash or
kind, whose amount is safe from increase or decrease. In order to gain
knowledge of the property, it is sufficient for the woman to see it, but
it is not necessary that it actually be weighed, measured, or
counted-whatever the case may require.

The contract of *mut'a* is not simply an exchange of goods, but a
marriage. Even if it is defined as a 'rental', that also is different
from an exchange. Hence it is sufficient that any possibility of
misunderstanding which might arise from not seeing the dower be removed.
As for goods which are not present, it is sufficient that the dower be
described in such a manner that the woman's ignorance will be removed,
i.e., that it be described exactly as it is.[^46]

There is no condition or requirement concerning the amount of the dower
except that the two sides come to an agreement over articles which may
properly be exchanged, even if they are no more than a few grains of
wheat.[^47] On this point there are specified *hadith* as well as the
*general hadith* which state that a woman who enters into *mut'a* is
'rented'.[^48] If the dower is not mentioned, the contract is
unanimously held to be invalid; On this point also there are a number of
*hadith.*[^49]

The woman may ask for the whole amount of the dower at the beginning of
the marriage. In this case, the man may not take back any of the dower
under any circumstances; unless for some reason the contract should have
been invalid from the beginning (see below). Several *hadith* are
recorded which establish this point without question.[^50]

In a situation where a contract is concluded, but before the beginning
of the time period the man decides not to go through with the marriage
but to 'give back' to the woman the contracted time, she is entitled to
one-half the dower. The situation is similar to divorce before
consummation in permanent marriage.[^51]

But if the man should give only part of the time period back to the
woman before consummation, there is a difference of opinion as to the
dower. According to al-Shaykh al-Ansari and al-Shahid al Thani, the
situation cannot be the same as in the first case--where the whole time
period was given back-since in this second case the essential point is
that *mut'a* demands a full dower.[^52]

The difference between the first and second cases is explained in more
detail by al-Shahid al Thani. He poses the question: 'What is it that
requires one-half of the dowers to be held back from the woman? Is it
two things together, i.e., not consummating the marriage and giving back
the whole of the time period? Or does the problem revolve around whether
or not the marriage was consummated?'

He states that there are two possibilities: On the one hand, the
*hadith* are explicit concerning the matter of consummation. The
situation is exactly the same as in divorce after permanent marriage:
one-half of the dower must be paid if the marriage has not been
consummated, but the whole dower must be paid if it has been
consummated. So in this respect, the reason that one-half the dower is
held back is that the marriage was not consummated.

On the other hand, there is the question of what exactly necessitates
that the dower be paid. In permanent marriage the key element is
consummation. But temporary marriage is different from permanent
marriage because of the time period. Therefore the time period also must
be taken into account.[^53]

Al-Shahid al Thani remarks that the difference between these two
possible interpretations becomes obvious in a situation where the
husband should return more than one-half of the time period to the wife,
not having consummated the marriage. According to the first
interpretation, the wife must receive the whole dower; but according to
the second, she is only entitled to one-half of it, He concludes that
the second interpretation would seem to be the correct one, so long as
we accept the authenticity of the *hadith* attributed to the Imam
al-Hasan: When asked about a man who gave the remaining time period back
to his temporary wife before the consummation of the marriage, he
replied in a general sense, 'The woman must return one-half the dower to
the man.'[^54]

Al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Hasan holds that whether the full dower or only
one-half is to be paid depends totally upon the question of
consummation. 'Giving back the time period' is equivalent to using it up
completely. In other words, when the man returns the remaining time
period to the woman, he has already taken possession of conjugal rights
with her for the elapsed time. But this does not require that the woman
relinquish one-half of the dowers.

In this respect the situation resembles the woman's 'giving back the
dower' in permanent marriage. If the woman thus relinquishes her claim
to it, this does not mean that her husband is no longer her husband in
the full sense. Therefore, giving back the time period has no
relationship with the dower being reduced to one-half.

The only question to consider is whether or not the marriage has been
consummated. If it has been consummated and then the husband returns
some or all of the remaining time, the wife is entitled to the whole
dower, since without question the dower becomes necessary as soon as
consummation takes place.[^55]

Whether the time period is given back with or without consummation, the
wife's consent is unnecessary, since giving back the period is
equivalent to the erasing of a debt owed by the woman.[^56]

If of her own free will a woman who has concluded a contract of *mut'a*
should separate from her husband before the end of the time period,
whether before or after consummation, the man reduces the dower in
proportion to the amount of time by which the time period of the *mut'a*
has been reduced-provided, that is, that he has not already paid her the
full dower.[^57]

Thus, for example, if the woman's dower is 3000 rials and the time
period 30 days; and if the woman should separate from her husband after
20 days, her husband would reduce the dower by one-third. Hence, if the
woman should fail to fulfill any of the conditions of the marriage for
the whole time period, she forfeits the whole dower.

The reason she forfeits part or all of it is that first, the contract of
*mut'a* by definition entails an exchange, such that the woman is in the
position of a 'rented' object, Second, numerous *hadith* have been
recorded concerning this particular point.

For example, the Imam Ja'far was asked if it is permissible to hold back
part of the dower if the woman fails to put herself at her husband's
disposal. He replied: 'It is permissible for you to hold back what you
can [i.e., what you have not already given her]. So if she goes back on
her word, take from her [in proportion to] the amount she has broken the
contract.'[^58]

However, if the woman should fail to provide the man with conjugal
rights because of an excuse sanctioned by the *sharia,* such as
menstruation or 'fear of an oppressor', then the dower may not be
reduced. A man came to the Imam Ja'far and said:[^59] 'I concluded a
contract of *mut'a* with a woman for one month for a given amount, But
the woman only came to me for part of the month, and part she stayed
away.' The Imam replied: 'An amount should be held back from her dower
equivalent to the amount she stayed from you, except for the days of her
menstruation, for those belong to her.'

If it should become apparent that the contract is invalid because the
woman already has a husband, or because she should be maintaining a
waiting period as the result of a previous marriage, or because she is
forbidden to the man by family relationship, or because of some other
reason, then one of the following courses of action should be taken:

If the marriage has already been consummated and if the woman was
ignorant of the fact that the contract was invalid at the time of sexual
intercourse, then she should be given the 'normal dower'. Here the
reasoning is that the fact of intercourse has to be honored and
compensation given. Since the contract is invalid, the 'specified dower'
is nullified; hence the normal dower must be paid.[^60]

As for whether the normal dower is the same as that for permanent
marriage or is to be adjusted according to the time period of the
*mut'a,* the most authoritative opinion is voiced by al-Shaykh al-Ansari
and al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Hasan. They hold that the normal dower is the
same as for permanent marriage. AI Tabataba'i argues that here the
normal dower is compensation for 'mistaken intercourse'. Since the
contract was invalid without the knowledge of the husband and wife,
their intercourse is 'mistaken'.

Therefore the man must pay the normal dowry of permanent marriage, which
is demanded in any instance of 'mistaken intercourse'.[^61] The time
period for which the woman was at the man's disposal is irrelevant, just
as there is no difference between one act of sexual intercourse and
several acts as long as the mistake remains in force.[^62]

If it should become apparent that the contract is invalid before the
marriage is consummated, the woman receives no dower. Only a valid
contract or the fact of intercourse warrants the dower's payment.
Al-Shahid al Thani claims that on this point there is consensus among
the *ulama.*[^63]

If the marriage has been consummated and the woman was aware of the
contract's invalidity, she can have no claim to a dower, since she is a
fornicatress, and there is no dower for fornication.

In all three of the above cases, if the man has already given the woman
the whole dower, she must return part or all of it as soon as the
invalidity of the contract becomes apparent. If she no longer possesses
the amount which must be returned, she is liable for it, no matter how
it may have left her hands-whether, for example, she has spent it or it
was stolen.[^64]

If the woman should die during the period of the *mut'a,* even if it be
before consummation, her dower may in no way be lessened, exactly as in
permanent marriage.[^65]

[^1]: Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'id (602-76/1205-77), author of Shara'i'
al-islam, a standard textbook of Shi'i fiqh and the subject of many
commentaries.

[^2]: Shara'i', Beirut, 1930,II,23.

[^3]: Zayn al-Din Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-'A.mili (911-65/1505-58), author
of Sharh al-lum'a (al-Rawdat al-bahiyya fi sharh al-lum'a
al-dimashqiyya), a commentary on al-Iuma al-dimashqiyya by al-Shahid
al-Awwal.

[^4]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 245.

[^5]: Abu 'Abdullah Muhammad ibn Makki al-'Amili (d. 782/1380).

[^6]: Jamal al-Din Hasan ibn Yusuf ibn Zayn al-Din 'Ali ibn al-Mutahhar
(648-726/1250-1326), author of lrshad al-adhhan ila ahkam al-iman.

[^7]: Murtada b. Muhammad Amin al-Dizfuli (1214-81/1800-64). His works
al-Matajir on fiqh and al-Rasa'il on us'ul al-fiqh are considered the
most complete textbooks on these sciences.

[^8]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 245; al-Matajir, Tehran 1352/1973, the book on
mut’a (which is a commentary on al-'Allama's lrshad).

[^9]: Fiqh,IV, 90.

[^10]: Shara'i, I,233.

[^11]: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr al-'Amili (1033-1104/1624-93),
Wasa'il al-shia, Tehran, 1385/1965-66, XIV, 446.

[^12]: 'Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Musawi (355-436/965-1044), leading Shi'i
scholar and author of many works. His brother, al-Sharif al-Radi (d.
406/1015), was also a famous scholar and compiled 'Ali's Nahj
al-balagha.

[^13]: Riyad, II, 113; Mukhtasar-i nafi' (an 18th/14th century Persian
summary of al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli's Shara'i' by an unknown author), ed.
M.T. Daneshpazhuh, Tehran, 1343/1964,231.

[^14]: Al-Shahid al Thani, Masalik al-ajham (a commentary on Shara'i'),
Tehran, 1273/1856-57, I,536.

[^15]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 110.

[^16]: Shara'i',II, 24.

[^17]: al-Matajir,II,298.

[^18]: Riyad, II,113.

[^19]: Wasa'il, XIV, 466.

[^20]: Ibid.,463.

[^21]: Shaykh Muhammad Hasan (d. 1266/1850), Jawahir al-kalam (a
commentary on Shara'i'), Tehran, 1325/1907, V, 165.

[^22]: Wasa'il, XIV, 452.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Jawahir, v, 165.

[^25]: Usul al-fiqh, the science that discusses the arts and techniques
for making juridical judgments.

[^26]: Asl al-sihha.

[^27]: Wasail, XIV, 458, hadith 3.

[^28]: Jawahir, V, 166,

[^29]: Wasail, XIV, 459, hadith 10.

[^30]: Ibid., 458, hadith 5.

[^31]: Ibid., 479, hadith I.

[^32]: Ibid., hadith 2.

[^33]: Ibid., 446, hadith 2 and 4.

[^34]: Matajir, II, 300.

[^35]: Ibid.,Jawahir,v,171.

[^36]: Matajir, II, 299; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 287; Jawahir, V, 169.

[^37]: Wasa'ill, XIV, hadith 1.

[^38]: Ibid., 469, hadith 1.

[^39]: Matajir, II, 299.

[^40]: Sharh al-lum'a, V, 287.

[^41]: Ibid.,285.

[^42]: Matajir, II, 300; Jawahir, V, 170.

[^43]: Sahih al-Bukhari, n.p., 1378/1958, III, 120.

[^44]: Matajir, II, 300.

[^45]: Ibid.

[^46]: Matajir, II, 300; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 284.

[^47]: Wasa'il, XIV, 467, hadith 5.

[^48]: Matajir, II. 300; Masalik, l, 538.

[^49]: Wasa'il, XIV, 465-66, hadith 1-3.

[^50]: Ibid., 482, hadith 1-2; 483, hadith I.

[^51]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 285; Shara'i, II, 24; Matajir, II, 300;
Masalik, 1,538.

[^52]: Matajir, II, 301; Sharh al-lum'a, V, 285; Masalik, 1,538.

[^53]: Masalik, I, 538.

[^54]: Wasa'il, XIV, 483, hadith I.

[^55]: Jawahir, V, 168.

[^56]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 285; Masalik, I,538.

[^57]: Sharh al-lum'a,v,285.

[^58]: Wasail, XIV, 481, hadith I.

[^59]: Ibid., hadith 4.

[^60]: Masalik, l,539; Matajir, lI,301; Riyad,II,114.

[^61]: Riyad, II ,115.

[^62]: Matajir, II, 301

[^63]: Masalik, I, 538.

[^64]: Matajir, II, 301; Sharh al-lum'a, v, 287-88.

[^65]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 286.


