The Legitimacy of Mut'a
=======================

The *ulama',* both Sunni and Shi'i, agree that *mut'a* was permitted at
the beginning of Islam. However, they disagree as to the reasons it was
permitted.

The Shi'i View
--------------

In the sura entitled 'Women', after listing those women to whom marriage
is forbidden, the Qur'an states as follows:

***“Lawful for you is what is beyond all that, that you may seek, using
your wealth, in wedlock and not in license. So those of them whom you
enjoy, give them their appointed wages; it is no fault in you in
agreeing together, after the due apportionate. God is All-Knowing,
All-Wise' (4:24).***

All Shi'i *ulama'* and some Sunni *ulama'* hold that this
verse-especially the words: 'Such wives as you enjoy
*(istamta'tum)'-refers* to the permissibility of *mut'a.* The Shi’a
present several arguments to prove this point.[^1]

This verse was revealed towards the beginning of the Prophet's stay in
Medina, which lasted from AH 1/CE 622 to 10/632. At that time the men of
Medina used to 'seek enjoyment' from women for a limited period of time
in exchange for a specified sum of money.

By its revelation this verse in effect confirmed an existing situation;
and it emphasized that men must fulfill their promises concerning the
agreed upon sum. In Medina this custom was looked upon as one kind of
temporary marriage and was referred to by the term *istimta',* the same
word employed in the Qur'anic verse-even though the literal meaning of
the word is 'to seek benefit' or 'to take enjoyment'.

Hence the meaning of the Qur'anic verse must be understood in terms of
the conventional usage of the time, for as is well known in the science
of Qur'anic commentary and Islamic jurisprudence, the Qur'an follows the
conventional usage of the people in all statutes and legal
prescriptions. If someone wants to understand a word in the Qur'an in
other than the conventional meaning of the time, he must supply a strong
reason for doing so.

The context of the verse also indicates that it is referring to
temporary marriage. In the preceding verses the Qur'an forbids acts of
injustice toward women.

***'Oh believers, it is not lawful for you to inherit from women against
their will; neither debar them, that you may go off with part of what
you have given them' (4:19).***

The most commonly accepted interpretation of this verse is that it
forbids the pre-Islamic Arab custom of inheriting stepmothers. When a
man died, one of his sons would inherit his wife, as long as she was not
his own mother. The stepson would place a cloth upon his dead father's
wife and thereby become her owner.

If he wished he could then marry her without paying her a dower. Or he
could keep her a virtual prisoner. He could also marry her to someone
else and take her dower for himself, or forbid her to marry anyone as
long as he was alive. If the woman possessed property, he was entitled
to take possession of it for himself.[^2]  
 The next verse reads in part as follows:

***' And if you desire to exchange a wife in place of another, and you
have given to one a hundred-weight, take of it nothing' (4:20).***

In other words, if a man divorces a wife to marry a different wife, he
must not take back any of the dower that he has given the first, even if
the dower is a very large one and he desires only a small part of it.

The next subject referred to in this passage is the marriage of one's
father's wife:

***' And do not marry women that your fathers married. ..' (4:22).***

Both this verse and verse 19 were revealed after Abu Qays b. al-Aslat
died and his wife was inherited and married by his son Muhsin. The son
refused to pay the daily expenses of his stepmother and wife, nor would
he give her, her share of the inheritance or allow her to visit her
relatives. She came to the Prophet and explained what had happened. He
told her to return to her husband and wait, that perhaps God would send
down a statute that would clarify her situation. Then these verses were
revealed.[^3]

In the following verse the Qur'an enumerates the women who are forbidden
to men. These are divided into seven kinds stemming from blood
relationship and seven more stemming from other causes:

***Forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and your sisters
and your paternal aunts and your maternal aunts and brothers' daughters
and sisters' daughters and your mothers that have suckled you and your
foster-sisters and mothers of your wives and your step-daughters who are
in your guardianship, (born) of your wives to whom you have gone in, but
if you have not gone in to them, there is no blame on you (in marrying
them), and the wives of your sons who are of your own loins and that you
should have two sisters together, except what has already passed; surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.*** ***(4:23)***

The next verse adds a fifteenth category of women forbidden to men:

***And wedded women, save what your right hands own….' (4:24)***

And it continues:

***'Lawful for you is what is beyond all that.'(4:24)***

 In other words, any woman not belonging to one of the fifteen
categories is permitted, whether by marriage or ownership.

And the same verse states:

***'That you may seek, using your wealth, in wedlock and not in
license.' (4:24)***

Grammatically, this clause is in apposition to 'what is beyond all
that.' It explains the legitimate mode of seeking sexual relationships
with women, whether as the result of marriage or the purchase of slaves.

The next part of this same verse states as follows: 'So those of them
whom you enjoy, give them their appointed wages.' The word 'so' *(fa)*
shows that this part of the verse is the conclusion reached by the
previous words. This section is either part of the previous subject
matter, or an example of it; in other words, its relation to the
previous section is either that of the part which is completing the
whole, or the particular example to the universal principle.

And since the previous section deals with the different kinds of
legitimate sexual relationships, either by marriage or the purchase of
slaves, we can conclude that this section of the verse is the exposition
of a further kind of marriage, not mentioned previously; a kind which
requires that the man pay the wages of his wife.

The next verse states that if a man is too poor to marry a free Muslim
woman, he should marry a Muslim slave girl; and the following verse
concerns certain statutes related to such marriages.

Finally this section of the chapter concludes with these words:

***'God desires to make clear to you, and to guide you to the customs of
those who went before you, and to turn towards you; God is All-knowing,
All-wise' (4:26).***

Many sayings have been related from the Companions of the Prophet and
those who followed them *(al-taibi'un)* confirming the Shi'i view that
verse 24 of this chapter concerns *mut 'a.* Several of the companions,
including Ibn 'Abbas, the ancestor of the 'Abbasid caliphs, Ibn Mas'ud,
one of the first to accept Islam, and Ubayy b. Ka'b, one of the scribes
of the revelation, hold that three words have been dropped form this
passage in the Qur'an and that the original version read: 'So those of
them whom you enjoy *to a specified term (ila ajal musamma).'*

This clearly indicates that the verse refers to *mut'a.* For example, it
has been related that Ibn 'Abbas was asked about *mut'a.* He answered:
'Have you not read the sura "Women" (4).' His questioner replied: 'Of
course I have.' He said: 'Did you not read: "So those of them whom you
enjoy to a specified term. .." , He answered: 'I did not read the verse
like that.' Ibn 'Abbas then said: 'I swear by God, this is how God
revealed it', and he repeated this statement twice.[^4]

In *Majma' al-bayan,* al Tabarsi, the famous Shi'i commentator of the
Qur'an summarizes the Shi'i arguments: the word 'enjoy' in this verse
refers to the marriage of *mut'a,* i.e., a marriage for a specified
dower and a determined time period. This opinion has been related from
Ibn 'Abbas and many of the 'followers' of the Companions such as Isma'il
b. 'Abd al-Rahman al-Suddi (d. 127/744-45) and Sa'id b. Jubayr al-Asadi
(95/713-14).

In fact, this clearly must be the case, for although the words
*istimta'* and *mut'a* have the literal meaning of 'enjoyment', in the
language of the *shari'a* they refer to the contract of temporary
marriage, especially when they are followed by the word 'women'. Hence
the meaning of the verse is: 'Whenever you draw up a contract of *mut'a*
with a woman, you must pay her, her wages.'[^5]

The Sunni View
--------------

As was indicated above, the Sunnis agree that at the beginning of Islam
*mut'a* was permitted. For example, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606/1209),
the famous Sunni theologian, writes in his *Great Commentary* on the
Qur'an that *mut'a* was at first permitted. The Prophet made a 'lesser
pilgrimage' *('umra)* to Mecca, and the women of Mecca made themselves
up especially for the occasion. Some of the Companions complained about
their long separation from their wives, and the Prophet replied: 'Then
go and enjoy *(istimta')* these women.'[^6]

Those Sunnis who hold that the Qur'anic verse mentioned above (4:23)
does indeed refer to the permissibility of *mut'a* also maintain that
the verse was subsequently abrogated *(naskh)* by other Qur'anic verses.
They offer three arguments to prove their point: other Qur'anic verses,
the sermon of 'Umar banning *mut'a,* and *hadith* of the Prophet
transmitted by the Companions. The Shi'i in turn reject each of the
arguments.

### 1. The Qur'anic Argument

The Sunnis argue that sexual intercourse is forbidden except with one's
wife or a slave by reason of the verse:

***'Prosperous are the believers ... who guard their private parts save
from their wives and what their right hands own.' (23:1-6)***[^7]

According to the Prophet's wife 'A'isha and others: ' *Mut'a* is
forbidden and abrogated in the Qur'an where God says: "who guard their
private parts. .."[^8]

The Sunni argument continues by pointing out that without question a
woman enjoyed through *mut’a* is not a slave. Nor is she a wife, for
several reasons: If she were a wife, she and her husband would inherit
from each other, since God says:

***' And for you a half of what your wives leave. ..'. (4:12).***

But everyone agrees that *mut'a* does not involve inheritance. If she
were a wife, the child would belong to the husband, since according to
the Prophet: 'The child belongs to the bed.' But again this is not the
case. And finally, if she were a wife, it would be necessary for her to
maintain the waiting period, since this is commanded by God (2:234); but
this also is not the case.

We have already seen that some of these arguments, taken from al-Razi's
*Great Commentary,* do not in fact apply to *mut'a* as the Shi’a
understand it. However this may be, it will be useful to see how the
Shi’a answer each of the Sunni claims:

As for the 'abrogation' of the verse concerning *mut'a,* historical
considerations show that this cannot be the case. The verse mentioned as
abrogating *mut'a* was revealed in Mecca, while the verse establishing
it was revealed after the Prophet had emigrated to Medina. But a verse
which abrogates another verse must be revealed after it, not before
it.[^9]

As for the Sunni claim that a wife by *mut'a* is not a legitimate wife
because she does not fulfill the *shari* requirements for being a
'wife', this also is false. In the question of inheritance, the Qur'anic
verse is a general one, and there is no reason to suppose that it may
not have certain exceptions. In fact, the specific requirements of
*mut'a* as established by the *hadith* literature show that *mut'a* is
an exception.

Nor is it the only exception, since an unbeliever cannot inherit from a
Muslim, nor can a murderer inherit from his victim. In short,
inheritance pertains to permanent marriage, but even in permanent
marriage it has certain exceptions, so that the verse establishing it
cannot be interpreted as nullifying *mut'a's* validity.[^10]

In the question of the child, there is no reason to claim that it is
illegitimate. In *mut'a* the 'bed' is legitimate, so the offspring is
also legitimate.[^11] The Imam Ja'far was asked: 'If the wife becomes
pregnant as a result of *mut'a,* to whom does the child belong?' He
replied: 'To the father',[^12] i.e., the child is legitimate.

In a similar manner numerous *hadith* exist to prove that a wife by
*mut'a* must observe the waiting period. Some of these are even related
in Sunni sources. For example al-Razi himself quotes a relevant saying
from Ibn 'Abbas. He was asked: 'Is *mut'a* fornication or marriage?' He
answered: 'Neither the one nor the other.' The questioner then asked:
'Well then, what is it?' Ibn 'Abbas replied: 'It is *mut'a',* just as
God has said.' The questioner continued: 'Is there a waiting period in
*mut'a?'* He replied: 'Yes, a menstrual period.' 'Do the husband and
wife inherit from each other?' He answered: 'No.'[^13]

Certain Sunnis also argue that *mut'a* cannot be considered a legitimate
form of sexual union because it excludes such things as inheritance,
divorce, sworn allegation, forswearing, and *zihar.* Since these
necessary concomitants of marriage do not apply to *mut'a,* it cannot be
considered marriage, so the woman cannot be considered a legitimate
wife. If she is neither a wife nor property, sexual intercourse with her
is illegitimate:

***'Prosperous are the believers, who. ..guard their private parts, save
from their wives and what their right hands own. ..; but whosoever seeks
after more than that, those are the transgressors' (23:1-7).***

Hence, persons who engage in *mut'a* transgress God's law.

A typical Shi'i answer to this argument runs as follows: First, the
Qur'anic verse is a general statement, and there is no reason why its
specific applications may not be clarified by other verses and *hadith.*
Second, it is not true that the above things are concomitants of
marriage: there is no inheritance in the case of a non-Muslim wife, a
murderer, or a slave-girl.

A legitimate sexual relationship may be dissolved without divorce in the
case of a wife who is the subject of a sworn allegation, a spouse who
leaves Islam, or a slave-girl who is sold. Sworn allegation,
forswearing, and *zihar* are all concomitants of *permanent marriage,*
not of legitimate sexual relationships in general (i.e., they do not
apply to sexual relationships with a slave).

If we suppose that some proof is found-in the form of a Qur'anic verse
or a *hadith- demonstrating* that these things do in fact pertain to
legitimate sexual relationships, then it will be necessary to specify
that there are certain exceptions. This is the only way we will be able
to combine the Qur'anic verses and the *hadith* which show that these
pertain to legitimate sexual relationships with those *hadith* which
demonstrate that they do not pertain to *mut'a.*[^14]

### 2. The Sermon of 'Umar

In a famous sermon[^15] the second caliph 'Umar banned *mut'a* with the
following words: 'Two *mut'a* were practiced during the time of the
Prophet [i.e. temporary marriage and *mutat al-hajj],*[^16] but I forbid
both of them and will punish anyone who practices either.' Al-Razi
summarizes the Sunni interpretation of 'Umar's words by saying that they
were pronounced in a gathering of Companions and no one protested.

Therefore, the situation must have been as follows: either (1) everyone
knew that *mut'a* was forbidden, so they remained silent; or (2) they
all knew that it was permitted, yet they remained silent out of
negligence and in order to placate 'Umar; or (3) they did not know
whether it was forbidden or permitted, so they remained silent since the
matter had just then been clarified for them, so they had no reason to
protest.[^17]

Al-Razi continues by saying that the first possibility is what he is
trying to prove. If we maintain the second possibility, then we must
call *'*Umar and the Companions who were with him unbelievers. For they
knew that the Qur'an and the Prophet had permitted *mut'a,* yet 'Umar
went ahead and banned it without the Qur'anic verse permitting it having
been abrogated. This is unbelief *(kufr);* and those who knew 'Umar was
wrong without protesting shared in his unbelief. But such a supposition
requires that we call Islam a religion of unbelief, which is absurd.

The third possibility that 'Umar's listeners had not known whether
*mut'a* was permitted or forbidden-is also absurd. For, if we suppose
that *mut'a* was permitted, then people would need to have knowledge of
that fact in their everyday lives, just as they need to have knowledge
about the permissibility of marriage. So *mut'a's* legal situation must
have been known, just as everyone knew about marriage.

Al-Razi concludes that as soon as we see that the second and third
possibilities are in fact absurd, then we know for certain that the
Companions remained silent only because they all knew that *mut'a* had
already been abrogated.

The Shi’a answer al-Razi's arguments as follows:[^18] 'Umar's sermon
demonstrates that during the lifetime of the Prophet *mut'a* was
permitted. The reason 'Umar attributed the banning to himself is that he
wanted to show that he was expressing his own view. If the Prophet
himself had prohibited *mut'a,* or if its permissibility pertained only
to a specific period in time, then 'Umar would have attributed its
prohibition to the Prophet, not to himself.

Another saying concerning *mut’a* is also attributed to 'Umar: 'God
permitted for His Prophet what He willed, and the Qur'an has been
revealed in its entirety. So complete the *hajj* and the *'umra* as God
has commanded you. But avoid marrying these women, and do not bring
before me any man who has married a woman for a specified period, or I
will stone him.'[^19]

The Shi'i *ulama'* point out that without question stoning as a
punishment for having performed *mut'a* could not be permissible, even
if we were to accept that *mut'a* is forbidden. For stoning can only be
a punishment when a man has committed fornication with a married woman.
Hence 'Umar had no basis for laying down this statute.[^20]

Al-Razi answers this line of reasoning by saying that perhaps 'Umar only
mentioned stoning to intimidate his listeners and make them think more
seriously about the consequences of temporary marriage. Certainly such
intimidation is permissible. The Prophet himself said: 'If anyone from
among us fails to pay his alms *(zakat*), I will take it from him along
with part of his property. ' But it is not permissible in Islam to take
a part of someone's property in punishment for not paying his alms. The
Prophet only said these words to press his point and to frighten his
listeners.[^21]

Concerning 'Umar's two sayings banning *mut'a,* the Shi’a argue as
follows:[^22] If his prohibition was based on 'independent judgment'
*(ijtihad),*[^23] then it is baseless, since all *ulama'* agree that
independent judgment can never gainsay the Qur'an or the *hadith.*

As for the Qur'anic basis of *mut’a,* we have already seen that-as far
as the Shi’a and certain individual Sunnis are concerned-the Qur'an
permits it in the chapter on Women, verse 23. As for its basis in the
prophetic *hadith,* many traditions have been related in the standard
Sunni collections, such as the words of 'Umar himself in his sermon:
'Two *mut'as* were practiced during the time of the Prophet. ..'.

Concerning 'Umar's 'independent judgment', one of the contemporary
*Shi'i ulama'* argues as follows: ' Umar may have made his judgment
completely on his own initiative and in direct contradiction to the
words of the Prophet; or he may have based his judgment on a prohibition
issued by the Prophet himself. If the first case is true, then 'Umar's
judgment is groundless, as noted above. And the second case cannot be
true, since a number of the Companions have given witness to the fact
that *mut'a* was permitted during the lifetime of the Prophet and up
until the time of his death.[^24]

In general the Shi’a argue that if 'Umar's prohibition had been based
upon the words of the Prophet, then other Companions would have known
about it. How is it possible for the Prophet to have forbidden *mut'a,*
yet, during the rest of his life, the period of Abu Bakr's caliphate and
the beginning of 'Umar's caliphate, for prohibition to have remained
unknown to everyone but 'Umar? Moreover, if his prohibition were based
upon the words of the Prophet, why did he not attribute it to him
instead of to himself?[^25]

Al-Razi answers these arguments by claiming that none of them disproves
his original contention. None of them proves that *mut'a* had not
already been abrogated when 'Umar made his sermon. Moreover, there
remains the question of the transmission of the *hadith* abrogating
*mut'a* : Was 'Umar the only person to have heard the Prophet ban it, or
had others heard him as well? Perhaps some of the Companions had heard
the prohibition from the Prophet and had then forgotten. But when 'Umar
mentioned the prohibition in a large gathering, everyone knew he was
speaking the truth, so they remained silent.[^26]

As for the fact that 'Umar attributes the prohibition to himself,
al-Razi answers by pointing to his earlier argument: If 'Umar meant: '
*Mut'a* has been permitted by the *shari'a* up until now, but now I have
banned it', then it becomes necessary for us to consider not only him,
but also everyone who heard his pronouncement and did not protest, as an
unbeliever.

It becomes necessary to consider even the Imam of the Shi’a , 'Ali, as
an unbeliever, since he was present and remained silent. But no one
wants to make such a claim. Hence we can only conclude that what 'Umar
meant was ... *Mut'a* was permitted during the time of the Prophet, but
I have forbidden it, since I know for certain-as you know-that the
Prophet abrogated it.'

The Shi’a reply to al-Razi's arguments as follows: First, it is
impossible to imagine that all of the Companions other than' Umar had
forgotten that *mut’a* had been forbidden, considering its everyday
importance. People need legitimate sexual relationships almost as much
as they need food and water. Second, the fact that no one protested
against 'Umar's pronouncement cannot be considered proof that the
Prophet himself had forbidden *mut'a.*

For 'Umar threatened the people with stoning, and considering his fabled
severity, no one would have dared to speak against him. If 'Ali had been
able to protest against 'Umar, he would not have remained because of the
circumstances he had no choice but to have patience and to bide his
time. The case *of mut'a* is similar. For was it not 'Ali who said: 'If
'Umar had not prohibited *mut'a,* no one would commit fornication except
the wretched'?[^27]

Shi'i authors also point out that 'Umar banned the two kinds of *mut’a*
together, whereas everyone-Sunnis and Shi’a -agree that the *hajj
al-mut'a* is permissible. Hence the *mut’a* pertaining to women should
also be permissible.[^28]

Finally, another Sunni view on this subject deserves mention: Other
*hadith* are recorded in reliable sources according to which 'Umar does
attribute the banning of *mut’a* to the Prophet and not to himself. So
it is probable that here we do not have an exact quotation of his words,
but a paraphrase.

Even if we accept the Shi'i claim that these are truly 'Umar's exact
words, then it is clear that by his words: 'I forbid them both', he
meant: 'I am clarifying their situation for you; or: 'I am putting into
practice the view of the Prophet.'

For it is well known in the science of jurisprudence that prohibition
and permissibility are often attributed to him who clarifies the
statute. Thus, for example, when it is said that Shafi'i forbids
*hadith* but Abu Hanifa permits it, no one imagines that Shafi'i and Abu
Hanifa are establishing these injunctions as their own. What is meant is
that they are explaining the injunction on the basis of their own
understanding of the Qur'an, the *sunna,* etc.[^29]

### 3. The Hadith Transmitted by the Companions

In Sunni sources *hadith* have been transmitted from the Prophet showing
that he banned *mut'a* during his lifetime. In most of the Sunni 'sound
collections' *(sihah*), it is related from 'Ali that he said: 'Verily
the Prophet of God banned the *mut'a* of temporary marriage and the
eating of the meat of domesticated asses.'[^30]

In many of these sources, and in Shi'i sources as well, the words: 'on
the day of the Battle of Khaybar' are added. The Shi'i report that the
great Shi'i *ulama'* such as al-Shaykh al Tusi considered this saying
authentic but maintained that 'Ali was practicing *taqiyya* or
'dissimulation' when he uttered it-i.e., he was hiding the true
situation in order to protect himself.[^31]

Ibn Sabra relates from his father the following: 'I came upon the
Prophet of God in the early morning ... leaning against the Ka'ba. He
said: "Oh People! I commanded you to 'seek enjoyment' *(istimta')* from
these women, but now God has forbidden that to you until the Day of
Resurrection. So if you have a temporary wife, let her go her way; and
do not take back anything of what you have given her."[^32]

Another *hadith* is related from Salma b. al-Akwa'. Through his father
he reported that the Prophet of God permitted *mut'a* in the year of
*Awtas* (8/629) for three days; but then he prohibited it. This
particular *hadith* is related in many sources, with many discrepancies
in the text.[^33]

For their part, the Shi’a do not consider these three *hadith* to have
any authority. To illustrate how they reject them, we can summarize
al-Khuis arguments:[^34] The *hadith* attributed to 'Ali cannot be
authentic, since all Muslims agree that *mut'a* was permitted in the
year Mecca was conquered. So how could 'Ali have claimed that *mut’a*
was banned on the Day of Khaybar (three years before Mecca's conquest)?

Because of this obvious discrepancy, some of the great Sunni authorities
on *hadith* have maintained that the words 'on the day of Khaybar'
probably refer only to the meat of domestic asses. But this is absurd,
for two reasons: First, it is counter to the rules of Arabic grammar: if
the phrase referred only to asses, the verb would have to be repeated.

Thus, in Arabic one says: 'I honored Zayd and 'Amr on Friday', or one
says: 'I honored Zayd *and I honored* 'Amr on Friday', thus making it
clear that 'on Friday' refers only to 'Amr. If the adverbial phrase
referred only to the meat, the text of the *hadith* would have to read:
'Verily the Prophet of God banned *mut’a,* and he banned the eating of
the meat of domesticated asses on the Day of Khaybar .' In short, since
everyone agrees that *mut'a* was permitted when Mecca was taken, the
Prophet cannot have banned it three years before that. Hence the
*hadith* is not authentic.

The second reason that the 'Day of Khaybar' cannot refer only to the
meat of domesticated asses is that this clearly conflicts with *hadith*
related by al-Bukhari, Muslim, and Ahmad b. Hanbal (three of the most
authoritative Sunni collections). For their versions of 'Ali's *hadith*
is as follows: 'The Prophet banned the *mut'a* of marriage on the Day of
Khaybar, as well as the meat of domesticated asses.

As for the *hadith* related by Ibn Sabra from his father, alKhu'i points
out that although his *hadith* has been related by many chains of
authority, they all go back to Ibn Sabra himself, and thus the *hadith*
is of the type known as *'wahid*, i.e., it derives from a single
Companion. And a Qur'anic verse cannot be abrogated even by the most
authentic kind of *hadith,* much less by a relatively weak one.

Moreover the very content of the *hadith* shows that it is not correct.
It is hardly conceivable that the Prophet could have stood before the
Ka'ba in front of a large group of Muslims and ban something until the
Day of Resurrection, and that then only one person-Sabra-should have
heard him or related his words. Where were those Companions who recorded
even the gestures and the glances of the Prophet?

Certainly they should have joined Sabra in reporting the prohibition of
*mut’a* until the Day of Resurrection. And where was 'Umar himself? He
certainly should have known about the prohibition so that it would not
have been necessary to attribute the banning of *mut'a* to himself.
Finally, there are discrepancies in the various versions of Sabra's
*hadith.* In some versions the prohibition is said to have occurred in
the year of Mecca (8/630), in others in the year of the Farewell
Pilgrimage (10/632). This discrepancy makes the *hadith* even more
untrustworthy.

Al-Shahid al Thani alludes to another point concerning Ibn Sabra's
*hadith* not mentioned by al-Khu'i: Ibn Sabra himself is the only source
for his father's words, but no one knows anything about him. He is not
mentioned in any of the books on *hadith* as a transmitter, nor has any
other *hadith* been related from him. For this reason al-Bukhari-the
most famous Sunni authority, and generally considered the most
reliable-left Ibn Sabra's *hadith* out of his collection.[^35]

As for the *hadith* of Salma b. al-Akwa', al-Khu'i remarks that again it
is a saying related from only one Companion *(wahid)* and cannot
abrogate a Qur'anic verse. In addition, if it is an authentic *hadith,*
it is strange that it remained unknown to such important Companions as
Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn Mas'ud, and Jabir b. 'Abd Allah. How is it possible for
the *hadith* to be authentic, while Abu Bakr did not forbid *mut'a*
during the whole period of his caliphate and 'Umar only banned it
towards the end of his own?[^36]

There are many sayings of the Shi'i Imams and the Companions which
indicate that *mut'a* was permitted up until the time of 'Umar's
prohibition. Three of the most famous are those of 'Ali, Ibn 'Abbas, and
'Umran b. al-Hasin. As we have already seen, 'Ali said: 'If 'Umar had
not prohibited *mut'a,* no one would commit fornication except the
wretched.'[^37]

This is the most famous form of a saying reported in numerous sources
and a number of different versions.[^38] The above version is derived
from Sunni works; a Shi'i version is related from the fifth Imam,
al-Baqir: 'If it were not for that [i.e., *mut'a]* with which ['Umar] b.
al-Khattab preceded me, no one would commit adultery except the
wretched.'

The saying related from Ibn 'Abbas is reported by the tenth/sixteenth
century Sunni scholar al-Suyuti in this form: 'God have mercy on 'Umar!
*Mut'a* was not but a mercy from God, through which He showed mercy to
Muhammad's community. If 'Umar had not banned it, no one would need
fornication except the wretched.'[^39]

The saying of 'Umran b. al-Hasin is as follows: ' *Mut'a* was permitted
by the Book of God, and we practiced it while the Prophet was alive. No
verse was revealed abrogating it, and the Prophet did not ban it before
he died.' Some sources, including the *Sahih* of Muslim, then add the
sentence: 'Then a man ['Umar] said what he wanted to according to his
own opinion.'[^40]

Another saying pointed to by the Shi’a is related from Jabir b. 'Abd
Allah in Muslim's *Sahih*: 'Jabir came [to Mecca] for the *'umra,* so we
went to see him where he was staying. He was asked about many things,
and then *mut'a* was mentioned. He said: 'Yes, we practiced *mut'a* at
the time of the Messenger of God, Abu Bakr, and 'Umar.'[^41]

For their part, the Sunnis do not accept these traditions as proving the
Shi'i points. The Sunnis consider the saying of Ibn 'Abbas the most
important and center most of their arguments around it. They quote other
sayings from Ibn 'Abbas on the same subject as proof of their own
contention. Al-Razi relates that poems were composed celebrating Ibn
'Abbas as the authority for the permissibility of *mut'a.* Having heard
of these verses, Ibn 'Abbas said: 'God slay them! I never said that it
was permitted unconditionally, but only to him who has no choice, just
as [when a person has no choice] carrion, blood, and pork are
permitted.'[^42]

Another saying is related from Ibn 'Abbas declaring that the Qur'anic
verse permitting *mut'a* was abrogated by the verse concerning divorce
(65:1). In addition, on his deathbed he is reported to have said: 'Oh
God, I repent to Thee of what I have said concerning *mut'a.* ..'.

In answer to the *hadi'th* of 'Ali, al-Razi relates the other saying
attributed to him referred to above; but he has nothing to say about the
other two traditions mentioned by the Shi’a .

### Arguments Derived From the Hadith

The Sunni argument for the prohibition of *mut'a* based upon the
*hadith* can be summarized as follows:[^43] The reason that the *ulama'*
have differed concerning *mut'a* is that it was permitted and then
banned a number of times. In the *Sahih* of Muslim (IV, p.130) the
following is related from one of the Companions: 'We were fighting in a
battle alongside the Messenger of God, and our wives were not with us.
We asked him: 'May we emasculate *(istikhsa')* ourselves?' He forbade us
to do so and gave us permission to marry women for a period of time in
exchange for an item of clothing.

Abu Hatim al-Busti, a well-known compiler of *hadith,* remarks in his
*Sahih* that the question the Companions asked the Prophet shows that at
first *mut'a* was forbidden, and hence the questioners saw no escape
from their sexual desires but emasculation. Likewise, the Prophet's
answer is meaningless unless *mut'a* had been forbidden up until that
time. Then in the year of the battle of Badr (2/624) he forbade it;
again, when Mecca was conquered (8/630) he allowed it, but only for a
period of three days. Then he forbade it until the Day of Resurrection.

Ibn al-'Arabi (d. 638/1240), the famous Sufi, wrote voluminously on the
meaning of the *sharf'a.* He calls *mut'a* one of the most remarkable
statutes in Islamic law, since it was permitted at the beginning of
Islam, then forbidden at the Battle of Khaybar, then permitted again at
the war of Awtas. Finally it was forbidden and remained forbidden. No
other statute in Islam was changed a number of times with the exception
of the *qibla* (the direction of prayer), for that was abrogated twice
before being finalized.

Al-Qurtubi reports that other authorities who have studied the
traditions concerning *mut'a* say that its statute was changed seven
times. He refers to Muslim's *Sahih* as the source for several authentic
*hadith* explaining how the situation of *mut'a* was changed (most of
these have been quoted above). Other *hadith* are quoted in other
sources, such as the *Sunan* of Abu Dawud.

Al-Qurtubi quotes Abu Ja'far al Tahawi to the effect that none of the
*hadith* which are quoted as referring to the permissibility of *mut'a*
in unconditional terms are in fact unconditional, since they specify
that *mut'a* was permitted only during journeys. The Prophet's last
prohibition of *mut'a,* which took place after the conquest of Mecca,
embraced all the previous occasions on which *mut'a* was permitted. None
of the transmitters of *hadi'th* say that the Prophet permitted *mut'a*
while he and his Companions were together in their homes and not
travelling.

As for the *hadith* of Sabra, which states that the Prophet permitted
*mut'a* at the Farewell Pilgrimage in the year 10/632, al Tahawi
acknowledges that this is not in keeping with the other *hadi'th.* But
having investigated all the traditions in this regard, he has found that
another *hadi'th* almost identical to that of Sabra, but related by 'Abd
al-'Aziz, places this occasion at the conquest of Mecca, when the men
complained of separation from their wives and the Prophet gave them
permission to practice *mut'a.*

 They could not have complained of such separation during the Farewell
Pilgrimage, since all of the wives were present, and the single men
could have taken permanent wives in Mecca. So the special situation that
existed during the other journeys and battles was lacking.

However, it is possible that the date of Sabra 's *hadi'th* is correct;
in this case we can explain the situation as follows: Since the Prophet
usually permitted *mut'a* during journeys away from Medina, in this case
also he permitted it; but then he banned it for the final time wanting
all the Muslims to know about it, for all of them were present for the
Farewell Pilgrimage. There is also the fact that the Meccans were in the
habit of practicing *mut'a* widely. Thus the Prophet banned *mut'a* in
Mecca so that they would understand that they could not continue in
their former custom,

The Shi'i answer to the Sunni argument on the basis of *hadi'th* can be
summarized as follows:[^44] The *hadi'th* demonstrating that *mut'a* is
forbidden are in conflict with those that show it is permitted. They
also conflict with *hadi'th* that show that *mut'a* continued to be
permitted during the times of the Prophet, Abu Bakr, and 'Umar, up until
the time that 'Umar banned it. The correct course of action is to prefer
those *hadi'th* which establish its permissibility, for a number of
reasons:

The *hadi'th* indicating *mut'a's* permissibility outnumber those which
show that it is banned.

Everyone agrees that the *hadi'th* indicating that *mut'a* was permitted
at certain times are authentic, but this is not the case concerning
those which indicate that it was banned. Hence one can speak of a
consensus *(ijma')* in the sense that all Muslims at one time agreed
that *mut'a* was permitted, even though afterwards a disagreement arose.

In order to chose the right course, we cannot base ourselves upon
opinion but must hold fast to that concerning which we have certainty.
Hence we must conclude that *mut'a* is still permitted, as long as we do
not have certain knowledge to the contrary.

The *hadith* which point to the banning of *mut'a* are themselves
questionable. When we realize that one of the incontestable elements of
Shi’a m as established by the Imams is the permissibility of *mut'a,*
then no *hadith* related from 'Ali stating that *mut'a* is forbidden can
be authentic.

Someone who held without question that *mut'a* is permissible would not
relate a *hadith* from the Prophet that it is forbidden. On many
occasions 'Ali censured 'Umar's banning of *mut'a.* His saying: 'If
'Umar had not banned *mut'a,* no one but the wretched would practice
fornication' is well-known, and no one has questioned its authenticity.

Those who hold that *mut'a* is forbidden have also claimed the consensus
of the Community as one of their proofs. They say that after 'Umar
banned *mut'a,* all of the Prophet's Companions went along with him with
the exception of Ibn 'Abbas, and he changed his opinion towards the end
of his life. In answer to this claim, the Shi’a point out that
'consensus' can not be accepted as a valid proof of the banning of
*mut'a;* and in any case, the very fact that the Shi'i Imams-the
Household of the Prophet-who are the very pillars of Islam, have all
agreed that *mut'a* is permitted shows that there was in fact no
consensus.

Moreover, from the first the Shi’a have agreed on the permissibility of
*mut'a,* to such an extent that this view has always been singled out as
one of the specific features of Shi’a m. Given this fact, to claim
consensus is meaningless. In addition, as we have seen above, many of
the Prophet's outstanding Companions and their followers held that
*mut'a* was permitted.

Finally, the claim that Ibn 'Abbas changed his view on *mut'a* toward
the end of his life has never been substantiated. Even if it were to be
proven, one could only claim consensus if we were certain that no one
was opposed to the view that *mut'a* is forbidden; whereas we know that
in fact the number of opponents was quite large. In short, the Shi’a
conclude, there is no real evidence to show that *mut'a* is not
permitted; and when the *hadi'th* are investigated, the conclusion is
likely to be reached that not only is it permitted *(mubah* ), it is
even recommended *(mustahabb* ).

The Opinions of The Four Sunny Schools of Law
---------------------------------------------

The general opinion of the four Sunni schools of law[^45] concerning the
reason *mut'a* was permitted and then afterwards prohibited can be
summarized as follows: At the beginning of Islam, the Muslims were in
the minority and were often at war. Many of them were not able to marry
and raise families, since they were constantly being called upon to
travel long distances and to engage in battle with the unbelievers.

Moreover, they had only recently embraced Islam; formerly, they had been
accustomed to the concupiscence of the pre-Islamic Arabs, who would
often possess harems containing large numbers of wives. They would have
sexual relationships with whichever wife they desired, and leave aside
those who no longer held any interest for them. The only 'principles'
involved in their sexual affairs were lust and desire.

When such men became Muslims, with Islam's strict guidance for sexual
relationships, it was difficult for them to spend much of their time at
war with no opportunity to satisfy their sexual instincts. Hence it was
natural that they be allowed to practice temporary marriage, especially
since such marriages do not involve any permanent bond of the type which
requires constant care and attention towards a wife and children. Nor at
the time of war could the usual means of reducing sexual desires, such
as fasting, be employed, since these would also reduce the fighting
ability of the soldiers.

Hence we see that the reason *mut'a* was permitted was the special
situation pertaining to the beginning of Islam. The *hadi'th* of Sabra
related by Muslim confirms this view: 'The Messenger of God gave us
permission to practice *mut'a* on the day of conquest when we entered
Mecca. Then as soon as he left the city, he banned it once again.' This
*hadi'th* illustrates clearly that *mut'a* was permitted due to the
special circumstances connected with military expeditions.

Ibn Maja relates that the Prophet said: 'Oh people! I would give you
permission to practice *mut'a,* but God has forbidden it until the Day
of Resurrection.' When we look at the status and rules of Islam in
general we see that *mut'a's* prohibition is in keeping with Islam. For
fornication and adultery are looked upon as a heinous form of sin and
necessitate a terrible punishment.

Islam forbids anything which would tend towards obscurity and make it
easy to commit detestable acts. The Qur'an states:

***' Approach not fornication; surely, it is indecency, and evil as a
way' (17:32).***

And according to the Prophet: 'No one is a believer in the act of
fornication.' Fornication is considered a sin in Islam for many reasons,
but certainly these are sufficient: It results in the destruction of
human dignity, the mixing of lineage and kinship, and the loss of
modesty.

But Islam came to eliminate such things and to a large degree was
successful in extirpating all despicable acts. Considering the high
level of humanity and outstanding moral qualities the Muslims achieved,
it is not reasonable to suppose that temporary marriage should be
permitted.

The four Sunni schools of law all agree that temporary marriage is
invalid. That which invalidates the contract is the stipulation of a
time period. If such a marriage takes place, it must be annulled, and if
it is consummated before the annulment takes place, the woman must be
paid the 'normal dowry'.

The Shafi'i school adds that even if the time period stipulated by the
contract should be the life-time of the husband or the wife, the
contract is still invalid, since the contract of marriage requires that
its effects continue after death. That is why a spouse may give his or
her spouse the ritual purification of the dead before burial (otherwise,
the washer of the dead must be of the same sex as the corpse).

A marriage contracted with a stipulation that comes to an end when one
of the spouses dies would mean that the effects of the marriage would
end at death. So such a stipulation invalidates the contract.[^46]

The Hanafis add that if the time period stipulated is so long that as a
rule the spouses could not remain alive until it comes to an end (e.g.,
if the man were to say: 'I will marry you until the hour of Resurrection
'), then we can no longer call the marriage 'temporary'. In effect this
stipulation means 'forever'.

Hence it is nullified as a stipulation of a 'time period' and the
contract is sound. If the husband's intention in contracting the
marriage is to enjoy the woman 's company only for a period of time, but
he does not make such a stipulation in the contract, the marriage is
correct. In the same way, if a person should marry making it a condition
of the contract that a divorce will take place after a certain period of
time, the contract is correct but the condition is nullified, since such
a condition cannot limit the contract.[^47]

In any case the four schools agree that the punishment for a person who
enters into a temporary marriage is not the same as that for
fornication. In the latter case the punishment *(hadd)* is 100 lashes
for each party in the case of an unmarried woman, and stoning to death
in the case of a married woman. But the punishment for *mut'a* is
defined as *ta'zi'r,* i.e., less than the full punishment for
fornication, depending on circumstances and the opinion of the judge.
The penalty for fornication is not exacted because certain doubts remain
concerning the status of *mut'a* as a result of the *hadi'th* of Ibn
'Abbas.

The Shi'i Juridical Argument
----------------------------

The Shi’a have always considered *mut'a* to be of special importance and
have tried to keep it alive as an institution of Islamic society. Shi'i
law is often referred to as the 'Ja'fari school of law', since in
reality the sixth Imam, Ja'far al-Sadiq, is its founder. Hence it is
appropriate to quote a few of his many sayings concerning *mut'a,* such
as: ' *Mut'a* was approved by the text of the Qur'an and became part of
the *sunna* of the Prophet,'[^48] Imam Ja'far considered the Qur'anic
verse referred to above (4:24) the basis for mut'a, He said: 'The verse
proves mut'a's permissibility. '[^49]

Once Abu Hanlfa, the founder of one of the four Sunni schools of law and
a student of the Imam Ja'far, asked the Imam about *mut'a,* He replied:
'Which of the two *mut'as* do you mean?' Abu Hanifa answered: 'I have
already asked you about the *mut'a* of the *hajj,* So tell me about the
*mut'a* of marriage.' The Imam said, 'Glory be to God! Have you not read
the Qur'an?

***"So those of them whom you enjoy, give to them their appointed wages"
(4:24).***'[^50]

Someone asked the Imam Ja'far: 'Why is it that four witnesses are
necessary [for proof to be established] in cases of adultery, but two
are sufficient in the case of murder?' He replied: 'God made *mut'a*
permissible for you, but He knew that you would not approve of it. So He
made the witnesses to number four as a protection for you. If it were
not for that, it would be brought against you [that you are committing
fornication, whereas you are in fact practicing *mut'a*]*.* But seldom
do four witnesses come together on a single matter.'[^51]

The Imam Ja'far considered *mut'a* a divine mercy by means of which
people were saved from the sin of fornication and delivered from God's
retribution. Concerning the Qur'anic verse:

***'Whatsoever mercy God opens to men, none can withhold' (35:2)***

the Imam said: ' *Mut'a* is part of that mercy.'[^52]

The Imam Ja'far said: 'I do not like a man to leave this world without
having married temporarily, even if only on one occasion.'[^53]

The Imam Ja'far said: 'It is reprehensible in my eyes that a man should
die while there yet remains a practice of the Messenger of God that he
has not adopted.' He was asked: 'And did the Messenger of God practice
*mut'a?'* He replied: 'Yes.' Then he recited the Qur'anic verse: ***'
And when the Prophet confided to one of his wives a certain matter' up
to the words 'and virgins too.' (66:3-5)*** [^54]

The Shi’a call Abu Ja'far Muhammad al Tusi (d. 460/1068) the 'Elder of
the Denomination' *(Shaykh al-ta'ifa),* since he is the founder of Shi'i
demonstrative jurisprudence *(al-fiqh al-istidlali);* in other words, he
was the first person to give Shi'i law a systematic basis. We can
conclude this chapter with a summary of his views on *mut'a.* He writes
that the Shi'i reasons for considering *mut'a* permissible are as
follows:[^55]

### The consensus of the Shi'i community

The words of the Qur'an:

***'Marry such women as seem good to you!' (4:3),***

since *mut'a* is a kind of marriage, but one which men desire to perform
by expending their property.

The words of the Qur'an:

***'So those of them whom you enjoy, give to them their appointed wages'
(4:24).***

The word *istimta'* (enjoy), unless otherwise qualified, signifies
'temporary marriage.'

Ibn Mas'ud's version of the Qur'an, which adds the words 'to a specified
term ' to the above verse.

There is no disagreement over the fact that *mut'a* was allowed at the
beginning of Islam. So those who claim that the verse was abrogated must
prove their assertion.

The principle from which discussion must begin is that *mut'a* is
permitted. That it should be forbidden must be proven.

The words of 'Umar concerning the 'two *mut'as'.* Here 'Umar tells us
that at the time of the Prophet, *mut'a* was permitted, i.e., that it
was a part of the religion of Islam. Proof must be provided that it is
no longer so.

After referring to these seven reasons, al Tusi answers the arguments of
those who claim *mut'a* is forbidden in much the same way that we have
seen above.

[^1]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 248-53, Note; Jawahir, v, 163.

[^2]: Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i (d. 1982), Tafsir al-mizan, Beirut,
1974; Persian translation by Muhammad Khatima, VIII, Qum, 1344/1965, 76.

[^3]: Ibid., 84.

[^4]: Abu 'Ali al-Fadl b. al-Hasan al Tabarsi (d. 548/1153), Majma'
al-bayan, Tehran, 1339/1960, III, 32.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: AI Tafsir al-kabir, Istanbul, 1307 / 1889-90, III, 286.

[^7]: Ibid.,287.

[^8]: Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Abi Bakr al-Ansari al-Qurtubi (d. 671/1273),
al-Jami' li ahkam al-Qur'an, Cairo, 1967 , v, 130.

[^9]: Tafsir al-mizan, Persian version, VIII, 132; Husayn Yusuf Makki,
al-Mut'a fi'l-Islam, Persian translation, Tehran, 1342/1963, p.59.

[^10]: Abu'I-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khu'i, al-Bayan fi tafsir al-Qur'an,
Najaf, 1375/1955-56, 219.

[^11]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 277, Note.

[^12]: Wasa'il, XIV, 488, hadith I.

[^13]: Al-Tafsir al-kabir,III, 286.

[^14]: Jawahir, v, 163.

[^15]: Ahmad b.Hanbal, al-Musnad, Beirut, n.d., 1,52.

[^16]: Pilgrims who come to Mecca for the hajj from a long distance and
want to perform the 'umra before the hajj are allowed to enter into a
state of consecration (ihram) for the 'umra and then to leave it until
they re-enter it for the hajj. During the intervening period they can
'enjoy themselves' (tamattu') with the activities of everyday life that
are forbidden in the state of ihram. This tamattu' before the hajj is
known as mut'at al-hajj.

[^17]: Al Tafsir al-kabir, III, 287.

[^18]: Majma' al-bayan, III, 32.

[^19]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Cairo, 1334/1916, IV, 38 (chapter: al-mut'a bi
'l-hajj wa 'l- 'umra).

[^20]: Jawahir, V, 161; al-Bayan, 229.

[^21]: Al-Tafsir al-kabir,III, 287.

[^22]: Sharh al-lum'a, V, 182-83; Jawahir, v, 161; al-Bayan,229.

[^23]: Those who have attained the capacity and necessary knowledge of
jurisprudence to make independent judgments (ijtihad) on cases
concerning which they are consulted are called mujtahids. In contrast to
Shi'i law, in Sunnism the 'door of ijtihad' has been closed.

[^24]: Al-Bayan,229.

[^25]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 283; al-Bayan, p.229; al-Mut'a, 68.

[^26]: Al Tafsir al-kabir, III, 290.

[^27]: Al-Mut'a, pp.68-69.

[^28]: Majma' al-bayan, III, 33.

[^29]: Muhammad Shaykh al-Islam Kurdistani, Rahnama-yi madhhab-i
Shafi'i, Tehran, 1337/1958, I,429-30.

[^30]: Al Tafsir al-kabir, III, 287-88.

[^31]: Wasa'il, IV, 441, hadith 32.

[^32]: Al Tafsir al-kabir, III, 288.

[^33]: Ibid.; al-Jami', V, 131; al-Bayan, p.244; al-Mut'a, pp.19-20.

[^34]: Al-Bayan, pp.222-24.

[^35]: Sharh al-lum'a, v, 264-82, Note; 282, Text.

[^36]: Al-Bayan, pp.222-23.

[^37]: Al Tafsir al-kabir, III, 287.

[^38]: Wasa'il, XIV, 436, hadith 2; 440, hadith 20 and 25.

[^39]: Al-Durr al-manlhur,Tehran, 1377/1957, II, 141.

[^40]: Al-Bayan, p.221; al-Tafsir al-kabir, Ill, 286; Ahmad b. Hanbal,
al-Musnad, VI, 436; Muslim, IV, 48.

[^41]: Muslim, IV, 131.

[^42]: Al Tafsir al-kabir, III, 286.

[^43]: Al-Jami', V, 130-32.

[^44]: Jawahir, v, 162-63.

[^45]: Fiqh, IV, 90-92.

[^46]: Ibid.,92.

[^47]: Ibid.,93-94.

[^48]: Wasa'il, XIV, 437, hadith 5.

[^49]: Ibid., 439, had'ith 19.

[^50]: Ibid., 437, hadith 6.

[^51]: Ibid., 439, hadith 14.

[^52]: Ibid., hadith 18.

[^53]: Ibid., 444, hadith 13.

[^54]: Ibid., 442, hadith 1.

[^55]: Abu Ja'far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al Tusi, Shaykh al Ta'ifa, (d.
460/1068), al-Khilaf, Tehran, 1372/1952-53, 11, 179-80.


