1. Insider and Outsider Scepticism about Philosophy
===================================================

Philosophers disagree immensely in significant ways.  Our best
philosophers disagree over the doctrines, methods, and even the aims of
philosophy.  Experts in all fields disagree, but disagreement is more
pervasive in philosophy than in most other fields.  As Thomas Kelly
says, ‘Philosophy is notable for the extent to which disagreements with
respect to even those most basic questions persist among its most able
practitioners, despite the fact that the arguments thought relevant to
the disputed questions are typically well-known to all parties to the
dispute.’[^1]

A sceptic might claim that radical dissensus shows that pursuing
philosophy is not a good means for discovering true answers for
philosophical questions.  Dissensus shows that philosophical methods are
unreliable instruments of truth.  Suppose an uncommitted person comes to
philosophy hoping to get true answers to her philosophical questions.
She wants to know what that nature of causation is, what justification
is, what rightness consists in, what justice is, and so on.  She notices
that philosophers have extensive disagreement about the answers to these
questions and thus concludes that the probability of her getting the
true answer by pursuing philosophy is low.  So, she becomes a sceptic
about the field of philosophy and walks away with her questions
unanswered.  Is she making a mistake?

In this paper, I consider scepticism of the sort that holds that there
are true answers to philosophical questions, but none of us are in a
good position to know these answers.  This type of scepticism admits of
two sub-types.  1) An*insider sceptic* holds that even the best
philosophers lack good reasons to hold their views.  So, the insider
sceptic thinks that philosophers who are not agnostic about
philosophical issues should become agnostic.  2) A person who is merely
an*outsider sceptic* , on the other hand, might accept that many
philosophers are justified in holding their views, despite widespread
disagreement.  The outsider sceptic need not hold that philosophers
should change their beliefs or become agnostic.  However, the outsider
sceptic also holds that people not already committed to one
philosophical position or another should stay uncommitted.  So, the
outsider sceptic holds that even if most philosophers are justified in
accepting their different views, a person who lacks philosophical
beliefs ought to refrain from using philosophical methodology and
instead should remain agnostic.

Suppose an uncommitted person, one who is currently agnostic about basic
philosophical questions, wishes to discover the true answers to these
philosophical questions.  She is also equally concerned to avoid false
answers.  She is thus willing to stop being agnostic and come to believe
a doctrine provided she does so via a reliable method.  For her, a
reliable method is one that is at least more likely than not to give her
true beliefs.  If these are her goals, it is difficult to show that
philosophy as we do it would be worth doing.  She might as well remain
agnostic.  This is not to say that we philosophers must give up our
doctrines and become agnostics ourselves, but merely that a
truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic does not have good reason to
pursue philosophy in the attempt to discover the truth about
philosophical questions. This paper argues that the presence of
widespread dissensus makes it difficult to defend philosophy from
outsider scepticism, if not insider scepticism.

There are many reasons why philosophy is worth doing.  Yet, it would be
disturbing if we cannot show the agnostic that philosophy gets her the
right type of value - true answers to philosophical questions.


