2. The Argument against Philosophy
==================================

Dissensus can be used in an argument against philosophy:

*The Argument against Philosophy* .  The goal of philosophy is to
uncover certain truths.  Radical dissensus shows that philosophical
methods are imprecise and inaccurate.  Philosophy continually leads
experts with the highest degree of epistemic virtue, doing the very best
they can, to accept a wide array of incompatible doctrines.  Therefore,
philosophy is an*unreliable* instrument for finding truth.  A person who
enters the field is highly unlikely to arrive at true answers to
philosophical questions.

This is a rough sketch of the argument.  I will refine it as necessary
as the paper proceeds. Note that Argument against Philosophy need not
claim that no philosopher has found the truth.  It is possible that Kant
got everything right.  Yet, philosophy also has arrived at hundreds of
other incompatible doctrines.  If philosophy leads to the truth, it is
only because it leads almost everywhere.

A person concerned only to get the truth would at the very least try to
believe some randomly chosen doctrine rather than be agnostic, since
there is at least some possibility that a random doctrine happens to be
correct.  She might even pursue philosophical methods if they increase
the probability of being correct, as it is possible they do.  Perhaps
philosophers are twice as likely to have true answers to philosophical
questions than non-philosophers are.  However, if this same person is
equally concerned to avoid false beliefs about philosophical issues,
then she would want to pursue philosophy only if it gave her a greater
than 50% chance of getting a true belief.  Given the degree of dissensus
in most fields of philosophy, it seems unlikely that philosophy offers
her this great a chance.

Here is an analogy.  Suppose, thousands of people, each of whom wants to
go to São Paulo, randomly board all flights departing Dallas-Fort
Worth.  Suppose they fill all departing seats, but are not told where
they are going.  Of these thousands, a few hundred in fact will land in
São Paulo.  Most will arrive somewhere else.  Philosophy seems like this
in many respects.  It may bring some people to the proper destination,
but it dumps most somewhere else.  Actually, matters are worse than
that.  Travellers will know whether they have arrived in São Paulo.  In
philosophy's case, some may indeed arrive at truth.  However, they will
not have discernibly better grounds for believing this than their
mistaken peers.   They may believe themselves to have better grounds,
and their peers believe this about themselves as well.  However, from
the outsider’s perspective, they look the same.  They are smart people
doing the best they can, and they disagree.  The outsider has little
reason to think one philosopher is closer to the truth than the next,
and little reason to think that if she became a philosopher, she would
do any better.

Here is another way of making the unreliability argument.  Suppose that
there are 10 competing doctrines in the field of philosophy of mind,
each of which is accepted by 10 percent of the members of the American
Philosophical Association.  Suppose, optimistically, that on the nature
of consciousness 10 percent of the members of the APA have the right
theory.  Suppose also that we can regard all members of the APA as
epistemic peers, where two people are epistemic peers just in case they
are equals with respect to their degree of epistemic virtue
(thoughtfulness, freedom from bias, etc.) and their access to
evidence.[^2]   An uncommitted person, looking at the field from the
outside, would worry that if she pursues philosophy, she will have
something like a 1 in 10 chance of getting the right answer to the
questions of the philosophy of mind.  She sees that philosophical
methodology—studying arguments, making new arguments, creating new
distinctions, reading texts, debating, etc.—generally leads people to
accept some theory or other of the nature of consciousness.  (Let us
assume that everyone who studies the philosophy of mind ends up
accepting 1 of the 10 theories.)  So, she knows that philosophical
methodology will result in her accepting some theory, but from her
standpoint, it is more likely than not that it will be the false
theory.  The greater the degree of disagreement among epistemic peers,
the lower the probability that philosophizing will get her to the truth.

This argument assumes than an agnostic outsider who ends up pursuing
philosophical methods will have either a random or proportional chance
of accepting any theory.  I.e., I am working on the assumption that she
will either accept a theory at random or with a probability proportional
to the percentage of her epistemic peers that accept any given theory.
Real people probably do not have a random chance due to their background
starting beliefs.  A person who comes to philosophy as a Christian is
probably more likely to end up being a moral realist and a natural law
theorist than his atheist counterpart.  A graduate student who studies
ethics at Harvard University is probably more likely than a student at
Australian National University to become a Kantian.  People have
dispositions towards one theory or another, and (in certain respects)
non-random factors such as the people with whom they study philosophy
affect the probability they will adopt any particular theory.  Suppose,
however, that our truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic has no such
dispositions and manages to have even exposure to all competing
doctrines.  Will pursuing philosophy assign her to a set of beliefs
randomly or in a probability proportional to the positions of her
epistemic peers?  Perhaps the agnostic will remain agnostic since she
has no dispositions.  Without a good empirical account of the mechanisms
of belief formation, I cannot be sure whether she has a random chance of
adopting any particular theory, adopting a theory with a probability
proportionate to the percentage of comparably virtuous philosophers
accepting that theory, or has some different probability altogether.
From her viewpoint, the process will seem random in some way.  So, I use
randomness here as a hopefully good-enough substitute for the actual
mechanism that assigns beliefs.[^3]

Under some circumstances, it could be reasonable for the outsider to
think she has a better chance than others do of getting things right.
For example, consider a an exceptional person with an IQ many times
greater than that of the average philosopher, with an exceptional
memory, who lived long enough to read every philosophy book ever
written, and who exhibited the epistemic virtues far better than Kant or
Hume did.  This person could legitimately conclude that she might do
better than other philosophers have.  However, no real agnostic will be
this exceptional.  A good response to the sceptical worry should provide
reason to pursue philosophy for a truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic
with epistemic virtue comparable to a typical philosopher’s.

Philosophers do seem to aim for truth.  Philosophy’s state of dissensus
may show us that philosophy is not worth doing if truth is our goal.
Pursuing philosophy is not a reliable method of finding to the truth
about philosophical issues.


