3. What Type of Defence Do We Want?
===================================

Suppose that accepting a philosophical theory cures tooth decay.  This
would make the theory a good*thing* , but not a good*theory* .
Similarly, a good hammer is good at driving nails.  If it is bad at
driving nails but using it cures tooth decay, this makes the hammer a
good thing, but not a good hammer.

So, what is the nail to which philosophy is the hammer?  We have sets of
questions we want theories to answer.  We want philosophy to get us the
truth.  We want it to answer our questions or to show us that the
questions were mistakes (because they represent pseudoproblems).

There are a number of types of defences of philosophy:

1- *Epistemic* : Philosophy is good because it gets us to the truth, or
something reasonably truth-like (such as understanding).

2- *Intrinsic* : Philosophy is good as an end in itself.

3- *Instrumental* : Philosophy is good for getting some values other
than truth.

4- *Aretaic* : Philosophy is good for fostering wisdom, good character,
or various intellectual virtues.

Aretaic defences could be considered a subset of instrumental defences.
When academic philosophers defend philosophy, e.g., by explaining its
value on the ‘Why Study Philosophy?’ webpages many departments post for
prospective majors, they often list defences of types 2, 3, and 4.  Each
of these are good defences, and conjoined they might be excellent
reasons to study philosophy or to pursue a philosophical career.  They
might be excellent non-epistemic reasons for becoming an insider rather
than an outsider, or for coming to accept some philosophical doctrines
rather than remaining agnostic.  Yet, ultimately we want a defence of
type 1.  If we do not get that, there is something disappointing about
the philosophical enterprise.

It is not enough that philosophy leads to some truths; it needs to lead
to truths about philosophical issues.  If philosophical theories helped
us learn the truth about physics, that would not quite be the target
value.  There are some distinctly philosophical questions we want
philosophy to answer.[^4]    Ultimately, we need 1\*.

1\*. *Proper Epistemic* : Philosophy is good because it gets us to the
truth (or something reasonably truth-like) about philosophical issues.

Below, I will consider a number of defences of philosophy.  In the next
section, I consider common defences and explain why they are
inadequate.  Many of them fail because they do not provide a proper
epistemic defence of philosophy, but simply show it to be of
instrumental or aretaic value.  In the section following the next, I
consider more pressing objections that hold that there is reasonable
disagreement among philosophers who are epistemic peers.  If reasonable
disagreement is possible, this implies that at least some philosophers
can justifiedly say to themselves, ‘Even though my epistemic peers
disagree with the theory I believe, my theory is true and I am justified
in believing that it is true.’  I will argue that even this sort of
defence is not enough to satisfy the truth-seeking, error-avoiding
agnostic.  This defence at best explains why insider scepticism is
unwarranted, but does not explain why outsider scepticism is
unwarranted.  That is, the possibility of rational disagreement can
explain why we philosophers who have views are not required to give them
up in light of disagreement, but it does not explain why a
truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic should pursue philosophy and come
to adopt any views.


