4. Some Inadequate Defences
===========================

In this section, I discuss some anti-sceptical defences of philosophy I
have encountered.  The defences are individually and collectively
unsatisfactory.  Each defence captures something important, and
collectively they may justify pursuing philosophy.  However, they do not
show that we can regard philosophy as producing the right sort of
value—true answers to philosophical questions.  It is not necessary to
go into much depth with these defences, because it can be shown rather
quickly that they are not the right type of defence.

Recall that the agnostic about philosophical issues is considering
pursuing philosophy with the goal of getting true answers to
philosophical questions.  This outsider sees the degree of dissensus and
thinks to herself, ‘At most one of these theories for any given issues
is correct.  It’s possible that if I study philosophy, I will produce a
new theory that competes with these others.  Each of these philosophers
thinks her own theory is more likely to be true than her competitors’
theories.  I realize that if I study philosophy, I will come to think
that way about whatever theories I come to accept as well.  However,
from my standpoint now, I have to regard each of the competing theories
as something like equally likely to be true, or perhaps likely to be
true in proportion to how many good philosophers accept the theory.
It’s possible none of them are true.  If so, then much more likely than
not, I will end up accepting a false theory.  So, I should remain an
outsider and an agnostic.’  The general problem with the defences listed
below is that even if they give this outsider good reasons to study
philosophy and to accept doctrines rather than be agnostic, these
defences do not give the right kind of reason.  I.e., they do not
give*proper epistemic defences* of philosophy.  Some of the other
defences fail because they rest on bad arguments, even if are attempts
at proper epistemic defences.

A. *The Argument Undermines Itself* .  There is a facile defence: The
Argument against Philosophy undermines itself.  The general position
that philosophy is irrational fails to pass self-inspection.
‘Philosophy is irrational’ is a philosophical position.  If philosophy
is irrational, so is the view that philosophy is irrational.  If
philosophical argumentation never establishes any position, then the
anti-philosophy position cannot be justified by philosophical
argumentation.  The Argument against Philosophy refutes the Argument
against Philosophy.  Even if this defence works, it is embarrassing if
this is the best defence philosophy has.  Yet, it is not obvious that
the defence succeeds.  It may just be that all philosophy is unreliable
except anti-philosophy philosophy.

The outsider sceptic’s position is that philosophical methodology is
unlikely to bring her to the truth about philosophical questions.  One
might argue that the sceptic used philosophical reasoning to arrive at
this conclusion, and so the sceptic cannot consistently be a sceptic.
However, it may just be that a small set of philosophical issues is
answered and that philosophical methodology works reliably on a small
set of issues, i.e., just in the areas needed to make the sceptic’s
argument.  For instance, perhaps the sceptic needs probability, an
account of the notion of an epistemic peer, some notion of reliability,
and not much else.

B. *Disunity of Science. * One could argue that science is less unified
than commonly thought.  Thomas Kuhn claims that the appearance of unity
is largely a myth propagated by ahistorical science textbooks.[^5] It
may also be that philosophy only appears to have more disagreement to us
philosophers because we are most familiar with philosophy.  If we were
better informed, we would realize that there is just as extensive
disagreement in biology and physics over fundamental issues as there is
in philosophy.  This approach may deflate science, making philosophy
seem less inferior in comparison, but it does not show us that
philosophy is truth-tracking.  Our truth-seeking outsider is not
impressed.  Also, deflating science also improves the comparative
position of astrology, phrenology, and creationism.

C. *Lists of Accomplishments* .  Another type of defence is that offered
by Wilbur Urban, former president of the American Philosophical
Association.  In 1925, Urban attempted to validate the rationality and
progressiveness of philosophy by listing its recent accomplishments.[^6]
Urban’s list looks strange.  Much of it is hard to understand, so it
is unclear whether the claims of progress are worth much.  The clearer
items are problematic.  For one, he claims that philosophy has made
progress because there is no movement back toward Kant.  However, eighty
years later, we see numerous defenders of forms of transcendental
idealism, Kantian constructivism, and the like.  He also claims that
philosophers have shown that value cannot be reduced to something else
and that evolution cannot fully explain values.  However, eighty years
of neo-naturalist metaethics and sociobiology shows that this claim is
not obviously true.  Though I agree with Urban, I have many epistemic
peers who disagree.  Third, he cites the growth of logic as a formal
discipline.  This is one of philosophy’s major accomplishments, but it
is not clear that this helps.  Formal logic may have less disagreement
than other fields, but it is also the place where philosophy comes
closest to being mathematics.

Any list will be contentious.  Probably, if I were to make a list of
philosophy’s recent accomplishments, it would seem esoteric, strange,
irrelevant, wrong, and/or silly to philosophers eighty years from now.

The outsider remains unimpressed.  She can look at such lists and ask,
do we yet know what right action is, what justification is, what
knowledge is, what justice is, and so on?  There remains extensive
disagreement over these fundamental issues, and she remains worried that
philosophy is unlikely to deliver her the truth.

D. *Progress as Destruction.* [^7]   Some philosophers defend philosophy
by saying that our work at least shows what theories are false.  For
instance, Gettier demolished the justified true belief analysis of
knowledge.  Quine, Putnam, and others eradicated logical positivism.
Gödel showed us that*Principia Mathematica* did not axiomatise
arithmetic.  If this is progress toward truth, it must be progress by
elimination.

Refuting inadequate past theories clears the path for good answers, but
does not thereby give us good answers.  (Even negative ‘progress’ tends
to be reversed, as once dead doctrines, such as Ross' moral theory, are
resurrected, albeit in better forms.[^8] )  Often, there are potentially
infinite numbers of possible theories in any sub-field.  So, even if
over the past 2500 years of philosophy, we have managed to show that a
few thousand theories are inadequate, that does not show us we are any
closer to the truth.  On the other hand, suppose there are a finite
number of theories.  If so, permanently refuting a theory increases the
probability one will accept the correct theory.  In this case, the
agnostic might have reason to pursue philosophy, but only if enough
theories had been or could refuted that she were more likely than not
going to accept the true one.  But this is not the case.

Additionally, this defence does not explain philosophers’ actual
behaviour.  Suppose philosophy is progressive because it can show, at
least, which theories are false, and the point is to arrive at the truth
though elimination.  This would justify constructing, debating,
examining, and attacking theories, but not*accepting* a theory.  It
would not give the agnostic reason to believe anything.

E. *Consensus Just Around the Corner. * One could concede that current
dissensus shows that philosophical methods are ineffective, but then
assert that philosophy could become effective in the future.
Philosophers use the wrong methods.  We need to continue working until
we discover the right methods.  Then agreement will follow.  Indeed, we
could even take agreement as a sign that we have discovered the right
methods.

The natural sciences began making progress when a change in methods was
adopted.  Scientists dropped the Aristotelian paradigm; i.e., they began
doing extensive ‘artificial’ experiments rather than just making
observations.  Also, they accepted mathematics as a tool for modelling
nature.  Could there be similar methodological revolutions for
philosophy?

Philosophers have made this claim before and tried to introduce new
methods. Hobbes argued that progress could be made and agreement would
be possible if philosophers would just start with clearly stated,
sensible definitions.  David Hume called the*Treatise* an attempt to
introduce empirical methods into philosophy.  Kant’s Copernican
Revolution meant to resolve the rationalist-empiricist debates by
exposing an unnoticed, mistaken common assumption.  Thus, seeking
consensus by finding the right methods has been tried and has not yet
worked.  After twenty five hundred years, the claim that consensus is
going to appear once we get the right methods is implausible.

We are more inclined to think disagreement is a permanent fixture.  In
fact, it seems that widespread philosophical consensus is more likely to
come from irrationality and intellectual corruption than from honest
inquiry.  The very best philosophers throughout history have produced
radically different doctrines.  (Part of what makes philosophers great
is that they do an excellent job defending novel doctrines.)  Thus, it
seems that we should not expect convergence as philosophers become more
rational.  On the contrary, our best philosophers tend to diverge rather
than converge.

F. *Philosophy as Maieutic* . Philosophy gives birth to new fields.
Philosophers invented economics, political science, sociology, physics,
biology, etc.  If we take a realist view of theories in these fields,
then philosophy is indirectly truth-tracking, as it produces other
fields that find the truth.

However, there are two worries with this sort of defence.  First, even
if it is an epistemic defence of philosophy, it is not a proper
epistemic defence.  We want philosophy to find answers to philosophical
questions, such as whether God exists, what the nature of knowledge is,
what is right and wrong, and so on.  There is a view that philosophy is
the field of residual speculation, and perhaps over time philosophy will
self-destruct as it gives birth to special sciences capable of answering
its questions.  However, arguably, there is a common core of questions
that cannot be made non-philosophical.  (This point is, of course,
subject to contention.) Though, looking backward, we can see how some
questions were mistakenly treated as philosophical, this does not give
us good reason to think that all questions will one day be turned over
to other fields.  So, insofar as we legitimately believe that there will
always be philosophical questions, the maieutic defence of philosophy is
not enough.

Worse, the birth rate appears to be dropping.  Philosophy is not
founding new fields as often as it used to.  At least when viewed in
isolation, the maieutic defence suggests that pretty soon we should stop
practicing philosophy, because the expected utility (in terms of
founding new fields) is too low.

G.*Developing Critical Thinking Skills* .  Another unsatisfactory
defence of philosophy is the claim that it develops critical thinking
skills and various intellectual virtues.  No doubt philosophy does
foster such virtues, but the defence is still unsatisfactory because it
is an aretaic rather than a proper epistemic defence.  That philosophy
develops such skills is an excellent reason for undergraduates planning
to work in other fields to major in it.   Still, the outsider sceptic is
not impressed, as this defence not explain how applying philosophical
skills to philosophical questions reliably generates true answers.  In
addition, this aretaic defence is somewhat embarrassing, in that it does
not do much to differentiate philosophy from playing logic games or
Sudoku.


