5. Rational Disagreement
========================

Here I consider at greater length the possibility of rational
disagreement as a response to the problem.   Consider two or more
epistemic peers holding contrary views on the same issue.  Can they each
justifiedly believe either A or B?

My epistemic peers disagree with me on this issue.  I am right, but they
are each wrong.  I am justified in holding my view, but they are not
justified in holding theirs.

My epistemic peers disagree with me on this issue.  I am right, but they
are each wrong.  I am justified in holding my view, and they are also
justified in holding theirs.

If rational disagreement is possible, then sometimes it is justifiable
for more than one member of a dispute to accept A, B, or something
similar.

In current epistemology, there is disagreement about whether rational
disagreement is possible.  E.g., Richard Feldman argues that reasonable
disagreement between peers is not possible under common circumstances,
because there is generally at most a uniquely justified belief in light
of a given set of evidence.[^9]   Adam Elga holds that when one
discovers that one disagrees with an epistemic peer, one should give the
peers’ views equal weight as one’s own.[^10]   David Christenson argues
that when on has disagreement with peers, this typically should occasion
belief-revision towards the views of one’s peers and vice versa.[^11]
In contrast, Thomas Kelly holds that one often need not revise one’s
views in light of discovering disagreement with one’s peers because one
believes they have misjudged the evidence.[^12]   Gideon Rosen holds
that rationality is permissive and that sometimes one is permitted to
choose among competing theories when given a set of evidence.[^13]

Nicholas Rescher explicitly addresses the problem of philosophical
dissensus.  He argues that philosophers choose to reject different
theses—and thus establish conflicting schools of thought—because they
accept different*cognitive values* or weigh the cognitive values
differently. [^14]   Cognitive values are the epistemic traits by which
we assess a doctrine, e.g., coherence, plausibility, generality,
importance, informativeness, elegance, etc.  A philosopher who more
strongly values plausibility and intuitiveness is likely to accept
different doctrines from those a philosopher who more strongly values
systematicity would accept.  Rescher argues that differences over the
relative weights of cognitive values cannot fully be resolved.
According to Rescher, rational theory acceptance means accepting a
theory that does justice to one’s cognitive values.  Different theorists
can reasonably accept different values to different degrees.  So,
rational disagreement is possible.

It might be thought that the possibility of rational disagreement will
bear on whether outsider scepticism is warranted in light of
philosophical dissensus.  For instance, Peter van Inwagen discusses
people who have heard philosophical debates but have remained agnostic.
He then says,

I think that any philosophy who does not wish to be a philosophical
sceptic…must agree with me that…it must be possible for one to be
justified in accepting a philosophical thesis when there are
philosophers who, by*all* objective and external criteria, are at least
as equally well qualified to pronounce on that thesis and who reject
it.[^15]

However, it is possible that whether the agnostic should become a
sceptic and whether the non-agnostic philosopher should become an
agnostic sceptic are distinct problems.  Perhaps rational disagreement
is possible among peers, and this excuses non-agnostic philosophers from
having to become agnostic sceptics.  However, as I will argue in this
section, even if this is so, this does not give reason for the
truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic to become a non-agnostic.
Rather, she should be a sceptic about philosophy.

Note that if rational disagreement were impossible, this would serve my
thesis, as it would bolster the case for outsider scepticism.  If
rational disagreement is impossible, then insiders (non-agnostic
philosophers) should become sceptics.  Presumably this means that
outsiders (agnostics who have not studied philosophy) should become
sceptics as well, once they learn that all the insiders are rationally
obligated to become sceptics.  However, I will assume for the sake of
argument that rational disagreement among epistemic peers is possible.
I will argue that even if it is possible, this will not be enough to
show the truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic that she ought to pursue
philosophy and adopt any views.  The possibility of rational
disagreement does not defeat outsider scepticism.

Since I am granting that rational disagreement is possible, I need not
consider Rosen’s, Kelly’s, or others’ arguments for rational
disagreement at length or with much precision.  I need only consider
their conclusion: rational disagreement is possible.  If so, then it
follows that when I recognize that my epistemic peers disagree with me
on some issue, sometimes I may still justifiedly believe that my view is
true.  (I take it that believing that X and believing that X is true are
the same thing.)  In addition, depending on one’s view of rational
disagreement, this might mean I am justified in believing I am
justified, and perhaps even in believing that my peers are justified in
having similar attitudes toward themselves.

So, what rational disagreement arguments deliver us, at the end, is
something like B: ‘Even though my epistemic peers disagree with me on
this issue, I am right, they are all wrong, I am justified in holding my
view, and they are also justified in holding theirs.’  If I am justified
in holding B, then insider scepticism is defeated.  I am not required to
become an agnostic and a sceptic.

However, notice that B is*not* what truth-seeking, error-avoiding
agnostic wants.  She comes to philosophy hoping to obtain true answers
to philosophical questions while avoiding error.  If rational
disagreement is possible, then philosophical inquiry can get her
justified belief in various philosophical doctrines even in the presence
of disagreement, but that was not what she asked for.  A justified
belief that one has the truth on some issue is a great thing to have - I
certainly would like to have that - but it is a poor substitute for bona
fide truth.  The truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic is not
interested in this substitute.

She might be impressed to learn (depending on what the standards are for
rational disagreement) that many or perhaps all philosophers are
justified in their beliefs.  With some good fortune, we might discover
that*all* actual philosophical disagreements among members of the APA
are reasonable ones, and so no philosopher must do any belief revision
or become a sceptic.  However, this still does not give the
truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic reason to become a believer.  She
wants a greater than not chance of getting true beliefs about most
philosophical issues.  Even a 100% chance of getting *a justified belief
that one has the truth about philosophical issues* or (more simply) a
100% chance of getting *justified beliefs* *about philosophical issues*
will not motivate her, because there are not the same things as a true
beliefs about most philosophical issues. They are poor surrogates.

Rescher’s defence of philosophy is particularly clear in how it fails to
satisfy this sort of agnostic.  (This is not to say his defence is bad,
but just that it is not what I called a proper epistemic defence.)
Rescher holds that it can instrumentally rational to accept a theory
based on one’s cognitive values.  There is a plurality of reasonable
stances on the weights of these cognitive values.  So, for Rescher,
rational disagreement rests precisely on these cognitive values rather
than on truth.  But our agnostic is not interested in these cognitive
unless they reliably get her to the truth.  Apparently, they do not,
because ex hypothesi the pursuit of theories by different people with
different cognitive values or weights for these values results in
dissensus.

The agnostic asks us if we can get her the truth.  In light of
dissensus, apparently we have to say no.  All we can offer is justified
belief.

*Brown University*

*Box 2005*

*Providence, RI 02912*

*Jason\_Brennan@brown.edu*


