Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Thomas Kelly, ‘The Epistemic Significance of Disagreement’, in John
Hawthorne and Tamar Gendler, eds., Oxford Studies in Epistemology
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), p. [^173]:

[^2] Kelly, ‘Epistemic Significance of Disagreement’, p. [^10]:

[^3] Thus, one possible way to defeat outsider scepticism would be to
show that a truth-seeking, error-avoiding agnostic is actually more
likely than the rest of us to arrive at true doctrines.  Perhaps her
lack of prior commitments makes philosophical methodology reliable for
her, if not for us.   Whether this counter-argument will work depends on
empirical points about the mechanism of belief formation as well.   Note
also that this type of response attributes our disagreements to bias.
However, suppose it can be show that the true agnostic has a good chance
of getting the truth.  There will still be a sort of leftover outsider
scepticism.  The outsider who is not an agnostic might still regard
philosophy as unreliable, as having too great a tendency to allow people
to rationalize their prior beliefs, etc.

[^4] Questions that were once thought to be philosophical have a
tendency to become questions for the social or natural sciences.  The
border between philosophical and nonphilosophical questions is fuzzy.
However, without saying how to make the distinction, I will assume there
is something like a core of questions that we reasonably can expect to
remain part of philosophy.

[^5] T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996), pp. 136-[^138]:

[^6] Wilbur M. Urban, ‘Progress in Philosophy in the Last Quarter
Century’, The Philosophical Review 35:2 (1926), pp. 93-[^123]:

[^7] This phrase comes from Toni Vogel Carey, ‘Is Philosophy
Progressive’, Philosophy Now 59 (2007), accessed online (3/15/07) at
http://www.philosophynow.org/issue59/59carey.html

[^8] E.g., Robert Audi, The Good in the Right, (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2004).

[^9] See Richard Feldman, ‘Reasonable Religious Disagreements’, in
Louise Antony. ed.,

Philosophers Without Gods , (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007);
Richard Feldman, ‘Epistemological Puzzles about Disagreement’, in
Stephen Hetherington (ed.), Epistemology Futures (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006).

[^10] Adam Elga, ‘Reflection and Disagreement’, Noûs 41 (2007), pp.
478-[^502]:

[^11] David Christensen, ‘Epistemology of Disagreement: the Good News’,
Philosophical Review 116 (2007), pp. 187-[^217]:

[^12] Kelly, ‘Epistemic Significance of Disagreement’.

[^13] Gideon Rosen, ‘Nominalism, Naturalism, Philosophical Relativism’,
Philosophical Perspectives 15 (2001), pp 69-[^91]:

[^14] Nicholas Rescher, The Strife of Systems (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1985), pp. 95-[^115]:

[^15] Peter van Inwagen, ‘It is Wrong, Everywhere, Always, and for
Anyone, to Believe Anything upon Insufficient Evidence’, in Eleonore
Stump and Michael J. Murray, eds., Philosophy of Religion: The Big
Questions (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996), p. [^275]:
