Part 2: Husbands and Wives, Sharing lives and seeking Happiness
===============================================================

Question no. 65: What is the opinion of Islam about singing and dancing in wedding ceremonies?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** What is the opinion of Islam about singing and dancing in
wedding ceremonies? The opinions of people are contrary; some say it is
lawful while others say it is unlawful.

**The answer:** In Islam, they are unlawful. The Prophet (S) has said,
‘Allah has sent me as mercy to people, and to eradicate musicals, pipes,
and the habits of the pre-Islamic era (jahiliyyah).’[^1] It is because
play, amusement, and singing do not meet with the aims of mercy,
worship, and closeness to Allah.  
    
 Jurisprudents have agreed that during the night of the wedding, singing
poetry with good and polite meanings is lawful, especially if it has
praises of the Prophet (S) and his progeny. Some jurisprudents have
permitted classical and quiet dancing, which is not mixed (between men
and women) and which does not excite lust.  
    
 This exception (in permitting singing and dancing) is limited to
weddings. Abu Baseer narrated, ‘Once, I asked Abu Abdullah (Imam
as-Sadiq) (a.s.) about the income of a songstress (the money she gains
for singing) and he said, ‘It is unlawful for one, to whom men come, but
there is no problem for the one, who is invited to weddings.’[^2]  
    
 The wisdom in this exception is that Islam has made a distinction
between marriage and adultery. Since adultery is done without the
presence of people, Islam has intended for marriage to be performed
openly and with attractive sound so that people can recognize this new
marital relation between these two persons.  
    
 Many arguments have taken place between jurisprudents about the new
methods in the world of singing and music. Many of them have considered
singing and music unlawful because they cause many bad consequences.
From the instruments of music and amusement, which incite lust, unlawful
behaviors begin besides the bad poetry used in songs and the mixing
between men and women until major sins are committed. Then, no excuse
will remain for the angels to attend and bless that marriage.  
    
 Those who try to close their eyes to these unlawful doings under
demonstrations of istihsan (approval) and assent have ignored that Islam
wants weddings to be performed in spiritual and moral spheres fitting
the principles of Islam and not the desires of the disease-hearted
people who imitate the corruptive methods of the West.  
    
 We disagree with using instruments of amusements to turn weddings,
which are acts of worship, to a stage of unlawful doings and behaviors.
We reject the inviting of the Satan and the preventing of the angels to
attend this honorable occasion.  
    
 The believers, who desire to be free from bad deeds until the Day of
Resurrection, should avoid all that is performed by bad and disobedient
people in their weddings, and thus they will be kept away from those
upon whom Allah has brought His wrath.  
    
 Let us think about it in this way: would any of our infallible Imams
(a.s.) attend a wedding in which singing and dancing were practiced if
he were invited to it?  
    
 If we suppose that we are in the age of the reappearance of Imam
al-Mahdi (a.s.) and he is amongst us now, what will he think about our
behaviors in the wedding?  
    
 Come! Let us make this faith in the unseen and our love for the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) the criterion of our behaviors on the occasions of joy so
that Allah may bless these occasions for us.  
    
 We hope that the believers adhere to the limits of Islam and do not
follow the Satan who wants them to fall in his traps and lose the
blessings of weddings, which are from the Sunna of the Prophet (S) and
the recommendable acts that are semi-obligatory.  
  

Question no. 66: Can a man wear a gold wedding ring?
----------------------------------------------------

**Question:** The gold ring has become the symbol of correlation between
spouses, while in the Sharia it is unlawful for men to put on gold. Is
there any exception concerning wedding bands?  
    
**The answer:** There is no exception. A Muslim man has to test his
faith in this critical position — whether he should obey his God or his
desire.  
    
 Then, for what is all this insistence on a ring of gold? If the golden
color is inevitable before people and cameras, the ring could be gilded
for this purpose.  
    
 In our opinion, it would be better for the wife to put on a silver ring
with a stone of carnelian on her husband’s right pinkie while reciting
blessings and peace on Muhammad (S) and his progeny and hoping that love
will continue between them until they leave this world with a good
end.  
  

Question no. 67: What is the opinion of Islam about the period between the engagement and the wedding?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** What is the opinion of Islam about the period between the
engagement and the wedding? Some people make the period too long and
some make it short. Both have advantages and disadvantages.

**The answer:** The length of the period depends on the circumstances of
the spouses. However, there are some manners that must be observed
during this period:  
    
 1. Hearty love, intellectual closeness, and mutual visits between the
families of the two spouses to better know each other and to strengthen
the relations between them are recommended.  
    
 2. They should avoid all that may hurt this blessed relation; offensive
words, insults, and bad behaviors that cause hatred must be avoided. If
some of this takes place accidentally from any of the spouses, they
should apologize, excuse each other, and determine not to do that
mistake again.  
    
 3. The spouses should read books about marital relations to learn the
principles, rights, and manners of marriage.  
    
 4. They should not mistrust each other or argue over every matter.  
    
 5. The wife should learn how to manage the affairs of her new house and
should convince herself of her new responsibilities. The husband also
has to undertake his new responsibilities outside the house and inside
the house in helping his wife as much as he possibly can.  
    
 6. During this period, the spouses should avoid doing what should be
done on the night of wedding!  
    
 7. It is better to make this period short.  
    
 8. They should take care of cleaning their bodies and getting rid of
unpleasant smells, especially the smell of the mouth by brushing the
teeth five times before every prayer, or at least three times, before
and after sleeping, and after lunch. They should use perfumes because
the Prophet (S) always used perfume and he had recommended his Umma to
also use it, except for women who should not use perfume except for
their husbands or their mahrams in order to not incite the lusts of
others.  
  

Question no. 68: I have psychological issues that threaten my marriage; how can I solve my problems?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I am afraid of the unknown and worried about the future. I
feel inward turmoil and psychological instability. Can I find a remedy
in religion before my marital life comes to an end?  
    
**The answer:** The present makes the future. If you manage your present
according to good foundations, you will build for yourself a happy
future. There is no excuse for your fear if you determine and rely on
Allah Who says, ***(And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will
most certainly guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the
doers of good)***[^3].  
    
 Starting now, you have to spend every hour of your day in a way that
pleases Allah, where if you think about your yesterdays (after your
determination), you will be delighted, and this delight is the future
that will make you proud of the right method you have determined to
follow.  
    
 Dear brother, try to forget your painful past, your defects, and all of
what hurts you psychologically! Set out towards Allah, Who grants
success to whoever relies on Him, and submit to Him, and then, do not
worry about any grief or distress concerning this life!  
    
 As for your marital life, you and your wife should read a lot to help
you plan for a good and peaceful life.  
    
 Does he who wants to establish a successful company not read about all
that concerns this aim?  
    
 You and your wife are two partners, who want to establish a happy life;
therefore, you should read about all that concerns this aim.  
    
 When you follow this way, you will find in front of you your future
clear and pleasant Inshallah.  
    
  

Question no. 69: What is the solution to the trend of excessive dowries being demanded by parents of girls?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** High and excessive dowries have become a sort of
competition between people and a cause of pride and boast in the
meetings of women. And this is the reason that prevents the youth from
getting married, and therefore, corruption spreads and the number of
spinsters increases. The worst of the matter is that girls lose more
because of the excessive dowries whereas parents do not feel their
sufferings, and then when girls do something against their parents’
will, the girls themselves are blamed and not the parents. The question
is: what is the solution to this dangerous social problem?  
    
**The answer:** A Muslim society that turns away from the true Islam
strays into troubles and problems forever, unless it turns back to
religion sincerely. This is the responsibility of all as the Prophet (S)
says, ‘All of you are guardians and all of you are responsible for your
subjects.’  
    
 Flagrant, material manifestations like high dowries and external beauty
have overwhelmed the lives of Muslims to the extent of absence of morals
and principles. At the same time, troubles, problems, and enmities have
filled their lives.  
    
 Islam has openly prohibited excessive dowries. The Prophet (S) said,
‘Do not exaggerate dowries of women, lest enmity comes out!’ [^4]

When we correlate this saying with the saying of Allah in the Qur'an,
***(Surely the Satan is your enemy, so take him for an enemy)***[^5], we
conclude that exaggerating dowries is something pleasing to the Satan
and thus is not a good deed. The Muslim family that accepts dowry as a
means of happiness for their daughters actually brings them enmity and
unhappiness by exaggerating that dowry.  
    
 The Prophet (S) says, ‘The best women of my umma are those of prettiest
faces and smallest dowries.[^6]’  
    
 In my opinion, “with prettiest faces” means happy mien and bloom and
not physical beauty as many people think. There are many women with
pretty faces who are sullen and gloomy; therefore, they would not be the
best of women even if their dowries were small.  
    
 Certainly it is not this that the Prophet (S) has meant by “pretty
faces”. Far be it from him to wrong the women who have not been created
with pretty faces! Therefore, we are certain that the Prophet (S) has
meant the moral beauty that gives woman happy mien, bloom, activeness,
and high spirits, and these things are the most important factors of
happiness in the marital life. When these qualities come together with a
small dowry, a woman will be beautiful and one of the best women even if
she lacks material beauty. The Prophetic traditions confirm what we have
said. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Whoever marries a woman just for her
wealth, Allah will subject him to the wealth. Whoever marries a woman
just for her beauty, he will see in her what he dislikes. But, whoever
marries a woman for her faith, Allah will gather for him all that he
likes in her.’  
    
 This is sufficient evidence to destruct the ignorant concepts of the
material civilization and restore the religious concepts to people.
Whoever turns away from this right path, will be an easy prey for devils
from the humans and the jinn.  
  

Question no. 70: Is it acceptable Islamically to set a high dowry to prevent divorce or ensure that if a divorce occurs the woman will be well-off?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Some people exaggerate the dowries of their daughters to
assure themselves of one of two things: first, that the husband will be
unable to divorce his wife, and second, if the husband does divorce his
wife, she will get enough money that she can live without troubles. Are
these motives justifiable whereas they are contrary to the Prophet’s
opinion?  
    
**The answer:** Excessive dowries change marriage into a trade made for
material motives, whereas easy and small dowries bring spouses closer to
each other from moral and humane motives. In the first case, marriage is
carried out with the mentality of traders, and then a woman is
considered as any kind of goods. In the second case, marriage is carried
out according to morals and values, and the woman’s actual value is
realized.  
    
 We can close our eyes and say that a wise man does not say anything
unless it has wisdom and benefit, that we may know some of it and not
know most of it. This is for an ordinary wise man, then how about the
wise Prophet (S), who did not say anything except that it came from the
Wisest One of all?!  
    
 Yes! The Prophet (S) said, ‘It is from the good fortune of woman that
her engagement is made easy, her dowry is made easy, and her pregnancy
is made easy.[^7]’  
    
 What people imagine then is definitely not true because first, they are
not more aware than the Prophet (S), and second, when someone wants to
divorce his wife, he does that either due to his shortcoming and
injustice or due to other justifiable reasons. If he is unjust to his
wife, he will leave her alone without divorcing her in order to force
her to give up her dowry, and then she will accept divorce without
getting a bit of her dowry; otherwise she will suffer until the end of
her life, and in this case her dowry will be of no use to her at all.
But if the husband is not neglectful of his wife’s rights, people will
consider the wife to be mistaken and erroneous. Will she be happy with
her dowry when people consider her so? Will someone come to marry her
after her reputation becomes tainted, and it is said that she has
mistreated her first husband? I think that no one would marry her except
if he looks for wealth and lust, and these things do not make a happy
marriage and a good life.  
    
 Third, why, at the beginning of marriage, which is a sacred and
heavenly supported relation, does the family of the girl, who is about
to be a wife, think of the guarantees of divorce? Does pessimism not
kill the spirit of delight and joy of the ceremonies of marriage?  
    
 I think that the high ratio of divorce in our countries is due to the
materialistic view, commercial thinking, and pessimistic spirit
surrounding marriages from the start.  
    
 Thus, many people throw themselves and their daughters into what they
would like to escape from because they mistrust what their great Prophet
(S) has said to them.  
    
 At the same time, while Islam recommends low dowries, it recommends
Muslims to not marry their daughters except to religious and honest
persons. There is no guarantee better than faith and morals to prevent
the occurrence of divorce and injustice after divorce, if it takes
place, due to legal excuses.  
    
 If the husband is religious, he will fear Allah and refrain from acting
unjustly towards his wife, and if he has good morals and treats his wife
fairly and kindly, he will not divorce her if she is similar to him in
faith and morals. Therefore, a high dowry is of no importance here.  
    
 If the wife deserves to be divorced and the husband is faithful but he
cannot afford to pay the dowry because of need, the wife will remain
suspended until she submits to a divorce without the dowry that she has
looked forward to.  
    
 Would that these people ponder on this Verse, ***(And give women their
dowries as a free gift, but if they of themselves be pleased to give up
to you a portion of it, then take it and enjoy it with right good
cheer)***[^8].  
    
 Here, there are three questions:  
    
 1. What does “free gift” mean?  
    
 It is the gift that a husband gives with his own free will to his wife
that is called a “dowry”.  
    
 2. What does “but if they of themselves be pleased to give up to you a
portion of it” mean?  
    
 It means that the wife can give that gift back to her husband with her
own free will.  
    
 3. What does “then take it and enjoy it with right good cheer” mean?  
    
 It is the fruit that comes out of the love that is founded by the
mutual exchanging of gifts between the spouses where they enjoy it
blissfully.  
    
 Therefore, the purpose of the dowry is to achieve true love that will
not shake before the problems of life or the mistakes that often happen
between spouses. If the dowry is given from a husband unwillingly, shall
he love his wife sincerely?  
    
 Certainly not! The Prophet (S) said, ‘Be lenient in dowries, because a
man may give a dowry to a woman (wife) but it may be as a cause of
hatred in his heart against her.[^9]’  
    
 The Prophet (S) also said, ‘The best of dowries is the easiest of
them.[^10]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Do not exaggerate in women’s dowries, lest
enmity comes out!’ [^11]  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘…As for the evil omen of woman, it is her
high dowry and disobedience of her husband.[^12]’  
    
 You will notice that a high dowry of a wife is compared, in an evil
omen, with disobedience of her husband.  
    
 From that, we note that the excessive dowry is as an evil omen in
marriage and a cause of disagreement and divorce, unlike what people
think. I ask: can ignorance succeed before the fact that Islam has
already announced?  
  

Question no. 71: What does Islam say about the ideal age difference between a husband and wife?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** People pay a lot of attention to the difference in age
between a husband and a wife. Would you please show me the recommended
amount of this difference according to Islam and what the other
qualities are that must be paid attention to before the agreement of
marriage?  
    
**The answer:** We have not found any verdict in Islam concerning this
matter. When we study the lives of the leaders of Islam, we find that
the difference in the ages of the spouses is in different extents.
Sometimes a wife is older and sometimes a husband is older. Lady
Khadija, the mother of Lady Fatima (a.s.), was married to the Prophet
(S) while she was fifteen years older than him, whereas Imam Ali (a.s.)
was married to Lady Fatima (a.s.) while he was ten years older than
her.  
    
 The same is said about the other faithful men and women in the history
of Islam. We have not read that they paid much attention, in their
marriages, to the matter of age, but rather, they paid attention to
other important qualities (of the other spouse) according to the
following order:  
    
 1. religiousness and faith  
    
 2. good morals  
    
 3. good family  
    
 These are the qualities according to which the believers are considered
equivalent to each other. The Prophet (S) says, ‘The believers are
equivalent to each other.[^13]’  
    
 From these three main qualities, the following qualities ramify:  
    
 1. intelligence, knowledge, and social manners  
    
 2. intellectual and cultural equivalence  
    
 3. physical health and freedom from hereditary diseases  
    
 4. sufficient income to at least cover the necessary expenses  
    
 5. acceptable outward beauty but not at the expense of moral beauty  
    
 6. proportionality of bodies as customary  
    
 It is customary nowadays that spouses should be nearer in age according
to the idea that cultural equivalence results from studying in the
modern schools, which means that both are somehow close in age.
Equivalence is not achieved when a young woman is a graduate of a
secondary school while the young man has been a graduate of a university
for ten years, which makes the difference in age between them over
seventeen years. Therefore, there is no cultural and intellectual
equivalence and accordingly marriage with this extent of difference in
ages is not advisable.  
    
 Custom has another conception in this field that differences in age
form a ground for marital disagreements because interests and hobbies of
different generations always cause clashes.  
    
 A third conception says that differences in age make one of the spouses
maturer than the other due to experiences and this is another cause that
leads to conflicts in opinions and situations, which makes spouses
disagree with each other.  
    
 Another traditional conception is that the difference in age means that
the older spouse may die long before the other, and especially if the
wife is still young, she will become a widow after the death of her
husband and may remain alone.  
    
 We agree with these four customary conceptions, but not absolutely.
There are many exceptional cases in which the marital life is of utmost
happiness and pleasure in spite of the age difference between the
spouses.  
    
 What is important in equivalence is the educational equivalence and
mental maturity, which leads to good behavior, kindness, humbleness, and
rapport.  
    
 If the main qualities we have mentioned are found in a husband and a
wife, they will live happily; otherwise, there will be no happiness even
if the spouses are of the same age.  
  

Question no. 72: What are the qualities of an ideal father and an ideal mother?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** What are the qualities of an ideal father and an ideal
mother?

**The answer:** An ideal father is one who:  
    
 1. undertakes his responsibility well to create a good marital and
family life with humane atmospheres.  
    
 2. brings his family lawful livelihood without a bit of unlawful.  
    
 3. respects his wife as a human being who is equal to him in rights and
duties, as Allah has said, ***(O people! be careful of (your duty to)
your Lord, Who created you from a single being and created its mate of
the same (kind) and spread from these two, many men and women; and be
careful of (your duty to) Allah, by Whom you demand one of another (your
rights), and (to) the ties of relationship; surely Allah ever watches
over you)***[^14].  
    
 4. cares for the intellectual, moral, and material needs of his
children and is generous to them as much as possible.  
    
 An ideal mother is one who:  
    
 1. understands her role as a mother who has the most important position
in educating children and feeding them with love and sentiment and
teaching them the meanings of goodness, benevolence, and the
afterlife.  
    
 2. undertakes her responsibility well and does not lose her patience or
give up her task, which is like the task of the prophets and apostles.  
    
 3. repels evil with that which is best.  
    
 4. prefers the comfort of her husband and children to her own ease and
comfort when there is a conflict between comforts.  
    
 5. always feels satisfied and content.  
    
 6. distributes her smiles of sincerity, satisfaction, and hope of
success and progress among all members of her family.  
    
 7. does not remind her husband of the work she does inside the house.  
    
 8. does not uncover the defects of her husband before others and does
not reveal the secrets of their life.  
    
 9. looks forward to the reward of the afterlife, pleasure of Allah, and
the bliss of Paradise, which Allah has put under her feet if she devotes
her intentions sincerely to Allah in this life.  
    
 Here, someone may question: why have you decreased the qualities and
responsibilities of a father and increased those of a mother? This is
not fair, O sheikh!  
    
 I say: if the wife has these ideal qualities, her husband will be
affected by her and then she will be a practical teacher for her husband
too. Then, the famous saying “behind every great man, there is a woman”
will become true.  
    
 When we reach this fact, we find that it is inevitable to emphasize the
great role of mothers in preparing our daughters in the best way to
undertake their important roles in achieving the happiness of the
society, the progress of the umma, and the guidance of the men and the
youth.  
    
 To see this fact, you can ponder on the reasons behind the wretchedness
of society, the underdevelopment of the umma, and the deviation of men
and the youth. You shall find heedless wives, bad women, and deviate
girls at the head of these reasons.  
    
 Therefore, it has been mentioned in traditions that wealth and women
are the most dangerous weapons of the Satan in seducing man and
deviating him from truth, justice, and goodness and removing him from
the moral paradise of this life and from the real Paradise in the
afterlife, in which the pious live in comfort and luxury forever.  
    
 History has proved this in the past and in the present. Woman has
corrupted and still corrupts whatever is around her if she is corrupted.
Even the sincere believers have been felled by corruptive women if they
became heedless for a moment.  
    
 Thus, responsibility is very heavy for a good mother, especially in
bringing up her daughters. Therefore, Islam has made her position higher
than the position of a good father. The Prophet (S) has ordered people
to be kind to their mother three times more than to their father.  
    
 If this becomes clear to you, you shall know the secret behind the
plans of colonialists that aim at corrupting daughters and making
mothers ignorant, because after that, colonialists can seize the wealth
of our countries easily, for they shall not find before them save
semi-men.  
    
 I have to declare something that is very bitter for every heart that
wishes for the exaltedness of Islam and the happiness of man and
society. It is that some women who are considered to be religious
whereas faith has never entered their hearts have played a dangerous
role in disrupting the Islamic unity, drawing the believers into
disagreements and setting the fire of sedition among them.  
    
 This is clear evidence showing women’s ability of destruction even if
they don the dress of religion.  
    
 Yes! If a woman has such a great ability of bad influence even over
religious people, it is reasonable and wise that much attention should
be paid to this great ability in order to direct it towards construction
rather than destruction.  
    
 Thus, we find that a faithful woman and ideal mother is a more
important factor of construction and happiness in life than a faithful
man and ideal father.  
  

Question no. 73: What is the role of motherhood in society and religion?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** What is the philosophy of motherhood? What is the relation
of woman to society with both positive and negative aspects? Can
motherhood be one of the factors that contribute to building a good and
faithful nation that can resist corruption and tyranny?  
    
**The answer:** Once, I heard Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi al-Mudarrisi say
in one of his lectures, ‘If you want a good society, you have to look
for a good mother, because if you find society sinking under the
pressures of corruption and loss, you should know well that all these
evils shall reach mothers. A mother is not only a school, but she is
also the life, origin, and essence of man….  
    
 In order to treat the problem from its roots, you have to turn to the
mother and try to treat the problems that the mother suffers from, and
then, you will know the reasons behind the deviation of society. Looking
for another place to cure the social diseases will be nothing save a
temporary tranquilizer that soon disappears and then the pains of the
diseases will come back again.’  
    
 About the philosophy of motherhood and the qualities of an ideal
mother, he says, ‘Before all, man has to ask himself: has he come to
this life to enjoy its pleasures and live for a certain period and then
he dies and everything finishes, or has he come to play a role and
undertake a responsibility? If the second conception is true, then what
is the responsibility of this man?’  
    
 To answer this question, I say: the greatest responsibility that man
undertakes in this life is the good upbringing of his children. A mother
who understands this responsibility knows well that all the affairs of
this life are minor before her responsibility for her children…  
    
 An ideal mother makes her children be among the people of Paradise and
tries her best to carry out this goal. She makes them love Allah and
fear the punishment of the afterlife…  
    
 Things like these are not realized unless a woman pays a lot of
attention to other things that are considered as bases to attain these
goals. A woman does not become a good mother except when she becomes a
good wife. As a man has to look for a good woman to marry, a woman does
not have to accept save a good man to be her husband. After marriage,
she has to try her best to raise and educate her children in the best
way. Also, she has to watch her husband especially concerning the source
of his livelihood. A good wife does not allow her husband to bring money
from anywhere, because she knows that unlawful money causes unlawful
sperm, and a man who is created from an unlawful sperm is difficult to
be reformed.’  
    
 We invite the *Ulama’*, thinkers, preachers, and pious people to take
extensive care to spread the culture of motherhood in societies,
especially amongst the rising generation of girls. Islam has paid a lot
of attention to the position of girls in the house due to her vital role
in the future when she becomes a wife and mother.  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘Whoever has a daughter and he brings her up
well, educates her well, and is generous to her with what Allah has
granted him, she will be as a fort and cover him from Fire.[^15]’  
    
 In another tradition, the Prophet (S) declares that the right of a
mother on her child is two times more than the right of a father. A
child has been recommended to be kind to his father, while he has been
recommended to be kind to his mother three times as much.  
    
 The best speech is that of Allah when He says, ***(And We have enjoined
on man doing of good to his parents; with trouble did his mother bear
him and with trouble did she bring him forth; and the bearing of him and
the weaning of him was thirty months; until when he attains his maturity
and reaches forty years, he says: My Lord! grant me that I may give
thanks for Thy favor which Thou hast bestowed on me and on my parents,
and that I may do good which pleases Thee and do good to me in respect
of my offspring; surely I turn to Thee, and surely I am of those who
submit. These are they from whom We accept the best of what they have
done and pass over their evil deeds, among the dwellers of the garden;
the promise of truth which they were promised)***[^16].  
  

Question no. 74: How do I deal with an ungrateful and frequently absent husband?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband travels too much, and the responsibility of the
house and children has fallen on me. My back has broken due to this
heavy responsibility; nevertheless, I have not received from him even a
word of gratitude. What shall I do?  
    
**The answer:** Your husband has to change his job, if it is possible,
or bring you a servant. You may teach your children the household
affairs to help you or you may make friends with the neighbors according
to the familiar, social way among good people. If all these solutions
fail, you should continue in your present state and look forward to the
reward of Allah that the future may be better than the past.  
    
 Dear sister, be patient for patience is an effective weapon. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said, ‘He, who rides in the boat of patience, arrives at the
field of victory.[^17]’  
    
 The husband, also, has to try his best to solve this problem. Islam
does not permit the burdening of wives with heavy duties.  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘Travel is a part of torment. Whenever one of you
finishes his travel, let him hasten back to his family.’  
    
 If this husband does not change his severe behavior towards his wife,
relatives have to advise him wisely, because supporting the cause of a
wronged one brings good in this life and the afterlife.  
  

Question no. 75: Should I ask my imprisoned husband to divorce me so I could marry another since we cannot be together and he cannot provide for our family?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband is unjustly undergoing a sentence of fifteen
years in prison for a matter of the truth! I live miserably with my
child. My husband’s relatives do not take any care of me or my little
son. Whenever I count the remaining period of my husband’s imprisonment,
which is ten years, I feel I will die before the actual death comes. I
have a friend who asked her husband to divorce her as soon as she knew
that he had been sentenced to life imprisonment and then she went to
live with a good husband. She often advises me to do the same. I am
confused and do not know what to do. Would you please guide me to the
right way so that I may follow it and keep myself away from the whispers
of the Satan?  
    
**The answer:** Dear faithful sister, there is something called loyalty,
whose light always shines in the stories of pious and dutiful people.
Loyalty is an Islamic value, a human nature, and a moral jewel. One who
has no loyalty lives with remorse his whole life and does not feel
happy.  
    
 Yes! There are some exceptions that Islam has permitted and specified
within certain boundaries. I prefer that these exceptional cases should
be dealt with in the agreement between the imprisoned husband and the
expectant wife. The husband who has entered prison after struggling to
revive noble values in society, which has been deprived of these values,
is able to make a decision to set his young wife free if she wishes to
live away from the long wait. Nevertheless, I prefer that the faithful
wife make a sacrifice for the sake of the values that her husband was
thrown in prison for. Among these values are loyalty, patience,
devotedness, and giving delight to her husband’s heart by visiting him
continuously and making him feel that she is with him not only in ease
but also in distress. Is life worth anything without values?  
    
 In a word, Islamic values must always be taken as the motives of our
situations. They must be the criteria of divorce or waiting. Allah says,
***(…then retain them with kindness or separate them with***
***kindness)***[^18]. Kindness is among the values to which Islam has
invited and which also include loyalty, patience, cooperation, and
mutual understanding.  
  

Question no. 76: How can the poor overcome their financial problems?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** How can poor families overcome their financial problems,
since the requirements of life are greater than the income these
families receive?  
    
**The answer:** Poverty is not a new problem for man. Islam has treated
poverty with its wise verdicts and moral teachings and with
supplications and with strengthening the moral aspects of man and
family. We feel sorry for most Muslims who have virtually said to Islam:
stick to the limits of books and lectures and do not enter our practical
life especially in our closed rooms!! Therefore, they have brought upon
themselves different problems in their lives.  
    
 Society, with its poor and rich, has kept away from the wide mercy and
abundant blessings of Allah. Whoever divorces piety, Heaven divorces
him. Allah says, ***(And if the people of the towns had believed and
guarded (against evil)***[^19]

We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from the heaven and
the earth, but they rejected, so We overtook them for what they had
earned). The poor commit some disobediences that bring them poverty and
the rich commit some disobediences that bring them distresses, and thus
poverty increases in the society. Imam Ali (a.s.) has said, ‘There is no
abundant blessing, unless there is a lost due beside it.’  
    
 Panting after the desires of this life, material pleasures, and lavish
expenditures is failure to know the facts to which Allah has invited
us.  
    
 From amongst the poetry ascribed to Imam Hasan (a.s.) is the following
verse:  
  

“O people of a transient world,

Adhering to an evanescent shadow is silliness.”

   
 Observing this fact, the economical life of a family must be well
organized. The husband, his wife, and the other qualified members of the
family can manage the income of the family in the best way and spare
some of it for emergencies.  
    
 It is useful to quote here what I have read in the al-Wa’iy al-Islami
magazine, vol. 414: “Many problems happen to families because of
disorganization of the income between the two spouses or the income does
not cover their needs.  
    
 Nowadays, these problems have become more complicated because of the
rise in prices, the high level of living, the change of life’s luxuries
of yesterday into essential needs today, and the increasing number of
population that leads to an increase in consumption.  
    
 The circumstances and the disagreements that emerge because of money
and defects in managing the income and expenditures may be different
from one family to another, but there are some important concerns such
as the changes that affect the lives of the spouses are such that each
of them will not have his/her own independent opinion about the
financial matters. In fact, the opinion of the other side will be
important, especially if the wife has a job and a personal income.  
    
 Some modern families suffer from serious financial problems, and some
husbands may belittle the material needs, which may increase the
disagreement between spouses.  
    
 But how can spouses face these financial crises?  
    
 1. Each spouse has to inform the other of his/her actual income so that
they conduct all their affairs clearly and with fidelity.  
    
 2. The spouses, together, have to specify the most important points of
expenditure.  
    
 3. They have to agree that the income of the husband and the income of
the wife become one to build the family and not to satisfy their
personal wishes.  
    
 4. They have to agree to balance their joint incomes so that nothing
disturbs their expenditure.  
    
 5. They must avoid participating in different projects and many
installments in order to not be overwhelmed by the great expenses
required from each of them.  
    
 6. If one of them faces a financial problem, he/she has to frankly
inform the other spouse so that they can make the necessary changes to
their budget.  
    
 Each husband and wife should not place money and financial problems in
the first position of their life, for the pillars of a happy family
stand on mutual understanding and respect before all. Money alone does
not bring happiness and tranquility, but it is a means to achieve the
requirements of life.”  
    
 There are many Qur’anic verses and supplications to be recited to
invoke Allah for livelihood. They are mentioned in the books of
supplications. What I mention here is something that I myself have
experienced. It is reciting the second and the third verses of the sura
at-Talaq (65), ***(…and whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He
will make for him an outlet, and give him sustenance from whence he
thinks not; and whoever trusts in Allah, He is sufficient for him;
surely Allah attains His purpose; Allah indeed has appointed a measure
for everything)*** three times after every prayer, attentively and
sincerely[^20].  
  

Question no. 77: I want to divorce my wife due to her defects which I cannot bear, but I received threats from her family. What should I do?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** A while ago, I married a young woman. After the wedding, I
discovered that she had some defects. I tried to be satisfied and
patient with her defect, but I could not. At last, I decided to divorce
her, but her brother began threatening me and caused me troubles. He is
an evil person, and I hate troubles. Frankly, I say that I am not brave
in evil or in resisting evil. I do not know what to do. I hope that you
may guide me to a solution.  
    
**The answer:** Legally, you have the right to divorce her, but
humaneness requires you to live with her if her defect is not so
serious. If you decide to divorce her, you have to be prudent towards
her brother. Allah says, ***(And the servants of the Beneficent are they
who walk on the earth in humbleness, and when the ignorant address them,
they say: Peace!)*** [^21]  
    
 Also we find this solution in a tradition narrated from one of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), ‘If you keep silent before an ignorant person, you
answer him fully and punish him painfully.’  
    
 You should follow this conduct if his harm towards you is through
speech, but if you fear that he may do more serious harm to you, you can
send some notables to advise and threaten him implicitly. If he persists
in his ignorance, you should try to move to another part of your
country. If he continues harassing you, then you should lodge a
complaint against him in court.  
    
 You should do so if there is no way before you except divorce, but if
you can live with your wife, you should; otherwise, after agreeing with
her, you can choose a second wife who can live with her without
troubles.  
  

Question no. 78: Should a man go against the wishes of his sick wife and marry another to satisfy his needs and desires?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I have a friend whose wife is sick and she cannot satisfy
his sexual desire. At the same time, she strongly refuses to let him
marry another wife. She acts like she’ll die whenever he wants to
discuss this subject with her, though he has the right to marry another
wife even if his first wife is sound. Then, how about it when she is
sick? I wonder at the selfishness and the unjust jealousy of such women
towards their poor husbands! My friend is always nervous because of his
wife who is not ready to talk about polygamy. What do you suggest for a
solution? Should my friend continue living with his wife and remain
without children, satisfied lust, or comfort or should he marry another
one regardless of what will happen?  
    
**The answer:** This husband has the right to get married whether in
order to get children, to satisfy his sexual lust, or to relieve his
strained nerves, but executing this right requires great wisdom in
caring for the moral side. He, to the extent of his abilities, has to
convince his wife and assure her that he will not leave her alone or
ignore her if she agrees on his marriage to another wife, rather her
agreement shall make him love and respect her more. He must carry out
his promise to her after her agreement.  
    
 If this attempt does not succeed, he should send some wise relatives of
hers to convince her and explain to her the divine verdict in this
concern. They should explain to her that by preventing her husband from
marrying another, she will bring upon herself the wrath of Allah that
will lead her to the torment of the afterlife because, by doing so, she
denies one of the verdicts of Allah and prohibits a lawful right of her
husband on the one hand, and on the other hand, she may lead her husband
to commit unlawful acts. In fact, her permission is not a condition for
the validity of her husband’s second marriage, but it is just a moral
requirement.  
    
 If this attempt does not succeed either, then the decision is up to the
husband whether he wants to live with her and make sacrifices for her or
if he wants to get married to another, regardless of the consequences.  
    
 I myself know someone who went ahead and married another wife in spite
of his wife’s threats, and then she submitted to the reality. However, I
also know other people who married additional wives in spite of their
wives’ threats, and their wives did in fact carry out their threats and
caused their husbands many troubles.  
    
 I do not know which type the wife of your friend will be! I pray to
Allah that she recovers her health and makes her husband happy, and I
hope she will find pleasure in submitting to the verdict of Allah
because nothing will be more useful to her than the verdicts of Allah,
which surely have wisdom and advantages that may be unknown by man, for
Allah is more aware than us.  
    
 Such women have to think of the pleasure of Allah and their ends in the
afterlife. This life is transient and ages are too short however much
they last! Then, let these women do good deeds and leave good
remembrances after them!  
  

Question no. 79: How can we solve the problem of poor relations with in-laws?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** The troubles between a wife and her husband’s relatives
are among the problems that most often lead a marriage to divorce. It is
seldom to find cordiality between a wife and her mother-in-law. My
question is: how do you deal with this problem?  
    
**The answer:** There are some points that must be obtained before the
troubles begin.  
    
 1. Spouses, and their families as well, should have a good amount of
comprehension, prudence, morals, and good faith, and this is what Islam
emphasizes.  
    
 2. Spouses should try to keep away from the incentives of
disagreement.  
    
 3. They should try to be independent in the abode and the domestic
means.  
    
 4. They should refrain from spying on others in the family.  
    
 5. They should not reveal their secrets to others.  
    
 6. They should try to spread love among all by praising, thanking, and
encouraging others.  
    
 However, if the problems begin, the following steps must be followed:  
    
 1. The problem must be belittled.  
    
 2. The problem must be limited only to the ones the problem relates
to.  
    
 3. Others may give advice with lenient speech and smiles and some
lectures about the afterlife, and they should avoid disputing. It would
be better to mention some jokes to quiet the anger of the ones involved
in the problem.  
    
 4. They should beware of suspecting and misunderstanding each other.  
    
 5. They should deal with the problem wisely and should humor the ones
involved in the problem until the fire of the problem is extinguished.  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) says, ‘Humor people and you will enjoy their
brotherhood. Meet them with smiles and joy and you will kill their
spites.[^22]’  
  

Question no. 80: What is the meaning of this verse “Men are the guardians of women”? Many men take it as an excuse to impose unjust control on their women.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** What is the meaning of this verse “***Men are the
guardians of women*****”**? Many men take it as an excuse to impose
unjust control on their women.

**The answer:** In managing the affairs of marital life, there must be
one decision-maker; otherwise, the family will become divided and fall
into parts. It is the same with companies, banks, and government
departments. They have one head, who is called manager, minister, or
president, to make decisions. This does not imply the permitting of
despotism. A manager, a minister, or a president, in spite of his
authority, has to consult with others and has to take counselors. Even
the messenger of Allah (S), who is the most perfect one among all human
beings, has been ordered by Allah to consult with others by saying,
***(…and consult with them in the affair; so when you have decided, then
place your trust in Allah)***[^23].  
    
 In this verse, you see two orders: one of consulting and the other of
determining. In the first order, there is a plural pronoun (consult with
them) whereas in the other order there is a singular pronoun. It is
understood that a final decision must be made by one person, and no
more; otherwise, disagreement will not be settled by one decision. As we
have said, a decision must be made after consulting with persons of
common benefit and common fate. This means that guardianship should be
for a decision-maker.  
    
 Here, we discuss the following question: if guardianship is to be
claimed by either the husband or the wife, which one of them is
preferred?  
    
 Islam prefers the husband over the wife for the following reasons:  
    
 1. Man in most cases has a greater ability of administration, control
over his nerves, courage, freedom in going out of home, dealing with
people, and dealing with the affairs of life than a woman.  
    
 2. If a woman works outdoors, she will be – in most cases – an easy
game for hunters.  
    
 3. Because the husband is the one who initially establishes the family
and the wife is a newcomer to the family, man is worthier of making a
decision on what he establishes. For example, if you establish a company
and invite someone qualified to assist you in administrating the
company, would you not keep the conclusive decisions to yourself though
you may regard the position of the one you have invited as a partner
with you in administration?  
    
 4. Because the husband undertakes the financial responsibility of the
family, it is natural that guardianship is his right. This is clear in
the Qur’anic verse ***(Men are the guardians of women because Allah has
made some of them to excel others and because they spend out of their
property)***[^24].  
    
 This matter, however, does not justify the unjust control of a man over
his wife. Many men exploit their authorities to achieve personal
benefits. This does not mean that this authority is wrong, but rather it
is wrong when the authorized men misuse this authority selfishly to
achieve their personal benefits.  
    
 If a keeper of a mosque or a Husayniyyah[^25] collects some money under
the pretense of doing some religious projects, but he spends this money
on his personal purposes, do we condemn the mosque, the Husayniyyah, and
the religious projects or do we condemn that disloyal person?  
    
 When Islam gave this guardianship to man, it ordered him to be fair,
honest, and wise. If man is not so, then the wrong lies in man himself
and not in the verdict of guardianship.  
    
 I do not think that there is a woman who refuses to be the wife of a
man who is bound by the conditions of guardianship and its Islamic
principles.  
    
 We ask: can a husband authorize his wife with this guardianship?  
    
 The answer: Yes, he has the right to convey his right to his wife.
Thus, Islam does not determine the despotism of men; rather, Islam
organizes the administration of a happy marital life, and thus
guardianship is a positive thing as long as the husband has positive
qualities.  
  

Question no. 81: If a person helps to arrange a marriage, is he/she responsible for problems that happen in the marriage?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I often hear from preachers that the person who arranges a
marriage between a Muslim man and a Muslim woman will get a great
reward. Once, I arranged a marriage between two young persons, and now
whenever a quarrel occurs between them, they blame me because I was the
cause of their marriage. This has made me refrain from attempting again
in this concern. What do you think I should do?  
    
**The answer:** The Prophet (S) has said, ‘He who marries his faithful
brother to a woman who supports him and makes him feel happy and
comfortable with her, Allah will marry him to a houri and will please
him with the veracious ones of his relatives and brothers who love him
and will make them pleased with him.[^26]’  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said, ‘Whoever marries a bachelor (to a woman)
will be among those whom Allah will look at on the Day of
Resurrection.[^27]’  
    
 Islam has urged us to assist people in getting married. Islam does not
urge anything unless it is to our advantage, giving us benefits in
religion and rewards in the afterlife. But the approach to achieving
this is important. The one who wants to arrange the marriage of two
persons has to regard the qualities of the two persons and the extent to
which they are near in ambitions and morals, and then he should tell
them and their families that he is just an introducer. Then, those
persons and their families must take the remaining steps. They should
inquire accurately about each other and then agree on the details and
conditions of marriage. The introducer has to tell them that he should
not be blamed since it is the spouses and their families who make the
final decision. He should tell them that a mediator does not know the
unseen, and if he knew the unseen, he would prevent the quarrels of the
spouses or would not prepare their marriage at all.  
    
 According to these points, you have to continue doing good to gain
rewards in the afterlife. Do not let the justifications of the persons
who are unable to deal with each other correctly prevent you from doing
good. Actual blame should be on them and not on the one who has intended
to do good and serve others.  
  

Question no. 82: My husband shows no interest in discussing things with me or listening to me and it makes me very unhappy; what should I do?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I separated from my first husband because he was a drug
addict, and for the past ten years, I have been married to a good man.
He speaks little with me and pays more attention to his business. I wish
we could sit together and discuss our interests, life affairs, educating
our children, the news of the society and neighbors, or the like.
Sometimes, I feel that I am full of speech but I do not find anyone
beside me to whom I can talk. I tell my husband: please listen to me! He
says: I have no time, and my mind is not ready to listen. Would you
please suggest a solution to my problem?  
    
**The answer:** Dear sister, you have to understand that people are
different in their natures but they are similar in other aspects. Your
good husband is different from you in some aspect, but this does not
mean that he hates you or hates to listen to your speech. Some aspects
are hereditary, others are related with the zodiacs, some are acquired
since childhood, and others are acquired because of the surrounding
environment and pressing difficulties that man faces due to political,
economical, or social reasons. These difficulties afflict all people,
but they cause some melancholy, others handicaps, others madness, others
failure and deviation, and others great success – and this kind is found
the least in people.  
    
 Dear sister, I suggest that you should try to talk with your other
relatives, such as your parents, brothers, sisters, daughters, or your
trusted neighbors. If you do not succeed, then you should accept the
reality because satisfaction is a treasure that does not end, as
mentioned in the Islamic traditions. It has also been mentioned that
keeping silent and speaking little are better.  
  

Question no. 83: I feel my wife neglects me now that we have a child.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife used to take care of me (fifty percent of the
time), but ever since she gave birth to our child, she pays all her
attention to the child as if she does not see her husband is also in the
house. I do not know how to deal with this situation without making her
misunderstand that I may be jealous of my child.  
    
**The answer:** This case results from a previous emotional void either
in her father’s house or in your house. When her child was born, she
tried to fill that void by excessive inclination towards him.  
    
 To repair the situation:  
    
 1. Bring her some books about the rights of the husband and marital
relations or some cassettes containing lectures about this subject!  
    
 2. Do not resent and do not show her your anger at her action, but you
should give her ample opportunity to return to her natural state!  
    
 3. Organize some time for both of you to talk and assure her of your
love to her!  
    
 4. Let her see your love and attention for the child to make her feel
that she is not the only one who loves the child!  
    
 5. Continue this behavior and do not give up because the fruits will
not come to you immediately, especially if her emotional void is deep
and old!  
    
 6. Send your friends’ wives to her to talk to her about her required
legal duties towards her husband, without making her feel that they have
come specifically to discuss this matter!  
  

Question no. 84: My wife used to be religious but became materialistic, so I tried to force her to correct her behavior and instead things only got worse; what should I do?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife used to always attend religious meetings, but now
she is interested only in material pleasures. She always insists that we
change the furniture or I buy her clothes and other things that are
beyond my financial ability. I talk to her about contentment, which I
assume she has learnt about in those religious meetings, but she pays no
attention. Once, I discussed this problem with a faithful man, and he
advised me to prevent her from going to those meetings justifying that
these meetings have become, in our present time, meetings of displaying
fashions or discussing the matters of this material world. I did, but
she became more obstinate and began disputing with me and threatened
that she would go out in spite of me. Now, my life is full of problems
with this wife. Would you please advise me what to do?  
    
**The answer:** Acknowledging the miserable reality is the first step in
repairing it. What you have mentioned about the meetings that are
clothed in religion hurts the heart of every protective believer, and at
the head of these protective people are Muhammad (S) and his pure
progeny (a.s.).  
    
 Really, some meetings not only do not educate our women, but they also
destroy the efforts of education made by the sincere people. The Prophet
(S) warned us when he said to his successor Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali,
whoever obeys his wife, Allah will throw him into the Fire.’ Imam Ali
(a.s.) asked, ‘What obedience?’ The Prophet (S) said, ‘He permits her to
go to meetings, weddings, meetings of weepers, and to put on transparent
clothes.[^28]’  
    
 The solution I suggest comes through the following points (whether you
follow all of them or some of them depends on your discretion in dealing
with the problem and its concerns):  
    
 First, after explaining to her your wife’s state, allow a wise woman to
befriend your wife and advise your wife from the wisdom she has received
from her Lord.  
    
 Second, you can hold religious meetings in your house, if possible, and
entrust your wife with some suitable responsibility that will occupy her
and allow her to feel her personality. If it is not possible, you can
take her to certain meetings after previously arranging with the
preacher to choose a suitable subject. For example, let him talk about
the saying of the Prophet (S), ‘There are three woman, who Allah frees
from the torment of the grave and resurrects with Fatima az-Zahra’
(a.s.); a woman who is patient with the stinginess of her husband, a
woman who is patient with the bad morals of her husband, and a woman who
gives up her dowry to her husband.’  
    
 Third, you should follow calm ways to convince her, because the harms
of anger, nervousness, and scolding are greater than their advantages.
Perhaps a nice word, a nice gesture, a present, a smile, or a joke would
treat many problems in a short amount of time.  
    
 Fourth, consider your financial ability and be realistic and sincere to
the best of your abilities. If she wants a necessary thing and you are
able to buy it for her, do so and do not be stingy for Allah grants kind
people His expansive and lawful livelihood.  
    
 Fifth, you should try your best to improve your living conditions
because remaining in poverty is something that religion does not
accept.  
    
 Sixth, if these steps are of no use, you have to be patient and bear
the problem until Allah determines what is best between you and your
wife.  
    
 Seventh, if all of these attempts are useless, you would be better off
threatening to divorce her, and then you can carry out a revocable
divorce, because then you can return to her after she repents of her bad
behaviors.  
  

Question no. 85: What is the opinion of Islam about birth control?
------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** What is the opinion of Islam about birth control and
stopping procreation? Some people in our family think that it is
unlawful; therefore, they procreate in spite of their limited incomes,
whereas others think that it is necessary to control birth though they
are in a good economical state.

**The answer:** Basically, the Muslims should procreate and increase in
number as it is understood from the Prophetic traditions. The Prophet
(S) said, ‘Do you not know that I will be proud of you before nations on
the Day of Resurrection even of miscarried fetuses…[^29]’ .  
    
 However, Islam has taken the different stages and circumstances of
people into consideration. Economical conditions, narrow residences,
difficulties of upbringing and educating, dangers of deviation from
religion, and the problems of controlling people’s affairs in general
are factors requiring birth control for some people, but they may not
require other people to practice that.  
    
 This is understood from other traditions too. The Prophet (S) said,
when predicting some things to take place in a time different from his
time, ‘A time will come to people, in which the best of people will be…
those of less children.[^30]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘There are three things that are among the worst
of calamities: big family, dominance of debts, and chronic
diseases.[^31]’  
    
 It is understood that a smaller family is better.  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) also said, ‘(having) few children is one of the two
eases.[^32]’  
    
 We conclude that this matter (birth control) is permissible and is a
personal decision according to the circumstances of a person himself. It
is not possible to impose or not to impose the concept of birth control
on someone except if it harms others seriously.  
    
 It is thus if there are no imperialist plans behind birth control;
otherwise, not controlling birth is obligatory on condition that one can
bring up and educate his children properly, lest they become an easy
game for the imperialists as mostly happens.  
  

Question no. 86: My in-laws are causing marital problems for me and my wife and she struggles to balance her relationship between me and them; how can we solve this problem?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife’s relatives interfere in the affairs of my marital
life, and so they have made our life full of troubles. As for my wife,
she is divided between her relatives and me. Her heart is with me, but
her courtesies are with them, and all the while, confusion hovers as a
cloud over her head. I do not know how to save her and myself from her
curious family!  
    
**The answer:** You can send some wise people as mediators to persuade
your wife’s relatives to stop their interferences, which may destroy the
happiness of their daughter if they truly want her happiness. But before
all, let us be realistic. Please, think of yourself! Perhaps you
practice a wrong behavior that needs to be repaired!  
    
 If you are certain about yourself, you should send mediators;
otherwise, repair yourself and carry out these steps reasonably and with
lenient morals:  
    
 1. Explain your opinions to your wife and let her stand with you in
this ordeal to avoid any dispute or quarrel with her family!  
    
 2. Change your behavior towards her family and be lenient to them.
Allah says, ***(Repel the evil deed with one which is better, then lo!
he, between whom and you there was enmity (will become) as though he was
a bosom friend)***[^33].  
    
 3. Let you and your wife be busy with building your future, and do not
listen to others’ criticism and disputes as long as you understand each
other and look forward to the pleasure of Allah.  
    
 4. On some occasions, offer your wife’s relatives some presents to gain
their love and to clear the old dregs from their hearts.  
  

Question no. 87: A neighbor couple is loud and garrulous, creating disturbance in the apartments we live in; what is the Islamic view of this behavior?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** In our building, we have a neighbor, whose wife is
garrulous and he himself does not refrain from talking with the female
neighbors and joking with them until their laughing becomes terribly
loud, besides the disturbance they make in the corridors. What is the
legal verdict of Islam on this bad behavior?  
    
**The answer:** This is impermissible in Islam according to these
Qur’anic verses: ***(…then be not soft in (your) speech, lest he in
whose heart is a disease yearn; and speak a good word. And stay in your
houses and do not display your finery like the displaying of the
ignorance of yore)***[^34].  
    
 Talkativeness and nonsense often revolve around backbiting, telling
tales, and revealing secrets that often cause problems between spouses,
families, and neighbors; and especially problematic is the mutual joking
and laughing between non-mahram men and women.  
    
 Allah the Almighty says, ***(And say to My servants (that) they speak
that which is best; surely the Satan sows dissensions among
them)***[^35] and ***(…and lower your voice; surely the most hateful of
voices is braying of the asses)***[^36].  
    
 From the recommendations of Prophet al-Khidhr (a.s.) to Prophet Moses
(a.s.), Prophet Muhammad (S) quoted the following, ‘Do not be talkative
and do not prattle, because talkativeness disgraces the *Ulama’* and
reveals the defects of silly people![^37]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Do not talk to people about everything you hear
because it is stupidity.[^38]’  
    
 He also said, ‘A silence dressing you in dignity is better than a
saying bringing you regret.[^39]’  
  

Question no. 88: My husband claims ineptitude at matters of home and child-rearing as an excuse for not helping me in any of these matters; how can I change his thinking?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband always repeats, ‘I am unable to manage the
house and to educate the children. Do whatever you want and do not
depend on me!’ This is not right, but I do not know how to correct his
thinking.  
    
**The answer:** It is very odd that the master of the family would
declare his inability to manage his house, which he himself has
established, or to educate one, two, or three children, whereas we find
the heads of companies, foundations, and governments managing, in
addition to their families, tens, hundreds, thousands, and millions of
people.  
    
 What is the reason behind this difference?  
    
 The reason lies in the following points, which are absent from an
incapable person’s mind and present before the mind of a successful
manager:  
    
 · First point: methodology  
    
 By this we mean recognizing the goals of marriage, procreation, and
forming a family, on which basis the master of the family plans for the
future of his children – the future, which stems from him first and
foremost. Does man, when he invites some guests, not think of the aim of
his invitation and then plan how and what foods he will offer
appropriate to their ranks and positions? In the same way, concerning
his family and children, he should specify aims and then think and plan
accordingly to execute them.  
    
 · Second point: organizing  
    
 It means distributing the domestic duties in such a way that each
member of the house knows his duty and also to ensure that the greater
part of the duties will not fall on the shoulder of any one person while
the others live without offering any help or feeling any
responsibility.  
    
 The master of the family is the one who divides the household duties
amongst the members of his family according to their ages and abilities;
for example, one for sweeping, the other for cooking, the third for
shopping, and so on. Allah says, ***(…and help one another in goodness
and piety)***[^40].  
    
 · Third point: coordination  
    
 Parents must agree on and settle many things between themselves so that
each of them knows his duties, such as buying the school supplies of
their children for example. If there is no prior arrangement between the
parents, the father may buy the supplies and the mother may also buy
them at the same time, or neither will buy them, and thus the affairs of
the children may become troubled at school.  
    
 Coordination, which is a part of organization, prevents the waste of
time, abilities, and efforts and the confusion of the family members
through different instructions in the house. Have you not seen Allah
with your mind and heart through His great organization of the creatures
and the coordination among them with the utmost accuracy? If it were not
so, all life would be in tumult.  
    
 · Fourth point: leadership  
    
 The master of the family, and especially the father, should touch the
hearts of the members of his family through love to attract them towards
his educational instructions, and this is one of the qualities of an
understanding leader. It is a stage higher than household management. A
successful leader is one who does not make others submit to his will by
force, but he instead uses wisdom and prudence to convince them to
submit. The leader who uses severity and violence will certainly produce
severe, impolite, mutinous, and wicked offspring with weak
personalities.  
    
 We do not deny the importance of using strictness and firmness in some
occasions. A wise leader is aware of those occasions, and he knows how
and when he should become strict and firm without making others feel
that he has a power over them that may deprive them of their freedom and
also without making them feel that responsible supervision is of no
importance. Leadership is the art of mixing many items, the most
important of which are knowledge, wisdom, tact, and good practice.  
    
 · Fifth point: knowledge  
    
 The master of the family should know the actual value of these points
in correlation to what Islam has legislated in its view towards the
universe, life, man, and their legislative and moral concerns.  
    
 Finally, this husband should strengthen his morale by relying on Allah
the Almighty. The nearest one who can help him in this matter is you, O
wife. You can inspire in him the spirit of responsibility. You can
encourage and praise him whenever he carries out something. You can tell
him that the greatness of the famous personalities in history came about
because they did not think of the difficulties in their achievements,
but they instead thought of the great achievements they would get.  
  

Question no. 89: What causes insomnia and how is it treated?
------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** What is the reason behind insomnia and lack of sleep, and
what is the treatment? If it is due to marital problems, it is enough to
make one think of not getting married.

**The answer:** The main reasons behind this case are:  
    
 1. Physical pains  
    
 2. Problems pressing on one’s mind  
    
 3. Worry, especially about one’s job and future projects  
    
 4. Watching films of terror and libertinism  
    
 5. Reading books that incite lust and the nerves  
    
 6. Feeling guilt  
    
 7. Marital problems, as you have mentioned in your question  
    
 To treat yourself, you have to perform the following steps:  
    
 1. Perform (wudu’) ritual ablution before going to bed!  
    
 2. Recite some suras of the Holy Qur’an especially the sura of al-Hashr
(59)!  
    
 3. Pray to Allah to forgive you your every sin!  
    
 4. Make planned efforts according to the orders of Allah!  
    
 5. Believe sincerely that Allah manages all affairs and He is the
Generous Giver!  
    
 6. Try to be outwardly and inwardly loyal and pure!  
    
 7. Be satisfied with what Allah has granted you of wealth and your
marital life!  
    
 8. Be certain that this world is transient and man’s age is short!  
    
 9. Read about the problems of others and always thank Allah for His
fate!  
    
 10. Tire your body out before going to bed with, for example, sports or
reading!  
  

Question no. 90: My husband is weak and uninvolved with household affairs; how can I get him to act as a proper head of household?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband has a weak and infirm personality. He does not
manage the household affairs. He neither enjoins nor does he forbid the
children. He pays no attention to their school education. How should I
behave towards him in order to make him act according to his suitable
position?  
    
**The answer:** This is the negative side of your husband’s personality,
but surely he has some positive qualities too. Try to regard these
qualities as well. But as for the negative side:  
    
 First, entrust him with some tasks even if he hesitates or refuses to
do them!  
    
 Second, try to give him self-confidence. For example, you can say to
him: I am sure you can do this work.  
    
 Third, declare to him that you want him to be with a strong
personality, and tell him that this is the wish of your children as
well. Tell him that the responsibilities in marital life are common and
divided according to Islamic teachings and the human nature!  
    
 Fourth, plan with your children to ask their father to interfere in
their affairs and to discuss with them different issues. In other words,
he should be involved in the family affairs in every way.  
    
 Fifth, if he does not change after these steps, you have to adapt
yourself to his state and convince yourself that it is a good state, for
every person has his own independent personality and private
mentality.  
  

Question no. 91: How can one know if someone suffers insanity?
--------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Once, a dispute took place between my wife and myself
about managing our marital life and our children’s affairs. She accused
me of insanity. This word, instead of making me angry, has made me
ponder about myself – am I really as my wife said? Would you please show
the connotation of sanity that I may understand my mentality for myself
and change accordingly, or I may convince my wife that I am not as she
says?  
    
**The answer:** I congratulate you for this liberal spirit and I wish
there were more like you in our fanatic societies. The Prophet (S), who
was definitely and without a doubt on the path of truth and guidance,
invited the polytheists, who were on a definite path of deviation, to an
open argumentation without fanaticism or omitting the argument of the
other side before showing the truth. ***(And most surely we or you are
on a right way or in manifest error)***[^41].  
    
 See how the Prophet (S) made the matter of disagreement between him and
the polytheists as though unresolved between guidance and deviation.
Thus, he encouraged them to begin argumentation. However, in our
societies, if two Muslims (or maybe two scholars) disagree, each one of
them determines that he is in the truth and his opponent is in the
falsehood and each one of them turns away from the other with enmity and
grudge!  
    
 Dear brother, as for your question, you should be aware that sanity has
some signs, most of which begin with the following don’ts:  
    
 1. Do not be inclined to violence, revenge, or transgressing against
the rights of others!  
    
 2. Do not show off in your deeds!  
    
 3. Do not like despotism!  
    
 4. Do not lie!  
    
 5. Do not be lazy to spend your life idly with no aim or
productivity!  
    
 6. Do not be greedy for what other people have or envy them!  
    
 7. Do not hate others, and do not fill your heart with grudge against
your opponents or whoever does you wrong!  
    
 8. Do not be selfish and think yourself better than all others!  
    
 9. Do not ignore religious beliefs throughout your life!  
    
 10. Do not disperse your mind, for then your concentration on your
tasks will scatter here and there!  
    
 After that, you should feel stable in your mentality and behaviors
before problems, look at life positively, become hopeful of your
tomorrow, and promise those whom you are responsible for a happy future.
Thus, you bring yourself and your family vitality, vigor, and
constructive activity.  
    
 These signs will indicate to you that your inner complexes have
disappeared, and then you will live with a pure nature that will repair
the condition you live in, and then you will understand your goal in
this life and the duties required from you.  
    
 Dear brother, with these points, you have to prove to your wife that
you are sane and you love your family, and for the sake of your family,
you are ready to tolerate all difficulties in order to continue towards
your goal, regardless of whether you are in difficulty or ease.  
    
 I confirm here that your not being angry with your wife when she called
you insane proves that you are mentally sound, and from this point on,
you must set out towards a better sanity and mentality.  
  

Question no. 92: How can I control my temper?
---------------------------------------------

**Question:** I often become so angry that I burst out against whoever
and whatever is around me. I confess that I am not happy with myself
when I am angry with my wife, my children, or others, but I do not know
how to treat this psychological disease!  
    
**The answer:** Dear brother, be sure that anger harms your health
because you burn with it your physical powers and the cells of your
brain and heart. You may also, because of anger, lose your family and
job. Remember that most of the dead in our present time have died
because of apoplexy after a case of anger and nervousness.  
    
 If you believe in this information, be sure that your case is curable
and the key to the cure is in your willpower, which may be difficult to
control in the beginning, but later on it will grow stronger until you
will find it easy to control your anger and change your behavior.  
    
 Here are some points to help you cure yourself inshallah:  
    
 1. When angry, try to orient your thinking and senses to something
besides the subject that provokes your anger!  
    
 2. Leave the place you are in when you become angry and walk to
another, and do not come back to it except after forgetting the
situation or when your anger disappears!  
    
 3. Assign an hour or half an hour every day for practicing exercises,
swimming, or breathing deeply! It would be better for you to practice
such exercises at the seashore.  
    
 4. Teach yourself to be merry through smiling, joking, and mentioning
pleasant events and comments within the limits of politeness and
honesty! In other words, be good-humored, lovely, and attractive!  
    
 5. Trust in the abilities of others, and do not think that they cannot
achieve something!  
    
 6. Choose some wise person with whom to discuss your sufferings,
entrust him with your secrets, and consult him regarding your affairs!  
    
 7. Always perform wudu’ and mention Allah with your tongue and heart
and remember that you are under His accurate watch!  
  

Question no. 93: I worry obsessively over failing in marriage, so much so that the worry itself could affect my marriage in a bad way; how can I solve my problem?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** I married recently, and I suffer from much psychological
worry and turmoil, fearing that I may fail in my marriage and become a
sad divorcee sitting in a corner of my father’s house like thousands of
divorcees. Would you please help me solve my suffering before what I
fear takes place though my husband is a good man?

**The answer:** Dear sister, your problem shows that you lack
self-confidence and your fears are not real. They are outcomes of
scruple and imagination. Your worrying about your future with your
husband may be a sufficient reason for you to fear as you do. To solve
your problem, you have to get rid of its cause by following these steps
without hesitation:  
    
 1. You should think deeply about why you scorn and belittle yourself
while you have been created with the divine dignity. Allah has granted
you honor and virtue as a highly respected being, so it is unjust for
you to do away with your position and value.  
    
 2. After discussing the matter with yourself, you will arrive at the
critical result that you are precious, and then you will know that a
precious one is she who tries her best to remain precious or become more
precious. This requires you to offer to your husband whatever good you
can offer. This will make you more attractive before your good
husband.  
    
 3. Seek refuge in Allah from the evil of the sneaking whisperer, who
whispers into the hearts of mankind, of the jinn and of mankind!  
    
 4. Read some books about the aspects of a successful wife and apply
them to yourself, and then do not doubt your ability to continue living
with your husband in a happy, joint life with your good offspring!  
    
 5. Always take lessons from successful wives, and do not spend your
time thinking of sad divorcees!  
    
 6. Always, convince yourself that you are happy, successful, strong,
and brave!  
    
 7. Keep these advices before your eyes throughout your life!  
  

Question no. 94: What are the causes of adultery and how can they be avoided?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** My friend is a shopkeeper. He said that there is a married
woman often tried to seduce him. Many times he chided her but with no
use. One day, she came to his shop and insisted for him to commit
adultery with her, justifying that her husband paid no attention to her
emotional needs. Would you please talk about these dangerous corruptions
and how to treat their causes?

**The answer:** The Prophet (S) said, ‘The wrath of Allah is so great on
a married woman who fills her eyes with other than her husband or one of
her mahrams. If she does so, Allah will nullify all her deeds, and if
she sleeps with other than her husband on her bed, Allah will definitely
burn her in Fire after torturing her in the grave.[^42]’  
    
 Dear brother, what is important is that your friend should overcome his
desires and not fall into the trap of this adulteress, for then he would
throw himself with her into the fire of Hell.  
    
 I would like to say to your friend and those like him what Imam
as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘Be abstinent from the women of people, and your
women will be abstinent![^43]’  
    
 Does his conscience accept that the honor of the women of his family
should be violated? If his answer is “NO”, let him beware of opening a
way for his own honor to be violated.  
    
 This tested man and that enticing woman should ponder deeply on the
sayings of the Prophet (S) narrated by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), ‘You have
to be abstinent and avoid adultery’[^44] and by Imam al-Baqir (a.s.),
‘There is no worship better near Allah than the abstinence of the
abdomen (not to eat any unlawful thing) and genitals.[^45]’  
    
 Let them, also, ponder on the great reward of the martyr who struggles
for the sake of Allah! It is less than the reward of one who is able to
commit adultery but he abstains and forbears. We have been informed of
such by Imam Ali (a.s.) who added, ‘An abstinent is about to be as one
of the angels.[^46]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) also said, ‘Satisfaction and suppressing the lust are
the best of abstinence.[^47]’  
    
 He said to Muhammad bin Abu Bakr when he appointed him as the wali of
Egypt, ‘Know that the best of abstinence is piety in the religion of
Allah and doing according to His orders. I recommend you of fearing
Allah in secrecy and in openness…[^48]’  
    
 Dear young man, you should resist and not permit yourself to commit
adultery because it is one of the major sins. Remember, when the Satan
invites you towards adultery, Allah sees you as do your great Prophet
(S) and infallible Imams (a.s.), who know your secrets every Thursday by
the will of Allah, Who knows every secret[^49].  
    
 You should remember that sin has destructive effects and bad
consequences that disgrace man in this life and bring him distresses and
griefs.  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘He who hastens towards lusts, hastens towards
plagues.[^50]’  
    
 He also said, ‘Whoever enjoys himself by disobeying Allah, Allah
afflicts him with meanness.[^51]’  
    
 Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said, ‘No disaster afflicts man except after a
sin…[^52]’  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘Allah the Almighty says: when he, who knows
Me, disobeys Me, I will set up one, who does not know Me, over
him.[^53]’  
    
 This is in this life, but as for the afterlife, the Prophet (S) said,
‘He who shakes hands with a woman who is unlawful (non-mahram) for him
will be afflicted with the wrath of Allah, and he who sleeps with a
woman who is unlawful for him will be tied by a chain of fire with the
Satan and they both will be thrown into Fire.[^54]’  
    
 I would like to draw the attentions of the husbands who are indifferent
to the sexual rights of their wives and also the husbands who are
lenient towards their wives in allowing them to watch erotic films or in
letting them go out without surveillance that they are partners in the
crime of adultery their wives commit.  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘Allah has given woman patience of ten men,
but if she is excited, the power of her lust becomes as of ten
men.[^55]’  
    
 The Prophet (S) ordered husbands by saying, ‘Wash your clothes, cut
your hairs, use miswak (tooth cleanser – i.e. brush your teeth), clean
your bodies, and adorn yourselves! The Israelites did not do that;
therefore, their women committed adultery.[^56]’  
    
 Adultery is not just a moment of pleasure which ends with the act;
rather, hundreds of problems come after it such as sudden death, which
is the worst of them, illegitimate children, who form a main cause of
crime in societies, and so on.  
  

Question no. 95: How can we adopt a child Islamically?
------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife is sterile, and I love children very much. I do
not want to die without leaving righteous descendents after me. I spoke
with my wife about marrying a faithful girl who would be as her friend
and assistant so that Allah may grant me good offspring, but she refused
and was about to attack and kill me. Several weeks passed until our
relation was restored to its natural state. I then suggested to her that
we might look for an orphan and adopt him as our son, if it was
acceptable to her. She accepted, but I do not know whether she was
sincere or she just accepted out of courtesy. Nevertheless, how should
we go about finding an orphan? How can we be sure that he is not
illegitimate?  
  

**The answer:** In the first part of the problem, the wife should
understand the truth and submit to the verdict of the Sharia, which is
the verdict of Allah, Who has given man the right to marry two, three,
or four wives (on condition that he will treat them all fairly and
equally) in normal cases, then how about if the first wife is in a state
like that of your wife?  
    
 Let this wife be sure that when Allah sees her submit to His judgment,
He will grant her goodness that will make her happy in this life and in
the afterlife. If her husband does get married, whether she agrees to it
or not, let her beware of the whispering of the Satan, who is the
bitterest enemy of man.  
    
 In the story of Sara, the wife of Prophet Abraham (a.s.), there is a
big similarity to the story of this tried wife. Sara was sterile.
Prophet Abraham (a.s.) got married to Hagar. Sara became jealous of
Hagar with the jealousy of unfaithful women. Therefore, Allah punished
Sara by granting Hagar a good son whose name was Ishmael (a.s.), who was
the forefather of our Prophet Muhammad (S) and the millions of sayyids
throughout these past fourteen centuries after hijra, whereas Sara has
gone without any mention.  
    
 As for the second part of the problem, if you agree on adopting an
orphan, this will be a great deed if you carry out its conditions.  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, as narrated by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), ‘Whoever
adopts an orphan until [the orphan] becomes secure from his needs, Allah
will assure Paradise to him for it just as He assures Hell to the eater
of an orphan’s property.[^57]’  
    
 The Prophet (S) also said, ‘The best of your houses is a house in which
there is an orphan treated kindly, and the worst of your houses is a
house in which there is an orphan treated badly.[^58]’  
    
 He also said, ‘Whoever shares his food and drink with an orphan so that
the orphan becomes secure from his needs will be in Paradise.’  
    
 As for the matter of looking for an orphan who is not illegitimate,
this matter has its own method that requires personal efforts and great
accuracy, and in some countries, certain official places can help you
out. I pray to Allah to make you and your wife successful in doing good
deeds.  
  

Question no. 96: How should a young couple prepare for parenthood?
------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife is faithful and from a respectable family. Before
marriage, we read together some books about marital life in the light of
Islamic values. Now, we are about to enter into a new stage of our
shared life: it is the stage of fatherhood and motherhood. Would you
please show us what is required from us in this stage so that Allah may
grant us a sound child mentally and physically? I have read a tradition
saying, ‘The unhappy one is made unhappy in his mother’s womb, and the
happy one is made happy in his mother’s womb.’

**The answer:** Your question shows your purposeful culture in life and
your association of Islam as a responsible mission. First, I would like
to congratulate you for this constructive culture and sincere
association of your beliefs.  
    
 As for the answer, I would like to say that there are some previous
procedures necessary before a sperm and an ovum should convene:  
    
 1. Close relation and true love; you should have the utmost
satisfaction and mental comfort with this relation!  
    
 2. Lawful food; the unlawful bite, the bite whose legal due is not
paid, and the bite, on which the name of Allah is not mentioned, have a
great negative effect on the offspring.  
    
 3. Suitable time (of making love); let your sleeping with your wife not
be on the first day of the lunar months nor at the middle of them, nor
in the nights of Eid ul-Adha (after the annual Hajj to Mecca) and Eid
ul-Fitr (the end of Ramadan), nor under a fruitful tree, nor before the
sun directly, nor on the roof of the house nor in the night of travel.  
    
 4. Praying to Allah to make the child sound  
    
 5. Performing wudu’ when sleeping together  
    
 But, after the creation of the fetus:  
    
 1. Adhering to mutual love, eating lawful food, supplicating to Allah,
and reciting the Qur'an  
    
 2. Avoiding smoking  
    
 3. Avoiding being angry and nervous  
    
 4. Avoiding chemical drugs  
    
 5. Performing wudu’ throughout the period of pregnancy  
    
 6. Eating spinach for it is rich in iron, eating dates for they plant
patience in the spirit of the fetus, eating quince for it gives the
fetus good morals and strengthen its mind and brain, and eating pears,
apples, and melons for they have an influence on the beauty, bloom, and
complexion of the fetus  
    
 And, after birth:  
    
 1. Reciting the azan in the child’s right ear and the iqama[^59] in its
left ear  
    
 2. Suckling the child from the mother’s breast while the mother is in a
good moral state, such as performing wudu’, sitting with the face
towards the Kaaba, and smiling at the child when suckling  
    
 3. Paying charity and aqeeqa (a sacrifice distributed amongst the poor
as a sacrifice for the newborn baby)  
    
 4. Choosing a nice name that has a good meaning, and there are no
better names than those of our infallible leaders and their pure
progeny. If there is an insistence on new names, they can be derived
from Qur’anic or historical words. For females, there are names like
Aala’, Asma’, Ayaat, Ru’ya, Fadak, Ghadeer, Hidayeh, etc. For males,
there are names like Zahir, Zahid, Tahir, Sabir, Bassim, Shareef, etc.  
    
 As for the tradition you have mentioned, it has been narrated from the
Prophet (S) in this way, ‘The unhappy one is he who is unhappy in his
mother’s womb, and the happy one is he who is happy in his mother’s
womb.[^60]’  
    
 This is the correct quotation of the tradition; the one you quoted
implies a sense of compulsion, as if it has been pre-determined from the
period of pregnancy whether a man will be happy or unhappy. Compulsion
is rejected in Islam because it does not go well with its teachings that
invite man to practice it by his own choice and will.  
    
 The phrase in the actual tradition means that happiness or unhappiness
begin from the ground parents prepare for their child, from the moment
the sperm and the ovum convene and throughout the period of pregnancy.
This has been confirmed by modern scientific researches, which say that
alcohol, smoking, narcotics, psychological turmoil, disturbing noises,
and harmful meals have negative effects on the health and mentality of
the fetus and will have bad effects on his behavior and life in the
future.  
    
 Parents must not be satisfied with their care in only the
above-mentioned stages, but they must continuously educate their
children of virtuous concepts and good morals as a farmer does to the
seed. He continuously waters, looks after, prunes, and protects it from
blights. If he delays or is slack in any one of these activities, the
fruits will be affected and his efforts will be lost.  
    
 Hence, Imam Ali (a.s.) said to his son Imam Hasan (a.s.), ‘The heart of
a youth is like an empty land; whatever is planted in it, [the land]
receives it. So, hasten towards good morals before your heart becomes
hard and your mind becomes busy…[^61]’  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘Educate your youth about the Hadith before
the Murji’ites[^62] deviate them![^63]’  
    
 The Murji’ites were deviants in their beliefs. They were active among
the Muslims at the time of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.). This movement was like
any movement that appears in our age, and every age, to close the way
before the youth and turn them away from the guidance of Allah the
Almighty. This often happens under the name of religion and guidance.  
    
 However, if man, from his early childhood and youth, learns the true
religion, he will discover the falsehoods and will be safe from the
deviants.  
  

Question no. 97: I feel my daughter-in-law is lazy and disrespectful of me; what should I do?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My daughter-in-law is one of the laziest people! She does
not heed her responsibility as a human being let alone as a wife! Even
after eating food, which others cook and serve before her hands, she
leaves without even picking up the leftovers on the table or the plates
she eats in. How strange this girl is! She lacks a conscience, or so I
think. She sees how tired her mother-in-law is, but she does not help
her. I kept silent and did not talk to my son about this matter until I
became impatient. Instead of reforming herself and accepting the truth,
she became angry and stopped talking to us. She has begun paying no
attention to us. I wonder at these strange types of youth from this
generation. What would you advise me and my daughter-in-law and those
amongst your readers who are like her?  
    
**The answer:** This girl and those like her are the results of bad
education in the houses of their families. Bad cultures and some TV
programs produce dependent and lazy people who do not feel any
responsibility or any value of time and age. This is a general aspect of
luxurious societies, which is not an aspect of good and faithful
people.  
    
 True faith makes man active, generous, merry, loving, cordial,
cooperative, and eager to do good whenever he can, and humanity makes
man an attractive being with his behavior. If man loses these two
elements, what value does he have then?  
    
 In Islam, we have moral incentives that make us hurry to serve people
and carry out their needs.  
    
 Once, the Prophet (S) suggested to his companions to build a bridge
over a river to help the weak people cross. Some companions said they
would build the bridge the next day. When they came the next day, they
found the bridge was already built. They went to the Prophet (S) to tell
him that. The Prophet (S) asked who had built the bridge and some people
replied, ‘O messenger of Allah, we went before them and built the bridge
just for the reward of Allah.’  
    
 The Prophet (S) prayed to Allah for these companions for their actions
and also for the other ones for their intention. Thus, faith led the
believers to accomplish great achievements with which the Islamic
civilization was formed. It is the civilization about which the scholars
of the West and the East have said that it was the source of the modern
sciences and the source of the positive aspects of the Western
civilization.  
    
 This spirit that the great Prophet (S) had inspired into Muslims has
died in most Muslims of nowadays. Some of them are lazy to such a degree
that they are indifferent even to their personal affairs and what brings
happiness to their marital life. However, this does not mean that it is
not possible for that spirit to come back to them or for it to be
revived in the souls again.  
    
 This is on the level of Islam, civilization, and life, but the same can
also be said for individuals and their families.  
    
 As for the problem presented in the question, it can be treated through
the following steps:  
    
 1. Attract this young wife by showing her more respect and
encouragement so that she can undertake some responsibilities without
becoming angry.  
    
 2. Give her some books that discuss concepts like cooperation,
undertaking responsibilities, purposefulness, and the importance of
winning the love of others in the family by performing domestic
affairs.  
    
 3. Avoid forcing and scolding, whether implicitly or openly, for these
things will lead her to resist.  
    
 4. Your son (her husband) should teach her the Islamic teachings
concerning the moral sides, part of which is the wife’s work in the
house such as cooking, cleaning, and other things; though they are not
obligatory like prayers and fasting, this work nevertheless is a moral
duty that has a direct influence on the happiness of the marital life.
She should know that intentional cooperation increases love, which is
the basis of the marital life.  
    
 As there are certain duties and responsibilities incumbent on the
husband, there are certain duties and responsibilities incumbent on the
wife too. Without mutual cooperation, their life will be full of
troubles and then it may reach a painful end.  
    
 5. The husband should also help his wife by performing some household
affairs whenever he has time and is ready, for he will be rewarded for
that.  
    
 6. The household affairs can be forced onto this wife in a clever way.
For example, those who usually perform the daily affairs in the house
may travel and leave this wife in the house so that she would be obliged
to work in the house. I hope that she will not be cleverer than you like
a certain lazy wife whose husband and mother-in-law planned to involve
her in the household responsibilities as follows:  
    
 The husband and his mother would compete for the broom; each of them
would try to sweep so that the wife might feel shame and come take the
broom from them and start sweeping herself. One day, she came to them
and surprised them by saying to her husband coldly and with a soft
voice: O dear, there is no need to dispute. One day you can sweep and
the other day your mother can sweep.  
    
 After this witticism, I would like to recommend this dear wife and
those like her of some things that have advantages and rewards for
them:  
    
 1. Work has a virtuous value that raises man to a high position and
makes him respected and beloved.  
    
 2. He who exerts himself becomes healthy, while the lazy ones are often
sick. Work activates the circulation of blood, joints, and muscles while
laziness does the opposite.  
    
 3. Willpower is a power that works miracles. It must be used in
constructive ways.  
    
 4. Humbleness is a quality of those who sit on the top of the good
life, so wherefore is this haughtiness, which throws man into the abyss
of meanness?  
    
 5. Man must have practical experiences in his life. In life, there are
many sudden events that a woman may fall into, and then she can rescue
herself based on her knowledge from previous experiences.  
    
 6. In order for the difficulty of the household affairs to become easy
for you and in order to get rid of your laziness, you should think of
the rewards of the afterlife. The infallible Imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) have narrated, ‘When a woman gives her husband a drink of water,
it is better for her than the worships of a year spent in fasting during
the day and praying in the night. For every drink she gives to her
husband, Allah will build her a town in Paradise and forgive her sixty
sins.[^64]’  
  

Question no. 98: A great number of Muslim women suffer spinsterhood; what is the solution?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** The phenomenon of spinsterhood in Muslim countries is
painful and full of grief. In Egypt for example, statistics confirm that
there are three million and eight hundred thousand unmarried girls who
are past thirty years in age.  
  Studies attribute this matter to the excessive dowries and high costs
of marriage besides that there are a great number of girls who are
afraid of marriage itself.  
    
 Ahmad Rif’at, a member of the Royal Society of Psychological Diseases
in Britain, says that the reasons for spinsterhood are due to the
competition between men and women in the field of work after the
competition has been limited to men for many years. Woman now wants to
prove her existence in the practical fields before she wants to
participate with a man in marital life; therefore her marriage becomes
delayed and marriage opportunities also decrease.  
    
 The Egyptian doctor Mahmood Abdurrahman, a specialist in psychological
medicine, thinks that the reasons behind the delay in marriage are due
to the conditions girls or their families make (such as excessive
dowries, the number of rooms in the future house, the job of the
husband, and even his shape), and also the conditions men make (such as
the age of the girl and a restriction that she must not have been
engaged or married before).  
    
 Dr. Muna Jad, the dean of the College of Kindergartens in Cairo, says
that the problem appears due to contradictions in which the youth live
that have placed the youth in a state of being torn apart and feeling
unstable and unsafe. The youth live in an atmosphere of imaginary wealth
like they see in some foreign films and serials. They wish to live in
those societies, but unfortunately they only see the outward
characteristics of those societies and not the actual characteristics
there. They see the good things only and not the bad things of those
societies.  
    
 Dr. Muna Jad mentions that the problems of the youth increase when they
cannot get married at a suitable age. Disappointment and despair
overcome them, and then they deny their society and all that is around
them. In fact, some of them may commit crimes and sins because of that,
and hence, they destroy themselves and all that is around them.  
    
 Your Eminence Sheikh al-Muhtadi al-Bahrani, regarding this information,
what is your opinion about the phenomenon of spinsterhood?  
    
**The answer:** What these scholars have mentioned is true, but the
researchers must study the hidden reasons for this phenomenon, which has
never been a big problem in the history of Islam.  
    
 I ask: who attracts women to work in the common fields with men? The
problem originates from the minds that are separate from the Islamic
mentality and have been educated with Western cultures and have come
back to manage the life of the Muslims according to what those cultures
inspired in them. Those cultures have all the means to make people
Muslims by name only while they are very far from Islam in their
behaviors of solving their psychological and social problems and their
political and economical crises.  
    
 Foreign films and serials undoubtedly have a great and dangerous
influence on the phenomenon of spinsterhood. The films that have been
produced in Egypt are not any less in their bad influences on Muslim
societies than those that have been produced in foreign studios. The
Egyptian libertine films and serials have played a serious role in
taking Muslims away from their Islamic values and in destroying their
moral principles. These films still affect the Arabic societies and
serve the imperialistic plots there. Excessive dowries, denial of
polygamy, encouragement of women to prefer divorce and spinsterhood in
some way or another, justification of sins and family treason, and
emphasis on the material aspects and indifference to the moral aspects
in the marital life are Zionist goods that have been sold out to the
public by the Egyptian films and serials. It is well-known that behind
the cultural attack to corrupt the youth of the Islamic umma and to
distribute the products of Zionist companies, like libertine films and
other such things, are great foundations, abundant capitals, and hellish
plans.  
    
 Of course, I am excluding the religious serials and good films that
Egypt produces although, in comparison with the bad ones, they appear as
withered flowers between huge thorns.  
    
 There is no doubt that spinsterhood has political, economical, and
other reasons. The companies dealing with unlawful sex and its means are
the first beneficiaries of deviations resulting from spinsterhood. The
politicians of this material life and of sleepless nights also are
beneficiaries, and they usually have authority over the media and
culture. The reasons are interlaced and spinsterhood is one of the
consequences of the great deviations of the umma.  
    
 As for the cure, it ought to be considered from four sides:  
    
 First, the state, which has the greatest abilities, can direct the
culture of its people toward Islamic resolutions through schools,
universities, and the media, especially through films and serials. It
also has the ability to prevent economical foundations and
establishments from exploiting spinsterhood by restricting employment of
unmarried women in cabarets, ballrooms, and studios of libertine films
and in their commercial requirements.  
    
 Second, charitable organizations can play a great role in resolving the
problem of spinsterhood by collecting charities from good people and
giving them to the youth whose poverty prevents them from getting
married. These organizations can also make use of the successful
experiment of collective weddings, as do charitable organizations in
some Islamic countries, where they arrange one party for the weddings of
hundreds of couples.  
    
 Third, *Ulama’* and preachers play an important role in convincing
society of the conception of the Sharia and the sunna of the Prophet (S)
concerning the matter of polygamy and how a husband must be just to all
of his wives equally. Explaining moral principles and emphasizing
concepts like satisfaction, avoidance of selfishness and envy,
contentment with the fate of Allah and His just determinations, regard
for the afterlife, and management of worldly affairs according to reason
and good morals will help the society do away with the problem of
spinsterhood or limit it. What gives good news though is that when the
temporary marriage (missyar), that has begun to find its way among the
Sunni, is practiced according to its moral conditions, it will limit
spinsterhood and secret debauchery; and if the temporary marriage of the
Shia is also practiced according to its legal conditions, it will solve
a great part of the problem.  
    
 Fourth, psychologists can play a great positive role in persuading
society of the comprehensive resolutions of Islam if they first convince
themselves of those resolutions and want, sincerely, to participate in
resolving the problem.  
    
 Finally, I suggest forming a committee including notables of each of
these four sides to study the problem in all its dimensions and then
generate suitable solutions and cooperate in implementing these
solutions.  
  

Question no. 99: Why do we find prevalence of sexual corruptions even among married people and otherwise religious people?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** It has been mentioned in Prophetic traditions that
marriage is half of religion and it protects men and women from slipping
into sexual corruptions. However, in our present age, we find married
men and married women practicing adultery as they like. Is this a defect
in the tradition or what? What is strange is that some religious,
married men are very lustful. How do you interpret this phenomenon?  
    
**The answer:** There are several reasons behind this kind of corruption
of married persons:  
    
 1. Sexual impotence of one of the spouses  
    
 2. Excessive lustfulness  
    
 3. Leisure, recklessness, and wealth  
    
 4. A wish for variety, discovering and tasting different kinds of
things  
    
 5. A wish for revenge, where, for example, one of the spouses may
practice adultery to take revenge on the other because of a quarrel
between them or something like that  
    
 6. Poverty and need, i.e., a person may practice adultery to obtain
some money  
    
 7. Dislike for the spouse because of unattractiveness or ignorance in
practicing sexual intercourse  
    
 8. Seduction and slipping into adultery at a moment of neglect  
    
 What is common between these reasons is a weakness in faith or the
absence of faith. Therefore, we always insist on strengthening religious
motives in man and continuing to instruct, remind, and warn him.  
    
 As for the excessive lust of religious people, the matter is different,
because a religious person, if he really is religious, can satisfy his
sexual lust with his wife; otherwise, religion permits him to marry
another wife either in permanent marriage or temporary marriage within
the legal conditions of each type of marriage.  
    
 If we suppose the opposite that it is the wife who wants to satisfy her
sexual lust but her husband is unable to satisfy her (and this is very
rare among religious women or may be impossible), here, a religious wife
should try to occupy herself with something else and soon her excitement
will go out. However, if she cannot satisfy herself with this resolution
forever, she has two choices: either to agree with her husband to
separate and get married to another man who is able to satisfy her
sexual lust, although it is not recommended, or to be patient and
satisfied with her fate based on “the important thing and the Most
Important,” and this is something praiseworthy.  
    
 It is thus if the lust is too strong and cannot be controlled except
through these resolutions. But the advice that I would like to give to
spouses in religious families is that they, in order to not fall into
sins, should lower their sights before the provocations in the
television, magazines, and streets and avoid heavy meals, which excite
their lust.  
    
 Allah says, ***(Say to the believing men that they cast down their
looks and guard their private parts; that is purer for them; surely
Allah is Aware of what they do, and tell the believing women*** ***to
lower their gaze and guard their private parts, and to display of their
adornment only that which is apparent, and to draw their veils over
their bosoms, and not to reveal their adornment save to their own
husbands or fathers or husbands' fathers, or their sons or their
husbands' sons, or their brothers or their brothers' sons or sisters'
sons, or their women, or their slaves, or male attendants who lack
vigor, or children who know naught of women's nakedness. And let them
not stamp their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their adornment.
And turn unto Allah together, O believers, in order that you may
succeed)***[^65].  
    
 A religious man and a religious woman, even if they lower their gazes,
may look at something unwillingly, and then their lust would become
excited despite their wills. In this case, Islam has recommended the
following:  
    
 ‘If someone of you sees a beautiful woman and he admires her, let him
go to sleep with his wife, because the pleasure is the same and what is
got from sleeping with that woman is like what is got from sleeping with
his wife.[^66]’  
    
 Islam has forbidden women and girls from displaying their charms even
inside the house before their brothers, uncles, and even their fathers.
Imam Ali (a.s.) narrates that one day a young man came to the Prophet
(S) and asked him, ‘Should I ask my mother’s permission when I want to
come in to her?’  
    
 The Prophet (S) said to him, ‘Do you want to see her without
clothes?’  
    
 He said, ‘No, I do not.’  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘Then, you should ask her permission.’  
    
 Then the young man asked, ‘Can my sister uncover her hair before me?’  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘No, she cannot.’  
    
 The young man asked, ‘Why?’  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘I fear for you that if she displays something of
her charms before you, the Satan may provoke you.[^67]’  
    
 We understand from this story that the Prophet (S) has perceived the
power of lust in this young man, as in any other young man, and
recommended that before such persons, charms must be covered to avoid
excitement and sin.  
    
 One who observes social cases, marital treasons, sins, files of the
courts, and the news of the terrible events of sexual rapes, even
against children, discovers how wide the gap is between Muslims and the
warnings of the Qur'an and the Prophet (S). If they were closer to the
Qur'an and the Sunna, they would not live in quarrels, corruption, and
disgrace.  
    
 Dear young men and young women, do not follow the steps of the Satan,
because they will lead you to his traps. Fear Allah secretly and openly,
and let jealousy, abstinence, and wariness be your dress! Avoid scenes
and situations that will incite your lusts to be safe from sins! Occupy
yourselves with work, sport, and worships to be close to Allah, the
Giver of happiness!  
  

Question no. 100: Is it better for a man to propose to a woman or for a woman to propose to a man?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** It is customary that young men go and propose to young
women. It is considered ugly among people when young women go and
propose to young men, whereas we find the Qur'an saying, ***(…and a
believing woman if she gave herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet
desired to marry her- specially for you, not for the (rest of)
believers)*****.(33:50)** My question is: which is right – what the
Muslims did at the time of the Prophet (S) or what is customary in our
present age?  
    
**The answer:** Customs, sometimes, control the affairs of people while
people have no choice in it. The position of Islam in this concern is
that the more important thing has to be preferred to the important thing
while preserving the benefits of people and moving gradually towards the
teachings Islam has established.  
    
 Yes! This Qur’anic verse is clear in this concern. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.)
narrates that once a woman from Medina came to the Prophet (S) and said,
‘O messenger of Allah, a woman does not go to engage a husband. I have
been a widow for a long time and I have no child. Do you want me (to be
your wife)? I have given myself to you if you accept me…[^68]’ .  
    
 This woman came to the Prophet (S) by herself and asked him to marry
her, and the Prophet (S) neither chided her nor disapproved of her doing
so. This means that this matter was natural in Islam. Besides, the
Qur'an has mentioned this matter without any implication of ugliness.
Khadeeja (a.s.) herself asked the Prophet (S) to marry her, and she was
the head lady of her time.  
    
 A proposal made by a virgin or a widow is not prohibited in the Sharia,
but customs have their respected position if they do not oppose the
Islamic values. In fact, in our present time, there does not have to be
a contradiction between customs and the wishes of a girl when she finds
a suitable husband. The potential husband can be informed secretly of
the wish of the girl. If he accepts, he can go and propose to the girl
according to customs; otherwise, he should bury the matter and keep the
secret forever. This is a trust and a traitor will be answerable on the
Day of Resurrection. In this way, as I think, the two manners can be
practiced together.  
  

Question no. 101: If I have divorced, can my family prevent me from choosing a second spouse by myself?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** I am a twenty-five year old girl. I have undergone an
unsuccessful marriage that ended with divorce. My family prevents me
from choosing my second marital life by myself. Legally, do they have
the right to do that or am I free to choose my husband?

**The answer:** Legally, you are free to choose the husband whom you
think will be suitable for you, but you would be better off, in order to
live free from family troubles, to agree with your family in any way you
find will have an influence on them.  
    
 Always decide to avoid what causes quarrels in your life, because a
life full of quarrels and nervousness is nearer to death than to life.  
    
 Man lives happily with his family and relatives when he behaves with
them leniently, smilingly, and wisely. It is wrong when man thinks of
attaining happiness through violence, nervousness, enmity, and hatred.
Those who think so are but moving corpses until a certain day.  
    
 Support for your situation in convincing your family of your free will
in choosing is a saying of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.). When he was asked a
question similar to yours, he said, ‘She is worthier of herself. She can
entrust a qualified one with her affairs if she likes after she has got
married to a husband before.[^69]’  
    
 Imam ar-Ridha (a.s.) has said, ‘The permission of a virgin (concerning
marriage) is her keeping silence and the permission of a widow or
divorcee is up to her.[^70]’  
    
 And you should not forget that a family often prevents their daughter
from choosing her husband by herself because they do not want her to be
involved in another failure, for it is quite often that young girls and
women are deceived by the nice words and shapes of men, and then when
those men satisfy their desires with these women, they leave them to
look for other victims. Therefore, Islam has emphasized the necessity of
the interference of a father in the matter of marriage of a virgin
because she has not had enough experience in this concern and she may be
liable to be deceived more than divorcees or widows who have some
experience in this matter.  
    
 Yes! There is a special exception that if a virgin is rational and
prudent, and her father is ignorant and cannot decide for the advantage
of his daughter, Islam permits her to choose a suitable husband by
herself even if her father objects to her choice.  
    
 Ibn Abbas reports that one day a bondwoman came to the Prophet (S) and
told him that her father had married her to somebody while she was
unwilling and the Prophet (S) gave her the choice (either to accept her
husband or to leave him)[^71].  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘There is no problem in marrying a virgin if
she agrees without her father’s permission[^72].’  
    
 In the light of this, our jurisprudents have given a fatwa that if a
virgin’s guardian prevents her from getting married to a qualified man
whom she wants, her guardian’s permission will be of no effect.[^73]

Question no. 102: How should wedding ceremonies be conducted?
-------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** We have seen and heard about many accidents that have
happened during wedding ceremonies and changed them into ceremonies of
sorrows. Would you please guide us as to how we can avoid such bad
accidents in order to make the ceremonies of joy the best moments in the
lives of spouses?  
    
**The answer:** The ceremonies of marriage, especially those which take
place during the night of wedding, are based on joyous traditions that
leave sweet memories in man’s life. Therefore, spouses care a lot for
these ceremonies. They take pictures to remain with them until the last
days of their lives and to remind them of those special hours, which are
different from any other hours of their life.  
    
 How nice are those moments and especially the influence left in
spouses’ hearts by the words of this supplication, which is read by the
marriage official in the midst of the songs of the relatives who gather
around the bride and bridegroom:  
    
 “O Allah, bless their marriage, unite their hearts, make their
offspring good and their life happy, send Your blessings on us and them!
O Allah, support whoever supports Your religion and disappoint whoever
disappoints the Muslims! O Allah, make them (these spouses) among those
who support Your religion and the people of Your religion and make them
successful in receiving Your contentment! O Allah, satisfy our and their
needs in this life and the afterlife by virtue of Muhammad and the pure
progeny of Muhammad!”  
    
 Such a beautiful scene from amongst all the scenes of life deserves the
best efforts and cooperation of relatives so that these ceremonies are
carried out with joy and delight in the best way. However,
unfortunately, in some of these weddings, quarrels take place by some
irresponsible persons that do away with the joy of the young spouses who
will not experience this occasion again with the same pleasure.  
    
 Such quarrels take place due to ignorance, bad education, whims,
drunkenness, mixing of sexes which provokes lusts, and making passes on
others that leads to disputes and suspicions, and consequently many
troubles are caused.  
    
 Blessings and happiness do not come to marriages that begin with
unlawful acts or encourage opportunities to commit unlawful acts.
Handicaps in newborn children and disagreements that lead to divorce or
griefs and distresses are the results of such unlawful actions during
weddings. Exciting songs, transparent clothes that display women’s
charms, bare faces with flagrant makeup before non-mahram men…all of
these will extinguish the marital happiness sooner or later. Let people
not think that it is harmless to celebrate the joys of a night or two in
one year! Everything has its enduring effects, and how often it is that
a simple matter troubles the situation and frustrates a marriage whereas
its beginning was simple and trivial.  
    
 Hence, since religion and its moral teachings are very important, we
continuously insist on and invite all classes of society to revive
themselves in a modern and attractive way and in a language that is
understandable by the youth.  
    
 Besides all that, the wedding ceremonies should be carried out
accurately. Supplications and charity to the poor should not be ignored
because they ward off misfortunes.  
  

Question no. 103: How can a wife advise a husband without upsetting him and harming the family structure?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband has good characteristics, but nevertheless he
also has some extreme bad conducts. I do not know how to advise him
without causing his anger against me and throwing my marital life into
troubles.  
    
**The answer:** Dear sister, criticizing and advising are like surgical
operations but are not conducted on the body; rather, they are done on
the spirit and the soul. Therefore it is a very difficult operation
requiring accuracy besides the following points:  
    
 1. Criticism must be preceded by love and a close relationship on both
sides because without these, criticism becomes more a cause of
disagreement and reluctance between spouses.  
    
 2. You should begin your talk with him by praising his good
characteristics and then proceed little by little to criticize his bad
behaviors. Praising him will make him trust in your love for him and
will strengthen his morale, and then you will find he will accept your
criticism sincerely.  
    
 3. After professing his fault, you should encourage him and give him
hope and confidence. For example, you could say to him “I think you are
able to change” or “It is not like you to say ‘I cannot’” or “I trust in
your will and I admire your personality”, etc.  
    
 4. You should not repeat criticisms on the same subject too often,
because repetition causes obduracy and anger.  
    
 5. Sometimes it would be better to criticize indirectly such as, for
example, by a hint, mentioning a tradition, mentioning a story that has
something to do with the matter, or playing a cassette of a lecture
discussing that specific problem.  
    
 6. Let your criticism be free of insult and mockery, because the goal
is to reform and rescue and not to destroy or avenge.  
    
 7. You should ask him for his criticisms about you, and when he tells
them, you should accept them and thank him. This will make it easier for
him to accept your criticisms about him, for humbleness brings
humbleness.  
    
 8. You should limit your criticism to the matter of the fault itself
and not generalize it to other sides of your husband’s personality.  
    
 9. Your criticism against your husband should be done when you are
alone with him and not in the presence of anyone else. It has been
mentioned in one of the traditions that “he who advises his brother
secretly does him good, and he who advises his brother openly does him
wrong.”  
    
 Here, I have to mention an advice aimed at myself first and then to
this husband and those like him. It is a saying by the greatest of the
wise and the master of the pious, Imam Ali (a.s.): “He who advises you,
fears for you, does good to you, thinks of your ends, and reforms your
defects, in obeying him lies your guidance and in disobeying him lies
your corruption.[^74]”  
    
 Imam Zaynul Aabideen (a.s.) said, ‘The right of the one who asks you
for advice on you is that you have to give him sincere advice and be
kind and pitiful to him. And the right of the advisor on you is that you
have to be lenient with him and listen to him carefully…[^75]” .  
  

Question no. 104: How can I handle the issue of a wife whose temperament I do not like?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

My wife is often nervous and angry. She scolds my children for anything
they do that she does not like. I fear for their education and future if
she continues in this state. In fact, I fear for my sincerity to her and
the remaining of my life with her. What would you advise me to do?  
    
**The answer:** Anger, as stated in the traditions, is a soldier of the
Satan and a flame of Fire like any other destructive means. If your wife
continues in her state and you also lose your patience, you both will in
fact arrive at the end that you fear, and the first losers will be your
children except if the stepmother will act towards them as a sincere and
real mother, and such stepmothers are few.  
    
 Hence, I advise this wife to be prudent and patient and I advise you
also to be more patient and to give her enough opportunities to ponder
on the outcome of anger, which has destructive results in the family.
You also have to think about the outcome of your patience because a day
will come where your wife will awake out of her errors, and then she
will appreciate your patience and compensate you for your previous days
with her. And a day will come to you when you will find your great
reward near Allah, and then your eyes will be delighted on ***(the day
when wealth and*** ***sons avail not (any) man, except him who comes to
Allah with a heart free (from evil))***[^76]. You must try to identify
the reasons for her anger and when you are able to remove the causes of
her anger, you will be happy with her. You have to be patient with her,
advise her, and pray to Allah for her.  
  

Question no. 105: My husband does not communicate with me and I sometimes doubt his feelings for me; what can I do?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** I have been married for six years now to a husband who
speaks little with me. He always keeps silent. Would you please tell me
how I can bring happiness to my marital life with this silent husband,
though he provides me with all I need for living? Sometimes the Satan
whispers to me that my husband hates me. Am I normal?

**The answer:** As spouses have to follow an appropriate program to run
the economical affairs of their joint life, they also have to follow an
appropriate program to achieve the most balanced sentiment possible,
because when love becomes firm between a husband and a wife, it gives
them tranquility, liveliness, and interest in their shared fate, and
then little talking between them does not affect their life.  
    
 Dear sister, what is important is that you have to do your best to
strengthen the love and the feeling of interest in your mutual fate with
your husband. Do not let your husband’s silence deprive you of his love
to you, because when love dries up, the train of your life will enter
into a tunnel of problems that will lead to a bad end. I think that
talking little is not an excuse for you to throw your life into
dangerous problems.  
    
 Your behaving lovingly towards him will defeat his hatred for you, if
he has any hatred towards you. In fact, not every silence of a husband
means that there is a hatred towards the wife. It may be a habit in the
husband since his childhood. However, if it is a new habit, you can talk
to him about it openly. Perhaps he may have suffered a psychological
shock, and this can be cured by your wisdom or that of other wise people
or specialists.  
  

Question no. 106: My husband and I are very poorly matched and have almost nothing in common and I am much more educated than he is; should we get divorced?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I am overcome with despair for my marital life to proceed
happily. This is because, as I think, of the difference between my
husband and me in intellect, culture, and understanding affairs of
living. I am a university ­graduate while he has not even finished
elementary school. I have a scientific position while he is weak and he
stammers when he wants to show what he intends to say. Therefore, I feel
that we do not understand each other. Do you think that divorce will
guarantee happiness for both of us?

**The answer:** Dear sister, there are three choices before you:  
    
 The first: you may choose to be satisfied with the situation you are in
and to not compare your life with the lives of others. This requires
you, first, to not think of others besides your husband, and second, you
should try your best to make him understand what you understand. You
should be aware that the basis of success in this life is sincerity in
love and looking forward to the reward of Allah and the good end of
patience.  
    
 The second: you may continue feeling dissatisfied and continue worrying
about your life and relationship, which definitely means eliminating
marital happiness.  
    
 The third, you may choose divorce, which is lawful but Allah hates it
and His Throne shakes for it except when the joint life of spouses
reaches a dead end.  
    
 If you ask me, I will not hesitate to advise you to follow the first
way. Mutual understanding most of the time means submitting to the
lawful wish of the husband and neglecting your personal wishes, but with
making him feel that this is only for the love of Allah and for the
continuity of a happy marital life.  
    
 Beware of being proud of the elements of preference you have, such as a
university diploma and the like, because this is a way leading to a bad
end and is a defect that does not befit a learned Muslim girl. Your
intellect requires you to know that happiness is gained through morals
and faith while university diplomas and scientific information alone do
not produce happiness and ease.  
    
 Dear sister, I hope that you pay attention to this fact before you are
filled with regret. This is my opinion if the reason for your despair is
as you have mentioned. However, if your husband is in a state that makes
him unsuccessful and unfit for you, the solution will be to follow the
third way. May Allah be with you!  
  

Question no. 107: My husband does not appreciate or help me in the excessive work I have to do to care for our home and seven children and this has caused me physical problems; what should I do?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I am a mother of seven children. I suffer from physical
troubles because I do too much work in the house that is beyond my
ability. My husband is a hard-hearted man who does not appreciate my
efforts and this increases my exhaustion. Would you please tell me what
to do?  
    
**The answer:** Distributing tasks in the marital life should be done
fairly and consensually. If you have children, they should be entrusted
with some tasks according to their ages and abilities while instilling
sincere motives inside them to do those tasks willingly and with
interest.  
    
 This is what should be done, but when the opposite takes place, it
means that there is a defect in someone’s mentality and this defect can
be cured by a sound mentality.  
    
 Dear sister, what you suffer can be cured by patience while expecting
your reward from Allah and showing love and respect towards your husband
so that he may someday awake out of his severity towards you. Besides
these steps, you should encourage him to attend the meetings of good
*Ulama’* and scholars and listen to the speeches of good preachers so
that he may be affected by a word from those *Ulama’* and preachers and
then he may be rescued from his injustice, for the true religion has
brought man solutions to all problems if he believes in religion.  
  

Question no. 108: I suffer from forgetfulness and it upsets my wife; what should we do?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Why am I so forgetful? My wife is angry at my state, and
my dignity does not permit for her to raise her voice against me. This
is the focal point of our problems.  
    
**The answer:** Forgetfulness has several causes, such as worry,
problems that press on one’s nerves, psychological troubles, fright,
melancholy, and sins, especially the hidden major sins. From among these
reasons, there are also some diseases and accidents.  
    
 These things are like black clouds lying heavily on a man’s memory. In
order to cure this case, you have to organize your life. For example,
you should assign a certain time for sleeping, follow a healthy diet,
practice sports, and strengthen your relation with Allah the Almighty by
performing the obligations and avoiding all kinds of sins.  
    
 There are some tested things that strengthen one’s memory such as
memorizing Qur’anic verses, always being with wudu’, reciting
supplications, and avoiding quarreling with others.  
  

Question no. 109: How can my wife and I get past our poor match and our quarrels for the sake of our children?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Between my wife and me there are several differences in
intellect, physique, and wealth. These things often cause disagreements
and quarrels between us. Sometimes, these quarrels break out before our
children. We are well aware that these disagreements and quarrels have
bad effects on the children’s mentality and education, but our violent
anger is uncontrollable. How can we get rid of this state and live
tranquilly to build the future of our children?  
  

**The answer:** There is no doubt that religious beliefs, cultures,
arts, traditions, and good habits have good effects on the manner of the
relationship between spouses, their views on life, and their way of
making use of the abilities they have. However, reason and wisdom lead
us to the knowledge that these differences between spouses do not
mandate disagreements and quarrels. In fact, a reasonable person should
deal with these natural differences wisely. He should look at them from
these five viewpoints:  
    
 First, these differences complement each other. The existence around us
is composed of different elements, but they all complement each other in
the best way. Spouses should not let their natural differences destroy
the bridges of love and understanding between them.  
    
 Second, spouses should try their best to change the cultures and habits
that Islam does not accept. How many habits and ideas have families
planted into their children who grow up with them without pondering on
whether they are right or wrong, and how many habits have the social
milieu (school, friends, the media, etc.) planted into children while
these habits and ideas are far removed from the pure Islamic culture.
Therefore, spouses should change the ideas and bad habits that trouble
them.  
    
 Third, to make the mutual understanding between spouses easy and to
decrease disagreements between them, each of them should give the other
side the right to show his\\her opinion freely without suppressing or
interrupting him\\her before completing his\\her speech and clarifying
his\\her opinion.  
    
 Fourth, we should know that the differences between people in general,
and between spouses in particular, are trials that people are tried
with. Instead of thinking of running away from these differences or
sinking into melancholy and psychological distresses, we should know how
to deal with this divine decree, which is inevitable. It is a trial for
man in this life, and Allah will accordingly determine for him the
reward and Paradise or the punishment and Hell. Therefore, let man think
deeply of where he wants to be!  
    
 Fifth, life is too short to comprehend problems and troubles that are
trivial. Hence, a reasonable person should overlook problems and live
his life, which he does not know when it shall end, happily with good
fame and honor.  
    
 The Prophet (S) has asked husbands to forgive their wives’ mistakes
even if they are seventy in one day. Once a man asked the Prophet (S)
about a wife’s right on her husband and the Prophet (S) said, ‘He covers
her body with clothes, satisfies her stomach with food, and forgives her
if she commits mistakes.’ The man asked, ‘How many times does he forgive
her?’ The Prophet (S) said, ‘seventy times a day.[^77]’  
  

Question no. 110: My husband’s family treats me badly because of my humble origins, even in front of guests and my husband does not defend me; what can I do?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband is a rich, young man and because I am not from
a rich family, the mother and the sisters of my husband gibe at me at
every occasion and even before the guests sometimes. Would you please
tell me what to do with this problem, which has begun to deprive me of
my happiness with my husband, who does not defend me before them?  
    
**The answer:** Material poverty is not a defect; rather the defect lies
in lack of morals. You are actually rich while they are the real poor
ones. Your faith, good morals, and patience will make you defeat your
problem and these are the strongest weapons in defeating unjust
situations against yourself.  
    
 Dear sister, try to be a strong wife who seizes her success from the
depths of her suffering to enjoy real happiness! Even if your husband
does not defend you, it does not mean that he agrees with his family’s
being unjust towards you. He may not know the proper way of defending or
he may think that his defending you shall complicate the problem
further; therefore, he is trying to keep the stability of the family.
Waiting for a suitable time of defending and in a wise way will be
better.  
    
 Thus, you would be better off appreciating the situation of your
husband and being more patient. Be sure that the right side will win at
the end of any crisis. Beware of pride when one day you shall feel your
success, because pride then shall make you as blamable as those who gibe
you today!  
    
 Besides that, you should try to be more humble and kind towards them,
and especially to the ones who gibe you, so that they may feel ashamed
and regretful when they are alone with their consciences and when they
find your good morals and kindness in return for their bad doings. Do
not hesitate, whenever the opportunity comes to you, to say good sayings
with smiles to those who do you wrong that they may be more reasonable
and stop their injustice towards you!  
  

Question no. 111: Love has waned in my marriage over time, how can I get it back?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Fifteen years have passed since I got married. These years
have been like a countdown of the love between my husband and myself.
What should I do to go back to the love that was between us at the
beginning of our marriage?

**The answer:** Sometimes the seed of love exists inside the spouses’
hearts, but accidents of life and discovering the defects and
deficiencies of each other throw some dust on that seed and prevent it
from growing in the marital life.  
    
 If your husband suffers from this, as I believe, then following these
steps may restore your love as it was:  
    
 First, love will blossom if spouses try to water it sincerely with
positive acts and if they overlook the negative acts.  
    
 Second, the goal of love is not controlling the beloved, possessing or
monopolizing him as some women think. If love comes out of heart, it
will undoubtedly enter into the other heart. Nothing will disturb it
except selfishness and attempts to control the other, which has been
referred to in traditions as “the jealousy of women”. In men, this
jealousy is opposite to that of women, because when a man becomes
jealous for his wife, he will protect her from bad men, whereas if a
woman becomes jealous for her husband, she will practice mastery,
possession, suspicion, and watching him. This will lead her husband to
an aversion for her and then what she does not like will take place.  
    
 Third, do not expect much from your husband; for example, do not expect
him to speak the same words of love that he used to speak during the
period of engagement or the first days of marriage. If he forgets to
offer you something that he used to offer on certain occasion, you
should not be angry with him. You should know that these things do away
with the love between you. Be discerning, easy, and humble because when
a husband sees his wife is inflexible, often angry, and complicated, he
will begin thinking of another wife or he will treat his wife likewise
or he may submit to her unwillingly and then no place for happiness will
remain in these cases.  
    
 Fourth, do not blame your husband too much because too much blame hurts
one’s dignity and causes disputes and quarrels, which destroy the
marital relationship. Try to understand his circumstances, appreciate
his efforts, and praise the positive sides of his personality, and then
refer to what deserves to be blamed in a lenient way, implicitly and
smilingly.  
  

Question no. 112: How can I overcome obstacles to achieve my ambitions?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Islam has emphasized much on pondering and thinking, as
you know. I, like other people, have my own ambitions in my marital and
family life in the midst of hundreds of obstacles and frustrations.
Would you please show me practical steps based on the right thinking in
order to solve these problems and push the obstacles out of my way?  
    
**The answer:** You should know that thinking, like breathing, is a
vital operation for man. Just as you live through breathing, you enjoy
the pleasures of life through thinking because you can defeat problems
one after another without exhausting yourself, and then you can feel the
ecstasy of victory.  
    
 Do not think that there exists a life without problems. The problems
for a person who does not ponder and think keep accumulating until that
person perishes while his accumulated problems remain.  
    
 The difference is that you, with the right thinking, feel, as you
should, that you can conquer a problem and are ready to conquer the next
one, without thinking you will be defeated or will suffer until you die
without achieving any success or gaining any benefit in your life.  
    
 As for the practical steps you have asked about, they are as follows:  
    
 1. Devote your heart to Allah the Almighty and ask Him for success!  
    
 2. Give charity as much as you possibly can to the poor without letting
any human being know about it!  
    
 3. Explain the problem you face to yourself and try to understand it
well!  
    
 4. Obtain as much information as you can to solve the problem!  
    
 5. Make a real estimation of your actual state!  
    
 6. Think of several solutions and consult with reasonable persons about
your problem!  
    
 7. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of each one of those
solutions, and then choose the best of them based on your actual
abilities!  
    
 8. When thinking of a certain matter, do not occupy your mind with
another one!  
    
 9. Concentrate all your abilities on solving your problems according to
the level of their importance!  
    
 10. Before beginning (to solve the problem), think well of the things
you need for the solution!  
    
 11. Carry out each step in its time!  
    
 12. Let your wife participate with you in these steps and cooperate
with her at all times!  
  

Question no. 113: I feel that my life is disorderly and not in control and my wife and I have no energy to solve the problem and discipline our children; what can we do?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** The state in my house is not as I would like. I am tired
when I come back from my work, I find my wife tired of the housework and
my children let loose and noisy, I beat them but with no use, etc. I
feel that my marital and family life is disorderly. I hope that you can
guide me with what may illuminate my way and save my life from this
disorderliness.  
    
**The answer:** There are five educational facts you have to comprehend
in order to get out of your troubles:  
    
 First, whereas when any one of us exhausts his powers in the problems
of life and then looks for comfort in peace and quiet away from noises,
children, on the contrary, feel pleasure and joy with disorderly
movements and with making noises that annoy adults, though children do
not mean to annoy others of course.  
    
 You expend your energies in working outside the house, but have you
ever asked yourself where your child expends his energies?  
    
 In the past, houses were big with wide yards where children would spend
their energies while their noises and cries would not reach their
parents’ resting places. But nowadays, since houses are small with
narrow yards, children should not be blamed for disturbing parents.  
    
 Second, a man, throughout the week, works outside the house while his
wife works inside the house. On days off, the man likes to rest in the
house after being tired outside it all week, whereas his wife likes to
go out on her husband’s days off after being tired of remaining in the
corners of her house all week.  
    
 This difference, if it is not treated with leniency by the two spouses
and especially the husband, may become a cause for disputes and quarrels
that also bring pain and boredom, of which children pay the costs.  
    
 Here, it would be better for the two spouses, who are different in
their wishes, to understand and agree with each other, and then they can
teach their children how to understand each other and agree with each
other when their wishes are different.  
    
 Third, beating children without certain rules and criteria encourages
them to commit crimes and repeat the same act they were beaten for. Let
us be very careful not to lead our children to commit crimes in their
childhood and adulthood through excessive scolding or severe beating.  
    
 Fourth, the father may say something harsh to the mother in front of
the children, and this word may leave bad effects on their mentality and
life while he is unaware of where these effects may have come from. For
example, one day the wife might cook some extra food and then the
husband would shout at her loudly in front of the children, “you have
not tasted poverty to know the value of my efforts and the money I bring
you!”  
    
 These words, which can be said in other ways and in private to the
wife, can plant a fear of the future inside the hearts of the children
and cause them mental disturbance and anxiety of the unknown. There is
no doubt that this matter will be an obstacle that stops the progress of
the children’s learning and affects their efforts to build their futures
besides the fact that it will make them desperate and absent-minded all
their lives. All this leads to disorderliness in life.  
    
 Fifth, try not to tire yourself with work outside the house, for your
duty towards your wife and children is not only to satisfy their
material needs. Psychological, educational, and spiritual needs are also
important. These aspects require you to sit with them, look after their
different affairs, and make them feel that you love and pay a lot of
attention to them. It is reported that Imam Hasan (a.s.) said, ‘I wonder
at how one who thinks of his foods does not think of his mentalities!’  
    
 Dear brother, man is a compound of body and spirit, the material and
immaterial, the outward and inward. The food he eats satisfies the two
elements, but the spiritual side may be the most important. Therefore,
you should assign a certain time for your family. You should sit with
them, enter their life, play, laugh, and be indulgent with them. The
happiness and delight that you will get in this side, you will not get
in the material side regardless of how much you tire yourself and
regardless of what money and material needs you offer to your family.  
  

Question no. 114: I want to be a successful wife. With what would you advise me to achieve my goal?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** I want to be a successful wife. With what would you advise
me to achieve my goal? Of course, this is the feeling of all married
women. I hope they will benefit from your apposite advices.

**The answer:** Thank you for your noble feelings, and as for the
answer: First, assign an hour of your time every day to review and
ponder over your qualities. Get rid of your bad qualities and strengthen
the good ones. You should, first and foremost, get rid of the ones that
invite you towards disobedience and sin because these will destroy your
happiness and throw your life into torment.  
    
 Second, assign some hours for worship! In order to make your worship
fruitful, recite the Holy Qur’an meditatively and read some good Islamic
books, especially those that concern your life directly.  
    
 Third, for the sake of the goal to which you aspire, you should observe
the following values:  
    
 1. mutual understanding and using nice words and fine comments when
talking with your husband  
    
 2. pardoning and overlooking trivial things  
    
 3. not following the husband and watching his goings and comings  
    
 4. caring for the cleanliness of the house and clothes and putting
everything in its place especially that which belongs to the husband  
    
 5. using good perfumes and wearing nice clothes  
    
 6. showing love for him and for the life with him and for everything he
likes if it pleases Allah  
    
 7. asking him about his worries and griefs and asking him to uncover to
you whatever is in his heart if he wants to reveal it but without
insisting on it or being angry if he refuses to reveal his secrets  
    
 8. being kind and humble in treating his relatives  
    
 9. relying on Allah in any case and not being angry or upset when
facing difficulties  
    
 You should always remember that practicing these values will bear fruit
if you behave naturally without pretence, though artificiality of manner
is the beginning of learning.  
  

Question no. 115: After a reversal of fortune, my husband became a bitter and difficult man and it is harming our whole family; what can we do?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband was a rich man, but later on his wealth was
lost in a terrible economical crisis. After that his morals, mentality,
and conducts changed. His face became angry, and his tongue uttered bad
words. He threatened anyone and anything at any excitement. Our house
became like hell, and our relatives and people decreased their visits to
us and some of them stopped visiting us at all. I cannot help him except
through speech, which does not change or reform him. Please, what would
you advise me to do in order to save him and my children from the
effects of this crisis?  
    
**The answer:** In order to recover, your husband has to:  
    
 1. believe in asceticism and subject himself to it. It has been
mentioned in a tradition that “he, who renounces the worldly pleasures,
makes little of misfortunes”. Imam Ali (a.s.) has said, ‘All asceticism
is between two words in the Qur'an. Allah has said, ***(So that you may
not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant at what He has
given you)***[^78].  
 He who does not grieve for the past nor becomes glad at the future
practices asceticism from its two sides.’  
    
 2. strengthen his belief in the will and fate of Allah. Imam as-Sajjad
(a.s.) is reported to have said, ‘O my Lord… delight my soul through Thy
decree, expand my breast through the instances of Thy wisdom, give to me
a trust through which I admit that Thy decree runs only to the best…’.  
    
 3. ponder over the dimensions of this tradition narrated by Imam
al-Baqir (a.s.), ‘whoever keeps people safe from his anger Allah will
keep him safe from the torment of the Day of Resurrection.[^79]’ He who
ponders on this tradition will not throw himself into the torment of the
afterlife after getting out of the torment of this life in order to not
lose both.  
    
 4. know that the Giver is Allah and the Withholder is Allah too and
know that a part of material losses belongs to man himself. Many times
the losses come after having disobeyed Allah by lying, cheating, doing
wrong, wasting, excessive misspending, and abstaining from giving the
deserving people their legal dues. I do not ascribe these qualities to
your husband, but I invite him to review the reasons of which he is
aware and then try to reform himself first. If he truly reforms himself,
Allah will grant him great livelihood again and abundantly.  
    
 Imam Zayn al-Abidin (as-Sajjad) (a.s.) said, ‘good saying increases
one’s wealth, grows livelihood, delays death, makes one beloved to
relatives, and enters him into Paradise.[^80]’  
    
 6. convince himself that losing wealth is much easier than losing one’s
children or family and the loss of wealth is easier than the loss of
health. Nothing is more precious than good morals and comfortable
nerves, by which wealth and glory can be regained.  
    
 I pray to Allah to grant us a happy life with lawful wealth, even if it
is little, and to keep us away from unlawful wealth, even if it is a
lot, because it increases grief and distress and does away with the
sweetness of living with loved ones and close relatives.  
  

Question no. 116: What is the cure for sexual impotence, and what are its causes?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** What is the cure for sexual impotence, and what are its
causes? My wife has begun thinking of divorce because I am frigid and
impotent.  
    
**The answer:** There are many causes behind sexual impotence:  
    
 1. neurotic fatigue  
    
 2. addiction to alcohol, drugs, and smoking  
    
 3. practicing masturbation during the period before marriage  
    
 4. absent-mindedness  
    
 5. a defect in the testicles  
    
 6. practicing excessive businesses and interests like trade, reading,
watching films, and offering excessive individual worships  
    
 7. misunderstanding the woman’s sexual need or being indifferent to her
need  
    
 8. the wife’s weak sexual culture or her lack of beauty or exciting
body  
    
 9. certain kind of foods  
    
 As for the cure, each cause has its own particular cure. Before all,
one who is sexually impotent must discern the cause of his case, and
then he should try to cure it. Neurotic fatigue, for example, can be
cured by strengthening one’s faith in Allah. It is not right to utilize
tranquillizers because most of the time they leave dangerous effects on
man’s health.  
    
 The following foods have great effects in strengthening the nerves:
honey with ginger, pepper, saffron, the cooked head of a cow or sheep,
beets cooked in milk, mulberries, bananas, eggs with onion, mutton,
carrots, pears, grapes, liver, sweet pomegranates, and endives.  
    
 As for the cure for addiction, abstaining from its causes can cure it.
There are certain methods to assist in this, the key of which is first
and foremost the will and determination of the addict himself.  
    
 As for masturbation, if a person practices it excessively during his
youth, it will be difficult for him to restore his sexual power quickly,
unless if he begins practicing morning sports, climbing mountains, and
taking cold baths.  
    
 Some doctors think that those persons who have practiced masturbation
deprive themselves of sexual pleasure in the marital relationship.  
    
 As for the rest of the causes, we say that a person should care for
himself and cure his state before his problems grow and their
complications destroy him.  
    
 The wife has to help her husband cure himself because the train of the
marital life will not arrive at the stations of happiness and bliss
without participation, cooperation, and mutual understanding.  
    
 As for thinking about divorce, it is a sign of selfishness and lack of
morals, and this does not befit a Muslim woman except when the motives
of divorce are legal, like when the husband neglects to cure himself
while he is able to do it. Then, divorce is excusable and it is a just
recompense for this husband.  
  

Question no. 117: Is temporary marriage lawful or unlawful? If it is lawful, then why do people dislike it? And if it is unlawful, then why is it unlawful?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Is temporary marriage lawful or unlawful? If it is lawful,
then why do people dislike it? And if it is unlawful, then why is it
unlawful? Would you please answer frankly? Thanks a lot.  
    
**The answer:** Permanent marriage is the basis for this answer. The
sexual instinct is the strongest in man after the instinct of living.
This instinct must be satisfied in the below-mentioned cases; otherwise,
it will cause bad complications. Temporary marriage can be practiced
under the following conditions:  
    
 1. The inability to secure a permanent marriage because of financial
difficulties or not finding a qualified spouse  
    
 2. The impossibility of making love with the wife because of her
illness or something else  
    
 3. Traveling or being away from one’s homeland  
    
 Since the view of Islam of the needs of man is a real, curative, and
purposeful view, Islam therefore has made temporary marriage lawful
according to this clear Qur’anic verse, ***(And those of whom you seek
content (by marrying them temporarily), give unto them their portions as
a duty. And there is no blame on you in what you do by mutual agreement
after the duty (hath been done). Lo! Allah is ever Knower,
Wise)***[^81].  
    
 It suffices us to ponder on the two words “Knower, Wise” to see that
there is wisdom behind the lawfulness of temporary marriage in Islam,
for Allah is aware of the actual need of man and He is wise in making
things lawful or unlawful.  
    
 The end of the next verse confirms what we have said. The verse reads,
***(This is for him among you who fears to commit sin)***[^82]. He who
fears to fall into sin because of his lust should practice temporary
marriage though patience is better for one who can be patient.  
    
 The next two verses confirm this meaning where Allah shows His great
mercy and accurate wisdom on the one hand, and on the other hand, He
uncovers the mean goals of those who prohibit the lawful blessings of
Allah.  
    
 Allah says, ***(And Allah desires that He should turn to you
(mercifully), and those who follow (their) lusts desire that you should
deviate (with) a great deviation. Allah desires that He should make
light your burdens, and man is created weak)***[^83].  
    
 Man has been created weak when it comes to his lusts and desires. It
has been declared by the Creator, Who is aware of what benefits man and
what corrupts him when He makes one thing lawful and prohibits another.
Things are declared lawful to satisfy man’s weakness before those lusts
and desires, and things are declared unlawful to protect him from what
weakens him and destroy his happiness.  
    
 Umar bin al-Khattab has confirmed the lawfulness of temporary marriage
at the time of the Prophet (S) when he prohibited it according to his
personal opinion. He has announced, as mentioned in the sources of our
Sunni brothers, ‘Two pleasures were permitted at the time of the
messenger of Allah, but I prohibit them and will beat people for
practicing them.[^84]’  
    
 In our sources, his saying has been mentioned as the following: ‘Two
pleasures were lawful at the time of the messenger of Allah, but I
prohibit them and will punish for them.[^85]’  
    
 Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari, the great companion of the Prophet, in
the Sunni sources likewise, has said, ‘we practiced temporary marriage
at the time of the Prophet (S), of Abu Bakr, and Umar, and then Umar
prohibited it.[^86]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) has commented on Umar’s decision by saying, ‘If Umar
had not prohibited temporary marriage, no one would have committed
adultery except a scoundrel.[^87]’  
    
 This is an accurate social analysis, which every researcher in
sociology and psychology arrives at. Because of these proofs, the
followers of Imam Ali (a.s.) did not pay attention to Umar’s decision in
order to not fall into adultery, wretchedness, and psychological and
physical diseases of suppression, while most of those who heeded Umar’s
decision and disliked practicing temporary marriage, whether from the
Sunni or the Shia, fell into those sins and diseases. Consequently, the
result of prohibiting and disliking temporary marriage is that the
sexual lust forces some people to commit adultery and forces others to
suppress their lust and face psychological diseases, except those whom
Allah has protected and they are very few.  
    
 How odd it is to see that in Muslim societies, people do not consider
adultery, ballrooms of the naked, scandals of the hotels, cabarets, and
buildings in whose rooms are practiced all kinds of perversion as ugly
while they consider temporary marriage, which Allah has made lawful and
which Muslims have practiced during the time of the Prophet (S), Abu
Bakr, and a period of Umar’s caliphate and which the Muslims who
disregarded Umar’s prohibition have practiced, as ugly!  
    
 Who do you think is behind this silence or this encouragement of
corruption and open debauchery? Who is behind denying the lawful
blessing that Allah has determined as a mercy for Muslims and as a
protection from falling into sins?  
    
 Is it not shameful recklessness and mockery at the Qur'an and the
Sunna? Who is responsible for that and who should defend the Qur'an and
the Sunna?  
    
 “It would be better for those who look for the welfare of man to have
had freedom as ibn Umar has had. Ibn Umar often practiced temporary
marriage. He was blamed for that. It was mentioned to him that his
father (Umar bin al-Khattab) had prohibited it. He said, ‘I just have
followed the saying of my father because he has said, ‘Two pleasures
were lawful at the time of the Prophet (S), but I prohibit them and
punish for them.’ I abide by his tradition and leave his own opinion to
him.”  
    
 A lesson must be taken from this saying of ibn Umar. The *Ulama’*
should not emulate anyone having an opinion opposed to the Qur'an or the
sayings of the Prophet (S). Fanaticism should not lead them to turn
their backs on the Book of Allah and the Sunna of the Prophet (S), for
they will spoil the general welfare and cause corruption. This does not
befit any one, especially not the people of knowledge. If some people of
the Middle Ages were so, the people of this age, in which freedom of
speech is of the highest value, must be far above such conducts.  
    
 They should not be like the judge Yahya bin Aktham, about whom Ibn
Khillikan has cited in his book (Wafiyyat al-A’yan) some verses of
poetry that were composed to censure the Abbasids for their employment
of Yahya as their judge:  
  

“I do not think oppression will end

as long as there is a ruler from the Abbasids for the umma.

They bring Yahya to run their politics,

while Yahya is not a politician.

He determines punishment for adultery,

while he considers a sodomite as not to be blamed.”

   
 It has been reported that once al-Ma’mun (the Abbasid caliph) saw Yahya
play with a beautiful young Turk boy, insert his hand between the boy’s
clothes and body, and do other things to him saying, ‘Had you not been
there, we would have been faithful.’  
    
 Then al-Ma’moon commented on this event by reciting:  
  

I wished I saw justice spread everywhere,

but after my hope, I became desperate.

When shall the world and its people be good,

while the judge of the judges of the Muslims commits sodomy?”

   
 Yahya was so bad and was infamous for committing sodomy. However, when
al-Ma’moon announced that temporary marriage was lawful and addressed
Umar by saying, ‘Who are you…to prohibit what the messenger of Allah has
made lawful?’, Yahya bin Aktham resisted him (al-Ma’moon) and began
roving in the countries to incite people against him and to criticize
him because he had permitted what Umar had prohibited. This dullness and
blind fanaticism lose sight of the general welfare, bring corruption,
and deny the mission of Prophet Muhammad (S) as the last of missions,
because belief in the last prophethood and last mission of Prophet
Muhammad (S) means believing that it is a sufficient Sharia to rule
human beings and to satisfy all their needs however much they and their
lives change. Thus, the *Ulama’* should be like ibn Umar. They should
not emulate just anything. They should give fatwas according to the
Qur'an and the Sunna of the Prophet (S), even if they have to oppose
their fathers. They should not be like those who say, ***(We found our
fathers on a course, and surely we are guided by their
footsteps)***[^88]. The rulers of the Muslims should also be brave like
al-Ma’moon for the sake of the general welfare. They should legislate
laws according to the Qur'an and the Sunna, even if they contradict the
laws of those who have preceded them. Thus, goodness will spread and
corruption will be denied.[^89]”  
    
 Hence, we have confidently confirmed our clear opinion:  
    
 1. Temporary marriage is lawful according to the Qur’an and the Sunna
and according to the confession of Umar that it was lawful at the time
of the Prophet (S) but it was he who had prohibited it. Perhaps, he
might have meant to prohibit it during his rule only, and so it was a
temporary prohibition. Then, for what is this insistence on following
this prohibition while the Qur'an and the Sunna have declared the
lawfulness of temporary marriage? Is it to keep the doors of adultery
wide open before furious lusts?  
    
 Many faithful men and faithful women live suppressed between their
natural lusts and the suffering of difficulties and pains in order for
it to not be said that they have practiced temporary marriage! Is this
not ignorance that the believing men and women have been afflicted
with?  
    
 For us, the Shia, temporary marriage is lawful. Once, Imam al-Baqir
(a.s.) was asked about temporary marriage and he said, ‘Allah has made
it lawful in His Book and through His prophet (S). It is lawful until
the Day of Resurrection.[^90]’ And this refutes the false sense of its
unlawfulness.  
    
 2. Temporary marriage is recommendable. It is reported that Imam
as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘It is recommended for a man to practice temporary
marriage. I do not like for any man of you to leave this world without
having practiced temporary marriage at least once.[^91]’ This also
refutes the false impermissibility of temporary marriage.  
    
 To confirm the recommendations of temporary marriage, it has been
narrated in traditions that the fall of the drops of water with which
one performs ghusl[^92] after having slept with his wife in a temporary
marriage is an excuse for his sins to be forgiven. It is also mentioned
that Allah has prohibited alcohol for this Umma and has instead
permitted temporary marriage[^93].  
    
 3. The abuse of temporary marriage by some people is possible, but this
does not justify prohibiting it or considering it ugly. Because there
are many legal verdicts that people of weak faith can exploit for the
sake of their bad personal benefits, is it right to annul these verdicts
just because of this reason? Certainly not! These verdicts must be
practiced according to their Islamic rules and morals to be lawful in
the full sense of the word.  
    
 4. As for the one who has a wife in a permanent marriage, it is hated
for him to omit her rights for the sake of the wife of a temporary
marriage. It may be unlawful in this case if temporary marriage causes
him to neglect his wife of permanent marriage and usurp her rights.  
    
 Therefore, Imam ar-Ridha (a.s.) said, ‘It (temporary marriage) is
absolutely lawful and permissible thing for one who is unable to get
married. Let him protect himself through temporary marriage. If he is
able to get married, it (temporary marriage) is permissible to him when
he is absent from his permanent wife.[^94]’  
    
 In short, temporary marriage is legally and rationally permissible in
all cases unless it leads to disregard for the permanent wife, which
means ignoring her sexual rights.  
    
 Though temporary marriage is permissible, it is not appropriate for one
to practice it excessively until he becomes famous for it among people.
One should pay careful attention to the moral aspects. He should be
moderate and avoid indecency.  
    
 Let us be realistic and not follow our fancies to establish verdicts
against the verdicts of Allah. A pious one never does that. I ask the
readers, who are protective of their religion, to follow what Allah and
His messenger have permitted because we are in an age where adultery is
desired by many people and where looking lustfully at girls and women by
non-mahrams has become the adultery of the eye, which causes problems of
another kind.  
    
 However, even with all these recommendations and confirmations of the
lawfulness of temporary marriage, I do not invite people to practice it
except those who are in dire need of it, and then they must follow the
juristic and moral conditions of it.  
  

Question no. 118: Does Islam teach its followers the practical way of practicing sexual intercourse between spouses?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Is there a sexual culture in Islam? In other words, does
Islam teach its followers the practical way of practicing sexual
intercourse between spouses? My question stems from a discussion with
one of my friends who says that Islam is far above such trivial matters!
I think that the sexual culture, from which several marital matters
arise besides the safety of the offspring, is not considered trivial.
What is your opinion about the subject?  
    
**The answer:** Islam has not ignored the issue of sexual education. In
our traditions there are clear talks about this matter. Imam ar-Ridha
(a.s.) said, ‘Do not make love with a woman except after you have played
with her a good deal and have played with her breasts. When you do that,
her lust will be excited and her organs will secrete, because her
secretion begins from her breasts and her lust appears on her
face…[^95]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘If one of you wants to sleep with his wife, let
him not hurry (in satisfying his lust) because women have some needs (to
be satisfied).[^96]’  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘If someone of you makes love with his wife, let
him not withdraw until she satisfies her need just as he likes her to
satisfy his need.[^97]’  
    
 There was a situation with one of the Prophet’s great companions,
Uthman bin Madh’oon. Once, his wife came to the Prophet (S) and said to
him, ‘O messenger of Allah, Uthman fasts during the day and offers
worships all night. (It was a metonymy that he did not meet her sexual
rights).’ The Prophet (S) went out angrily holding his shoes until he
came to Uthman, who was offering prayers. Uthman finished his prayers
and then saw the Prophet (S) who said, ‘O Uthman, Allah has not sent me
with monasticism, but He has sent me with an easy religion. I fast,
offer prayers, and sleep with my wives. Whoever loves my nature let him
follow my Sunna, and making love (lawfully) is from my Sunna.[^98]’  
    
 The traditions reported from the Prophet (S) and Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) show
the necessity of separating the beds of boys and girls and for having
everyone sleep in his/her own bed because contact between boys and girls
incites the sexual lust and causes premature sexual ripeness.  
    
 The traditions also talk about the necessity of paying attention to the
suitable age of kissing children. The Prophet (S) said, ‘When a girl
becomes six years old, she should not be kissed by a man, and a boy
should not be kissed by a woman if he exceeds sevens years old.’  
    
 The traditions emphasize the importance of knocking on the door and
asking permission before entering the room of two spouses. The spouses
also must be careful when sleeping together that no adult or child hears
their sighs or other sounds.  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘I swear by
Him in Whose hand my soul is that if a man makes love with his wife
while there is an alert boy or girl in the house who sees them or hears
their speaking or sighing, he/she will not succeed at all. If it is a
boy, he will become an adulterer, and if it is a girl, she will become
an adulteress.[^99]’  
    
 You notice that sexual education has been mentioned in the teachings of
the Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but in
polite words and purified phrases, away from indecorousness or
incitement of one’s imagination as we find in the Western cultures and
books of sex, whose destructive effects are more than their advantages.
In fact, what are intended by those cultures are those very destructive
effects.  
  

Question no. 119: How can Islam, by permitting polygamy, want to solve problems whereas we find more problems in polygamy?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My father has taken another wife. My mother is angry with
him, and I am confused between them. From one side and according to my
belief, I see that Islam does not permit anything unless there is a
benefit in it, and from another side and according to the reality, I
have pity on my mother though I do not approve of her anxiety, which may
be the reason that led my father to get married to another wife. Would
you please guide me with which of these views I should adopt? I hope
that you will give me a glance at the subject of polygamy and the
problems that result from it. How can Islam, by permitting polygamy,
want to solve problems whereas we find more problems in polygamy?  
    
**The answer:** As you said, Islam does not permit anything unless there
are advantages in it, but those advantages are not achieved except by
studying the subject in a real and comprehensive way. If getting married
to a second, third, or fourth wife is just to satisfy a sexual desire
without other humane purposes, it will not achieve the sought after
advantages besides the motive, which will languish after the sexual
intercourse and will then be replaced by problems that will destroy
everything even the pleasure of sex itself.  
    
 Islam is very wise in permitting polygamy, but as for the appropriate
situations and times to practice it, they will only be realized by the
man who has been brought up under the shadow of Islam itself, and the
one who does not care for justice (in dealing with his wives) will face
many difficulties and be in a critical situation.  
    
 The Prophet (S) said, ‘He, who has two wives but does not treat them
equally concerning sentiment and financial affairs, will come on the Day
of Resurrection handcuffed and bent over, and then he will enter into
the Fire[^100].’  
    
 Following Islam according to practical conditions definitely solves all
psychological and social problems, whether those of individuals or
families. But following Islam according to one’s mood and worldly
desires takes one to the forbidden division and complicates his
problems.  
    
 An understanding Muslim woman would be better off submitting to the
verdicts of the Sharia to emerge from the trial successfully; otherwise,
she will be resurrected with those who deny the Sunna of the Prophet (S)
and the verdicts of Islam.  
    
 Just as envy is a bad quality that one should drive away from his heart
and conducts, so is the jealousy of women. When a wife harms her husband
by doing something wrong out of jealousy, she violates the moral and
legal limits.  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘The jealousy of woman is unbelief and the
jealousy of man is belief.[^101]’ Would a Muslim woman accept to bring
herself unbelief?  
    
 Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) explained the above-mentioned tradition by saying,
‘The jealousy of women is envy and envy is the origin of unbelief. When
women become jealous, they become angry, and when they become angry,
they disbelieve except the faithful ones of them.[^102]’  
    
 Dear sister, do not live in confusion. For what is this confusion? Your
father has chosen his way, and he is a part of you and you are a part of
him. Your legal duty is clear. You have to be kind to both of your
parents equally and with no difference, but with more help and respect
for your mother because she is weaker and more tired as you say.  
    
 Give advice to your mother and father whenever you find a suitable
opportunity. Tell them that a Muslim is one who submits to the verdicts
of Islam and does not obey his desires and his personal opinions instead
of obeying Allah.  
  

Question no. 120: My husband hates me because he wants male children from me, but Allah gives me females. What is my guilt in this? Why are men so severe?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband hates me because he wants male children from
me, but Allah gives me females. What is my guilt in this? Why are men so
severe? I hope that you do not misunderstand me. I want to express my
suffering and show the ignorance of some husbands who ignore the wisdom
of Allah in His people. I offer my question so that you may show my
husband and those like him the viewpoint of Islam in this concern.
Thanks a lot.  
** **  
**The answer:** Dear patient sister, I appreciate your feelings and I do
not misunderstand you. In fact, I agree with you on what you say. Men
are severe, but just some of them or maybe most of them. As for your
husband and his like, they are unaware of the following points:  
    
 1. A husband should be happy with what Allah, Who knows the benefit of
man, gives him. Let him read, for example, this saying of the Prophet
(S), ‘There is no house having girls in it except twelve blessings and
mercies come down to it from Heaven every day. The visit of the angels
to that house does not stop. They (the angels) write to the girls’
father every day and night (the reward of) worships of a year.[^103]’  
    
 2. Doctors have proved that the semen of man determines the gender of
the fetus, and the wife has nothing to do in this concern. She is just
like a vessel, and the husband has to thank her because she protects his
deposit in her vessel until she lays down this heavy burden. She suffers
much pain and difficulties throughout the period of pregnancy.  
    
 Allah says in the Qur'an, ***(And We have enjoined on man doing of good
to his parents; with trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble
did she bring him forth; and the bearing of him and the weaning of him
was thirty months; until when he attains his maturity and reaches forty
years, he says: My Lord! grant me that I may give thanks for Thy favor
which Thou hast bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good
which pleases Thee and do good to me in respect of my offspring; surely
I turn to Thee, and surely I am of those who submit)***[^104]. Thus,
Allah appreciates the efforts of a woman; then why should the husband
not appreciate them if he believes in Allah?  
    
 3. The roots of hating female children stem from the pre-Islamic era. A
Muslim husband should protect himself from falling into the abyss of
that age of ignorance.  
    
 4. The Creator is Allah the Almighty and the husband should feel
ashamed of himself if his ignorance leads him to oppose his Creator.  
    
 5. The vigor and vitality of the wife bring happiness to the marital
life and make the husband recover his senses. A nice story in this
concern has been mentioned by al-Jahidh in his book al-Bayan (p.186). He
says,  
    
 ‘Once, Abu Hamza ad-Dhabbiy left the tent of his wife and went to live
with one of his neighbors when his wife gave birth to a girl. One day,
he passed by his wife’s tent while she was playing with her daughter and
singing,  
  

“what is the matter with Abu Hamza,

that he does not come to us?

He stays in the house next to us,

angry that we don’t give birth to boys.

By Allah, it is not in our hands.

We just take what we are given.

And we are like the farm to the farmers,

we grow what they have sowed in us!”

   
 Then Abu Hamza came into his wife’s tent and kissed his daughter’s head
and her mother.’  
    
 6. Nevertheless, to be given a male child, there are some scientific
and religious ways and others of the unseen, which a man can follow
without harming his poor wife.  
    
 It is reported that Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said, ‘Whoever wants a
male child to be born, let him place his right hand on his wife’s navel
on the right side (when making love), recite the Sura of al-Qadr (97)
seven times, and then make love, and every day in the morning and
evening he should recite (subhanallah: glory be to Allah) seventy times,
(astaghfirullah: I ask Allah to forgive me) ten times, (subhanallah
al-adheem: glory be to Allah the Great) nine times, and the tenth time
he should say: (astaghfirullaha innallaha kaana ghaffara yursilis
samaa’a ‘alaykum midrara wa yumdidkum bi ‘amwaalin wa baneena wa yaj’al
lakum jannaatin wa yaj’al lakum anhaara: I ask Allah to forgive me
because Allah ***(is the most Forgiving. He will send down upon you the
cloud, pouring down abundance of rain, and help you with wealth and
sons, and make for you gardens, and make for you rivers)***[^105]
’)[^106].  
  

Question no. 121: I am sterile and there is no hope for a cure for me, I find this an injustice for me and my wife
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I am sterile and there is no hope for a cure for me. I
want to know why I have been afflicted with this injustice, and what the
guilt of my wife is that she will not have a child to call her “mama”
all her life and be delighted like all other mothers! O sheikh, please,
excuse me for this question! I do not object to the wisdom of my Lord,
but Satan whispers into my heart.  
    
**The answer:** Dear brother, since you know that Satan whispers to you,
you must seek the protection of Allah against him. You have to submit to
the Lord of the worlds because He is aware of you, your wife, and
millions of people like you. He is more aware of what benefits His
people and what harms them. You do not know; perhaps when you are given
a child, it may be born handicapped and then you and your wife will
suffer difficulties and insomnia all your life, or when your child grows
up, he may be a source of troubles to you and to your wife. Many
accidents have happened in this life, any one of which is sufficient to
give people big lessons. Many parents wished they had no child after
being involved in great troubles because of him.  
    
 Then, why should you let the Satan affect your faith even a little?
Thus, you will lose your faith and this loss is bitterer than your not
having a child.  
    
 You should believe in the wisdom of Allah sincerely, adhere to your
faith and certainty, shut out the whispers of the Satan who destroys you
through your passion, and say, when the Satan begins whispering to you,
‘Perhaps that I have not been given is better for me because my Lord is
aware of the ends of things’ and Allah is the Guardian of the
believers.  
  

Question no. 122: My wife is sick. In fact, she is handicapped, and I want to get married to another wife, but I am confused as to what the consequences of doing this will be
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife is sick. In fact, she is handicapped, and I want
to get married to another wife, but I am confused as to what the
consequences of doing this will be. I cannot tolerate living with her
forever. Whenever I think of my state of continuing to live with my wife
versus getting married to another one, I find so many difficulties
gather in my heart, which seems like it is about to stop beating.
Please, guide me to the right way, and may Allah reward you with
goodness!  
    
**The answer:** Dear brother, take it easy! Let your mind think, and do
not put dams of illusion before yourself! Every problem has a solution
by the will of Allah the Almighty. This world, with all its defects, has
good people yet; otherwise, it would have sunk with its people.  
    
 Things are not dark, and life is not melancholy as the Satan shows it
to you. You asked me to guide you to the right way, and I say that it
begins from the following:  
    
 First, pray to Allah to guide you to the right path and to not allow
you to follow your desires at all!  
    
 Second, consult with reasonable people about the steps you should
take!  
    
 Third, treat your sick wife with kindness and mercifulness only
whenever your circumstances allow you to do that!  
    
 Fourth, assure her that your marriage to another one does not mean that
you will ignore her, and tell her that her cooperation in this matter
will make you love and respect her even more!  
    
 Fifth, in your dealings with her, be understanding and lenient in all
situations and expect your reward from Allah, Who rewards good-doers,
and the reward of whoever does good will not be lost!  
    
 Finally, if you decide to get married while your first wife is
unwilling in spite of all the previous steps, and your second marriage
has legal reasons, try to get married without letting her know in order
to not increase her sickness. If temporary marriage can solve your
problem, you may prefer it to a permanent marriage. And then if she
finds out about you and becomes angry, you should not reply to her
angrily or harm her for it has been mentioned in traditions that it is
not a habit of generous people to avenge immediately.  
    
 Nevertheless, I think that you would be better off being patient if
observing patience is possible for you.  
  

Question no. 123: My husband was handicapped after a traffic accident. How can I continue living with him until the last of my life while I am still young?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband was handicapped after a traffic accident. How
can I continue living with him until the last of my life while I am
still young?  
    
**The answer:** If the love between you is true, the matter is easy, but
if the love is weak or you think selfishly, the matter is difficult.  
    
 Dear sister, I hope you accept reality because faithfulness and
patience are much higher values than personal ambition, except if the
husband does not appreciate this faithfulness and you cannot be patient
with him. In this case, you would be better off to ask him for a
divorce, and if he does not divorce you, then you can go to the legal
judge (the religious authority) to determine your situation.  
    
 The basis of a happy life is love and devotion. Try to live with this
valuable reminder, which if lost for some reason or other, there will be
no reason to make you continue your life with your husband except if you
have a greater power of patience, sacrifice, and altruism and if you
want the reward of the afterlife.  
    
 In general, you should deal with your problem wisely and prefer what is
more important to any important thing. I pray to Allah for you.  
  

Question no. 124: How to deal with a spouse who has moral or psychological defects and is not willing or able to reform?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My question does not concern me. It is about how to deal
with a husband or a wife who has qualities of nervousness, stupidity,
ignorance, indifference, obscenity, or haughtiness but insists on
adhering to these qualities and does not accept advices or think of
reform.  
    
**The answer:** I advise the people, who are afflicted with such
spouses, to regard what they consider to be important things in the
light of their benefits. Sometimes patience and silence are preferred
because they are the best ways to defeat the problems that lie in the
way of success as mentioned in one of the traditions “He is happy whose
tongue is silent and whose speech is little but meaningful”, whereas at
other times divorce and separation must be preferred.  
  

Question no. 125: What is the right behavior to adopt if one of the spouses is polite and high-minded but not religious and pays no attention to lawful or unlawful things, purity or impurity?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** What is the right behavior to adopt if one of the spouses
is polite and high-minded but not religious and pays no attention to
lawful or unlawful things, purity or impurity?  
    
**The answer:** If this does not cause a conflict, it will be better for
them to live as two spouses and continue loving each other, hoping that
Allah may guide the unreligious one to be religious and then they may
live happily according to the principles of Islam. But if this attitude
will cause a conflict between them, for example, if the husband forces
his religious wife to take off her veil before his friends or to serve
drinks for his guests or to give up prayers and fasting, first, he must
be advised either directly or indirectly by other persons. If this is
useless, then the rupture of relations should be followed. Sometimes,
the rupture of relations is in the form of a separation to force the
other side to reform himself/herself and sometimes in the form of
divorce. It is better that these stages should be carried out under the
supervision of a religious and wise family counselor. The objective is
not to give up the religious obligations, for no obedience to a creature
is worth disobeying the Creator. What is the value of the creature for
whom man disobeys his Exalted Lord?  
    
 A religious wife has to take the Pharaoh’s wife as her example, as has
been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an, and a religious husband has to notice
the example of Prophet Lot towards his wife. Man will withstand if he
looks forward to the happiness of the afterlife, for this life with all
its sweetness, which is mixed with the bitterness of problems, is
evanescent and not eternal. Sudden death often happens in our present
age. Do you not see how our youths are surprised by death and swallowed
by graves without a prior notice? Being caught up in the pleasures of
this life, which may be for a short time, is followed by deprivation of
eternal pleasures in the bliss of Paradise, which Allah has prepared for
the pious.  
  

Question no. 126: Can you advise how a young woman married to a very old man should behave to observe his rights and explain what her rights are and what she should do when her husband passes?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I have a young friend whose husband is very old.
Sometimes, she asks me: what is a suitable conduct that meets the rights
of the husband in order to please Allah? Then what are the rights of
this young wife with a great ambition on her husband? What will her fate
be after the death of such an old husband? I am not able to answer my
friend’s questions except in general points, which are not sufficient.
Would you please say what could persuade her and those like her?
Thanks.  
    
**The answer:** First, we should say that she has married willingly. She
has not been forced to accept an old man as her husband. If it is so,
she has to accept the consequences of her choice and be a good wife to
her husband without comparing him to young husbands. The first one to
compare and perish, and cause others to perish with him, was Iblis, and
Allah has warned us of following him.  
    
 As for death, people’s ages are in the hand of Allah. How often it is
that young people die and old people participate in their funerals! Let
us suppose that her husband dies as others die, whether she is young or
old at the time. Then, she has to do as widows do. She must wait for a
new prospective husband or become patient as most widows or as spinsters
do who accept reality and adapt themselves to its requirements. This
kind of marriage does not mandate worrying about the future or being
melancholy. A polite and religious old man is better than a reckless
young man.  
    
 The important thing is submission to fate and then to behave according
to the Islamic morals. Satisfaction, as stated in the traditions, is a
treasure that has no end, and contentment is a rest that discontented
people will not taste.  
  

Question no. 127: Due to marriage, I live far away from my home and family and even though my spouse and children are wonderful I need to know how to get over my constant heartache and longing for home and family.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I live with my husband in emigration. He is very kind and
does not deprive me of my rights as a wife. I am proud of him and of the
sound children Allah has given me through him. Praise be to Allah.
However, being in a state of emigration away from my relatives and
country troubles me. I have been deprived of my relatives and country
because of my husband who is one of the political oppositionists to the
state. This matter causes me continuous worry. I do not know how to
convince myself of the reality around me while my heart is aching with
memories and longing for my country. I fear that my state may affect my
relationship with my husband. Please, show me a solution to my case and
accept my thanks!  
    
**The answer:** Dear sister,  
    
 First, thank Allah for the faithful, mujahid[^107] husband you have!
Those who have such qualities are few. As a part of thanking Allah, you
should continue being patient with the difficulties of emigration and
requirements of jihad. You should always remember that Allah has
promised the mujahidin great reward and virtue, and they will enter
Paradise without any reckoning.  
    
 Second, man has the ability to adapt himself to all environments. He
can grow accustomed to whatever is around him, but it is culture and
willpower that lead him to either happiness or wretchedness. Try your
best to strengthen your willpower and culture but in a way that pleases
Allah the Almighty!  
    
 Third, you may read the biographies of those who have preceded us in
faith, emigration, and jihad for the sake of Allah, for history has
great, useful, and inspiring lessons!  
    
 Fourth, you should be certain that life is unstable. It does not remain
as it is; a wind brings the tide and another brings the ebb, and Allah
has the power to do anything at any moment.  
    
 Fifth, you should read a lot about the decree of Fate, because
believing in this great concept cures many of our psychological and
material problems.  
    
 Sixth, you should put your griefs and ambition in the frame of your
marital life and darling children and make their happiness be the first
and last goal in your life. It is this that will benefit you in this
life and the afterlife. Let other matters and that which concerns other
people be in the second and third degree. Do not mix up what is more
important and what is important, because preferring the second one to
the first will make you fail.  
    
 Seventh, you should know that the problems in the present age have
spread in all countries, and your mother country is different now from
what it was in the days of your memories. Conducts, morals, new
generations, imported cultures, the types of economical and social
relations, and whatever else you can imagine have become different and
have changed since your emigration. It is not right, in evaluation, to
dream of life in the past criteria and then walk behind their mirage.  
    
 Eighth, in your spare time, you should occupy yourself with social
relations with your neighbors and with families who are in the same
situation as you. The feeling of emigration disappears when man mixes
with people of identical sufferings.  
    
 Ninth, you can assign yourself a mission to work for, according to your
circumstances and intellectual level. Being busy with a certain goal
closes the gaps of tiredness and exhaustion and brings one closer to
success.  
    
 Tenth, you should always remember that life is short and a reasonable
person is he who takes advantage of it to choose the best fruits before
he misses the boat. Many are those who have emigrated and lived with
their faith and then died (while in emigration) and will be in Paradise;
whereas, if they had remained in their countries, they may have been
among the people of Hell. How often it is that living in the motherland
country for some believers, and even for those who have lost their
faith, is bitter and difficult while it is not so after emigration.  
  

Question no. 128: Would you please show us the verdict of Islam towards the situations of the growing numbers of women who are divorcees, widows and spinsters?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** In our family there is a divorcee, and amongst our
relatives there is a widow besides three spinsters. I see this state as
irregular, though it is as a result of our society’s ignorance of Islam,
which they construe as just praying, fasting, and some other traditional
rituals. They have turned their backs on the verdicts of Islam
concerning polygamy, temporary marriage, facilitating marriage, and
avoiding the habits from the time of ignorance. Would you please show us
the verdict of Islam towards the situations of these women?  
    
**The answer:** The phenomenon of the large numbers of divorcees,
widows, and spinsters is universal. In our Muslim societies, it is
supposed that this painful phenomenon would be limited if we followed
all the principles of Islam without preferring one to another as we
like, but, unfortunately, most of the Muslims have missed this way!  
    
 Islam is clear in its position towards this phenomenon. We can notice
this through the following points:  
    
 First, Islam places certain conditions and limits for divorce, which
cannot be executed easily.  
    
 Second, when a divorce takes place, Islam gives the option to a
divorcee to remarry and not remain single.  
    
 Third, Islam has legislated the laws of polygamy and temporary marriage
within conditions of justice and morality.  
    
 Fourth, Islam has facilitated the procedures for marriage with no
strictness or difficulty.  
    
 Fifth, Islam has recommended people to treat these women with the
utmost politeness, kindness, and respect and to feel and care for their
sufferings. Islam has promised a great reward for this.  
    
 Sixth, wealthy people should establish centers and foundations to
employ these women in works befitting their abilities, such as sewing,
nursing, cooking, weaving, handiworks and the like, and then the
products should be sold, and the profits should be given to the workers
themselves, to help the orphans, to cure the sick, or to establish other
charitable foundations.  
  

Question no. 129: Could you give some instructions for what remains of the life of a spinster who regrets being unjust to herself by turning down many earlier proposals?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I was an unveiled girl at the university. I fed on the
worldly cultures until I became self-conceited and thus killed my chance
for happiness. One young man after another would come asking for my
hand, but I kept refusing, wishing for the knight of my dreams to come,
but he never did, or he might have been one of those who came but I
could not discover him because of the mirage of my illusions and the
facade of my wishes. Thus, I missed the boat of marriage and now I am
one of the millions of spinsters. I regret, but uselessly. I have
repented to Allah of what I have committed against myself. I do not know
where I shall be after my death. I hope that girls and their parents
might take a lesson from my case and refrain from complicating the
conditions of marriage when a religious, high-minded young man comes
asking for the girl’s hand. How long does man plan on living that he
complicates this life for himself? Our Islam, the religion of ease, has
emphasized religiousness and morality when selecting spouses because it
sees in them a sure guaranty to achieve the rest of the conditions of
happiness, which are just branches of these two conditions. After this
foreword, my question is to ask for instructions for what remains of the
life of a spinster who regrets being unjust to herself. Would you please
answer me?  
    
**The answer:** Dear sister, may Allah bless you! I pray to Allah to
make your present and future better than your past and to recompense you
for what you have missed with the best of that for what you wish as a
reward from Him for your repentance, change, and loving heart that
wishes goodness for others. I pray for you sincerely that you may defeat
the obstacles in your way, and Allah will be with you in this life and
in the afterlife if you are with Him.  
    
 I have read in your letter bitter sufferings and I feel sorry for your
state. May Allah help your heart and damn that culture which has killed
your happiness. I join my supplication and the hope and call of your
supplication to warn Muslim girls of this predicament before they fall
into the same error into which you fell.  
    
 Yes, there is no happiness save in going back to the pure culture of
Islam. It truly is the culture of ease and bliss.  
    
 My instructions to you are as follows:  
    
 1. You should build your afterlife with every good deed.  
    
 2. You should spend your time with satisfying the needs of the
believing women and guiding them to good and righteousness.  
    
 3. You should spend the rest of your life in spreading religion by
every wise means, for example by publishing books, collecting donations
for charitable projects, and the like.  
    
 4. Try to learn literary writing and giving speeches and practice them
for the sake of Allah only and not to show off!  
    
 5. Always ask Allah to forgive you!  
    
 6. Adorn yourself with Islamic morals in every case!  
  

Question no. 130: A woman’s husband has died; should I not allow her temporary marriage with my husband to satisfy her needs?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband asked me to agree to his marriage with another
wife in a temporary marriage, but I refused. However, when I pondered on
the verdict of the Sharia in permitting temporary marriage, my mind and
senses guided me to agree and encourage him to do so. I asked myself:
this woman’s husband has died, but her sexual lust has not died. Then,
how should she satisfy it? Unlawfully or by suppressing it or by lawful
temporary marriage?  
    
 There is no doubt that the third choice is the right one, which Islam
has legislated. However, Umar bin al-Khattab prohibited it, and it was
his personal opinion and for a certain period, as I think. If temporary
marriage was not prohibited (by Umar) and if this prohibition did not
last for the following ages, the doors of adultery would not have been
opened to society. It is mentioned in traditions narrated from the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) that if temporary marriage was not prohibited, no one would
commit adultery except scoundrels. No noble man will go towards adultery
while the door of lawful temporary marriage is open to him. This door
has been opened by the Wise Creator, Who is more aware of the truth of
man and the requirements of his lust than anyone else.  
    
 Yes! This was my thought when I gave my husband my permission to marry
that widow, but after that, he did me wrong. He went too far and
exceeded the limits in practicing temporary marriage until he started
ignoring me. He did not even think of the family’s needs.  
    
 I am still satisfied with the verdict of our great Sharia and will not
allow myself or others to deny or suspect this verdict, but I hope that
you can give some advice to men who are like my husband. Is this my fair
reward? Has Allah not said, ***(Is the reward of goodness aught but
goodness)***[^108]? Please, excuse me for lengthening my speech and
thank you for answering me.  
    
**The answer:** Dear faithful sister, it is mentioned in one of the
traditions that “do not put wisdom near other than its people for you
will wrong it, and do not prevent it from its people for you will wrong
them”.  
    
 Dear sister, your situation results from your kindness and religious
understanding, but your mistake is that you have put this wisdom near
other than its people for whom it was intended. A man like your husband,
whether you do him good or not, will carry out what he wants and will
cover his actions with religion if he pretends to be religious;
otherwise he will commit his wrong in an irreligious way, paying
attention to nothing.  
    
 The problem lies neither in the verdict of the Sharia nor in your good
situation, which pleases Allah, but the problem lies in your guilty
husband. Be certain that Allah will not waste your reward because He is
just and you are benevolent and patient. Besides, you will get your
reward for your feelings towards that widow. May Allah bless you and
make you succeed in your life and afterlife.  
  

Question no. 131: What would you say about a woman who went to the West and adopted unIslamic shameful behaviors?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My friend and his wife, after spending two years in the
West, came to their country to visit their families and friends. The
shameful clothes of this wife, the exciting colors on her face, and the
perfumes she sprinkled on herself inside and outside the house attracted
the attentions of all. When she sat with the women, she showed off and
became proud to such a degree that she made them laugh at her shape.  
    
 Unfortunately, she is from a religious family. She had not been so
before she emigrated to the West. All her family disputed with her, but
she faced them with pride and haughtiness and spoke to them impudently
and with no Islamic morals. The least of her words to them was “you are
still reactionary”.  
    
 It is said that her husband fears to resist her; therefore, he lets her
alone lest she fall into sin as has happened to many women in those
countries, which support the independence of women from the economical
side and that paves the way for them to go wherever they like.  
    
 What is the obligatory way to deal with such a wife, especially when
her husband is weak before her?  
    
**The answer:** This phenomenon results from previous causes. The most
important cause is a weak religious education in beliefs and morals. It
was obligatory on her family to plant the facts of religion inside her
and to teach her the realities of this world and its deceiving faces.  
    
 If this woman is submitted to psychologists, they, unanimously, will
say that she suffers from an inferiority complex and she, with her
behavior, wants to repair her defect and solve her complex according to
her illusory imagination.  
    
 Since this wife is insolent and throws her silly words impudently, I
think it would be better for her husband to treat her with wisdom and
good exhortation, but whenever it is possible, he should dispute with
her in a wise manner to achieve a good result. But, if it is possible
that this may lead her to be stubborn or to fall into sin, it would be
better then to be patient with her until Allah will bring forth the
fruit of the wise efforts and good exhortation.  
    
 It is important in dealing with women like her, that have been dazzled
with the West and have collapsed in fancies, to pay careful attention to
politeness and to the Islamic morals when repelling evil with good in
order to limit their stubbornness and to prevent their fall.  
    
 The husband of this wife must not neglect her case, especially not her
emotional satisfaction. Let him permit her to wear any kind of clothes
she likes as long as it is inside his house. He should prove his love
for her in every possible manner. At the same time, he should speak to
her frankly that her behavior, which displeases Allah, disgusts him and
shakes his love for her. Does any lover like to disgust her beloved and
shake his love for her? This husband should realize that the shameless
behavior of his wife makes other men covet her and visualize her in
their laps. Does this please a husband with jealousy and a wife with
abstinence and conscience?  
    
 This is besides other problems that she may face from men who she may
excite and who may unexpectedly rape her. As for the problems of the
grave, the afterlife, and the torment of Fire, the matter is very
difficult and the talk is very long!  
    
 I hope that this Muslim woman and those like her are criticized with
attention to the previous points and with emphasis also on another
important point and that is to explain the disadvantages of displaying a
woman’s charms before foreign men. Some examples from Western societies
can be shown besides showing stories of western girls who have been
guided and have believed in Islam and kept to the veil and abstinence.  
    
 Here, as an example and to encourage our girls, I would like to mention
the story of a Danish woman who was the wife of a young Shiite man from
Lebanon. He told me that his wife had become a Shiite Muslim and
resigned from her job, from which she gained a lot of money. She made
spreading the teachings of Islam her honorable job. She said that she
did not want to see Muslim girls and women fall into what the Western
girls and women had fallen into.  
    
 She always read Islamic books and after reading them, she would give
them to other girls for the sake of Allah and to guide those girls to
Islam and to its high humane teachings[^109].  
    
 He said about his active wife that she offered prayers a lot and she
was very devoted to her religion and veil. Whenever she met a Muslim
woman who was a deviate or inclined to the Western way of life, she
would enjoin her to do good deeds and forbid her from doing bad deeds
saying, ‘we have known the emptiness of our material civilization and
given it up and become proud of Islam. Why are you so dazzled by what we
have tried and desisted from?’  
    
 Indeed, this Danish woman is a source of pride. There are millions like
her in the Western countries. Allah has made them as a proof for our
women and girls who are emigrants in those countries and for those in
our Muslim countries who imitate the western fashions and way of life.
Thus, Allah gives them His full proof lest they will have an excuse
against Him on the Day of Resurrection, the day of painful torment.  
    
 I ask this young woman, who is captured by her fancy and who calls her
family reactionary, to ponder over the words of Imam Ali (a.s.) when he
said, ‘Shyness and abstinence are from the qualities of faith, the
natures of the free, and the aspects of the pious.[^110]’  
    
 Is the bondage to lusts and desires considered freedom or the belief in
Allah the Almighty and obeisance to Him?  
  

Question no. 132: My wife follows a religious authority mujtahid different from what I chose, and now she asked me to follow the mujtahid she follows or to divorce her, what should I do?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I imitate (follow) a religious authority (mujtahid) that I
have chosen by my will after I have read his Islamic thoughts, which
comply with the present age. There are millions who imitate him all over
the world.  
    
 My wife agreed to marry me even though she knew about this matter (my
choice of mujtahid[^111]). But now, a year after our marriage, she asks
for me to either imitate the mujtahid she imitates or for me to divorce
her. Before this request, we used to discuss the matter a lot. I did not
imagine that someday it would deserve to be discussed to this extent or
that it would be a cause for wasting our time and annoying our nerves
besides that it might be a cause for divorce!  
    
 In the beginning, I paid no attention to her request. I heard from one
of her relatives that she had known, since the beginning of our
marriage, about my imitating this mujtahid but she had said that she
would be able to make me change. Now, after her attempts have failed,
she comes to me asking me to divorce her.  
    
 I am confused and indignant at the same time. I am confused as to what
I should prefer; should I submit to this stickling wife who asks for an
illegal and inhumane thing or should I submit to the destruction of my
marital life and the wealth I have spent in establishing this life?  
    
 I am indignant too because I thought that religion was a means of
happiness and mental comfort for man, but why do those who ascribe to
themselves religion and call themselves *Ulama’* throw their ignorant
followers into fanaticism? By doing so, they distort the truth of
religion and the fame of the good *Ulama’* and mujtahids and destroy the
happiness of man. Why do the honorable religious authorities and
scholars not deny these calamities, which deal deathblows?  
    
 I heard about such a matter that happened or caused marital
disagreements, but I did not expect that it would happen to me.  
    
 Why do some speakers stress the disagreements and political disputes
between some religious authorities and leaders while praising their own
leaders and exalting them to the level of infallibility and charismata?
Why do they think that no one is good besides them and that those who do
not adopt their opinions are deviates and misled?  
    
 For what is this extremism? Whereto do these persons want us to get
with their narrow-mindedness? Has the time not come yet for our
authorities to fight these mockeries, which are practiced under the
pretence of supporting the religious authorities themselves? I apologize
for violating the decorum of politeness. Please, excuse me if I was
somewhat harsh in my speech! There is no power save in Allah, the
Exalted, the Great.  
    
**The answer:** Dear brother, I find you right, wronged, and calling for
reform. These are the qualities of one who does not leave the true
religion just because the pretenders have practically left it.  
    
 May Allah bless your faith, certainty, and taqlid[^112]. I pray to
Allah to bless your marriage and your patience too. Allah always blesses
the intentions of the sincere people because He has promised that He
will not waste the reward of good doers.  
    
 Dear brother, this problem is one of the results of entering into the
world of politics without having an immunity of piety in the heart. The
manifestations of piety that do not come from the heart are too many!
The philosophy of these manifestations is that man is to be tried and
then he either becomes more faithful or he perishes along the way.
Without being tried, man shall not attain the high degrees of Paradise
nor shall he be thrown into the abyss of Hell. May Allah protect you,
us, and all the Muslims from the flame of Hell and the moaning of its
inhabitants.  
    
 You should know that when piety abides in the heart, immunity, which
resists the prevailing of envy, fanaticism, injustice, oppression,
superiority complex, and the omitting of others from the religious and
social stations of activities, will be born.  
    
 I wish that those people would at least once in their lives ponder over
the speech of Imam Ali (a.s.) about the qualities of the pious people.
Piety, as the master of the pious Imam Ali (a.s.) explained to his
companion Humam who flew high towards his lofty goal longing for
Paradise and fearing the Fire, is the required immunity for every true
Shia. If anyone finds this piety inside him, let him enter any field to
which his legal duty guides him, whether the field of culture, trade,
politics, war, family, sitting in loneliness, or at the table of
negotiations. However, this piety has disappeared from the lives of many
people in our present age and so their lives have entered into the
darkness of injustice; sometimes it is the injustice of the husband to
his wife, the wife to her husband, the parents to their children, the
members of the family to each other, or the neighbor to his neighbor and
sometimes it is the injustice of the government to its people, the
people to their leaders, or countries to each other, and so forth. I
ask: can he, who is unjust to others, defeat injustice?  
    
 There are many Qur’anic verses and prophetic traditions that have
warned Muslims of injustice. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Beware of injustice,
for it is the darkness of the Day of Resurrection![^113]’  
    
 About party spirits the Prophet (S) said, ‘He who is fanatic
fanaticizes will take off the noose of faith from his neck.[^114]’  
    
 In some books I have written about denying fanaticism and
disagreements, especially concerning the religious authorities. The most
important thing that I have written criticizing this phenomenon and
giving curative alternatives you can read in my book (Stories and Ideas
from the moralities of Clergymen). In more than 700 pages of the book
you will find important instructions about this concern that you and
your wife can both benefit from. You can also refer to our books in
general where we have tried to treat this destructive disease through
Qur’anic verses and the instructions of the Prophet (S) and Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). I pray to Allah to make us succeed in treating our intellectual,
mental, familial, and social diseases or in limiting them.  
    
***(He said: O my people! have you considered if I have a clear proof
from my Lord and He has given me a goodly sustenance from Himself, and I
do not desire that in opposition to you I should betake myself to that
which I forbid you: I desire nothing but reform so far as I am able, and
with none but Allah is the direction of my affair to a right issue; on
Him do I rely and to Him do I turn)***[^115].  
    
 The reform that all disputers feign has certain morals and principles,
the head of which is piety as Imam Ali (a.s.) said in one of his
traditions[^116]. With true piety and by knowing its criteria, man can
understand the limits of truth and falsehood in all cases.  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Does it please you that you are from the
triumphant party of Allah? Fear Allah the Almighty and do good in all
your affairs, because Allah is with those who guard against evil and
those who do good (to others).[^117]’  
    
 The Prophet (S) recommended Abu Tharr by saying, ‘O Abu Tharr, in
working with piety be more careful than your care for work.[^118]’  
    
 However, we find that most of the fanatics who feign religiousness are
enthusiastic in their actions but inattentive in their positions with
regards to piety and to what the Holy Qur'an has said, ***(Allah only
accepts from those who guard (against evil))***[^119].  
    
 Dear faithful brother, be pious and let your worships and situations be
sincere to Allah to receive His great contentment!  
    
 Politics, presidency, fame, praises, and lifting pictures without piety
or the acceptance of Allah are but mirages leading to perishment.  
    
 I know some persons who expended their efforts in boyish disputes and
quarrels that turned the happiness of some spouses into unhappiness and
began spreading rumors against whoever disagreed with them in thought
until they set the fire of disagreements and quarrels. However, some of
them changed their positions after they realized that the facts could
not be seen in the dust of the quarrels and the smoke of
disagreements.  
    
 I hope that those who come after us will take a lesson from this
historic period, whose bad deeds have eaten away its good deeds. I hope
they will not intrude on each other and kill their powers and abilities
over trivial things. Let us heed this advice from our pure leaders of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) who said, ‘Strive and make every effort! If you do not
do so, then do not disobey. Whoever builds and does not tear down, his
building will rise even if it is simple, and whoever builds and tears
down, his building will not rise[^120].’  
    
 I wonder at the followers of different religious authorities who defy
death in their disputes!  
    
 These authorities differ in opinions because they are mujtahids, and
the legal duty of any mujtahid is to stick to his own opinion; otherwise
he will be an imitator of other than himself. However, the blame is on
the followers; why do they dispute, on which basis do they quarrel, and
by what right do they exchange names against the names of the
mujtahids!  
    
 We are proud of all of our mujtahids, and we tell the world that we
believe in freedom of opinion and our evidence of that is the
multiplicity of opinions of our mujtahids. Is it not wrong for the
followers to deform this shining face of the freedom of Ijtihad [^121]
in our Hawzas[^122]?  
    
 You can see in the following one of the situations when our mujtahids
disagree in opinion and how nicely they deal with each other. One of the
great *Ulama’*[^123], who has written many books and accompanied many
mujtahids in Iran, told me that in the beginning of the year 1962 AD,
and before the uprising of Khurdad[^124] took place in Iran, when Imam
Khomeini (may Allah have mercy on him) began increasing his criticism
against the extinct regime of the Shah, the great Ayatullah al-Akhond
al-Hamadani thought that the position of Imam Khomeini would not serve
the goal that Imam Khomeini intended; therefore, he sent Sheikh
Abdurraheem, the teller of this story, to Imam Khomeini to tell him word
by word: “Al-Akhond al-Hamadani sends you his greetings and says to you,
‘O Abu Tharr, slowly, slowly!’”  
    
 Sheikh Abdurraheem said, ‘I went to the meeting where Imam Khomeini was
giving his lecture. After he finished his lecture, I went out after him
and waited for him to be alone so I could deliver the oral message to
him, without allowing it to fall into the trap of spies or being heard
by any of his attendants because the message was special. I followed him
until he stopped near the tomb of the late mujtahid Ayatullah Sayyid
al-Buroojerdi to recite the sura of al-Fatiha for him. I seized the
opportunity, approached him, and told him the phrase as it was, no more
no less. Imam Khomeini replied to me saying, ‘Send him my greetings and
say to him: O Salman, rise, rise!’  
    
 Dear reader, notice how these mujtahids respected each other. Al-Akhond
al-Hamadani addressed Imam Khomeini as “Abu Tharr” because Imam Khomeini
was revolutionary in his actions like Abu Tharr was and did not submit
to injustice and deviation. Imam Khomeini addressed al-Akhond
al-Hamadani in his reply as “O Salman!” He compared him to Salman
al-Farsi in his steadfastness, devotedness, and asceticism. Both Abu
Tharr and Salman were great companions of the Prophet (S); they might
have been different in their situations but with no enmity to each
other, rather each of them had his own opinions according to the area of
his legal duty. In the same way, those who bore the similitudes of Abu
Tharr and Salman sent each other highly polite messages within the
morals of Islam although they were different in analyzing the situations
and different in their opinions.  
    
 At the same time when you see our mujtahids have the morals of the
first companions, you see those who pretend to be their followers have
the morals of other than them.  
    
 Is this the right line of Islam, which Imam Khomeini and other
mujtahids wanted and made great efforts throughout their lives to
serve?  
    
 Yes, there are mistakes, but they are distributed amongst all. No one
can be proud that he is free from mistakes or defects. No one is
infallible. Since it is so, let each side keep silent! They should not
provoke each other or criticize each other baselessly, for ultimately
the two sides would lose.  
    
 Therefore, each one should act according to the mujtahid whom Islamic
freedom has permitted to be imitated and followed. Let the youths
undertake legal responsibility with all its moral dimensions. This is
the method we impart in our instructions, as we have received from the
Holy Qur'an, the conducts of the Prophet (S) and his guiding progeny
(a.s.), the events of history, and our experiences in this age.  
    
 Acting according to this method requires some important steps:  
    
 1. Acquiring knowledge and information by continuously reciting the
Qur'an and reading its interpretation, reading traditions and their
meanings, and reading good books published by this Islamic school  
    
 2. Heartily concentrating on achieving the good end  
    
 3. Watching one’s deeds to serve that very goal  
    
 4. Respecting others even if they are dissenters  
    
 5. Observing equanimity, solidity, morality and gravity  
    
 6. Being certain of the truthfulness or falseness of any news that
comes to one’s ear  
    
 7. Improving one’s mental and intellectual abilities and all the means
leading to Islamic goals, and this requires paying attention to these
listed steps and also avoiding selfishness and dictatorship  
    
 8. Being courageous in taking decisions to change what one has
accustomed himself to  
    
 9. Complying oneself with news events and being aware of contemporary
issues  
    
 10. Always praying to Allah for success and being humble to the truth  
    
 Dear brother, with these points in mind, I hope your wife will return
to her reason. If she is sincere to her religion, she should ask the
mujtahid whom she imitates to give her a fatwa. I am sure that he will
deny her situation, and ask her to be reasonable and live in peace with
her husband.  
  

Question no. 133: What would you say to the wife of a heavy smoker that feels unable to quit, while the house is made to stink and the wife and children, as well as he, are at great risk for health problems and death due to the smoking?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My husband is a heavy smoker. The place in which he smokes
is like a chimney. Everything in our house has the smell of cigarettes.
Thus far, my children and I have not even felt the smell of perfumes.
Doctors say that the harms of smoking are more dangerous to those around
the smoker than to the smoker himself. My husband knows well how much we
suffer from his smoking, but he often says that his willpower does not
help him in giving up smoking. What would you say to me, to him, and to
those who suffer like us?  
    
**The answer:** One’s will becomes strong if he strengthens his culture,
which is mixed with piety and caution for the ends. When we read that
medical researches and actual experiments have proved smoking to have
serious harms for the smoker and for others, we become certain that a
smoker is a victim of his desire and his saying that his will is weak is
but a justification for his submitting to his desire.  
    
 I know a man who smoked for 40 years and then he gave up smoking, and
his son smoked for 20 years and then he gave it up. I also know an old
man who smoked up until 25 years ago, but then he gave up smoking. When
smokers say they have weak wills and determinations, they just uncover
the control of their desires over them. I say that because I myself have
suffered from the harms of smoking in my larynx because smokers would
not abstain from smoking in the meetings where I ascended the minbar to
give speeches. I still suffer from this harm and ask Allah to forgive
those who have caused me to suffer.  
    
 The fact is that cigarette smoking, which is the worst thing Muslims
have adapted in their lives, cannot be justified by any rational reason,
especially when it causes harms to others and violates their right of
breathing pure air.  
    
 Therefore, most jurisprudents consider smoking unlawful on the basis of
its “harm and harming”, and even if some jurisprudents are lenient to
smoking addicts in permitting them to harm themselves, they do not
permit them to harm others. The atmosphere is for all, and keeping it
safe is obligatory on them. A permitted smoker has to smoke in a place
where he shall not harm others.  
    
 Hence, it is required of every religious person who smokes to ponder
over his act from the legal aspect and the aspect of the moral
principles associated with it.  
    
 This is in general, but as for this sister and her question about her
smoking husband, I would like to present to her a story of a clever wife
that she may benefit from this successful experience.  
    
 Once, a wife of a smoker said to her husband, ‘Every day you spend a
dinar to buy two packets of cigarettes. Would I also not have the right
to take a dinar from our expenditures every day if I were a smoker?’  
    
 Her husband agreed, and based on this logical evidence, she took a
dinar every day. She saved them until there were 358 dinars after a
year. Then she called her husband to the yard. She brought the money
with a match in her hand to show her husband that she wanted to burn the
money.  
    
 Her husband cried out, ‘Have you lost your mind? Do you want to prove
the saying of Imam Ali (a.s.) that “women have deficient minds”?’  
    
 The wife said, ‘Do you see any signs that I have lost my mind?’  
    
 He said, ‘Is there a sign clearer than setting fire to these dinars?’  
    
 She said, ‘It is my money and I could have burnt it every day like you
but I collected them in order to not lose more than one match and in
order to not burn with them my health and the health of those living
with me who have the right to breathe pure oxygen. And since you take
the word of Imam Ali (a.s.) as an excuse, let me tell you that Imam Ali
(a.s.), the great leader and the generous man, was far above to mean
with his wise words what you and your like interpret, O my dear
husband!’  
    
 Being defeated before this clear, practical proof of his wife, the
husband opened his mind and submitted to the inevitable truth. His
intelligent wife went on to say, ‘Imam Ali (a.s.) was afflicted with a
woman who was used as a means to fight him by some men who called
themselves companions. Imam Ali (a.s.) gave a speech on this occasion,
and said those words to reduce the influence of their plot. In this
speech, Imam Ali (a.s.) said about those men, ‘O semi men and no men!’  
    
 The faithful women understood what Imam Ali (a.s.) meant by these
words, and therefore, they did not object to him or ask him about his
intention because it was so clear. In fact, those women supported him in
all situations and they remained sincere to him and defended him even
after his bloody martyrdom when his soul ascended to the Kingdom of
Allah and to His great contentment.’  
    
 With these words this wife was able to make her husband stop playing
with the meanings of the words of the infallible imams (a.s.) and to
make him give up smoking.  
    
 The husband was enlightened by the intelligence of his wife and her
good analysis of religion and history. Therefore, he made his decision
to immediately give up smoking.  
    
 Soon, his wife decided to give him that money as a gift for his
willpower and as a reward for his humbleness.  
    
 Dear sister, this is an experiment from which you and others in your
position can benefit. I hope that husbands may take lesson before they
meet intelligent wives, for the facts show that when some women know the
truth of religion, they definitely become more reasonable than men.  
  

Question no. 134: Is it wrong to reveal to my daughter, upon her request, the sins of her mother that led to our divorce?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I divorced my wife twenty years ago. Recently, my
daughter, who is married, asked me why I divorced her mother. I was
confused as to how to answer her. After she repeatedly insisted, I told
her that one day I saw her mother commit adultery with my friend who
used to visit me in the house. I beat him severely until he fled from
me, and then I immediately divorced her mother. I am regretful that I
uncovered this secret to my daughter. Am I sinful before Allah and
mistaken in my frank answer, for her mother may have repented after
that?  
    
**The answer:** You would have been better off to cover the sin of your
wife, for Allah is the Coverer of defects. By your frank answer, you
have placed a thick wall between your daughter and her mother who might
have repented (God willing), and furthermore, you have made your
daughter live with worry about her reputation and suffer continuous
psychological suffering, fearing that her mother might be exposed one
day. This is a kind of injustice. You could have covered the matter if
you had answered wisely.  
    
 A Muslim must prefer the principle of covering and being indifferent of
others’ defects, except when there is a greater advantage like in
reforming or warning. In some traditions, it has been narrated that
whoever covers the defects of others Allah will cover him.  
    
 As for marital treason, it may happen to anyone besides you; therefore,
its causes must be known to prevent the tragedy and its bad consequences
from occurring. Being unveiled, incitements, ballrooms, cinemas, movies,
and videos, for example, are among the most important causes for
committing this sin. Besides this, when some husbands bring their
friends to their houses and their wives participate in those meetings
with poor veiling, exciting laughter, speaking softly followed by
suspicious looks and desires of touching, traitors and traitresses
(curse be upon them and upon whoever paves the way for treason) are
encouraged to commit their great sin when the simple-minded husband is
absent.  
    
 What is the guilt of the innocent daughter who lives away from her
mother and father? When this daughter grows up, she looks for the
reasons why she has been deprived of the warmth of her parents.  
    
 Why do people not think of the consequences of their violating the
Islamic Sharia?  
    
 Yes, for these reasons, Islam has prohibited such preliminaries and
imposed the veil, abstinence, and modesty on Muslims.  
  

Question no. 135: What is the Islamic view regarding belief in magic and paying attention to it?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife and some of my relatives believe in magic,
jugglery, and the like. I did not believe in this and I would often say
to them that they lived in superstitions. However, a little time ago, I
began coming nearer to their beliefs when I saw some signs and heard
some stories. What is the view of Islam regarding this matter, to which
some Muslim families and communities and even some western people pay a
great deal of attention, to a degree that they associate their
unhappiness and wretchedness or happiness and success to it?  
    
**The answer:** Magic and its likes, such as divination, jugglery,
conjuration, and employing the jinn for bad purposes, are prohibited in
Islam because they are based on lying, cheating, ill-gotten moneys, and
neglecting reason and religion. There is no doubt that magic has an
external influence on some people of weak, diseased hearts and much
illusion. Allah says, ***(…they taught men sorcery… and from these two
(angels) people learn that by which they cause division between man and
wife; but they injure thereby no one save by Allah's
permission)***.[^125]  
    
 The wisdom of prohibiting magic is that when Allah the Almighty created
man, He honored him with reason and invited him to use reason to build
his life according to its guidance, whereas magic and other things like
it contradict the high divine goal and make man and society live in
ignorance and illusion away from the truth and the real facts.  
    
 Islam has contended against magic and declared that a magician must be
killed if he does not repent. The money gained from magic is unlawful.
Teaching magic, learning it, and taking wages for it are all
unlawful[^126].  
    
 Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘He, who learns something of magic whether
little or much, disbelieves…[^127]’  
    
 Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘A diviner is like a fortune-teller, and a
fortune-teller is like a magician, and a magician is like an unbeliever,
and the unbeliever will be in Fire.[^128]’  
    
 If magic and its likes had no harmful effects, Islam would not have
prohibited them. We do not say that magic has no effects, but one must
seek the protection of Allah the Almighty from magic and its bad
effects. Allah says in His Book, ***(So when they cast down, Musa
(Moses) said to them: What you have brought is magic; surely Allah will
make it naught; surely Allah does not make*** ***the work of
mischief-makers to thrive. And Allah will show the truth to be the truth
by His words, though the guilty may be averse (to it))***[^129].  
    
 This verse and what happened to Prophet Moses (a.s.) with the magicians
shows that magic was practiced by the followers of the Devils, but Allah
curbed it so that its influence would not reach those who believed and
relied on Allah sincerely such as Prophet Moses (a.s.) and the believers
whom the influence of magic and jugglery did not affect.  
    
 We conclude that when man believes in Allah with sincerity and
certainty, magic and its like will not have any influence over him. If
magic was able to have influence over anyone, the devils from the human
beings and the jinn would do to the believers whatever they liked;
however, we find the believers stronger than them, and, moreover, they
are able to even annul the effects of magic on others by reciting some
Qur’anic verses and certain supplications, through which they strengthen
the spirit of a bewitched one and help him overcome the magic and the
magician.  
    
 Dear brother, herein, I recommend you, your wife, your relatives, and
whoever else experiences these fears with the following:

1. Connect yourselves to Allah sincerely, abide by the legal
obligations, refrain from unlawful things, always be pure and always
busy yourselves with the remembrance of Allah! Thus, you will protect
yourselves from the evil whisperings of the Satan, from magic, and from
every evil doing of man and the Devils.  
    
 2. Keep these ideas away from your minds as if they do not exist!
Thinking of these matters in itself prepares the ground for such
illusions and makes the soul fertile to receive misfortunes.  
    
 3. Try to keep away from enmities and from those who would use unlawful
means to harm you!  
    
 4. Beware of those who deal with what are called “unusual sciences”,
for they look forward to your money before they think of your
treatment!  
    
 5. Always recite the Holy Qur'an and the supplications of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) inside your houses, and especially the ziyara of al-Jami’a
al-Kabira, the ziyara of Ashura, the tradition of al-Kisa’, the Verse of
al-Kursi (2:255) five times, and “astaghfirullah” (I ask Allah to
forgive me) seventy times!  
  

Question no. 136: My husband has always openly said that he does not love me and stays with me only for our children and now I do not love him anymore and am very unhappy; what should I do?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** I am a mother of three girls and two boys. This is the
production of twenty years of my marriage, which my husband openly
describes as being a bad choice. He says that he stays with me just for
the sake of the children. He does not feel any love towards me as his
wife. He is sad and nervous. He insinuates that he wants to get married
to a girl that matches his ambition. Now, after my hopeless attempts, I
have become like him. I do not feel a deep love for him. I have lost my
patience. I do not know what my fate or the fate of my children will be.
I cry when I am alone. Does my crying solve my problem or could you show
me a solution that would take me near happiness and success with my
husband?  
** **  
**The answer:** To have a happy marital life, one should think deeply
before getting married. One should think of the culture, ambition,
wishes, and morals of the other person to whom one wants to get married.
Without that, life will be full of troubles and sufferings as you suffer
now. This is the problem of most of those who get married just to
satisfy their lusts; they do not think of what will happen when the lust
extinguishes and children come.  
    
 Now, let us think of a solution on the basis of “something is better
than nothing.” We suggest that you should:  
    
 1. care for yourself by using adornments, perfumes, attractive clothes,
and nice (unaffected) words even at ordinary times.  
    
 2. care for whatever he is interested in, because this is the key to
get to his heart.  
    
 3. read more about Islamic culture in general, the Holy Qur'an, and
supplications because knowledge relieves the heart and guides to the
right way.  
    
 4. show love to him and to your children and pay careful attention to
the sacred instinct of motherhood so that he may understand that you are
ready to tolerate every difficulty for the sake of the happiness of the
family, of which you and your husband are two inseparable parts.  
    
 5. be smiling and ease the atmosphere in the house with jokes and
delightful comments. You should not say that what he has done to you has
killed this spirit in you and beware of being desperate!  
    
 6. not scold him if he insinuates that he wants to get married to a
second wife because he will be more stubborn until he achieves what he
wants just to avenge his personality.  
    
 7. Lastly, supposing he does achieve his second marriage, you should
continue acting according to the aforementioned points as if no
difficult matter has happened. In other words, you should convince
yourself with the reality. Between you and the other woman, who has the
right to live her marital life with your husband, there are certain
rights and duties that have been determined by the wise Islamic Sharia.
Therefore, do not let the Satan throw you into jealousy against the
verdicts of Islam, for then you would destroy your religion and lose
your life and afterlife. Life is too short and temporary and it is not
worth being selfish or wasting time in troubles.  
    
 You should realize that when it is difficult for some men to be alone
with their wives, either because they have old children or too many
guests come too often or the like, they begin thinking of another
marriage for some reasons, the first of which is to satisfy their sexual
lusts. I do not know whether your husband or your circumstances in the
house are like this or not. The assessment is up to you.  
    
 Besides all this, I have a word to say to your husband and I hope he
will read it with his mind and not with his desires. I would like to
say:  
    
 Dear brother, I do not doubt that you look forward to a happy and easy
life for there is no reasonable person on earth who wants the opposite,
not even the scoundrels! Then, try to ponder on your state through
answering the following questions:  
    
 1. How will you benefit if you destroy your life and get married to
another wife? Will your conscience leave you free to be happy with the
second wife while you have destroyed the first one?  
    
 2. What will you lose if you remain with your wife and children and
stay satisfied with your fate?  
    
 3. Suppose that you get married to another wife, will you be able to
treat your two wives equally and fairly?  
    
 After this, I invite you both to think of the following principles and
agree, according to them, on what brings you happiness.  
    
 1. Be certain that Allah does not determine anything unless it has an
advantage for man that most of the time is hidden to him, and when it
appears to him, he thanks Allah for not fulfilling his wish, which he
had wished for but was not granted.  
    
 2. This world and its pleasures are transient and man’s age is too
short for him to achieve all his wishes. How many young people are there
upon whom accidents come unexpectedly and cut the rope of their hopes
and wishes!  
    
 3. The value of man is in his good deeds that lead him to Paradise,
which has the everlasting bliss that no eye has ever seen, no ear heard,
and no mind imagined.  
    
 4. It is great for a man to leave behind him after his death a nice
picture about himself. This nice picture is contingent on one’s good
morals and his respecting others’ rights, which makes others pray to
Allah to reward him with good. Will the soul have a pleasure greater
than this?  
  

Question no. 137: I would like to build my family on sound bases according to Islamic teachings. What is the guiding principle to achieve this goal?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
**Question:** I would like to build my family on sound bases according
to Islamic teachings. What is the guiding principle to achieve this
goal?

**The answer:** First, you should know the features of a good family and
those of a bad family, and then you can decide which of the respective
features to follow.  
    
 The features of a good family are as follows:  
    
 1. The absence or fewness of controversies between the members of the
family, especially between the husband and the wife  
    
 2. The parents’ being as a successful example for their children
through their conducts and thoughts  
    
 3. Observance of religious occasions, both the happy and sorrowful
ones, and also of family occasions, like birthdays, as much as
possible  
    
 4. Exchanging visits with good people and especially with relatives  
    
 5. Communal meetings with interactive discussions, jokes, and
narrations of amusing incidents  
    
 6. Satisfaction of the material needs of all family members such as
clothes, food, shelter, and others, besides the moral needs like love,
sympathy, care, respect, and the like  
    
 The features of a bad family are as follows:  
    
 1. Always or often criticizing and disparaging each other and not
respecting or encouraging each other  
    
 2. Looking at problems from a pessimistic view, as if they are not
experiments from which success can be derived  
    
 3. Excessively watching others and suspecting every behavior of the
family members  
    
 4. The dictatorship of the responsible member in the family and his
autocracy in making all decisions  
    
 5. Cold relationship between the husband and the wife, while the
children live in separation and with bad relations  
    
 6. Not reciprocating visits with relatives and other people  
    
 Of course, you may not find a family with all the ideal qualities, but
you should try your best to raise the moral level of your family to be
as near the ideal qualities as possible. When you find a good family,
try to become acquainted with it and cooperate together to reach the
required level of sound social relations. Beware of being ideal
theoretically because reality has its own area that is narrower than in
theories.  
    
 Generally speaking, to achieve your goal, you should try to achieve the
following four points as Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘There are four things
that bring happiness to man: a good wife, dutiful children, good
friends, and living in one’s own country.[^130]’  
  

Question no. 138: How can we create tranquility and quiet time in our family life?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** Noisiness, quarrels, and idle talking prevail in our
family life. There is no moment of tranquility that allows us to rest
and think quietly. The flame of disputation burns at everything and at
every moment in our house. I can say that there is no ordinary word said
in our house unless hundreds of words burst after it like splinters
everywhere, and that does not even include the quarrels between the
families of our relatives. Would you please show us the reasons and
solutions for this destructive phenomenon?  
    
**The answer:** First and foremost, let each one of your family members
and relatives remember that his life is short, then how would it be if
he spends it in quarreling and brings himself senility and death before
time? Let them remember too that happiness comes in the boat of
discernment, tranquility, delightfulness, and reasonability. Happiness
does not approach a person or a family leading a disorderly life. If one
loves his life, health, and happiness, surely he will not involve
himself in troubles and idle disputations. I do not think that there is
someone who knows this fact and does not abide by its conditions!  
    
 In order to avoid disputations and quarrels, each person who lives in
this house should bear in mind the following points:  
    
 1. The house is a place of tranquility and peace of mind  
    
 2. When disputations and arguments begin, the more reasonable one from
both sides is he who keeps silent, regardless of whatever the other side
encroaches upon him  
    
 3. The subjects of disputations or the situations that take place
during quarrels should not be revealed to those outside the house or to
those who are not present when the quarrels take place  
    
 4. One should be satisfied and not pine for the blessings others have  
    
 5. One should be aware of the mentalities and the ways of thinking of
others before dealing with them  
    
 6. One should avoid violence  
    
 7. One should avoid any differentiating in dealings with others when
there is no excuse  
    
 8. The Qur'an and other supplications should be recited in the house,
and on different occasions, religious meetings about Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
should be held  
    
 9. Gifts should be offered on occasions of joy  
    
 10. One should constantly be mentioning words praising Allah, such as
(la ilaha illallah-there is no god but Allah), (la hawla wela quwwata
illabillah-there is no power save in Allah), (alhamdu lillah-praise be
to Allah), (astaghfirullah-I ask Allah to forgive me), (aamantu billah-I
have believed in Allah), (tawakkaltu alallah-I have relied on Allah),
(ya Allah- O Allah), (ya raheem- O Merciful), (ya haleem- O Clement),
(ya ghafoor- O Forgiver), etc.  
    
 What may prevent family quarrels is if children heed the following
points in regards to their parents:  
    
 1. They should respect their parents and not raise their voices before
them.  
    
 2. They should acknowledge the fact that their parents do not wish
anything for them save goodness and success.  
    
 3. They should be patient with their parents whenever the parents
unintentionally make a mistake, especially since we know that because of
the pressures of life, parents may sometimes do unwelcome things towards
their children but they definitely do not intend to harm them.  
    
 4. They should provide their parents with financial assistance before
they declare their need, and then they should not remind them of that as
a favor to them.  
    
 5. They should not ask their parents for what they cannot provide,
especially when it comes to buying some things.  
    
 6. They should greet them courteously and always ask about their
health.  
    
 7. They should try their best to treat them when they are ill.  
    
 8. They should provide them with all of what they need in the house.  
    
 As for the behaviors of parents towards their children, they are as
follows:  
    
 1. They should care a great deal for the religious education and modern
scientific learning of their children.  
    
 2. They should praise their children in the presence of others.  
    
 3. They should satisfy all their needs as much as they possibly can.  
    
 4. They should treat them with love, kindness, mercy, and smiles.  
    
 5. They should be friends with them.  
    
 6. They should not beat them except when it becomes necessary in order
to educate them.  
    
 7. They should not insult them in the presence of others.  
    
 8. They should give them some pocket money.  
    
 9. They should buy them good books and encourage them to read more and
more.  
    
 10. They should watch their relations with others.  
    
 11. They should teach them Islamic teachings and the true beliefs.  
    
 12. They should accompany them to picnics and travel with them if it is
possible.  
    
 13. They should encourage them to learn swimming, archery, and
handicrafts.  
    
 14. They should marry them to suitable spouses at the suitable time.  
  

Question no. 139: My wife and I love each other but we often quarrel and we do not know how to solve our problem.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** We are quarrelsome spouses. We love each other, but we do
not know why we quarrel, and over very trivial things too. After that,
we sit crying and then come to an agreement with each other. After
sometime, we return to another quarrel. Our marital life is ridiculous,
is it not? Sometimes I think of divorce, but then I regret and ask Allah
to forgive me. I am confused, my wife is confused, and so are our
children.  
    
**The answer:** The most important factor in solving marital problems is
for the spouses themselves to be determined to solve their problems.
Without their intention and determination, they will not arrive at any
solution at all. As for divorce, it is not the first nor is it the
second solution, but it is the last of the last of solutions. Statistics
have proven that those who hurry towards divorce, even in their new
marriages their problems remain with them. You should be certain that
unstudied divorce is not a suitable solution; rather, it will be a cause
for bigger problems.  
    
 The best solution lies in following these instructions:  
    
 1. One should be quiet and have calm nerves. This is done by turning to
Allah and remembering that man will be afflicted with the wrath of Allah
if he submits to his fancy and desires. One should go to religious
centers, talk with religious scholars and ethicists, and call to mind
the horrible terrors of the afterlife. These things will have a great
effect on man in encouraging him to find a suitable solution and carry
it out.  
    
 2. One should be fair in disagreements. This is an important factor
that leads to a solution. Both disagreeing sides have to pay close
attention to this moral value that will lead them to the truth.  
    
 3. One should have an actual understanding of things; this means that
spouses should know that life is not free from problems, disagreements,
and differences of taste. Therefore, each one has to ignore the wrong
the other side has done to him.  
    
 4. Disagreement in itself does not cause problems; rather, it is made
by the methods each of the disagreeing sides takes in dealing with the
disagreement. Hence, good and reasonable methods should be taken
whenever there is a disagreement.  
    
 5. Let us learn how to listen to whoever disagrees with us! This
principle helps the disagreeing spouses reduce the intensity of their
disagreements, and they may, after that, discover that they have
disagreed over a trivial thing.  
    
 6. Whenever we discover our fault and become certain that the other
side is right, we must accept the truth and apologize and then discuss
the details little by little.  
    
 7. Whatever the disagreement, alienation, and separation, spouses must
not give up the joint duties and responsibilities that keep the family
sound and safe, especially not those concerning their children. The
experiences of quarrelsome spouses, who adhered to their joint
responsibilities in spite of their disagreements, have proven that they,
after a short time, agreed with each other and picked the sweet fruits
of happiness and felicity.  
    
 8. Spouses should take sufficient time for thinking, for this helps to
solve problems. Each one of the disagreeing spouses should sit
privately, reviewing himself to discover his own mistakes and
determining to repair his faults.  
    
 9. Spouses should not keep problems in mind except when trying to find
a solution for it.  
    
 10. They should try to limit the problems and not relate these problems
to previous ones, because limiting the problems helps to find easy
solutions and achieve a happy marital life. Let us always remember that
willpower and determination are the keys to these solutions and
instructions. And on Allah let the believers rely!  
  

Question no. 140: My wife does not visit friends and family because she wants to take presents but they are beyond my means; what do you suggest?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question:** My wife does not visit our relatives or my friends’ wives,
because she dislikes visiting them without taking presents with her to
give them. Unfortunately, the presents she thinks of are not cheap, and
my financial state does not allow me to buy such presents. What would
you suggest?  
    
**The answer:** This kind of thinking results from the influence of
worldly cultures, which have prevailed over the life of people and made
them forget their religious culture. The worldly life always exhausts
people, separates them from each other, and deprives them of their
happiness and joy. It was so and is still so, but people still do not
take lessons.  
    
 Islam has emphasized the necessity of interconnection with relatives
and good friends. As for presents, they are recommendable because they
deepen the interrelations and bring the hearts closer to each other.
However, it is not right to give up necessities and social obligations
just for luxuries.  
    
 It is not necessary for a present to be materially expensive, because a
present has its moral meaning. A brave one, who will get a great reward
from Allah, is he who breaks the idol of ignorance resting inside the
souls and tries with high confidence to derive a good principle by
giving a greater moral value to a present than its material value. A
visit with smiles and nice words and some chocolates for the children is
much better near Allah than a visit with carrying presents that
overburden the backs, exhaust the selves, and empty the pockets! Rather
it will have no reward from Allah because the gift was bought just for
pride and showing off.  
    
 In a word, our society is in terrible need of a moral and cultural
revolution to overturn many thoughts, one of which is “either to go with
expensive presents or give up interrelations and mutual visits
completely.”

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71 p.250.

[^2]: Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.12 p.84.

[^3]: Holy Qur’an, 29:69.

[^4]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.123, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.103 p.351.

[^5]: Holy Qur’an, 35:6.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103 p.237.

[^7]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.4 p.279.

[^8]: Holy Qur’an, 4:4.

[^9]: Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.15 p.11.

[^10]: Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.15 p.11.

[^11]: Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.15 p.11.

[^12]: Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.15 p.11.

[^13]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.49.

[^14]: Holy Qur’an, 4:1.

[^15]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.1 p.74.

[^16]: Holy Qur’an, 46:15-16.

[^17]: Al-Hikam az-Zahira, p.265.

[^18]: Holy Qur’an, 65:2.

[^19]: Holy Qur’an, 7:96.

[^20]: Refer to a story about this verse under the title (This is the
true gold) in our book Qissas wa Khawatir (stories and ideas).

[^21]: Holy Qur’an, 25:63.

[^22]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.3 p.240.

[^23]: Holy Qur’an, 3:159.

[^24]: Holy Qur’an, 4:34.

[^25]: Husayniyyah is a place like the mosque where certain ceremonies
are held on the anniversary of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (s) and on
other religious occasions.

[^26]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.4 p.275-276.

[^27]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.4 p.275-276.

[^28]: Kitab al-Mawa’idh, p.27.

[^29]: Furoo’ al-Kafi, vol.5 p.334.

[^30]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.16 p.287.

[^31]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p.364.

[^32]: Nahjol Balagha, p.153.

[^33]: Holy Qur’an, 41:34.

[^34]: Holy Qur’an, 33:32-33.

[^35]: Holy Qur’an, 17:53.

[^36]: Holy Qur’an, 31:19.

[^37]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.8 p.439.

[^38]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.8 p.443.

[^39]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.8 p.443.

[^40]: Holy Qur’an, 5:2.

[^41]: Holy Qur’an, 34:24.

[^42]: Al-Hadith, vol.3 p.142.

[^43]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 6 p.359.

[^44]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.5 p.554.

[^45]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2 p.80.

[^46]: Nahjol Balagha, short maxims, 474.

[^47]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 6 p.364

[^48]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 6 p.364

[^49]: As in Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23 p.345, Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p.426.

[^50]: Ghurar al-Hikam, 666.

[^51]: Ghurar al-Hikam, 686.

[^52]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2 p.269.

[^53]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 11 p.242.

[^54]: Al-Hikam al-Dhahira, p.302.

[^55]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.5 p.338.

[^56]: Nahjol Fasaha, p.72 trad.377.

[^57]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75 p.4.

[^58]: Al-Hikam az-Zahira an an-Nabiy wa Itratihi at-Tahira, p.212.

[^59]: Iqama is a certain wording recited at the beginning of prayers.

[^60]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 5 p.9.

[^61]: Nahjol Balagha, his letter to his son Imam al-Hasan (s)

[^62]: A politico-religious movement in early Islam.

[^63]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 15 p.196.

[^64]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.123

[^65]: Holy Qur’an, 24:30-31.

[^66]: Rawdhat al-Muttaqeen, vol.8 p.245, the tradition is narrated from
the Prophet (s).

[^67]: Da’a’im al-Islam, vol.2 p.220.

[^68]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.5 p.568.

[^69]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.201.

[^70]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.206.

[^71]: Sunan of Ibn Maja, vol.1 p.603.

[^72]: Rawdhatul Muttaqeen, vol.14 p.214.

[^73]: Urwatul Wuthqa, chap. Awliya’ al-Aqd.

[^74]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.10 p.57.

[^75]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.10 p.57.

[^76]: Holy Qur’an, 26:88-89.

[^77]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.216

[^78]: Holy Qur’an, 57:23.

[^79]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.2 p.305.

[^80]: Al-Amali by as-Sadooq, the first tradition.

[^81]: Holy Qur’an, 4:24.

[^82]: Holy Qur’an, 4:25.

[^83]: Holy Qur’an, 4:27-28.

[^84]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.16 p.521

[^85]: Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan, vol.3 p.32.

[^86]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.16 p.523.

[^87]: Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan, vol.3 p.32.

[^88]: Holy Qur’an, 43:22.

[^89]: Islam is the way of Happiness and Peace, by Sheikh Muhammad
al-Khalisi, p.186-188

[^90]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.5 p.449.

[^91]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103 p.305.

[^92]: Ghusl is ritual ablution required after making love or having a
wet dream.

[^93]: Safeenat al-Najat, chap. MATA’A.

[^94]: Usul al-Kafi, vol.5 p.45, Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.14 p.449.

[^95]: Mustadrak wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.2 p.545.

[^96]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.83.

[^97]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.16 p.344.

[^98]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.74.

[^99]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.94.

[^100]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 4 p.291.

[^101]: Nahjol Balagha, short maxims.

[^102]: Wassa'il ash-Shia, vol. 14 p.110.

[^103]: Jami’ al-Akhbar, p.285.

[^104]: Holy Qur’an, 46:15.

[^105]: Holy Qur’an, 71:10-12.

[^106]: Jami’ al-Akhbar, p.281.

[^107]: Mujahid is the one who fights for the sake of Allah.

[^108]: Holy Qur’an, 55:60.

[^109]: In my every travel to Denmark, I would bring with me some
Islamic books and present them to her as gifts through her faithful
husband.

[^110]: Sharh Ghurar al-Hikam, vol.2 p. 584.

[^111]: Mujtahid is a person accepted in Shiism as an authority on the
interpretation of Islamic law

[^112]: Taqlid is the imitating of a religious authority in practicing
the obligations and verdicts of religion.

[^113]: Jami’ al-Akhbar, p.426.

[^114]: Jami’ al-Akhbar, p.461.

[^115]: Holy Qur’an, 11:88.

[^116]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70 p.284.

[^117]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 10 p.619.

[^118]: Ibid.,p.632, quoted from Kanzol Ummal, vol.10 p.619.

[^119]: Holy Qur’an, 5:27.

[^120]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70 p.286.

[^121]: Ijtihad is the ability of deriving legal verdicts from religious
texts.

[^122]: Hawza is a theological college, where students can specialize in
Islamic law, philosophy, theology, and logic

[^123]: He is Sheikh Dr. Abdurraheem Bekhshayishi.

[^124]: Khurdad is the third month in the Iranian calendar.

[^125]: Holy Qur’an, 2:102.

[^126]: Some jurisprudents say that learning magic and teaching it for
the sake of resisting it is possible, but they emphasize that those who
learn magic must be pious so that their piety will prevent them from
using magic for other purposes.

[^127]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 4 p.408.

[^128]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol. 4 p.408.

[^129]: Holy Qur’an, 10:81- 82.

[^130]: Jami’ al-Akhbar, p.285.


