Higher Education and Social and Moral Development
=================================================

In HEIs the development of social and moral responsibility through the
transmission of values has been seen as problematical since the
certainties of religious doctrine have diminished since the nineteenth
century. Sandolow (1991) states that ‘contemporary notions of morality
are likely to regard it as a human construct’, suggesting that the
current debate focuses not so much on absolutes about what is moral or
not, but on how we deal with questions about what has been constructed.

With little consensus about what is morality, educationalists are left
with the unenviable task of supporting the development of social and
moral responsibility without a certain framework on which to base this
process. However, some believe that the role of HEIs in this process has
become central because of that very uncertainty. Sandolow (1991) argues
that as both large influential conglomerates and as centres of
education, HEIs have a role in supporting moral development. Sandolow
adopts Feinberg’s (1968) view that collective social responsibility is
the concern of large institutions and that while their primary purpose
may not be to pursue social justice, it is still part of their role. In
addition, the view that HEIs should be concerned with moral issues
persists, implying that students need to be viewed as members of a
community and not just as customers.

Wilcox and Ebbs (1992) echo this view, stating that, as HEIs are a
source of knowledge they are also powerful and capable of influencing
social and economic life. Harkavy (2006), however, suggests that often
the rhetoric of HEIs does not match outcomes. While HEIs may support the
promotion of citizenship values and practices, the commercialisation of
higher education ‘powerfully legitimises and reinforces the pursuit of
economic self-interest by students’ (Harkavy, 2006:14). This begs the
question as to whether higher education has moved in purpose from the
ethical, social and character development that was evident in the past,
to a focus on discipline-led training for specific employment purposes
(Holland, 1991). This implies that students may have ‘utilitarian’
purposes for entering higher education, focusing on achieving
qualifications for a career, rather than a broader educational
experience (Jones and Thomas, 2005). This is confirmed by Kuh (2005)
cited in Hersch and Schneider (2005), who reported that in the previous
decade there was a significant decrease in the number of students who
had reported developments in their values and ethics during their time
in higher education. In addition, Cleaver et al (2005) found that
schools encountered significant difficulties in involving pupils in
decision-making, which resonates with the experience of HEIs.

In consumer –driven market economies, in which, the distribution of
wealth, power and status dominate, it is difficult to see where the
notion of individual moral responsibility may lie. Sandolow (1991)
argues this point and suggests that HEIs are critiqued from both
conservative and liberal standpoints for neither teaching the ethics of
individual moral responsibility or a commitment to improving society
through social change. Carr (1999) proposes that there are two questions
involved: the ‘proper direction’ of moral education, and whether what
happens in our educational institutions can improve public behaviour.
The problem is when moral education

focuses only on issues of social order and the inculcation of desirable
social habits. Although this is generally seen as part of the moral
educational process, it is problematical to consider an education that
goes beyond this and tackling issues of ‘absolute and universal moral
significance.’(p26). Carr warns we must be careful not to confuse ‘moral
education and social engineering’, because although the latter may be
positively affected by success in the former, they are not the same
thing.

Hersch and Schneider (2005) argue that despite the difficulties, this is
not an issue HEIs can duck. Moral messages are part of what takes place
in HEIs and, as they cannot be ignored, these messages must not be left
to chance (Colby et al.,2003). Hersch and Schneider (2005) suggest that
concerns about imposing moral values on students and the fragmentation
of ethical certainties may suggest that others’ social and moral
responsibility is ‘none of our business’. However, the authors discount
this view on the basis that whether formally planned or not, being part
of a higher education community will convey moral values and influence
the development of students’ social and moral responsibility. If this is
the case, then HEIs need to consider the ways in which that influence is
best expressed.

Wilcox and Ebbs (1992) promote the view that it is important to analyse
the ethics of the ethos of the whole institution, in terms of culture,
customs and practices across the institutional structures. The key issue
is the impact of this ethos on the quality of life. As such,

‘Responsibility for individual and social welfare is part of the
institutional landscape, a daily occurrence manifested in decision
making on all levels of the college or university and in the goals
toward which the decision making is directed.’ (p1)

The quality of the ethical environment is significant to students’
overall experience of higher education and the ways in which they
negotiate ethical issues and their own experiences.


