The Concept of Morality
=======================

There is no doubt that the concept of morality is disputed, but Wilson
(1990) reminds us that there is a difference between words and concepts.
While ‘moral’ may mean different things in different contexts, the
concept of morality is common. Hersch et al (1980) state that morality
has three elements : caring (involving social motivation and social
knowledge); judging (making judgements about competing moral issues in
relation to a consistent moral principle); acting (an action not being
moral or immoral in itself but dependent on the caring and judging it is
based on).

However, defining morality is complex and Wilson draws on Plato and
Aristotle’s deliberations to suggest that ‘the central use of ‘moral’
refers to a certain set of underlying dispositions, to the basic
ecology….of human desires, emotions and deeds.’ (p82) Wilson goes on to
argue that morality is not something we can accept or reject as
suggested by Warnock (1971) because it underpins all human activities,
even those concerned with non-moral issues.

Eshelman (2004) states than any theory of moral responsibility should
discuss the concept of moral responsibility; the criteria for being a
moral agent; the conditions under which moral responsibility is properly
applied (where an agent has acted with free will and is able to make
choices) and ‘objects of responsibility ascriptions’ (those things that
we can ascribe moral responsibility to such as actions or non-actions).

A key part of this discussion is how morality can be determined.
Concerns about determining the moral virtues have given way to focusing
on trying to determine what is moral behaviour and what is not and
criteria or principles for determining what is right and what is wrong.
These questions have a different significance since the hegemony of the
church in determining absolute moral values gave way to more
individualistic and subjective views of values during the Reformation
(Carr, 1999). Subsequent theories of morality focus more on the role of
moral reasoning in achieving human goals rather than any absolute
concept of moral values.

As such, normative ethical theories emerged, dealing with efforts to
determine how right and wrong can be classified and translated into
rules for human conduct. Consequentialist theories hold that it is the
consequences of an action that determine its morality, not the character
of the action itself. So the morality of an action is determined
retrospectively, based on the outcomes of the action, and a morally
positive action is one that produces good consequences (Eshelmen,
2004).  Utilitarians such as Bentham and Mills saw morality in
consequential terms by suggesting morally good acts were those that
brought the greatest good to the greatest number, with no other criteria
for judging the worth of moral values than this.

Deontological theories focus on the morality of an action as inherent in
the act itself and not in the outcomes of that act. Locke’s theory that
humans have inalienable natural rights, which determine codes of social
behaviour exemplifies this. Locke argued that breaches of these
inalienable rights would be classified as ‘wrong’ and upholding these
rights would be classified as ‘right’, regardless of outcome. Kant also
focused on the morality of action themselves rather than outcomes,
arguing that moral acts

are what any rational being could envisage as being universal moral
laws, following on from Hobbe’s assertion that moral behaviour is that
which unbiased others would agree was moral. Kant suggested that the
test for the morality of an action was the categorical imperative i.e.
that any such action could become a universal moral law. If this should
not be the case, then the action would not be seen as moral.

The issue that arises from both these theoretical bases is the
implication that a value judgement about what is ‘right’ and what is
‘wrong’ or what is a ‘good’ outcome or a ‘bad’ outcome has to be made.
This begs the question as to whether all assumptions of morality are
subjective and relative. Ayer (1948) argues that there is no ‘truth
value’ to moral statements as they merely reflect the individuals’ moral
beliefs and are entirely subjective. He suggested that moral discussion
focuses on the advisability of accepting or rejecting an action or
viewpoint but ‘discredits the logical authority of moral statements
because the criteria for logical verification cannot be established.’
(McPhail, 1982:21).  If we, then, reject the existence of universal
moral laws, then are all moral standpoints individually or socially
determined within specific cultural contexts? If this is the case, then
the promotion of morality through education could be viewed as part of
the socialisation of an individual into a group (community) by
inculcating a particular culturally determined view or perspective of
what morality is. Is morality therefore nothing more than a collection
of cultural norms to be passed on to new citizens-in-the making? And as
such, is moral education merely a process by which these cultural norms
are passed on to citizens-to-be to ensure their social compliance?
McPhail (1982) argues that morality can stand beyond the social norms
and therefore include both inculcation into these norms and evaluation
and criticism of these. However, this discussion brings us back to the
basic question of why we should be moral in terms of concern for others
and their needs, and whether incentives to morality are intrinsic or
relate to personal gratification or gain.

Determining what is moral is one significant aspect of the debate, but
another rests on the notion of whether individuals can be moral. The
concept of moral responsibility rests on the idea that individuals can
be held responsible for their actions and therefore be judged as to the
morality of these. This presupposes that individuals are free to make
choices about their actions. One of the problematical issues in
discussing moral responsibility is the extent to which this is the case.
Can we really be held morally responsible for our actions? The notion of
being responsible or being held responsible implies that the individual
can make choices and decisions unencumbered and without duress, in fact,
by exercising free will.

The extent to which free will actually exists has occupied philosophers
from ancient Greece onwards. The concept of free will was acknowledged
in early Greek texts in terms of ascribing praise or blame to actions
and acknowledging that some actions were free of praise or blame
(excused) because they were coerced, as the agent’s freedom to choose
had been compromised (Eshelmen, 2004). Aristotle theorised that moral
responsibility can be judged in individuals who are moral agents and who
are able to act voluntarily. Moral agents are those who have the
capacity to

make deliberate decisions about their actions, based on their concept of
what is ‘good’. Voluntary action implies that the agent chooses to act
and is aware of their actions. Eshelman (2004) suggests an ambiguity in
Aristotle’s theory, based on the appropriateness of judging others
behaviour as moral. He argues that this ambiguity centres round whether
Aristotle’s view of moral responsibility is merit-based (praise or blame
given because the agent deserves this) or consequentialist (praise or
blame given because it may bring about improvements in the agent’s
behaviour or character). However, the key theme is the extent to which
free will exists and whether the presence or absence of free will
determines the ability to act morally.

Hard determinists argue that free will is impossible in a world where
events and actions are causally determined by a chain of prior
occurrences, bringing into question the ability of individuals to make
rational and free choices about their actions. Without free will, the
individual cannot be held morally responsible for actions that are
pre-determined and outside that individual’s control. The debate about
whether the concepts of free will and determinism can be held
simultaneously has dominated discussion about whether humans can be held
responsible for their actions. Compatibilists argue that these two
apparently opposing concepts can be reconciled as behaviour needs to be
determined, rather than random, for the actor to be held responsible for
it. Free will is dependent on choices being deliberately and consciously
made and the existence of choice, in that the actor could have acted
otherwise than they did. The question then arises as to whether free
will does exist. Can individuals really make choices and act freely?
Sartre theorised that freedom of choice and action are the only criteria
for moral behaviour. He argued that there can be no guidance or
prescription for moral behaviour and choices, but that the individual
acts morally if they choose their actions freely. Sartre distinguishes
his views not by emphasising free choice as a central tenet of morality,
but because he considered this was a sufficient criteria. Straughan
(1982) suggests that while a single criteria such as this is
‘undemanding’ in terms of defining morality, Sartre’s focus on the
individual’s own unsupported and undirected responsibility for his
morality leaves a vacuum in determining how we grow into moral agents or
begin to understand morality. However, Straughan also argues that in
fact Sartre’s theory is based in, but ignores, existing social
frameworks that support the development of morality.

Honderich (1988) adopts a deterministic stance but argues that the
compatibilism/incompatibilism argument is not the only way of assessing
the impact of determinism on the concept of free will. He suggests that
moral responsibility depends on our attitudes to others actions, which
involve aesthetic attitudes relating to our withdrawal from repugnant
behaviour and retributive attitudes, which relate to our desire to
disapprove, blame or punish this behaviour. However, we cannot sustain
retributive attitudes if we do not believe others are responsible for
their behaviours. As such, Honderich suggest two models of moral
responsibility. If we are able to make choices and are responsible for
these (voluntariness and origination) then we have free will but this is
incompatible with determinism. If we are

only able to make choices but cannot be responsible for these
(voluntariness only) then we have free will that is compatible with
determinism.

Honderich (1988) argues the significance of consequentialism, suggesting
through his ‘Principle of Humanity’ that morality is associated with
behaviour that helps others out of ‘bad’ lives. Morality is therefore
linked to our actions or omissions in terms of this process as we have
moral responsibility for ‘bad’ lives. Decision-making on whether an
action is moral or not should be based on the consequences of that
action only (Anscombe, 1958). This begs the question of how the morality
of specific actions can be judged in terms of consequences as these may
be different for different individuals, groups or communities affected
by such actions. Raillon (1984) argues that there can be tension between
the individuals’ interests and the interests of the community in
determining the morality of an action, where the outcomes differ for
each. He suggests that individuals will be more concerned with the
outcomes for themselves and those close to them than they will for the
wider community. Downie (1964) also suggested that the extent of moral
responsibility may be determined according to the social roles that
individual adopt within their social context. Social roles may impact on
the individual’s freedom to act from choice. For example, an individual
may choose not to kill another human as part of their freely chosen
moral behaviour, but may kill others in the social role of a combatant
in war.

Strawson (1974) also suggest that social contexts are important for our
understandings of moral responsibility, in terms of the significance of
interpersonal relationships to the extent to which we hold others
morally responsible. Strawson argued that we cannot hold others to be
morally responsible because of their being morally responsible. Our
attitudes to holding others morally responsible are not value free but
dependent on our subjective views of what that person’s behaviour means
in terms of their attitudes to us- our reactions to whether this
behaviour indicated good will or otherwise towards us. Strawson
described this response as a participant reactive attitude. However,
this attitude can be suspended and a more objective stance taken if we
do not believe that the other is fully part of the social and moral
community (such as young children, mentally ill people). Strawson argues
that judgements about moral responsibility are dependent on the reactive
attitude to the others behaviour, rather than on our belief that the
other is morally responsible. However, Wilson (1990) suggests that
Strawson makes too much of the link between morality and action,
although the distinction between individual and social moral needs is
relevant.

Eshelman (2004) suggests that the most recent views on morality focus on
responsibility as attributability and responsibility as accountability.
Attributability is related to the notion of self and accountability to
the concept of moral responsibility in a social context so that
behaviour is ‘governed by an interpersonal normative standard of conduct
that creates expectations between members of a shared community.’ Within
this concept, holding someone responsible is essentially a social act,
based on belonging to a shared moral community. Moral responsibility can
be seen in this context as the extent to which individuals support or
undermine the

well-being of the community, suggesting that morality is indeed a
culturally-determined set of norms and conformity to these is moral
behaviour. This view is contested on the basis that we must not equate
social conformity with morality, because one of the key aspects of
developing morality is the development of moral reasoning.

These debates reflect the uncertainties about how moral and social
responsibility can be conceptualised and promoted within modern
societies. Adrift from moral certainties and wary of merely promoting
dominant cultural norms, the role of moral reasoning and the ability to
rationally choose between moral values is forefronted, but leaves us
with a concern that such choices may lack a coherent value-base or
‘morality’. The debate leaves us with the question as to how we promote
moral and social responsibility in young people as part of their
learning in higher education in ways that promote moral reasoning but
also develop values and ethical stances that go beyond, and can contest,
the social norms of the times.


