Educating for Social and Moral Responsibility
=============================================

As such, key questions in terms of developing social and moral
responsibility in educational settings remain problematical. Is there a
difference between moral education and social engineering to improve
public behaviour? How can we resolve issues about the fluid and
contextual notion of moral values? And are we truly able to be held
morally responsible for our actions in a deterministic world? Hersch et
al (1980:14) suggest that the purpose of moral education in the
nineteenth century was to promote a ‘narrow form of socialization’.
However, in the twentieth century this narrowness was challenged by
philosophers such as Dewey (1909;1938) who argued that morality was a
dynamic not static concept, linked to the changing values of modern
democracies. Dewey believed that moral education needed to be rooted in
the development of reasoning, not in training children to be dutiful to
fixed moral rules. As such, Dewey’s arguments suggest that moral
education and education per se are the same thing as they both involve
the use of reason to resolve issues.

However, liberal educationalists such as Dewey were challenged in their
belief that learning the ability to rationally reflect on values was
sufficient to develop moral responsibility. According to Carr (1999)
liberal educationalists in a secular world sought to promote ‘rational
moral autonomy’ to prepare individuals’ for their role in an
individualistic market economy and to maximise the chances of positive
life choices. This notion of morality is rooted in concepts of
individual rights and reciprocal relationships between individuals
rather than the absolute moral values of previous times. Jonathan (1999)
suggests that liberal moral education supports the development of
individuals as moral agents who are equipped to reflect on the range of
values they encounter and make considered moral judgements about these.
Kohlberg (1981) supports this approach through his theory of moral
development. Theorising that moral development is achieved through
stages in progress towards increasingly sophisticated moral reasoning
signifies that such moral reasoning is the ‘central feature of morality
and moral education.’ (Straughan 1982:19).

Wilson (1990) argues that moral relativism does not make all values and
beliefs arbitrary. He suggests that the answer to problems of relativity
in moral thinking should be answered by closer focus on the processes of
thinking about and rationalising moral issues. However, Carr (1999)
concludes that liberal moral education, with its tolerance of a wide
range of moral perspectives, excluding those which infringed on
individual rights, failed to establish or explore ‘which human goals are
worthier of pursuit than others.’ (p38). Straughan (1982) suggests that
the determining the content of moral education is problematical because
nothing can be categorically determined as morally right and that moral
agents need to be able to make rational judgements and choices to be
moral. However, he also argues that whereas following the dictates of an
external moral authority has no value as a basis for moral development,
developing a rational conscience, in which the moral authority is
internalised, has.

Jonathan (1999) also states that the development of critical reasoning
is not sufficient in moral education as it does not in itself provide
the

framework upon which to develop and structure moral values. However,
responses to the perceived crisis of moral decline vary. Straughan
(1982) suggested that the perception that a moral vacuum had entered the
classroom, as the declining influence of religion severed society from
moral certainties, was a flawed concept. Straughan argues that the
‘moralistic argument ‘ is untenable as it is not possible to educate for
moral certainties or to teach children ‘to be good’. (1982:9). Straughan
suggests that while educators affect value neutrality and value
clarification to support the development of individual moral reasoning,
in fact values are transmitted through in all educational institutions
through pedagogical choices and practices.

Wilcox and Ebbs (1992) suggest that the learning community is the key
element in supporting the ‘scholar teacher/researcher’ to balance
individual and group needs as they negotiate ‘teaching, discovery,
application and integration.’ The learning community provides coherence
to the experience of members and supports the development of an ethical
basis for the institution as a whole. Learning communities can be
described as:

‘an ideal type of higher education culture that seeks to overcome
current tendencies toward individual alienation and intellectual
fragmentation with regard to present academic specialization and special
interests.’

It is clear that the role of HEIs must go beyond simply supporting the
development of rational thinking in students in value-free ways. The
culture and ethos of the institution needs to promote the development of
social and moral responsibility in more active and committed ways, which
support the student to negotiate the competing demands of self and
others.


