Ethos and Active Learning
=========================

Dewey (1909; 1938) strongly advocated active learning approaches to
moral education arguing that participation and reflection were the keys
to learning moral values. In this way, learning about morality becomes
practicing moral behaviour in a variety of social situations. This view
has implications for education in social and moral responsibility today,
as according to Dewey, this simply cannot be achieved through classroom
teaching, but must be achieved through collective participation in
meaningful activities and institutions, which promote learning through
experience, enquiry and reflection.

‘Even if the teacher introduced concepts like democracy, justice,
respect for others, and human rights, if the classroom and school
structure continued to model and enforce authoritarian social relations,
no effective learning would take place.’ (Hersch et al, 1980:21)

McPhail (1982) suggests that Dewey’s ideas are relevant to pluralist
societies in which moral values and bases may be contested and the
rights of the individual and groups may at time conflict. Sandolow
(1991) also suggests supporting student ‘character development’ through
active learning that develops both student knowledge and their ability
to think rationally, as a way forward from the apparent impasse in HEIs
around moral development.

Farbo (2006) also supports the introduction of engagement pedagogies but
warned that they must not be merely seen as instructional innovation.
HEIs must create the conditions for learning about moral and social
issues through their structures and functions in order for this to be a
meaningful experience. In his review of Dewey’s work Smith (2001)
suggests that educational institutions need to reflect the ideals that
they are supporting in their own structures and functions, by
democratising relationships between students and teachers. Smith also
cites Winch and Gingell (1999) who state that 'if schools exist to
promote democratic values it would appear that they need to remove
authoritarian relationships.' (Smith, 2001). It is difficult to see how
this does not also apply to HEIs. Democratic relationships are only one
aspect of effective learning communities for citizenship; Hersch and
Schneider (2005) suggest that there needs to be a significant and
‘pervasive’ cultural change to ensure that HEIs can educate for moral
responsibility.

Nixon suggests that the way forward is a ‘new Aristotelianism’
(2004:115) informed by both the Socratic idea of negative wisdom and the
moral imperative to take the ‘right action’. Negative wisdom involves
the questioning of false assumptions and therefore involvement in
rational debate, whereas the ‘right action’ implies involvement in
social and community issues and living a ‘good’ life. Combining these
two notions suggest that a ‘good’ life can be lived despite the lack of
moral certainties. Within this notion, learning is associated with
agency and social engagement. Students need to practise social and moral
responsibility through engaging with others in learning about their
world, rather than learn about citizenship issues in theory. Pedagogies
that promote rational debate and reflection need to be promoted in the
context of exploring social and

moral issues in ‘real life’ contexts. In this way learning becomes the
medium for social engagement and participation.


