The Career of the Third Saf’ir, al-Nawabakhti
=============================================

1. Al‑Nawbakhti’s Activities During the Time of the Second Saf’ir
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The third *Saf’ir* was Abu al‑Qasim al‑Husayn b. Ruh b. Abi Bahr
al-Nawbakhti. He remained in the office in the years 305‑326/917‑937,
although the date of his birth is not known. According to Ibn Shahr
Ashub, al‑Nawbakhti was a close associate of the eleventh Imam,
al­‘Askari, and was his Gate *(Bab)*[^1]*,* but it is difficult to
accept such a report because al‑‘Askari died in 260/874 and al‑Nawbakhti
died in 326/937.

There are several reports indicating that al‑Nawbakhti was a native of
the traditional Shiite city of Qumm. Al‑Kashshi and Yahya b. Abi Tayy
(d. 630/1232) called him al‑Qummi[^2].

Moreover al‑Nawbakhti was fluent in the Persian dialect of the people of
Abah, one of the suburbs of Qumm[^3], and this suggests that he belonged
to the branch of Banu Nawbakht resident in Qumm. However, he had
emigrated to Baghdad during the time of the first *Saf’ir.* According to
al‑Tusi, he was brought up in Baghdad under the guardianship of Muhammad
b. ‘Ali Bilal,[^4] who later denied that Abu Ja’far al‑‘Umari was. the
second *Saf’ir* of the Twelfth Imam.

Al‑Nawbakhti joined the service of the second *Saf’ir* and became his
agent *(wakil).* Despite his youth al-Nawbakhti was distinguished by his
shrewdness, particularly in his relations with opponents[^5].

Perhaps it was this quality which enabled him to climb quickly in the
ranks of the organization.

Al‑Nawbakhti spent several years working as an agent for the second
*Saf’ir,* who used to pay him a salary of 30 dinars a month. He also
received financial support from high Shiite officials and viziers like
Banu Furat. The second *Saf’ir* employed him to look after his
properties and made him the connecting link between himself and the
other leaders of the Imamites[^6].

According to al‑Tusi, al‑Nawbakhti was the intermediary between the
second *Saf’ir* and the two agents of Kufa, al‑Zajawzji and Abu Ghalib
al‑Zurari[^7]. His service in the *Wikala* helped him in contacting high
Shi’ite officials of the ‘Abbasid administration, particularly his
relatives Banu Nawbakht and also Banu Furat[^8].

By the year 298/910 he had become highly respected by the people. At
that time an interesting occurrence took place which reveals his
importance. Al‑Saduq narrates that an ‘Alid called al­-’Aqiqi went to
visit the vizier 'Ali b. ‘Isa al‑Jarrah asking him to solve his
financial problems, but the vizier would not listen to him. Therefore
al‑Nawbakhti sent a message to al‑‘Aqiqi and solved his
difficulties[^9].

This narration gives some indication of the social position of
al‑Nawbakhti while he was still an agent of the second *Saf’ir*.

2. The Installation of the Third Saf’ir
---------------------------------------

As we have already seen, (106‑7) the ten eminent agents in Baghdad
expected that Ja’far. b. Ahmad b. Matil would take over the office of
the second *Saf’ir* when he died. But on his death bed, when the agents
were all gathered together, he appointed Ibn Ruh al‑Nawbakhti, saying
that the Twelfth Imam had ordered him to do so[^10].

At that time the Imamites put forward different reasons for the
designation of Ibn Ruh al‑Nawbakhti. Umm Kulthum, the daughter of the
second *Saf’ir* , thought that Ibn Ruh was promoted to the office of the
deputyship (*sifara*) because of his close relationship with her father.
She reports that her father even used to reveal to him what had occurred
between himself and his slave‑girls[^11].

However, according to the agent Ibn Qurd, the other nine agents in
Baghdad, especially Ibn Matil, were closer to the second *Saf’ir* than
Ibn Ruh[^12].

It seems most likely that Ibn Ruh had personal qualifications which made
him a suitable *Saf’ir*. Indeed we have a report attributed to Abu Sahl
al­ Nawbakhti to support this point. The latter was asked by some
Imamites as to why he had not been promoted to the *sifara* instead of
Ibn Ruh. He answered,

*"They (the Imams) know best about whom they have selected for this
office. I am a person who meets opponents and argues with them. If I had
known what Abu al‑Qasim (Ibn Ruh) knows about the Imam, perhaps in the
course of my arguments, having found myself under the attack of enemies
to give them well­founded reasons for the existence of the concealed
Imam, I would have pointed out his whereabouts.*

*But if Abu al‑Qasim had the Imam underneath his garments, and if his
flesh was being cut into pieces to make him reveal his whereabouts, he
would not yield or reveal his presence to his foes."* [^13]

This document indicates that Ibn Ruh was promoted to the *sifara* mainly
because of his loyalty and the shrewdness which he had shown on several
occasions. Therefore we cannot accept the opinion of Sachedina, who
thinks that the appointment of Ibn Ruh as *Saf’ir* to the Twelfth Imam,
"must have been influenced by another eminent member of the Nawbakht
family, namely Abu Sahl Isma’il b. ‘Ali.

He was one of those leading Imamites, who were present in the last days
of the second agent to bear witness to the designation of Abu al­-Qasim
as the agent."[^14]

In fact, there are also many points to encourage us to disagree with
Sachedina's opinion.

***First***, the installation of all the twelve Imams in the office of
the Imamate from Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib until the time of the Twelfth
Imam, had been carried out neither by the interference of their
followers nor by election. As has been demonstrated repeatedly
throughout this work the fact is that the promotion of each new Imam
occurred according to the personal stipulation (*al­ Ta yin bi‑l‑Nass*)
of the preceding Imam in his last will.

Moreover the installation of the first and second *Saf’irs* had followed
the same method. They were promoted to the office of the *Wikala* by the
order of the Imam and there is no evidence to prove that Ibn Ruh was not
similarly appointed.

***Second***, none of the ten eminent agents, who were present at that
meeting, expected to participate by election, nomination or other means
in the appointment of Abu Ja’far's successor. On the contrary, they
attended the meeting so as to know who would be stipulated as the third
*Saf’ir* by the order of the Imam himself.

***Third,*** the second *Saf’ir* had ordered his personal servant,
Dhaka, that in the case of his death, he should hand his staff and the
treasure chest over to Ibn Ruh[^15].

***Fourth,*** if we take into consideration the fact that the rest of
the ten agents recognised the promotion of Ibn Ruh, especially Ibn
Matil, who was expected to be the third *Saf’ir*[^16], and the fact that
al‑Shalmaghani, even after his own aspiration to the office of the
*Sifara* recognised Ibn Ruh as the *Saf’ir*[^17], it is clear that Ibn
Ruh must in fact have been appointed by the Imam himself and neither Abu
Sahl al‑Nawbakhti nor his family did influence the Imam's decision.

3. The Activities of Ibn Ruh al‑Nawbakhti
-----------------------------------------

According to al‑Dhahabi, after the death of the second *Saf’ir* in
305/917, his successor Ibn Ruh went to the headquarters (*Dar
al­-Niyaba) of* the organization, where he met the eminent Imamites such
as the servant of the second *Saf’ir*, Dhaka. The latter prepared the
things which his master had entrusted to him, that is, the staff and the
treasure chest containing the seals of the Imams, and handed them over
to Ibn Ruh as he had been instructed.

Thereafter Ibn Ruh together with the other agents went to the house of
Muhammad b. ‘Ali al‑Shalmaghani[^18], his close associate who later
became his rival.

From the very beginning, Ibn Ruh proved his ability to lead the
organization successfully. His shrewdness enabled him to avoid the
consequences of participation in the sectarian discussions which took
place at the palace of Ibn Yasar, one of the high officials of
al­Muqtadir, the caliph. He used to attend those discussions only as a
listener.

According to al‑Tusi, Ibn Ruh was so cautious that he even discharged
his servant because he had cursed Mu'awiya[^19]. Perhaps he took this
step to avoid the danger posed by the vizier, Hamid b. al­‘Abbas
(306‑311/918‑923), who was well‑known for his hatred of Shiites
generally[^20].

There is evidence that the ten agents of the second *Saf’ir* continued
their activities under al‑Nawbakhti. Among these agents were Ja’far b.
Ahmad b. Matil, Abu Abd Allah al‑Katib, al‑Hasan al‑Wajna’, Muhammad b.
Humam,’Isma’il b. Ishaq al‑Nawbakhti, Ahmad b. Matil, Muhammad al‑Aswad,
and al‑Madd'im. Two other names also appear in the lists of the agents
in Baghdad: al‑Shalmaghani and Ahmad b. Ibrahim al‑Nawbakhti.  
 The latter was a narrator of traditions and the husband of Umm Kulthum,
the daughter of the second *Saf’ir*, and Ibn Ruh employed him as his
personal secretary. The former was appointed as an agent by Ibn Ruh
after he had become the *Saf’ir*[^21].

Through his ten agents in Baghdad Ibn Ruh directed the activities of the
Imamite agents and their underground political cells in the other
provinces. He sent his first letter of instructions to the agent of
al‑Ahwaz, Muhammad b. Nafis, on 5th Shawwal 305/23rd November 917, in
which he confirmed him in his office[^22].

He appointed his agent al‑Shalmaghani to supervise the underground
Imamite cells among the people of Band Bistam in Baghdad[^23] and made
him the mediator between himself and the agents of Kufa, Abu Ja’far
al‑Zajawzji and Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Sulayman al­-Zurari[^24].
Al‑Shalmaghani continued his supervision of the agents of Kufa and
Baghdad until the year 312/923, when Ibn Ruh discharged him from his
office and excommunicated him after he had taught the incarnation of God
inhuman form[^25].

According to al‑Tusi, Abu ‘Abd Allah al‑Hasan al‑Wajna’, one of the ten
agents in Baghdad, practised his activities in Nisibin and Mosul. In
307/919 he met a certain individual called Muhammad b. al‑Fadl
al‑Mawsili who denied that Ibn Ruh was the *Saf’ir* of the Twelfth Imam.
He tried to convince him that Ibn Ruh was truly appointed as *Saf’ir* by
the Imam, but al‑Mawsili argued that, if Ibn Ruh was so, he must show
miracles as the first and the second *Saf’irs* did before.

In order to content him, al‑Hasan al‑Wajna’ brought him to Baghdad,
where he saw with his own eyes Ibn Ruh's miracles which prompted him to
recognize him as the rightful *Saf’ir*.[^26]

This report reveals that al‑Hasan al‑Wajna’ was appointed by the third
*Saf’ir* to direct the Imamites' activities in the province of Jazira.
In Wasit, al‑Hasan b. Muhammad b. Qatat al‑Saydalani, the Wakd al‑Waqf
during the time of the second *Saf’ir*, and Ibn Matil, who had worked as
the connecting link between al‑Saydalani and the second *Saf’ir*[^27],
continued their activities during the time of Ibn Ruh[^28].

As has already been noted, some reports reveal that because of the
persecution of the Imamites which had been carried out by the caliphs
al‑Mu'tadid (279‑89/892‑902) and al‑Muktafi (289‑95/902‑8) and their
attempts to arrest the Imam, he changed his place of residence from
Samarra to the Hijaz. This situation naturally led to difficulties as
regards the methods of communication between him and his agents.

Furthermore information concerning the relations between the third
*Saf’ir* and his agents in the other provinces is rare and obscure.
However, there is evidence that the Imam continued to practise his
activities from Mecca. Al‑Tusi relates that a certain Ya qub b. Yusuf
al‑Ghassani saw a group of men from different provinces come to the
house where the Imam lived and correspond with them through an old
serving woman. Some of those men were from Baghdad[^29].

Al‑Saduq reports that the agent al‑Hasan al‑Wajna’ met the Imam at the
same house in 314/926,[^30] which indicates that the residence of the
Imam was in the Hijaz during the time of the third *Saf’ir*. But there
is no available reference to the names of the agents in Mecca and
Medina.

The Imam also had agents in Egypt who recognized the *sifara* of Ibn
Ruh[^31]. According to al‑Tusi, al‑Qasim b. al‑ ‘Ala was still the agent
in Azerbayjan. He directed the Imamite activities through two
assistants, that is Abu Hamid ‘Umran b. al‑Mufallis and Abu ‘Ali b.
Jahdar, and also used to look after the personal domain which the
eleventh Imam, al‑‘Askari, had endowed to the Twelfth Imam.

Correspondence between al‑Qasim b. al‑‘Ala and Ibn Ruh took place
through a messenger who used to come to Azerbayjan. After the death of
al‑Qasim his son al‑Hasan was promoted to the office by the order of the
Imam[^32].

In Iran, Muhammad b. Ja’far al‑Asadi al‑Razi, the agent of Rayy, had
been instructed by the second *Saf’ir* to supervise the activities of
the agents of the other Iranian provinces. He continued this supervision
during the time of the third *Saf’ir*[^33]. But after the death of
al­-Razi in 312/924,33 the method of communication between the agents in
Iran and Ibn Ruh changed from indirect correspondence via al­ Razi to
direct contact between Ibn Ruh and the agents.

Al‑Saduq reports several narratives in support of this point. For
example, ‘Ali b. al‑Husayn b. Babawayh, the leader of the Imamites in
Qumm, made direct contact with the third *Saf’ir* via the agent in
Baghdad, al­-Aswad[^34].

An agent from Balkh, Muhammad b. al‑Hasan al‑Sayrafi, did likewise. He
collected the tax dues (gold and silver) from the Imamites of Balkh and
handed them over to Ibn Ruh in Baghdad, and he continued his direct
contact even during the time of the fourth *Saf’ir*, al‑Sammari[^35].

In the same way al‑Husayn b. 'Ali al‑Qummi received ten gold ingots from
Ibn Jawshir, who asked him to hand them over to Ibn Ruh, so he did
so[^36]. These reports indicate that the position of Ibn Ruh as the
*Saf’ir* of the Twelfth Imam became well­ known amongst the Imamites, in
contrast to that of the first and the second *Saf’irs*, whose office had
been kept secret. For this reason some ordinary Imamites were encouraged
to ignore the agents of their areas and contact the third *Saf’ir*
directly.

Ibn Ruh was highly esteemed by the ‘Abbasid court during the time of the
caliph of al‑Muqtadir (295‑320/907‑932). This can be attributed to the
influence of Ibn Ruh's family, Banu Nawbakht, in the ‘Abbasid
administration, an influence which had begun during the time of the
caliph al‑Mansur (d.158/774) and lasted until the time of al‑Muqtadir.
Ibn Ruh himself participated in the Abbasid administration. According to
al‑Jahshayari, he was at one point in charge of the personal domain of
the caliph (*Diwan al‑Diya al-­Khasya*)[^37].

Therefore we find some agents, such as Abu Ghalib al­-Zurari, paying
respect to Ibn Ruh because of the economic and political influence of
his family[^38]. Abbas Iqbal illustrates Ibn Ruh's influence by
reporting that, during the time of the vizier Hamid b. al­‘Abbas
(306‑311/918‑923), Ibn Ruh's house became the place for the meetings of
administrators, nobles, and deposed viziers, especially Banu Furat[^39].

Most likely Ibn Ruh exercised his influence upon the Shi’ites, who were
working in the administration, encouraging them to employ their brothers
in faith in the 'Abbasid administration and offer financial help to the
needy among the Shiites in general. Certain references indicate that
these instructions were put into action by ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Furat.
According to Ibn Khallikan, he used to support 5,000 people
financially[^40].

When he was a vizier he appointed the agent Abu Sahl al‑Nawbakhti as
governor of the Mubarik district of Wasit and Muhammad b. ‘Ali
al‑Bazawfari as governor of the district of al‑Sulh and al‑Muzara’at in
Wasit[^41]. Simultaneously Muhsin b. al‑Furat apppointed the Baghdad
agent al‑Shalmaghani as deputy to certain governors in other
districts[^42].

Participation in the administration enabled the agents to study the
economic and political situation of the government and facilitated
communications through their administrative positions.

Despite Ibn Ruh's great influence he seems to have been put in a
critical situation by the militant activities of the other Shiites,
particularly the Qaramita. These were used by his rivals as a pretext to
cause his arrest. In 311/923 a caravan of Baghdadi pilgrims, including
some relatives of the caliph al‑Muqtadir, were attacked and captured by
the Qaramita, an act which caused the people of Baghdad to be very
upset.

Since the Qaramita were Shiites,this gave the enemies of the Shiites,
like Nasr al‑Hajib the chamberlain, an excellent weapon against the
vizier Ibn al‑Furat. Nasr claimed that because Ibn al‑Furat was Shiite,
he had encouraged the Qaramita to attack the pilgrims. Moreover, the
masses were provoked to shout in public that Ibn al‑Furat and his son
Muhsin were the "greater Qarmati and the lesser Qarmati". In 312/924, as
a result of these events Ibn al‑Furat and his son were discharged and
then murdered[^43].

Al‑Tusi reports that Ibn Ruh was arrested in 312/924, but does not give
any reason for his imprisonment. Al‑Dhahabi claims that his arrest was
caused by the inflammatory propaganda against the Qaramita. He was
accused of corresponding with the Qaramita in an effort to have them
besiege Baghdad[^44].

According to Ibn ‘Arib, Ibn Ruh was arrested because he failed to hand
over to the government the money which he owed it[^45].  
 This reveals that some officials may have falsely accused Ibn Ruh of
corresponding with the Qaramita in order to facilitate his arrest.. In
any case, Ibn Ruh spent five years in jail until the caliph,
al‑Muqtadir, released him in 317/929.[^46]

Ibn Ruh recovered his previous respect and reputation, renewed his
direct supervision over the Imamite activities, and once again received
money from the Imamites. Many of his relatives, such as Ishaq b.
Isma’ili (d. 322/933), Ali b. al‑ Abbas (d. 324/935) and al-­Husayn b.
Ali b. al‑ Abbas, had managed to maintain high offices in the Abbasid
administration, so his influence increased.

Many influential officials and deposed viziers like 'Ali b. Muqla sought
his acquaintance in order to pave the way for their advancement in the
‘Abbasid administration[^47].

For example, the vizier Ibn Muqla spent 20,000 dinars on estates and
endowed them as *awqaf* for the Talibiyyin in 319/931.[^48] But later he
lost his office and therefore asked Ibn Ruh to help him. Ibn Ruh
contacted his relative al‑Husayn b. 'Ali b. al-’Abbas al‑Nawbakhti, who
was the secretary *(katib)* of *Amir al‑ Umara , I*bn Ra'iq, and asked
him to support Ibn Muqla in his efforts to recover his office, which
were successful in 325/936.[^49]

At the same time that the third *Saf’ir* was wielding his powerful
influence in official circles, he was faced with the serious deviation
of his main deputy, al‑Shalmaghani, who began to make claims outside
Islamic beliefs.

4. The Third Saf’ir and al‑Shalmaghani
--------------------------------------

Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Abi al‑‘Azaqir al‑Shalmaghani, who was brought up in
the village of Shalmaghan situated in the suburbs of Wasit, became one
of the reciters *(qurra) of* the Qur'an in Wasit. Afterwards he moved to
Baghdad where he joined the ‘Abbasid administration, working as
secretary *(katib)*[^50].

He was also an Imamite scholar *(faqih)* and wrote eighteen works
dealing with Shiite law and theology, among which is his book
*al‑Ghayba.* His writings were highly esteemed by the Imamites before
his deviations[^51].

It has been noted that after the promotion of Ibn Ruh to the *sifara,*
he appointed al‑Shalmaghani to direct the activities of the Imamites in
Baghdad, especially those of Banu Bistam, and those of the two agents of
Kufa, al‑Zajawzji and al‑Zurari[^52].

Al‑Shalmaghani continued directing the Imamites' activities in Baghdad
and Kufa for many years. He was well‑known for his impatient political
ambitions, and he may have lost hope of gaining power in the near future
by following the instructions of the Twelfth Imam to the letter.
Therefore he decided to ignore the Twelfth Imam's instructions and
started searching for other groups to achieve his political ambitions.
According to Ibn Hawqal, al‑Shalmaghani paid allegiance to the Isma’ili
Mahdi[^53] .

However, Ibn Hawqal is the only narrator of this occurrence, and he
gives neither the date of al‑Shalmaghani's deviation, nor the reason he
later abandoned his Isma’ili ties. It is most likely that he turned away
from the Isma’ilis to the underground movement of the *Ghulat* because
he found in their belief in the incarnation of God (hulul) in human form
the best means to put his political and economic ambitions into action.

According to al‑Shalmaghani's belief, throughout the course of history
God has been incarnated in human form. In other words, God was
incarnated first in the body of Adam and thereafter transmigrated to the
bodies of the Prophets. After the Prophet Muhammad, He transmigrated to
the bodies of the Imams until the time of the eleventh Imam, and then He
appeared in the body of al-Shalmaghani himself. Simultaneously Allah had
created His foe Iblis, who was also incarnated and who transmigrated
throughout the course of history into a series of wicked human forms.

According to al‑Shalmaghani, Allah's purpose in His incarnation and
trans­migration was to prove His existence and His excellence[^54].

Al‑Shalmaghani did not leave the Imamite organization immediately after
his deviation nor did he announce the incarnation of God in his own
body. Several reports suggest that he used his office as a deputy of the
*Saf’ir,* Ibn Ruh, to train gradually the agents who were below him to
accept his heretical teachings. The agent Muhammad b. Humam reports that
he heard al‑Shalmaghani saying, "The truth (God) is one, but His forms
are several.

One day He takes on a white form, another day a red one, and on another
a blue one." Ibn Humam reports, "This was the first statement which
caused‑me to reject al‑Shalmaghani, because this was the doctrine of the
people of the incarnation of God (*al‑Hululiyya*).[^55]"

According to another report al‑Shalmaghani managed to persuade some
agents together with their families, especially the agents of Banu
Bistam, to accept the doctrine of the incarnation of God and the
transmigration of souls. Afterwards he divulged to them that the soul of
the Prophet had transmigrated into the body of the second *Saf’ir* Abu
Ja’far, the soul of ‘Ali b. Abi Talib had transmigrated into the body of
the third *Saf’ir* Ibn Ruh, and the soul of Fatima, the Prophet's
daughter, had transmigrated into the body of Umm Kulthum, the second
*Saf’ir's* daughter.

At the same time al‑Shalmaghani told the sub‑agents not to divulge this
secret, because it was the true faith[^56].

It appears that Ibn Ruh discovered the deviation of al-Shalmaghani
through a female missionary, Umm Kulthum, who used to supervise the
Imamite activities among the females of Banu Bistam. He ordered her to
stop her relations and her secret meetings with them.

He told her that al‑Shalmaghani had impressed his deviation so deeply on
their hearts that they would even accept it if he were to claim that
Allah Himself had become incarnated in his body; then he would follow in
al‑Hallaj's footsteps and claim that he was Allah[^57].

The precise date of this incident is unknown. However, according to Ibn
al‑Athir the deviation of al‑Shalmaghani began during the early time of
the vizierate of Hamid b. al‑‘Abbas, between the years
306‑311/918‑923.[^58] This is consistent with al‑Tusi's report, which
indicates that the deviation of al‑Shalmaghani must have occurred before
312/924.[^59]

After discovering al‑Shalmaghani's heretical ideas, Ibn Ruh discharged
him from his office and caused knowledge of his heresy to become
widespread, first among the people of Banu Nawbakht and then among
others[^60].Afterwards he ordered the agents to sever their relations
with him.

It seems that the agent of Kufa, Muhammad b. Ahmad al‑Zajawzji followed
this order, because al‑Tusi reports that he considered anyone possessing
the book *al‑Taklif* by al-­Shalmaghani as extremist[^61].

But the agents of Banu Bistam in Baghdad refused Ibn Ruh's order and
continued to receive instructions from al‑Shalmaghani. For this reason
Ibn Ruh disclosed al‑Shalmaghani's situation to all the Imamites and
excommunicated him along with all those who paid attention to him[^62].

Ibn Ruh's announcement reveals that a considerable body of the agents in
Baghdad and the ordinary believers had been influenced by
al‑Shalmaghani. After his excommunication, he began propagating the idea
that he and not Ibn Ruh was the rightful representative *(Saf’ir)* of
the Twelfth Imam[^63].

Through this claim and his belief in the incarnation of Allah in the
bodies of the Prophets and the Imams, al‑Shalmaghani tried to monopolize
the economic and political positions of the organization. Later he even
advanced the claim that Allah was present in his own body," and that
*Iblis* was localized in the human form of the Twelfth Imam, since the
latter was known as *al-Qa’im.*

Here al‑Shalmaghani was claiming that *al-Qa’im* ("the one standing")
meant *Iblis,* who had refused to prostrate himself before Adam when
other angels had done so[^64]."

He also claimed that ‘Ali b. Abi Talib was Allah, and that He had sent
Muhammad to be His Prophet, but that the latter had betrayed Him.
Therefore ‘Ali gave Muhammad a period of truce lasting about 350 years,
at the end of which Islamic law would be changed[^65]. Then the law
would have a new interpretaton, e.g. Paradise would be the acceptance of
al­-Shalmaghani's claim and allegiance to him, while Hell would be the
rejection of his doctrine.

Moreover, he aimed at eliminating the main claimants to the caliphate,
particularly the ‘Alids and the ‘Abbasids, and considered himself the
rightful claimant to all religious and political authority[^66].

The political ambitions of al‑Shalmaghani are obvious in his
materialistic interpretation of the Qur'anic verses concerning Hell and
Paradise to serve his own ambitions. These are especially apparent with
reference to two points. Firstly, he fixed a date for the change of the
Islamic Shari’a; 350/967. By this "prophecy" he was attempting to
mobilise people to support him in his preparation for the "coming age".

Secondly he concentrated his propaganda among the high officials of the
‘Abbasid army and administration and gained a considerable number of
followers, like Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Abdus, Ibrahim b. Abi 'Awn, the
author of the book *al‑Tashbihat,* Ibn Shabib al‑Zayyat, Abu Ja’far b.
Bistam and Abu ‘Ali b. Bistam, all of whom were secretaries *(kuttab)*
of the state[^67].

In 312/924 al‑Muhsin b. al‑Furat, the son of the vizier Ibn al‑Furat,
joined his side and enabled his followers to penetrate the 'Abbasid
administrative circles[^68]. Moreover, al‑Husayn b. al‑Qasim b. ‘Ubayd
Allah b. Wahb, who held the vizierate between the years 319‑20/931­2,
was one of the partisans of al‑Shalmaghani[^69].

It has already been noted that the third *Saf’ir* was imprisoned in
312/924. Al‑Shalmaghani seized this oppportunity to expand his
activities among the Imamites, who had not yet received an answer from
the Imam himself concerning the claims of al‑Shalmaghani. Therefore the
Imam sent via Ibn Ruh this pronouncement concerning his attitude towards
the claims of al‑Shalmaghani:

*... Muhammad b. ‘Ali, known as al‑Shalmaghani, is one of those upon
whom Allah has hastened His judgement and to whom He has granted no
respite. He has deviated from Islam and separated himself from it. He
has become an apostate from the religion of Allah, making claims which
indicate the denial of Allah, the Most Glorious and High, fabricating
lies and falsehoods, and pronouncing untruths and great trans­gressions.
Those who associate another with Allah are in far error and clearly
suffer great loss.*

*For indeed we declare ourselves free (of any relationship with
al‑Shalmaghani) before Allah, may He be exalted, and His messenger and
his family, may the blessings of Allah, His peace, His mercy and His
benediction be upon them according to His benevolence; while we curse
him (i.e. al‑Shalmaghani), may the curses of Allah be showered
successively (upon him) externally and internally, secretly and
publicly, at every time and in every circumstance.*

*And (may the curse of Allah be) upon those who agree with him and
follow him, and also upon those who, having heard our announcement,
continue to pay allegiance to him.*

*So inform them (the Imamite agents) that we shall guard and take
precautions against him, as was the case with those who preceded him and
held similar views, like al‑Shari’i, al-Numayri, al‑Hilali, al‑Bilali
and so forth. For the traditions of Allah are conformable to us. In Him
we place our trust, and from Him we seek assistance. He is sufficient
for us in all our affairs and is the best of Guardians*.[^70]

According to al‑Tusi the agent Muhammad b. Humam received this
pronouncement from Ibn Ruh while he was in prison. He spread it
personally among all the agents in Baghdad and sent it to the agents in
the other cities until it became well‑known among the ordinary
Imamites[^71].

According to Ibn al‑Athir, Ibn Ruh disclosed al‑Shalmaghani's claim even
to the ‘Abbasids. As a result in 313/925 the vizier al-­Khaqani tried to
arrest him[^72], an attempt which brought about the imprisonment of many
people who had inclined towards him[^73].

However he disappeared and escaped to Mosul, where he took refuge from
the ruler Nasir al‑Dawla al‑Hasan b. ‘Abd Allah b. Hamdan. He lived
there in alvillage called Ma althaya in the vicinity of Mosul. However,
he did not break off communication with his followers in Baghdad[^74].

According to al‑Najashi, during his concealment in the village of
Ma'alth'aya, al‑Shalmaghani narrated his books to a certain Abu ‘Abd
Allah al‑Shaybani. He was an Imamite *Muhaddith* who lived in the
Nawbakhtiyya district of Baghdad," but he later turned away from the
Imamite school[^75].

In 316/928 al‑Shaybani returned secretly to Baghdad[^76] in order to be
in direct contact with his followers, whose activities had spread widely
among the officials of the Abbasid administration, a development which
can possibly be regarded as a step toward his objective of obtaining
power.

Al‑Husayn b. al‑Qasim b. ‘Ubayd Allah b. Wahb, the partisan of
al‑Shalmaghani, was promoted to the vizierate in 319/931 and his name
was stamped on the coin beside the name of the caliph al‑Muqtadir[^77].

As a vizier Ibn Wahb enabled his partisans to assume high positions, but
after a year he was discharged. Later the new caliph al‑Qahir
(320‑322/932‑934) exiled him to al‑Riqqah in Syria because of his
allegiance to al-Shalmaghani. He also arrested his comrades, especially
the Banu Bistam, and seized their property[^78].

This campaign continued until al‑Shalmaghani himself was arrested in
323/934. Along with a few of the leading personalities of his movement,
like Ibn Abi 'Awn, he was tortured and executed, and the corpses were
burnt at the police headquarters *(Dar al‑Shurta)* on the western side
of Baghdad[^79].

Ibn Ruh's influence and authority among the ‘Abbasids increased after
the persecution of al‑Shalmaghani, who was their common enemy. Thus Ibn
Ruh recovered his high influence and became close to the caliph al‑Radi
(322‑29/934‑40).

Moreover it appears that Ibn Ruh's cooperation with the ‘Abbasids
against al‑Shalmaghani led the caliph al‑Radi to think that his
activities with the Imamites had no connection with the Twelfth Imam and
would probably cease in the near future. Al‑Suli reports:

Al‑Radi sometimes mentioned that the Imamites used to hand the *khums
(al‑amwal)* over to Ibn Ruh but we refuted this accusation, and claimed
that it was a lie. So he said to us, "What is wrong with that? By Allah,
I wish that there were a thousand people like him to whom the Imamites
might bring their possessions so that Allah might impoverish them. I do
not mind if they (Ibn Ruh and others) become rich through receiving
their possessions (i.e. those of the Imamites).[^80]"

Ibn Ruh died on the 18th of Sha'ban 326/20 June 938, and was buried in
al‑Nawbakhtiyya district[^81] in the western side of Baghdad[^82]. He
was‑ succeeded by Abu al‑Hasan ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Sammar[^83].

[^1]: Ibn Sahr Ashub, Manaqib, I, 458.

[^2]: Ikhtiyar, 557. The work of Ibn Abi Tayy is not extant, but
al‑Dhahabi used it in writing al‑Nawbakhti's biography; al‑Dhahabi,
Tarikh al‑Islam, f. 132.

[^3]: T. al-Ghayba, 209‑10; Iqbal, Khandan Nawbakhti, 214.

[^4]: T. al-Ghayba, 252‑253.

[^5]: T. al-Ghayba, 250- 252.

[^6]: T. al-Ghayba, 242‑3; Bihar, LI, 355.

[^7]: The narrator of this report is Abu Ghalib al‑Zurari. He reports
that he used to contact the second Safi’r via al‑Nawbakhti, who when he
became the third Safi’r, contacted the agents of Kufa through
al‑Shalmaghani; T. al-Ghayba, 202.

[^8]: T. al-Ghayba, 242.

[^9]: Kama’l, 505‑6.

[^10]: The testament of the second safi’r to Ibn Ruh al‑Nawbakhti was
reported on the authority of the agents, Muhammad b. Humam and Ja’far b.
Ahmad b. Matil, who were present at that meeting and bore witness to the
designation. Moreover Ibn Barina, the grandson of the second Safi’r,
also reports the testament and agrees with the other agents in regard to
its authenticity. Kama’l, 503.

[^11]: T. al-Ghayba, 242‑3.

[^12]: T. al-Ghayba, 240.

[^13]: T. al-Ghayba, 255.

[^14]: Sachedina, The Doctrine of Mahdism in Imami Shi'ism (Ph.D.)
Thesis, Toronto University (Canada, 1976), 137.

[^15]: al‑Dhahabi, Tarikh al‑Islam, f. 132.

[^16]: T. al-Ghayba, 240. According to some reports, the decision that
Ibn Ruh would be the successor of Abu Ja’far had already been revealed
by Abu Ja’far himself to a few agents three years before his death in
305/917. Ja’far al‑Mada'ini and Muhammad b. ‘Ali al‑Aswad were amongst
the agents who received these instructions. Kama’l, 501‑2.

[^17]: T. al-Ghayba, 256.

[^18]: al‑Dhahabi, Tarikh al‑Islam, f. 132 b.

[^19]: T. al-Ghayba, 250‑1.

[^20]: For a full account of the career of Hamid b. al‑‘Abbas, see
al‑Kubaysi, op. cit., 190‑9.

[^21]: Bihar, LI, 320‑1; T. al-Ghayba, 212, 242‑3.

[^22]: Iqbal, op. cit., 216.

[^23]: Bihar, LI, 371; T. al-Ghayba, 263.

[^24]: T. al-Ghayba, 197‑8, 212.

[^25]: al‑Najashi, 293‑4; Buzurg, Nawabigh al‑Ruwat, 289.

[^26]: T. al-Ghayba, 205‑6; Buzurg, Nawabigh al‑Ruwat, 96.

[^27]: Kama’l, 504.

[^28]: T. al-Ghayba, 240.

[^29]: T. al-Ghayba, 176, 179‑80.

[^30]: Kama’l, 443‑4.

[^31]: T. al-Ghayba, 255.

[^32]: T. al-Ghayba, 202‑5. According to Buzurg, al‑Qasim died in
304/916. But al­-Tusi refers to his activities during the time of the
third Saf’ir (305‑26/917‑37), so his death must have occurred after
304/916; T. al-Ghayba, 202.

[^33]: al‑Najashi, 289.

[^34]: Kama’l, 502.

[^35]: Kama’l, 516- 517.

[^36]: Kama’l, 518‑9.

[^37]: al‑Jahshayari, al‑wuzara', 300

[^38]: T. al-Ghayba, 199.

[^39]: Iqbal, op. cit., 217.

[^40]: Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al‑A’yan (Cairo, 1948), III, 99.

[^41]: al‑Sabi, op. cit., 40‑1.

[^42]: Ibn Miskawayh, op. cit., I, 123.

[^43]: Ibn Miskawayh, op. cit., I, 120‑7.

[^44]: T. al-Ghayba, 200; al‑Dhahabi, Tarikh al‑Islam, f. 132a.

[^45]: ‘Arib, op. cit., 141.

[^46]: ‘Arib, op. cit., 141; T. al-Ghayba, 200.

[^47]: Iqbal, op. cit., 220

[^48]: Ibn Miskawayh, op. cit., I, 225.

[^49]: al‑Suli, al‑Awraq, 87.

[^50]: Ibn al‑Athir, al-Lubab, II, 27; Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 296;
Mujam al‑Buldan, V, 288.

[^51]: al‑Najashi, 293‑4; T. al-Fihrist, 305‑6; T. al-Ghayba, 158, 221,
267. It seems that the extant work called Fiqh al‑Riďa is in fact Kitab
al‑Taklif of al‑Shalmaghani because it has a tradition concerning
testimony (al‑Shahada) and another concerning the definition of the
measure called kurr which al‑Shalmaghani gave in contrast to the other
Imamites.

[^52]: T. al-Ghayba, 212, 263.

[^53]: Ibn Hawqal, op. cit., 211.

[^54]: Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 301‑3, al‑Kamil, VIII, 218‑9.

[^55]: Bihar, LI, 374; Hashim al‑Hasani, op. cit., II, 575.

[^56]: Bihar, LI, 372; al‑Sadr, op. cit., I, 516.

[^57]: Such a claim obviously contradicts the beliefs of both the Shia
and the Sunni alike. For details of God's essential nature according to
the Imamites, see al-Hilli, al‑Hasan b. Yusuf, Anwar al‑Malakut fi Sharh
al‑Yaqut (Teheran, 1338), 77‑85, and his al‑Bab al‑Hadi Ashar, A
Treatise on the principles of Shiite theology, trans. from Arabic from
W. Miller (London 1958), 15‑52

[^58]: al‑Kamil, VIII, 218‑9.

[^59]: T. al-Ghayba, 268.

[^60]: T. al-Ghayba, 265.

[^61]: T. al-Ghayba, 253‑4.

[^62]: T. al-Ghayba, 2564.

[^63]: al‑Kamil, VIII, 218.

[^64]: Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 302; Ibn al‑Athir, al-Lubab, II, 27

[^65]: T. al-Ghayba, 266.

[^66]: Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 302‑3; al‑Shibi, op. cit., 203.

[^67]: al‑Dhahabi, al‑‘Ibar, II, 191.

[^68]: Ibn Miskawayh, op. cit., I, 123.

[^69]: Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 303.

[^70]: al‑Sadr, op. cit., 517‑8.

[^71]: T. al-Ghayba, 269.

[^72]: al‑Kamil, VIII, 217.

[^73]: Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 299.

[^74]: al‑Najashi, 289, 294.

[^75]: Al‑Shaybani seems to have been an Imamite Muhaddith but after the
deviation of al‑Shalmaghani he inclined toward him, ignoring the Twelfth
Imam's pronouncement against him; T. al-Fihrist; 299; al‑Najashi, 309.

[^76]: al‑Sadr, op. cit., I, 527; Hashim al‑Hasani, op. cit., II, 575.

[^77]: Ibn Miskawayh, op. cit., I, 215‑7, 223.

[^78]: Ibn Miskawayh, I, 267.

[^79]: al‑Mas'udi, al‑Tanbih, 343; Yaqut, Irshad al‑Arib, I, 299‑304.

[^80]: al‑Sufi, op. cit., 104.

[^81]: T. al-Ghayba, 252.

[^82]: At the present time the grave of Ibn Ruh is situated on the
eastern side of Baghdad, whereas al‑Tusi mentions that this grave was in
the Nawbakhtiyya district at the avenue which leads to Qantarat
al‑Shawk, which was located in the western side of Baghdad; Yaqut, Mujam
al‑Buldan, IV, 191; al‑‘Amid, op. cit., 70.

[^83]: Kama’l, 517.


