The Fourth Saf’ir and the Complete Occultation of the Twelfth Imam
==================================================================

1. The Career of the Fourth Saf’ir (326-329/937-941)
----------------------------------------------------

Al-Tusi reports that Ibn Ruh designated Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Sammari as his successor[^1]. According to al-Tabarsi, this
designation was by the stipulation and order of the Twelfth Imam
himself[^2].

His surname is derived from the name of al-Sammar or al-Saymar, situated
in one of the districts of Basra, where the relatives of al­-Sammari
used to live[^3]. According to al-Mas’udi many members of this family,
like al-Hasan and Muhammad, the sons of Isma’il b. Salih and ‘Ali b.
Ziyad, had large estates in Basra. They devoted half of the income from
these estates to the eleventh Imam, who used to receive it every year
and correspond with them[^4].

Moreover, some of al-Sammari s relatives were agents of the Twelfth
Imam. Among these was ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Ziyad, who had also been an
agent to the tenth and eleventh Imams and who wrote a book called
*al*-*Awsiyya* to confirm the Imamate of the Twelfth Imam[^5].

He was the brother-in­law of the vizier Ja’far b. Muhammad, a
relationship which enabled him to achieve an important office in the
‘Abbasid administration[^6]. According to al-Kulayni, the Twelfth Imam
divulged to him in a letter that his death would occur in 280/893, when
it actually occurred[^7].

These points indicate that al-Sammari came from a family whose members
were well-known for their Shiite beliefs and their service to the
organization. In fact, such a background was necessary to enable
al-Sammari to reach the office of the sifara with little opposition,
especially if one takes into consideration the prolonged occultation of
the Twelfth Imam, which shook the faith of a considerable body of the
Imamites.

However, the sifara of al-Sammari was too short-lived to cause any
remarkable changes in the relations between him and the other agents.
Although nothing is known about the details of his activities, a report
mentioned by al-Saduq makes it clear that the agents recognised him as
the rightful *Saf’ir* and handed the *khums* over to him[^8].

Al-Sammari died on the 15th of Sha’ban 329/15th May 941 and was buried
in al-Khaljani street in the quarter of al-Muhawwal[^9]. According to
Yaqut, this quarter was situated to the north of the village of Buratha,
on the western side of Baghdad[^10].

A week before the death of al-Sammari the following pronouncement
(Tawqi') was issued by the Twelfth Imam:

May Allah give good rewards to your bretheren concerning you (i.e. on
your death), for indeed you shall die after six days. So prepare your
affairs, and do not appoint anyone to take your place after your death.
For the second occultation has now occurred, and there can be no
appearance until, after a long time when Allah gives His permission,
hearts become hardened and the world becomes filled with injustice.

And someone shall come to my partisans (Shi’a) claiming that he has seen
me; but beware of anyone claiming to have seen me before the rise of
al-­Sufyani and the outcry from the sky, for he shall be a slanderous
liar[^11].

Six days after the announcement of this document the principal agents
congregated at the death-bed of the fourth safer and asked him who was
to take charge of his office. Al-Sammari replied, "To Allah belongs the
matter which He shall accomplish" (*Li*-*llah* *amr huwa*
*balighuh*).[^12]"

This was the last statement heard from al-Sammari, the fourth *Saf’ir*.
Thereby direct communication between the safars and the Twelfth Imam was
brought to an end. In other words the short occultation had ended and
the second occultation or, according to the later sources, the major
occultation had begun.

2. An Analysis of the Tawqi’ of the Fourth Saf’ir
-------------------------------------------------

The pronouncement of the Twelfth Imam illustrates five points:

***Firstly,*** it reveals that the fourth *Saf’ir*, al-Sammari, would
die six days after the issue of the Tawqi’. According to the Imamite
reports, al-Sammari did die on the mentioned day. It is worth pointing
out that the Twelfth Imam is also said to have predicted the times of
the deaths of the three previous *Saf’irs*[^13]. For the Imamites this
prediction was strong proof that the Tawqi' had been issued by the Imam
himself.

***Secondly,*** the Imam ordered the fourth *Saf’ir* not to designate
anyone to succeed him or to be in charge of his office, "*wa*-*la tusi
ila ahad fa*-*yaqum maqamak ba'd wafatik*."[^14]  
 This clearly indicated the end of direct communication between the Imam
and his *Saf’irs* and agents. Hence the Imam in the Tawqi denies that he
will have any personal *Saf’ir* during the second occultation before his
return:

*“And someone shall come to my partisans (Shi’a) claiming that he has
seen me; but beware of anyone claiming to have seen me before the rise
of al-Sufyani and the outcry from the sky, for he shall be a slanderous
liar”*.[^15]

The highly developed activities of the organization, which continued for
about 69 years between the years 260-329/874-941 were ended by the
death-bed statement of the fourth *Saf’ir* as regards his successor: God
would do what He wished in this matter, *"Li*-*llah a*mr huwa
*balighuh."*[^16]

***Thirdly,*** the Tawqi’ announces the beginning of the second, or the
complete occultation (*Fa*-*qad waqa* *T. al*-*Ghayba* *al*-*Thaniya aw
al­*-*Tamma*)[^17], which al-Nu'mani describes as the period of
confusion, al­-Hayra[^18]. Al-Mufid calls it the longer occultation
(*al*-*Ghayba* *al*-*Tula)*, whereas the later Imamites refer to it as
the major occultation *(al-Ghayba* al-Kubra)[^19].

***Fourthly,*** there can be no appearance of the Imam until Allah gives
him His permission. His return will take place when it becomes far from
the expectation of the people because of the hardening of their hearts
and the filling of the world with tyranny[^20].

***Fifthly,*** the Tawqi' indicates that the appearance of the Imam will
be preceded by two inevitable signs, that is the rise of al-Sufyani, who
according to early traditions will rise and dominate Syria, and the
outcry in the sky in the name of the Imam.

After quoting the-Tawqi' Rajkowski states as follows:

*“. . . this document is a clear indication that the leaders of
al-­Shi’a al-Qat’iyya had lost hope in the speedy arrival of al-Mahdi
and thought that the moment of al-Zuhur might still be very distant; so
that it was no longer possible to keep up the pretences of direct
communication between the successive Ambassador and the Sahib al-Zaman.
It was better to leave the Shiites without an official mediator, and
rely only on al-Mahdi's invisible protection and inspiration”.*[^21]

Rajkowski seems to be suggesting that the eleventh Imam died heirless
and the leading Imamites invented the idea of the occultation
*(al*-*Ghayba)* and claimed that the *Saf’irs* had direct communications
with al-’Askari's successor. Rajkowski's theory seems to have inspired
Jihad al-Hasani to hold similar views concerning the role of the four
*Saf’irs.* He says,

*“... by resorting to the claim of being agents for the concealed
Twelfth Imam, the four Twelver agents were apparently able to put
themselves forward in the position of the leadership though they were
not from the line of descent of the Prophet”.*[^22]

The hypothesis of these two authors might be sound if there were no
clear proof that al-’Askari had left a successor or that traditions were
circulating in Imamite circles before 260/874 indicating that the series
of the Imams would end with the Twelfth Imam, who would be
*al-Qa’im*.[^23]

However, it has been demonstrated that it was highly probable that the
eleventh Imam had showed his son to about forty of his adherents among
whom were the first two agents, ‘Uthman b. Said and Muhammad b.
‘Uthman[^24].

Furthermore, the evidence has strongly suggested that the eleventh Imam
sent his son to Medina in 259/873,[^25] where he stayed during the time
of the first *Saf’ir.* Moreover, the Imamite organization, the *Wikala*,
was established during the time of the sixth Imam al-Sadiq.

Had it appeared suddenly after the death of al- ‘Askari without the
spread of traditions before 260/874 predicting the *Ghayba* and without
the explicit appointment of ‘Uthman b. Said and his son Muhammad (Abu
Ja’far) by the eleventh Imam as the agents of his son the Twelfth
Imam[^26], one could agree with Rajkowski's statement and with
Montgomery Watt, who says:

*“... the Imamite theory of twelve Imams did not come into being of its
own accord, as it were, following upon certain events known to all. The
theory was an interpretation of selected events, and was deliberately
created by politicians to further their own - perhaps very worthy –
ends”*.[^27]

We have already mentioned that the Imamites consider *Wilaya*
(allegiance and obedience to *Ahl al*-*Bayt)* as the fifth pillar of
Islam. According to them, the practice of all the other pillars (the
prayer, *zakat*, fasting, pilgrimage) is invalid without the recognition
of the rights of the Imam[^28]. They report many traditions stressing
the necessity of the existence of an Imam until the Day of Judgement,
such as the well-known saying attributed to ‘Ali b. Abi Talib:

*Allah, I know that knowledge (al-'Ilm) cannot disappear completely, its
sources cannot cease, and You cannot leave Your earth without a proof
(Hujja) of You for Your creation, either manifest and unobeyed or afraid
and unknown (i.e. in a state of occultation). Otherwise Your proofs
(hujaj) would be (sent) in vain, and Your followers would go astray
after You have guided them.* [^29]

Al-Saffar (d. 290/902) reports that al-Baqir interpreted the Qur'anic
verse, ***"Indeed you are a warner and for every people there will be a
Guide."*** (al-Ra’ad, 13:7), as follows: The "warner" is the Prophet,
peace be upon him, and in every time there is someone who will guide
others to what the Prophet brought. These guides are first the Prophet
of Allah, then the Guided ones *(al*-*Hudat)*; that is, 'Ali and the
Imams (the "legatees", *al*-*Awsiya* ),[^30]

Al-Kashshi reports a tradition attributed to the eighth Imam, al­-Riďa:
"The Imam cannot pass away unless he sees his successor, except for
*al-Qa’im.*” [^31]

All of these traditions depict the Imamite belief in the necessity of
the continuity of the *Imama.* Any break in its continuity would mean
its overthrow as a principle of the religion. The short occultation did
not signify the non-existence of the Twelfth Imam, because he continued
to carry out his activities via his four *Saf’irs* until the year
329/941.

Thus, regardless of the "creations of politicians," it is quite clear
that the first occultation of the Twelfth Imam occurred within a
religious environment where this event had come to be expected.

As we have noted, the ‘Abbasid authorities wanted to restrict the
activities of the Imams, so they included them amongst their courtiers
and placed them under house arrest, so that they could no longer
practice their activities amongst their followers. Restrictions were
placed upon the Imams from the time of al-RidH and were greatly
increased during the Imamate of the eleventh Imam, al-’Askari[^32].

As a result, the Imams devised a policy to save their last successor
from a similar situation. They realized that any son born to the
eleventh Imam would be hidden from the eyes of the ‘Abbasids so that he
could carry out his activities *incognito.*

*To* this end they encouraged the transmission of traditions *(hadith)*
predicting an Imam who would be hidden from sight and would implement
his policies in secret amongst his followers; and this would be the
Twelfth Imam. Such steps were taken so as to prepare the Imamites to
accept the *Saf’irs* as the Imam's intermediaries.

In the light of this explanation, it is worth mentioning a few of the
traditions which were reported by al-’Asfari, who died in 250/863, that
is, ten years before the death of al-’Askari:

**i)** Al-Baqir said to his companion Abu al-Muqdam, *"O Abu al­-Muqdam,
what would you do if an occultation (sabta) occurred between the
Haramayn (i.e. Mecca and Medina) . . . My father used to say that would
happen and that Allah does what He wills. . ."*

**ii)** The Prophet is reported to have said, *"I and eleven of my
descendants and you, O* *‘Ali, are the axis of the earth, its pegs and
its mountains. . . When my eleven descendants pass away, then chaos and
disorder will occur among the people."*

**iii)** The Prophet is reported to have said, *"(There will be) from my
descendants eleven leaders (who will) be noble and receive and
understand (knowledge). The last of them will be al-Qa’im, who will fill
the world with justice after it has been filled with tyranny."*[^33]

These and other traditions were spread in both Imamite and Zaydite
circles. Al-’Asfari, who was a member of *al*-*Zaydiyya al­ Jarudiyya*,
was himself awaiting the rise of *al*-*Mahdi* in the near future and
used to carry his sword with him. As already mentioned, he once said
that he carried his sword so that he would always be ready to fight
along with *al*-*Mahdi.*[^34]

According to al-Saduq these traditions and others predicting the
occurrence of the *Ghayba* were the main reason for the Imamite
acceptance of the *Ghayba* and for their being satisfied that the series
of the Imams should stop at the Twelfth. For the Imamites the acceptance
of the *Ghayba is* a matter of obedience to the orders of the Imams.

3. The Imamite Learned Men's Attitude Towards the Second Occultation
--------------------------------------------------------------------

As has already been indicated, during the period of the short
occultation (260-329/874-941) more than two generations of Imamites were
brought up under the careful supervision of the agents and with the
teachings of the Imamite narrators *(al*-*Muhaddith’un)*, in order that
the new generation would recognize that religious authority derives from
indirect communication with the hidden Imam, via his four *Saf’irs.*

 Their arguments and instructions concerning the hidden Imam were based
mainly on the traditions attributed to the previous eleven Imams before
the year 260/874, including the traditions narrated by al- ‘Asfari.
Although the Imamites split into fifteen groups and held different views
concerning the successor of al-’Askari at the time of the first
*Saf’ir*, the teaching and the underground activities of the second
*Saf’ir* met with success.

His followers *(al*-*Imamiyya al*-*Qat'iyya)* carried out intensive
propaganda to prove the existence of the Twelfth Imam and the necessity
for his occultation without specifying the date of his reappearance:
*"concerning the release from suffering (i.e. the rise of the Imam) it
is in the hand of Allah and those who try to fix certain times for it
are liars."* [^35]

Thus the teachings and doctrine of the followers of the second *Saf’ir*
dominated Imamite circles, whereas the other groups disappeared. During
the time of the third and the fourth *Saf’irs* we find the new
generation of Imamites more obedient to the *Saf’irs* and willing to
accept their statements as the statements of the Twelfth Imam.

They were all the more willing because, as we have noted, all the
pronouncements *(Tawqi’at)* issued to the four *Saf’irs* and attributed
to the Twelfth Imam were written in the same handwriting and in the same
style[^36].

The identical handwriting explains the consensus among the Imamites to
be obedient to the last pronouncement of the fourth *Saf’ir*, by which
the first occultation came to an end and the second began.

There is evidence that when the last pronouncement of the Twelfth Imam
proclaimed the end of direct communication with the fourth *Saf’ir*, the
agents ceased their underground activities and in particular refrained
from collecting the *khums.* In other words the Imamite underground
organization *(al*-*Wikala)*, which had been established during the time
of al-Sadiq (d. 148/765), was dissolved by that pronouncement.

Henceforth anyone claiming to be the *Saf’ir* of the Imam was considered
an unbeliever and imposter. For this reason the Imamites cursed Muhammad
b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Umari, known as Abu Bakr al-Baghdgdi, the nephew
of the second *Saf’ir*, when he claimed that he was the *Saf’ir* of the
Twelfth Imam[^37]. Al-Tusi gives an example of how the agents refrained
from collecting' the *khums:*

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. al-Walid al-Qummi came to Basra as the
representative of his father and the group (i.e. the agents in Qumm).
The Imamites questioned him concerning rumours that he was the deputy of
the Imam.

But he denied them, saying: *"I have no right in this matter"* So they
offered him money as a test, but he rejected it and said, *"It is
forbidden for me to take it, because I have no right in this matter
(i.e. the deputyship of the Imam), and I have never made such a
claim."*[^38]

Perhaps these two examples are a further evidence that the theory of the
occultation of the Twelfth Imam was not "the creation of politicians" to
further their own ends. In fact, there were some people motivated by
political and worldly aspirations, such as al-Shalmaghani and Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi, whose followers held that they were the *Saf’irs* of the
hidden Imam. However, the Imamites totally rejected their claim[^39].

The agents' decision to end their activities led the Imamite narrators
*(al*-*Muhaddithun*, *al*-*Ruwat)* to the belief that since no new
*Saf’ir* had been appointed, the second occultation which they called
the "period of trial and confusion" had begun. They supported their
conclusion with traditions attributed to the previous Imams indicating
that *al-Qa’im* would have two forms of occultation before his rising,
one of them being short and the other long.

Al-Nu’mani may have been the first scholar to give this particular
interpretation to existing traditions. After quoting nine traditions
predicting the two forms of *Ghaybas* and attributed to al-Sadiq on the
authority of seven of his disciples[^40], al-Nu’mani comments:

*“The authenticity of these traditions mentioning that al-Qa’im has two
occultations has been proved - Praise be to Allah. For by bringing about
the occultation He has authenticated the statements of the Imams.*

*As for the first occultation, it is that during which there were
Saf’irs between the Imam and the people, safars who had been appointed
by the Imam and who carried out their activities while* *living amongst
the people... This is the short occultation, whose days have come to an
end and whose period has passed away.*

*The second occultation is the one during which the Saf’irs and the
mediators have been removed for a purpose intended by Allah and planned
for in the creation. In other words, throughout this period testing,
examination, trial, sifting and purification will be the lot of those
who claimed (to be Imamites), just as is stated in the Qur'an:*

***It is not (the purpose) of Allah to leave you in your present state
till He shall separate the wicked from the good. And it is not (the
purpose*** **of)** ***Allah to let you know the unseen.*** **(Al-Imran**
**3:179)***.*

*. .* *This explains our statement that the Imam has two occultations
and that we are living in the second”.*[^41]

Al-Nu'mani's interpretation of the two *Ghaybas* became the foundation
for most explanations put forward by the Imamite jurists from the time
of al-Saduq (d. 381/991) in *Kamal* *al*-*Din wa*-*Tamam al*-*­Nima* and
al-Khazzaz al-Razi al-Qummi (d. 381/991) in *Kifayat al*-*­Athar* *fi*
*al*-*Nusus ala al*-*A'imma al*-*Ithna* *‘Ashar* through the period of
al-Majlisi (d.1111/1700) in *Bihar* *al*-*Anwar.*

However, a contemporary scholar, Sachedina, writes as follows:

“*It is plausible to maintain that the division of the Ghayba into
short, and long is the innovation of the Imamite jurists. In support of
this division, traditions were either invented or interpreted to
accommodate the situation as it appeared to them”*.[^42]

But Sachedina's hypothesis does not bear scrutiny, because the belief in
two *Ghaybas* did not come newly into being after the death of the
fourth *Saf’ir* in 329/941, nor was it invented by al-Nu'mani and those
scholars who followed his footsteps, such as al-Saduq, al­-Khazzaz,
al-Mufid (d. 413/1022) and al-Tusi (d. 460/1067). They merely clarified
the consistency between the two concealments of the Twelfth Imam and the
traditions predicting their occurrence[^43].

From the historical viewpoint there are several reports which reveal
that the traditions speaking about two concealments already existed
prior to the year 329/941 when the second occultation began and that
they were used by the Waqifa and the Imamites.

The Waqifa who stopped at the seventh Imam Musa al-Kazim (d. 183/799)
contending that he was *al-Qa’im al*-*Mahdi*, had narrated these
traditions. Among the Waqifite narrators is Abu Muhammad ‘Ali b. Ahmad
al-’Alawi, who wrote a book in support of Waqifite doctrine called *Fi*
*Nusrat al*-*Waqifa.* He mentions this tradition attributed to al-Sadiq:

*“The Sahib al-Amr (i.e. al-Qa’im) will have two occultations, one of
which will be longer than the other. Finally people will say that he has
died and others will say that he has been killed. Only a few of his
followers will continue to support his Imamate, and no one will know his
whereabouts and his affairs except his servant”.*[^44]

As we have previousely seen, one group of the Imamites held that the
eleventh Imam had not died in 260/874, but had merely disappeared and
would return and be recognized, only to disappear again before finally
rising as *al-Qa’im*[^45].

According to al-Nawbakhti (d. ca. 310/922) this group based its claim on
the generally accepted narration which states that *al-Qa’im* will have
two concealments[^46]. Agha Buzurg reports that such traditions were
included by al-Hasan b. Mahbub al-Zarrad in *Kitab al*-*Mashyakha*,[^47]
and by al-Fadl b. Shadhan (d. 260/873) in *Kitab* *al*-*Ghayba*,[^48]
but these works are not extant.

Fortunately, al-Kulayni, who lived during the short occultation, has
included three of these traditions in *al*-*Kafi.* According to one of
these traditions, al-Sadiq said:

*“Al-Qa’im will have two concealments, one of them short and the other
long. In the first only his intimate partisans will know his
whereabouts, while in the second only his close associates will know his
whereabouts.”*[^49]

These traditions predicting the two concealments of the Twelfth Imam
which are reported by al-Hasan b. Mahbub, al-Fadl b. Shadhan and
al-Kulayni were not invented by the Imamite narrators as is Sachedina's
belief.

On the contrary, such traditions were the main reason why Imamite
scholars like Ibn Qubba[^50] and al-Nu’mani put forward the claim that
the Twelfth Imam was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*, since they applied them to
the historical circumstances which accompanied the career of the Twelfth
Imam from 260/874 until the discontinuation of his direct communication
with his followers after the death of his fourth *Saf’ir* in 329/941.
Thus al-Nu'mani, after narrating such traditions, states,

*“Considering the large number of traditions predicting the concealment
transmitted through the centuries, if the concealment had not occurred
the very principle of the Imama would be invalid. However by its
occurrence Allah the Exalted has proved the authenticity of the Imams'
warnings about the occultation and the correctness of their belief in it
which they held generation after generation. In so doing, Allah obliged
the Shi’a to accept it”*[^51].

4. The Attitude of the Ordinary Imamites towards the Second Occultation
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Despite the fact that the Imamite narrators like al-Nu’mani accepted the
second occultation of the Twelfth Imam and contented themselves with the
traditions going back to before 260/874 which predicted its occurrence,
the vast majority of the ordinary Imamites disagreed with them.

They argued that if the Imam was born in 256/870, he was 73 years old by
the end of the first occultation in 329/941, and this accords with the
life span of a normal person. They concluded that he had probably died,
since death is the natural end for a person living to such an age.
Al-Nu’mani describes the confusion among the Imamite populace as
follows:

*“The majority of the Imamites asked regarding the successor of
al-Hasan, "Where is he?", "How could this happen?", "For how long will
he be concealed?" and "How much longer will he live, since he is now
about 73 years old?"*

*Some of them believed that he was dead. Other groups denied his birth
or even his existence, and mocked those who believed in him. Some merely
found it difficult to accept the prolongation of his concealment because
they could not imagine that it was within the power of God. . . to
prolong the age of His wali (i.e. the Imam) . . . and cause him to
reappear afterwards”* .[^52]

According to al-Nu’mani the bulk of these groups abandoned their belief
in the hidden Imam. In fact those who continued to hold a firm belief
irrhis Imamate were a small minority belonging to the circles of
narrators, like Ibn Qubba and al-Nu’mani himself, who based their belief
on the traditions of the Imams.[^53]

Many scholars shared the perplexity of the Imamite masses over the
prolonged occultation of the Twelfth Imam. According to Ibn al-Nadim,
Abu Sahl Isma’il b. ‘Ali al-Nawbakhti was the first to hold the opinion
that the Twelfth Imam had died during his occultation, that his son had
succeeded him, and that the Imama would continue in his progeny until
Allah resurrected the Twelfth Imam.[^54]

The attribution of this statement to Abu Sahl may be sound, because in
his defence and vindication of the concealment of the Imam written
around the year 290/902, he does not expect the concealment to last
beyond the life span of an ordinary person. He writes,

*“Until the present time there has been one of his hidden and reliable
adherents, who claims that he is the Imam's Gate (Bab) and the
intermediary for his commands and orders to his followers. The period of
the occultation (of the Imam) has not become so prolonged that it is
exceptional and beyond the length of the concealments of those who went
into concealment before him”.*[^55]

Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Salt al-Qummi was another
Imamite scholar baffled by the discontinuation of direct communication
with the Imam because of his prolonged occultation. Thus he went along
with a philosopher from Bukhara in doubting the Imam's existence.[^56]

Several remarks made about twenty years after the beginning of the
second occultation (around the year 352/963) suggest that confusion and
despair over the immediate return of the Twelfth Imam became a dominant
feature in Imamite circles.

Moreover harsh attacks on the concealment of the Twelfth Imam by such
Mu’tazilites as Abu al­-Qasim al-Balkhi[^57] and such Zaydites as Abu
Zayd al-’Alawis[^58] and al­-Sahib b. ‘Abbad[^59] increased this
confusion among the Imamite populace from Nisapur to Baghdad, so that
many Imamites abandoned their belief.[^60]

The confusion over the prolongation of the occultation along with the
attacks from opposition groups encouraged the Imamite narrators to
justify the *Ghayba by* composing works. At first they gathered their
material from traditions attributed to the Prophet and the Imams. Such
works are exemplified by al-Nu’mani's *Kitab* *al*-*Ghayba* and
al-Saduq's *Kamal* *al*-*Din.*

The latter explains that he composed his work while he was living in
Nisapur, because concealment of the Imam caused perplexity and
bafflement among the majority of the Shi'a who used to visit him and
consequently they had gone astray. Their number included even the
well-known Qummi scholar Muhammad b. al-Salt.

This situation provoked him into writing a work quoting the authentic
narrations attributed to the Prophet and the Imams on this issue.
According to him, these narrations had already been assembled in
*al*-*Usul al*-*Arba’mi'a* and had been written down before 260/874 by
the followers of al-Sadiq and the other Imams[^61]. He also devotes a
chapter to people who lived to be more than 100 years old in order to
vindicate the advanced age of the Twelfth Imam during his occultation.

By the end of the 4th/10th century, it seems that the argument based on
traditions and employed by al-Kulayni, al-Mas'udi, al-­Nu’mani, al-Saduq
and al-Khazzaz were no longer sufficient[^62]. Hence the Imamite
scholars resorted to theological arguments *(‘Ilm al*-*Kalam)* and used
them extensively to vindicate the Imam's concealment. Al-Mufid (d. 413/
1022) was perhaps the pioneer in this period.

In his work *al*-*Fusul al*-*’Ashara* *fi* *al*-*Ghayba* he tries to
prove the existence of the hidden Imam on the basis of two principles:
the necessity of the existence of an Imam at every period of time and
the infallibility of this Imam. Al-Mufid's treatment of this subject
became the framework for later Imamite scholars like his pupil
al­-Karajaki (d. 449/1057), al-Murtada and al-Tusi.

In *al*-*Ghayba*, the last of these advances both the traditional and
the theological arguments for vindicating the complete occultation of
the Twelfth Imam. However that may be, the theological approach goes
beyond the historical approach of the present work and pertains to a
later period.

5. The Application of the Epithet al-Mahdi to the Twelfth Imam
--------------------------------------------------------------

The traditions used by the Imamites during the short occultation to
support the view that the Twelfth Imam was the one who will rise with
the sword *(al-Qa’im bil*-*sayf)* were the same traditions talking about
the Twelfth Imam as the expected Mahdi.

In other words, the two ideas, *al-Qa’im* and *al*-*Mahdi*, were already
combined and applied to the Twelfth Imam at the time of the Prophet.
But, as we have already seen (pp 21-23, 30) the Imams due to certain
reasons revealed it only to a few of their followers instructing them
not to publicize it. In spite of this Sachedina holds that

*“. . . the Mahdiism of the Twelfth Imamite Imam was a later development
in the theory of the Imamate of the hidden Imam, which combined the
already known belief in the coming of al-Mahdi to restore justice and
equity with the prolonged occultation of the Twelfth Imam”.*[^63]

Sachedina reached this conclusion after examining the *Kutub
al*-*­Ziyarat*[^64] which was included by al-Majlisi in his work *Bihar*
*a*l-­*Anwar*[^65]. According to Sachedina the earliest work of this
literary genre is related on the authority of the Twelfth Imam himself
in reply to a letter written by Abd Allah al-Himyari (d. 290/902).
Sachedina says,

*“In this Ziyarah which I have carefully examined, there is no mention
of the title al-Mahdi at all. The Twelfth Imam is not addressed as the
Mahdi, the one promised by the Prophet. This is the first Ziyarah
mentioned in this section of the Book on the Shrines.*”[^66]

From the historical point of view there are several points in
Sachedina's thesis which are open to question.

***Firstly,*** according to sayings attributed to al-Baqir and al-Jawad,
all the Imams hold the title *al-Qa’im*, inferring that they have been
entrusted with the execution of Allah's order *(Kullun Qa'imun bi* *­Amr
Allah)*; in addition, they all hold the title *al*-*Mahdi*, whose duty
is to guide people to the Religion, of Allah *(kulluna Nahdi ila Din
Allah)*.[^67] For this reason, we find that in the books on pilgrimage
or *Ziyara*, all the Imams are addressed as *al*-*A'imma al*-*Rashidun
al*-*Mahdiyyun*.[^68]

Consequently the Twelfth Imam must hold the title of al-Mahdi in this
meaning, even though here the word has quite a different meaning from
the epithet *al-Qa’im al*-*Mahdi*, the one promised by the Prophet who
will rise with the sword[^69].

>  -وَ أَنَّ الْمَهْدِيَّ أَنْتَصِرُ بِهِ لِدِينِي وَ أُظْهِرُ بِهِ
> دَوْلَتِي وَ أَنْتَقِمُ بِهِ مِنْ أَعْدَائِي وَ أُعْبَدُ بِهِ طَوْعاً
> وَ كَرْهاً  811

> -وَ إِنَّ الْقَائِمَ إِذَا قَامَ سَارَ فِيهِمْ بِالسَّيْفِ وَ
> السَّبْيِ وَ ذَلِكَ أَنَّهُ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّ شِيعَتَهُ لَمْ يُظْهَرْ
> عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ أَبَداً  812

***Secondly,*** in the Imamite works there is a certain consistency
between the signs indicating the rise of *al-Qa’im* and his performance
of his duty on earth following his return and those pointing to the rise
of *al*-*Mahdi.* This can be noted in such statements as the following:

It becomes clear from numerous statements of this nature that the Imams
used two different titles when referring to one person. A tradition
attributed to al-Sadiq makes the identity between the two figures
explicitly for when he was asked by his follower Abu Said al­Khurasani,
"Are *al*-*Mahdi* and *al-Qa’im* one and the same person?" He replied
"Yes.[^70]

Hence we find that al-Nu'mani sometimes refers to the Twelfth Imam as
*al-Qa’im* and sometimes as *al*-*Mahdi* without imagining that such an
application of the two terms would lead to confusion among the Imamites.
It is clear that the two titles refer to the same person since
al-Nu'mani also reports a narration attributed to al-Baqir revealing
that *al*-*Mahdi is al-Qa’im bi*-*l*-*Sayf.*

When the *Qa'im* of the People of the House *(Ahl al*-*Bayt)* rises he
will distribute equally among the people and deal justly with his
subjects. He is called *al*-*Mahdi* because he will be the Guide to
secret matters.[^71]

For this reason al-Nu’mani refers to the Twelfth Imam as *al-Qa’im
al*-*Mahdi*.[^72]

Moreover it is clear that the expected Mahdi acquired this title because
he will be ‘guided' by Allah and will guide men to undertake a spiritual
transformation of society, just as he acquired the title *al-Qa’im
bil-Sayf* because he will rise by militant means to put into practice
this transformation, namely the establishment of a truly Islamic State
based entirely upon the shari’a as interpreted and implemented by the
Prophet and his rightful successors, the Imams. This can also be seen in
al-Mufid's interpretation of the doctrine of return (*al-Raj’a*):

*“I say that Allah the Exalted will return some of the dead people to
the present world in the physical forms which they had before. He will
do this to honour one group and to debase another, to grant superiority
to the faithful over the deniers, and to judge between the oppressors
and the oppressed. This will take place after the rising of al-Mahdi of
the Family of Muhammad”*.[^73]

Moreover most of the ‘Alids who had been inspired by the Prophetic
tradition predicting the rise of *al*-*Mahdi* held the title *al-Qa’im
al*-*Mahdi* when they rose in arms, like Muhammad b. Ja’far al-­Sadiq,
who rose in 199/814.[^74]

Thirdly, al-Kulayni and al-Mas’udi, both of whom lived during the period
of the short occultation, report a tradition which explicitly refers to
the Twelfth Imam as *al*-*Mahdi:* ‘Ali b. Abi Talib said,

I thought about a child who will be from my flesh, the eleventh from my
line of descendants. He is the *Mahdi* who will fill the earth with
justice and equity when the height of injustice and tyranny in the world
has been reached. He will live in a state of occultation as a result of
which a group of people will go astray and another will remain
faithful.[^75]

Al-Saduq (d. 381/991) includes similar traditions referring to the
Twelfth Imam as *al*-*Mahdi* and as *al-Qa’im*.[^76] He also cites the
text of a visit (ziyara) to the Twelfth Imam during his occultation
which is attributed to the second *Saf’ir*, Abu Ja’far, (d. 305/917),
who addresses the Twelfth Imam as *al*-*Hujja al-Qa’im* al-Mahdi.[^77]

In the light of these points one can conclude that after the Twelfth
Imam went into occultation for the first time, the Imamite scholars
considered him as *al-Qa’im* al-Mahdi, the one who will rise with the
sword. This was a strongly supported belief by the time of the
occurrence of the second or complete occultation.

6. The Effect of the Complete Occultation on the Position of the Imamite Fuqaha'
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The occurrence of the second occultation of the Twelfth Imam, followed
by the immediate dissolution of the Imamite *Wikala* after the death of
al-Sammari, the fourth safar in 329/941, left a serious vacuum in the
Imamite leadership. This situation allowed the Imamite jurists
*(al*-*Fuqaha') to* extend their activities.

They reached a consensus 'that the concealed Imam would be alive until
the moment of his rising in arms, irrespective of the length of his
concealment. They based their view upon such traditions as that
attributed to al­Sadiq, who says to his adherent Hazim,

*O Hazim, the Sahib al-Amr (al-Qa’im) has two occultations and will rise
after the second one. Anyone who comes to you claiming that he has
purified his hands in the soil of his grave (i.e. the grave of
al-Qa’im), do not believe him.* [^78]

But in reality they found themselves in need of a leader to save the
congregation from possible disintegration, and there was no one to
undertake this task except themselves. By the last quarter of the
fourth/tenth century the ordinary Imamites were accepting the statements
of the jurists as the actual statements of the Twelfth Imam, but they
did not consider their authority equal to his.[^79]

In other words the *fuqaha' were* considered the spokesmen for the
Imam's views concerning Islamic doctrine and law. But they were not in
charge of the office of the Imdma because as is explained by authors
such as al­-Tusi and al-Majlisi, it is not possible for anyone to hold
the position of Imam before the rise of *al-Qa’im*.[^80]

For this reason the eminent leaders of the Imamites, al-Mufid
(d.413/1022) and al-Tusi (d. 460/1067), refused to give themselves
authority over the half of the *khums* [^81] which was set aside for the
Imam. Al-Mufid held that any faithful follower who wanted to pay the
Imam's share should put it aside and either keep it in a safe place or
bury it.

In case of his death, he should turn it over to a trustworthy person to
give to the Imam when he rises. As for the other half of the *khums*,
which is called sadat share, it should be divided into three shares and
distributed equally among the needy members of the Prophet's family,
i.e. the orphans, the poor and the penniless travellers.[^82]

Al-Mufid's view was also held by such later scholars as al-­Tusi, Abu
al-Salah and Ibn Zahra al-Halabi. This consensus among the *Fuqaha*'
concerning the *khums* continued until the 7th/13th century. But since
the Twelfth Imam's occultation prolonged, the believers did not know
what to do with the Imam's share in the *khums*, which they have been
trusted with by their predecessors.

By the beginning of the 7th AH/13th century the Imamite *Fuqaha'*, in
particular, al-Muhaqiq al-Hilli wanted to solve this problem. He began
receiving the Imam's share in the *khums and* spent it on religious
activities serving the Shiite cause.

This step taken by the later *Fuqaha*' marked a break with the authority
of the earlier *Fuqaha*'. It was a factor along with other previous
factors for the extension of the role of the *Fuqaha'* after the second
occultation which can be seen in the following points:

***Firstly,*** the prolongation of the occultation of the Twelfth Imam
enabled the Imamite *fuqaha'* to develop their role from mere narrators
of traditions into *mujtahidun. It* has been noted that as regards legal
statutes *(al*-*Ahkam) the fuqaha*' used to consult the Twelfth Imam via
his four representatives during the time of the short occultation
(260-329/874-941). In other words their main function was to narrate the
traditions of the Imams, and they continued to perform this function in
the early years of the second occultation.[^83]

Thus they rejected the arguments based on reason *(‘Aql)* put forward
first by Ibn ‘Aqil al-’Umam (in the first half of the fourth/tenth
century and then by Ibn al-Junayd al-Askafi (d. 381/991). Both of these
figures refined Imamite jurisprudence,put forward new ideas, separated
the discussions about principles (*usul*) from those about subordinates
(*furu’*) and based their method on the basic principles of
jurisprudence. Their method was rejected by the Imamite *Fuqaha'*
because it might lead to wrong inference in finding the religious rules.

They considered it a sort of wrong analogy *(qiyas fasid)* similar to
that which was established and implemented by non-shi'ite jurists.

The prolongation of the Twelfth Imam's concealment, which was attacked
by Zaydite scholars and others, led the Imamite jurists to introduce
rational arguments in order to defend their belief in the existence of
the Twelfth Imam[^84]

Men who had been mere narrators of traditions became scholastic
theologians *(Mutakallimun).* This change in the role of the *Fuqaha'*
can be seen in al-Mufid's works. His works mark a break with earlier
Imamite writing like al-Saffar and al­Kulayni's works which are purely
collections of traditions, whereas al-Mufid's are mainly treatises
written in defence of the Imamite doctrine, in particular, the belief in
the Twelfth Imam's occultation.

Al-Mufid also was a narrator of traditions *(Muhaddith)*, but since he
gave priority to the theological issues he was named the speaker of the
Shiites *(Mutakallim al*-*Shi'a).* Moreover with the passing of time new
situations arose to which the *shari’a* had to be applied, and since
direct communication with the Twelfth Imam had come to an end, someone
had to be found to give an answer to these questions.

Thus the Imamite *Fuqaha'* expanded their role by undertaking *Ijtihad*
[^85] to answer such questions and to fill the vacuum which had been
brought about by the concealment of the Twelfth Imam. Al-Mufid may have
been the first jurist to practice *Ijtihad.* Then al-Tusi (d.460/1067)
gave a definite shape to it.[^86]

Secondly, in light of the first point it is clear that during the last
quarter of the fourth/tenth century the Imamite *Fuqaha'* acquired
authority to give legal judgements *(fatwa)* to a much greater extent
than those who had been contemporary with the beginning of the second
occultation and the dissolution of the underground organization. It has
already been noted that after the death of al­Sammari in 329/941 the
Imamite agents and such *fuqaha'* as Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Walid were
expecting the Imam's reappearance with the sword in the near future, and
for this reason they refused to receive any of the *khums* supposing
that it was forbidden for them to do so.[^87]

But ever since the time of al-Mufid the *fuqaha'* have granted
themselves authority to receive the *sadat* share of the *khums* in
order to distribute it amongst the needy of the Prophet's kindred. Since
nothing was stipulated concerning the direct deputyship of the Twelfth
Imam[^88], the Imamite *fuqaha'* gradually gained enough authority to
act as his indirect representatives. They based their new position on
traditions which lay down the role they were to have while the Imam was
in hiding. Below are the main traditions which have been used in
supporting the authority of the *fuqaha':*

**i)** The Twelfth Imam issued a pronouncement *(Tawqi)* in reply to
Ishaq b. Ya’qub via his second *Saf’ir:*

*As for the events which will occur, turn to the narrators of our
traditions, because they (the narrators) are my proof to you, while I am
the proof of Allah to them.*[^89]

**ii)** Al-Tabarsi mentions this tradition attributed to the eleventh
Imam:

*It is obligatory for the populace to follow the jurist who refrains
from committing wrong, mentions his faith, opposes carnal desire, and
obeys Allah's command.*[^90]

**iii)** Al-Tabarsi reports another transmission on the authority of the
tenth Imam concerning the role of the *fuqaha':*

*After the occultation of your Qa'im a group of the ‘ulama' will call
people to believe in his (al-Qa’im's) Imamate and defend his religion by
using proofs sent by Allah, so that they might save the weak-minded
faithful from either the deceptions of Satan and his followers, or the
deceptions of the anti-’Alids (al-­Nawasib).*

*If none of these* *‘* *ulama' remain, then everyone will stray from the
religion of Allah. However, as the pilot holds the rudder of the ship,
the* *‘ulama' will hold firmly onto the hearts of the weak-minded
Shiites, preventing them from straying. Those ‘ulama' are the most
excellent in the view of Allah the Exalted.*[^91]

It is clear from the above traditions that the *fuqaha'* must possess
two qualities before they can acquire the right to be the deputies of
the Imam without direct stipulation. Firstly they should be
knowledge­able in the law. Secondly they should be just. Then,
irrespective of their family, whether they are from the progeny of
al-Husayn or not, they are entitled to be deputies. It is worth
repeating that the four *Saf’irs* of the Twelfth Imam were not
descendants of ‘Ali.

This may indicate that the Twelfth Imam wanted to train and raise his
followers to accept, after his complete occultation, the leadership of
the just and knowledgeable *fuqaha'*, even if they were not ‘Alids.
Moreover, it can be noted that after the beginning of the complete
occultation, the majority of able *fuqaha'* were not from the progeny of
‘Ali. Among such *fuqaha'* were al-Nu'mani (d. 360/970), al-Saduq (d.
381/991), al-Mufid (d. 413/1022).

In short the authority of the *fuqaha'* became so well-established
amongst the Imamites that a considerable number of the later *fuqaha'*,
such as al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli (d. 676/1277) granted the *faqih* complete
authority over the deputyship of the hidden Imam.[^92]

He gave himself as a *faqih* the right to deal with the Imam's share of
the *khums* while the early *fuqaha'* like al-Mufid only gave themselves
authority over the part of the *khums (sadat* share) intended for the
orphans, the poor, and the penniless travellers of the Prophet's
kindred.

Al-Hilli argues that if the first half of the *khums* (the Imam's share)
is obligatory, then it must be distributed even during the Imam's
occultation, because that which, Allah has made obligatory cannot be
abrogated on account of the occultation of the Imam.

He continues to assert that the one who is charged with distributing the
share of the Imam according to the needs of the Prophet's kindred must
hold the deputyship of the Imam in legal matters i.e. that he must be
one of the just Imamite *fuqaha'*.[^93]

The extension of the authority of the Imamite *fuqaha'* as a result of
the prolongation of the Imam's occultation was a positive factor
contributing to the unity of the Imamite community. It has been noted
that after the death of each Imam, the Imamites split into various
factions.

This trend reached its peak on the death of the eleventh Imam in
260/874, when his followers divided into fourteen groups. But after the
occultation of the Twelfth Imam, the *fuqaha'* became united in their
attempt to establish their own religious and political authority.

The force which united them was the belief in the Imamate of the
concealed Imam. As a result, Shi’ism was saved from splitting into
further factions. Consequently, the number of its followers increased.
The death of a *faqih* who believed in the Imamate of the hidden Imam
did not lead to a split amongst the *faqih's* followers, and they
usually accepted the leadership of another Imamite *faqih.*

Thus all the fourteen factions which had grown up among the followers of
al-’Askari disappeared around the year 373/983 except for the one group
which supported the Imamate of the Twelfth Imam, who was in a state of
complete occultation.[^94]

[^1]: T. al-Ghayba, 256.

[^2]: al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, II, 296-7.

[^3]: Buzurg, Nawabigh al-Ruwat, 200. Saymara was the name of a town in
the region of al-Jabal in Iran (Ibn Hawqal, op. cit., 158, 259), but it
seems that the surname of the fourth Saf’ir is derived from the river
al-Sammar in Basra, because most of his relatives lived there; Ithbat,
246-7; al-Subki, Tabaqat al-Shafi’iyya, III, 339.

[^4]: Ithbat, 246-7.

[^5]: Bihar, LI, 23.

[^6]: Ithbat, 240.

[^7]: al-Kafi, I, 524.

[^8]: Kama’l, 517.

[^9]: T. al-Ghayba, 257-8; Bihar, LI, 362.

[^10]: Yaqut, Mujam al-Buldan, I, 532.

[^11]: Kama’l, 516; T. al-Ghayba, 257; al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, II, 297;
Sadr al-Din al-Sadr, op. cit., 179-80.

[^12]: Kama’l, 516.

[^13]: T. al-Ghayba, 237-8.

[^14]: Kama’l, 516.

[^15]: Kama’l, 516.

[^16]: Kama’l, 516.

[^17]: Kama’l, 516.

[^18]: N. al-Ghayba, 92.

[^19]: al-Irshad, 399; Bihar, LIII, complete work.

[^20]: Kama’l, 516.

[^21]: Rajowski, op. cit., 673-4.

[^22]: al-Hasani, op. cit., 278.

[^23]: For these traditions see al-’Asfari, op. cit., f. 1-2.

[^24]: Kama’l, 442-3; T. al-Ghayba, 231-2.

[^25]: Ithbat, 247-8.

[^26]: al-Kafi, I, 329-30.

[^27]: Watt, The Majesty that is Islam, 170-1.

[^28]: al-Kafi, I, 183, 375, al-Tusi, al-Amali, I, 124. Al-Kulayni
devotes a complete section to the principle of Wilaya. He records about
90 narrations containing an exegesis of Qur'anic verses concerning it,
al-Kafi 412-38.

[^29]: al-Kafi, I, 355, 339. For a full account of these traditions, see
al-Saffar, Basa'ir al-Darajat, f. 23b; al-Mufid, Awa'il al-Maqalat, 8;
al-Kafi, I, 177-8, 184.

[^30]: al-Saffar, Basa'ir al-Darajat, f. 23b-24a.

[^31]: Ikhtiyar, 464-5.

[^32]: This can be noted in the tradition attributed to the ninth Imam,
al-Jawad, who said, "If my son, ‘Ali, died, a light from him will appear
and when this light went off, another light will be concealed. I warn
those who doubt what will happen." N. al-Ghayba, 99.

[^33]: For all these traditions see al-’Asfari, op. cit., f. 1-2
(Appendix); Kama’l, 349.

[^34]: See Chapter I.

[^35]: al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, II, 283.

[^36]: Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, Bahth Hawla al-Mahdi, 69-70.

[^37]: Bihar, LI, 377-78.

[^38]: T. al-Ghayba, 270.

[^39]: Incidents recorded by Ibn Taghri Bardi indicate that the
adherents of al­- Shalmaghani continued their underground activities
until the year 341/952, when the ‘Abbasids discovered their cells. For a
full account, see Nujum, III, 307-8.

[^40]: The disciples of al-Sadiq who narrated these traditions on his
authority were Ishaq b. ‘Amman al-Sayrafi, Ibrahim b. ‘Amr al-Kannas
Hisham b. Salim, al­-Mufaddil b. ‘Umar, Hazim b. Habib, Abu Basir and
Muhammad b. Muslim; N. al-Ghayba, 90-1.

[^41]: N. al-Ghayba, 92.

[^42]: Sachedina, op. cit., 125

[^43]: T. al-Ghayba, 110.

[^44]: al-’Alawi, Fi Nusrat al- Waqifa, quoted in T. al-Ghayba, 44.

[^45]: Q. Maqalat, 106.

[^46]: N. Firaq, 97.

[^47]: Buzurg, al-Dhari’a, XXI, 69.

[^48]: Quoted in the T. al-Ghayba, 274.

[^49]: al-Kafi, 1, 340.

[^50]: Kama’l, 112.

[^51]: N. al-Ghayba, 6.

[^52]: N. al-Ghayba, 80.

[^53]: N. al-Ghayba, 99; Ibn Qubba quoted in Kama’l, 112.

[^54]: Ibn al-Nadim, op. cit., 225.

[^55]: Abu Sahl al-Nawbakhti, Kitab al-Tanbih, quoted in Kama’l, 3.

[^56]: Kama’l, 3.

[^57]: Quoted by al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, II, 176, 182-3.

[^58]: Quoted in Kama’l, 94-122, 126.

[^59]: Ibn ‘Abbad, Nusrat Madhahib al-Zaydiyya, 211.

[^60]: Kama’l, 2-3, 16.

[^61]: Kama’l, 2-3, 19.

[^62]: There are two reports which support this point. First al-Saduq
mentions that the Zaydites accused the Imamites of inventing the
Prophetic traditions which indicate that his successors will be twelve
Imams (Kama’l, 67-8). The Zaydite al­- Saib b. ‘Abbad (d. 381/991) held
this claim against the Imamites (Ibn ‘Abbad, Nusrat Madhahib
al-Zaydiyya, 209-12). Also the Isma’ilis did so. Ivanow (ed.), Zahr
al-Ma’atli, 51.

[^63]: Sachedina, op. cit., 83.

[^64]: Kutub al-Ziyarat are the books which give details of how to
undertake pilgrimages to the shrines of the Imams.

[^65]: Bihar, CII, 81.

[^66]: Sachedina, op. cit., 86-7.

[^67]: al-Kafi, I, 307, 536; Kama’l, 263; al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, II,
249-50; Ithbat, 178-9.

[^68]: al-Saduq, Man la Yahduruhu al-Faqih, II, 371; al-Tusi,
al-Tahdhib, VI, 114; N. al­- Ghayba, 45.

[^69]: al-Saffar (d. 290), Basa'ir al-Darajat, f. 50a; al-Kafi, I, 243.

[^70]: T. al-Ghayba, (Najaf, 1965), 296.

[^71]: N. al-Ghayba, 125.

[^72]: N. al-Ghayba, 125.

[^73]: al-Mufid, Awa'il al-Maqalat, 50.

[^74]: Maqatil, 359.

[^75]: al-Kafi, I, 19, 35, 338; Ithbat, 260.

[^76]: Kama’l, 256, 260, 280, 289, 333, 338, 342.

[^77]: Kama’l, 512, 513.

[^78]: N. al-Ghayba, 91; T. al-Ghayba, 274-5; Ikhtiyar, 476.

[^79]: Kama’l, 81.

[^80]: T. al-Ghayba, 215; Bihar, LII, 99.

[^81]: The khums (the fifth) in Shiite law is an obligatory tax based on
the following Qur'anic verse: "And know ye that whatever of a thing ye
acquire, a fifth of it is for God, and for the Apostle, and for the
Apostle's near relatives and the orphans and the needy and the penniless
traveller" (al-Anfal, 8: 41). The Imams collected the khums from their
followers and used the first three shares for the benefit of the
congregation and the kindred of the Prophet, and the second three shares
for distribution among the orphans, the needy, and the penniless
traveller (wayfarer) of the Prophet's family; Asl ‘Asim b. Hamid
al-­Hannat, f. 22; al-Kafi, II, 626-8.

[^82]: al-Muhaqqiq al-Hili, al-Mu’tabar fi sharh al-Mukhtasar (Qumm,
1318), 298; al-Jawami' al-Fiqhiyya (Iran, 1276), 12, 76.

[^83]: For details see Ibn Dawud, al-Rijal, 110; T. al-Fihrist, 268,
363; Ibn Qubba, quoted in Kama’l, 120; al-Najashi, 315.

[^84]: al-Sahib b. ‘Abbad, op. cit., 211.

[^85]: Ijtihad, in Sunni law means the pronouncing of independent
judgements on legal or theological questions based on the interpretation
and application of the four principles, the Qur'an, traditions,
consensus, and reason (Aql). According to the Imamites, Ijtihad is
employing all one's power to arrive at speculative probability (zann) in
a case or in a rule of divine law depending mainly on the Qur'an and
traditions; al-Ghurayf, al-Ijtihad wal-Fatwa (Beirut, 1978), 9.

[^86]: For the role of al-Tusi in the formulation of Imamite ijtihad,
see Mahmud Ramyar, Shaykh Tusi, Ph.D. thesis (Edinburgh, 1977), 88-92.

[^87]: T. al-Ghayba, 270.

[^88]: al-Khumayni, al-Hukuma al-Islamiyya, (Beirut, 1978), 48.

[^89]: al-’Amili, al-Wasa’il, XVIII, 101; Bihar, LIII, 181; al-Khumayni,
op. cit., 77.

[^90]: al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, II,. 263-4; al-’Amili, al-Wasa’il, XVIII,
94-5.

[^91]: al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, II, 260.

[^92]: al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, al-Mu'tabar, 298.

[^93]: al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, al-Mu’tabar, 298.

[^94]: al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 261.


