Conclusion
==========

The conclusion of the present work can be summarized as follows:

i) The problem of the nature of the *Ghayba* of the Twelfth Imam is an
old one in the history of Shi'ism and is closely connected with the
question of the *Imama.* From the beginning the Shiites held that the
Prophet could not have left his community without a leader to supervise
the interpretation of the *shari’a* and its implementation in society.

On the contrary, he had appointed ‘Ali as his successor and stipulated
that the leadership of the community should pass to al­-Hasan and
al‑Husayn, and thereafter to the eldest son of each subsequent Imam from
the line of al‑Husayn until the rise of *al­Mahdi.*

However, the Imams were unable to rule the whole community after the
death of the Prophet. Since political power had been usurped by others,
the Imams were forced to seek to regain it according to those methods
which they felt to be sound and legal, even though the political and
economic resources of their opponents were stronger than their own,
especially after the martyrdom of al‑Husayn.

None of the Imams after al‑Husayn involved themselves directly in any
obvious political activities or took part in direct incitement to
revolt. In fact it seems that they restricted their activities to three
major areas:

**A)** They encouraged the dissemination of Prophetic traditions amongst
the people to acquaint them with the right of the People of the House of
the Prophet *(Ahl al‑Bayt)* to lead the community and to show them that
their exclusion from actual political leadership did not mean that they
were content to adopt a purely spiritual stance, nor did it imply tacit
support of the government of the day.

Indeed they were totally committed to their struggle to regain control,
but only when circumstances indicated the probable success of their
rebellion, and when they were sure of the support of a sufficient number
of faithful followers to aid the revolution and to implement Islam
according to the Imamite approach.

**B)** From the Imamate of al‑Sadiq the Imams circulated Prophetic
*Hadith* amongst the Imamites themselves concerning the rise of an Imam
from Ahl *al‑Bayt* who would establish the righteous state. This Imam
would be *al-Qa’im al‑Mahdi,* who was mentioned in the Prophetic
traditions. He would first go into a state of concealment from which he
would continue to direct the affairs of the *Imama.* Then he would go
into total occultation.

But the majority of the traditions did not specify which Imam this would
be, nor did they stipulate a definite date for his uprising. This
obscurity allowed some ‘Alids to use these traditions to support their
own political aims, without heeding the instructions of the Imam as
regards the correct circumstances for the concealment and rising of
*al-Qa’im al‑Mahdi.*

A clear example of this is seen in the case of the Isma’ilis, who broke
away from the Imamites and continued to carry out their activities
secretly between the years 145‑296/762‑908, until one of them managed to
reach power in the year 296/908, claiming the title *al-­Mahdi.*

The Zaydites also used these traditions in their attempts to gain
control, but lacked the precaution and careful planning of the Isma’ills
and the Imamites. In fact the obscurity of these *Hadiths,* related from
al‑Sadiq was one of the reasons that some Imamites believed that the
concealed Imam was Musa al‑Kazim, who would rise as *al-Qa’im al‑Mahdi*
These people were called the Waqifa.

**C)** The early Imams believed that any of them could be *al-Qa’im
al‑Mahdi* if the conditions were right but after the failure of their
intended revolt in 140/757, they decided that it would be ill­advised to
fix a particular date for another uprising.

In this way the Imams hoped to encourage their followers in religious
activities which would pave the way for more political matters at the
appropriate time. At the same time they also secretly encouraged their
most faithful followers, who found that they had no option but to rebel
against unjust and tyrannical rulers.

One of the results of these policies was the establishment of the
*Wikala* during the Imamate of al‑Sadiq as a means of supervising the
activities of the Imamites and guiding them towards the final aim of the
Imams, namely the establishment of a truly Islamic state based entirely
upon the *shari’a* as interpreted and implemented by the Prophet and his
Household.

**D)** The ‘Abbasid authorities were aware of the danger posed by the
Shiites and especially by the Imamites. So they tried to turn the
attention of the people away from the rights of *Ahl al‑Bayt* (the
People of the House) by fabricating Prophetic traditions which stated
that the Imam after the Prophet was al‑'Abbas and not 'Ali.

Simultaneously, they worked to divide the Shiites internally by
appointing men from the *Jaririyya* to certain sensitive posts, so that
the *Jaririyya* could investigate the Imamites and spread propaganda
against them. After the failure of this policy, from the time of
al-­Ma'mun the ‘Abbasids instituted a new plan which was intended to
curtail the revolutionary activities of the Shiites. Part of this plan
was to make the Imams their courtiers so that they could watch their
every move.

This can be observed in the policy of al‑Ma'mun, who brought al‑Riďa
from Medina to Merv and appointed him his heir apparent, keeping him
under house arrest. Al‑Ma'mun followed a similar policy with the ninth
Imam al‑Jawad. Later the ‘Abbasid caliphs followed al‑Ma'mun's lead in
their attitude towards the tenth Imam, al‑Hadi, and his son al‑‘Askari,
both of whom were kept under house arrest in Samarra for most of their
lives.

It thus became extremely difficult for the Imams to have normal
relations with their followers, except their closest associates with
whom they held secret meetings.

It seems likely that the house arrest of the later Imams led them to
expand the role of the organization, the *Wikala,* and to entrust the
*Saf’ir* with more authority to supervise the Imamites' activities. From
the time of al‑Jawad onwards, the Imam began to guide the activities of
his followers through his *Saf’ir.* The ordinary Imamites found such a
situation strange and had to be educated to accept such indirect
communication with the Imam.

However the role of the *Saf’ir* during this period is not as obvious as
his later position during the first occultation of the Twelfth Imam,
because the Imam's whereabouts were well‑known and his position clear.

It also seems that the continuation of the house arrest encouraged the
Imams to find a means which might release them from its restrictions.
From the years 245‑250/859‑64 onwards statements related on the
authority of al‑Hadi and al‑‘Askari, indicating that an unnamed Twelfth
Imam would go into concealment, were circulating amongst the Imamites.
Furthermore al‑Hadi and al‑‘Askari ordered their close agents to follow
the instructions of ‘Uthman b. Said al­‘Umari and his son Abu Ja’far
(i.e. the first and the second safrs).

It appears therefore that outwardly and historically the Imam's first
concealment grew from the desire of his fathers to evade the
surveillance of the government of the day, so that he could safely
perform the duties of the *Imama.*

**E)** An attempt has been made in‑this study to prove that the eleventh
Imam, al‑‘Askari, left a single male successor, whose name was Muhammad
and who was smuggled by his father from Samarra to Medina in 259/873. He
was the Twelfth Imam and his concealment began during the years
260‑329/874‑941. This was regarded as his first occultation, during
which he continued to carry out his activities without disclosing his
identity or his whereabouts, except to his four *Saf’irs* and certain
select followers.

The first occultation was distinguished by the widening of the role of
the *Wikala.* Throughout this period the four *safrs* directed the
Imamites' activities. Their names were ‘Uthman b. Said al‑‘Umari, Abu
Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Uthman, al‑Husayn b. Ruh al­-Nawbakhti and 'Ali b.
Muhammad al‑Sammari. Baghdad was the centre of activities for the saf
*r,* who had agents in other provinces, beneath whom were many local
agents.

A critical study of this period reveals that the main function of the
*Saf’irs* was to perform certain tasks previously undertaken by the
Imams so as to save the Imam from the political pressure of the
‘Abbasids, which had been directed toward his predecessors from the time
of al‑Ma'mun.

The split amongst the Imamites after the death of al‑ ‘Askari in
260/8741ed the first and the second *Saf’irs* to concentrate their
efforts upon re‑uniting the Imamite ranks by proving the existence of
the Twelfth Imam and emphasizing that he was *al-Qa’im al‑Mahdi;* that
is, he who would undertake the elimination of oppressive government by
militant means.

While the Imam was in hiding the role of the *Saf’ir* continued to
increase so that by the time of the fourth *Saf’ir,* his statements
began to be regarded as the statements of the Imam himself. It seems
that the increased role of the *Saf’ir* was the result of the
instructions of the Imam himself, who wanted his followers to accept the
leadership of the jurists until the. moment of his reappearance.

**F)** On the death of the fourth *Saf’ir* in 329/941 no further
*Saf’ir* was appointed and all direct communications with the Imam came
to an end, which meant the end of the Imamite *Wikala.* This was also
considered the beginning of the second occultation. At this stage the
Imamites expected the Imam's reappearance in the near future, and as a
result none of the jurists dared to act on behalf of the Imam.

However the prolongation of the occultation led them to attempt to fill
the vacuum left by the death of the fourth *Saf’ir.* They turned their
attention to theological matters and became the leaders of the Imamites
in this field. Gradually they came to be seen as the hidden Imam's
indirect deputies, who were leading the community and instructing in the
law during his occultation.

Finally the concealment of the Twelfth Imam seems to have been closely
connected with two important phenomena:

***Firstly**,* with the occurrence of the second occultation, most of
the Shiite revolts, particularly those of the Zaydite and the Imamites,
gradually disappeared.

***Secondly**,* when the Imams were openly living amongst their
followers, they suffered along with them from the oppression of the
government, which was suspicious of their ambitions. But after the
second occultation this oppression all but disappeared, and the Imamite
jurists *(Fuqaha)* began to carry out their activities without
encountering the difficult conditions faced by their predecessors.

This encouraged one to put forward the idea that Imams were throughout
their lives trying to recover their usurped right, the political
leadership of the Islamic state, by means which they believed to be
correct and legal, while after the second occultation this task fell
upon the Imamites themselves under the leadership of the *Fuqaha;* a
situation which has continued until the present day.

In other words, as long as the Muslims are not ready for such political
transformation the rise of the hidden Imam, the expected Mahdi, will be
far. During his occultation it is the task of his followers in
particular the *Fuqaha'* to make Muslims ready for this transformation.
They should struggle to make them true committed Muslims practicing the
*shari’a* in its true sense in their daily life and in all aspects of
society.

The *Fuqaha* 'should convince the Muslims that their rightful leader is
the hidden Imam, the expected Mahdi, who was divinely appointed and that
he acquired this title, the Mahdi, because he will be ‘guided' by Allah
and will guide men to undertake a spiritual and political transformation
of society.

Before the reappearance of the hidden Imam, the *Fuqaha’* can assume
political authority in order to disseminate the above tasks and to
implement the rules of the *shari* *‘a*.


