Preface
=======

It is particularly welcomed that this new study of the occultation of
the Twelfth Imam should be presented to those interested in the history
of religion. Indeed, too little attention has been paid to this subject
by scholarship generally, and especially in the West. When the matter
has been discussed, it has tended to be dismissed rather cursorily. In
some measure, Dr. Hussain's work serves to restore the balance.

The author, using little known and rarely consulted early Shi’ite
sources, has presented a detailed study of the Imami-Shi’ite movement
from the time of Ja’far al-Sadiq, the Sixth Imam, to the end of the
lesser occultation of the Twelfth Imam. What emerges is a picture of a
secret religious organisation with adherents all over the Islamic world.
This organisation had to be secret because it was constantly subject to
persecution from the authorities.

The great unifying force of the movement which Dr. Hussain describes was
its belief in the Imamate as a central institution to preserve the
integrity of Islam. This Imamate would be the means by which justice and
equity would be eventually brought to the world. Dr. Hussain
demonstrates that the traditions about one of the Imams being the
*Mahdi* were circulating among the Shi'a from the very earliest times.

He also establishes that though there was some confusion among the Shi'a
as to which Imam would be the *Mahdi*, there was some evidence that
traditions existed which said it was to be the Twelfth Imam and that
traditions about the Twelfth Imam being the last Imam even found their
way into the body of Sunni literature.

For the first time in English, the evidence for the existence of the
Twelfth Imam is fully presented and while it is of a circumstantial
nature, it is much more convincing than the usual picture presented by
Western scholarship. Dr. Hussain's thorough and sympathetic treatment of
this is to be greatly welcomed.

The greater occultation of the Twelfth Imam is a matter of religious
faith. It, like other great religious beliefs, is not something that
scholars can prove or disprove. However, it has an inner religious
reality which no one can reject. The proof of this inner religious
reality is that it is a doctrine that has sustained and strengthened the
faith of millions of Shi’ite Muslims up to the present time. Despite
persecution and tribulation, this community and their faith have
survived.

This work of meticulous scholarship by Dr. Hussain is commended to all
those interested in the history of the development of Islam and Shi'ism.
The work of the Muhammadi Trust, and its tireless secretary in ensuring
its publication is particularly appreciated.

**I.** **K.** **A.** **Howard**  
 Department of Islamic Studies,  
 University of Edinburgh


