Introduction
============

***In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate***

Muhammad b. al-Hasan al- ‘Askari is the Twelfth Imam of the "Imamates"
or "Twelve-Imam Shi’ites", *al*-*Ithna* *Ashariyya*, who form the second
largest denomination in Islam after the Sunnis. He appears to have been
born in 256 A.H./869 A.D. Four years later, after the death of his
father al- ‘Askari, the eleventh Imam, he was hidden from the
authorities of the ‘Abbasid caliphs as a precaution.

His whereabouts were disclosed only to a very few of his followers. Four
of his father's close associates became successive mediators between the
Imam and his followers until the year 329/941.

This period has been considered by the Imamites as the first or the
short occultation *(al*-*Ghayba)* of the Twelfth Imam. During it the
four *Saf’irs* directly supervised the underground religious and
political activities  
 of the Imamites.

The last *Saf’ir* announced on his death-bed in 329/941 that the Twelfth
Imam had decided not to appoint another *Saf’ir* and had entered into
total occultation. The Imamites considered this declaration the
beginning of the Twelfth Imam's second occultation, which has continued
until the present time.

Because of the second occultation the series of Imams stopped at the
number twelve. Accordingly the Imamites believe that the Twelfth Imam is
*al-Qa’im* ("he who will rise"), whose rising was promised by the
Prophet. For the Prophet is said to have predicted that a descendant of
his daughter Fatima would rise with the sword and fill the world with
justice and equity. For this reason the Imamites believe that he is
still alive, but in a state of occultation until the moment of his
rising at an unspecified time in the future.

Since the first half of the fourth/tenth century many scholars have
examined the occultation of the Twelfth Imam purely from the theological
point of view, even though this event appears to have been historical.
However, because of the close connection between the occultation and the
Imamate (al-Imama) or the religious and political leadership, it became
involved with Shi’ite theological discussions and gradually its
historical aspects came to be ignored.

Thus modern scholars like Ignaz Goldziher, Margoliouth, Snouck Hurgronje
and Darmesteter were inclined to study the occultation of the Twelfth
Imam as a theological phenomenon and tried to trace its pre-Islamic
origins.

The present inquiry is an attempt to study the historical background and
circumstances of the occultation of the Twelfth Imam. The Imamites had
political ambitions to obtain political power under the leadership of an
Imam called *al-Qa’im* *bi*-*l*-*sayf* *(the* one who will rise with the
sword). This study tries to examine the role of these ambitions in his
occultation and to trace as well the evolution of the underground
Imamite organization (*al*-*Wikala*) and its role during the time of the
Twelfth Imam's short occultation.

It is essential to make a survey of the main sources of this study so
that the viewpoint of each of them can be understood and the information
they contain evaluated accordingly.


