Survey of the Sources
=====================

1. Books on the question of the Ghayba
--------------------------------------

It is indeed an old idea in Imamite history that one Imam from the
progeny of the Prophet would go into hiding to prepare for the day when
he would rise again under the title *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* *and* fill
the world with justice. The concealment *(al*-*Ghayba)* was considered a
sign of the true *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* and both before and after the
occultation of the Twelfth Imam in 260/874.

Many Shi’ite writers collected traditions attributed to the Prophet and
the Imams concerning this issue. These traditions were used by many
Shi’ite groups to back up the claims of their leaders who aspired to
power by adopting the title of *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*.

Before 260/874 they were used even by some Imamites themselves as
evidence that one or another of their deceased Imams was in fact
*al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi.* Finally the same traditions have been used by
the Imamites to support their claims that the Twelfth Imam was
*al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* himself. These works on the subject of the
*Ghayba* can be divided into three groups based on the dates of their
authorship.

### A. Books on the question of the occultation written before 260/874

The Imamite scholars wrote about four hundred books *(al*-*Usul* *al­*
*Arba’mi'a*)during the lifetimes of the first eleven Imams. Some of
these dealt with the subject of the Imam's concealment, recording
traditions on the authority of the Prophet and the Imams predicting that
an Imam would go into occultation.

These traditions, however, neither named the Imam nor fixed the time at
which his occultation would begin. The ambiguity of these traditions
encouraged many Shi’ites to apply them to different Imams. Hence the
Waqifa sect held that Musa al-Kazim, the seventh Imam, was the hidden
Imam whereas *al*-*Imamiyya* *al*-*Qat’iyya* and *al*-*Zaydiyya*
*al*-*Jarudiyya*[^1] held that the hidden Imam would be the Twelfth, but
they did not identify him by name.

Despite the fact that a great majority of these early works are not
extant, it appears that during the fourth and fifth centuries the
Imamite authors based their works concerning al­-*Ghayba* *on* these
early writings. The following works are examples of the Waqifite,
Zaydite and Imamite views on this matter.

#### The Waqifa

1. Al-Anmati Ibrahim b. Salih al-Kufi, was a companion of the fifth
Imam, al-Baqir (d. 114/732). He wrote a book entitled al­ *Ghayba* which
represents the Waqifite point of view, although the information he gave
was used by such later scholars as Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Nuh (d. before
423/1031) and al-Tusi to support the Imamite view[^2].

2. Al-Ta'i al-Tatari, 'Ali b. al-Hasan, was a companion of the seventh
Imam, al-Kazim (d. 183/799), whom he named as the hidden Imam. In
defence of his view he wrote *Kitab* *al*-*Ghayba*, which became the
framework for the works of later Waqifite authors like Ibn Suma’a (d.
263/877) on this issue[^3].

3. Al-Hasan b. Muhammad b. Suma’a, composed a book on *al*-*Ghayba*,
following the footsteps of his Waqifite teacher al-Ta'i al­
Tatari[^4].  
 However, those Imamites who lived during the period from
260-329/874-940-1 such as al-Hasan al-Saffar (d. 292/904) and al­
Kulayni (d. 329/940), used his information to support their claim that
the hidden Imam was not the seventh Imam but the Twelfth Imam[^5].

#### The Zaydites

Abu Said ‘Abbad b. Ya’qub al-Rawajini al- ‘Asfari (d. 250/864) was one
of the leading scholars of the Shi’ite sect *al*-*Zaydiyya*
*al­Jarudiyya.* He compiled a book of traditions entitled *Kitab* *Abu*
*Said* *al*- *Asfari.* The importance of this work is that its author
cites a tradition referring to the occultation at least ten years before
its occurrence.

He also mentions other traditions which point to the fact that the
number of the Imams would end with the Twelfth Imam and that he would be
*al-Qa’im.* However, in contrast to the Imamites he does not mention the
names of the twelve Imams.

Al-’Asfari's work along with the works of Sulaym b. Qays (d.
80­90/699-707) and al-Hasan b. Mahbub al-Sarrad (d. 244/838) were used
extensively by such Imamites as al-Kulayni (d. 329/941), al­ Nu'mani (d.
360/970) and al-Saduq (d. 380/991) to prove the existence of the Twelfth
Imam and his subsequent occultation.

#### The Imamites

1. ‘Ali b. Mahzayar al-Ahwazi was a close associate of the ninth Imam,
al-Jawad. He was appointed by the latter as his representative in
al-Ahwaz and continued to remain in office throughout the reign of the
tenth Imam, al-Hadi. He wrote two books, called *Kitab* *al*-*Malahim*
and *Kitab* *al-Qa’im*, both dealing with the occultation of the Imam
and his subsequent rising with the sword[^6].

Then between the years 260/874 and 329/940 his two sons Ibrahim and
Muhammad became the authorised representatives of the Twelfth Imam in
al-Ahwaz. It is on their authority that al-Kulayni and al-Saduq give
important information concerning the com­munication methods employed in
the underground activities of the Imamites.

2. In his work on the subject of *al*-*Ghayba* called *al* *­Mashyakha*,
al-Hasan b. Mahbub al-Sarrad (d. 224/838) records several anedoctes
which are often attributed to the Imams. This work has been lost but
several quotations from it are included in the available Imamite
sources.

3. Al-Fadl b. Shadhan al-Nisaburi (d. 260/873) was a well­known Imamite
scholar and secured the trust and the praise of the eleventh Imam. He
also compiled a book called *al*-*Ghayba*[^7], but most of its material
seems to have been quoted from the work of al-Hasan b. Mahbub[^8]. Since
al-Fadl died two months before the death of the eleventh Imam in
260/874, the importance of his work lies in the traditions he recorded
indicating that the Twelfth Imam would be *al-Qa’im.*

Many later writers like al-Tusi in his own work entitled *al*-*Ghayba*,
relied on al-Fadl's work. Baha al-Din al-Nili (d. 790/1388) also
compiled a work entitled *al*-*Ghayba* by summarising al-Fadl's
work[^9]. Despite the fact that the actual work of al-Fadl is lost, the
works *Kifayat* *al*-*Muhtadi* *fi* *Ma’rifat* *al*-*Mahdi* by Mirlawhi
(d. 12th/18th century) and *Kashf* *al*-*Astir* by Mirza Husayn al-Nuri
(d. 1320/1902) seems to be copies of his work[^10]. Therefore it is not
unreasonable to make use of these later sources for our present
purposes.

### B. Books on the Question of the Ghayba written between the years 260-329/8'74-941

During the years of the short occultation (260-329/874-941) many books
reflecting different views were composed on the question of *al*
*­Ghayba.* These were mainly collections of anecdotes based on works
written before 260/874. Their authors were either jurists or
propagandists and they participated in the activities of the underground
organization of the Imamites led by the Twelfth Imam himself.

Thus they recorded important information, which cannot be found in books
on history compiled during the same period. In 262/876, Ibrahim b. Ishaq
al-Nahawandi (d. 286/899) claimed to be the representative of the
Twelfth Imam in Baghdad[^11].

He composed a book about the *Ghayba* reflecting the view of the
extremists *(al*-*Ghulat).* Later al-Nu’mani (d. 360/970) used al­
Nahawandi's information extensively in composing his well-known book
*al*- *Ghayba.*[^12]

‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far al-Himyari (d. after 293/905) wrote a book entitled
*al*-*Ghayba* *wa*-*l*-*Hayra.* The importance of his work lies in the
fact that he was one of the close associates of the tenth and the
eleventh Imams and later became the agent of the first two deputies
*(Saf’irs)* of the Twelfth Imam. Unfortunately this work and the work
called *al*-*Imama* *wa*-*l*-*Tabsira* *min* *al*-*Hayra* by Ibn
Babawayh (d. 329/940) are not extant. However, the latter's son,
al-Saduq (d. 382/991) and al-Tusi (d. 460/1067) made thorough use of
these works.

Al-Kulayni (d. 329/940) devoted much space in the section entitled
*al*-*Hujja* of his book *al*-*Kafi* to the question of the occultation.
He backs up this study with important information on the general
situation of the Imamites between the years 260-329/874-940 with special
emphasis on the role of the *Saf’irs* of the Imam in this period. He
recorded many traditions attributed to the Imams concerning the
concealment of the Twelfth Imam.

He quoted this information from the earlier Waqifite and Imamite authors
like al-Hasan b. Mahbub (d. 224/838), ‘Abbad b. Ya'qub al- ‘Asfari (d.
250/864) and al-Hasan b. Suma’a (d. 263/877). Moreover the agents of the
Twelfth Imam were the main source of his information on the underground
activities of the Imamites.

### C. Books on the question of the Ghayba written after 329/941

The occurrence of the second occultation in 329/941 led to a state of
confusion among the Imamites. Hence several works were composed to
justify the Twelfth Imam's occultation and to explain the reasons for
its prolongation. Five works of this period can be considered the basis
for all later Imamite opinions concerning the occultation. Since these
primary sources have been widely used in this book, it is worth
evaluating the information they contain in some detail.

1. Al-Nu’mani, Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. Ja’far, known as Ibn Abi Zaynab,
was a native of the town of Nu’maniyya, one of the districts of Wasit.
He moved to Baghdad where he was educated in *Hadith* transmission under
the supervision of al-Kulayni (d. 329/940) and Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 333/944).
He then went to Syria where he died around the year 360/970.

Because of the confusion which had spread amongst the Shi’ites after the
death of the eleventh Imam, al- ‘Askari, in the year 260/874, al-Nu’mani
wrote a book entitled *al*-*Ghayba.* He tried to prove the necessity of
the Twelfth Imam's occultation by relating traditions on the authority
of the Prophet and the Imams predicting its occurrence. He acquired most
of his information from early authors who wrote on this subject,
irrespective of their doctrinal views.

Among such early authors are al-Hasan b. Mahbub, an Imamite (d.
224/838), al­ Fadl b. Shadhan, an Imamite (d. 260/873), al-Hasan b.
Suma’a, a Waqifite (d. 263/877), Ibrahim b. Ishaq al-Nahawandi, an
extremist (d. 286/899), al-Kulayni, an Imamite (d. 329/940), the
well-known Zaydite jurist Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 333/944), and al-Mas'udi (d.
345/956)[^13].

Al-Nu'mani's outstanding contribution was that he was the first compiler
after al-Mas’udi (d. 345/956) to give an interpretation of those
traditions attributed to the Imams by al-Kulayni, which indicated that
*al-Qa’im* would have two occupations, the first short and the second
long. Al-Nu'mani stated that the first occultation was the period of the
four representatives of the Twelfth Imam, lasting from the year 260/874
until the year 329/940-1, and that the second began after the death of
the fourth *Saf’ir* in 329/941.[^14]

Some of his remarks reflect how the complete occultation of the Twelfth
Imam threw the Imamites into confusion and caused a massive decrease in
their numbers. His interpretation became the basis for all later Imamite
works on this subject.

2. Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Babawayh, who is better known as al-Saduq (d.
381/991), wrote a book on the question of the *Ghayba* entitled *Kama’l*
*al*-*Di'n* *wa* *Tamam* *al*-*Ni’ma.* The information contained in this
work is valuable because al-Saduq relied on the Shi’ite primary sources
*(al*-*Usul)* which had been compiled before 260/874.[^15]

Thus we find that he often refers to the authors al-Hasan b. Mahbub,
al-Fadl b. Shadhan, al-Hasan b. Suma’a, al-Saffar, al­Himyari and his
own father, Ibn Babawayh[^16], who had close ties with the third and
fourth *Saf’irs* of the Twelfth Imam. Because his father was an eminent
jurist and the Imam's agent in Qumm, al-Saduq was able to give reliable
information regarding the underground com­munications between the agents
and the Imam via his four *Saf’irs.*

However, a study of the chain of transmitters *(isnad)* of some of his
reports concerning the birth of the Twelfth Imam indicates that
al-­Saduq obtained his information from extremists such as Muhammad b.
Bahr. Consequently, one must be careful in using these reports.

3. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. al-Nu’man, who is known as al-Mufid (d.
413/1022), was at one time the leader of the Imamites. During this time
the question of the occultation began to penetrate theological
discussions. Hence he wrote five articles in defence of the occultation
of the Twelfth Imam and also compiled an independent work entitled
*al*-*Fusul* *al*-*’Ashara* *fi* *al*-*Ghayba.* Despite the dogmatic
approach of this work, it records valuable information concerning the
historical circumstances surrounding the disappearance of the Twelfth
Imam before 260/874.

Al-Mufid also presents an exposition similar to that of al-Nawbakhti and
Sa'd al-Qummi putting forward the fifteen different views held by the
Imamites after 260/874. Al ­Mufid bore witness to the disappearance of
all fifteen groups by 373/983, except the Twelvers who believed that
their leader was the Twelfth Imam and that he was in concealment.

In his book *al*-*Irshad*, al-Mufid follows the method employed by
al-Kulayni and al­Nu'mani in the narration of *Hadith*, first of all by
proving the existence of the Twelfth Imam and then by vindicating the
prolongation of his age beyond the life-span of an ordinary person.

4. After al-Mufid his two eminent pupils 'Ali b. al-Husayn, better known
as al-Murtada (d. 436/1044), and Muhammad b. 'Ali al-Karajaki (d.
449/1057), followed his rational approach in their treatises on the
prolongation of the Twelfth Imam's concealment. This approach is clear
in the extant article of al-Murtada which was published in Baghdad in
1955 under the title *Masa'la* *wajiza* *fi* *al* *­Ghayba* and
translated into English by Sachedina[^17].

In 427/1035 al­ Karajaki compiled a work entitled *al*-*Burhan* *‘ala*
*Sihhat* *Tul* *‘Umr* *al­* *Imam* *Sahib* *al*-*Zaman*, in which he
mentions many people whose ages had been prolonged beyond the life-span
of an ordinary person. His aim in this was to prove, like al-Saduq and
al-Mufid before him, that the prolongation of the Twelfth Imam's life
during his occultation was not an extraordinary phenomenon.

On account of the dogmatic approach of these two works they are devoid
of any historical information concerning the actual career of the
Twelfth Imam between the years 260-329/874-941.

5. The well-known Imamite scholar Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tusi (d.
460/1067) deals with the question of the *Ghayba* *of* the Twelfth Imam
in most *of* his dogmatic works. But the most important *of* these is
*Kitab* *al*- *Ghayba*, in which he makes use of both tradition and
reason to prove that the Twelfth Imam was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*, and
that he must be in a state of occultation. Through his refutation of the
other Shi’ite claims, which held that ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (d. 41/661), Ibn
al-Hanafiyya (d. 84/703), al-Sadiq (d. 148/765), Muhammad b. Isma'il,
and al-Kazim (d. 183/799) were *al-Qa’im* and that they were in hiding,
he suggests that the traditions concerning the occultation go back to
the time of 'Ali.

Al-Tusi also provides reliable historical information on the underground
activities of the four representatives of the Twelfth Imam, quoting from
a missing book entitled *Akhbar* *al*- *Wukala'* *al* *­Arba'a* by Ahmad
b. Nuh al-Basri. Al-Tusi's work became the main source for all the later
Imamite writers regarding the concealment of the Twelfth Imam,
particularly al-Majlisi (d. 1111/1699) in his work *Bihar* *al*-*Anwar.*

A contemporary of al-Kulayni was Abu al-Qasim al-Balkhi, a Mu'tazilite,
who died around the year 301/913. He held that the eleventh Imam had
died heirless and gave expression to these opinions in his work
*al*-*Mustarshid*, which is a refutation of Ibn Qubba's book al-Insaf.
Unfortunately his work has been lost. However judging by the quotations
recorded in the book *al*-*Mughni* by al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar (d.
415/1024), it appears that al-Balkhi relied on al-Hasan al-Nawbakhti (d.
ca. 310/922) for information concerning the divisions among the Imamites
after the year 260/874.[^18]

As for al-Ash’ari (d. 324/935), he depended on al-Balkhi for his
information about the Imamites. In fact after al-Ash'ari's conversion to
the group of *Ahl* *al*-*Hadith*, later to be the Sunnites, his books
became the main source for the later Sunnite writers, such as al­
Baghdadi (d. 429/1037) in his work *al*-*Farq* *bayn* *al*-*Firaq*[^19]
, the writer Ibn Hazm (d. 456/ 1063) in his work *al*-*Fasl* *fi*
*al*-*Milal* *wa*-*l*-*Ahwa'* *wa­* *l*-*Nihal* and later al-Shahristani
(d. 548/1153) in his work *al*-*Milal* *wa­* *l*-*Nihal*[^20].

However the information contained in the latter works concerning the
Imamite schisms after the death of al- ‘Askari is so far removed from
the original expostion of al-Balkhi and al-Nawbakhti that one has to be
careful about relying upon it.

2. The Biographical Works
-------------------------

Among the primary sources of this study are the books of *al*-*Rijal*,
which deal with the scientific biographies of the narrators and
compilers of traditions by estimating the degree of their authority and
deducing their reliability from their dogmatic and political
inclinations.

The Imamites compiled four main biographical works concerned with the
domain of the present study in the 4th-5th/10th-11th centuries.

1. The first is *Ma'rifat* *al*-*Naqilin* *‘an* *al*-*A'imma*
*al*-*Sadiqin*, compiled by Muhammad b. ‘Umar al-Kashshi. He was a
native of the town of Kashsh near Samarqand, where he was brought up
under the auspices of the Imamite scholar Muhammad b. Mas'ud al
­Samarqandi and where he spent the whole of his life. According to al
­Tusi he died in 368/978.[^21]

Al-Kashshi quoted his information from fifty-three narrators, but his
main source was ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Qutayba of Nishapur[^22], who was
contemporary with the short occultation and had close ties with the
agents of the Twelfth Imam in Khurasan. Ibn Qutayba provides important
information concerning the evolution of the underground organization of
the Imamites *(al­*-*Wikala)* after al-Sadiq (d. 148/765) and the reason
behind the rise of the Waqifite groups after the death of the seventh
Imam in 183/799.

Al-Kashshi's work became an important source for later Imamite scholars
like al-Tusi (d. 460/1067), who summarised it and gave it the title
*Ikhtiyar* *Ma’rifat* *al*-*Rijal.*

2,3. Al-Tusi's works, *al*-*Fihrist* and *al*-*Rijal*, are two of the
four main Imamite books of al-Rijal. He cites different chains of
transmitters *(isnad)* regarded as authentic and enables us to discover
the links between the Imamite scholars and the agents during the short
occultation.

4. The fourth Imamite work on *al*-*Rijal* *is* *Fihrist* *Asma'*
*Musannifi* *al*-*Shi’a*, which was written by Ahmad b. 'Ali al-Najashi
(d. 450/1058), a native of Kufa. He received his Shi’ite education there
and then moved to Baghdad, where he was one of the leading Imamite
scholars along with al-Murtada (d. 436/1044).

His residing in these two cities enabled him to establish close contact
with forty­five Imamite scholars who had in their possession documents
related to the period of the short occultation. These documents cast
light on the different ranks within the Imamite organization and provide
useful information on works on the *Ghayba* compiled before and after
260/874.

Al-Barqi (d. 278/891), in his work on *al*-*Rijal*, provides valuable
reports concerning the relationship between the Imams and their
followers in particular the tenth and eleventh Imams, since he was their
contemporary.

Despite the fact that the work of al-Dhahabi (d. 748/ 1347) entitled
*Mizan* *al*-*I’tidal* *is* a later source, it contains some reports
which elucidate the background of the *Ghayba* and its connection with
the rise of *al-Qa’im.*

3 The Books of General History
------------------------------

Al-Tabari (d. 310/922) lived during the periods of the short
occultation. His work *Tarikh* *al*-*RUsul* *wa*-*l*-*Muluk* *is* devoid
of any information on the activities of the representatives of the
Twelfth Imam, which points to the fact that their activities were
underground.

Alternatively, he does follow the militant activities of the other
Shi’ite groups like the Qaramita and the Isma’ilis until the
establishment of their state in 296/908. He also traces the use of the
prophetic traditions regarding *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* by these groups
in their struggle for power during the time of the short occultation.

Al-Mas'udi (d. 346/957) lived during the period of the second
occultation and provides important information regarding the harsh
treatment of the Imams and their followers by the ‘Abbasids and the
effect of this policy on the occurrence of the *Ghayba.* This can be
found in his works, *Muruj* *al*-*Dhahab*, *al*-*Tanbah*
*wa*-*l*-*Ishraf* and *Ithbat* *al*-*Wasiyya* (attributed to him).

In his work *al*-*Kamil* *fi* *al*-*Tarikh*, Ibn al-Athir (d. 630/ 1232)
provides a useful report concerning the schisms among the agents of the
Twelfth Imam and the role of the extremists in these schisms, especially
al-Shalmaghani. It is possible that Ibn al-Athir quotes his information
from an Imamite work entitled *Tarikh* *al*-*Imamiyya* by Yahya b. Abi
Tay (d. 630/1232). Unfortunately, however, this work is not extant.

Many other historical and geographical works and books of traditions
have also been used in the present study. Before they have been
employed, they have been considered with the same critical method as
that used above.

[^1]: The founder of this sect was Abu al-Jarud Ziyad b. al-Mundhir, the
companion of the fifth Imam, al-Baqir. After the revolt of Zayd b. 'Ali,
Abu al-Jarud abandoned his allegiance to al-Baqir and put forward the
claim of Zayd, establishing a new sect called al-Zaydiyya al-Jarudiyya.
Some later representatives of this sect agree with the Imamites that the
series of the Imams ended with the number twelve but others claim that
there were thirteen by including Zayd

[^2]: Ahmad b. al-’Abbas al-Najashi, Kitab al-Rijal (Tehran, n.d.), 12,
19; Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tusi, al-Fihrist (Mashhad, 1972), 14; Ibn
Dawud al­ Hilli, Kitab al-Rijal (Tehran, 1964), 15, 416.

[^3]: al-Najashi, 193; T. al-Fihrist, 216-7.

[^4]: al-Najashi, 32-3; T. al-Fihrist, 97-8.

[^5]: Muhammad b. Ya'qub al-Kulayni, al-Kafi fi ‘Ilm al-Din (Tehran,
1381), I, 335-6; al-Najashi, 39.

[^6]: al-Najashi, 191; T. al-Fihrist, 226.

[^7]: al-Najashi 235-6.

[^8]: al-Galbagani, Muntakhab al-Athar (Tehran, n.d.), 467.

[^9]: Buzurg, al-Dhari'a, XX, 201.

[^10]: Buzurg, al-Dhari’a, XVI, 82; al-Galbagani, op.cit., 467.

[^11]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar (Tehran, 1395), LI, 300-1.

[^12]: N. al-Ghayba, 143, 156, 163, 185.

[^13]: N. al-Ghayba, 82-6, 100.

[^14]: N. al-Ghayba, 91-2.

[^15]: Kama’l, 19.

[^16]: Kama’l, 127, 133, 187, 211, 222, 174, 381.

[^17]: Sachedina, A Treatise on the Occultation of the Twelfth Imamite
Imam, Studia Islamica (Paris, 1978), XLVIII, 117-24.

[^18]: al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni fi Abwab al-Tawhid, al-Imama
(Cairo, 1963), II, 176, 182.

[^19]: al-Baghdadi, al-Farq bayn al-Firaq (Beirut, 1973), 24, 51-2.

[^20]: Ibn Hazm, ‘Ali b. Muhammad, al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa-I-Ahwa'
wa-l-Nihal (Cairo, 1317-21), IV, 180, 188; al-Shahristani, al-Milal
wa-l-Nihal (London, 1864),128.

[^21]: al-Najashi, 288; T.Rijal 458.

[^22]: al-Najashi, 197.


