The Role of the Imams in the Shiite Underground Activities and their Influence upon the Evolution of the Ghayba
===============================================================================================================

1. Al-Sadiq's Attitude towards the new Regime
---------------------------------------------

It appears that the members of the ‘Abbasid family who became part of
the revolutionary movement against the Umayyads adhered to the belief,
in common with the various groups of the Shi'a, that the first lawful
caliph after the Prophet was ‘Ali[^1], and that the caliphate must
belong to the People of the House *(Ahl* *al*-*Bayt).*

The ‘Abbdsids preached against the Umayyads by calling for reform and
justice. They invited the people to rally around the most suitable
person from the progeny of Muhammad *(al*-*Da'wa* *li*-*l*-*Riďa* *min*
*Al* *Muhammad).* Many Shi’ite thought that this slogan referred only to
the descendants of Imam ‘Ali. Thus they joined the ‘Abbasid
movement[^2].

Some of the Shi'a, such as Abu Salama al-Khallal, reached high rank in
the ‘Abbasid movement without cognizing the fact that the ‘Abbasids were
the founders of the movement, and they aimed to monopolize the caliphate
for themselves.

When the propagandists overthrew the Umayyads in 132/749, Abu Salama
al-Khallal, having discovered the reality of the ‘Abbasid's goal,
endeavoured to transfer the caliphate to the ‘Alids by corresponding
with Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq, ‘Umar al-Ashraf and ‘Abd Allah al-Mahd,
offering it to each of them, Imam Ja’far al-Sddiq rejected the offer
bluntly by burning Abu Salama's letter, and he warned ‘Umar al-Ashraf
and ‘Abd Allah al­-Mahd against accepting it[^3].

Al-Sadiq had already held a secret meeting with the leading
personalities of the ‘Abbasid family, such as al-Saffah and al-Mansur at
al-Abwa', near Medina, around the year 120/737, to discuss the situation
of the People of the House *(Ahl* *al*-*Bayt).* At this meeting the
attendants wanted to form an underground collusion to bring about the
downfall of the Umayyads.

A proposal also was made to support the Hasanid claims put forward by
‘Abd Allah al-Mahd on behalf of his son Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya[^4],
but al-Sadiq refused to have anything to do with it. Although the
‘Abbasids present at this meeting made a nominal pledge to Muham­mad
al-Nafs al-Zakiyya, al-Sadiq seems to have been aware of the possibility
that their involvement with the revolutionaries, part­icularly the
Kaysaniyya or its Hashimiyya branch; would be successful and that they
would replace the Umayyads.

Also al-Sadiq knew he was the true divinely appointed Imam of the
Muslims and he achieved the Imamate by the testament of his father, Imam
al-Baqir. Thus people should rally around him to recover his right in
the caliphate. Al-Sadiq's view did not please the ‘Abbasids, so, they
carried out their underground activities against the Umayyads without
his participation.

When the ‘Abbasids succeeded in seizing the reins of power in 132/749
they were naturally aware of the danger from their kinsmen, the ‘Alids,
whose claims to succession would be greater than their own if ‘Ali's
right to the caliphate were to be accepted by the general populace. As a
result the ‘Alids now faced ‘Abbasid oppression more severe than that of
the Umayyads[^5].

The motives for this oppression seem to have been first of all
doctrinal. The early members of the ‘Abbasid family, such as ‘Abd Allah
b. ‘Abbas[^6], had confirmed ‘Ali's right to the Imamate (the political
and religious authority) by relating many traditions attributed to the
Prophet supporting it. They had also supported ‘Ali against the first
three Caliphs and participated in the Caliphate of ‘Ali, and they gave
some support to his son al-Hasan.[^7]

In the eyes of the ‘Alids by taking over the Caliphate the ‘Abbasids
became usurpers of the political authority of the Imamate. Hence the
‘Abbasids became suspicious of the ‘Alid attitude toward their
authority. Secondly there were economic motives for the ‘Abbasid
oppression since Imam al-Sadiq continued to collect the *khums* secretly
from his followers[^8], an act which the ‘Abbasids considered as a
preparatory step towards some conspiracy to overthrow them.

These two factors obliged the ‘Abbasids to keep al­-Sadiq in Medina and
to hold his followers, especially in Iraq and later in Egypt, under
close scrutiny as measures to ensure the security of the state.

Thus al-Sadiq maintained an externally quiescent policy towards the
‘Abbasids. Yet at the same time he spread traditions amongst the Shi’ite
narrators of traditions stating that the Imamate was a prerogative
bestowed by God upon one of the descendants of al­-Husayn, who, before
his death and at the Prophet's order, had transferred it to his
successor by a clear stipulation *(al*-*Nass* *al*-*Jali)*[^9].

Al-Sadiq held that it was not necessary for the divinely appointed Imam
to rise in revolt immediately in order to recover his rights to
political authority. He should be satisfied with the spiritual
leadership and perform its duties until the time when the community is
sufficiently aware of his right to political power. Then God will assist
him in his quest[^10].

In accordance with his quiescent policy al­-Sadiq announced openly that
*al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* and not himself would achieve political
power[^11].

Al-Sadiq's quiescent policy did not satisfy a considerable body of his
adherents. Their political ambitions caused schism amongst the Imamites.
The instigator of this political movement was called Abu al-Khattab. At
first he was trusted by al-Sadiq and nominated as agent *(wakil)* of the
Shi’ite group in Kufa.

But al-Sadiq then repudiated and denounced him because of his extremist
theological view[^12], which he had endeavoured to enforce by militant
means. It seems likely that Abu al-Khattab wanted to circumvent the
influence and the interference of al-Sadiq by propounding his political
and revolutionary ideas to al-Sadiq's son Isma'il, who was more inclined
to such thoughts than his younger brother Musa. Thus Abu al-Khattab
hoped to give his revolutionary ideas religious legitimacy under
Isma’il's name.

Although the rebellion of Abu al-Khattab was easily subdued at Kufa, his
failure and al-Sadiq's continued insistence on a quiescent policy forced
Abu al-Khattab's followers to resort to underground activities under the
leadership of Muhammad b. Isma’il. This event led the adherents of
al-Sadiq to split into the Isma'ilis and the Musawiyya.

After his death, they split into Musawiyya, who held the Imamate of Musa
al-Kazim, al-Fatthiyya, who held the Imamate of the eldest son of
al-Sadiq, Abd Allah al-Aftah; al-­*Muhammadiyya*, who held the Imamate
of Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Sadiq, the Waqifa, who thought that al-Sadiq
had not died but was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi;* and the two Isma’ili sects
who held the Imamate of Isma'il and his son Muhammad respectively[^13].

2. The Imamite activities during the period of al-Kazim (148-183/765-799)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

As a consequence of al-Sadiq's death the Imamites became so weak that
even if military rebellion might have been possible during his
life­time, there was little chance of it now. The rise of the Isma'ilis
during al-Sadiq's lifetime, followed by the rise of the *Fathiyya* sect,
which included most of the Imamite *fuqaha'*,[^14] made the position of
al-Sadiq's successor, Musa al-Kazim, very weak, and obliged him to
follow the quiescent policy of his father.

For this reason al-Mansur(d. 158/774) did not take any action against
him or his followers during his life-time. However he continued his
pursuit of the representatives of the revolutionary branch of the
Hasanids[^15].

The regime of al-Mahdi, who was installed in the Caliphate after the
death of his father al-Mansur in 158/774,[^16] was distinguished by his
"orthodox" policy. He encouraged the traditional *muhaddithun*, pursued
the *zindiqs*, and oppressed the People of the Book[^17]. However, "this
policy could be described as less religious policy than a political
weapon. The promotion of the Surma by the ‘Abbdsids was, in fact, a
means in the struggle against the religio-political enemies or
opposition movements"[^18].

This statement is illustrated by al-Mahdi's attitude towards the
Imamites. When he came to power in 158/774, the followers of al-Kazim
became active and more powerful than the Fathiyya and the
Isma'ilis[^19].

Al-Mahdi thought that the religious and intellectual activities of
al-Kazim's partisans might endanger his regime, especially as there was
a report indicating "that an important body of opinion had been turning
towards the ‘Alids and away from the ‘Abbasids or rather, had been
insisting that the Hashimite charisma was not equally spread through all
the clan, but was peculiarly present in the ‘Alids alone[^20].

Perhaps for this reason, al-Mahdi summoned al-Kazim from Medina and
imprisoned him in Baghdad. But in so doing he neither reinforced the
legitimacy of his rule nor changed public opinion towards the
charismatic character of al-Kazim[^21].

Therefore, he decided to follow a policy which depended on bribery and
the intimidation of the Shi’a. Al-Kazim was released in 159/775, after
he had sworn that he would not rise in arms against al-Mahdi or his
successors[^22]. According to al-Tabari, al-Mahdi simultaneously
approached the Zaydites in order to gain their assistance in monitoring
the activities of the ‘Alids and their followers.

For example, he made overtures to Ya'qub b. Dawud, who belonged to a
family which had worked in the secretarial affairs of Khurasan during
the Umayyad period[^23], and made him his "brother in God". Then, in
163/799, al-Mahdi made him his vizier and vested him with full powers to
handle all the affairs of the Caliphate, whereupon Ya'qub gathered
together the Zaydites and appointed them to the high offices of the
state[^24].

Al-Mahdi may have been motivated by the fact that the non-revolutionary
Zaydites *(al­*-*Jara'riyya)* believed in the Imamate of the Inferior
*(al*-*Mafdul)* as long as the Superior *(al*-*Afdal)*, was present, and
such dogma might give a legitimate foundation to his Caliphate which
could be used against the ‘Alids.

During al-Mahdi's regime the claim was put forward that the lawful Imam
after the Prophet was not ‘Ali but al-’Abbas, and that therefore the
Imamate belonged to his family[^25]. In fact Ya'qub b. Dawud brought
many jurisprudents together from Basra, Kufa and al-Sham and organised
them[^26] so as to further this claim. Al-Kashshi reports two
transmissions to support this.

He says that the Zaydite Hisham b. Ibrahim wrote many Zaydite works, one
of them entitled "The Confirmation of the Imamate of al- ‘Abbas”, and he
adds that another Zaydite, called Ibn al-Muq’ad, wrote a
heresiographical work illustrating the dogmas, places and activities of
the pro-Imamites, such as *al*-*Ya’furiyya*, *al*-*Zurariyya*, *al*-
*Ammariyya*, and *al*-*Jawaliqiyya*, and submitted his work to al-Mahdi.
This work was then recited together with a warning by the Caliph at the
gates of Baghdad, Medina and other cities[^27].

The recitation of this work was the first step to al-Mahdi's pursuit of
the other factions of the pro­‘Alids. Some of these pro-’Alids were
obliged to flee from Kufa to remote provinces, like Yemen[^28], while
al-Kazim spread instructions amongst his adherents for them to follow
his quiescent policy carefully. Al-Kashshi's report seems to indicate
that the tense relationship between the ‘Abbasids and the pro-’Alids
continued until the death of al-Mahdi in 169/785.[^29]

Although some of this tension seems to have been alleviated with the
accession of al-Hadi, the Hasanids were closely watched and their
salaries cut. They began to increase their propaganda in Khurasan and
the other provinces in a new Zaydite form, and they contacted the
leading personalities of the Hasanids in Medina, encouraging them to
revolt[^30].

As a part of al-Hadi's precautionary policy the Hasanids of Medina were
forced to come to the office of the governor every evening. They
exploited a gathering of their followers from numerous provinces during
the Pilgrimage and made their ill-treatment by the governor an excuse to
rebel in 169/785. But their uprising was easily defeated and resulted in
their being massacred in the battle of Fakhkh[^31].

However the Caliph accused al-Kazim of provoking the rebels and decided
to kill him, but died in 170/786 before he could put his decision into
practice[^32].

The battle of Fakhkh and the commitment of al-Hades successor,
al-Rashid, to the anti- ‘Alid policy of his predecessors only served to
entrench the political strategy of the three ‘Alid parties, the
revolutionary Hasanids, the Isma'ilis and the Imamites.

The Imamite group under Imam Musa al-Kazim became stronger and more
organised, and insisted on a gradual movement towards their political
goal, but the Imam rejected any bid to rise in arms because he
considered this the task of *al-Qa’im*[^33].

His adherents, most of whom were originally from Kufa, were scattered
throughout the Islamic state and used the rite of Pilgrimage to
communicate with each other. They succeeded in maintaining an important
body of followers in Akhmim in Egypt, which became a centre for
communication between the Shi’a in Kufa and those in Egypt[^34]. They
had other followers in al-Maghrib[^35].

Al-Kazim permitted a few of his adherents to work in the ‘Abbasid
administration, especially in the offices of *al*-*wizara* and
*al*-*barad* (governmental mail), so that they could help to save their
fellows in times of danger. Hence several Imamite families held office,
such as that of ‘Ali b. Yaqtin [^36] and that of al-Ash'ath, including
Ja’far b. Muhammad al-Ash'ath and his son al- ‘Abbas, who became the
governor of Khurasan, and Waddah (or Wadih), who worked in the *barid*
of Egypt[^37].

The enlargement of al-Kazim's party increased his wealth, for there is
much evidence to indicate that he collected secretly from his
adherents[^38] the *khums*, the *zakat*, gifts and other taxes enjoined
in the *Shari'a* as part of what was due to his Imamate.

The second Shi’ite party was the Isma’ilis, who had already
disassociated themselves from the quiescent policy of al-Sadiq and his
son al-Kazim by adopting the Imamate of Isma'il first and then of his
son Muhammad, both of whom were more inclined toward more actively
revolutionary underground political activities.

They learnt from the repeated failure of the Hasanid uprisings, which
were initiated without political preparation, and they decided to
struggle for power through a gradual political process.

This decision encouraged them to adopt ideas from beyond the circle of
Islam, and their adoption of these ideas may have "liberated" their
minds from the limits of *Shari’a.* They put forward new interpretations
of the Islamic texts, according to which each passage had an esoteric
and an exoteric meaning[^39].

For example, a tradition attributed to the Prophet says that the *Mahdi*
*will* appear when the sun rises from the place of its setting.
According to them, this meant not the rising of the real sun, but that
of *al*-*Mahdi*, who would appear in al-Maghrib. Therefore, they became
more interested in preaching their doctrine in al-Maghrib and encouraged
their followers in the east to emigrate there[^40].

Nawbakhti's reports suggest that the relationship between the Isma'ilis
and al-Kazim's followers was tense, since the Isma’ili leaders allowed
their followers to assassinate the Imamites who supported al-Kazim[^41].
Moreover the Imamites accused the Isma'ilis of being implicated in the
arrest of al-Kazim[^42].

In the Hijaz the situation of the third Shi’ite group, the Hasanids, was
very difficult following the total defeat of their second revolt in
Fakhkh in 169/785. The ‘Abbasids discovered that the notion of
*al*-*Mahdi* had been in circulation amongst the Hasanids and that they
believed that he might rise in Mecca.

It was such a notion that encouraged two Hasanid leaders to rise in
arms, first al-Nafs al­-Zakiyya in 145/762 and then al-Husayn b. 'Ali in
169/785, each of whom hoped that he might be the promised *Mahdi*[^43].

Thus the ‘Abbasids continued to restrict the movements of the Hasanids
and forced them to present themselves to the governor *(al*-*Wali)*
every evening."[^44] This critical situation made it impossible for the
Hasanids to take any militant action in the Hijaz, so two of al-Nafs
al-Zakiyya's brothers left Medina after the battle of Fakhkh to promote
their claims elsewhere.

The first of these was Yahya al-Mahd, who went to the province of Daylam
and preached his ideas there, winning considerable support from the
native princes and the people of Daylam, whom he provoked to rebellion
against the caliph al-Rashid in 175/791.[^45]

The second brother, Idris, fled to Egypt, where he already had a large
body of partisans, and, with the assistance of a certain Wadih, a
Shi’ite working in the bared, managed to escape from there to
al-Maghrib. It seems most likely that his partisans in al-­Maghrib had
already spread much propaganda against the ‘Abbasids, because within
three years Idris succeeded in rebelling against them and establishing
the Idrisid state, in 172/788.[^46]

The numerous Shi’ite activities mentioned above seem to have been the
causes of al-Rashid's anti-’Alid policy, which covered most of his
Caliphate. In 171 /787 he became suspicious of the loyalty of the ‘Alids
in Baghdad, and decided to gather all of them together and exile them to
Medina[^47].

He followed this step with the appointment of Bakkar al-Zubayri, a
descendant of ‘Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr, as governor of Medina and he
ordered him to put the ‘Alids under close watch and to restrict their
movements[^48]. As for the rebellion of Yahya al-Mahd in Daylam,
al-Rashid sent an army against him (fifty thousand according to
al-Tabari) under the leadership of al-Fadl b. Yahya al-Barinaki.

Through diplomacy and promises of amnesty he managed to persuade Yahya
al-Mahd to end his uprising and to surrender, after giving him a
guarantee of security from al-Rashid. But the Caliph was not satisfied,
so he had al-Mahd arrested in Baghdad and killed [^49].

As for the revolt of Idris al-Mahd, al-Rashid followed the policy of his
father al-Mahdi by using the Zaydites against the other ‘Alids. He sent
a Zaydite scholar called Sulayman b. Jarir to kill Idris. In order to
hide his secret target, Sulayman pretended to be a Shi’ite partisan who
had escaped from the ‘Abbasids' oppression. He became one of the
courtiers of Idris and managed to poison him in 177/793.[^50]

However the assassination of IdrTs did not bring about the
disintegration of his state, as the Berber tribes installed his child,
Idris II, after his death. For this reason al-Rashid vested Ibrahim b.
al-Aghlab with the government of Ifriqiyya and, four years later,
encouraged him to establish the Aghlabid state, possibly to counteract
the danger posed by the Idrisids[^51].

In the meantime the Imamite scholars were active in the intellectual
field in Egypt, Yaman, Iraq and Khurasan[^52].  
 Hisham b. al-Hakam, for example, attempted to prove the legitimacy of
the Imamate of al-Kazim, which means that he considered the ‘Abbasids as
usurpers of al-Kazim's rights[^53].

The Hasanid uprisings in Daylam and al-Maghrib and the underground
activities of the Imamites and the Isma’ilis worried al­Rashid and made
him think that al-Kazim, whom he already knew to be receiving the
*khums*, *the* kharaj and gifts from his followers; was behind all these
activities and had prepared a conspiracy to overthrow him. Therefore he
initiated a campaign of arresting the Imamites[^54].

He started by arresting al-Kazim in Medina in 179/795, and sent him to
prison in Basra and Baghdad[^55]. Furthermore, Ibn al-Mu'tazz reports
that al-Rashid ordered the Zaydite Abu ‘Isma to kill the Imamite poet
Mansur al-Nammari[^56].

It was this campaign of persecution that forced the Imamite missionary
Hisham b. al-Hakam to hide in Mada’in, from whence he escaped to Kufa,
where he died two months later[^57].

However al-Rashid's arrests did not deter the Imamite underground
activities, especially in Basra. Therefore, according to the Imamite
narrations, al-Kazim was poisoned for al-­Rashid in 183/799 at the
instigation of Yahya al-Barinaki[^58].

Al-­Rashid also put to death sixty ‘Alids who were in his prisons[^59].

The death of al-Kazim led to another schism amongst the Imamites. The
first group, which represented quite a large body, was called the
*Waqifa.* They held that he was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*, *but* they
differed amongst themselves concerning his death and split into four
sub-groups, three of whom maintained that he had died while the fourth
denied it[^60].

A few anecdotes mentioned by the *Ithna'* *‘Ashariyya* suggest that the
cause of the denial of al-Kazim's death was that some of his agents,
like ‘Uthman b. ‘Isa al-Rawasi in Egypt, and Ziyad, al-Qindi, ‘Ali b.
Abi Hamza, Hayyan and al-Sarraj in Kufa, possessed a large amount of
money (more than a hundred thousand dinars) which belonged to al-Kazim.
Since they had used this money for their own benefit, they denied his
death and rejected the Imamate of al-Riďa in order that they would have
an excuse for not returning the money[^61].

However, it is hard to agree with al-­Kashshi's view concerning the
reason behind the emergence of the *Waqifa* sect. Most of the traditions
concernng the occultation and the rise of *al-Qa’im* are attributed to
al-Sadiq, who did not indicate explicitly which of his descendants would
be *al-Qa’im*[^62].

Therefore it is very likely that a considerable number of the
*muhaddithun* *thought* that the Imam had indicated his son Musa and
hence stopped at him, contending that he was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*
*and* was in a state of occultation.

The second group resulting from the schism after al-Kazim's death held
that he had passed away and the Imam was his son ‘Ali al-Riďa, who,
according to al-Kulayni, assumed the Imamate by the designation of his
father[^63]. Al-Riďa faced many difficulties in proving his right to the
Imamate, not only to his father's prominent followers, but also to his
brother Ahmad.[^64]

However, between the years 183-199/799-814, he managed to maintain a
considerable number of followers, and administer an underground system
of communication to carry on the religious functions of his
Imamate[^65].

Moreover his preference for the religious dimensions of Islam, rather
than its political dimensions, made him a magnet for many individuals,
including the precursors of the sufi movements, especially in
Khurasan[^66]. But many Imamites who had accepted his Imamate were not
satisfied with his quietist attitude and involved themselves in the
underground activities of the revolutionary Zaydites, probably without
his permission[^67].

3. The Attitude of al-Riďa towards the ‘Alid Revolt against al-Ma’mun
---------------------------------------------------------------------

When al-Amin became caliph, Iraq was the centre of his power. It was
here that he maintained the support of the Arabs, and especially that of
the Murji'ite scholars *(al*-*amma*, later called the Sunnites), while
his brother al-Ma’mun was governor of Khurasan and gained the support of
its military leaders and senior administrators, especially the Persian
vizier al-Fadl b. Sahl and his partisans, who eventually helped him to
overthrow al-Amin[^68].

Al-Ma’mun's success in gaining the caliphate was contrary to the
political and economic interest of al-Amm's supporters. Therefore many
regional revolts took place in Syria, al-Jazira, Yemen and Iraq, headed
by the local ‘Abbasid governors[^69].

At the same time the ‘Alids used their underground propaganda which was
influential in the Yemen, Hijaz and Iraq, to exploit al-Ma’mun's
difficulties in Iraq and to cause a revolt in Kufa in 199/815. Thus
these regions fell out of al-Ma’mun's control.

Although reports about the ideological identity of the ‘Alid uprising
and the events surrounding it are confused, apparently it was a Zaydite
revolt[^70] maintained with the support of some Imamite sects. These
included the followers of Ahmad b. Musa al-Kazim and the *sabtiyya*, the
followers of Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Sadiq[^71], along with some of the
Imamites, but without the direct order of the eighth Imam, al-Riďa[^72].

The spiritual leader of this revolt was Muhammad b. Ibrahim b. Tabataba,
while its military leader was Abu al-Saraya. It broke out under the
slogan "We invite people to rally around the most suitable leader from
the progeny of Muhammad and to practice the teachings of the Qur'an and
the sunna'[^73] in Kufa on the 10th Jumada 199/26th January 815, where
the rebels had the support of the people of the environs of Kufa and of
the bedouins. Abu al-Saraya minted coins in his own name in Kufa,
managed to defeat three ‘Abbasid armies and occupied Mada'in[^74].

Moreover he dispatched many successful campaigns under the leadership of
al-Riďa's brothers and relatives to extend his authority in Iraq,
al-Ahwaz, Fars, the Hijaz, and Yemen. They fulfilled their tasks and
became the governors of these regions.

For example, Zayd b. Musa al-Kazim became the governor of al­Ahwaz and
Basra, Fars came under the control of Isma'il b. Musa al-Kazim, and
Yemen came under the control of his brother Ibrahim, Wasit was ruled by
Husayn b. Ibrahim b. al-Hasan b ‘Ali. Abu al­-Saraya appointed Sulayman
b. Dawud in Medina, and nominated al-­Husayn al-Aftas as governor in
Mecca, authorising him to be the leader of the pilgrims and to provide
the *Ka'ba* with a white kiswa[^75].

The authority of Abu al-Saraya increased after the mysterious death of
the spiritual leader of the revolt, Ibn Tabataba on the 1st Rajab
199/15th February 815, and the refusal of the eminent ‘Alid, ‘Ali b.
'Ubayd Allah, to accept the position of Ibn Tabataba. Abu al­-Saraya, in
order to evade the interference of any strong spiritual leader,
nominated for this post a young ‘Alid called Muhammad b. Muhammad b.
Zayd b. ‘Ali[^76], and monopolised all affairs of the leadership of the
revolt.

Abu al-Saraya's full control in Iraq did not continue, because the
‘Abbasid army defeated him at Qasr b. Hubayra near Kufa and forced him
to withdraw towards Basra along with 800 horsemen. But news came to him
that his governor in Basra, Zayd b. Musa al-Kazim, had also been
defeated after hard combat and had been captured by the ‘Abbasid troops.

Thus he went towards al-Ahwaz, but was defeated by the ‘Abbasid governor
of that city and his followers dispersed. A few months later the troops
of al-Hasan b. Sahl captured him at Jalawla' and on 10th Rabic I
200/18th October 815 they beheaded him, after which his body was impaled
in Baghdad[^77].

It is worth mentioning that the failure of this revolt caused some
Imamites to hold that Musa al-Kazim, the seventh Imam, was *al-Qa’im*
*al*-*Mahdi* They had considered his son Ahmad' as the lawful successor
of his father. But since he had participated with Abu al­-Saraya, they
rejected his Imamate and denied the death of al-Kazim[^78].

This fact reveals the general attitude of the Imamites towards any
militant action and indicates that they had *Hadiths* concerning the
rise of an Imam with the sword, whose uprising would never be defeated,
for he could not die without establishing the government of the People
of the House. This may be the reason behind the quiescent attitude of
those followers of al-Riďa who did not take any open or active part in
the revolt of Abu al-Saraya.

On hearing of the military defeat of their comrades on the Iraqi front
after the death of Abu al-Saraya, the rebels in Mecca, who had full
control of the Hijaz and the Yemen, made overtures to Muhammad b. Ja’far
al-Sadiq, asking him to be their leader and finally persuading him to
accept their offer. They swore the oath of allegiance to him as their
caliph and called him *Amir* *al*-*Mu'minin* on 6th Rabi’ II 200/13th
November 815[^79].

He himself claimed that he was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*, and based his
claim on prophetic traditions[^80]. But the eighth Imam al-Riďa denied
his claim, although he endeavoured to save him from a military defeat by
advising trim to postpone his revolt against the ‘Abbasids[^81].

The installation by the rebels of an ‘Alid caliph in Mecca with the
epithet *al*-*Mahdi* threatened the authority of al-Ma’mun. Having
failed to subdue the revolt by force, al-Ma’mun decided to resort to
political methods, by conciliating the eight Imam al-Riďa. He dispatched
an army under the leadership of 'Isa b. al-Juludi to Medina for this
purpose[^82].

But this army was badly defeated at the hands of Muhammad b. Ja’far
al-Sadiq. Therefore al-Juludi asked al-Riďa to contact Muhammad and ask
him to end his resistance, but he rejected al-Riďa's mediation and
insisted on continuing his rebellion. This led to skirmishes between the
‘Abbasid troops and the rebels until the end of the year 200/815, when
the ‘Abbasid army captured Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Sadiq and forced him to
renounce his claim publicly[^83].

Because his arrest did not return the areas of revolt into the hands of
the authorities, al-Juludi returned with him and al-Riďa to Merv.
According to al-Kulayni, al-Ma’mun welcomed al-Riďa and offered him the
caliphate, but he refused. However, after a few. months of negotiation
with al-Ma mun, al-Riďa agreed to be his successor[^84].

The caliph announced his acceptance. on 5th Ramadan 201/28th March 817
and called him *"al*-*Riďa* *mini* *Al* *Muhammad'.* At the same time he
ordered his soldiers to wear green clothes instead of the black which
was the emblem of the ‘Abbasids. Then he strengthened his relations with
al-Riďa by marrying his sister Umm Habiba to al-Riďa[^85].

The installation of al-Riďa was in reality a political step arranged by
the Persian vizier al-Fadl b. Sahl and associated with other policies
aimed at consolidating his Persian support and harming the interests of
his Arab opposition in Baghdad. This can be concluded from the points
mentioned below:

***Firstly***, the fact that al-Ma’mun continued to reside in Merv
caused complaints amongst the military and administrative groups in
Iraq, who had been the courtiers of Al-Amin (193-198/808-814) and who
then had to struggle for their economic and regional interests against
the Persian vizier of al-Ma’mun, al-Fadl b. Sahl, and his brother
al­-Hasan b. Sahl[^86].

Because he was busy with this conflict, al-Ma’mun failed to subdue
completely the ‘Alid rebellion in the Hijaz and Yemen. Therefore, with
the encouragement of his vizier, al-Ma’mun installed al-Riďa as his
successor to the caliphate in order to divide the rebels by gaining the
support of al-Riďa's adherents and those who were hoping for the
appearance of an inspired ‘Alid leader[^87].

***Secondly*****,** al-Ma’mun changed the colour of the ‘Abbasid emblem
from black to green. The latter colour was associated with the Sasanids,
whereas the ‘Alid emblem was white[^88].  
 Such a step suggests the influence of the Persian vizier al-Fadl b.
Sahl.

***Thirdly***, by installing al-Riďa as his successor, al-Ma’mun
succeeded in splitting the rebels by gaining the support of al-Riďa's
brothers, who accepted the conciliation of al-Ma’mun and mentioned his
name in the *khutba* along with the name of al-Riďa. According to
al-Tabari, al-’Abbas b. Musa al-Kazim accepted the governorship of Kufa
on behalf of al-Ma’mun, a fact which encouraged some of the rebels to
mentions the names of al-Ma’mun and al-Riďa in the *khutba.*

But the majority of the Kufans insisted on mentioning only al-Riďa's
name or that of any prominent person from the descendants of 'Ali[^89].

Such attitudes indicate the Zaydite inclination of the Kufans. However,
the leader of the rebels in Mecca, Ibrahim b. Musd al-Kazim agreed to
mention both his brother al­Rida and al-Ma’mun in the *khutba.* For this
reason, al-Ma’mun confirmed his office and authorised him to lead the
pilgrimage in Mecca[^90].

But a year later, in 202/817, the caliph gave the governorship of Mecca
to an ‘Abbasid leader, ‘Isa al-Juludi, and dispatched Ibrahim to Yemen
to subdue the rebellion there. He also granted him Yemen's governorship.
After he had fulfilled this task, Ibrahim set out for Mecca, but during
his return he was arrested, as was his brother Zayd, and sent to
al-Ma’mun[^91].

Moreover, al-­Nawbakhti mentions that a considerable body of the
*muhaddithun* and Zaydites (the non-revolutionary branch) became
Imamites after the installation of al-Riďa. But the accounts of
al-Kashshi and al-Saduq suggest that these same people, for example
Hisham b. Ibrahim al-Rashidi, had been used by al-Ma’mun to watch the
partisans of al-Riďa, and this might explain why they returned to their
previous faith directly after the death of al-Riďa in 203/817.[^92]

***Fourthl*****y,** after he had quashed the 'Alid rebellion, al-Ma’mun
decided to go to Baghdad, taking with him al-Riďa and Muhammad b. Ja’far
al-Sadiq. During his advance, his vizier. al-Fadl b. Sahl was
assassinated, then al-Riďa died in Tus, probably of poison[^93], and
Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Sadiq passed away and was buried in Jurjan[^94].

Their mysterious deaths seem to indicate that al-Ma’mun, having used
them to fragment the ‘Alid opposition, was now moving on to a more
rigorous anti- 'Alid programme.

***Fifthly***, the numerous measures initiated by al-Ma’mun after his
arrival at Bahgdad on Rabi’ I 204/819 revealed the political aim of his
previous policy. He cast aside the green banner and ordered his subjects
to wear the black colour of the ‘Abbasids[^95]. He granted al­ Riďa's
successor, al-Jawad, two million dirhams[^96], and gave back the
‘district of Fadak to prominent ‘Alids, Muhammad b. Yahya b. al-­Husayn
and Muhammad b. ‘Ubayd Allah b. al-Hasan[^97].

Furthermore, the land-tax *(al*-*kharaj)* of the *sawad* was adjusted in
favour of the tax-payer. The share of the treasury was to be two-fifths
instead of half of the produce[^98].

Through these actions, al-Ma’mun wanted to cut the support given by the
prominent ‘Alids and the peasants of the *sawad* to the revolutionary
'Alid activities, which, according to Abu al-Fida, he had brought to an
end. He was also endeavouring to work against his Arab opposition in
Baghdad. When he entered the city everything there returned to normal as
if the uprising had never occurred.[^99]

***Finally***, in 205/820 al-Ma mun started to hold symposiums between
the Imamites and the Zaydites, and encouraged them to discuss the
question of the *Im* *ama* in his presence. It is worth mentioning that
the non-revolutionary Zaydites believed in the Imamate of the inferior
*(al*-*Mafdul)* in spite of the presence of the superior *(al*-*Afdal).*

This view was based on the belief that even though ‘Ali b. Abi Talib was
the most excellent of the community after the Prophet, he fully
recognized the caliphate of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Because of this belief
of the Zaydites, in the discussions with the Imamites, al-Ma’mun often
agreed with the viewpoints of Zaydite scholars such as ‘Ali b. al-Him,
as regards the Imamate[^100].

Then al-Ma’mun managed to capture the 'Alid rebel ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. ‘Umar b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, who rose
in arms in Yemen. By subduing this rebellion, al­Ma’mun ended the last
military opposition of the ‘Alids during his rule. Finally, in 206/821
his real attitude towards the ‘Alids was revealed when he ordered them
to wear black, and announced that all the descendants of Imam ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib and their close kindred *(al­*-*Talibiyun)* should be
prevented from entering his palace[^101].

4. The development of the Imamite organization (al-Wikala) during the time of al-Jawad
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Despite the well-developed status of the Imamite organization during the
last period of al-Riďa's Imamate, he died, leaving a successor only
seven years old, thus causing further splits amongst his followers.
Al-Mas'udi mentions that because of the age of Muhammad al-Jawad, the
ninth Imam, al-Riďa's followers were confused as to whether or not he
possessed the requisite qualifications for the Imamate.

Therefore eighty leading personalities from various provinces, among
them al-Rayyan b. al­ Salt, Safwan b. Yahya, Yunis b. ‘Abd al-Rahman,
Muhammad b. Hakim, 'Ali b. al-Hasan al-Wasiti, and Ishaq b. Isma’ il b.
Nawbakht, gathered together at the house of ‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-Hajjaj
in Baghdad to discuss the validity of al-Jawad's Imamate.

They decided to test his knowledge during the pilgrimage. Two groups
concluded that al-Jawad's age precluded his being qualified for the
Imamate; the first group supported the Imamate of his uncle, Ahmad b.
Musa al-Kazim, whereas the second group, including Ibrahim b. Salih
al­Anmati, joined the *Waqifa* and held that the seventh Imam .was
*al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*[^102]*.*

But the rest were satisfied that al-Jawad's knowledge was exceptional
and held that he was well qualified in spite of his age[^103]. Hence
they continued with the affairs of the organization, and sent
propagandists from Kufa and Medina to various provinces. According to
*al*-*Najashi*, many Kufan *muhaddithun*, such as Muhammad b. Muhammad
b. al-Ash'ath, Ahmad b. Sahl, al-Husayn. b. ‘Ali al-Misri, and Isma’ il
b. Musa al-Kazim, moved to Egypt and carried on their activities there.

One of these activities was to circulate the traditions of the Prophet
concerning *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* and the fact that he would be from
the progeny of al-Husayn[^104].

A narration mentioned by al-Kulayni suggests that they gained
considerable adherents there, namely, that ‘Ali b. Asbat al-Kufi came
from Egypt to Medina to see al-Jawad so as to describe him to the
Imamites in Egypt[^105]. Throughout the land of the caliphate the
Imamite system of sending out agents *(wukala')* became more developed
and managed to save their organization from certain disintegration.

The Imam's agents spread in many provinces, like al-Ahwaz[^106], Hamadan
[^107], Sistan, Bist' [^108], Rayy [^109], Basra[^110], Wasit,
Baghdad[^111], and the traditional centres of the Imamites, Kufa and
Qumm[^112].

They allowed their partisans to work in the ‘Abbasid administration.
Thus Muhammad b. Isma'il b. Bazi and Ahmad b. Hamza al-Qummi occupied
high ranks in the vizierate[^113], and Nuh b. Darraj was the qadi of
Baghdad and then of Kufa. Because his relatives were the agents of
al-Jawad, he hid his faith during his occupation of this post[^114].

Other Imamites became governors of some ‘Abbasid provinces, such as
al-Husayn b. ‘Abd Allah al-Nisaburi, the governor of Bist and Sistan,
and al-Hakam b. ‘Alya al-Asadi, the governor of Bahrain. Both of these
men paid the *khums* to al-Jawad while hiding their allegiance to
him[^115].

At this stage the underground activities of the agents only aimed at
controlling and carrying on the religious and financial affairs of the
Imamites, not at endangering al-Ma’mun's rule. However in the year
210/825 the people of Qumm, most of whom were Imamites, appealed to the
caliph to reduce their land-tax *(al*-*kharaj)*, just as he had reduced
the *kharaj* of the inhabitants of Rayy, but he ignored their appeal.

Therefore they refused to pay the *kharaj* and took control of the
affairs of Qumm[^116].  
 As a result al-Ma’mun dispatched three regiments of his army from
Baghdad and Khurasan to quash their revolt. The leader of the Abbasid
army, ‘Ali b. Hisham accomplished his task. He demolished the wall of
Qumm and killed many people, amongst them Yahya b. ‘Umran, who,
according to Ibn Shahr Ashub, was the agent of al-Jawad[^117].

Moreover al-Ma’mun collected seven million dirhams from Qumm's
inhabitants as a *kharaj* instead of the normal amount, which had been
two million dirhams before the uprising. The reports of al-Tabari and
Ibn al-Athir indicate that some of the leaders of this revolt were
exiled to Egypt, among them Ja’far b. Dawud al-Qummi[^118].

But these measures did not end the military activities in Qumm.
According to al-Tabari, Ja’far b. Dawud escaped from Egypt and rebelled
in Qumm in 214/829, but his revolt was subdued and he was arrested and
banished again to Egypt[^119].

Unfortunately the Imamite sources are silent about these military
actions in Qumm and their relationship with the Imamites' organization.
But al-Ma’mun linked these activities with al-Jawad. Thus he endeavoured
to end them through the Imam. According to al-Azdi and al-Tabari, during
his march to invade al-Rum, al-Mam'un summoned al-Jawad and welcomed him
in Tikrit in Safar 215/830, where he married his daughter Umm al­-Fadl
to him.

He asked him to celebrate his marriage in Baghdad, then to go back with
his wife to Medina[^120].

But this marriage neither gave al-Ma’mun the support of the Imamites nor
stopped the revolts in Qumm. Ja’far b. Dawud managed to escape again
from Egypt and rebelled in Qumm in 216/831, where he defeated the army
sent by al­Ma’mun and killed its leader ‘Ali b. ‘Isa. He continued his
resistance until the end of the year 217/832, when the ‘Abbasid troops
ended his uprising and executed him[^121].

But afterwards the underground activities of the ‘Alids increased on a
wide scale. Therefore al-­Mu’tasim, who succeeded al-Ma’mun to the
caliphate in 218/833, was obliged to summon al-Jawad and Muhammad b.
al-Qasim al-­Talqan, so as to investigate their role in the underground
activities.

The latter, on hearing of al-Mu'tasim's decision, escaped from Kufa to
Khurasan[^122], whereas al-Jawad was arrested in Medina and taken along
with his wife, Umm al-Fadl, to the caliph in Baghdad, where he was put
under house-arrest. He died a few months later in Dhu al­-Hijja 220/835.
Some Imamite writers claim that his wife Umm al­-Fadl poisoned him at
the instigation of al-Mu'tasim, but al-Mufid thinks that he died
naturally[^123].

In the last few years of al-Jawad's Imamate the system and the tactics
of the Imamite agents were highly developed. The Imam's followers in
Khurasan allowed themselves to be recruited into the ‘Abbasid army and
participated in subduing the rebellion of the *Khurramiyya.* According
to al-Tusi, in 220/834 they seized a large amount of booty from the
rebels, so al-Jawad ordered them to pay the *khums* either to him
directly or to his agent[^124].

Al-Jawad himself, on hearing of al-Mu'tasim's command to present himself
in Baghdad, asked his representative Muhammad b. Al-Faraj to hand the
*khums* to his son 'Ali al-Hddi as a .sign that he was to be his
successor[^125].

5. The ‘Abbasids' Attitude toward the activities of al­-Hadi
------------------------------------------------------------

According to the Imamite sources; the bulk of the followers of al­Jaw5d
accepted the Imamate of his successor ‘Ali al-Hadi, who was then seven
years old. His age presented no obstacle to their accepting his Imamate,
since they had faced the same problem with his father, who had also been
seven years old when he took over the office.

A few of al-Jawad's followers, however, supported the Imamate of his son
Musa, but after a short time they rejoined the rest of the Imamites,
accepting the Imamate of ‘Ali al-Hadi[^126].

At this stage the Imamites concentrated their efforts in re­organising
the activities of their followers. This was especially necessary
considering the fact that the flourishing state of the 'Abbasid economy
had decreased the ‘Alids' opportunities to obtain supporters for further
military action[^127].

Perhaps for this reason the caliph, al-Mu'tasim and his successor
al-Wathiq (227-232/841-846), were more tolerant towards the ‘Alids than
al-Ma’mun before them or al-Mutawakkil after them. According to Abu
al-Faraj al-Isfahani, the descendants of ‘Ali b. Abi Talib and their
close kindred (*al*-­*Talibiyun)* assembled in Samarra where they were
paid salaries by the caliph al-Wathiq[^128].

The latter also distributed a large amount of money among the ‘Alids in
the Hijaz and other provinces[^129].

After the death of al-Wathiq certain events had serious consequences for
the ‘Abbasid attitude towards the activities.of the adherents of the
tenth Imam, al-Hadi. Al-Mutawakkil was chosen to the caliphate in
232/837,[^130] and his installation was seen by the narrators
*(al*-*Muhaddithun* *al*-*amma)* as a major setback for those who
favoured the ‘Alids.

The majority of the latter were from the ranks of the Mu'tazila and the
Shi’ites, who formed the progressive and indeed radical element in
society. Recognising this, al­Mutawakkil carried out certain measures
with the aim of destroying the economic and political foundations of
both the Mu'tazila and the Shi’ites.

***Firstly***, he abandoned the"inquisition" *(al*-*Mihna)* against the
narrators of the *amma*, which had been implemented by al-Ma mun with
the support of the Mu’tazilites, and he encouraged these narrators and
their adherents to openly adopt anti-Shi’ite slogans[^131].

***Secondly***, al-Mutawakkil discharged the vizier, al-Zayyat, and his
staff from their offices and appointed instead al-Jarjara’i and Ibn
Khaqan, who were more inclined to go along to with his anti-Shi’ite
policy[^132].

***Thirdly***, he decided to rebuild the whole structure of the army in
two stages. First he began to gradually weaken the power of the
Tahirids, who were in charge of ruling Khurasan and of policing Baghdad
and the Sawad. He did this by nominating his three sons, al­Muntasir,
al-Mu’tazz and al-Mu'ayyad, as his successive heirs apparent, and then
appointing al-Muntasir as governor in *Ifriqiyya* and al-Maghrib,
al-Mu'ayyad as governor in Syria, and al-Mu'tazz as ruler of the eastern
provinces, in particular Khurasan.

Simultaneously the caliph divided the army in the capital among his sons
and sent them to the provinces to which he had appointed them, so as to
prevent any direct conspiracy on the part of the leaders of the army.
His second move was to begin to build a new army called al­Shakiriyya,
recruiting people from areas which were well-known for their anti-’Alid
attitudes, particularly from Syria, al-Jazira, al-Jabal, Hijaz, and even
from the *‘Abna* , who had rebelled against the "inquisition"[^133].

While carrying out these measures, al-Mutawakkil turned towards the
opposition to deal with the organised underground activities of the
‘Alids in general and the Imamites in particular. The intellectual
activities of the Imamites in Egypt, which had been encouraged by
Isma’il b. Musa al-Kazim, had borne fruit and expanded into the sphere
of underground political activities, even penetrating into remote parts
of North Africa[^134].

The system of communication of their organization (*al*-*Wikala*) was
highly developed, particulary in the capital Samarra, Baghdad, Mada’in,
and the districts of the Sawad[^135].  
 Furthermore al-Yaqubi's report seems to indicate that the Imamites had
hidden the name of their Imam to the extent that the caliph was not sure
exactly who he was[^136] or if he had direct links with Shi’ite
underground activities.

Al-Mutawakkil instigated a campaign of arrests against the Imamites in
232/846, accompanied by such harsh treatment that some of the agents of
the Imam in Baghdad, Mada’in, Kufa and the Sawad died under torture,
while others were thrown into jail[^137].

By these measures the caliph caused serious damage to the communication
network within the *Wikala*. In order to fill the vacuum left by the
arrested agents, the Imam had to appoint new agents instead, such as Abu
‘Ali b. Rashid, who was nominated to lead the activites of the Imamites
in Baghdad, Mada’in and the Sawad, and Ayyub b. Nuh, who was appointed
as the agent of Kufa.

Al-Hadi also provided them with new instructions concerning their duties
during this critical situation[^138].

Despite all the Imamite efforts to save their organization, the
investigation of the governor of Medina, ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad, led to
the discovery that al-Hadi was in fact behind these activities. He
informed al-Mutawakkil, warning him of the danger of al-Hades presence
in Medina. So the caliph summoned al-Hadi to Samarra in 233/848, where
he kept him under house-arrest[^139].

Two years later the caliph discovered that Egypt and the areas near the
tomb of al-Husayn in the Sawad were the strongest centres of the
underground communications of the ‘Alids. Therefore he ordered that the
tomb of al-Husayn and the houses nearby be levelled to the ground. Then
he ordered that the ground of the tomb be ploughed and cultivated, so
that any trace of the tomb would be forgotten. Furthermore he issued an
order prohibiting people from visiting the tombs of any of the Imams and
warning them that anyone found in their vicinity would be
arrested[^140].

Al-Mutawakkil also waged another campaign of arrests. Among those taken
prisoner was Yahya b. ‘Umar al-’Alawi, who was accused of conspiracy and
held in the jail of *al*-*Mutbaq* in Baghdad[^141]. At the same time
al-Mutawakkil ordered the governor of Egypt to deport the *Talibiyyin*
to Iraq, and he did so. Afterwards in 236/850,[^142] al­Mutawakkil
banished them to Medina which had been used as a place of exile for the
‘Alids.

Several remarks suggest that al-Mutawakkil went even further in his
policy, aiming in the long term to destroy the economic and social
status of the ‘Alids, and issued many orders so as to achieve this end.
He confiscated the properties of the Husaynids, that is the estate of
Fadak, whose revenue at that time, according to Ibn Tawus, was 24,000
dinars, and granted it to his partisan ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar
al­-Bazyar[^143].

He also warned the inhabitants of the Hijaz not to have any
communication with the ‘Alids or to support them financially. Many
people were severely punished because they did so. According to
al-Isfahani, as a result of al-Mutawakkil's measures the ‘Alids faced
harsh treatment in Medina, where they were totally isolated from other
people and deprived of their necessary livelihood[^144].

The caliph also wanted to remove the Shi’ites from the ‘Abbasid
administration and to destroy their good standing in public opinion.
Al-Mas'udi gives an example of this policy: he mentions that Ishaq b.
lbrahim, the governor of Saymara and Sirawan in the province of
al­-Jabal, was discharged from his office because of his Imamite
allegiance, and that other people lost their positions for the same
reason[^145].

According to al-Kindi, al-Mutawakkil ordered his governor in Egypt to
deal with the ‘Alids according to the following rules:

**1)** *No* *‘Alid* *could* *be* *given* *an* *estate* *or* *be*
*allowed* *to* *ride* *a* *horse* *or* *to* *move* *from* *al-Fustat*
*to* *the* *other* *towns* *of* *the* *province.*

**2)** *No* *‘Alid* *was* *permitted* *to* *possess* *more* *than* *one*
*slave.*

**3)** *If* *there* *was* *any* *conflict* *between* *an* *‘Alid* *and*
*a* *non­‘Alid,* *the* *judge* *must* *first* *hear* *the* *claim* *of*
*the* *non-Alid,* *and* *then* *accept* *it* *without* *negotiation*
*with* *the* *‘Alid*.[^146]

By these measures, al-Mutawakkil managed to prevent the Shi’ites from
plotting against his regime, but he failed to end their underground
activities. Reports indicate that al-Hadi continued his communications
with his adherents secretly, receiving the *khums* and other taxes from
his agents in Qumm and its districts[^147].

According to al-Mas'udi, al-Mutawakkil was informed about this, and he
also heard that in al-Hadi's house there were arms and letters from his
supporters indicating a conspiracy against him. Therefore the house was
searched by the caliph's soldiers, but they did not find any proof, and
so al-Hadi was set free[^148].

The suppression of the Imamites decreased after the assassination of
al-Mutawakkil, who was succeeded by his son al-Muntasir in 247/861. He
was more tolerant toward them than his father. He issued an order to
stop the campaign of arrests and the oppression of the ‘Alids and their
adherents, and permitted them to visit the tombs of al-Husayn and the
other Imams.

He also gave the properties of Fadak back to them. But this new attitude
on the part of the caliph ceased with the succession of al-Mustain in
248/862.[^149]

According to al-Kindi, the Imamites in Egypt were persecuted by its
governor, Yazid b. ‘Abd Allah al-Turki, who arrested an ‘Alid leader
called Ibn Abi Hudra along with his followers. They were accused of
carrying out underground activities and deported to Iraq in
248/862.[^150] Al­-Kulayni also states that the campaign of arrests and
pursuits affected the followers of al-Hadi in Egypt.

For example, Muhammad b. Hajar was slain and the estate of Sayf b.
al-Layth was seized by the ruler[^151].

Meanwhile in Iraq some of the followers of al-Hadi in Samarra were
arrested[^152], and his main agent in Kufa, Ayyub b. Nuh, was pursued by
the qadi of the city[^153].

It appears, however, that the ‘Abbasid oppression did not deter the
Shi’ite ambition to reach power. Many historians like al-Isfahani report
that ‘Alid revolts broke out in 250-1/864-5 in the areas of Kufa,
*Tabari*stan, Rayy, Qazwin, Egypt and Hijaz.

These might have been directed by one group, or to be more accurate, by
one leader. It is beyond the scope of this work to deal with the details
of these revolts, but it is worth mentioning that the rebels employed
the Prophetic traditions concerning *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* and the
signs of his rising to achieve immediate political success.

According to Ibn ‘Uqda, the leader of this uprising, Yahya b. ‘Umar
al-’Alawi, was expected to be *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*, because all the
signs and events predicted by the sixth Imam, al-Sadiq, regarding the
rise of *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* occured during the course of that
revolution[^154]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبداللة لا بدان رجل يخرج من ال محمد ولا بدان يمسك الراية
البيضاء. قال علي ابن الحسن; فاجتمع اهل بني رواس و كانوا قد عقدوا عمامة
بيضاء على قناة فامسكها محمد بن معروف وقت خروج يحيى بن عمر, و قال ابو
عبد اللة في هذا الخبر, و يجف فراتكم فجف الفرات, و قال ايضا; يحونكم قوم
صغار الاعين فيخرجونكم من دوركم. و قال علي ابن الحسن, فجاءنا كنجور و
الاتراك فاخرجوا الناس من ديارهم. و قال ابو عبد اللة ايضا; و تجىء
السباع الى دوركم. قال علي; فجاءت السباع الى دورنا. و قال ابو عبد اللة,
و كاني بجناءزكم تحفر.و قال علي ابن الحسن, فراينا ذلك كلة. و قال ابو
عبد اللة; يخرج رجل اشقر ذو سبال ينصب لة كرسي على باب دار عمر بن حريث ,
يدعوا الناس بي البراءة من علي ابن ابي طالب علية السلام و يقتل خلقا من
الخلق و يقتل في يومة , فراينا ذلك كلة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This document indicates that the Imamites were expecting the
establishment of their state by *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* in the near
future. Despite the uprising's Zaydite facade, many pure Imamites
participated. According to Ibn ‘Uqda, the holder of the rebel standard
in Mecca was Muhammad b. Ma’ruf al-Hilali (d. 250/864), who was among
the eminent Imamites of the Hijaz[^155].

Furthermore, the leader' of the rebels in Kufa, Yahya b. ‘Umar, who was
assassinated in 250/864, attracted the sympathy and praise of al­-Hadi's
agent, Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari[^156].

In addition al-Mas’udi reports that a certain ‘Ali b. Musa b. Isma'il b.
Musa al-Kazim took part in the revolt in Rayy and was arrested by the
caliph al-Mu’tazz. Since this man was the grandson of the Isma'il b.
Musa al-Kazim who had preached the Imamite doctrine in Egypt, it seems
extremely probable that the revolt was essentially Imamite[^157].

Moreover, al-Tabari gives information concerning the underground
activities of the Imamites and their role in this rebellion, which the
authorities considered purely Zaydite rather than Imamite. He also
reports that the ‘Abbdsid spies discovered correspondence between the
leader of the rebels in *Tabari*stan, al-Hasan b. Zayd, and the nephew
of Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Khalf al-’Attar. Both of these men were adherents
of the tenth Imam, al-Hadi[^158].

This led the authorities to the conclusion that the Imamites had direct
links with the rebels. So they arrested the leading Imamite
personalities in Baghdad and deported them to Samarra. Among them were
Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Attar, Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari[^159], and the two sons
of al-Hadi, Ja’far and al-Hasan al-’Askari, later to be the eleventh
Imam[^160].

One can link these ‘Abbasid precautions to the sudden death of al-Hadi
in Samarra in 254/868, because the authorities believed him to be behind
all these disturbances, and felt that his death would bring them to an
end[^161].

The cautious attitude of the authorities towards the Imamites continued
during the short Imamate of the eleventh Imam, al-Hasan al-’Askari
(254-60/868-74). He was put under house-arrest and his movements were
restricted, since he was obliged to present himself at the palace of the
caliph in Samarra every Monday and Thursday[^162].

Despite these restrictions, al- ‘Askari managed to communicate with his
agents by secret means[^163].

It appears that the continuation of the rebellion of the ‘Alids, who
extended their penetration into new areas, was behind the restriction of
the Imam's movements. According to al-Tusi, the caliph al-Muhtadi
arrested some Imamites in 255/869, accusing them of the assassination of
‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad al-’Abbasi, who had been murdered by the rebels
in Kufa. Al-’Askari was also arrested, but was set free soon after the
death of the caliph, al-Muhtadi[^164].

Despite the fact that the eleventh Imam managed to carry out his
activities without the knowledge of the authorities until his death in
260/874,[^165] the policy of house­arrest, which had been imposed upon
the Imams by the caliph al­-Ma’mun and had been continued until the time
of al-’Askari, seems to have led him to search for a method by which he
could prevent ‘Abbasid surveillance being imposed on his son, the
Twelfth Imam, so that he could disguise his identity and carry on his
activities in secret[^166].

6. Conclusion
-------------

From the death of al-Husayn onward, the Imams of the Shi'a followed a
more or less passive policy towards the ruling caliphs, but this did not
indicate their acceptance of the rights of the Umayyads and then the
‘Abbasids to the caliphate. Rather they believed that, since these
families had come to power through natural means, their downfall would
also be according to the will of Allah, that He would indicate their
imminent downfall to them and assist them in carrying out His will when
the appropriate time had arrived.

Towards this end they were always prepared to rise and take their
rightful position, because any Imam could be ordained by Allah as
*al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi.* This can be noted in the statement of Imam ‘Ali
b. Abi Talib,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البيت اهل منا يشاء من الله يجعل والمهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Allah will choose the Mahdi, whom He wants, from among us, the People
of the House."*[^167]

Thus al-Sadiq, who was strong and capable of leading an uprising might
have risen against the caliph if his followers had adhered to his
instructions, but schisms appeared amongst their ranks and the Imam's
aspirations came to naught. A considerable body among al­-Sadiq's
followers were not satisfied with his political methods, and
disassociated themselves from him in order to struggle for power without
his interference.

This was manifested in the emergence of the Zaydites and the Isma'ilis,
who put forward a new interpretation of the traditions *(Ahadith)*
concerning *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* and his rising and used it in their
struggle for power. This can be seen in the Zaydite and Isma’ili revolts
between the years 145-296/762-908, which ended with the establishment of
an Isma’ili state and the installation of an Imam with the title
*al*-*Mahdi.*

The Imams, however, denied the claim of any ‘Alid who claimed that he
was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* promised by the Prophet, but they
sympathised with some ‘Alid rebels who were loyal to them. This might
encourage us to assume that the Imams had two methods designed to help
them reach power.

The first was the scholarly, cultural and religious activities which
they fostered amongst the people without openly involving themselves in
any political activities. Secondly, they secretly supported some Shi’ite
rebels who were loyal to them, hoping that they would hand the power
over to them after their success.

The military activities of the various Shi’ite groups confused the
‘Abbasids and led them to believe that the Imamite Imams were behind
them or at least that the result of their intellectual activities would
be militant action. Therefore the ‘Abbasid authorities forced the Imams
to reside in the capital from the year 202/817 under house­arrest.

This policy was imposed upon the Imams al-Riďa, al-Jawad, al-Hadi, and
al-’Askari, and led them to develop the underground system of their
organisation *(al*-*Wikala)* *so* that it could function under these
difficult conditions.

At the same time this critical situation forced the eleventh Imam,
al-’Askari, to search for a method by which he could prevent ‘Abbasid
surveillance being imposed upon his son, later to be the Twelfth Imam,
so as to enable him to disguise his identity and carry on his activities
beyond the careful watch of the authorities.

[^1]: Ahmad b. Abi Ya’qub b. Widih al-Ya'qubi, Tarikh al-Ya’qubi (Najaf,
1964), III, 90; Ibn Khaldun, al-’Ibar wa-diwan al-Mubtada wa-l-Khabar
(Cairo, 1867­ 70), III, 173, Tabari, III, 33-4, 37; al-Hilali, op.cit.,
186.

[^2]: Ahmad Ibrahim al-Sharif, al-’Alan al-Islamif al-’Asral-’Abbasi
(Cairo, 1967) 19-25; Watt, The Majesty that was Islam, 28-30, 95-8.
According to al-Najashi, amongst the Imamites who participated in the
'Abbasid propaganda was Yaqlin b. Musa, who was their propagandist in
Kufa; al-Najashi, 209.

[^3]: al-Jahshayari, Kitab al-Wuzara' wa-l-Kuttab (Cairo, 1938), 86;
al-Ya’qubi, III, 89-90, 92; Tabari, III, 27, 34; Ibn al-Taqtaqa,
al-Fakhri fi al-Adab al-Sultaniyya (Cairo, 1927), III, 2; Watt, The
Formative Period of Islamic Thought (Edinburgh, 1973), 153-4.

[^4]: al-Masudi, Ithbat al-Wasiyya (Najaf, 1955), 181-2; Maqatil, 209;
Omar, F., "Some Aspects of the ‘Abbasid-Husaynid relations during the
early ‘Abbasid period (132-193/750-809)," Arabica, XXII, 171.

[^5]: Kashif al-Ghita', Asl al-Shi’a wa-isulaha (Qumm, 1391), 51; Ahmad
Amin, Dhuha al-Islam (Cairo, 1956), III, 281-2; al-Isfahani, Kitab
al-Aghani XI, 300.

[^6]: ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas b. ‘Abd al-Muttalib was one of the companions
of the Prophet. He was born three years before the Prophet's emigration
to Medina and in-the year 68/687 in Ta'if. He was famous in his deep
knowledge about the interpretation of the Qur'an and the Prophetic
tradition. Thus he acquired the title Hibru-l-Umma, the learned man of
the nation. Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalam, al­ Isaba, II, 330-4.

[^7]: Muhammad Riďa al-Muzaffar, al-Saqifa (Najaf, 1965), 69-70. An
example of the cooperation between the ‘Abbasids and ‘Ali during his
regime: he appointed Quthum b. al-’Abbas as governor of Mecca and
al-Ta'if, ‘Ubayd Allah b. ‘Abbas in Yemen and Bahrain and ‘Abd Allah b.
'Abbas in Basra. When ‘Ali died ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas associated with
al-Hasan as a leader in his army. Tabari, V, 64-5, 137, 141-3, 155,
158-9; al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa'(Cairo, 1964), 205; al-QarashT,
al-Imam al-Hasan (Najaf, 1973), 49-54.

[^8]: al-Kafi I, 203-4, 545-6, 516. Several sources report that the
other Imams received the khums and voluntary gifts from their followers,
some of whom were working in the ‘Abbasid offices, such as Hasan b.
‘Alya al-Asadi, who was the governor of Bahrain. According to another
report, the ninth Imam, al­- Jawad, ordered his followers to send him
his share of the booty which they had seized from the Khurramiyya.
al-Tusi, al-Istibsar (Tehran, 1970), II, 58, 60-2; Maqatil, 333.

[^9]: al-Kafi, I, 279-81.

[^10]: Omar, op. cit., Arabica, XXII (1975), 175-6.

[^11]: For a full account of al-Sadiq's statements concerning the future
Mahdi see Kama’l, 333-59.

[^12]: Ikhtiyar, 290-3,321,323,326. For detail about Abu al-Khattab's
activities see al­ Shibi, K. M., al-Sila bayn al-Tasawwuf
wa-l-Tashayyu’, Baghdad, 1966, 141-6; Ivanow, The Alleged founder of
lsma’ilism (Bombay, 1946), 113-51; B. Lewis, The origins of Isma’ilism
(Cambridge, 1940). 32, 39, 66. B. Lewis, "Abu al­ Khattab', E. 12

[^13]: N. Firaq, 56-66, al-Shibi, op. cit, 206-31; C. Huart,
"Isma’iliyya' E 12

[^14]: N. Firaq, 65. For an account of the Fathiyya see Watt,
"Side-lights on Early Imamite Doctrine', Studia lslamica, MC MLXX, vol.
XXXI°, 293-5; al-Hasam, op. cit., II 369-77.

[^15]: Tabari, III, 261-3, 377-8; Mizan, IV, 211.

[^16]: Muruj, VI, 224; Shaban, Islamic History (C.U.P., 1976), II, 21.

[^17]: al-Kafi, I, 478; Muruj, VI, 227.

[^18]: Omar, F., "Some observations on the Reign of the ‘Abbasid Caliph
al-Mahdi (158-169/775-785)", Arabica, XXI, 139.

[^19]: Sa’d b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ashari al-Qummi, al-Maqalat wa-I-Firaq
(Tehran, 1963), 89.

[^20]: Watt,Formative Period, 155.

[^21]: al-Kafi, I, 484.

[^22]: al-Khatib al-Baghdad, Tarikh Baghdad (Beirut, 1931), XIII, 31;
Tabari, III, 533; Ibn Tulun, al-Shadharat al-Dhahabiyya (Beirut, 1958),
96.

[^23]: Tabari, III, 506-7; al-Fakhri, 136.

[^24]: Tabari III, 508; al-Saduq agrees with al-Tabari about the
persuasion of Ya'qub b. Dawud, but he mentions that he was coverted to
the Imamiteschool about 179/795. See ‘Uyun, 60. However, Ya’qub belonged
to a Shi’ite family from Merv. His father and uncle helped promote
‘Abbasid propaganda in Khurasan. Later Ya’qub himself was associated
with al-Nafs al-Zakiyya in his revolt in 145/762, after which he was
imprisoned until 158/774-5. Shaban, op. cit., 21.

[^25]: N. Firaq, 43; Watt, Formative Period, 155; according to al-Balkhi
this claim was invented by the Rawandiyya after the death of al-Mahdi.
However, it appears that the Rawandiyya had held this claim at the
instigation of al-Mahdi himself. AI-Qadf ‘Abd al-Jabbar, op. cit., II,
177

[^26]: Tabari, III, 486-7.

[^27]: Ikhtiyar, 265-6, 501. All these groups derived their names from
various companions of al-Sadiq: i.e. Abd Allah b. Abi Ya’fur, Zurara b.
A yun, ‘Ammar b. Mnsa al-Sabati and Hisham b. Salim al-Jawaliqi
respectively. al­ Najashi, 132, 157, 223, 338; T. al-Fihrist, 141-3,
235, 356.

[^28]: Ikhtiyar, 335.

[^29]: Ikhtiyar, 269-70.

[^30]: al-Ya’qubi, III, 142. It is clear from the prominent persons who
took part in this revolt that it was Zaydite, for example Yahya,
Sulayman and Idris, the brothers of al-Nafs al-Zakiyya, who rebelled in
the year 145/762 against al-Mansur. Moreover Ibrahim b. Isma’il Tabataba
was the father of Muhammad b. Tabataba, the spiritual leader of the
Zaydite revolt which took place in Kufa in 199/814 (Maqatil, 297, 304).
It is worth mentioning that al-Sahib b. ‘Abbad considered the
individuals mentioned above as Zaydite; al-Sahib b. ‘Abbad, Nusrat
Madhahib al-Zaydiyya (Baghdad, 1977), 222.

[^31]: Tabari, III, 552-3, 557-9; Muruj, VI, 226-7; Maqatil, 298.

[^32]: ‘Ibar, III, 215-6. Al-Isfahani mentions two narrations about the
attitude of al­-Kazim. The first one reveals that he refused to
participate in the revolt, while the second shows that he ordered Yahya
al-Mahd to rise in arms; Maqatil, 298, 304. There is evidence showing
that al-Kazim did not take part in this revolt but encouraged the rebels
to fight the ‘Abbasids vigorously, al-Kafi, I, 366.

[^33]: al-Galbaygani, op. cit., 219, quoted from al-Khazaz al-Razi
al-Qumi, Kifayat al-Athar fi al-Nusus ‘ala al-Imam at-Thani ‘Ashar.

[^34]: al-Kafi, I, 494. The Imamite activities in Egypt may have started
in Akhmim during the time of al-Sadiq, because some people of Akhmim
such as ‘Uthman b. Suwayd al-Akhmimi and Dhu al-Nun al-Misri were
students of Jabir b. Hayyan al-Kufi, who was a student of al-Sadiq
(al-Qifti, Tarikh al-Hukama' [Leipzig, 1903], 185; al-Shibi, op. cit.,
360). Among al-Kazim's Kufan agents in Egypt were ‘Uthman b. ‘Isa
al-Rawasi and al-Husayn b. ‘Ali al-’Uyun, 92; al­ Najashi, 52, 230.

[^35]: Ikhtiyar, 442.

[^36]: Ikhtiyar, 433. For a full account of other names see al-Najashi,
104, 158, 254-5.

[^37]: Tabari, III, 561, 609, 612, 740; al-Ya’qubi, III, 166; al-Kafi,
II, 224-5. AI-Kashshi mentions that the family of Banu al-Ash ath sent
the zakat (30,000 dinars) to the agent of al-Kazim in Kufa, which seems
to confirm their Imamite inclinations; Ikhtiyar, 459

[^38]: Uyun, I, 18, 24, 25-6, 92; Ikhtiyar, 405, 468; al-Fakhri, 145-6;
al-Haythami, al­ Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa (Cairo, 1312/1894), 101.

[^39]: N. Firaq, 63- 64.

[^40]: Ivanow, W., The Rise of the Fatimids (Bombay, 1946), 49-52,
quoting from an Isma’ili Ms entitled Zahr al-Ma’ani.

[^41]: N. Firaq, 64.

[^42]: Al-Kulayni mentions this on the authority of ‘Ali b. Ja’far
al-Sadiq. His narrations states that Muhammad b. Isma’il met his uncle
al-Kazim in Mecca and asked him to allow him to go to Baghdad. Al-Kazim
did so and gave him 300 dinars and 3000 dirhams for the expense of his
journey. Then he warned his nephew not to bring about his death by
giving the authorities information concerning his activities. However,
Muhammad contacted the caliph Harun al-Rashid and informed him that his
uncle was considered the real caliph by the people who had visited him;
al-Kafi, I, 485-6. Also see Ikhtiyar, 263-5; Ibn Hazm, Jamharat Ansab
al-’Arab (Cairo, 1971), 60.

[^43]: al-Fakhri (Gotha, Greifswald, 1860), 195-6, 227-8; al-Kafi, I,
366.

[^44]: Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh (Leiden, 1866-1876), VI, 61.

[^45]: Tabari, III, 612-3; al-Fakhri, 231; al-Kulayni records a
correspondence between Yahya al-Mahd and al-Kdzim, which indicates that
the latter had nothing to do with this revolt; al-Kafi, I, 366-7.

[^46]: Ahmad b. Khalid al-Misri al-Salawi, al-Istaqsa li-Akhbar
al-Maghrib al-Aqsa (al Dar al-Bayda, 1954), I, 67-9.

[^47]: Tabari, III, 606.

[^48]: Tabari, III, 614, 616.

[^49]: Tabari, III, 613-16; al-Ya’qubi, III, 145-6;’Ibar, III, 218;
al-Kamil, VI, 85.

[^50]: Because Sulayman succeeded in killing Idris, the Caliph al-Rashid
appointed him to the barid of Egypt, and had the previous official
Wadih, who had helped Idris in his escape to al-Maghrib, killed; Tabari,
III, 561

[^51]: Tabari, III, 561, 649; al-Kamil, VI, 106-8.

[^52]: Osman, op. cit., 300; Q. Maqalat, 88; Ikhtiyar, 598-9.

[^53]: Ikhtiyar, 258-63.

[^54]: al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj (Najaf, 1966), 161; Ikhtiyar, 262. Some of
the Imamites accused the Isma'ilis of provoking al-Rashid against
al-Kazim. They mentioned that Muhammad b. Isma’il informed al-Rashid
about al-Kazim's underground activities (al-Kafi I, 485-6). Whereas the
arrest of al-Kazim was part of the general plan of the Caliph which he
carried out against the Imamites, several remarks suggest that the
viziers Banu al-Marmak were behind al-­Rashid's plan, in order to bring
about the fall of their Imamite competitors in the 'Abbasid ministry,
the family of Banu al-Ash’ath; al-Kafi, II, 224-5; Ikhtiyar, 258.

[^55]: al-Kafi, I, 476;N. Firaq, 71-2.

[^56]: Ibn al-Mutazz, Tabaqat al-Shu ara' (Cairo, 1956), 244.

[^57]: According to al-Najashi and al-Tusi, Hisham's death occurred in
199/814. But it seems that he died before that. Al-Kashshi associates
his death with the arrest of al-Kazim in 179/795. In that year Hisham
attended a theological symposium in the presence of al-Rashid and Yahya
al-Barinak'. Later al-Rasfd issued an order to arrest al-Kazim and his
partisans. Hence Hisham escaped to Madain, then to Kufa where he died
two months later; al-Najashi, 338; T. al-Fihrist, 355; Ikhtiyar, 255-6,
258-62.

[^58]: N. Firaq, 67; Ikhtiyar, 258; al-Kafi, I, 258-9; al-Ya’qubi
relates that the ‘Alid underground activities were probably quite strong
in Basra. The increase in the activities of the missionary of this
group, Ahmad b. ‘Isa al-’Alawi, who spent sixty years hidden there,
finally caused al-Rashid to pursue them. Ahmad b. ‘Isa was imprisoned,
but he managed to escape to Basra in 188/803. Then ‘Abbasid spies
detected the missionary and the agent of his group, Hadir, who refused
to reveal the place of his leader; so they killed him and impaled his
body in Baghdad; al-Ya’qubi, III, 160.

[^59]: Uyun, I, 89-90, II, 143.

[^60]: N. Firaq, 67-8, 70; Q. Maqalat, 89-91; al-Najashi, 61, 258,
230-31. It seems from the report of al-Kashshi that Muhammad b. Bashir
and his followers applied the term al-Mahdi to al-Kazim, whose death
they denied, giving him the epithet al-Qaim al-Mahdi (Ikhtiyar, 478).
Such evidence indicates that the Imamites already knew about the rise of
one of their Imams under the title of al-Qa’im al­ Mahdi, but they were
not sure who this would be.

[^61]: al-Saduq,’Ilal al-Shara'i' (Najaf, 1966), I, 235;’Uyun, 91-2;
Ikhtiyar, 459-60, 467,468,493. The leaders of the Waqifa were Muhammad
b. al-Hasan b. Shammun and 'Ali b. Abi Hamza; Ikhtiyar, 444; al-Najashi,
230-1.

[^62]: al-Kafi, I, 333-43.

[^63]: al-Kafi, I, 312; Q. Maqalat, 89

[^64]: Ikhtiyar, 464-5,472.

[^65]: Ikhtiyar, 591- 592.

[^66]: Most of the eastern Sufi movements trace their origins to Ma'ruf
al-Karkhi (d. 200/815), who was a companion of al-Riďa. They regarded
al-Riďa as of the Sufi movement, but at the same time they did not
believe in his Imamate. For an account of this relation see al-Shibi,
op. cit.

[^67]: Uyun, II, 234-5.

[^68]: Watt, Formative Period, 176; al-Fakhri, 159-61; al-Kamil„ VI,
227.

[^69]: Ibn A’tham al-Kufi, op. cit., VIII, 312-3. The most dangerous
revolt was the rebellion of Nasr b. Shabth in al-Jazira. Another serious
revolt was the protest of the populace (al-Amma) of Baghdad against the
installation of al-Riďa as heir-apparent by al-Ma’mun. Thus they
installed Ibrahim b. al-Mahdi as a caliph there; Bidaya, X, 280-2;
al-Kamil, VI, 230.

[^70]: It is clear from the reports of al-Tabari and al-Najashi that the
rebels did not believe in the Imamate of a specific ‘Alid Imam, but they
supported the Imamate of him who would rise in arms in order to
establish his rights to this office (Tabari, III, 979, 1019; al-Najashi,
194). They wrote on the coins which they mined in Kufa a Qur'anic verse
(al-Saff 51: 4) revealing their, revolutionary inclination. Al-Isfahani
and al-Sahib b. ‘Abbad considered it a Zaydite uprising; Maqatil, 347,
350;’Uyun, II, 235; Ibn ‘Abbad, op. cit., 222.

[^71]: Muruj, VII, 56.

[^72]: A considerable body of the followers of al-Riďa participated in
this revolt without his instruction. Perhaps they noticed that the
brothers of their Imam were prominent leaders of the revolt, and thought
that al-Riďa was behindtheir participation. Hence they joined it. There
were men like Muhammad b. Muslima al-Kufi (Tabari, III, 989), who was
regarded by al-Najashi as trustworthy (al-Najashi, 286;’Uyun, II,
234-5). It seems from al-Riďa's interpretation of a dream of one of his
partisans concerning an expected uprising that he already knew of the
activities of his kinsmen; al-Kafi, VIII, 257.

[^73]: al-Da’wa li-l-Riďa min Al Muhammad wa-’Amal bi-l-Kitab
wa-l-sunna.

[^74]: Tabari, III, 976-79.

[^75]: al-Kamil, VI, 214-16; Maqatil, 355; Tabari, III, 981-3, 988.
Al-Azraqi reports that Abu al-Saraya sent a kiswa of silk to the Ka’ba
in two colours, white and yellow, the former of which was the colour of
the’Alids' standard. Between the two parts was written: "In the name of
God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. May God bless Muhammad and his
progeny, the noble descendants, the pure, and the best of the human
race. Abu al-Saraya, he who invites people to rally behind Al Muhammad
has ordered that this kiswa be made for the holy House of God."
al-Azraqi, Akhbar Makka (Mecca, 1965), I, 263, 264.

[^76]: al-Najashi, 194; Maqatil, 354; Gibb, H. A. R., "Abu al-Saraya",
E.I2

[^77]: Maqatil, 363-6;Tabari, III, 985-6.

[^78]: Al-Kulayni reports several traditions on the authority of ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn and al-Sadiq regarding this point, al-Kafi, VIII, 264, 310.

[^79]: Tabari, III, 990.

[^80]: Maqatil, 359; Uyun, 155.

[^81]: al-Kafi, I, 491; Maqatil, 360.

[^82]: al-Kafi, I, 488-9; ‘Uyun, II, 146; Tabari, III, 1000.

[^83]: Maqatil, 360; al-Yafi’i, al-’Iqd al-Thamm, I, 444-5.

[^84]: al-Kafi, I, 489, VIII, 151; ‘Uyun, 138-40; Tabari, III, 1012-3.

[^85]: Khatib, X, 184. Concerning Umm Habiba, al-Tabari thinks that she
was al-­Ma’mun's daughter (Tabari, III, 1029), but Ibn Tulun reports
that she was his sister. The age of al-Ma’mun at that time was 30;
therefore one is inclined to accept Ibn Tulun's report; Ibn Tulun, op.
cit., 97.

[^86]: al-Ya’qubi, III, 185; al-Kamil VI, 227.

[^87]: Watt, Formative Period 176. Al-Kulayni reports that al-Ma'mnn
asked al-Riďa to write to his followers in the areas of revolt,
askingthem to stop their support of the rebels; al-Kafi, VIII, 151.

[^88]: Several anecdotes indicate that the ‘Alids' standard was white.
The followers of Abu al-Saraya were called "al-Mubayyida" in reference
to the standard of ‘Ali (al-Azraqi, op. cit., I, 263-4). Na un b.
Khazim, an Arab advisor of al­ Ma’mun, warned the latter against
adopting the advice of al-Fadl b. Sahl in installing al-Riďa. He pointed
out to him that his vizier was not sincere to the ‘Alids, because he
suggested the green colour, the sign of his ancestors, the Sasanids,
instead of the white, the standard of ‘Ali and his sons (J. Wuzara',
313). When al-Ma’mun asked al-Riďa to perform the Friday prayer, the
latter wore a white turban and white clothes (‘Uyun, II, 149). Finally
the Imamites narrate that the banners of the followers of al-Qaim
al-Mahdi would be white (Najm al-Din al-’Askari, al-Mahdi al-Maw'ud
al-Muntazar [Beirut, 1977], I, 177).

[^89]: Tabari, III, 1019-20; also al-Kamil, VI, 242.

[^90]: Tabari, III 1029; al-Kamil, VI, 248.

[^91]: al-Ya’qubi, III, 184, 190.

[^92]: N. Firaq, 72-3; Ikhtiyar, 501-2; ‘Uyun, II, 151-2.

[^93]: Ibn Hibban, Kitab al-Majruhin (Halab, 1976), II, 209-10.

[^94]: al-Kafi, I, 486, 490; Muruj, VIII, 57, 61; ‘Uyun, I, 186, 188;
Shaban, op. cit., 47.

[^95]: al-Kamil, VI, 253; Ahmad b. Tahir b. Tayfur, Tarikh Baghdad
(Cairo, 1949), 10.

[^96]: ‘Uyun, II, 188.

[^97]: al-Ya’qubi, III, 204; according to the account of al-Kulayni both
were Imamites and the father of the first, Yahya b. al-Husayn, supported
the Imamate of al­-Riďa (al-Kafi, I, 316). Al-Najashi reports that the
grandson of the second, Yahya b. Ahmad b. Muhammad, was a prominent
Imamite in Nishapur; al-Najashi, 345; Abu al-Fida, al-Mukhtasar fi
Akhbar al-Bashari, II, 32.

[^98]: Tabari, III, 1039; al-Kamil, VI, 253.

[^99]: Abu al-Fida, op, cit., II, 25-6.

[^100]: Tabari, III, 1040.

[^101]: Tabari, III, 1062-3; al-Kama’l, VI, 269.

[^102]: N. Firaq, 85-7; Q. Maqalat, 93-5; al-Najashi, 19.

[^103]: Ithbat, 213-5.

[^104]: al-Najashi, 21, 67-8, 141, 294.

[^105]: al-Kafi, I, 494.

[^106]: al-Najashi , 191.

[^107]: Ikhtiyar, 611-2; al-Najashi, 265.

[^108]: al-Kafi, V, 111.

[^109]: Bihar, L, 44-5.

[^110]: Ikhtiyar, 487; al-Najashi, 180.

[^111]: Ithbat, 213, 215.

[^112]: al-Kafi, I, 548; T. al-Ghayba, 227; Bihar, L, 37-8.

[^113]: al-Najashi, 254.

[^114]: al-Najashi, 80, 98; Mizan, IV, 276.

[^115]: al-Kafi, V, III; al-Tusi, al-Istibsar, II, 58.

[^116]: al-Azdi, 368.

[^117]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib Ali Abi Talib, IV, 397; al-Azdi, 368.

[^118]: Tabari, III, 1092-3, 1102; al-Kamil, VI, 264, 293.

[^119]: Tabari, III, 1102.

[^120]: Tabari, III, 1103; al-Azdi, 399.

[^121]: Tabari, III, 1106, 1111; al-Kamil, VI, 286-7.

[^122]: Muhammad b. al-Qasim was the Imam of the revolutionary Zaydites
during al-­Jawad's period. When al-Mu’tasim endeavoured to arrest him,
he escaped from Kufa and revolted in al-Talqan. But al-Mu’tasim captured
him and imprisoned him in Samarra. Then he disappeared from jail
mysteriously. Thus a considerable body of the Zaydites in the districts
of Kufa, Tabaristan, Daylam and Khurasan held that he did not die but
was alive and would rise in arms to fill the earth with justice after it
had been filled with tyranny; Muruj, VI, 116-7.

[^123]: Ithbat, 220; Bihar, L, 15-17; al-Irshad, 297, 307.

[^124]: al-Tusi, al-Istibsar, II, 60-2.

[^125]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib, IV, 389.

[^126]: Maqalat, 99.

[^127]: The flourishing state of the 'Abbasid economy can be noted in
al-Mu’tasim's ability to recruit a new garrison, mainly from the Turks
of Caucasus, and to establish a new capital, Samarra. His successor
al-Mutawakkil followed in his footsteps, establishing another garrison,
which he called al-Shakiriyya, by recruiting people from the western
provinces of the empire. Later al-Shakiriyya garrison was enlarged by
al-Mutawakkil until it became his official army. Furthermore he
established a new capital called al-Ja’fariyya. According to al­Mas'udi,
after his death he left four million dinars and seven million dirhams in
the treasury. Muruj, VII, 276-7; Shaban, op. cit., 76.

[^128]: Maqalat, 394; al-Fakhri, 176.

[^129]: al-Yaqubi, III, 216.

[^130]: Tabari, III, 1368.

[^131]: Shaban, op. cit., 73; al-Tikriti, al-Mutawakkil boyn Khusumih
wa-Ansarih, Bulletin of the College of Arts, Basrah University, 1976,
113.

[^132]: Tabari, III, 1373-5; see also al-Kafi, I, 498.

[^133]: Shaban, op. cit., 72-5; 76.

[^134]: Al Mas’udi and Ibn Hazm mention that Ja’far b. Isma’il b. Musa
al-Kazim was killed by Ibn al-Aghlab in al-Maghrib during the caliphate
of al Mu’tazz (Muruj, VII, 404; Ibn Hazm, op. cit., 64), which suggests
that Ja’far may have been sent there by his father to preach to the
people concerning the ‘Alids' rights to the caliphate.

[^135]: Ikhtiyar, 513-4.

[^136]: al-Yaqubi, lII, 217.

[^137]: Ikhtiyar, 603, 607; T. al-Ghayba, 226-7; Bihar, L, 183.

[^138]: Ikhtiyar, 513-4.

[^139]: Ithbat, 225-6; Bihar, L, 209.

[^140]: Tabari, III, 407; Muruj VII, 302. Many early sources represent
the ‘Abbasid view, and contemporary scholars claim that the reason
behind the demolition of al-Husayn's tomb was that the Shi’ a had made
it an alternative centre for pilgrimage (Maqatil, 395; al-Tikriti The
Religious Policity of al-Mutawakkil 'Ala Allah al-’Abbasi
[232-47/847-68], M. A. Dissertation [McGill University, Canada, 1969],
58, 63). But all the narrations espousing this view are attributed to a
single narrator called Ahmad b. al-Ji'd who was a loyal supporter of the
‘Abbasids. Perhaps he gave this interpretation to excuse the action of
the caliph, whose aim was to stop the underground activities of the
Shi’a, who used their visit to the tomb of al-Husayn as a means of
communication. In addition the caliph wanted to eliminate any sign of
the grave, which might revive the revolutionary trends amongst the
Shi’a.

[^141]: Tabari, III, 1404.

[^142]: al-Kindi, Wilat Misr, (Beirut, 1972), 177-8.

[^143]: Ibn Tawus, Kash al-Mahajja (Najaf, 1950), 124; al-Sadr, Fadak fi
al-Tarrikh (Najaf, 1955), 23.

[^144]: Maqatil, 396.

[^145]: Muruj VII, 238-9; al-Kafi, I, 500.

[^146]: al-Kindi, op. cit., 230.

[^147]: Bihar, L, 185.

[^148]: Muruj VII, 207.

[^149]: Ibid, VII, 302.

[^150]: al-Kindi, op. cit., 229.

[^151]: al-Kafi, I, 511, 513.

[^152]: Manaqib, IV, 416.

[^153]: al-Arbili, Kashf al-Ghumma, III, 247. The qadi of Kufa at that
time was Ja’far b. ‘Abd al-Wahid. The caliph al-Musta’in removed him
from this office and exiled him to Basra where he died in 257/780;
Mizan, I, 413.

[^154]: Ibn ‘Uqda, op. cit., f. 74-5.

[^155]: Ibn ‘Uqda, op. cit., f. 75; al-Najashi, 280-1. Ibn ‘Uqda, Ahmad
b. Muhammad (249-333/863-944) is a kufan Muhaddith. He belonged to the
Zaydite sect, al­-Jarudiyya. Al-Nu'mani relied on him in writing his
work al-Ghayba. Buzurg, Nawabigh al-Ruwat, 46-7.

[^156]: Tabari, III, 1522.

[^157]: Muruj, VII, 404.

[^158]: Tabari, III, 1362, 1683; Ikhtiyar, 68.

[^159]: Tabari, III, 1683-4.

[^160]: T. al-Ghayba, 141, 226; Bihar, L, 206-7.

[^161]: The majority of the Imamite scholars believe that al-Hadi was
poisoned at the instigation of the ‘Abbasids; Manaqib, IV, 401; Bihar,
L, 206-7.

[^162]: T. al-Ghayba, 139-40.

[^163]: Manaqib, IV, 427-8; Bihar, L, 283-4.

[^164]: T. al-Ghayba, 147, 226; Bihar, L, 303; Tabari, III, 1709

[^165]: . al-Kafi, I, 503.

[^166]: This will be discussed in greater detail in the next chapter

[^167]: al-Kafi, I, 450


