The Imamites’ Views concerning the Concealed Imam and His Birth
===============================================================

1. The Schisms Amongst the Adherents of al-Hasan al-'Askari After His Death.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A) Introduction

The Imamate during the life of the last six Imams of the Twelver
Imamites *(al*-*Imamiyya* *al*-*Ithna* ‘a*shariyya)* was distinguised by
the many splits which occurred after the death of each Imam, who was
considered by the Imamites as one of the twelve Imams, over the
recognition of his successor. In spite of these repeated schisms, after
a hard struggle each Imam was able to maintain the obedience of the
majority of the followers of the previous Imam[^1].

Al-Hasan b. ‘Ali al-’Askari was born in 232/845 and died in 260/874.
According to some later Shi’ite sources, he was poisoned through the
instigation of the ‘Abbasid caliph, al-Mu’tamid[^2].

During the six years of his Imamate, al-’Askari lived in hiding and
prudent fear because of the restrictions imposed upon him by his being
surrounded by the spies of al-Mu'tamid. This was the reason for his lack
of open contact with the mass of his followers. Only the elite of his
adherents were able to communicate with him personally[^3].

The same sources report that in the year 260/874 the eleventh Imam
became ill. As soon as news of his sickness reached al-Mu’tamid, he
dispatched five of his special servants to al-’Askari house, ordering
them to keep close watch on him.

Thereafter the caliph sent physicians and the *Qadi* *al*-*Qudat* in the
company of ten men whom he considered trustworthy, to al-’Askari's house
to remain with him and observe his condition and the situation within
his home at all times. Al-’Askari's malady became worse and he passed
away on 8th Rabi’ I 260/1st January 874.

Al-Mu'tamid dispatched Abu ‘Isa b. al-Mutawakkil to say the prayer for
the dead over the body of al-’Askari. After this rite was completed
al-’Askari was buried within the confines of his house in *Sirr* *Man*
*Ra'a* (Samarra), next to his father[^4].

According to the early Imamite sources al-’Askari did not leave a
publicly acknowledged son, nor did he determine upon or install his
successor openly[^5]. As al-Mufid says, the Imamites were suffering
oppression at the hand of the ‘Abbasids, while the caliph, al-Mu’tamid,
was searching for al-’Askari's son and trying to arrest him by any means
possible.

Moreover, the views of the Imamite Shi’a about him were being
circulated, and it was becoming known that they were waiting for him to
rise. For this reason al-’Askari had not revealed his son during his
lifetime, not even to the greater portion of his own adherents[^6].

Because the Imamites were distinguished from other Islamic denominatons
by the principle of the designation of the Imam by his predecessor they
seem to have found themselves in a critical situation after their Imam's
death, since he had not designated his successor openly. Therefore the
Imamite jurists had recourse to the traditions of the Prophet and his
progeny to determine who was to be the Twelfth Imam.

They found many traditions to support their various claims. Amongst them
were transmissions which stated that an Imam could not die without
seeing his offspring who would succeed him; that the world cannot be
without a Proof[^7]; that the Imamate cannot pass to two brothers after
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and that it will be occupied by one of the
progeny of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn[^8]; that the Imam knows who will succeed
him and does not die until he gives his testament to his successor[^9];
and that the Imamate should belong to the eldest son of the preceding
Imam[^10].

These traditions seem to have been adopted by the greater portion of the
Imamites, and their interpretation of these traditions led to various
viewpoints, which in turn led to new divisions amongst the Imamites.

Sa’d al-Qummi counted fifteen schisms, whereas al-Nawbakhti and al-Mufid
enumerated them as fourteen. Al-Mas’udi thinks that there were twenty
sects, while al-Shahristani counts only eleven[^11]. Nevertheless a
study of the claims of these factions reveals that there were apparently
only five major schisms.

However, each of these became further split over the theological and
traditional arguments employed to support their claims. At any rate it
seems important to set down the major claims of these schisms in order
to achieve a clear conception of the Imamites at that time.

### B) Schism I: the Waqifa at al-’Askari

What brought the people of this faction together was their claim that
the eleventh Imam, al-’Askari, was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* although they
differed as to how he became *al-Qa’im.*

***i)*** The first faction of this schism deemed that al- ‘Askari had
not died, but had gone into occultation[^12]. They based their
assumption on the traditions reported from the previous Imams, which
said that an Imam could not die without having a publicly acknowledged
son to succeed him, because the world cannot be without a Proof[^13].

While the people were not obliged to accept the Imamate of those who
were now laying claim to it, they should acknowledge the Imamate of
al­‘Askari whose Imamate had been confirmed by the testament of the
former Imam. They also maintained that they had a tradition which said
that *al-Qa’im* had two occultations.

Therefore, since al-’Askari had not left a publicly acknowleged son and
since the earth cannot remain for an hour without a Proof, it was right
to claim that he had not died but was hidden, and that he was truly
*al-Qa’im.*

This was his first occultation, after which he would rise again. Then,
when his rising became known, he would conceal himself once more in his
second occultation[^14].

In their discussions with their opponents, they tried to distinguish
themselves from the Imamites who had stopped at the seventh Imam, Musa
al-Kazim (183/799), claiming he was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*, by faulting
them for stopping at al-Kazim. They pointed out that he had died and
left his successor, ‘Ali al-Riďa (202/817) as well as other sons, while
al-’Askari had obviously passed away and left no heir[^15].

***ii)*** The second faction of the *Waqifa* at al-’Askari believed that
he had died, but was then raised to life, and was *al-Qa’im*
*al*-*Mahdi* Basically, the members of this faction established their
doctrine on a transmission from Imam Ja’far al-Sa'diq, who said that
*al-Qa’im* was called *al-Qa’im* because he would "rise" again after his
death. They stated that it was certain that al-’Askari had died without
leaving a successor and without designating anyone as his legatee.

Thus there was no doubt about his being *al-Qa’im*, nor about his being
alive after death, although he concealed himself for fear of his foes.
They supported their theories with a saying of Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib,
contained in his advice to his follower Kumayl b. Ziyad, "O Allah,
indeed You do not leave the earth without a *Qaim* with proof from You,
whether manifest or hidden, for then Your proofs and Your signs would be
invalidated."[^16]

On the basis of ‘Ali's words they concluded that al-’Askari was absent
and hidden, but that he would rise to fill the earth with peace and
justice after it had been filled with tyranny[^17].

***iii)*** *Al*-*Waqifa* *al*-*la* *Adriyya* also stopped at al-’Askari.
They deemed that he had died and had been the Imam. Although the earth
could not be without a Proof from Allah, they were not sure who had
succeeded al-’Askari, his son or his brother. Therefore they stopped at
the Imamate of al-’Askari, and decided to make no decision until the
matter became clear to them[^18].

Unfortunately, the contemporary sources do not mention anyone as
representing the three factions of *al*-*Waqifa* at al-’Askari. However,
from the doctrine of the first faction of the *Waqifa*, it seems that
its partisans lived in places which were far from Samarra, the city of
the Imam. Since they were not present at the moment of his death, they
tended to believe that he had not in fact died, but was *al-Qa’im*
*al*-*Mahdi.*

### C) Schism II: The Ja’farites

The representatives of this schism claimed that the Imam after
al­‘Askari was his youngest brother, Ja’far, but they differed as to how
the Imamate had passed on to him, and therefore split into four
factions.

***i)*** The first faction believed that al- ‘Askari had died and that
he had held the Imamate by the testament of his father. Since the
Imamate can only pass to the eldest living son of the former Imam, the
Imamate passed from ‘Ali al-Hadi not to his eldest son Muhammad, who had
died before him, but to al-’Askari, who was the elder of the two sons
who had outlived their father[^19].

This faction believed that al-’Askari had not left a publicly
acknowledged son to take over the Imamate and, therefore, his sole
remaining brother, Ja’far, was the Imam. In order to support their dogma
they were obliged to repeat the Fathiyya's[^20] arguments about the
Imamate. The latter claimed that Musa al-Kazim received the Imamate, not
from his father Ja’far al-Sadiq, but from his eldest brother ‘Abd Allah,
according to the tradition which says that the Imamate passes on to the
eldest son of the Imam when he dies.

Like the Fathiyya, this faction of the Ja’farites accepted the
authenticity of the tradition which says that the Imamate will not fall
to two brothers after al-Hasan and al-Husayn. But they maintained that
this could only be applied if al-’Askari had left a son. Since
al-’Askari had passed away without leaving a publicly acknowledged
successor, his brother Ja’far was the designated Imam[^21] and the
Imamate would pass on in his offspring.

They also recognised ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far al-Sadiq as the seventh Imam.
Consequently Ja’far was thirteenth in the chain of Imams.

***ii)*** The second faction of the Ja’farites contended that the
eleventh Imam had himself designated Ja’far as his successor according
to the principle of *al*-*Bada'*[^22]. The same thing had happened in
the case of Ism'a'il, the eldest son of Imam Ja’far al­-Sadiq. God had
clarified His ultimate decision concerning him by taking away his soul
and placing his brothers ‘Abd Allah and Musa consecutively in the
Imamate instead.

Similarly, in the case of Ja’far b. ‘Ali, God had entrusted al-’Askari
with the Imamate, but thereafter He had made it clear that the Imamate
should not pass on in the progeny of al-’Askari. Therefore He
transferred it to his brother Ja’far, who was the Imam after
al-’Askari's death. Like the previous factions, this faction used the
argument and dogma of the Fathiyya to support their viewpoint.

This sect was probably more popular than the first among the
theologians, especially in Kufa. Its leader was a Kufi theologian called
‘Ali b. Tahl or al-Talhi al-Khazzaz, who had been famous amongst the
surviving members of the Fathiyya for his skill in theological
discussions. He upheld Ja’far's Imamate and encouraged people to take
his side. He was supported in his propaganda by the sister of Faris. b.
Hatim b. Mahawiyya al-Qazwini, although she rejected the Imamate of al-
‘Askari and claimed that the Imamate had been transferred to Ja’far from
his father, ‘Ali al-Hadi[^23].

She may have had this claim because her brother, Faris b. Hatim, was
killed on the order of al- ‘Askari[^24]. It is also possible that the
Kufan scholastic family Banu Faddal, who were active supporters of the
Fathiyya, adopted the doctrine of this faction, especially Ahmad b.
al-Hasan b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Faddal, who died in 260/874, and his
brother ‘Ali.

***iii)*** The members of this faction claimed that the Imamate had
passed on to Ja’far through the designation of his father. They based
their doctrine on a tradition attributed to Ja’far al-Sadiq, which
states that the Imamate cannot be held by two brothers after al-Hasan
and al-Husayn[^25]. Since Muhammad, the eldest son of ‘Ali al-Hadi, died
during the lifetime of his father, and since the Imamate should belong
to those who survive the death of their father, it had not been
transferred to Muhammad.

They may have accepted the Imamate of al-’Askari because he was the
eldest son after the death of his father, but they rejected his Imamate
after his death, because he had passed away without leaving a publicly
acknowledged son as his successor. It was a matter of course to them,
they said, that the Imam could not die without leaving a publicly
acknowledged and well­ known successor, designated by him and entrusted
with the Imamate.

Therefore the claim of al-’Askari to the Imamate must be invalid. So it
was inevitable that the Imam was Ja’far, by the designation of his
father[^26].

It is worth mentioning that this faction existed within the lifetime of
al- ‘Askari. When the tenth Imam died in 254/868 the majority of his
followers accepted the Imamate of his eldest surviving son, al­‘Askari,
as confirmed by the testament of his father, but a minority took
Ja’far's side[^27]. He became more powerful after al- ‘Askari's death,
since some of al- ‘Askari's adherents abandoned his Imamate and accepted
that of Ja’far. A leading scholar of this faction was ‘Ali b. Ahmad b.
Bashshar, who wrote a book on the *Ghayba* and disputed fiercely with
his opponents[^28].

There is some evidence that this faction achieved a certain degree of
success by persuading a few of the people who had accepted al- ‘Askari's
Imamate to join their side. Al-Saduq and al-Majlisi report a letter
attributed to the Twelfth Imam, and sent to his agent, ‘Uthman b. Sa’id
al-’Umari. This letter reveals that an' adherent of this faction argued
with a Twelver called al-Mukhtar, and succeeded in making him accept the
Imamate of Ja’far[^29]. The sister of Faris b. Hatim, who was mentioned
above, was one of the partisans of this group.

***iv)*** The followers of this faction were called al-Nafisiyya. They
believed that the tenth Imam had designated his eldest son Muhammad as
his legatee. Then, according to the principle of *Bada'*, Allah took
away his life while his father was still alive.

But when Muhammad b. ‘Ali passed away, by the order of his father, he
designated his brother Ja’far as his successor. He entrusted his
testament, the books, the secret knowledge and the weapons needed by the
community to his trustworthy young slave called Nafis. And he ordered
him to hand them 'over to his brother Ja’far when his father died.

However, when Muhammad died, the adherents of al-’Askari discovered the
secret arrangement and the role of Nafis. Since Nafis was afraid of them
and feared that the Imamate might be cut short, he called Ja’far and
handed over the trust of Muhammad b. ‘Ali al­ Hadi. Ja’far himself
claimed that the Imamate had been passed to him from his brother,
Muhammad[^30].

The members of this faction denied the testament of al-Hasan al-’Askari,
because his father, they claimed, had neither designated him nor changed
his testament from Muhammad. Nafis was killed by being drowned in a
well[^31].

### D) Schism III: The Muhammadiyya

This sect denied the Imamate of Ja’far and al-’Askari and considered
Muhammad, who had died in the lifetime of his father, as their Imam.
They argued that ‘Ali al-Hadi, the tenth Imam, had neither designated
nor indicated either al-’Askari or Ja’far as his legatee. Therefore
neither of them had any right to make claims upon the Imamate.

Since the Imam could not die without leaving a successor, and since
al-’Askari had passed away and not left a publicly acknowledged or
well-known son, his Imamate was invalidated. Ja’far, they added, was not
worthy of putting forward a claim because his immorality and sinfulness
were infamous. His wicked character could not be prudent fear
*(Taqiyya)* in the face of his enemies, for *Taqiyya* cannot be
practiced by committing sins.

They concluded that since it was forbidden for the Imamate to be
nullified, they were obliged to return to the Imamate of Muhammad b.
'Ali, since he had left offspring and his acts were distinguished by
probity and virtue[^32]. Others of them even considered him as
*al*-*Qaim* *al*-*Mahdi*[^33] and some of them went as far as to deny
his death[^34].

### E) Schism IV: The Qat’iyya

This faction constituted the greater portion of the Imamites. They
believed that al-’Askari had died and left a son to succeed him, but
they differed about the day of his birth, his name, and whether or not
he was *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi.* For this reason they split into six
groups:

***i)*** The first group maintained that al- ‘Askari had died and left a
son called Muhammad. According to Sa'd al-Qummi, they held that his son
had come of age, while, according to al-Nawbakhti and al-Shahristani,
they believed that he had been born two years before his father's death.
He was the Imam because his father had designated him so, and because it
was well-known that al- Askari had left no other son. So inevitably he
was the Imam and *al-Qa’im.*

But due to fear of his uncle, Ja’far, he went into concealment and this
became one of his occultations. This group built their doctrine on a
tradtion attributed to Ja’far al-Sadiq, which says that *al-Qa’im's*
date of birth is hidden from the people, information concerning him is
obscure, and the people cannot know him[^35].

Unfortunately little is known about this faction, but al-Saduq, while
trying to prove the birth of the Twelfth Imam, mentions traditions which
are presumably attributed to this faction's adherents. One of these was
called Ya'qub b. Manfush, who claimed that he had visited al-’Askari and
asked him about his successor. Al-’Askari showed him his son, who was
between eight and ten years old, indicating that his son would succeed
him. Another was called Daw' b. Ali al-’Ijli, who maintained that he had
met al-’Askari in his house where he saw his son, who was then two years
old[^36].

***ii)*** The members of this group held the same dogma as the previous
faction. They agreed with them on the death of al- ‘Askari, but they
thought that he had left a successor whose name was not Muhammad but
'Ali. They said that al-’Askari had no son except 'Ali, who had been
seen by his father's trustworthy followers. According to Sa’d al-Qummi
this sect had few adherents and they were concentrated within the
suburbs of the Sawad of Kufa[^37].

***iii)*** This sect held that the Imam after al-’Askari was his son,
who had been born eight months after his father's death and had then
gone into concealment. They argued that those who claimed that a son was
born to him during his lifetime were making false statements, because
al- ‘Askari had died without leaving a publicly acknowledged son.

But the pregnancy had been known to the caliph as well as other people,
and for this reason the caliph delayed dividing his share in the state
until the pregnancy was proved invalid. In fact, they said, the son was
born eight months after the death of his father and was ridden, and his
father had ordered that he be called Muhammad.

They based their doctrine on a tradition attributed to the eighth main,
‘Ali b. Musa al-Riďa, which says, "*You* *would* *test* *the* *foetus*
*which* *is* *within* *the* *womb* *of* *his* *mother,* *and* *the*
*suckling* *child.*"[^38]

***iv)*** The partisans of this faction held that al-’Askari had no sons
at all. The arguments about a hidden son, who was born during the
lifetime of al- ‘Askari, were rejected by them, because they had
searched for him during the life of the eleventh Imam using various
means, but had failed to find him.

But since the Imam cannot die without leaving an heir, they claimed that
a slave girl had conceived a child belonging to al- ‘Askari, and that
when she gave birth to him he would be the Imam, even if, as they are
reported to have said by al-Mufid, the pregnancy should last a hundred
years. They established their doctrine on a tradition of al-Sadiq, which
states that *al-Qa’im* *is* he whose conception and date of birth are
hidden from the people[^39].

***v)*** This faction held that the Imam after al- ‘Askari was his son
Muhammad, who was the Awaited One *(al*-*Muntazar).* They claimed that
he had died but would rise to life with the sword to fill the earth with
peace and justice after it had been filled with tyranny and
injustice[^40].

This group is mentioned neither by Sa’d al-Qummi nor by al-Nawbakhti.
Presumably the latter dealt with it but this discussion was later
dropped from his work, since al-Mufid who based his information on
al-Nawbakhti's work, mentions this group in *al­‘Uyun*
*wa*-*l*-*Mahasin*[^41].

***vi)*** This group, entitled the *Imamiyya* by Sa’d al-Qummi and
al-Nawbakhti, held that al- ‘Askari had died and that inevitably Allah's
*Hujja* on earth was his son. He was his sole successor and legatee,
charged with the affairs of the Imamate after him in accordance with the
method laid down by previous tradition. Thus the Imamate should pass on
to his offspring until the Day of Resurrection, but he was absent and
hidden by an order.

It was prohibited to seek him out before he chose to manifest himself,
because his adherents would endanger his life and thier own if they
looked for him. In spite of his occultation a few reliable followers
could contact him[^42]. He was born on 15th Sha'ban 256/29th July
868.[^43]

Basically this group directed their arguments against those factions
which supported the Imamate of Muhammad and Ja’far. With the partisans
of Muhammad they argued that the Imamate could be held neither by the
descendants of Muhammad, who had died during his father's lifetime, nor
by his legatee, such as his brother or someone else, because there was
no evidence or proof for accepting the Imamate of a son who had died
before his father. Perhaps this argument was also directed against the
Nafisiyya.

Presumably with the Jac farites they argued that the Imamate could not
pass from brother to brother after al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and that the
Imamate should fall to the eldest son of the preceding Imam. The
eleventh Imam al- ‘Askari, was designated by the testament of his
father, so the Imamate had to pass to his offspring[^44]. They also said
tht it was improper for the faithful to select an Imam for themselves.
Allah had to choose him and to manifest him at the proper time[^45].

This faction constituted the majority of the Imamites who had accepted
the Imamate of al- ‘Askari, such as Abu Sahl Isma’il b. ‘Ali
al-Nawbakhti, al-Hasan b. Musa al-Nawbakhti, Sa'd b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Ash'ari al-Qummi (the author of *Kitab* *al*-*Maqalat*
*wa*-*l*-*Firaq)*, ‘Uthman b. Said al- Umari and his son Muhammad[^46].

### F) Schism V: The Cessation of the Imamate

This group held that from the moment al-’Askari died there was no longer
an Imam. Al-Nawbakhti, al-Mufid and al-Shahristani considered this group
as one faction, whereas Sa’d al-Qummi was presumably more accurate when
he divided it into two[^47], since the partisans of this schism agreed
on the death of al-’Askari and the cessation of the Imamate, while they
differed on the dogma of *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* as follows:

***i)*** The first group deemed that it had been confirmed by successive
transmission that al-Askari would die without leaving a successor. For
this reason there was no Imam after al-’Askari and the Imamate ceased.
This, they contended, was reasonable and permitted. Since the cessation
of the prophecy after Muhammad was possible, the cessation of the
Imamate was also possible.

They established their doctrine on a transmission attributed to the
sixth Imam, Ja’far al-Sadiq, which states that the earth cannot be
without a Proof unless Allah becomes angry at the sins of His creatures
and retains him from them for as long as He wills. This group did not
believe in the rising of *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*[^48]*.*

***ii)*** The people of the second group held the same doctrine as the
previous faction, but they separated from them over the dogma of
*al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* They said that since al-’Askari had passed away
without leaving a successor, the Imamate had ceased until Allah raised
the Qa'im from among the Imams who had died, such as al-Hasan al-
‘Askari, or from among any of his descendants.

Furthermore the rising of *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi* was inevitable because
this was confirmed by successive tradition. They considered the period
after the death of al- ‘Askari and the rise of *al-Qa’im* as an interval
of time devoid of prophecy and Imamate, like the period between Jesus
and Muhammad[^49].

There is some evidence that many people from various countries doubted
the existence of the Twelfth Imam, such as Muhammad b. Ali b. Mahzayar
al-Ahwazi from al-Ahwaz[^50], and many of the persons from Banu Taalib
in Medina who had been agents of the eleventh Imam[^51].

### G) Conclusion

This historical and theological survey suggests that on the death of al-
Askari, the Imamites fell into problems similar to those which had beset
them after the death of the seventh Imam, Musa al-Kazim. They split into
*al*-*Waqifa*, *Muhammadiyya*, *Ja’fariyya* and *Qat’iyya*. Possibly the
causes of this split were as follows:

***i)*** Although the bulk of the Imamites accepted the Imamate of
al­‘Askari, they retained their cultural and sectarian backgrounds. For
example, al- Askari himself had allowed his adherents to accept the
traditions related by the Banu Faddal, who belong to the *Waqifa* Musa
al-Kazim, but had urged them to reject their doctrine.

The influence exerted by these cultural ties can be noted in the
traditional arguments held by the Imamites after the death of
al­‘Askari, arguments which led to the rise of the *Waqifa* at
al-’Askari and the encouragement of the Ja’farites.

***ii)*** Despite its developed system the Imamite organization
*(al­*-*Wikala)* did not widely disseminate the testament of Imam al-
Askari concerning his successor amongst the populace and the lower
missionaries. The organization may have acted in this way because of the
tense political situation. Thus no successor was openly indicated by
al-’Askari, nor was any well-known to the general mass of the Imamites.

For this reason the Imamites who knew nothing about al­Askari's
testament had recourse to the traditions adopted by the majority of the
Imamites to determine who was to be the Twelfth Imam. The interpretation
of these traditions led to various different points of view which, in
turn, led to new sub-divisions amongst the Qat’iyya and the
*Muhammadiyya*.

***iii)*** The third cause contributing to these divisions was the
personal ambition of al-’Askari's brother, Ja’far, who claimed the
Imamate during the lifetime of al- ‘Askari. Ja’far became more powerful
after the death of his brother, because he was encouraged by the
Fathiyya, in order to vindicate their doctrine, and especially by Banu
Faddal in Kufa. However Ja’far's success did not continue, because his
followers differed as to how he gained the Imamate, and because their
arguments in the field of traditions were weaker than those of the
Qat’iyya.

Thus, as al-Mufid and al-Tusi state, all these divisions and splits
gradually vanished, except for the *Qat’iyya*, who became the Twelvers
in the fourth/tenth century[^52].

2. The Question of the Birth of the Twelfth Imam
------------------------------------------------

The possibility that the Twelfth Imam was born and his birth was kept
hidden is supported by a number of narrations. The fact that there were
already narrations about the Twelfth Imam as *al-Qa’im* *al*-*Mahdi*
gave rise to other narrations which can only be described as
hagiographical. But from the time of al-Saduq onwards, even these were
accepted by the Imamites as historical facts.  
 Nevertheless, other early narrations present his birth as a purely
historical fact without the embellishment of miraculous reports.

### A) The Origin of the Mother of the Twelfth Imam

The earliest Imamite scholar to give an account of the Twelfth Imam's
mother is al-Mas'udi. He reports that she was a slave-girl called
Narjis[^53]. Al-Shahid (d. 786/1384) states that her name was Maryam b.
Zayd al-’Alawiyya[^54], and other reports give her name as Rayhana,
Saqil and Sawsan.ss It is possible that her name was in fact Narjis and
the other names, except Saqil, were given to her by her owner Hakima
bint Muhammad al-Jawad. People at that time used to call their
slave-girls by different names as a form of flattery, and Narjis,
Rayhana and Sawsan are all names of flowers.

The earliest report concerning the nationality of the Twelfth Imam's
mother goes back to the year 286/899. This was written down for the
first time by al-Saduq, on the authority of Muhammad b. Bahr
al-Shaybani, who attributed his narration to Bishr b. Sulayman
al-Nakhkhas. According to this report she was a Christian from Byzantium
who had been captured by Islamic troops[^55].

She was sold as a slave and bought by al-Nakhkhas in the slave-market in
Baghdad. Al-Nakhkhas sent her to the tenth Imam, ‘Ali al-Hadi, in
Samarra. After this, however, the narration begins’ to lose much of its
credibility and becomes hagiographical. It is related that she was
Malika b. Yashshu', the granddaughter of the Emperor of Byzantium, whose
mother was a descendant of Simon (Sham' un) the disciple of Jesus.

When Malika was in her grandfather's palace, she dreamt that she saw
Jesus's mother, Mary, and Muhammad's daughter, Fatima. In this dream
Fattima converts her to Islam and persuades her to allow herself to be
captured by Islamic troops[^56].

The authenticity of this narration is questionable in many aspects, the
most doubtful points being found in the last part.

***Firstly*** there was no major battle between the ‘Abbasids and the
Byzantines after 242/856[^57] and there is no indication in the sources
that the Emperor of Byzantium appealed to the ‘Abbasids to liberate his
granddaughter.

***Secondly***, the early Imamite authors, particularly al-Qummi,
al-Nawbakhti, al-Kulayni and al-Mas'udi, who were contemporaries of
al-Shaybani, the narrator of this report, do not refer to it in their
works. In addition, al-Kashshi, who was a companion of al-Shaybani, and
the later scholars al-Najashi and Ibn Dawud claim that he was an
extremist [^58].

***Thirdly***, al-Kulayni states that *al-Qa’im*'s mother was a
slave-girl from al-Nawba, the northern province of Sudan[^59]. Moreover
al­-Nu'mani and al-Saduq related other narrations which indicate that
*al-Qa’im*'s mother was to be a black slave-girl[^60]. It may be that
the later Imamites ignored these transmissions and considered the
narration of al-Shaybani as authentic because the latter makes
*al-Qa’im*’s mother of noble ancestry and high social status.

They would have been particulary attracted by the connection the report
establishes between the Twelfth Imam, *al-Qa’im*, and Jesus, since
prophetic traditions state that the two of them will rise together to
rid the world of tyranny[^61].

In the light of these three points the narration of-Muhammad b. Bahr
al-Shaybani can be rejected despite the fact that al-Tusi and Ibn Rustam
al-Tabari consider it reliable[^62]. Possibly the correct account of the
origin of *al-Qa’im*'s mother is given by al-Mufid, who states that she
was a slave-girl brought up in the house of Hakima, the sister of the
tenth Imam. According to his report the Imam saw her one day and
predicted that she would give birth to someone with special Divine
blessing[^63].

According to al-Saduq she died before the death of her husband,
al-Hasari al-’Askari, in 260/874.[^64] But al-Najashi's report indicates
that she was alive after this year hiding at the house of Muhammad b.
‘Ali b. Hamza, one of the close associates of her husband
al-’Askari[^65].

### B) The Birth of the Twelfth Imam

Since the eleventh Imam died without leaving an obvious son, most of his
followers, who held that he had in fact left a successor, based their
belief on traditions attributed to the preceding Imams concerning
*al-Qa’im* al-Mahdi and his occultation[^66]. The following statements,
some of which we have already had occasion to relate, are examples of
these traditions: The world cannot be void of a Proof, either manifest
and well-known, or hidden because of fear[^67].

The Imamate cannot be vested to two brothers after al-Hasan and
al-Husayn[^68]. According to al-Sadiq, the "Master of the Command"
(*Sahib* *al*-*Amr*) will have two occultations. One of them will be so
prolonged that some will say that he has died and others will say that
he has been killed, and finally only a few of his followers will remain
faithful to his Imamate.

No one will become cognizant of his whereabouts and his affairs except
his intimate partisans, who will look after his affairs[^69]. It is
worth mentioning that this last tradition had also been recorded before
the death of al-’Askari in 260/874 by the Sevener Imamites, the Waqifa
who had applied these traditions to the seventh Imam Musa al-Kazim[^70].

Abu Sahl al-Nawbakhti reports that al-’Askari had intimate partisans who
used to narrate traditions concerning Islamic law on his authority and
were his deputies. When al-’Askari died in 260/874 all of them agreed
that he had left a son who was the Imam. Al-Nawbakhti adds that they
forbade their adherents to ask about his name or to reveal his existence
to his foes, who were at that time trying to arrest him[^71].

The ‘Abbasids'political pressure, which forced al-’Askari to hide the
birth of his son from the ordinary Imamites, may also have led the
Twelfth Imam to transmit different reports concerning the date of his
birth, some of which took on a hagiographical form.

Most of the Imamite sources agree that al-’Askari's son was born on
Friday, the 15th of Sha'ban[^72], but they differ about the year of his
birth. Al-Qummi gives an account of a group of Imamites who held that
al- ‘Askari had died and left a son called Muhammad, who had already
come of age when his father died[^73].

But they did not fix the year of his birth. Perhaps this group based
their belief in the existence of al-’Askarl's son mainly upon the
tradition which says that the earth cannot be void of a Proof.
Unfortunately al-Qummi does not report any witnesses to the birth of the
Imam from this group to support their opinion.

Al-Kulayni, al-Mufid and al-Tusi mention four different viewpoints
concerning the date of the Twelfth Imam's birth. The first was related
by ‘Allan al-Razi and al-Kulayni on the authority of 'Ali b. Muhammad,
who states that the Twelfth Imam was born in 255/868.[^74] Al-Tusi
reports two narrations attributed to Hakima bint al-Jawad which support
this date[^75].

The second report states that he was born in 258/871. This report is
attributed by Daw' b. ‘Ali al-’Ijli to an anonymous Persian who related
that in the year 260/873 he had come to Samarra from Persia to serve in
the house of al- ‘Askari. According to the Persian one of al­‘Askari's
slave-girls had given birth and he saw the child in the arms of another
slave-girl. He estimated his age at about two years[^76].

Another transmission, on the authority of Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Bilal,
relates that al- ‘Askari informed him twice about his successor: once in
258/871, then three days before his death in 260/874.[^77]

The narration attributed to Daw’ does not mention explicitly the date of
the Imam's birth nor the time when the narrator gave his estimation,
whether it was before or after the death of al-’Askari. Regarding the
narration of Ibn Bilal, although al-’Askari informed him about the
existence of his successor in 258/871, this does not indicate or reveal
that the birth of his son occurred in that year. In fact it leads us to
think that the birth occurred before 258/871.

The third viewpoint was that of a group of Imamites who thought that al-
‘Askari's son had been born after his father's death in 1261/874. They
claimed that a slave-girl had conceived a child belonging to al-’Askari,
and that her pregnancy had been known to the caliph as well as to other
people.

Thus the authorities delayed the division of his share of the estate
until the pregnancy was proved invalid to the caliph. They contended
that the Imam was born eight months after his father's death, and was
then hidden. Al- ‘Askari had commanded that he be named Muhammad[^78].

From the historical viewpoint, the account given by this group is
completely unconvincing and in itself does not encourage one to believe
that al­‘Askari had left a successor. Firstly, al-’Askari's slave-girl,
Saqil, who had claimed that she was pregnant by her master, was detained
by the ‘Abbasid authorities for two years until the pregnancy was proved
invalid[^79]. Secondly, al-Kulayni reports that Abu Hashim
al­-Ja’fari[^80] once asked the eleventh Imam

*"O master, do you have a son?" He replied, "Yes." Abu Hashim said, "If
something should happen to you, where should I ask for him?" The Imam
said, "In Medina."*[^81]

It is well-known that al -’Askari died in 260/874 and that Abu Hashim
died the following year. Therefore this narration would suggest that the
birth occurred before 260/874. Thirdly, al-Mas'udi reports that the
Twelfth Imam was born two years after the death of his grandfather,
al-Hadi[^82]. As the latter died in 254/869,[^83] the birth would have
occurred in 256/870.

Al-Mas’udi's narration adds weight to the fourth viewpoint, which places
the birth of the Twelfth Imam in 256/870. The Imamite sources record
many narrations in favour of this date[^84]. The most important one,
however, is mentioned on the authority of Mu’alla b. Muhammad and Ahmad
b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah, who related that al-’Askari issued a letter
to his reliable followers after the assassination of al-Muhtadi, the
caliph, saying,

*"This is the punishment of him who has sinned against Allah, the
Exalted, in regard to his legatees. He thought that he would kill me
without offspring. Now he has seen the omnipotence of Allah, the
Exalted."*

The narration continues to report that in fact the Imam had a son called
Muhammad, who was born in 256/870.[^85]

Al-Muhtadi wad dethroned and died in Rajab 256/870.[^86]

Moreover all the Imamite narrators agree that the birth of the Twelfth
Imam occurred on the 15th of Sha’ ban. So if one links the death of
al­Muhtadi in the month of Rajab with the letter of al-’Askari which was
issued in the next month, Sha’ ban, it would seem plausible that the
Imam's birth occurred on the 15th of Sha’ban in 256/870.

Furthermore al-Mas'udi reports an anecdote attributed to Khadija bint
Muhammad al-Jawad to support such a hypothesis. In 262/875 a certain man
called Ahmad b. Ibrahim asked her about al- ‘Askari's successor, and she
confirmed his existence, adding that he had taken over the Imamate on
11th Rabi’ 1260/874 at the age of four years and seven months[^87],
which means that he was born on 15th Sha’ban 256/18th July 870.

It is worth quoting here a narration concerning the birth of the Twelfth
Imam which was viewed as authentic by the time of al-­Mas'udi, who died
in 345/956. Al-Saduq presented it as follows and attributed it to Hakima
bint al-Jawad, who related,

*"Abu Muhammad al-Hasan b. ‘Ali, peace be upon both of them, called on
me with the message, ‘O aunt, break your fast at our house tonight,
because it is the fifteenth of Sha’ban. Tonight Allah, the Exalted, will
manifest the Hujja, His Proof on earth.' (When I went to the house), I
asked him who the mother of the child was. He said, ‘Narjis.'*

*I said, ‘May Allah make me your sacrifice! But there is no sign of
pregnancy in her!' He said, ‘What I am telling you is so.' Therefore I
went in and greeted them. When I had taken my seat Narjis came forward
to take off my shoes and said to me, ‘My mistress and the lady of my
family, how are you tonight?'*

*I said, ‘Nay you are the mistress of myself and my family.' But she
denied my speech and replied, ‘What are you saying, O aunt?' I said to
her, ‘O my daughter, tonight Allah the Exalted will give you a son who
shall be the Master in this world and in the hereafter' She became
embarrassed and blushed.*

*"After I had finished my evening prayer I broke my fast and then went
to sleep. At midnight I woke for prayer. I performed my prayer while
Narjis was sleeping, without any sign of childbirth. Then I sat down
performing the supererogatory prayer. Thereafter I went to bed and got
up again, but she was still sleeping. Then she got up, performed her
supererogatory prayer and lay down again."*

*Hakima continued, "I went out to see the dawn and found that its first
stage was about to appear. But she was still asleep. So I began to doubt
al-* *‘Askari's expectation. Just then he called out from his place,*
*‘Do not be in a hurry, O aunt, the matter is approaching.' I sat down
and recited the Qur anic suras* *Ha Mim al-Sajda (40) and Yasin (36). At
that moment she got up alarmed. I ran to her and said,* *‘The name of
Allah be upon you, do you feel anything?'*

*She replied,* *‘O aunt, yes.' Then I said to her* *‘Gather yourself and
procure peace in your heart.' However at that moment we felt sleepy and
drowsiness overcame us. After that I got up at the voice of my Master,
and when I raised the covering from him I saw him, peace be upon him,
prostrate on the ground*[^88]. *I took him to my bosom and noticed that
he was pure and clean.*

*Abu Muhammad called out to me and said, ‘O aunt, bring my son to me,'
and I did so ... Afterwards al-’Askari put his tongue in his mouth and
gently stroked his eyes, ears and joints with his hand. Then he said, ‘O
my son, speak.' The child replied, ‘I bear witness that there is no god
but Allah, He is unique and has no partner, and I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah.' Then he sent his greetings upon the
commander of the faithful (Amir al-Mu'minin), and upon the Imams
respectively until he stopped at the name of his father. Then he stopped
speaking.*

*"Abu Muhammad said,* *‘O aunt, take him to his mother, so that he may
greet her, and then bring him back to me.' I took him to her and when he
had done so I brought him back and left him there. Al-Askari said to
me,* *‘O aunt, come to visit us on the seventh day.' The next day I came
to greet Abu Muhammad and raised the curtain to see my Master. But I did
not see him. So I asked the Imam,* *‘May Allah make me your sacrifice!
What has happened to my Master?' He replied,* *‘O aunt, we have
entrusted him to the one to whom the mother of Moses entrusted her
son*.'[^89]

*Hakima said, "On the seventh day I came and greeted him and took my
seat. Abu Muhammad said, ‘Bring my son to me.' I brought him wrapped in
a piece of cloth, and the Imam repeated what he had done on the first
day and the child said what he had said before. Then he recited the
Qur'anic verse"*

 ***And We desired to show favour unto those who were oppressed in the
earth, and to make them Imams and to make them the inheritors. And to
establish them in the earth, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their
hosts that which they feared from them**. "*[^90]

The hagiographical nature of this account is obvious. However, certain
of its elements suggest something about the nature of the birth. It
seems that the pregnancy of Narjis was deliberately concealed, and a
close relative was brought in to act as midwife only when the birth was
due. If this was the case and a son was indeed born to al- ‘Askari - the
likeliest date being 256/870 - then the reasons for the concealment of
the pregnancy and the birth would be the same as the reasons for the
Imam's occultation.

3. The Reasons for the First Occultation of the Twelfth Imam
------------------------------------------------------------

The early Imamite works mention three reasons for the occultation of the
Twelfth Imam, reasons which mirror the new tactics of the Imams in their
religious and political activities

Al-Sadiq was reported to have said that *al-Qa’im* would go into
occultation before he rose again, because he would be afraid of being
killed[^91]. A second reason is mentioned on the authority of the
Twelfth Imam, who was reported as having informed his partisan Ishaq b.
Ya'qub that all his forefathers had paid the oath of obedience to
oppressive rulers, but that he had hidden himself in order to rise in
arms, and had made no oath of obedience to any oppressive ruler[^92].

This reason had already been mentioned by al-Hasan and al-Riďa, who both
said that *al-Qa’im* alone would not swear fealty to an oppressive
ruler[^93]. The third reason is mentioned by al-Kulayni, who states that
the occultation was a test set by Allah for his creatures, so as to see
who would remain steadfast in acknowledging the Imamate of the Twelfth
Imam[^94].

These three reasons depict a new phase in the attitude of the Imamites
toward their struggle for power. It appears that the quiescent policy of
the Imams towards the ‘Abbasid regime, along with their continued
intellectual activities, had led the Imamite organizaton to a more
politically developed situation.

This fact encouraged the Twelfth Imam to instigate underground political
activities against the ‘Abbasids. At the same time, he knew that certain
followers of his forefathers had caused the failure of two bids for
power in 70/689 and 140/757 by revealing the activities of the Imams to
their enemies, which led to their arrest and the failure of their
attempt[^95].

Perhaps such incidents obliged the Twelfth Imam to live in a state of
concealment even from his own followers so as to practice his
underground activities through the Imamite organization and to evade any
‘Abbasid bid to arrest him. This is indicated by many traditions
commanding the Imamites to keep the name of *al-Qa’im* a secret[^96].

Al-Kulayni reports that, after the death of al- ‘Askari in 260/874, some
people among his adherents asked the agent (wakil), Abu Abd Allah
al-Salihi, to ask about the name and residence of the Twelfth Imam for
them. When he did so, the answer was,

***"If you reveal the name to them, they will reveal it in public; and
if they realize the place of his residence they will lead foes to
it.”***[^97]

Al-Kulayni mentions another report which asserts that the occultation of
the Twelfth Imam was a preparatory step for the overthrow of the state
of injustice[^98].

It is relevant to study the plan of al-’Askari to hide his son and the
‘Abbasid attitude towards the Imamites after the death of al-’Askari so
as to see why the later felt it necessary to hide his son.

4. Al- ‘Askari’s Plan to Hide his Successor
-------------------------------------------

The circumstances which accompanied the birth of al-’Askari's son
suggest that al-’Askari wanted to save his successor from the
restrictive policy of the ‘Abbasids, which had been established by
al-­Ma’mun. Hence he did not circulate in public the news concerning the
birth of his son, but only disclosed it to a few reliable followers,
such as Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari, Ahmad b. Ishaq, and Hakima and Khadija,
the aunts of al-’Askari[^99].

Moreover he decided to move his son to a place safer than Samarra so
that he could carry on his religious and political activities through
the *Wikala* without suffering the interference of the ‘Abbasids.

Study of the hagiographical and historical anecdotes concerning the
first occultation of the Imam and his reappearance reveals that
al­‘Askari hid his son first in Samarra and then in Medina, where he
lived under the guardianship of his paternal grandmother. According to
al-Saduq, al-’Askari sent his son to an unknown place forty days after
his birth, and then his son was brought back to his mother[^100].

According to al-Mas’udi, three years later, in the year 259/873,
al­‘Askari asked his own mother, Hadith to go on the pilgrimage. He
explained his critical position to her, gave her full instructions, and
sent his son with her. His son had already received from his father the
signs of the Imamate, the most esteemed name of Allah, the inheritance
and the weapon.

Thereafter Hadith and her grandson went to Mecca under the protection of
a close friend called Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Muttahir[^101]. It appears
that after they had performed the rite of pilgrimage they went to
Medina, which was used as the place of concealment for the Twelfth Imam.

Many reports incline one to accept the above description of the Twelfth
Imam's early life. As we have seen, Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari once asked
al-’Askari where he should ask for his successor were he to die.
Al-’Askari said, "In Medina." Another report states that the residence
of *al-Qa’im* would be in Medina, surrounded by thirty intimate
followers[^102].

All the traditions concerning the rise of *al-Qa’im* indicate that it
will occur in Mecca[^103]. The Imamite sources record that the Twelfth
Imam *al-Qa’im* went on the pilgrimage every year[^104]. Such evidence
indicates that the Twelfth Imam was in an area not far from Mecca,
perhaps Medina.

As part of al-’Askari's prudent fear, he made his manifest testament
only to his mother, Hadith, and did not mention any successor openly to
anyone else[^105]. From all this it seems most probable that the Twelfth
Imam spent most of his early life in Medina, because al-’AskarT
recognised the danger which his son would face were he to remain in
Iraq.

5. The Abbasid Attempt to Arrest al- 'Askari's Son
--------------------------------------------------

The caliph al-Mu'tamid continued the ‘Abbasid policy of patting the
Imams under close watch and enforced it even more vigorously with the
spread of the traditions concerning the role of the Twelfth Imam.

On hearing about the deterioraton of al-’Askari's health, al-Mu’tamid
sent five of his most trusted officers, amongst whom was his servant
Nahrir, to the house of al-’Askari to watch over him. He also ordered
the chief judge, al-Hasan b. Abi al-Shawarib[^106], to send ten reliable
people to participate in this task.

When al-’Askari died on 8th Rabi’ I 260/1st January 874, the caliph sent
a contingent to search his house. They sealed off all his estate and
then looked for his son to the extent that they even brought women to
examine his slave­girls in case any of them were pregnant[^107].

Despite the fact that the primary investigation proved to al-Mu’tamid
that al-’Askari died without leaving a son, the vast majority of the
Imamites held that he had in fact left one[^108].

According to the Imamite works, Ja’far, the brother of al-’Askari, who
had already claimed to be the Imam and tried to succeed his brother,
revealed to the authorities the Imamites' belief in the existence of
al-’Askari's successor. Al-Saduq reports that a band of people from
Qumm, among whom was Muhammad b. Ja’far al-­Himyari, arrived at Samarra
in ignorance of the death of al-’Askari with letters of inquiry and
legal taxes.

There they learned about his death and were directed to Ja’far. They met
him and wanted to indulge in the ceremonies which they had practiced
before on such occasions.

They asked Ja’far to tell them about the amount of money they had
brought and who had given it to them. Ja’far replied that he was no
soothsayer and that the things the Imamites claimed about al­‘Askari
were mere lies, because Allah alone could know such things. He then told
them. to hand the money over to him, but they refused to do so, and
their quarrel became public.

While they were arguing someone came, called them by name and led them
to a house. There he showed them someone who was believed to be the
agent of the Twelfth Imam and who revealed to them how much money they
had brought. Therefore they accepted the Imamate of the Twelfth Imam.
Having done so they were commanded that they should henceforth hand the
money to a certain man in Baghdad[^109].

According to al-Saduq, Ja’far went straight to the caliph, al-Mu'tamid,
and informed him that the Imamites still believed in the existence of a
son of al­‘Askari. Al-Mu’tamid immediately had this investigated by
sending a band of soldiers with Ja’far to search the house of al-’Askari
and the houses of the neighbours[^110].

They arrested a slave-girl called Saqil and demanded that she show them
the child, but she denied having given birth to a child. According to
al-Saduq, in order to save the life of the Twelfth Imam, Saqil claimed
to be pregnant[^111]. Thereupon al­-Mu’tamid incarcerated her in his
harem for observation.

Under the supervision of Nahrir, the caliph's wives and slave-girls and
the wives of the chief judge, Ibn Abi al-Shawarib, observed Saqil for
two years until they felt that further observation was no longer
necessary. When disturbances occurred in various parts of the Empire and
the vizier ‘Ubayd Allah Ibn Khaqan suddenly died, they ignored her
completely[^112].

Many reports indicate that while Saqil was imprisoned the ‘Abbasids
carried out a campaign of persecution against the Imamites and that
Ja’far was behind it. In spite of the fact that the Imamites lost many
people, all attempts on the part of the authorities to arrest the
Twelfth Imam proved fruitless.

According to al-Mufid, al-’Askari wanted to deny the ‘Abbasids the
opportunity to find any trace which might endanger the life of his
successor. Hence he devised a plan whereby according to his public will
he left his estate only to his mother, Hadith[^113].

On hearing of the death of her son, she came from Medina to Samarra to
take over the estate, but found that it was under ‘Abbasid control.
Furthermore, Ja’far quarrelled with her about his brother's inheritance,
insisting on his right to the estate. He raised the case with the
authorities, who were trying to confirm that al-’Askari had no son by
interfering in it.

Hadith maintained that al-’Askari had made her his sole heiress, and
that according to Imamite law Ja’far had no right to the estate of his
brother[^114].

This quarrel went on for two years until the pregnancy of Saqil proved
false. Although the judge adjudicated in favour of Hadith, Ja’far's
claim was not disputed because of his influential connections. In the
end the estate was divided into two parts, in spite of Imamite
law[^115].

[^1]: N. Firaq, 65-6,77,79.

[^2]: The reports of the early Shi’ite authors like al-Kulayni, Sa’d
al-Qummi and al-Mufid did not reveal any external cause for al-’Askari's
death ( al-Kafi, I, 509; Q. Maqalat, 101-2, al-Irshad, 377, 383, 389;
al-Mufid, al-Muqni’a fi al-Fiqh [Iran, 1274], 72-5; and his Tashih
I’tiqadat al-Imamiyya [Tabriz, 1371], 63,) but the later Shi’ite authors
followed al-Tabari, who claimed that the Imam was poisoned or killed. He
based this assumption on a tradition whose chain of transmitters related
to al-Sadiq, who said "None of us die naturally, but are killed or
martyred." (al-Tabarsi, Ilam al-Wara, 349; Muhammad b. Ja’far al­
Tabari, Dala'il al-Imama [Najaf, 1369], 223, Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib,
IV,421; Bihar, L, 236-8, 335, Muhammad al-Sadr, Tarikh al-Ghayba
al-Sughra [Beirut, 1972], 230-4).

[^3]: Ibn Shahr Ashnb, Manaqib, III; 533; Ithbat, 262; Subhi, Nazariyyat
al-Imaina (Cairo, 1969), 394.

[^4]: Al-Kulayni and al-Mufid report the same chain of transmitters for
their information about al-’Askari's death (al-Kafi, I, 503-5;
al-Irshad, 381-2, 389). Al-Nawbakhti agrees with Sad al-Qummi that Abu
‘Isa prayed ‘Askari's body (N. Firaq, 79; Q. Maqalat, 102). But Sad
dates al-’Askari's death in Rabi’ II, which agrees with al-Mas’udi's
report (Ithbat, 248). Al Kulayni's report seems to be more reliable that
the latter, since it adds several supporting reports.

[^5]: N. Firaq, 79; Q. Maqalat, 102.

[^6]: al-Irshad, 389-90; Kama’l (Tehran 1378/1958), I, 101.

[^7]: Al-Barqi and al-Kulayni mention many traditions with different
chains of transmitters asserting that the world cannot be without a
Proof (Hujja); al­ Barqi, al-Mahasin (Tehran, 1370/1950), 92, 234-6;
al-Kafi, I, 178-80, 514; see also Dala'il, 229-30; Ahmad b. ‘Ali
al-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj (Najaf, 1966), II, 48-9, 78.

[^8]: al-Kafi, I, 285-6; al-Ghayba, 146.

[^9]: al-Kafi, I, 276-7.

[^10]: Q. Maqalat, 109.

[^11]: Because of the way al-Shahristani classifies his information on
these schisms, it seems that his study is based on the works of
al-Nawbakhti and al-Ash’ari. Al­ Nawbakhti deemed the Imamite
sub-divisions to be as many as fourteen, although his work in its
present form counts only thirteen. Fortunately al­ Mufid, who discusses
the various factions on the authority of al-Nawbakhti, mentions the
fourteenth faction, which is missing from al-Nawbakhti's work.
Al-Mas’udi does not give any details on the splits. Later al-Nawbakhti's
work became more circulated than Sa’d al-Qummi's work, because the
latter contains opinions on the occultation which contrast with the
official opinion of the later Imamites from the fifth/eleventh century
onwards; al-Qummi's book was gradually withdrawn from these circles; N.
Firaq, 79; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 258-60; Muruj, VIII, 50, Milal, 130-1.

[^12]: Kama’l, 40.

[^13]: al-Kafi, I, 178-80, 514.

[^14]: Q. Maqalat, 106; N. Firaq, 78-80; Milal, 129.

[^15]: Q. Maqalat, 106-107.

[^16]: al-Kaji, I, 178; al-Sharif al-Radi (ed.), Nahj al-Bahagha
(Beirut, 1967), 497; N Firaq, 80-1.

[^17]: Q. Maqalat, 107.

[^18]: N. Firaq, 89-90.

[^19]: Q. Maqalat, 111; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 259.

[^20]: Al-Fathiyya: A Shi’ite sect which arose after the death of Ja’far
al-Sadiq, the sixth Imam, who contended that the Imamate had passed on
from al-Sadiq not to Musa but to his eldest son, ‘Abd Allah, accordingto
thetradition which says that the Imamate can only be vested in the
eldest son, with the condition that he should be free from any bodily
defects (al-Kafi, I, 285; Ikhtiyar, 282-3). They were also called
al-Fathiyya as an allusion either to ‘Abd Allah b. Jaf'ar because he had
broad feet or was broad-headed, or it referred to their leader, who was
called ‘Abd Allah al-Aftah: N. Firaq 65; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 248-51;
Ikhtiyar, 254.

[^21]: N. Firaq, 93; Q. Maqalat, 111-2.

[^22]: Al-bada' means the appearance of something or some knowledge
after it has been concealed. In theological terms, it is a dogma which
deals with the question of whether or not it is possible for God to
change His decision about something. The theologians maintain that this
is impossible, even if it often appears to happen, as for example when
Ja’far al-Sadiq designated Isma’il as his successor according to God's
command. For when Isma’il died, God then ordered Ja’far to designate
Musa al-Kazim as his successor. So it seems that God changed his
decision about who was to succeed Ja’far. But in fact, God's eternal
knowledge never changes. What changes is the degree to which men are
cognizant of that knowledge. Hence the doctrine of al-bada' states that
God's ultimate judgement about something often appears to men only after
first having been concealed. It declares that God cannot have changed
His decision, for that would imply that His knowledge changes, or that
He was ignorant and then gained knowledge. Finally, the Imamites hold
that Goes does allow certain people to have knowledge of His ultimate
judgement. Bandar, A., ‘Aqidat al-Bada' (Baghdad, 1976); also a letter
from the author dated 15th January 1978.

[^23]: N. Firaq, 99; al-Shahristani's information concerning this sect
is confused. He claims that Faris b. Hatim, not his sister, was a
follower of Ja’far, but Faris had been assassinated by the order of
al-Askari himself; see Milal, 129; Ikhtiyar, 524.

[^24]: For the dogma of Faris b. Hatim, his political activities in
Qazwm and Samarra, and his assassination, see Ikhtiyar, 522-8;
al-Najashi, 238; T. al-Ghayba, 238.

[^25]: Al-Nawbakhti and al-Qummi mention that a group maintained that
Ja’far was the Imam after al-’Askari not by the testament of his brother
but by that of his father. Thus they held that the adoption of the
Imamate of al-’Askari was incorrect and that people should go back to
the Imamate of Ja’far; N. Firaq, 82­-3; Q. Maqalat, 110-1; al-Fusul
al-Mukhtara, 259.

[^26]: For this tradition see al-Kafi, I, 285-6; T. al-Ghayba, 146.

[^27]: N. Firaq, 79; Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Qubba, al-Insaf fi
al-Imams, quoted in Kama’l, 55.

[^28]: Kama’l, 51-3.

[^29]: Kama’l, 511; Bihar, LIII, 190-1.

[^30]: Q. Maqalat, 112-3; N. Firaq, 88-9, Ibn Qubba, op. cit., quoted in
Kama’l, 59. About Ibn Qubba and his work see al-Najashi, 290-1, T.
al-Fihrist, 297-8.

[^31]: Q. Maqalat, 103.

[^32]: Q. Maqalat, 109.

[^33]: N. Firaq, 84.

[^34]: T. al-Ghayba, 128-9; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 259.

[^35]: Q. Maqalat, 114; N. Firaq, 84-5; Milal, 130.

[^36]: Kama’l, II, 78, 109-10; see al-Galbaygani, op. cir, 356.

[^37]: Q. Maqlat, 114; T. al-Ghayba, 147; al-Mufid also mentions this
faction but thought that they held the same dogma as al-Qat’iyya (The
Twelvers); al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 259-60.

[^38]: Q. Maqalat, 114; N. Firaq, 85; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 261; Milal,
130.

[^39]: Al-Nawbakhti's information about this sect is confused, whereas
al-Qummi and al-Mufid are much clearer in their presentation; N. Firaq,
85-6; Q. Maqalat, 114-5; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 260.

[^40]: T. al-Ghayba, 60.

[^41]: al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 260.

[^42]: Q. Maqalat, 102-4; Abu Sahl al-Nawbakhti, Kitab al-Tanbih, quoted
in Kama’l, 88; al-Insaf quoted in Kama’l, 61.

[^43]: This group dated his birth as mentioned but the later Imamites
differ about it. Ibn Rustam al-Tabari dates it as 15th Sha'ban 257,
while al-Kulayni mentions several traditions giving the dates 252,255
and 256 respectively. Al-Saduq and al­ Mufid follow al-Kulayni on this
point. Some of the factions opposed to the Imamites may have abandoned
their claims and joined the Imamites, who then accepted their differing
transmissions concerning the birth of the Twelfth Imam; al-Kafi, I,
514-16; Dala'il, 271; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 258; Kama’l, 430.

[^44]: al-Insaj; quoted in Kama’l, 55-6.

[^45]: N. Firaq, 90-91.

[^46]: Ibn al-Nadim, al-Fihrist, (Tehran, 1972), 225; Kama’l, 482; Q.
Maqlat, 106.

[^47]: Milal, 130-1; N. Firaq, 88-9.

[^48]: Q. Maqalat, 107-8.

[^49]: Q. Maqalat, 108-9; T. al-Ghayba, 147.

[^50]: Kama’l, 485,487.

[^51]: al-Kafi, I, 518-9.

[^52]: T. al-Ghayba, 142-6; al-Fusul al-Mukhtara, 261.

[^53]: Ithbat, 248. For the later authors who named her as Narjis see
al-Irshad, 390; T. al-Ghayba, 153, 158; ‘Uyun, 32-3.

[^54]: Bihar, LI, 28, quoted from al-Dirus.

[^55]: Kama’l, 431-2.

[^56]: Kama’l, 317-23.

[^57]: Tabari, III, 1434.

[^58]: Ikhtiyar, 147-8; al-Najashi, 298; Ibn Dawud, al-Rijal, 541.

[^59]: al-Kafi, I, 323.

[^60]: N. al-Ghayba, 84, 85, 120; Kama’l, 329.

[^61]: Kama’l, 280, 345; al-Marwazi, Kitab al-Fitan, Mss fol, 150-63.

[^62]: T. al-Ghayba, 134-9; Dala'il, 262-4.

[^63]: al-Irshad, 390-1.

[^64]: Kama’l, 431.

[^65]: al-Najashi, 268.

[^66]: Ibn Qubba, Naqd Kitab al-Ashhad, quoted in Kama’l, 113.

[^67]: al-Kafi I, 178; N. Firaq, 91.

[^68]: al-Kafi, I, 285-6; Abu Sahl al-Nawbakhti states in his work
al-Tanbih that the main argument used by the Imamites to prove the
existence of the Twelfth Imam was the traditions of the preceding Imams,
which had been narrated beforethe death of the eleventh Imam in 260/874;
quoted in Kama’l, 92-3; also see N. Firaq, 90-91; Q. Maqalat, 102.

[^69]: N. al-Ghayba, 90.

[^70]: T. al-Ghayba, 90.

[^71]: Abu Sahl al-Nawbakhti, al-Tanbih, quoted in Kama’l, 92-3.

[^72]: For example, see al-Kafi, I, 514; Kama’l, 424; al-Irshad, 390.
However, Ibn Rustam al-Tabari mentions that al-’Askari's son was born on
the 8th of Sha’ban, 257/870; Dalail, 272.

[^73]: Q. Maqalat, 114; al-Saduq reports a narration the authority of
Ya'qub b. Manfush who claimed that al-’Askari had shown him his son,
whose age at that time was between eight and ten years old; Kama’l, 407.

[^74]: al-Kafi, I, 329; al-Irshad, 390-391.

[^75]: T. al-Ghayba, 150-151, 153.

[^76]: al-Kafi, I, 514-5.

[^77]: al-Kafi, I, 328; al-Irshad, 394.

[^78]: Q. Maqalat, 114; N. Firaq, 85.

[^79]: Kama’l, 33.

[^80]: According to al-Tabari, Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari died in 261/875;
Tabari, III, 1887.

[^81]: al-Kafi, I, 328.

[^82]: Ithbat, 251.

[^83]: According to al-Kulayni the Tenth Imam, al-Hadi, died on 26
Jumada II, 254/2 June 869; al-Kafi, I, 497.

[^84]: Kama’l, 432.

[^85]: al-Kafi I, 329, 514; Kama’l, 430; T. al-Ghayba, 144.

[^86]: Tabari, III, 1813; al-Kama’l, VII, 157.

[^87]: Ithbat, 261-2.

[^88]: According to al-Kulayni each Imam when he comes out from the womb
of is mother puts his hands on the ground and holds his head towards the
sky, and then recites some Qur'anic verses; al-Kafi, I, 386.

[^89]: Kama’l, 424-6; the account of the birth of the Twelfth Imam has
been related in the Imamites' works with some differences in detail. See
Ithbat, 248-50; T. al Ghayba, 150-4; Dalail, 269-70. All the Imamite
sources agree that al-’Askari left only one son; al-Saduq, however,
reports a narration on the authority of Ibrahim al-Mazyar which
indicates that al-Askari had two sons, Muhammad and Musa, who were
living in Hijaz. A critical study of the context of the narration and
its chain of transmitters suggests it was invented, mainly because the
narrator Ibrahim b. al-Mazyar died before 260/874, whereas according to
the narrative al-’Askari's sons were mature, and this is unlikely if the
Twelfth Imam was born in 256/874; Kama’l, 445-53.

[^90]: al-Qasas, 28: 5-6.

[^91]: ‘Ilal, 243-4; Kama’l, 24; N. al-Ghayba, 86-7; al-Kafi, I, 340;
al-Murtada, Mas'ala wajiza fi al-Ghayba , l l; al-Fusul al-’Ashara, 16.

[^92]: N. al-Ghayba, 101; Kama’l, 303, 485.

[^93]: ‘Ilal, 245; Kama’l, 316.

[^94]: al-Kafi, I, 336.

[^95]: al-Kafi, I, 369.

[^96]: al-Kafi, I, 328, 330.

[^97]: al-Kafi, I, 333.

[^98]: al-Kafi, I, VIII, 247.

[^99]: The Imamite works record the names of many individuals who saw
the son of al-’Askari. One report attributed to Muhammad b. ‘Uthman, the
second Saf’ir of the Twelfth Imam, says that al-Askari gathered together
forty of his reliable followers and showed them his son; Kama’l, 435;
al-Kafi, I, 330-1; T. al-Ghayba, 148, 152

[^100]: Kama’l, 429.

[^101]: Ithbat, 247-8, 253.

[^102]: al-Kafi I, 328, 240; N. al-Ghayba, 99-100; T. al-Ghayba, 149.

[^103]: ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-San’ani, al-Musannaf (Beirut, 1972), XI, 371;
N. al-Ghayba, 98-9.

[^104]: al-Kafi, I, 339.

[^105]: al-Fusul al-’Ashara, 13.

[^106]: Al-Hasan b. Muhammad was related to an Umayyad family called Al
Abi al-­Shawarib. During the ‘Abbasid period most of his relatives
worked in the office of Judge (al-Qada'). As part of his anti-shi’ite
policy al-Mutawakkil included al-Hasan b. Abi al-Shawarib among his
courtiers (Tabari, III, 1428). Later al-­Mu’tazz appointed him chief
judge in 252/866 (Tabari, III, 1684). Three years later he was
discharged from his office, but recovered it during al-Mu’tadid's
regime. He continued in this office until his death in Mecca in 261/875;
Tabari, III, 1787, 1790-1, 1891, 1907.

[^107]: al-Kafi, I, 505; Kama’l, 43.

[^108]: Kama’l, 43.

[^109]: Kama’l, 476- 478.

[^110]: Kama’l, 473.

[^111]: Kama’l, 476.

[^112]: Kama’l, 474.

[^113]: al-Fusul al-‘Ashara, 13.

[^114]: According to Imamite law, if a dead person leaves a mother and a
son and a brother, the brother has no right to take anything from the
estate; al-Saduq, al­muqnia (Tehran, 1377), 171; Kama’l, 47, 58.

[^115]: Muhammad al-Sadr, op. cit., I, 314.


