The Underground Activities of the Twelth Imam as seen in the Actions of the Saf’irs
===================================================================================

1. A Brief Study of the Wikala Before the Twelfth Imam
------------------------------------------------------

As mentioned in Chapter Two, a critical situation the Imams faced,
brought about by the ‘Abbasids, forced the Imams to search for a new
means to communicate with the members of their congregation. The Imamite
sources indicate that the sixth Imam al‑Sadiq was the first Imam to
employ an underground system of communication *(al­Tanzim* *al‑Sirri)*
among his community[^1].

The main purpose of the *Wikala* was to collect the *khums,* the
*zakat,* and other kinds of alms for the Imam from his followers.
Although the *Wikala* may have had other purposes at that time, the
sources rarely record them. Al‑Sadiq directed the activities of the
organization with such care that the ‘Abbasids were not aware of its
existence.

As part of his prudent fear *(al‑Taqiyya),* he used to ask some of his
followers to carry out certain tasks for the organization without
informing them that they were in fact his agents. Al‑Tusi reports that
Nasr b. Qabus al‑Lakhmi spent twenty years working as an agent *(wakil)*
for al‑Sadiq, without knowing that he had actually been appointed as
one.

Al‑Sadiq's most important agent in Iraq was ‘Abd al‑Rahman b. al‑Hajjaj,
who continued in this office until his death, after the time of the
eighth Imam al‑Riďa[^2].

Mu'alla b. Khunays was al‑Sadiq's agent in Medina. In 133/750 he was
arrested by the ‘Abbasids and sentenced to death because he refused to
reveal the names of the Imamite propagandists[^3].

Despite the difficulties which faced the *Wikala* in its early stages,
the areas covered by the agents and their training were extended during
the time of al‑Kazim as activities were intensified. The rite of
pilgrimage was used as a means to communicate with each other.
Al-Kazim's agent in Egypt was ‘Uthman b. ‘Isa al‑Rawwasi[^4].

He also had agents in numerous other places, such as Hayyan al‑Sarraj in
Kufa, Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr in Baghdad, and Yunis b. Ya'qub al‑Bajli in
Medina[^5]. Al‑Mas'udi's report suggests that all the agents received
their instructions from ‘Abd al‑Rahman b. al‑Hajjaj, who was then
resident in Baghdad[^6].

The agents faced another campaign of arrests in 179/795 instigated by
the caliph al‑Rashid. It caused the Imamite organization considerable
damage. The agent in Baghdad, Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr, was arrested and
tortured in the unfulfilled hope that he would reveal the names and
locations of al‑Kazim's followers, while his sister was put in jail for
four years[^7].

Another agent, ‘Ali b. Yaqtin, who used to send money and letters to the
Imam through an individual called Isma’il b. Salam, was also arrested
and spent the rest of his life in prison[^8]. According to the Imamite
sources the campaign of arrests led to the arrest of al‑Kazim himself
and to his death in prison[^9]. Sixty other ‘Alids also died under
torture in prison[^10].

After the death of al‑Kazim the members of the Imamite organization
found themselves faced with an internal theological and political
question involving the doctrine of *al-Qa’im* *al‑Mahdi* and his
occultation. Al‑Kazim's agents, such as al‑Rawwasi in Egypt, Ziyad
al‑Qindi in Baghdad, ‘Ali b. Abi Hamza and Hayyan al‑Sarraj in Kufa, and
al‑Hasan b. Qayama in Wasit, had received many traditions attributed to
al‑Sadiq concerning *al-Qa’im* *al‑Mahdi* and his occultation, but these
traditions did not explicitly state his identity[^11].

Perhaps for this reason, they applied these traditions to the seventh
Imam al‑Kazim by denying his death and contending that he was *al-Qa’im*
*al‑Mahdi,* but that he had gone into occultation[^12].

Consequently, they rejected the Imamate of his son al‑Riďa and split
into a new group called the *Waqifa,* using the money of the
organization to their own ends. As a result al‑Riďa lost a considerable
number of trained agents and over 100,000 dinars[^13].

Between the years 183‑202/799‑817 al‑Riďa managed to solve this problem
at least partially by clarifying to the members of the *Waqifa* the true
nature of *al-Qa’im* *al‑Mahdi,* as transmitted on the authority of the
previous Imams. According to al‑Kashshi, he seems to have been able to
persuade some of the members of the *Waqifa,* like al‑Rawwasi and his
followers to recognize his Imamate[^14].

Meanwhile the role of the *Wikala* was expanded to embrace the new needs
and tasks of the congregation. Al‑Riďa's agents were ‘Abd al‑‘Aziz b.
al‑Muhtadi in Qumm[^15], Safwan b. Yahya in Kufa[^16], ‘Abd Allah b.
Jandab and ‘Abd al‑Rahman b. al‑Hajjaj in Baghdad[^17].

Along with another eighty agents ‘Abd al‑Rahman b. al‑Hajjaj controlled
the leadership of the organization through the time of the ninth Imam,
al‑Jawad[^18], who achieved considerable success in protecting the
organization from new schisms. Moreover the tactics of his agents
developed in new directions especially in widening the sphere of
*al‑Taqiyya* (prudent fear) by allowing some of his partisans to
participate in the administration and the army of the ‘Abbasids.[^19]

During the long Imamate of the tenth Imam, al‑Hadi (220-254/835‑868) new
trends emerged amongst the Imamites due to historical circumstances,
trends which were later to play a dangerous role during the time of the
Twelfth Imam.

As was pointed out above (Ch. II), al‑Mutawakkil practiced the policy of
al‑Ma’mun, who had made al-Riďa and his son al‑Jawad join his courtiers
so that their links with their partisans could be restricted and closely
watched. Al‑Mutawakkil did the same with al‑Hadi. In 233/847 he summoned
him , from Medina to Samarra, where he spent the rest of his life[^20].

The absence of direct contact between the Imam and his followers led to
an increase in the religious and political role of the *Wikala,* so that
the agents of the Imam gained more authority in running its affairs.
Gradually the leadership of the *Wikala* became the only authority which
could determine and prove the legitimacy of the new Imam.

For example the ninth Imam, al‑Jawad, gave his testament concerning his
successor to his chief agent Muhammad b. al‑Faraj. He told him that in
case he should die, he should take his orders from al‑Hadi[^21].

When al‑Jawdd died in 220/835 the prominent leaders of the organization
held a secret meeting at the house of Muhammad b. al‑Faraj to determine
the next Imam, who was proved to be al‑Hadi[^22].

The agents of the Imam gradually gained a great deal of experience in
organizing their partisans into separate units. Several reports suggest
that the agents divided their followers into four separate groups
according to area. The first included Baghdad, Mada’in, Sawad and Kufa,
the second Basra and al‑Ahwaz, the third Qumm and Hamadan, and the
fourth the Hijaz, Yemen and Egypt.

Each area was entrusted to an independent agent, beneath whom many local
agents were appointed. The workings of this system can be observed in
letters of instruction attributed to al‑Hadi concerning the
organization's administration. It is reported that he sent a letter in
232/847 to his local agent, ‘Ali b. Bilal, saying:

*"I have substituted Abu ‘Ali b. Rashid for ‘Ali b. al‑Husayn b. ‘Abd
Rabba. I have entrusted him with this post since he is sufficiently
qualified so that no one can take precedence over him. He has been
informed that you are the chief (shaykh) of your own area, since I
wished to invest you with that area. However, you have to follow him and
hand all the revenues to collect over to him."*

In a letter to his agents in Baghdad, Mada’in and Kufa, al‑Hadi wrote,

*"O Ayyub b. Nuh, I am commanding you to cut off relations between
yourself and Abu ‘Ali. Both of you should engage yourselves with what
you have been entrusted and ordered to do in your areas. If you do so
you should be able to manage your affairs without consulting me ... O
Ayyub, I am ordering you neither to receive anything from the people of
Baghdad and Mada’in, nor to give anyone amongst them permission to
contact me.*

*If anyone brings you revenue from outside your area, order him to send
it to the agent of his own area. O Abu 'Ali, I am ordering you to follow
what I have ordered Ayyub.*"[^23]

This system saved the organization from otherwise inevitable damage
after the harsh attack of al‑Mutawakkil upon its underground political
cells in 235/850. In the same way it was saved from the attack of
al‑Musta’in in 248/862.

It should be noted that during the time of the tenth and eleventh Imams,
the leadership of the organization in the four areas, was monopolized by
a few individuals. Their tasks later fell to their descendants and
remained under their control during the shorter occultation of the
Twelfth Imam. For example, ‘Ali b. Mazyar was the agent of al‑Jawad and
al‑Hadi in al‑Ahwaz[^24], while his sons were the agents of the Twelfth
Imam in the same region[^25].

Ibrahim b. Muhammad al‑Hamadani was the agent of al‑Hadi in
Hamadan[^26], while his offspring inherited this post from father to son
until the time of the Twelfth Imam[^27].  
 Another agent was Isma’il b. Ishaq b. Nawbakht[^28], whose family later
directed the members of the organization in Baghdad, while one of his
relatives, al‑Husayn b. Ruh, became the third *Saf’ir* or
"representative" of the Twelfth Imam.

Among the agents, the most important was ‘Uthmari b. Said al­‘Umari,
who, as we shall see, was brought up under the auspices of the tenth
Imam, al‑Hadi. He made him first his own agent and then the agent of his
son, Imam al‑ ‘Askari. After the death of the latter ‘Uthman controlled
the whole leadership of the organization as the first representative of
the Twelfth Imam, and his son Muhammad later succeeded him to the post,
as the second *Saf’ir.*

The fact that the Imam's activities were underground made it easy for
certain people to claim falsely to be the representatives of al‑Hadi and
al‑ ‘Askari, and thus to collect money from the Imamites. It seems that
this practice was carried out by the extremists *(al‑Ghulat)* and
increased throughout the time of the Twelfth Imam at the expense of his
rightful agents[^29].

2. The Main Functions of the Wikala
-----------------------------------

For the Twelver Imamites the series of Imams ends with the Twelfth Imam,
who, from the death of his father in 260/874 up to the year 329/940‑1,
is believed to have lived in occultation. According to al­Nu'mani this
period was called the "short occultation," *al‑Ghayba* *al‑Qasira*[^30],
and according to later scholars the minor occultation, *al-Ghayba*
*al‑Sughra*.

It was of decisive importance for the organization and the internal
evolution of the congregation. During it the Twelfth Imam is considered
to have pursued his activities from behind the scenes and to have led
his followers by means of four specially chosen representatives. These
were called *sufara* (sing. *Saf’ir)* or "ambassadors."

The first was ‘Uthman b. Said al-Umari, the second his son Muhammad, the
third al‑Husayn b. Ruh al-Nawbakhti and the fourth 'Ali b. Muhammad
al‑Sammari.

A critical study of the history of this period (260‑329/874‑941) reveals
that the main function of the *Saf’irs* was to implement certain tasks
previously undertaken by the Imams so as to save him from the political
pressure of the ‘Abbasids[^31].

His predecessors had suffered this pressure since the time of al‑Ma’mun,
especially since it was widely accepted among the Imamites of that
period that the Twelfth Imam would be *al-Qa’im* *bi‑l‑Amr* *li‑Izalat*
*al‑Duwal,* that is,"he who is to be in charge of eliminating the
governments (of the oppressors by militant means).[^32]"

One of the ambassadors' tasks was to draw complete darkness over the
name of the Imam and his whereabouts, not only as regards his foes, but
even as regards his followers. Simultaneously the *Saf’ir* had to prove
the existence of the Imam to his reliable adherents. This statement can
be illustrates by a report of al‑Kulayni. ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far
al‑Himyari once asked the first *Saf’ir* whether or not he had seen the
successor of the eleventh Imam.

Al‑‘Umari, the *Saf’ir,* confirmed that he had seen him. But he added
that people were forbidden to ask about his name, because if the
government discovered his name they would certainly try to arrest
him[^33]. In this way the first *Saf’ir* led the court of the caliph,
al‑Mu'tamid, to think that the eleventh Imam had died without a
successor[^34].

According to al‑Kulayni's report, the conclusion reached by the
‘Abbasids seems to have released the Imamites from the humiliation which
they had suffered throughout the time of the previous Imams. The agents
of the Twelfth Imam began to carry out their activities without being
afraid of the authorities, since they were sure of the non‑existence of
the Twelfth Imam, and thus did not bother to investigate the Imamite's
activities[^35].

The activities of the *Saf’irs* also aimed at protecting the
congregation from any more schisms by proving the authenticity of the
Imamate of al‑‘Askari's son. Towards this aim they employed those
sayings of the Prophet and the Imams which indicate that the series of
Imams will end with the Twelfth, who would then go into
occultation[^36].

The four *Saf’irs* carried out another task in the name of the Imam.
They received and collected the taxes that the Imamites had previously
paid to their Imams. According to the Imamite sources all the *Saf’irs*
performed miracles before receiving the money so that their adherents
would believe in their legitimacy. According to the Imamite belief,
whoever proclaimed himself a *Saf’ir* and did not work miracles had lied
about the Imam and was driven out of the organization[^37].

The *Tawqi’at* (written and signed answers or pronouncements) attributed
to the Twelfth Imam indicate that he neither gave any statement to
elucidate his attitude towards the political and economic situation of
his time, nor ordered his followers to implicate themselves in an open
political struggle with their rivals, the ‘Abbasids.

In fact, it is reasonable to agree with Muhammad al‑Sadr that by acting
in this manner the Imam enabled his partisans to pursue their activities
without attracting the attention of the ‘Abbasids by statements
criticising their rule[^38].

Moreover it seems most likely that in following this policy the Imam
wanted his agents and propagandists to concentrate their efforts upon
strengthening the size and quality of their party, until it developed
its political means and ideology to a degree which might enable it to
put its goal into action.

But the involvement of the agents in an immediate political struggle
would have taken place at the expense of an increase in the size and the
development of the ideological and political basis of the organization.

3. The Early Career of Uthman b. Sa’id
--------------------------------------

Most of the Imamite information concerning the activities of the four
*'Saf’irs* is attributed to al‑Tusi in his work *al‑Ghayba.* The latter
depended mainly on two early missing works, that is, *Kitab* *fi*
*Akhbar* *Abi* *Amr* *wa* *Abi* *Ja’far* *al‑‘Umariyyayn* by Ibn Barina
al‑Katib, the son of the granddaughter of the second *Saf’ir,* and
*Kitab* *Akhbar* *al‑Wakil* *al‑‘Arba’a* by Ahmad b. Nuh[^39].

Unfortunately, the work of al‑Tusi and other works give very few details
concerning the background to the career of the first *Saf’ir.* We know
that the latter was Abu ‘Amr ‘Uthman b. Said al-Umari from the tribe of
Asad.

Javad ‘Ali, whose opinion was followed by Rajkowski, thought that the
grandfather of ‘Uthman was ‘Amr b. Hurayth al‑Sayrafi al‑Kufi, a
well‑known Shi’ite from Kufa who belonged to Banu Asad. According to
Javad ‘Ali, since both belonged to the same tribe, both are known by the
epithet al‑Asadi[^40].

But this cannot be accepted because there is no explicit evidence
leading one to link the lineage of the two individuals. Nothing is known
about the *Saf’ir* nor of his position in the congregation. Moreover,
the year of his birth and the details of his youth have not been handed
down.

It is said that at the age of eleven ‘Uthman b. Said was contracted to
become a servant in the house of the ninth Imam, al‑Jaw‑ad, and that he
never left his service. Later he became his gate‑keeper and chamberlain.
As the Imam's "right hand", he enjoyed his entire confidence and was
entrusted with the execution of all his commissions[^41].

‘Uthman b. Said occupied this same position of trust throughout the
lifetime of al‑Hadi, the tenth Imam[^42], who was watched carefully and
suspiciously by the government of the day, so that he even avoided
speaking with the individual members of the community.

For this reason, al‑Hadi presented ‘Uthman to those who found it
difficult to consult him directly. He told them that ‘Uthman was his
trusted associate and a man of honour, and that whatever he did was done
in the Imam's name[^43].

Furthermore, al-­Kashshi's account indicates that during the last ten
years of the time of al‑Hadi, the leadership of the underground
organization *(al-­Wikala)* was in ‘Uthman's hands. He organized its
internal affairs and systematized the relations between the centre of
the organization and its branches in the remote provinces.

When the agent, 'Ali b. ‘Amr, came to Samarra from Qazwin with money and
contacted Faris b. Hatim, without knowing that the latter had been
cursed by the Imam in 250/864, ‘ Uthmari quickly moved his lieutenants
to save the money and prevented ‘Ali b. ‘Amr from having contact with
Faris b. Hatim[^44].

‘Uthman continued to hold this position of trust under the eleventh Imam
al‑‘Askari, who appointed him using the same words as had his father. It
is reported that al‑ ‘Askari had only informed a few of his followers
that ‘Uthman b. Said was his agent. However, at one point a group of
Yemenite Shi’ites brought money to al‑ ‘Askari, and he revealed to them
that ‘Uthman was his agent and that his son, Muhammad, would be the
agent of the Twelfth Imam, *al‑Mahdi*[^45].

According to another narration al‑‘Askari presented his successor to
forty reliable Shi’ites, such as al‑Hasan b. Ayyub, ‘Ali b. Bilal, Ahmad
b. Hilal, and ‘Uthman b. Said. He informed them that they would not see
him again and commanded them to obey ‘Uthman during the concealment of
the Twelfth Imam, because he would be his representative[^46].

Moreover, during the last illness of the eleventh Imam, ‘Uthman looked
after him and cared for him. According to al­-Tusi, he performed the
last rites for the dead man, washed the corpse, wrapped him in his
shroud and buried him. For the Imamites these are the unmistakeable
signs that ‘Uthman was the rightful representative *Saf’ir* of the
hidden Imam. They contended that ‘Uthman did all this on the orders of
al‑‘Askari[^47].

4. The Career of the First Saf’ir
---------------------------------

The first *Saf’ir* managed to satisfy the prominent Imamites who were
already members of the organization that the Twelfth Imam was in a state
of occultation and thus safe from his enemies, while also convincing
them that he was the rightful representative of the Imam.

It appears that his occupation of the leadership of the organization
during the time of the tenth and the eleventh Imams encouraged the
agents to accept his claim and follow his instructions, without asking
him to show a miracle or proof[^48].

However, the ordinary Imamites, who had nothing to do with the
organization, were confused by the occultation of the Imam and, as has
been noted[^49], held different views concerning the Twelfth Imam's
successor. Many Imamites refused to pay the *khums* to ‘Uthman b. Said
unless he showed, by means of a miracle, that he had been rightfully
appointed by the Twelfth Imam. This is illustrated by a narrative of
al‑Kulayni attributed to Sa’d al­-Ash'ari al‑Qummi:

*"Al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr, Abu al‑Saddam and a number of others spoke
together after the death of Abu Muhammad (the eleventh Imam) about the
agents and decided to search for the new Imam. Al‑Hasan b. Nadr came to
Abu al‑Saddam and said to him, ‘I desire to make the pilgrimage.' Abu
al‑Saddam said to him, ‘Delay it this year.'*

*Al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr said to him, ‘I am frightened by my dreams, so I
must go.' He made Ahmad b. Ya'la b. Hammad his executor. The latter had
devoted some money to the Imam. Hearing of al‑Hasan's decision, he gave
the money to al‑Hasan and commanded him not to hand anything over
without proof.*

*"Al‑Hasan said, ‘When I arrived at Baghdad I rented a house. Thereafter
an agent brought me clothes and money and entrusted them to me. I said
to him,"What is this?" He said to me, "It is what you see." Then another
one brought similar goods, and a third one until they filled the house.
Afterwards Ahmad b. Ishaq (the assistant of the Saf’ir) brought me all
the goods he had. Thus I became confused. But later I received a message
from al‑Rajul (the Imam), peace be upon him, ordering me to take the
goods to al‑‘Askar (Samarra).*

*. . When I arrived there I received a message ordering me to bring the
goods (to him). So I loaded them in the baskets of the carriers. When I
reached the corridor of his house, I found a black slave standing there.
He asked me, "Are you al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr?" I said, "Yes." He replied,
"Enter." So I entered the house, and then I entered an apartment, where
I emptied the baskets of the carriers. . .*

*There was a curtain leading to another apartment. Someone called me
from behind it, "O al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr, praise Allah for His grace is
upon you, and do not doubt, for Satan would be pleased if you waver."
Thereafter he sent out two garments for me and said, "Take them, because
you will need them." So I took them and went out.' "*

Sa'd al‑Ash'ari reports that al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr departed and died in
the month of Ramadan, and the two garments were used as his shroud[^50].

This event was a clear proof to al‑Hasan, because both his name and his
doubts concerning the validity of the agents' activities had been
revealed to him. Moreover, according to Sa'd al‑Ash’ari, the two
garments which al‑Hasan had received were a prediction of his death,
which occurred a month later.

If one studies carefully the circumstances surrounding al‑Hasan b.
al‑Nadr from the time of his decision to investigate the activities of
the agents until his death, one can surmise that the agents arranged
them so as to remove his doubts.

They would have done so because al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr was prominent
amongst the Imamites of Qumm[^51], and his doubts might have affected
the Imamites of his area. So perhaps the agents of Qumm informed the
*Saf’ir* in Baghdad about his arrival there. This can be understood from
the act of Ahmad b. Ishaq and the other agents who brought the clothes
to al‑Hasan's house and later sent him a letter ordering him to send the
goods to Samarra.

There, it is reported, he met the Imam, who confirmed for him the
validity of the agent's activities. One can discover from this example
and many others not quoted here[^52] the means used by the *Saf’ir* to
remove the doubts and confusion of the Imamites brought about by the
concealment of their Imam, and to make them obey his instructions.

As has already been indicated the *Saf’ir* forbade his partisans to ask
about the name of the Imam. Perhaps, their silence along with
al­‘Askari's last will in which he bequeathed his endowments to his
mother and placed her in charge of his affair without referring to his
successor[^53], encouraged the authorities to believe that the Imamites
no longer had an Imam and, therefore, that any Imamite activities were
useless. In doing so the *Saf’ir* gained a certain freedom to have
communication with the Twelfth Imam and his followers. This is
illustrated by a statement attributed to the *Saf’ir:*

*"The caliph thinks that Abu Muhammad (al‑‘Askari), peace be upon him,
died childless. Thus his estate was divided and given to someone, who
had no right in the estate but he (the Twelfth Imam) kept quiet. These
are his agents carrying out their activities without being afraid that
someone would stop them for investigation. If the (Imam's) name is
identified, the (authorities) would start searching for (his
whereabouts). So, by Allah, do not ask about his name.*”[^54]

The belief that al‑ ‘Askari had no successor was circulated among some
sunni scholars, such as Abu al‑Qasim al‑Balkhi (died around 300/912). In
his account of the Imamite doctrine, he states, "In our time al‑Hasan b.
‘Ali died and had no son. Therefore they (the Imamites) became
confused[^55].

Gradually this belief was so disseminated among the non‑Imamite circles
that leading sunni scholars such as Ibn Hazm (d. 456/1063) and
al‑Shahristani (d. 548/1153) were encouraged to view it as a matter of
fact[^56]*.* Later al­-Dhahabi believed that al‑‘Askari left a son but
he disappeared when he was nine years old or less in 265/878, when he
entered a cellar *(sardab)* in Samarra and was not seen again[^57].

In other words the Twelfth Imam died during the lifetime of the first
*Saf’ir.* But al­-Dhahabi is a later historian, since he died in
748/1347. Moreover he does not give the source of his narration, nor
does he state explicitly how al‑‘Askari's son died even though he
presents his information concerning the concealment of the Twelfth Imam
in the list of people who died in 265/878 to give the impression that he
had passed away in that year.

The earliest report concerning the occultation of al­‘Askari's son in
the cellar is given by al‑Kanji, who died in 08/1260, but he also does
not mention the source of his information[^58].

It is therefore most likely that al‑Dhahabi based his report upon a
belief common among the Imamite masses, that the Twelfth Imam had hidden
himself in the cellar of his house. This belief spread after the
fifth/eleventh century and later became popular among certain scholars,
such as Ibn Khaldun[^59].

Moreover, several reports in the early Imamite sources refute
al-Dhahabi's narration and prove that the Twelfth Imam was alive after
265/878. Al‑Tusi mentions that many of the Imamites received written
answers to their letters from the Imam in the same hand­writing as in
the letters they used to receive during the lifetime of the first
*Saf’ir*[^60], and al‑Saduq lists thirteen agents and forty‑six ordinary
Imamites from numerous cities who claimed to have seen the Twelfth Imam
both during and after the time of the first *Saf’ir*[^61].

From this it is clear that al‑Dhahabi's report is based on popular
belief rather than upon sound historical facts. So it would be foolish
to give credence to his claims concerning the death and occultation of
the Twelfth Imam.

5. The Opposition to the First Saf’ir
-------------------------------------

As has been noted the occultation of the Imam resulted in the gradual
expansion of the role of the *Saf’ir.* However it also made it easier
for a pretender to the deputyship *(al‑sifara* or *al‑niyaba)* to
practice his activities among the Imamites at the expense of the Imam's
rightful representative. As we have seen, this was practiced mainly
throughout the period of the short occultation by the extremists
*(al‑Ghulat).*

That they were extremists is indicated by a number of factors. Firstly,
the claimant to the *sifara* believed in the incarnation of God
(hulul)[^62].

Most of the claimants to the *sifara* from the time of al‑Hasan
al-Shari’i up until al‑Shalmaghani claimed first that they were the
agents of the Imam. Then when the Imam excommunicated them, they called
people on their own account. Extremists had claimed to be the Imam's
representative even before the occultation of the Twelfth Imam, but with
a slight difference.

The claimant would first announce that he was the Gate *(Bab)* of the
Imam, and then claim that he was a prophet. Al‑Kashshi mentions many
extremists who did so, such as Muhammad b. Furat, al‑Qasim al‑Yaqtini
and Ali b. Haska[^63].

The third factor indicating that the claimants were extremists is that
certain links existed between the extremists active during the time of
the tenth and eleventh Imams and the claimants who lived during the time
of the short occultation.

According to al‑Kashshi, Ali b. Haska was the teacher of Muhammad b.
Musa al‑Shari’i, al-­Qasim al‑ Yaqtini and al‑Hasan b. Muhammad b.
Baba[^64]. The last of these was a close follower of Muhammad b. Nusayr,
who led the extremists trend during the time of the eleventh Imam, and
then claimed that he was the agent of the Twelfth Imam[^65]. Morever,
Ibn Nusayr was supported by some of Banu Furat, the descendants of the
extremist Muhammad b. Furat[^66].

According to al‑Tusi, Abu Muhammad al‑Hasan al‑Shari’i'[^67] was the
first to claim falsely to be the Imam's representative during the short
occultation, but the Imamites cursed him and refused to accept him. Then
the Twelfth Imam issued a *Tawqi;* in which he excommunicated al‑Shari’i
and announced the falseness of his claim[^68].

Although al-Shari’i did not achieve immediate success, his following
grew in strength and eventually he formed a strong threat to the
leadership of the second *Saf’ir.*

6. The Imam's Wikala During the Time of the First Saf’ir
--------------------------------------------------------

The main problem facing any historian dealing with the period of the
short occultation is that most of the activities of the Twelfth Imam and
his representatives were carried out underground. Perhaps for this
reason, the Imamite scholars such as al‑Kulayni, ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far
al‑Himyari, Sa’d al‑Ash ‘ari and al‑Hasan b. Musa al-Nawbakhti rarely
mention the names of the Imam's agents, or refer to their activities or
links with each other: however, they do refer to those of their
activities which did not attract the attention of the authorities.

Therefore, the historical information concerning the underground
activities of the agents is to be found scattered throughout the
theological and heresiographical works much more than in the histories.
Because of the nature of these works the historical information has
taken on a heresiographical form. In addition, both questions asked by
the Shi’ites and answers of the Twelfth Imam and his *Saf’irs* were
collected during his time, but unfortunately, most of them have been
lost.

Only a few are extant, especially in works dealing with the concealment
*(Ghayba).* For example the second *Saf’ir* Abu Ja’far Muhammad b.
‘Uthman, collected the pronouncements of his father, but his collection
is not extant. However, many anecdotes which assist us in discovering
the links among the Imam's agents and the nature of their activities
have been recorded.

### A) Iraq: The Centre of the Wikala

After the death of the eleventh Imam, the first *Saf’ir* had not the
slightest reason to remain in Samarra, which was then the capital and
the headquarters of the troops of the ‘Abbasid dynasty, which had
opposed the Imams from the very beginning.

Perhaps for this reason, ‘Uthman b. Said wanted to carry out the
activities of the organization beyond the surveillance of the
authorities in the capital. Therefore he moved to Baghdad, where he made
the area of al­Karkh, which was inhabited by Shi’ites, the centre for
the leadership of the organization[^69].

A part of ‘Uthman's prudent fear *(al‑Taqiyya)* was to evade the
investigation of the regime by not involving himself in any open
political or religious arguments. He also disguised himself as a
butter‑seller *(samman)* and, used to bring money to the Imam in a
butter‑sack. Consequently he acquired the nickname al‑Zayyat or
al‑Samman[^70].

Al‑Kashshi reports that his name was Hafs b. ‘Amr al‑‘Umari[^71], which
may have been a pseudonym he used when he held underground meetings with
other agents.

It has been noted that the Twelfth Imam was sent by his father to Medina
in 259/873. However, the first *Saf’ir* made Baghdad the centre of the
organization. He followed the traditional geographical divisions of the
Islamic provinces in organizing the underground political units (cells)
of the organization. Nevertheless he took into consideration the size of
each factional unit, the distance of each area from the capital, and its
situation on the main roads.

According to al‑Kashshi, ‘Uthman b. Said was the head of the *Wikala*
from the time of the eleventh Imam, in the sense that all the revenue
sent by the adherents to the Imam through his agents was given in the
end to ‘Uthman, who in turn handed it over to the Imam[^72].

Many agents were situated below the *Saf’ir* in the ranks of the
organization in Baghdad and in the other cities of Iraq, such as Hajiz
b. Yazid al‑Washsha', Ahmad b. Ishaq al‑Ash’ari and Muhammad b. Ahmad b.
Ja’far al‑Qattan, the last two of whom were the chief assistants of the
first *Saf’ir*.

Ahmad b. Ishaq was at first al‑ ‘Askari's agent for his endowments awqaa
in Qumm[^73]. However, after the death of al‑ ‘Askari the sources begin
to refer to his activities in Baghdad as assistant to ‘Uthman b. Said in
the financial affairs of the organization. Al­Kulayni reports that in
260/874 some people from the east doubted the validity of the agents
after al‑ ‘Askari's death and for this reason they came to Baghdad.
Along with other agents Ahmad b. Ishaq managed to remove their
doubts[^74].

The first *Saf’ir* may have summoned him from Qumm because he needed his
service in Iraq after al‑ ‘Askari's death. According to Ibn Rustam
al‑Tabari, Ahmad b. Ishaq continued his career in the organization in
Iraq until his death during the time of the second *Saf’ir*[^75].

Muhammad al‑Qattan was the second agent of the *Saf’ir* in Baghdad. In
order to hide his activities he disguised himself as a cotton dealer.
The agents used to bring money and letters to him hidden in cotton which
he then took to the *Saf’ir*[^76].

Ibn Rustam reports that in 261‑3/875‑6 the people of Dinawar collected
16,000 dinars, which were entrusted to a certain Ahmad b. Muhammad
al-­Dinawari. At Qarmisin[^77] he collected 1,000 dinars more and some
garments. After an intensive search in Baghdad and Sdmarra, he received
in Samarra a letter describing the money and other items and ordering
him to take them to ‘Uthman b. Sa’id and to follow his instructions.

The latter ordered al‑Dinawari to hand over the items to al‑Qattan[^78].
It is reported that al‑Qattan had dealings with an agent in Tus called
al‑Hasan b. al‑Fadl b. Zayd al‑Yamani. According to al­ Mufid, al‑Yamani
used to deal with al‑Qattan as if he were the *Saf’ir*[^79].

The third agent of the *Saf’ir* in Baghdad was Hajiz. His relations with
a large number of agents indicate that he held a high position in the
organization. He was perhaps the connecting link between the agents in
the eastern provinces and the *Saf’ir* in Baghdad, especially since
al‑Saduq and al‑Kulayni mention certain persons from the cities of Balkh
and Marv who contacted the Imam and his *Saf’ir* through Hajiz[^80].

While the first *Saf’ir* seems to have led the affairs of the
organization in Baghdad with the help of his three assistants, he may
also have directly supervised the activities of his agents in the other
main cities, such as al‑Mada in, Kufa, Wasit, Basra and al‑Ahwaz.

In the last of these the leadership of the *Wikala* had been in the
hands of Banu Mazyar or Mahzayar from the time of the ninth Imam.
Al‑Kashshi reports that the agent of the Imam in al‑Ahwaz, Ibrahim b.
Mazyar, had collected a large amount of money.

On his deathbed he revealed to his son Muhammad a special secret code
and ordered him to hand the money over to the person who would disclose
to him his knowledge of this code.

Al‑Kashshi adds that when Muhammad arrived at Baghdad, al‑‘Umari the
*Saf’ir* came to him and divulged to him the exact code, so he handed
the money over to him[^81]. It is clear from this report that the first
*Saf’ir* had already agreed on the code with Ibrahim al‑Mazyar so as to
save the organization from infiltration and misuse by false agents.

According to al‑Kulayni and al‑Mufid, a few days later Muhammad received
a letter of promotion indicating that he was installed in the post of
his father in al‑Ahwaz[^82].

This underground system of communication between the *Saf’ir* in Baghdad
and the agent in al‑Ahwaz was similar to other such systems which
existed at this stage between the *Saf’ir* and his other agents in Iraq,
such as Banu al‑Rakuli in Kufa[^83].

### B) The Second Area: Egypt, the Hijaz and Yemen

The main centre for the organization in this area seems to have been
Medina. It is reported that al‑ ‘Askari had many agents there amongst
the ‘Alids *(al‑Talibiyyin).* *However,* after al‑ ‘Askari's death, some
of them denied the existence of his son, the Twelfth Imam.

According to al‑Kulayni, those who held that al‑ ‘Askari had left a son
received letters confirming them in their posts, whereas the deniers did
not receive such letters which showed that they were dismissed from
their posts in the *Wikala*[^84].

Another report indicates that the principal agent in Medina in 264/877‑8
was Yahya b. Muhammad al‑ ‘Arid[^85]. Unfortunately, the sources neither
explain how the *Saf’ir* in Baghdad used to contact his agents in Hijaz,
nor do they refer to the connecting links among the agents of Egypt,
Hijaz and Yemen. However, it is most likely that the agents used the
occasion of the pilgrimage to communicate with each other[^86].

But it seems that the *Saf’ir* did not keep in direct contact with his
agent in Medina and preferred to employ slaves who were mostly ignorant
and irreligious as the connecting link. He did this to keep the
attention of the authorities away from such activities.

The agents in Egypt followed the instructions of the agents in Hijaz,
especially as regards their contact with the centre in Iraq. Al­Kulayni
reports a narration attributed to al‑Hasan b. ‘Isa al‑ Aridi, who was
probably the agent in Mecca[^87].

He says that after the death of al‑ Askari, an Egyptian came to Mecca
with money for the Imam, but was confused because some people held that
al‑ ‘Askari had died without a son and that the Imam was his brother
Ja’far, whereas other people informed him that al‑ ‘Askari had, in fact,
left a successor.

Afterwards he sent a certain person called Abu Talib to Samarra with a
letter, probably a recommendation from the agent in Mecca. In Samarra
Abu Talib first contacted Ja’far, asking him for proof so that he could
accept his Imamate, but Ja’far could not produce any.

Therefore he went to the Gate *(Bab,* deputy), who gave him a strong
proof that he was the rightful representative of the new Imam (the
Twelfth), by revealing to him that his master, the Egyptian, had
entrusted him with money to deal with according to his wish. For this
reason Abu Talib handed over the money to the *Bab* and received a
letter in reply to his letter[^88].

Perhaps the agent in Mecca had sent forward complete information
concerning the case of his Egyptian colleague.

Yemen was a traditional region for Shi ‘ite tendencies. Al‑Hadi had had
agents there since 248/862,[^89] and there were agents who had direct
contact with ‘Uthman b. Said during the time of al‑ Askari[^90].

According to al‑Kulayni, the chief agent in Yemen during the time of the
Twelfth Imam was Ja’far b. Ibrahim, who was related to a family working
in the Imamite organization in Hamadan, Kufa and Yemen[^91]. A report
mentioned by al‑Najashi indicates that the connecting link between the
agents in Yemen and the first *Saf’ir* was ‘Ali b. al‑Husayn
al‑Yamani[^92].

### C) The Third Area: Azerbayjan and Arran

The third area was Azerbayjan. According to Muhammad al­-Safwani[^93],
the agent there was al‑Qasim b. al‑ ‘Ala, who had held the post from the
time of al‑Hadi and who continued his activities from the province of
Arran[^94] during the time of the Twelfth Imam. The Twelfth Imam
remained in touch with al‑Qasim until the latter died during the time of
the third *Saf’ir*, when his post was given to his son al­ Hasan at the
Twelfth Imam's order.

Al‑Safwani does not mention the name of the connecting link between the
agent of this area and the centre of the organization. However, he
states explicitly that al­-Qasim b. al‑‘Ala was in direct contact with
the *Saf’ir* in Iraq through a messenger, who used to deal with him
without revealing his name[^95].

### D) The Fourth Area: Qumm and Dinawar

It is well‑known that Qumm was a traditional area for the Shi’ites, the
bulk of whom were Arab[^96], and that there were many endowments (awqaf)
for the Imams in Qumm. Therefore, it probably received more attention
from the first *Saf’ir*, who used to keep in direct contact not only
with the agent of Qumm but also with the other agents in the province of
Jabal.

The prominent agent in Qumm was ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far al‑Himyari[^97],
who remained in this post during the time of the second *Saf’ir*[^98].
Moreover, there were many sub­ agents in numerous cities with a
considerable Imamite population, such as Dinawar, whose agent in
261‑3/875‑6 was Ahmad b. Muhammad al‑Dinawari. The agent in Qurmisin was
Ahmad al­-Madra’i[^99].

### E) The Fifth Area: Rayy and Khurasan

Al‑Kashshi's account of the situation of the organization during the
time of the tenth and the eleventh Imams indicates that the latter had
several agents in various cities in Khurasan and the eastern provinces,
extending as far as the city of Kabul. Those agents, along with other
sub‑agents, used to carry out their missions according to the direct
instruction of the Imam. For example, al‑‘Askari sent Ayyub b. al‑Nab to
Nisapur as his agent[^100].

However, the penetration of the movement into remote regions of the
east, the rise of the Zaydite state in Tabaristan from 250/864, and the
continual military activities of the Khawarij in Sijistan, which caused
a great deal of trouble for Imamites[^101], all helped make it difficult
for al‑ ‘Askari to supervise directly the activities in each area.

Therefore al‑ ‘Askari issued a letter ordering the activities of the
agents in Bayhaq and Nisapur to be linked with those of the agents in
Rayy so that the two former cities could only receive his instructions
from the agent in Rayy, who was to take his orders directly from ‘Uthman
b. Said in Samarra.

According to this letter al‑ ‘Askari appointed Ishaq b. Muhammad as his
agent in Nisapur, commanding him to pay the dues to Ibrahim b. ‘Abda,
his agent in Bayhaq and its districts. The latter in turn was commanded
to hand the dues to the agent of Rayy, Muhammad b. Ja’far al‑Razi or to
the person appointed by al‑Razi.

At the end of his letter the Imam pointed out that all the *khums* and
other taxes which were sent by his followers should be given to ‘Uthman
b. Said, who would then hand them to him[^102]. Such a statement reveals
that ‘Uthman b. Said was at the top of the organization before the death
of al‑‘Askari in 260/874.

After the death of al‑ ‘Askari the first *Saf’ir* followed the system of
communication which had been practiced before. Several anecdotes reveal
that he directed the activities of this area through the agent in Rayy,
al‑Rgazi, who in turn directly supervised the activities of the agents
in Bayhaq, Nisapur[^103], and perhaps Hamadan.

There were many sub‑agents of different ranks below the main agent in
each city. Al‑Najashi reports a narration which elucidates this system.
He mentions that al‑Qasim b. Muhammad al‑Hamadani, Bistam b. ‘Ali and
‘Aziz b. Zuhayr were sub‑agents in one place in Hamadan and carried out
their task under the instructions and commands of al­-Hasan b. Harun b.
‘Umran al‑Hamadani[^104]. Al‑Najashi does not explain how the latter
used to contact the *Saf’ir.*

Al‑Kulayni, however, reports that Muhammad b. Harun b. ‘Umran
al‑Hamadani, the brother of the agent of Hamadan, made his shops an
endowment *(waqf)* to the Twelfth Imam and wanted to hand them over to
his agent, whose identity was unknown to him.

Thereafter Muhammad b. Ja’far al‑Razi, the agent of Rayy, received an
order to take these shops as *waqf* [^105] in his capacity as *wakil*
for the whole of Iran. This narration reveals that there was a strong
link between the agent of Rayy and the agent of Hamadan and that the
latter was below al‑Razi in the ranks of the organization[^106].

Since the agents in this area held different ranks within the
organization, it is most likely that this system existed in the other
areas of the organization as well.

7. The Death of the First Saf’ir
--------------------------------

Despite the important role of the first *Saf’ir,* ‘Uthman b. Said, no
one gives the date of his death. Modern historians have tried to supply
plausible dates. Hashim al‑Hasani thinks that the deputyship
*(al-­sifara)* of ‘Uthman b. Said continued until the year
265/879,[^107] but he does not give any source for this information. In
contrast Javad Ali states as follows:

*"Twenty years after the withdrawal of the Twelfth Imam, in the year
280/893, the first Saf’ir died, according to a tawqi, said to have been
addressed by the hidden Imam to the son of the first Saf’ir and the
Shi’ite congregation, in which after expressing sentiments of condolence
on the death of such a pious man, the Imam appointed his son Abu Ja’far
(Muhammad) as his successor."*[^108]

However, Javad Ali relied on al‑Tusi, who only indicates that the
narrator, Muhammad b. Humam, heard the narration from Muhammad al‑Razi
in 280/893; he does not cite any date for the death of the first
*Saf’ir*[^109].

Furthermore, it seems that the first *Saf’ir* did not remain in office
for a long period, because al‑Tusi reports that when Muhammad b. ‘Uthman
(Abu Ja’far) succeeded his father, a certain Ahmad b. Hilal al‑
Abarta'i, whose death occurred in 267/880‑1,[^110] denied that Abu
Ja’far was the *Saf’ir* of the Twelfth Imam after his father.[^111]"
Hence the death of the first *Saf’ir* must have occurred after 260/874,
the date of the death of the eleventh Imam, and before 267/880.

According to Ibn Barina, ‘Uthman b. Sa’id was buried on the western side
of Baghdad in the Darb Mosque. This mosque takes its name from its
position at Darb Jibla, an avenue in the Maydan street[^112]. Al‑Tusi
confirms Ibn Barina's report when he states that he saw the grave in a
place which he used to visit every month between the years 404/1013 and
433/1040.[^113]

[^1]: Javad 'Ali, op. cit., in Der Islam, XXV (1939), 212.

[^2]: al‑Ghayba, 224‑5. Al‑Tusi thinks that Ibn al‑Hajjaj died during
the time of al‑Riďa, but al‑Mas’udi reports that he was still alive
after al‑Riďa's death in 203/818; Ithbat, 213.

[^3]: al-Kafi, II, 557; Ikhtiyar, 381; al‑Saduq, Man la Yahduruh
al‑Faqih (al‑Mashyakha), IV, 67. The date of his death is not mentioned.
However, al­ Kashshi reports that Dawud b. ‘Ali, who killed Mu’alla,
died a few days after Mu'alla, and according to al‑Dhahabi, Dawud died
in 133/750 (Mizan, II, 14). So the persecution of Mu’alla must have
occured in the same year.

[^4]: Ikhtiyar, 459‑60.

[^5]: al‑Najashi, 21, 231, 250, 348.

[^6]: Ithbat, 213.

[^7]: al‑Najashi, 250.

[^8]: al‑Najashi, 209.

[^9]: Ikhtiyar, 258; N. Firaq, 67‑8, ‘Uyun, 194‑5.

[^10]: ‘Uyun, I, 89‑90, II, 143.

[^11]: For a full account of these traditions see Chapter I pp 17‑30;
however the Waqifa report a tradition attributed to al‑Sadiq which
states that al-Qa’im would be the seventh Imam; Ikhtiyar, 475; al-Kafi,
I, 320‑1

[^12]: Ikhtiyar, 463‑7, 475‑8; T. al-Ghayba, 227‑8.

[^13]: ‘Ilal, I, 235; T. al-Ghayba, 46‑7; Ikhtiyar, 459‑60, 466‑7.

[^14]: Ikhtiyar, 597‑9.

[^15]: Ikhtiyar, 483, 506, 591‑2.

[^16]: al‑Najashi, 148.

[^17]: T. al-Ghayba, 224‑5; al‑Tusi states that ‘Abd Allah b. Jandab was
the agent of the seventh and the eighth Imams but it seems that his
career in the organization was earlier than that. According to Ibn
Shu’ba, he was the agent of the sixth Imam, al‑Sadiq; Ibn Shu’ba, Tuhaf
al‑‘Uqul, 223.

[^18]: Ithbat, 213‑5.

[^19]: al‑Najashi', 80, 98, 254; al‑Tusi, al‑Istibsar, II, 58‑61;
al‑Kafi V, 111.

[^20]: al‑ Ya'qubi, III, 217.

[^21]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib, IV, 389.

[^22]: al‑Kafi, I, 324.

[^23]: Ikhtiyar, 513‑4; according to another letter the agent of al‑Hadi
in Baghdad and its environs was ‘Ali b. al‑Husayn b. ‘Abd Rabba. After
his death in Mecca in 229/843, Abu ‘Ali b. Rashid assumed his post;
Ikhtiyar, 510.

[^24]: al‑Najashi, 191.

[^25]: Kama’l, 442; al‑Kafi I, 518.

[^26]: Ikhtiyar, 608, 611‑2, 557.

[^27]: Ibn Dawud, al‑Rijal, 248; al-Kafi, I, 519; Ikhtiyar, 608;
al‑Najashi, 265‑6.

[^28]: Ithbat, 215; al‑Barqi categorized him as one of the close
followers of al‑Hadi; al-Rijal, 60

[^29]: The representatives of this trend throughout the time of the
tenth and the eleventh Imams were mainly such extremists as Ahmad b.
Muhammad al­ Sayyari, Ja’far b. Waqid, Abu al‑Samhari, ‘Amr b. Yahya
al‑Dihqan, Faris b. Hatim al‑Qazwini and Muhammad b. Nusayr al‑Numayri;
Ikhtiyar, 525, 529, 573, 606.

[^30]: N. al‑Ghayba, 92

[^31]: al‑Sadr, op. cit., I, 341‑6.

[^32]: T. al-Ghayba, 56, 109.

[^33]: T. al-Ghayba, 57.

[^34]: al-Kafi, I, 505; Kama’l, 441‑2.

[^35]: T. al-Ghayba, 157; al-Kafi, I, 330.

[^36]: For a full account of the traditions which were used by the
Imamites during the short occultation, see al‑Kafi, I, 525‑35; N.
al‑Ghayba, 26‑47; al‑‘Asfari, Asl Abu Said al‑'A fari, f. 1‑3.

[^37]: Kama’l, 476‑8; Javad 'Ali, op. cit., in Der Islam, XXV (1939),
197‑227.

[^38]: al‑Sadr; op. cit., I, 377‑9.

[^39]: al‑Najashi, 343; T. al‑Fihrist, 48.

[^40]: Javad ‘Ali, op. cit‑ in Der Islam, XXV (1939), 199; Rajkowski,
op. cit., 667; al­ Najashi, 222; T. al‑Fihrist, 243; al‑Tusi mentions
that the grandfather of ‘Uthman was ‘Amr, however, he does not link him
with ‘Amr b. Hurayth; T. al-Ghayba, 231.

[^41]: Javad ‘Ali, op. cit., in Der Islam, XXV (1939), 199.

[^42]: Dala'il, 217.

[^43]: T. al-Ghayba, 229.

[^44]: Ikhtiyar, 526.

[^45]: T. al-Ghayba, 229‑31.

[^46]: T. al-Ghayba, 231‑2; Kama’l, 435; for a full account of those men
see al‑Najashi, 41, 202, 323.

[^47]: T. al-Ghayba, 231.

[^48]: Kama’l, 90, 441‑2; al‑Kafi, I, 329‑30; T. al-Ghayba, 157.

[^49]: For a full account see Chapter III.

[^50]: al‑Kafi, I, 517‑8, 522‑3.

[^51]: Al‑Kashshi gives his statement as regards al‑Hasan b. al‑Nadr
along with his account of Abu Hamid al‑Maraghi. He does not name
explicitly the city which al‑Hasan belonged to; Ikhtiyar, 535. According
to al‑Mustawfi Maragha is a large town, and was formerly the capital of
Azerbayjan; al‑Qazwini, Nuzhat al­ Qulub, 88. However, there is evidence
to support the claim that al‑Hasan b. al­ Nadr was a native of Qumm.
Al‑Saduq reports that al‑Hasan was from Qumm and listed him among the
people who saw the twelfth Imam; Kama’l, 442.

[^52]: Al‑Kulayni reports in his account of the birth of the twelfth
Imam sixteen narrations, elucidating the activities of the first Saf’ir
with his followers. Most of these narrations indicate that he practiced
miracles to persuade them that he was rightfully appointed by the Imam;
al-Kafi:, I, 514‑24, narrations nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12‑17, 20, 21, 23,
28.

[^53]: al‑Fusul al‑‘Ashra, 13.

[^54]: T. al-Ghayba, 157‑8, al‑Kafi, I, 329‑30.

[^55]: Abd al‑Jabbar, al‑Mugni (Cairo, 1963), II, 176; quoted from
al‑Balkhi.

[^56]: Milal, 128; Fasl IV, 181, however some later sunni scholars such
as Abu Nu ‘aym al‑Asfahini, ‘Abd al‑Wahhab al‑Sha’ram al‑Maliki,
al‑Kunji al‑Shafi'i and Sibt b. al‑Jawzi held that al‑Hasan al‑‘Askari
had, in fact, left a son. For full account of the later sunnite views
concerning the existence of the twelfth Imam, see Sulayman al‑Qanduri,
al‑Hanafi; Yanabi al‑Mawadda (al­ Istana, n.d.), 451,471,491; Sadr
al‑Din al‑Sadr, op. cit., 65‑7.

[^57]: al‑Dhahabi, al‑‘Ibar, II, 31.

[^58]: al‑Kanji, op. cit., 336‑7.

[^59]: Ibn Khaldun writes that the twelfth Imam disappeared in a cellar
in Hilla. However, Hilla was established in 495/1101 by Banu Mazyad
whereas the occultation of the Imam, according to al‑Dhahabi took place
in 265/878. Thus it appears that Ibn Khaldun also relied in his report
on the popular belief; al­ Muqaddima (Cairo, 1322), 157.

[^60]: Al‑Tusi states that the second Saf’ir saw the twelfth Imam in
Mecca holding the drapes of the Ka’ba. According to another report a
certain Yusuf b. Ahmad al­ -Ja’fari on his way to Syria in 309/921 saw
the Imam (T. al-Ghayba, 162, 166). For a full account of the letters of
the Imamites and their answers) by the Imam, see T, al‑Ghayba, 184‑93;
Muhammad al‑Sadr, op. cit., 1, 403,430.

[^61]: Kama’l, 442‑3.

[^62]: Abu al‑Fida, al‑Mukhtasar, II, 80‑I; al‑Kamil, VIII, 219‑20.

[^63]: Ikhtiyar, 518, 520, 555.

[^64]: Ikhtiyar, 521.

[^65]: According to al‑Tabrani (a Nusayri writer), the Nusayriyya
movement was established by 'Ali b. Ahmad al‑Tarba'i, who during the
time of al‑‘Askari gained thirty‑five partisans in the village of Tarba'
and other followers in Ninawa near Hilla. Then he attracted Muhammad b.
Nusayr to his side. The latter led the movement along with his student
al‑Husayn b. Harridan during the time of the short occultation. In
336/947 the movement became independent from the Imamites, and gave more
emphasis to the role ofthe Gate (Bab) than the Imam himself; al‑Tabrani,
Sabil Rah at al‑Arwah, in Der Islam, XXVII (1946), 129‑31.

[^66]: T. al-Ghayba, 259.

[^67]: Al‑Tusi mentions that al‑Shari i was an adherent of the tenth
Imam and that he is not sure about his real name. Al‑Kashshi mentions a
certain Muhammad b. Musa al‑Shari'i or al‑Sharif amongst the Ghulat
during the time of the tenth Imam. It is most likely that he is the same
person discussed by al‑Tusi; Ikhtiyar, 521

[^68]: T. al-Ghayba, 258.

[^69]: Javad ‘Ali, op. cit., in Der Islam, XXV (1939), 203; In his
account of al‑Karkh district al‑Baghdadi states that many places were
inhabited by Rafidites (Shi’ites); al‑Khatib, I, 81.

[^70]: T. al-Ghayba, 229.

[^71]: Ikhtiyar, 532.

[^72]: Ikhtiyar, 580.

[^73]: al‑Qummi, Tarikhi Qumm, 211.

[^74]: al-Kafi, I, 517‑8.

[^75]: Dala'il, 272, 275‑7.

[^76]: Bihar, LI, 316‑7.

[^77]: Qarmisin: A small town in the province of Jabal about thirty‑one
farsakhs from Hamadan. Ibn Khurdadhba, al‑Masalik wa‑l‑Mamalik (Leiden,
1889), 41, 198.

[^78]: Bihar, LI, 300‑3; Dala'il, 283‑5.

[^79]: al‑Irshad, 399. For the relations of al‑Qattan with the eastern
provinces, see Ikhtiyar, 535.

[^80]: Kama’l, 488, 499; al-Kafi, I, 521; Bihar, LI, 294, 295‑6.

[^81]: Ikhtiyar, 531.

[^82]: al-Kafi, I, 518; al‑Irshad, 397.

[^83]: al‑Fusul al‑‘Ashara, 17; According to al‑Mufid Banu al‑Rakuli
were the agents of the Imam in Kufa; however, after the death of the
first Saf’ir, the sources begin to refer to Banu Zuzara and Banu
al‑Zajawzji as the agents in Kufa. The two different names. الركولي
الزجوزجي seem to refer to one family. Perhaps the correct spelling of
this name is الزجوزجي but the copyist of al‑Mufid's work misread it as
الركولي. T. al-Ghayba, 198‑200.

[^84]: al‑Kafi, 1, 518‑9.

[^85]: Kama’l, 496‑7; al‑Saduq reports that al‑‘Aridi knew the place of
the twelfth Imam in Medina and guided a person from Kashmir to the Imam;
Kama’l, 497, 440.

[^86]: al‑Irshad, 401.

[^87]: al-Kafi, I, 523.

[^88]: al-Kafi, I, 523. Al‑Mufid relates the same report but both of
them did not give the name of the agent of the Imam in Samarra,
al‑Irshad, 401.

[^89]: Ikhtiyar, 527; al-Kafi, I, 519.

[^90]: T. al‑Ghayba. 216.

[^91]: al‑Najashi, 264.

[^92]: al-Kafi. I, 519‑20.

[^93]: According to al‑Tusi, al‑Safwani was the assistant of al‑Qasim b.
al‑‘Ala during the time of the third Saf’ir; another report indicates
that he met the second Saf’ir in Baghdad in 307/919; T. al-Ghayba, 203‑5

[^94]: Al‑Safwani reports that Arran was a city in Azerbayjan, but it is
well known among the geographers that Arran is a province and that its
capital was Barda’. It is included in the great triangle of land lying
to the west of the junction point ofthe rivers Ayrus (Kur) and Araxas
(al‑Ras); T. al-Ghayba, 204.

[^95]: T. al-Ghayba, 204.

[^96]: Ibn Hawqal, al‑Masalik wa‑l‑Mamalik, 264; al‑Subki, op. cit.,
III, 230, 233.

[^97]: T. al-Ghayba, 229‑30.

[^98]: al‑Najashi 162‑3.

[^99]: Bihar, LI, 300, quoted from Kitab al‑Nujum.

[^100]: Ikhtiyar, 542‑3, 527.

[^101]: Al‑Kashshi's report indicates that the relations between the
Khawarij and the Imamites in Sijistan were tense. He states that al‑Fadl
b. Shadhan escaped from the Khawarij when they attacked Bayhaq, but he
died during his escape; Ikhtiyar, 543. Al‑Isfahani reports that the
Khawarij killed an ‘Alid called Muhammad b. Ja’far b. Muhammad; Maqatil,
453.

[^102]: Ikhtiyar, 509‑10, 575‑8.

[^103]: al-Kafi, I, 523‑4; Ikhtiyar, 509‑10, 575‑80.

[^104]: al‑Najashi, 264‑5.

[^105]: al‑Kafi, I, 524.

[^106]: Although there is no clear statement concerning the links
between al‑Razi and Hamadan. there is ample evidence that al‑Razi
controlled the activities of all the agents in Iran, so it is more than
probable that he directed those of al‑Hasan b. Harun, especially in view
of this narration.

[^107]: Hashim al‑Hasam, op. cit., II, 568.

[^108]: Javad Ali op. cit., in Der Islam, XXV (1939), 205.

[^109]: T. al-Ghayba, 235.

[^110]: al‑Najashi, 65.

[^111]: T. al-Ghayba, 260.

[^112]: T. al-Ghayba, 232. Although Ibn Barina states that the location
of the grave was on the western side of Baghdad, today there is a grave
within a mosque located in an avenue leading to the Maydan crossroad on
the eastern side of Baghdad. The Imamites believe that this is the grave
of ‘Uthman b. Said.

[^113]: T. al-Ghayba, 232‑3.


