Presentation
============

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful "And this is my
straight path, so follow it, and follow not other wars, for thei' will
lead you a war from His war..." Sura AI-An'am (6:153)

Historically and sociologically speaking. the greatest problem faced by
humanity has been that of law, order and discipline, but unfortunately
mankind itself is the cause of this grave problem.

The solution to this problem is further complicated by man's arrogance.
for he regards himself a godhead, his will a law and his desires and
whims a discipline and order.

How much mankind suffers from this problem while revolving with the
wheel of loss and futile quest is proved by the absurd laws, man coins,
legislates, invents and implements vainly, without being able to reach
the avowed goal or to obtain any good result. In fact with these errors
he increases humanity's already sk v-high pile of errors and adds his
failures to the calamity of human sufferings.

Thus it is evident that this straying and c&nftised man will never get
relief from a hard and cruel life, so long as he remains away from the
course of his exalted Creator. Allah. and continues to disregard the
Divine Call and Message. Allah, the Almighty has clearly mentioned in
the holy Qur'an:

"And whoever turns away from Mv rememberan cc, his will be a narrow
ltfr, and I shall raise hi,,, blind on the L)av of Resurrection. He
it'll say: My Lord why hare You raised tue bli,,d, when I was a seeing
one. He will say: So ( it must be,) , Our revelations anw to you but you
forgot the,,,. In like manner you are forgotten this Day" Sura Taha
(20:124-126)

In this brief study we will try to throw light on certain aspects of
law-making and explain some of its dimensions as fellows: A Definition
of Law

A Definition of Law-maker

An Explanation of the task kuced by the Law-maker An Evaluation of
Islamic Law and Secular Law

We hope that this study would provide a clear vision to humanity and
present in its true perspective the thought and position of the Muslim
individual, whounfortunalely due to the distortions made bymaterialistic
imperialism has started begging and borrowing alien ideas, thoughts,
principles and systems, in gross violation of truth discharged by
reality, so beautifully explained by the glorious Qur'an. We sincerely
hope Islam will enable mankind to return to Allah's straight path and
His Divine Laws, the clue to a peaceful life full of harmony, virtue and
happiness.

We earnestly invoke Allah the Merciful to help us enact His Laws and to
follow His course. Allah is the Hearer of our humble invocations.


AL-BALAGH FOUNDATION


**A DEFINITION OF LAW**

If we contemplate the world around us, ourselves, the nature of our
society as well as the texture of relations and events in our
environment, we realize that everything in this existence is running
according to a perfectly balanced system and exact calculation.

The Universe with its worlds of life. thought. society. etc. is by the
nature of its existence, the way it moves and the correlations of its
elements, subject to universal facts which organize its course, define
its role and goal. and keep it active and efficient. It is motivated by
the potent factor of Humanity.

through langtiagc and its use, the sounds and their pronou
nciations.the meditation and its ideas.the thought and the course of its
movement, the will and the wa~ it acts, the self and its behaviour. and
last but not the least, the instincts and their inclinations, response
and expressions. All of these appear in the feelings of love and hatred
that affect human conduct, relations and attitudes. resulting in peace
and happiness or crime and tension in the society, as well as progress
or the decline of civilization in the course of history.

They also appear in the fluctuations of usages as well as of demand and
supply. Besides preserving the inherited physical and biological
characteristics and the balance in their appearance and disappearance,
they can be perceived in dispersion of the stars, atoms, heavenly bodies
and cosmic clusters in their respective orbits.

All these human or cosmic phenomena in this universe, go on and on, in
this world of matter, life and thought. They promote such changes as,
biogeny, birth and extinction,join other elements, affect them or are
influenced by them, as the case may be, in a limited manner or in
certain specific ways of execution.

Such manners of execution. phenomena and the events. including
perfectly systematic forms of heings are called ~The Law'. Thus it is
quite obvious that the necessity of the Law is a universal fact,
required by every event, cause, phenomena and subject, be it natural or
social.

So. under this universal and inevitable rule. Man's activities,
behaviour and social relations should he formulated within a legal frame
in accordance with a specitic manner that would preserve his life,
accomplish his humanistic objectives, show the nature of his
constitution and plan the course of progress and relationship.

When these human relations in the fields of society politics, economy
etc., are systematized in the lorni ofdefined rules, we call them laws,
canons or regulations of Allah'. all of which come within the scope of
religion and constitute a part of it. since the scope of religion is
much wider thanjust to organize man's external social relations.

Actually, religion organizes man's inner self too and morally builds
it. It takes I. Every Islamic rule is a law. BLIt we contznc this
definition to the concept of law in the social arena, as the current
technical terms go. The Islamic Laws or Canons are known in Arabic as
Shari'a'. care of belief, devotional rites, and the individual's
personal activities, such as how to keep clean, to eat, to drink, to
wear clothes, to think. etc.

Therefore. the Law could be defined as: "The principle which organizes
human relations among individuals and groups. This covers all aspects of
human life such as social. political, commercial, administrative,
financial, family. inheritance work. laud transactions. . etc.

It is. thus, obvious that the objective of the existence of the Divine
Law is, to subject every manifest human activity and relation to a
balanced and calculated frame of organization and discipline. In Islam.
existence is not a confusion, absurdity or loss, as is evident by the
following verses of the Qur'an:

"Deemed you thctm that We had created you frr itaught, and that you
would not be returned to us?" Sura A!-Mo'minun (23:115 )

"He has created erert'thitmg and has ordained for it a imieasure." Sura
Al-Furqan (25:2)

"…And then' is a measure us'ith Hi,,, for everthing." Sura AI-Ra'ad
(13:8)

"... For each We hai'e appointed a law and a traced out war..". Sura
AI-Ma'ida (5:48)


**A Definition Of Law-Maker**

"Thea, when, yea warship besides His are bat asses which jw have
aaueed,twa aadyearjfrthers. Allah has revealed aatherlty for lbs. The
jadgeseat rests with Allah only, Who has cessaaded yea that yea worship
aeae Mve His. This is the right religion, bat most people do not knew."
Sura Yusuf :(12:40)

"Stireli' Your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods of time, and He is firm in power. He covers the night with
the dai', which it persues incessantly: and (He created) the sun, the
moon and the stars iiiade subservient bj His command. His is the
creation and the command. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds."
Sura AI-A'raf (7:54)

If we contemplate and.scrutini7e the phenomena of this world,
uncovering the secrets and depths of existence and examine the order
governing beings. nature and society, we discover the natural connection
between laws and ethics as well as the organization of relations between
the individual and society on one hand, and the general and natural
genesis that organizes nature and life on the other. Man thus, is seen
as a universal being who needs like other natural parts of the
universe.

to be organized.

This unified look makes us realize that there is a common universal law
to which man and other parts of the cistence arc subject.

This conscious and reflective look helps us to discover another
important fact, that man and other beings of nature have a single common
initiator, direction and goal.

Allah is the Initiator Who created the whole universe, the Director Who
guides and organizes the creatures, and the Great Goal to which man and
the universe are heading in their both compulsory and optional progress
towards perfèctionea progress which is to be carried on according to
every being's degree of existence and potentiality of perfection.

Through this uniٌed thinking and analysis we realize that the whole
universe, including mankind, is in need of a balanced law and order
system, so as to organize man's life on uatural and universal
principles. These rules should he 1,1 harmony with his disposition.
inborn characteristics and the elements of his existence and activities,
as man is an important member of the greater organization of the
Universal Family.

This conclusion leads us to believe that the One Who created the
universe and life, and based existence on perfection, beauty, order and
accuracy of the highest exactitude would not leave Man,a key member of
the large universal family of existence, exempted from the progress of
this general order of the universe. He would not let him deviate from
the greatest goal of ex.istence, the goal of attaining perfection,
pronouncing servitude to~ Allah, and proclaiming the truth of His
Existence and Oneness.

Therefore, Man should get a clear vision of the Divine Law which
organizes his life in accordance with human nature and disposition,
through a suitable programme and a perfect course and order.

As Man was the only being that had the free will to choose, and to
express his aims through conscious selection and voluntary dealings,
Allah the Exalted, sent Messengers bearing His Laws to show Man the all
embracing course and order that guides him to the final goal of
existence,complete submission and servitude to Allah alone. This goal
can only be accomplished by sincerely following the path of the Wise
Creator, that is by adhering to His message brought by the strenuous
efforts of His Messengers and Prophets.

By going through the Qur'anic verses, we get the gist of this idea, the
idea of man's need to be governed by a natural order. This is obvious.in
the call of the Qur'an and in its address to Man, as is shown in this
verse:

"Surely your Lord is Allah who created the heavens and the earth in six
periods of time, and He is firm in power. He covers the night with the
day,which it persues incessantly; and (He created) tile sun, tile moon
and the stars made subservient by His command. His is hte creation and
the command. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds." Sura AI-A'raf
(7:54)

In this verse the Qur'an explicitly reminds us of the Divine
Commandment over the entire existence, as well as the general
organisation of the universe, thus placing Man within the frame of an
orderly and coordinated existence and disclosing the common bond between
Creation' and Commandment,\* thereby fixing the -principle of His
supreme Lordship alone (which is sovereignty, management and guidance).
This clearly confirms that it is not possible to separate Creation' from
Commandment' (Genesis from Legislation). It is virtually impossible for
Man to be isolated from the order of life chosen for him by his Creator,
as it will upset the balance and cause him to deviate and his life to
decline and decay.

The Qur'an refers to this - Genesis - Legislation' relationship in an
explicit expression:

"His is the creation attd the command. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of
the worlds." Sura AI-A'raf (7:54)

"... The jttdge,nent rests with Allah only, Who has commanded ~on that
you us'orship none sai'e Hi,,,. This is the right religion, bitt most
people do not know." Sura Yusuf (12:40)

So, by bringing us to this conclusion, the Qur'an emphasizes the
essence of the natural connection between Genesis and Legislation. We
thus discover the important fact, of Taith and Thought'. that is. the
One Who creates the beings, initiates their existence, assigns their
goal and plans their constitutioni, Himself remains the real Director.
designing for His creatures, the road of progress and the order of
movement.

Several verses of the glorious Qur'an give prominence to this clear
truth and enable us to perceive that the principle of ruling and
command, ----------------------------------------------- \* Creatioh
means to bring Into eIstencc what did not e'.ist before. "Commandment
means: guiding. organt/,ng and directing.

or Law-making and Organizing, is not the responsibility of any one of
the creatures. It is a matter wholly related to the Creator's Will and
Wisdom.

This is because Organizing and Legislating is a form of relationship
between the Creator and His creatures. This relationship is practically
a beautiful bond expressing servitude, or a state of complete
subjugation between Man and his Lord. So, any other party trying to
organize human life and coining rules and laws to arrange the different
individual and social activities, would mean sharing the power of
legislation with Allah, the Almighty.

Attributing this authority (of legislation) to other than Allah would
be a form of worship, submission and surrender to other than Allah\*.
That is why the glorious Qur'an draws our attention towards this grave
conclusion and firmly rebukes man from committing this error.

"... The judgement rests with Allah only, Who has commanded you that
you worship none save Him..." Sura Yusuf (12:40)

The Qur'an accuses the Jews and the Christians who neglected Allah's
Laws and just system, and submitted to the desires of the Rabbis and the
Priests, who coined their own laws and rules contrary to the Divine
Command. The Qur'an reters to them as follows: "Ther have taken as lords
besides Allah their Rabbis and their Monks and (also) the Messiah son of
Mary, when (her were bidden to worship one God. There is no god save
Him; far from, His glory be what they ascribe as partners (unto Him)!''
Sura AI-Tawba (9:31)

Interpreting the lordship of the Rabbis and Monks as stated in the
above verse, the Imams (AS.) have said, that worship, here means the
blind obedience of the Jews and Christians to the wills and desires of
their leaders. who cleverly twisted the Divine Laws, to suit their own
selfish interests.

----------------------------------------------------------

\* To submit to Allah's legislation does not mean the cancellation of
man's will. It actually means to have man's life and course planned and
systematized. and at the same time, to enable his human will to choose
and differentiate between vices and virtues.

lmam .Ja'far Al-Sadiq (AS.), asked about the meanint~ of the above
verse, said: "Br Allah, they did not ask to be worshipped. if they had
asked the,,, to do so, they would not hai'e obeyed the,,,. Rut they
(Rabbis at:d Monks) sanctioned the unlawful as lawful, and the lawful as
unlawful, and thus they (the people), without perceiving, blindly
(obeyed) worshipped them."

The above is the actual meaning of the verses of the holy Qur'an. which
clearly denounces the authority of law-making by any other than Allah.
This deviation is disblief, abomination, injustice and ignorance. Those
who legislate and make abnormal laws. distorting Divine Justice and
Allah's Will, are called tyrants and idol worshippers as the Qur'anic
texts say:

"... Whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are thej' that
are the trculsgressors." Sura Al-Ma'ida (5:47)

"... Whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that
are the unjust." Sura AI-Ma'ida (5:45)

"…Whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that are
the unhelievers. Sura AI-Ma'ida(5:44)

"Is it a judgenient of (the times ofl ignorance that they are
seeking?And who is better thou .]hlah to judge frr a people who are sure
( in their belief ).?" Sura AI-Ma'ida (5:50)

"Have you not seen those who assert that they behie~'e in ut'hat has
been rem'ealed to you and what was revealed before ron? They desire to
summon one another to the judgement of the Saw,,, though they ,t'cre
commanded to deny hun, and the Satan desires to lead them astray into a
remote error." Sura AI-Nisa (4:60)

Through the above verses of the holy Qur'an we realize that judgement
means both legislation and la~wmaking. Thus the peoples' adherance to (
9 )

the laws and the enacting of them, should not be against Allah's will
and command and should be regarded as an aspect of worship, and humanity
should submit to Him alone.


