Islam: the Universal Legislation For Mankind
============================================

From our aforementioned general and all-embracing look at the beings.
including man, the following important lacts of this vast universe and
life Ã«atl be inferred:

1. Unity of Origin- Allah. the Exalted.

2. Unity of Creation- comprising numerous parts.

3. Unity of Order- governing the Universe.

4. Unity of Goal- direction towards Allah.

Through this vision of unity and oneness, we come to realize the
necessity of man's submission and connection to this principle, the
principle of the unity of Origin. Creation. Order and Goal. Man has but
to enter the circle embracing the whole existence, and he will be in
harmony with the Divine Religion which forms the Order and the Goal in
the shape of laws which take in consideration all hi~ existence and
diverse activities:

"And how have We set von (0 Muhammad) on a clear road of(Our)
commandment; so follow it, and follow not the whims of those who know
not. Sura Al-Jathiya (45:18)

**Will and Adherence**

While discussing universal unity and the need for a natural canon for
man to govern his activities, organize his relations and give shape to
his personal contents in behaviour and action, we should make
distinction between a voluntary adherence to that canon. and a
compulsory and material submission to it.

Man is completely free, and has full power but in order to organize his
social life he has to submit to this universal canon based on the nature
of his existence. By accepting and this Divine Order. Man would be
expressing his contents and the possibilities, activities, innovations.
perfection and other symptoms of animation in ways adapted to his own
free wifl.

In other words. Man can formulate his activities, by voluntary practice
of this sound legislative plan and undertake an orderly construction of
the ( 10 )

framework of his life by charting its welfare and high objectives,
among other things in the world. This legislative plan should be a canon
which coincides, in its principles and goals. with man's inborn nature,
feelings and needs, encompassing and organizing them all and providing
him with prosperity and happiness.

The Islamic Canon is thus a legislative moulding of the laws of life
and human nature. It. consequently. becomes: "the record containing all
the principles of organization and activity , because "it is the real
uncovering of the code of life and the order of human existence. Allah.
the Exalted, says:

"The nature made by Allah, in which He has made men; there is no
altering (the laws) of Allah's creation, that is the right religion, but
most people do not know." Sura Al-Rum (30:30)

"He has made plaitm to you of the religion which He enjoined Noah, and
that which We ha me revealed to you (Muhammad), and that which We
enjoined up on Abraham,, and Moses and Jesus, that establish the
religion and be not divided therein; dreadfulfor the unbelievers is that
which you call thcmir lo, Allah chooses for Himself whom He pleases, and
guides to Himself him who turns ( to Him) frequently. Sura Al-Shura
(42:13)

"This is My straight path, sofrllow it. Follow not ( other)ways, for
they will lead you away from His way. This He has enjoined you, that you
may guard (against evil).'' Sura Al-An'am (6:153)


**Stages Of The Existence Of Law**

The proof that Islam is the answer for mankind's universal legislation,
and that it is the formula uncovering the law of human nature, is based
on the facts, that there arc in this human existence certain rules and
regulations which govern and mould it. without which there would he
nothing. except chaos, confusion, futility and corruption.

If we trace the stages of the appearance of Law and its role in human
life we realize that like other natural laws it appears in three
existing forms in this world, which are as follows:

I. The Objective Form: Human laws have an objective form which govern
the mental, psychological and material being of man. It is a self-
subsistent form, as are the natural material rules which govern the
order of the world of matter in their reality, independence,
correlation. arrangement of their results and efforts, etc. For example
thinking' has certain rules which it follows and has its own laws, rules
and goals which control its movements. Likewise the whole human body
composed of diverse parts. has its own laws, rules, goals and needs,
which control its activities.

Similar are the social. economic and political relations which are also
subject to their relevant rules and laws which affect their results.

2. The Scientific Form: This is the rational stage of the laws and
facts which control human life. During this stage sciencc discovers
these laws and derives I rom them their subjects, as we derive
grammatical. physical and astronom cal rules from these very subjects
and applications.

3. The Process of Formulating Laws: This is the process of the verbal
construction ola form expressing the meanintts of the laws and their
aims in words easily understood by Man. so that he may accordingly' plan
his life and organiie his individual and social conducts and
activities.

Thus these three stages of legislation.in their true forms. arc
possible onl fbr the Creator of the existence. Since He is the Creator
of Man as well as the laws and regulations. and is fulls' aware of every
detail about their facts and truthfully expresses them. Llnlike a human
being whose knowledge and ability is limited in discovering and defining
the natural laws of life. Furthermore. Man cannot be regarded sincere
and objective in his dealing with the laws.

He falsifies them to suit his own selfish interests, or in the
interests of other groups as the case may he. and thus he does not
define legality in its scientific and objective forms.

There are nunierous examples proving this human frailty. For instance
when Man discovered the harms of alcoholic drinks, adultery. usuarv
trade monopolies and the like. he prohibited none of them in utter
d~sregard to the proven scientific facts. On the contrary, he resorted
to sophisticated means to conceal the actual truth.

Therefore, leaving the task ofjudgement and legislation to Allah alone
is the only way of saving Man from doom. beau. Allah the Creator is the
only One Who knows all the hidden secrets of mankind and lire:

"Does He not kaew what He created? And He is the Knower of the
Subtleties, the Aware." Sura Al-Mulk (67:14)

Allah alone is able to communicate what He wants to. by means of the
best possible way understandable to mankind- the way of the prophets and
the divine revelation to them. disclosed in explicit verbal forms that
are clear in meaning and implication. This was actually what had been
preached throughout the course of history by all the Divine Laws and
Messages: "And We did not send any Apostle, but with the language of his
peaple, that he might make (the message) clear far them..." Sura
Ibrahim(14:4)

"... (This is) a boak which we have revealed ta you (Muhammad) that you
may bring forth men, by their Lets permission fram utter darkness into
light-to the way af the Mighty. the Praised One." Sura Ibrahim (14.1)

"Surely this Qur'an guides to that which is most upright and gives good
tidings to the believers t'ho do good works that they shall have a great
reward." Sura Al-lsra' (17:9)

lmam Al-Sadiq (AS.) drawing our attention to these facts has rightly
remarked: "The Qur'an is a covenant of Allah to His creatures. A muslin,
will hai'e to look into His covenant, and read from it fifty verses (at
least) a day." \*

From this starting point, the Qur'an draws a picture of the nature of
the Divine Law revealed through the Prophets, showing that it is the
existential fact coinciding with the nature of the human -being. It also
discloses to us the gross unfitness of other laws,

rules or regulations (man-made), which vainly try to define life and
its order, contrary to the nature of man and life, or in other words
these laws are not applicable unless life and nature itself is changed.
Thus we can safely conclude that this religion is the Divine decision
that suits the nature and innate disposition of Man as well as its
multi-sided construction, as Allah, the Exalted, says:

--------------------------------------------------

\* AI-Bavan Ii Tafsecr AI-Qur'an. . p. 4

"Such has been the course of Allah that has indeed ruti btjirt aad yea
shaM aat jlad a cheap Ia AUdit tweeze." SuraAI-Fath (41:23)

"And recite whet hes beta reveeied te yea ef the leekq' year Lard;
There It - wha cea titer His ward.,, ead yet shall nat jlad cay wfage
besides Him." Sura Al-Kahaf(18.27)

"And the ward efyaar Lard has beta accomplished truly and justly; there
is neat that eta cheap His wards and He is the Hearer, the Knawer."
Sura.AI-An'am(6:115)

"Rather yet wish to put qaestleas ta year Messeager as Nests was
qaestleaed befere? And whoever adepts unbelief instead of faith, he
indeed has lost the right direction of the way." Sura Al-Baqara
(2:108)

"And if the truth had followed their low desires, surely the heam'ens
and the earth and all thosewho are therein would have been perished.
Noy, We have brought to them their reminder, put from their reminder
they now turn away." Sura Al-Mu'minun (23:71)

The above - mentioned verses of the Qur'an help mank,nd to perceive the
truth, by clearing the mist of blindness from the eyes, and pushing
aside from the intellect any doubts of illusion and ignorance, which
would have misled Man to imagine that he is able to devise laws and
canons according to his wishes and desires.

It makes him realize that an off-hand and extempore law however
minutely designed cannot solve his problems nor organize his diverse
activities and individual and social relations, in harmony with his
natural existence.

This is because Secular Laws are not based on rational foundations, nor
have they a truthful reality behind them, except man's imaginations and
illusions.

For example if we ask the Secular Legislator: Why do you impose a fine
or a year's imprisonment for a certain crime? Is this penalty based on
the basis of a strict balance and calculation such as that the
punishment imposed, is ecjual to crime, according to the legislative
equation? Did you study its graveness and its effect on I lie social rca
lit. or its psychological reactioii. aiRi ale you Stile it will act as a
restraint, and is a just decision keepiiw the balance among the parties
concerned'? On what ( 14 )

grounds did von build our decision. conclusion and penal tv [or this
particular crime?

Should we put such questions to him, lie would not be able to give us
sclentilical!~' satisfvin~ answers, and we would conic to realize that
lie talks nothing but nonsense. niakes laws without a n~' ha Janice. or
reasoiiahle argu mciit. completely unaware that h~' doing so. lie is
generating an artificial being in the svsteni of life. contrary to the
logic of justice and contradicting the very principles of existence.

Such misfit laws, cause negative effects on humanity and upset the
universal balance of truthfulness and justice oii whose very basis every
truth in this world has been erected "Allah bears witness that there is
no god but He and (so do) the angels and those possessed of knowledge
(too are witnesses) maintaining His creation with justice: there is no
god but He, the Ahnighty, the Wise." Sura AaI-Imran (3:18)

"And if you obey most of those on earth they whould lead yon astray
from Allah's way. They follow but conjecture, and they only lie." Sura
AI-An'ani (6:116)


**A Comparison Between Islamic Law and Secular Law**

It was not novelty in human life or the desire toestablish justice or
order that prompted Man to make laws and rules. and coin ways of living
and.organizing, because these were already in existence. The real cause
was Man's own selfish interest and tne desire to enslave his tellow-
beings that made him to turn away from Allah's Law, or to have any
consideration for it.

Ever since the dawn of history, the tyrants and oppressors have
ceaselessly tried to rebel against the will of truth and justice in this
world, regardingthemselves as gods or god-heads to be worshipped, and
their idols to be sanctified in the altar of despotism and tyranny.

Tracing the history of the origin of the laws which govern the life of
society in its controlling positivity, we find that they all speak of
the will of the ruler and express only his aims and interests in life.
They are far from being in the peoples' real interests, and the
principles of right and justice. This is because the Secular Laws,' in
their reality, express nothing ( 15 )

but the desire to enslave mankind, to serve the will of the oppressor
and subdue humanity to the whims of the deviated rulers who either
intentionally or unintentionally consider themselves as powerful gods or
god-heads. Actually the desires ofthe rulers whichhavebeencoined as laws
and rules thus tightening their grip on the people and their lives.

Whereas, on the other hand, it was the contrary in respect to the role
of the Islamic Legislation, which sought to establish truth and justice,
and to liberate Man from oppression, be kind to him, and protect his
interests in life, as is evident from the following verse of the
glorious Qur'an'

I. Secular Laws are the earthly laws coined to protect the interests of
a tyrant or a particular class.

"Those who follow the Apostle-Prophet, the Ummi (one who neither reads
nor writes) whom they find described in the Torah and the Gospel, (who,i
enjoins them good and forbids them evil, and makes laps Jul for them all
good things and unlawfuly for them the foul; and removes from them their
burden and the shackles which were upon them; so (as for) those who
believe in him, and honour him, and help him, and follow the light which
has been sent down with him; these it is that are the successful."

Sura AI-A'raf (7:157)

"And We have not sent you but as a mnercj for the creation." Sura
AI-Anbiya (21:107)

By studying these two verses one may easily rccot~iiizc that the aims
and goals of Islam. dcflned by the Qur'an. are: liberation of Man.
delivering him lroni darkness into the light, and guiding him towards
the horiions oh truth and happiness. If we try a fair, conscious and
rational asscssrnent of the Islamic Laws and the Sccular Laws in their
diverse forms and philosophies, such as Capitalism. Socialism. Communism
and the like, which are offshoots of. ignorant thinkimz.

we realize the most important differences which distinguish Islamic or
Divine Laws from Secular or man-made Laws, and which define their
respective identities and features are as follows:


