A Definition of Law Maker
=========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِلَّا أَسْمَاءً سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا
أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمْ مَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ بِهَا مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ ۚ إِنِ
الْحُكْمُ إِلَّا لِلَّهِ ۚ أَمَرَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ ۚ
ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا
يَعْلَمُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[12:40] You do not serve besides Him but names which you have named,
you and your fathers; Allah has not sent down any authority for them;
judgment is only Allah's; He has commanded that you shall not serve
aught but Him; this is the right religion but most people do not
know:***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ ۗ أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ ۗ تَبَارَكَ
اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[7:54] Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the
earth in six periods of time, and He is firm in power; He throws the
veil of night over the day, which it pursues incessantly; and (He
created) the sun and the moon and the stars, made subservient by His
command; surely His is the creation and the command; blessed is Allah,
the Lord of the worlds.***

If we contemplate and scrutinize the phenomena of this world, uncovering
the secrets and depths of existence and examine the order governing
beings, nature and society, we discover the natural connection between
laws and ethics as well as the organization of relations between the
individual and society on one hand, and the general and natural genesis
that organizes nature and life on the other. Man thus, is seen as a
universal being who needs like other natural parts of the universe, to
be organized.

This unified look makes us realize that there is a common universal law
to which man and other parts of the existence are subjects.

This conscious and reflective look helps us to discover another
important fact, that man and other beings of nature have a single common
initiator, direction and goal.

Allah is the Initiator Who created the whole universe, the Director Who
guides and organizes the creatures, and the Great Goal to which man and
the universe are heading in their both compulsory and optional progress
towards perfection, which is to be carried on according to every being's
degree of existence and potentiality of perfection.

Through this unified thinking and analysis we realize that the whole
universe, including mankind, is in need of a balanced law and order
system, so as to organize man's life on natural and universal
principles. These rules should be in harmony with his disposition, nborn
characteristics and the elements of his existence and activities, as man
is an important member of the greater organization of the universal
family.

This conclusion leads us to believe that the One Who created the
universe and life, and based existence on perfection, beauty, order and
accuracy of the highest exactitude would not leave man, a key member of
the large universal family of existence, exempted from the progress of
this general order of the universe. He would not let him deviate from
the greatest goal of existence, the goal of attaining perfection,
pronouncing servitude to Allah, and proclaiming the truth of His
Existence and Oneness.

Therefore, man should get a clear vision of the Divine Law which
organizes his life in accordance with human nature and disposition,
through a suitable program and a perfect course and order.

As man was the only being that had the free will to choose, and to
express his aims through conscious selection and voluntary dealings,
Allah the Exalted, sent Messengers, bearing His Laws to show man the
all-embracing course and order that guides him to the final goal of
existence, complete submission and servitude to Allah alone. This goal
can only be accomplished by sincerely following the path of the Wise
Creator that is by adhering to His message brought by the strenuous
efforts of His Messengers and Prophets.

By going through the Qur'anic verses, we get the gist of this idea, the
idea of man's need to be governed by a natural order. This is obvious in
the call of the Qur'an and in its address to man, as is shown in this
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ ۗ أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ ۗ تَبَارَكَ
اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[7:54] Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the
earth in six periods of time, and He is firm in power; He throws the
veil of night over the day, which it pursues incessantly; and (He
created) the sun and the moon and the stars, made subservient by His
command; surely His is the creation and the command; blessed is Allah,
the Lord of the worlds.***

In this verse the Qur'an explicitly reminds us of the Divine Commandment
over the entire existence, as well as the general organization of the
universe, thus placing man within the frame of an orderly and
coordinated existence and disclosing the common bond between Creation
and Commandment[^1], thereby fixing the principle of His supreme
Lordship alone (which is sovereignty, management and guidance). This
clearly confirms that it is not possible to separate Creation from
Commandment (Genesis from Legislation). It is virtually impossible for
man to be isolated from the order of life chosen for him by his Creator,
as it will upset the balance and cause him to deviate and his life to
decline and decay.

The Qur'an refers to this - Genesis - Legislation' relationship in an
explicit expression:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…”ۗ أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ ۗ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ
الْعَالَمِينَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[07:54] ...surely His is the creation and the command; blessed is
Allah, the Lord of the worlds.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِلَّا أَسْمَاءً سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا
أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمْ مَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ بِهَا مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ ۚ إِنِ
الْحُكْمُ إِلَّا لِلَّهِ ۚ أَمَرَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ ۚ
ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا
يَعْلَمُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[12:40] You do not serve besides Him but names which you have named,
you and your fathers; Allah has not sent down any authority for them;
judgment is only Allah's; He has commanded that you shall not serve
aught but Him; this is the right religion but most people do not
know:***

So, by bringing us to this conclusion, the Qur'an emphasizes the essence
of the natural connection between Genesis and Legislation. We thus
discover the important fact, of faith and thought', that is the One Who
creates the beings, initiates their existence, assigns their goal and
plans their constitution, Himself remains the real Director, designing
for His creatures, the road of progress and the order of movement.

Several verses of the glorious Qur'an give prominence to this clear
truth and enable us to perceive that the principle of ruling and
command, or law-making and Organizing, is not the responsibility of any
one of the creatures. It is a matter wholly related to the Creator's
Will and Wisdom.

This is because Organizing and Legislating is a form of relationship
between the Creator and His creatures. This relationship is practically
a beautiful bond expressing servitude, or a state of complete
subjugation between man and his Lord.

So, any other party trying to organize human life and coining rules and
laws to arrange the different individual and social activities, would
mean sharing the power of legislation with Allah, the Almighty.

Attributing this authority (of legislation) to other than Allah would be
a form of worship, submission and surrender to other than Allah[^2].
That is why the glorious Qur'an draws our attention towards this grave
conclusion and firmly rebukes man from committing this error.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
”إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلَّا لِلَّهِ ۚ أَمَرَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا
إِيَّاهُ ۚ”
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[12:40] …judgment is only Allah's; He has commanded that you shall
not serve aught but Him…***

The Qur'an accuses the Jews and the Christians who neglected Allah's
Laws and Just system, and submitted to the desires of the rabbis and the
priests, who coined their own laws and rules contrary to the Divine
Command. The Qur'an refers to them as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“اتَّخَذُوا أَحْبَارَهُمْ وَرُهْبَانَهُمْ أَرْبَابًا مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ وَالْمَسِيحَ ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَمَا أُمِرُوا إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُوا
إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۚ سُبْحَانَهُ عَمَّا
يُشْرِكُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[ 9:31] They have taken their doctors of law and their monks for
lords besides Allah, and (also) the Messiah son of Marium and they were
enjoined that they should serve one Allah only, there is no god but He;
far from His glory be what they set up (with Him).***

Interpreting the lordship of the rabbis and monks as stated in the above
verse, the Imams (AS) have said, that worship, here means the blind
obedience of the Jews and Christians to the wills and desires of their
leaders, who cleverly twisted the Divine Laws, to suit their own selfish
interests.

Imam Ja'far Al-Sadiq (AS) about the meaning of the above verse, said:

*"By Allah, they did not ask to be worshipped. If they had asked them to
do so, they would not have obeyed them but they (Rabbis and Monks)
sanctioned the unlawful as lawful, and the lawful as unlawful, and thus
they (the people), without perceiving, blindly (obeyed) worshipped
them.”*

The above is the actual meaning of the verses of the holy Qur'an, which
clearly denounces the authority of law-making by any other than Allah.
This deviation is disbelief, abomination, injustice and ignorance. Those
who legislate and make abnormal laws, distorting Divine Justice and
Allah's Will, are called tyrants and idol worshippers as the Qur'anic
texts say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَلْيَحْكُمْ أَهْلُ الْإِنْجِيلِ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ فِيهِ ۚ
وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[5:47] And the followers of the Injeel should have judged by what
Allah revealed in it; and whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed,
those are they that are the transgressors.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَكَتَبْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِيهَا أَنَّ النَّفْسَ بِالنَّفْسِ وَالْعَيْنَ
بِالْعَيْنِ وَالْأَنْفَ بِالْأَنْفِ وَالْأُذُنَ بِالْأُذُنِ وَالسِّنَّ
بِالسِّنِّ وَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ ۚ فَمَنْ تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ
كَفَّارَةٌ لَهُ ۚ وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ
فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[5:45] And We prescribed to them in it that life is for life, and eye
for eye, and nose for nose, and ear for ear, and tooth for tooth, and
(that there is) reprisal in wounds; but he who foregoes it, it shall be
an expiation for him; and whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed,
those are they that are the unjust.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ ۚ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا
النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُوا لِلَّذِينَ هَادُوا
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِنْ كِتَابِ
اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاءَ ۚ فَلَا تَخْشَوُا النَّاسَ
وَاخْشَوْنِ وَلَا تَشْتَرُوا بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا ۚ وَمَنْ لَمْ
يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[5:44] Surely We revealed the Taurat in which was guidance and light;
with it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah) judged
(matters) for those who were Jews, and the masters of Divine knowledge
and the doctors, because they were required to guard (part) of the Book
of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof; therefore fear not the people
and fear Me, and do not take a small price for My communications; and
whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that are
the unbelievers.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَفَحُكْمَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يَبْغُونَ ۚ وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللَّهِ
حُكْمًا لِقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[5:50] Is it then the judgment of (the times of) ignorance that they
desire? And who is better than Allah to judge for a people who are
sure?***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا
أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يَتَحَاكَمُوا إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ
وَيُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَنْ يُضِلَّهُمْ ضَلَالًا بَعِيدًا “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[4:60] Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what
has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire
to summon one another to the judgment of the Shaitan, though they were
commanded to deny him, and the Shaitan desires to lead them astray into
a remote error.***

Through the above verses of the holy Qur'an we realize that judgment
means both legislation and law-making. Thus, the people\`s adherence to
the laws and the enacting of them, should not be against Allah's will
and command and should be regarded as an aspect of worship, and humanity
should submit to Him alone.

[^1]: Creation means to bring into existence what did not exist before.
"Commandment means: guiding, organizing and directing.

[^2]: To submit to Allah's legislation does not mean the cancellation of
man's will. It actually means to have man's life and course planned and
systematized, and at the same time, to enable his human will to choose
and differentiate between vices and virtues.


