I. Criterion of Truth and Justice
=================================

I. The Islamic Canon is based on the criterion of ~Truth and Justice',
the two constant values of life by which legislation and law-making are
judged, and on whose basis their natures, values, effects, goals and
coincidence with the great objective of existence, are estimated.

These two concepts are the foundation on which the entire Islamic
Legislation is based. There is not a single law which is not backed by
these two principles, as are the other facts of the universe.

By getting to know the meaning of Truth and Justice' from the Islamic
point of view, we are apt to discover the secret of their being the
bases on which the Islamic laws are built:-

a. When a thing is True', it.deserves a legitimate place n the life of
society, as falsehood has neither place nor originality in Islam and is
regarded as transient, unstable, an unjustified futility, and a
worthless nothingness. Actually. falsehood is the inconsistent and
negative course practiced by Man against the idea of Truth. For this
reason the Qur'an rejects it as passing and vanishing, unable to occupy
the place of truth or remain constant in the world of reality:

"Nay; We cast the truth against the falsehood, so that it breaks its
head and lo; it vanishes. And woe to you for what you describe." Sura
Al-Anbiya(21:13)

"And say: The Truth has come and falsehood has vanished away: Surely
falsehood is ever bound to vanish." Sura AI-Isra (17:81)

Who is best suited tojudge. other than the Creator ofthe world and all
beings whose knowledge encompasses everything, whether a thing- be it a
canon or a subject- has the merit of coming into existence and occupying
a space however small in this world. Consequently. the Secular Law
knowing no 'Truthful' or natural base proves to be false, transient,
haphazard. accepting no noble values. irrationally formed, admitting no
estimation, having no constancy, futile, and showing no justification
for existence, except the will and desire of' its maker.

So. the human legislator knows nothing about the status. value and
effects of the law he is asked to legislate, as far as the facts and the
objectives of existence are concerned.

Therefore, the glorious Qur'an describes this procedure on the part of
Man as confusion, going astray, ignorance and forgery, and condemns this
act of the ignorant Man who undertakes the responsibility of law-making.
"And do not mix up the truth with falsehood, nor hide the truth whi1e
yon know ( it)." Sura A I- Baqara (2:42)

"Those are they for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter but the
fire, and what they wrought in it shall go for nothing, and vain is what
they do."

"Is he (to be counted equal with them) then who has with him clear
proof from his Lord, and a witness from Him recites it, and before
it(is) the Book of Moses a guide and a mercy? These believe in it; and
whoever of the (different)parties disbelieves in it, the fire is his
appointed place. So do not be in doubt concerning it, surely it is the
truth from your Lord; but most people do not believe." Sura Hud
(11:16.17)

Then the Qur'an further stresses the objective of the Divine Law and
its role in defining truth' and dismissing the schemings of the straying
human soul which intrudes on the truth a false and vain course and law:
"That He might cause the truth to triumph and bring vanity to naught,
however much the guilty might oppose ." Sura AI-Anfal (8:8)

"And with truth have We revealed it , and truth did it come..." Sura
Al- Isra' (17:105)

b. The second criterion, on which the Islamic Legislation is based, is
Justice'. It is the balance by which everything is weighed, and
evaluated. Justice' is to put everything in its proper place, and to
give to everybody his due or what he deserves1 Islam says that it is
just to implement whatever is true. and it is unjust and transgressive
not to do so.

Justice' is Allah's sacred attribute which puts its initials on His
acts and is a sign of His mercy, including the Law which He sent down to
all humanity. Therefore, the concept of Justice in the Qur'an is the
basic principle behind all of Allah's deeds, whether creative or
legislative.

The glorious Qur'an refers to this principle ofthe Islamic Legislation
in different terms, such as: the balance, equity. justice, straight
criterion, etc. Allah the Almighty says:

"Surely Allah enjoins the doing ofjustice and kindness (to others~ and
giving to kinsfolk, and he forbids lewdness, and evil and rebellion. He
admonishes you in order that von mar take heed." SuraAl-Nahl (16:90)

"Surely Allah commands von to make orer trusts to their owners, and
that when you judge between mankind you judge with justice:surelv Allah
admonishes you t'ith what is excellent; surely Allah is Hearing,
Seeing." Sura Al-Nisa (4:58)

"And when they commnit some lewdness they say: Wefrtuid our fathers
doing this and Allah has enjoined it on us. Say: Surely Allah, does not,
enjoin lewdness. Do you say against Allah what you do not know?"

"Say: My Lord has enjoined justice, and set upright your faces,
(towards Him) at every time of prayer and call on Him, being sincere to
Him f'onl.j) in obedience; as He brought you forth into being, so shall
von also return (to Him)." Sura Al-A'raf (7: 28,29)

"And We will set lip a just balance on the Day of Resurrection, so no
soul shall be dealth with unjustly in the least; and though there be the
weight of a grain of mustard seed, (yet) will We bring it. And
sufficient are We to take account." Sura AI-Anbiya' (21:47)

The Qur'an not only lays stress on justice but it also condemns
injustice and resents it in several erscs. attackine the wrong- doers
and threatening them with torture and curse as is clear lrom the
examples given below: "... Those who waving shall haew by what a (great)
irvine they will be evertaraed: Sura Al-shu'ara (26:227)

"The Day en which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust, and fer
the is cane, and fer thea. is the evil abede." Suna AI-Mu'min (40.52)

Islam. thus. regards justice as the foundation on which everythitIg in
life should be based. Wa salon ktitno law is ~ight.uflless it is brined
on the idea ~Ejustice. Jti,iticdtes the subject ot'the law its value
tail ( 19 )

ttgard.sb√¥tingltII rightful position in respect to other thitijs pnd
events. Divine Legislation is therefore exact and balanced. with no loss
and Ito injustice.

The Secular Laws sadly lack such noSe ~tlues and criterions (Truth
andifisllce)in their objective form and teal natUre. This is because
they do riot hints tonstant. distinct and real idda about the concept of
Justice..

It looks at it with a look subjected to the nature of the situations
and the subjective human estimations. Thus. the toneept of Truth and
Justice' was merely turned into a human consideration, under the mercy
of the law-gives' desires and whims. Consequently. Secular Law is
deprived from the most important bases and criterions.

**2. OBJECflVITY**

The objecti'ity of the IslamicLegislation is concentrated in its being
free from the intrusion of personal interests of desires and the
subconscious factors, which may quite possibly. knowingly or unknowingly
affect the human lawmaker and participate in the rnakinsz of his
decisions, and his laws. Human knowledge and faculties are influenced by
factors of environment. lie redi ty and personal characteristics, as has
been proved by psychological and Social studies.

This fact has also beendiscovered by all those who subjected the
Secular Laws and man-made caiions to analytical studies. It was obvious
that they had been influenced by the environment. circumstances.
psvchologica I and social situations and the law-makers~personal
interests and emotions. Thus as a matter of fact. such laws carry the
symptoms of the diseases prevalent in the society. and actually express
the will of the rulers, as these laws can easily be affected by the
legislator's desires and inclinations.

The Islamic Canon. on the other hand, is scientific. objective. honest
and far from being under the influence of the motives and factors which
determine man-made laws. The true law-giver, here, is Allah. the
Exalted. Who is glorified from all those inclinations and impressions
from which Man can never completely and absolutely be free. This is the
secret of the construction of the Div inc Law. which is based on "Truth
and Justice , and its aim is only the welfare of humanity and its noble
objectives in life.

**3. CLARITY OF VISION**

The Islamic Law or the Islamic Canon. which is Divinely revealed has a
clear objective, and a defined goal, that charts out Man's course in
life, and shows him his aim, and Man realizes that the goal of the
Divine Law is to have him serve his Creator, and be liberated from all
servitude and submission to human beings.

Consequently, his lawful actions which he practices durintt his life
entitle him to a lair reward in the Hereafter, unlike the Secular Law,
under whose shadow Man would feel heini~ tied with the fetters of the
ruling authority which has no obvious objective eccept that which serves
the interests of the governing clan and its ambitions-a state which
should urge Man to fight such laws and get rid of them .

Man, under such laws, suffers from the anguish of confusion and without
any distinct goal in life. He linds no sense in adhering to a law but
only to a low but only to an extent which affords him a limited and
spontan eous objective. or spares him the penalty imposed by the
government on those who disobex its laws. Such laws cannot cope with the
needs of the human soul, nor can they e spress his lawful ambitions in
life.

That is why the individual under the grip of this law does not respect
its regulations sincerely and tries to break through its bonds whenever
opportunity affords him the chance. the eve of the authority's watchman
dozes off, or when he realizes the triviality of the law which does not
deserve to be obeyed.

This fact is supported by the statistics issued by the quarters
concerned with criminology and instances of lawbreaking. They say that
the Ÿågures for crimes are ever increasing, and the number of those who
break the law is growing every' year. proving the fact that the Secular
Law is incapable of solving Man's problems and inspiring respect and
obedience from him.

On the other hand the Islamic Laxv encourages Man to apply it sincerely
and defend the will of the law and its objectives. This is because the
individual under the shelter of the Islamic Law feels that the law
protects his interests and cares for his objectives both in this world
and in the Hereafter.

Faith lnsplns t~ic faithful Muslim that lie is responsible before his
Creator for enacting the will of the law and carry out its decisions
sinccrcly.

Thus, juding from this ideological and rational point. the Islamic Law
acquires a spiritual power and a moral drive enabling at to he
applicable and its aims to he attainable more than if it depended on
force and compulsion.

**4. THE ETHICS OF THE ISLAMIC LAW:**

The Islamic Law is based on its respect for morals, safeguarding them
and mainiainiaig close tics with theni.contrarv to the Secular Law,
which does not adhere to morality, nor cares for it. Secular Law so
neglects the ethical argunient and turns away from it that the human
civilization is thrown an a terrible tragedy which drags man down the
precipice oi degradation and lawlessness.

This irrational theory of separation between morals and law gave birth
to ditkrent materialistic cultures of diverse ideological trends and
courses. such as Marxism. Communism. Existentialism. Freudianism.
Capitalism. Socialism and other philosophies and social opinions.

Capitalism, for example. regards morals as a personal behaviour
connected to the individual's freedom, and that the law or the state has
no right to meddle in personal afTairs. nor enact laws protecting
morals, unless a personal behaviour may endanger the freedom of the
others, or falls within the scope of the criminal law based on the
general philosophy of the capitalist concept. Thus Capitalism not only
believes in irresponsible freedom or permisiveness but actually builds
all human activity on it.

Communism regards morals (as stated in the Communist Manifesto of Marx
and Engels) as bourgeoise deception which must be abolished. It says:
"Religion. constitution and morals are but a bourgeoise deception So,
morals, according to Marxism. is a social phenomenon imposed by the
bourgeoise systems to protect themselves, by decieving the people and
convincing them of such ethical concepts as mercy, truth, duty, right,
kindness, disdain, shame. etc. Therefore, it is nec~ssary for the
Marxist Revolution to destroy morals and exterminate them, according to
the communists.

Now on comparing these ignorant Western and Eastern concepts with the
Divine Islamic Religion, we find the Messenger of Islam. Muhammed (SAW.)
saying:

"I have been sent to complete the noblest of morals", and "The one who
is the best in morals is the most complete in faith . In light of these
statements we discover that Islam dignifies the human-being and bases
life on firm moral foundations which distinguish the Islamic Law and
Society from other laws and societies.

That is why the Islamic Law flows with the spirit of morality and
undertakes to implant and protect ethics in all aspects of life.

The Islamic Law in contrast to the Secular is based on moral
imperatives, which regulate, human conduct. Thus the Messenger of Islam,
Muhammed (S.A.W.) did not simply transmi.t these Laws, but implemented
them in the life of a socio - political order, showing their eternal
practibility.

**5. CAPACITY AND UNIVERSALITY:**

One of the major differences between the Secular Law and the Islamic
Law is the latter's capacity and universality. The Islamic Law leaves no
part of the human activity. big or small, without having it organised.
in one way or another, through well defined laws, rules and regulations.
It deals with man as an objective and complete unit ofdifTercnt
individual and social activities.

organizing it, controlling its behaviour and subjecting it to an exact
legal discipline, which covers every part of its actions like eating,
drinking. behaviour and relations with the family, neighbours and
friends, as well as caring t~or the body, the clothes. etc.

It prohibits all actions which are harmful such as gambling, drinking
wine, adultery, wantonness, and the like. It also handles the individual
within a wide scope of social organization, through organizing economy.
politics., war. peace. judicature. finance, work. commerce. etc.

As to the Secular Law it miserably lacks all these characteristics,
since it suffers from the narrowness and limits of its horizon and is
incapable of organizing the different aspects of the human behaviour, as
the Islamic Law does.

A considerable part of the human activity is neglected by the Secular
Law on the pretext that it concerns the individual conduct which has
nothing to do with the law. and thus. it falls short of defining the
all- embracing unity of human activity, leaving wide spaces of lik
suffering from negligence and confusion. This, as a matter of fact.
causes unbyidgeahIe gaps in social discipline in adjusting man's
behaviour, and

in turn makes it a paralysed law, incapable of guaranteeing justice
peace and security.

**6. HARMONY AND NON-CONTRADICTION:**

The Islamic Law forms a perfect responsive and objective unit. Each
part of it supports the other and helps it to be applicable. The
prohibition of alcoholic drinks. for example. closes the possibility of
yet another related crime. which is also punishable by Islam.

Islam's prohibition of performing the prayers on a usurped property
helps to protect peoples rights and to respect private possession.

In this way Islam fixes the connection among all its laws and rules,
unlike the Secular Law which stiflers from divisions and lacks cohesive
unity, because most of its laws are often self- contradictory.

The Secular Constitutions, likewise, stiller from similar contradiction
and discord, despite the fact that constitutions are the origins from
which laws are derived. This grave deficiency forces the legislative
authorities, according to the circumstancess. to establish
Constitutional Tribunals to tackle and solve such contradictions in many
instances.

Examples reflecting these conflicts and contradictions are mans'. In
some countries the Mercantile Law contradicts the Economic or
Administrative Law, or ~ll these laws taken together may contradict the
spirit ofthe political constitution itself. In the Socialist regimes,
for example. where the wealth is in the hands of' the State and where
there is no private possession, the laws, nevertheless. allow the
eovernment to conclude contracts with individual contractors. Or with
large monopoliiing companies! Or. they may allow alcoholic drinks, but,
at the sanie time. may punish those who commit some crime because of
intoxication. Weird indeed, the law itself paves the way for them to be
caught in its trap. and vet it punishes them!

Thus, the Secular Law falls in a state of contradiction and conflict
because of the multiplicity of law-makers with certainly different
motives and deficient knowledge which make them fall short of realizing
the truth and the need.

**7. HUMANITARIANISM:**

One of the most important difThrences between the Secular Law and the
Islamic Law is the fact that the Islamic Law is humanitarian.
Regionalism, racialism, class- discrimination, opportunism and egoism,

are not found in the text and spirit of the Islamic Law as the call of
Islam is addressed to the human race as a whole. Its message is a
universal one. Its laws are general and not legislated for the sake of a
particular group. The glorious Qur'an says to the Messenger:

"And We have not sent you but as a mercy for the peoples" Sura
AI-Anbiya' (21:107)

The contrary is the case concerning the Secular Law. It reflects the
legislator's understanding and his personal inclination. It is full of
anti-human concepts causing it to revolve within narrow limits, such as
regionalism. racialism, class difference. individual selfishness and the
like. Allthese result in injustice, deprivation and suppression for
those who are compelled to abide by this law which only expresses. the
legislator's understanding of the matter and his aggressive, anti-
humanistic trend.

**8. EVERLASTINGNESS:**

The biggest characteristic distinguishing the Islamic Canon from other
laws is the fact that it is everlasting. Islam alone enjoys this
attribute which gives it the power throughout the ages and it remains
with the generations as a leader, director and pioneer on the road of
virtue, guidance and sound cultural construction.

Islam's everlastingness is due to the following factors:

a. Islam represents the eternal logic of truth and justice in life,
since it expresses the eternal will and wisdom ol Allah in existence.
Allah, the Exalted, says:

"Surely, Allah enjoins the doing oj justice and kindness..." Sura
Al-Nahl (16:90)

"Say: My Lord has enjoined justice..." Sura Al-A'raf (7:29)

"And with truth We revealed it, and with truth did it come..." Sura
AI-Isra' (17 105)

b. Islam expresses the universal legislative torm of the eternal human
rules in man himself, whether physical. psychological, intellectual or
spiritual.

Islam is not the off-spring of particular social circumstances, nor is
it the product of human thinking under certain limits of time, place and
thought. In fact, it is "the legislative formulation of the nature of
human life, and a complete disclosure of its rules and systems .

c. Islam does not impose a rigid form of application and enactment.
Actually, it is open and flexible concerning the methods and ways of
application. which Man may device in every generation to suit his
purpose for the enactment of his obligations, provided he keeps to the
spirit of the Divine Law, and sincerely carries out its decisions.

d. The open doors of 'Ijtehad'\* i.e. legislative and rational
decisions, based on the principles, concerning different matters which
may arise due to changing circumstances, is acceptable toIslam.

The Secular Law avails of no such merits. It revolves within the limits
of the will of its maker and his social conscience, which would
inevitably be reflected through the spirit of legislation. stamping it
with deficiency and incapability. This, of course, would result in laws
far from being in harmony with the natural rules of life, or failing to
meet the requirements for a sound development of a human being.
Actually. there are ample chances for interference in these laws and
turning them into loose verbal forms twistable in accordance with the
desires and the drives of rulers who coin them, change them, or cancel
them whenever these do i1ot suit their purpose. Such people are
described in theQur an as:

"Postponement ( of a sacred month)\* is only an additiot,in unbelief
whereby those who disbelieve are misled, they allow it one year and
forbid it ( another) year, that they may make up the numberof the months
it'hich Allah has made sacred and thus violate what Allah has made
sacred. The evil of their deeds is made fair - seeming to them. Allah
does not guide the unbelieving people." Sura Al-Tawba (9:37)

So. they assume the powers to confirm or change laws, as if there were
no reality for truth, justice and the natural law established in the
world of existence, save that which cares for their own interests:

----------------------------------------------------

\* Ijtihad: The process of arriving at a personal opinion by an Islamic
jurisprudent through inference, induction and., analogy. \* The
idolators would postpone a sacred month in which war was forbidden, when
they wanted to make war, and make up for it by hallowing another
month.

"And if the truth had followed their low desires, surely the heavens
and the earth and all those who are therein would have been perished ."
Sura AI-Mu'mjneen (23:71)

In short, the Secular Law represents only the will of its makers and
expresses only their ideology, desires and interests, away from the
logic of truth andjustice in their true objectivity. Truth, in the eyes
of such laws, is but what is agreeable to the law-makers, and justice,
to them, is but what follows the whims of the law- makers and protects
their authority and interests.


