Islam: The Universal Legislation for Mankind
============================================

From our aforementioned general and all-embracing look at the beings,
including man, the following important facts of this vast universe and
life can be inferred:

• Unity of Origin- Allah, the Exalted.

• Unity of Creation- comprising numerous parts.

• Unity of Order- governing the Universe.

• Unity of Goal- direction towards Allah.

Through this vision of unity and oneness, we come to realize the
necessity of man's submission and connection to this principle, the
principle of the unity of Origin, Creation, Order and Goal. Man has but
to enter the circle embracing the whole existence, and he will be in
harmony with the Divine Religion which forms the Order and the Goal in
the shape of laws which take into consideration all his existence and
diverse activities:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاكَ عَلَىٰ شَرِيعَةٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ فَاتَّبِعْهَا وَلَا
تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[45:18] Then We have made you follow a course in the affair,
therefore follow it, and do not follow the low desires of those who do
not know.***

While discussing universal unity and the need for a natural canon for
man to govern his activities, organize his relations and give shape to
his personal contents in behavior and action, we should make distinction
between a voluntary adherence to that canon, and a compulsory and
material submission to it.

Man is completely free, and has full power but in order to organize his
social life he has to submit to this universal canon based on the nature
of his existence. By accepting and following this Divine Order, man
would be expressing his contents and the possibilities, activities,
innovations, perfection and other symptoms of animation in ways adapted
to his own free will.

In other words, man can formulate his activities, by voluntary practice
of this sound legislative plan and undertake an orderly construction of
the framework of his life by charting its welfare and high objectives,
among other things in the world.

This legislative plan should be a canon which coincides, in its
principles and goals, with man's inborn nature, feelings and needs,
encompassing and organizing them all and providing him with prosperity
and happiness.

The Islamic canon is thus a legislative molding of the laws of life and
human nature. It consequently becomes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا ۚ فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي
فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ
الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[30:30] Then set your face upright for religion in the right state--
the nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no altering
of Allah's creation; that is the right religion, but most people do not
know—***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“شَرَعَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الدِّينِ مَا وَصَّىٰ بِهِ نُوحًا وَالَّذِي
أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ وَمَا وَصَّيْنَا بِهِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ
وَعِيسَىٰ ۖ أَنْ أَقِيمُوا الدِّينَ وَلَا تَتَفَرَّقُوا فِيهِ ۚ كَبُرَ
عَلَى الْمُشْرِكِينَ مَا تَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَيْهِ ۚ اللَّهُ يَجْتَبِي
إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يُنِيبُ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[42:13] He has made plain to you of the religion what He enjoined
upon Nuh and that which We have revealed to you and that which We
enjoined upon Ibrahim and Musa and Isa that keep to obedience and be not
divided therein; hard to the unbelievers is that which you call them to;
Allah chooses for Himself whom He pleases, and guides to Himself him who
turns (to Him), frequently.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَأَنَّ هَٰذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ ۖ وَلَا
تَتَّبِعُوا السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ بِكُمْ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكُمْ
وَصَّاكُمْ بِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ“
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[6:153] And (know) that this is My path, the right one therefore
follow it, and follow not (other) ways, for they will lead you away from
His way; this He has enjoined you with that you may guard (against
evil).***


