Stages of the Existence of Law
==============================

The proof that Islam is the answer for mankind's universal legislation,
and that it is the formula uncovering the law of human nature, is based
on the facts that there are in this human existence certain rules and
regulations which govern and mold it, without which there would be
nothing, except chaos, confusion, futility and corruption.

If we trace the stages of the appearance of law and its role in human
life we realize that like other natural laws it appears in three
existing forms in this world, which are as follows:

1. The Objective Form.

2. The Scientific Form.

3. The Process of Formulating Laws.

The Objective Form
------------------

Human laws have an objective form that governs the mental, psychological
and material being of man. It is a self- subsistent form, as are the
natural material rules which govern the order of the world of matter in
their reality, independence, correlation, arrangement of their results
and efforts, etc. For example, thinking has certain rules which it
follows and has its own laws, rules and goals which control its
movements. Likewise the whole human body composed of diverse parts, has
its own laws, rules, goals and needs, which control its activities.

Similar are the social, economic and political relations which are also
subject to their relevant rules and laws which affect their results.

The Scientific Form
-------------------

This is the rational stage of the laws and facts which control human
life. During this stage science discovers these laws and derives from
them their subjects, as we derive grammatical, physical and astronomical
rules from these very subjects and applications.

The Process of Formulating Laws
-------------------------------

This is the process of the verbal construction and expressing the
meanings of the laws and their aims in words easily understood by man,
so that he may accordingly plan his life and organize his individual and
social conducts and activities.

Thus these three stages of legislation in their true forms are possible
only for the Creator of the existence. Since He is the Creator of man as
well as the laws and regulations and is fully aware of every detail
about their facts and truthfully expresses them. Unlike a human being
whose knowledge and ability is limited in discovering and defining the
natural laws of life. Furthermore, man cannot be regarded sincere and
objective in his dealing with the laws. He falsifies them to suit his
own selfish interests, or in the interests of other groups as the case
may be, and thus he does not define legality in its scientific and
objective forms.

There are numerous examples proving this human frailty. For instance
when man discovered the harms of alcoholic drinks, adultery, usury trade
monopolies and the like, he prohibited none of them in utter disregard
to the proven scientific facts. On the contrary, he resorted to
sophisticated means to conceal the actual truth.

Therefore, leaving the task of judgment and legislation to Allah alone
is the only way of saving man from doom beau. Allah the Creator is the
only One Who knows all the hidden secrets of mankind and life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَلَا يَعْلَمُ مَنْ خَلَقَ وَهُوَ اللَّطِيفُ الْخَبِيرُ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[67:14] Does He not know, Who created? And He is the Knower of the
subtleties, the Aware.***

Allah alone is able to communicate what He wants to by means of the best
possible way understandable to mankind. The way of the prophets and the
divine revelation to them, disclosed in explicit verbal forms that are
clear in meaning and implication. This was actually what had been
preached throughout the course of history by all the Divine Laws and
Messages:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا بِلِسَانِ قَوْمِهِ لِيُبَيِّنَ
لَهُمْ ۖ فَيُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ
وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[14:4] And We did not send any messenger but with the language of his
people, so that he might explain to them clearly; then Allah makes whom
He pleases err and He guides whom He pleases and He is the Mighty, the
Wise.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“الر ۚ كِتَابٌ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ
الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ
الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[14:1] Alif Lam Ra. (This is) a Book which We have revealed to you
that you may bring forth men, by their Lord's permission from utter
darkness into light-- to the way of the Mighty, the Praised One,***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنَ يَهْدِي لِلَّتِي هِيَ أَقْوَمُ وَيُبَشِّرُ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ
أَجْرًا كَبِيرًا “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[17:9] Surely this Quran guides to that which is most upright and
gives good news to the believers who do good that they shall have a
great reward.***

Imam Ja’far Al-Sadiq (AS) drawing our attention to these facts has
rightly remarked:

*"The Qur'an is a covenant of Allah to His creatures. A Muslim will have
to look into His covenant, and read from it fifty verses (at least) a
day.”* [^1]

From this starting point, the Qur'an draws a picture of the nature of
the Divine Law revealed through the Prophets, showing that it is the
existential fact coinciding with the nature of the human -being. It also
discloses to us the gross unfitness of other laws, rules or regulations
(man-made), which vainly try to define life and its order, contrary to
the nature of man and life, or in other words these laws are not
applicable unless life and nature itself is changed. Thus we can safely
conclude that this religion is the Divine decision that suits the nature
and innate disposition of man as well as its multi-sided construction,
as Allah, the Exalted, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَذَٰلِكُمْ ظَنُّكُمُ الَّذِي ظَنَنْتُمْ بِرَبِّكُمْ أَرْدَاكُمْ
فَأَصْبَحْتُمْ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[41:23] And that was your (evil) thought which you entertained about
your Lord that has tumbled you down into perdition, so are you become of
the lost ones.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَاتْلُ مَا أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ كِتَابِ رَبِّكَ ۖ لَا مُبَدِّلَ
لِكَلِمَاتِهِ وَلَنْ تَجِدَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مُلْتَحَدًا “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[18:27] And recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of your
Lord, there is none who can alter His words; and you shall not find any
refuge besides Him.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقًا وَعَدْلًا ۚ لَا مُبَدِّلَ
لِكَلِمَاتِهِ ۚ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[6:115] And the word of your Lord has been accomplished truly and
justly; there is none who can change His words, and He is the Hearing,
the Knowing.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَمْ تُرِيدُونَ أَنْ تَسْأَلُوا رَسُولَكُمْ كَمَا سُئِلَ مُوسَىٰ مِنْ
قَبْلُ ۗ وَمَنْ يَتَبَدَّلِ الْكُفْرَ بِالْإِيمَانِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ
سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[2:108] Rather you wish to put questions to your Messenger, as Musa
was questioned before; and whoever adopts unbelief instead of faith, he
indeed has lost the right direction of the way.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ
وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ ۚ بَلْ أَتَيْنَاهُمْ بِذِكْرِهِمْ فَهُمْ
عَنْ ذِكْرِهِمْ مُعْرِضُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[23:71] And should the truth follow their low desires, surely the
heavens and the earth and all those who are therein would have perished.
Nay! We have brought to them their reminder, but from their reminder
they turn aside.***

The above - mentioned verses of the Qur'an help mankind to perceive the
truth, by clearing the mist of blindness from the eyes, and pushing
aside from the intellect any doubts of illusion and ignorance, which
would have misled man to imagine that he is able to devise laws and
canons according to his wishes and desires. It makes him realize that an
off-hand and extempore law however minutely designed cannot solve his
problems nor organize his diverse activities and individual and social
relations, in harmony with his natural existence.

This is because Secular Laws are not based on rational foundations, nor
have they a truthful reality behind them, except man's imaginations and
illusions.

For example, if we ask the Secular Legislator: Why do you impose a fine
or a year's imprisonment for a certain crime? Is this penalty based on
the basis of a strict balance and calculation such as that the
punishment imposed, is actual to crime, according to the legislative
equation? Did you study its graveness and its effect on the social
reality or its psychological reaction acting as a restraint, and is a
just decision keeping the balance among the parties concerned? On what
grounds did you build your decision, conclusion and penalty for this
particular crime?

Should we put such questions to him? lie would not be able to give us
scientifically satisfactory answers, and we would come to realize that
lie talks nothing but nonsense, makes laws without a true Justice or
reasonable argument, completely unaware that by doing so, lie is
generating an artificial being in the system of life contrary to the
logic of justice and contradicting the very principles of existence.

Such misfit laws, cause negative effects on humanity and upset the
universal balance of truthfulness and justice on whose very basis every
truth in this world has been erected.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“شَهِدَ اللَّهُ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ
وَأُولُو الْعِلْمِ قَائِمًا بِالْقِسْطِ ۚ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[3:18] Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do)
the angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation
with justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَإِنْ تُطِعْ أَكْثَرَ مَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ يُضِلُّوكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ ۚ إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا
يَخْرُصُونَ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[6:116] And if you obey most of those in the earth, they will lead
you astray from Allah's way; they follow but conjecture and they only
lie.***

[^1]: Al-Bavan fi Tafseer Al-Qur'an, page 4


