Dedicated
=========

To you…who spread knowledge and faith on the earth

To you…the leading light who liberated the humanity

To you…O Messenger of Allah (s)

This humble research is presented to your exalted position regarding
your second beloved son, His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) whom you fed the
perfections of your prophethood and bestowed him with your love and
sincerity. And your clear statement in this regard: “Husain is from me
and I am from Husain”, which you gave to him. He became the reviver of
your religion and liberator of your nation. He was martyred in the path
of your aims and eternal values. We present this to you, as none besides
you is worthy of it and none shall ever be worthy of it. Then please
accept this humble presentation and bestow me your pleasure and
acceptance so that it may suffice me on the day I meet my Lord.

وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْهِمْ
فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَاتِ وَإِقَامَ الصَّلوةِ وَإِيتَاءَ الزَّكَوةِ وَكَانُوا
لَنَا عَابِدِينَ

**And We made them Imams who guided (people) by Our command, and We
revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer and the
giving of the alms, and Us (alone) did they serve…*[1]***

 

إِنَّ اللّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم
بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ
وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالإِنجِيلِ
وَالْقُرْآنِ وَمَنْ أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ مِنَ اللّهِ فَاسْتَبْشِرُواْ
بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُم بِهِ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ

**Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property for this, that they shall have the garden; they fight in
Allah’s way, so they slay and are slain; a promise which is binding on
Him in the Taurat and the Injeel and the Quran; and who is more faithful
to his covenant than Allah? Rejoice therefore in the pledge, which you
have made; and that is the mighty achievement.*[2]***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Anbiya 21:73  
 **[2]**Surah Taubah 9:111


