Supplications of Imam Husain (‘a)
=================================

Supplications that have been quoted from His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a)
are full of lessons of training with the aim to make firm the foundation
of faith and belief in Allah, strength, fear and humility for Allah in
the depths of the souls of the people so that they may be restrained
from crossing the limits and are prevented from injustice and
oppression. And the Ahle Bayt (‘a) used to emphasize on this aspect
most…and such supplications are not related from any leader or righteous
Muslims. And these supplications are considered greatest heritage of
intellectual and literary treasure of Islam because they include the
principles of ethics, rules of behavior and manners and in addition to
this, contain the philosophy of divine oneness and signs of just
politics and other things are also included. Here we shall mention some
supplications of the Holy Imam:

1 – Supplication of Imam Husain (‘a) for warding off the enemies
----------------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Imam (‘a) recited this supplication and sought the refuge of
the Almighty from the mischief of the enemies. The supplication is as
follows: “O Allah! O my strength in my difficulties and my Helper in my
problems. Protect me with the eye that never sleeps. And keep in Your
refuge where no hand can reach. And have mercy on me through Your power
so that I do not die; as You are my helper. O Allah, You are the
Greatest, the Highest and more powerful than whatever I fear. O Allah,
by Your power I keep the necks of my enemies away from me and from his
mischief I seek refuge. Indeed You are powerful over everything.”

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (‘a) supplicated in the same words when the tyrant
Mansur ordered his arrest to harass him. The Almighty Allah saved him
from his evil and bestowed him relief. He was asked about its
explanation and he replied that it was a supplication of his
great-grandfather that he had recited.

2- Supplication of Imam Husain (‘a) for rain
--------------------------------------------

When Imam Husain (‘a) used to come out to pray for rain he used to say:
“O Allah, grant us such rain that it shall be widespread and beneficial.
It should be for all and it should be profitable and it should not carry
any harm so that those who live in towns and deserted areas should all
benefit and through this there should be increase in our sustenance and
thankfulness. O Allah make it the day of faith and the day of
forgiveness as Your forgiveness is not stopped by anything. O Allah,
send blessings to our land and through it give harvest of olives and
pastures.”**[1]**

3 – Supplication of Imam Husain (‘a) on the Day of Arafah
---------------------------------------------------------

The supplication of Imam Husain (‘a) on the Day of Arafah is one of the
most significant supplications of Ahle Bayt (‘a). It contains most the
divine graces and His great bounties. This blessed supplication has been
narrated by Bashar and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Uyunul Akhbar* 2/303

Bashir Asadi and he says: We were with Imam Husain (‘a) in Arafah in the
evening. His Eminence came out with utmost humility and respect and
accompanied with some people of Ahle Bayt (‘a), his son and servants
went to the left side of the mountain and stood facing the House of
Allah (Ka’ba). Then he raised up his hands before his face (to pray) and
like a beggar asking for food he recited:

“Praise belongs to God, whose decree none may avert, and whose gift none
may prevent. No fashioner’s fashioning is like His fashioning, and He is
the Generous, the All-embracing. He brought forth the varieties of
unprecedented creatures and perfected through His wisdom all He had
fashioned. Hidden not from Him are harbingers, nor lost with Him are
deposits. He repays every fashioner, feathers the nest of all who are
content and has mercy upon all who humble themselves. He sends down
benefits and the all-encompassing Book in radiant light. He hears
supplications, averts afflictions, raises up in degrees, and knocks down
tyrants. For there is no god other than He, nothing is equal to Him,
“Like Him there is naught, and He is the Hearing, the Seeing”, the
subtle, the Aware, and “He is powerful over all things”.

O God, I make You my quest and bear witness to Your Lordship,
acknowledging that You are my Lord and to You is my return. You
originated me by Your blessing before I was a thing remembered. You
created me from dust, then gave me a place in the loins (of my fathers),
secure from the uncertainty of Fate and the vagaries of the ages and the
years. I remained a traveler from loin to womb in a time immemorial of
past days and bygone centuries. In Your tenderness, bounty and goodness
toward me You didst not send me out into the empire of the leaders of
disbelief, those who broke Your covenant and cried lies to Your
messengers. Rather, You sent me out to that guidance which had been
foreordained for me, the way, which You made easy for me and in which
You nurtured me. And before that You were kind to me through Your
gracious fashioning and abundant blessings. You originated my creation
from a sperm-drop spilled and made me to dwell in a threefold gloom
among flesh, blood and skin. You gave me not to witness my creation, nor
didst You entrust me with anything of my own affair.**[1]**

Then thou sent me out into the world for the guidance that had been
ordained for me, complete and unimpaired. You watched over me in the
cradle as an infant boy, provided me with food, wholesome milk, and
turned the hearts of the nursemaids toward me. You entrusted my
upbringing to compassionate mothers, guarded me from the calamities
brought by the jinn and kept me secure from excess and lack. High are
You, O Merciful! O Compassionate! Then when I began to utter speech You
completed for me Your abundant blessings. You nurtured me more and more
each year until, when my nature was perfected and my strength balanced,
You made Your argument incumbent upon me by inspiring me with knowledge
of You, awing me with the marvels of Your wisdom, awakening me to the
wonders of Your  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Or did not expose me by my creation.

creation which You had multiplied in Your Heaven and Your earth, and
instructing me in Your thanks and remembrance. You made incumbent upon
me Your obedience and worship, made me to understand what Your
messengers had brought and made easy for me the acceptance of Your good
pleasure. You were gracious to me in all of this, through Your succor
and kindness. Then, since You created me from the best soil, You were
not satisfied, my God, that I should have one blessing without another.
You provided me with varieties of sustenance and kinds of garments and
Your tremendous, most tremendous, graciousness to me and Your eternal
goodness toward me. And finally, when You had completed for me every
blessing and turned away from me all misfortunes, You were not prevented
by my ignorance and audacity from guiding me toward that which would
bring me nigh to You or from giving me success in that which would bring
me close to You. For if I prayed to You, You answered, if I asked of
You, You gave, if I obeyed You, You showed Your gratitude, and if I
thanked You, You gave me more.**[1]**

All of that was to perfect Your blessings upon me and Your goodness
toward me. So glory be to You; Glory be to You, who are Producer and
Reproducer, Laudable, Glorious. Holy are Your Names and tremendous Your
bounties. So which of Your blessings, my God, can I enumerate by
counting and mentioning? For which of Your gifts am I able to give
thanks? Since they, O Lord, are more than reckoners can count or those
who entrust to memory can attain by knowledge. But the affliction and
hardship, O God, that You turned and averted from me is more than the
health and happiness that came to me. And I witness, my God, by the
truth of my faith, the knotted resolutions of my certainty, my pure and
unadulterated profession of Unity, the hidden inwardness of my
consciousness, the places to which the streams of light of my eyes are
attached, the lines on my forehead’s surface, the openings for my
breath’s channels, the parts of my nose’s soft point, the paths of my
ears’ canals, what my lips close upon and compress, the movements of my
tongue in speaking, the joint at the back of my mouth and jaw, the
sockets of my molar teeth, the place where I swallow my food and drink,
that which bears my brain, the hollow passages of my neck’s fibers, that
which is contained in my breast’s cavity, the carriers of my aorta, the
places where my heart’s curtain is attached, the small pieces of flesh
around my liver, that which the ribs of my sides encompass, the sockets
of my joints, the contraction of my members, the tips of my fingers, my
flesh, my blood, my hair, my skin, my nerves, my windpipe, my bones, my
brain, my veins, and all of my members, what was knitted upon them in
the days when I was a suckling baby, what the earth has taken away from
me, my sleep, my waking, my being still, and the movements of my bowing
and prostrating, that had I taken pains and had I striven for the
duration of the epochs and ages were my life to be extended through them
to deliver thanks for one of Your blessings, I would not have been able
to do so, except by Your grace,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** His Eminence (a.s.) in accordance with the command of Allah has
indicated towards the 7<sup>th</sup> verse of Surah Ibrahim which says:
If you are grateful, I would certainly give to you more…

which alone makes incumbent upon me never-ending and ever renewed
gratitude to You, and fresh and ever present praise. Indeed, and were I
and the reckoners among Your creatures ever so eager to calculate the
extent of Your bestowal of blessings, whether past or approaching, we
would fail to encompass it through numbers or to calculate its
boundaries. Never How could it ever be done! For You announce in Your
eloquent Book and truthful Tiding, “And if you count God’s blessing, you
will never number it”.**[1]** Your Book, O God, Your Message, has spoken
the truth! And Your prophets and messengers delivered Your revelation
that You had sent down upon them and the religion that You had
promulgated for them and through them. And I witness, my God, by my
effort, my diligence, and the extent of my obedience and my capacity,
and I say as a believer possessing certainty, “Praise belongs to God,
who has not taken to Him a son” that He might have an heir, “and who has
not any associate in His dominion” who might oppose Him in what He
creates, “nor any protector out of humbleness” who would aid Him in what
He fashions. So glory be to Him, glory be to Him! “Why, were there gods
in earth and heaven other than God, they would surely go to ruin” and be
rent. Glory be to God, the Unique, the One, “the Everlasting Refuge” who
“has not begotten, nor has He been begotten, and equal to Him there is
none”. Praise belongs to God, praise equal to the praise of the angels
stationed near to Him and the prophets sent by Him. And God bless His
elect, Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets, and his virtuous, pure and
sincere household, and give them peace.

Then he began to supplicate. He occupied himself with prayer as tears
ran from his blessed eyes. Then he said:

O God, cause me to fear You as if I were seeing You, give me felicity
through piety toward You, make me not wretched by disobedience toward
You, choose the best for me by Your decree (qadha’) and bless me by Your
determination (qadar), that I may love not the hastening of what You
have delayed, nor the delaying of what You have hastened. O God, appoint
for me sufficiency in my soul, certainty in my heart, sincerity in my
action, light in my eyes, and insight in my religion. Give me enjoyment
of my bodily members, make my hearing and my seeing my two inheritors,
help me against him who wrongs me, show me in him my revenge and my
desires, and console thereby my eyes. O God, remove my affliction, veil
my defects, forgive my offence, drive away my Satan, dissolve my debt,
and give me, my God, the highest degree in the world to come and in this
world. O God, to You belongs the praise, just as You created me and made
me to hear and to see; and to You belongs the praise, just as You
created me and made me a creature unimpaired as a mercy to me, while You
had no need of my creation. My Lord, since You created me and then made
straight my nature; my Lord, since You caused me to grow and made good
my shape; my Lord, since You didst good to me and gave me well-being in
my soul; my Lord, since You preserved me and gave me success; my Lord,
since You blessed me and then guided me; my Lord, since  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Ibrahim 14:34

You chose me and gave me of every good; my Lord, since You gave me to
eat and drink; my Lord, since You enriched me and contented me; my Lord,
since You aided me and exalted me; my Lord, since You clothed me with
Your pure covering and smoothed the way for me by Your sufficient
fashioning: Bless Muhammad and the household of Muhammad, aid me against
the misfortunes of time and the calamities of nights and days, deliver
me from the terrors of this world and the torments of the world to come
and spare me from the evil of that which the evildoers do in the earth.

O God, as for what I fear, spare me from it, and as for what I seek to
avoid, guard me against it. in my soul and my religion watch over me, in
my traveling protect me, in my family and my property appoint for me a
successor, in what You have provided for me bless me, in my soul humble
me, in the eyes of men magnify me, from the evil of jinn and men
preserve me, for my sins disgrace me not, for my inward secrets shame me
not, for my action try me not, of Your blessings deprive me not and to
other than You entrust me not. My God, to whom wouldst You entrust me?
To a relative? He would cut me off. Or to a stranger? He would look at
me with displeasure. Or to those who act toward me with arrogance? But
You are my Lord and the sovereign over my affair. I would complain to
You of my exile and the remoteness of my abode, and that he whom You
have made sovereign over me despises me. My God, so cause not Your wrath
to alight upon me. If You become not wrathful with me I will have no
care, glory be to You But Your protection is more embracing. So I ask
You, O Lord, by the Light of Your Face by which the earth and the
heavens are illuminated, shadows are removed, and the affairs of the
ancients and the later folks are set aright, not to cause me to die when
Your wrath is upon me, nor to send down upon me Your anger. The pleasure
is Yours The pleasure is Yours, to be satisfied with me before that.
There is no god but You, Lord of the Holy Land, the Sacred Monument, and
the Ancient House, upon which You caused blessing to descend and which
You made a sanctuary for mankind. O He who pardons the greatest sins by
His clemency! O He who lavishes blessings by His bounty! O He who gives
abundance by His generosity! O Sustenance to me in my adversity! O
Companion to me in my solitude! O Aid to me in my affliction! O
Benefactor to me in my blessing! O my God and God of my fathers,
Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob! Lord of Gabriel, Michael and Israfil!
Lord of Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets, and his household, the
chosen ones! Revealer of the Torah, the Gospel, the Psalms and the
Criterion, and Sender down of Kaf Ha’ Ya’ Ayn Sad, Ta’ Ha’, Ya’ Sin, and
the Wise Quran! You are my cave (of refuge) when the roads for all their
amplitude constrict me and the land for all its breadth is strait for
me. If not for Your mercy, I would have been among the perishing, and
You annul my slip. If not for Your covering me, I would have been among
the disgraced, and You confirm me with help against my enemies. And if
not for Your helping me, I would have been among those overcome. O He
who appropriated loftiness and exaltation to Himself, so His friends
(awliya’) are mighty through His might! O He before whom kings place the
yoke of abasement

around their necks, for they fear His overwhelming power! “He knows the
treachery of the eyes and what the breasts conceal” and the unseen
brought by time and fate. O He about whom none knows how He is but He! O
He about whom none knows what He is but He! O He whom none knows but
He!**[1]** O He who squeezed the earth onto the water and held back the
air with the sky! O He to whom belong the noblest Names! O He who
possesses kindness, which will never be cut off! O He who assigned the
cavalcade to Joseph in the barren land, brought him out of the well and
made him a king after slavery! O He who returned him to Jacob after “his
eyes were whitened with sorrow that he was suppressing”. O He who
removed affliction and tribulation from Ayyub and restrained Ibrahim’s
hands from the sacrifice of his son after he had reached old age and his
life had passed by! O He who answered the prayer of Zakaria and bestowed
upon him John, not leaving him childless and alone! O He who brought
Yunus out from the stomach of the fish! O He who parted the sea for the
Children of Israel, then saved them and drowned Firon and his hosts! O
He who sends winds heralding His mercy! O He who does not hurry (to act)
against those of His creatures who disobey Him! O He who rescued the
sorcerers after (their) long denial! They had early benefited from His
blessing, eating His provision and worshipping other than Him; they had
opposed, denied and cried lies to His messengers. O God! O God! O
Beginner, O Creator with no compeer! O Everlasting who has no end! O
Living when nothing was alive! O Quickener of the dead! O “He Who is
aware of the deserts of every soul”! O He toward whom my gratitude was
little, yet He deprived me not! My transgression was great, yet He
disgraced me not! He saw me committing acts of disobedience, yet he made
me not notorious! O He who watched over me in childhood! O He who
provided for me in my adulthood! O He whose favors toward me cannot be
reckoned and whose blessings cannot be repaid! O He who has confronted
me with the good and the fair, and I have confronted Him with evil and
disobedience in return! O He who led me to faith before I had come to
know gratitude for His gracious bestowal O He upon whom I called when I
was sick and He healed me, when naked and He clothed me, when hungry and
He satisfied me, when thirsty and He gave me to drink, when abased and
He exalted me, when ignorant and He gave me knowledge, when alone and He
increased my number, when away and He returned me, when empty-handed and
He enriched me, when in need of help and He helped me, and when rich and
He took not from me. I refrained from (calling upon You in) all of that
and You caused me to begin (to call). Yours are the praise and the
gratitude! O He who overlooked my slip, relieved my distress, heard my
prayer, covered my defects, forgave my sins, caused me to reach my
desire, and helped me against my enemy! If I were to count Your
blessings, favors and generous acts of kindness I would not be able to
reckon them. O my Protector! You are He who was gracious, You are He who
blessed, You are He who worked good, You are He who was kind, You are He
who was bounteous, You are He who perfected, You are He who provided,
You are He who  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** O one except Whom none know Him

gave success, You are He who bestowed, You are He who enriched, You are
He who contented, You are He who sheltered, You are He who sufficed, You
are He who guided, You are He who preserved (from sin), You are He who
covered (my sins), You are He who forgave, You are He who overlooked,
You are He who established (in the earth), You are He who exalted, You
are He who aided, You are He who supported, You are He who confirmed,
You are He who helped, You are He who healed, You are He who gave
well-being, You are He who honored - blessed are You and high exalted!
So Yours is the praise everlastingly, and Yours is gratitude enduringly
and forever! Then I, my God, confess my sins, so forgive me for them. I
am he who did evil, I am he who made mistakes, I am he who purposed (to
sin), I am he who was ignorant, I am he who was heedless, I am he who
was negligent, I am he who relied (upon other than You), I am he who
premeditated, I am he who promised, I am he who went back on his word, I
am he who confessed (my sins) and I am he who acknowledged Your
blessings upon me and with me and then returned to my sins. So forgive
me for them, O He who is not harmed by the sins of His servants nor
needs He their obedience. He gives success through His aid and His mercy
to whomsoever of them works righteousness. So praise belongs to You, My
God and My Lord!

My God, You commanded me and I disobeyed and You forbade me and I
committed what You had forbidden. I became such that I neither possessed
any of guiltlessness that I might ask forgiveness nor any power that I
might be helped. Then by what means shall I turn toward You, O my
Protector!? What, by my ears? Or my eyes? Or my tongue? Or my hand? Or
my leg? Are not all of them Your blessings given to me? And with all of
them I disobey You, O my Protector! Yours is the argument and the means
against me. O He who veiled me (my sins) from fathers and mothers lest
they drive me away, from relatives and brothers lest they rebuke me, and
from kings lest they punish me! If they had seen, O my Protector, what
You have seen from me, they would not have given me respite, they would
have abandoned me and cut me off. So here I am, O my God, before You O
Lord, humbled, abased, constrained, despised, neither possessing
guiltlessness that I might ask forgiveness nor possessing power that I
might be helped. There is no argument with which I might argue, nor can
I say I committed not (sins) and worked not evil. And denial, were I to
deny-my Protector-could hardly profit me. How could it ever do that ?
For all of my members are witness against me for what I have done. And I
acted with certainty and without any doubt that You wilt ask me about
great affairs, and that You are the equitable Judge who does no wrong.
Your justice is deadly for me and I flee from Your every just act. If
thou chastise me, O my God, it is for my sins after Your argument
against me; and if You pardon me, it is by Your clemency, generosity and
kindness. “There is no god but You, glory be to You! Truly I am one of
the wrong-doers”. There is no god but You, glory be to You! Truly I am
one of those who pray forgiveness. There is no god but You, glory be to
You I Truly I am one of those who profess Your Unity. There is no god
but You, glory be to You! Truly I am one of the fearful. There is no god
but You, glory

be to You I Truly I am one of those who are afraid. There is no god but
You, glory be to You! Truly I am one of the hopeful. There is no god but
You, glory be to You! Truly I am one of those who yearn. There is no god
but You, glory be to You! Truly I am one of those who say “There is no
god but You”. There is no god but You, glory be to You! Truly I am one
of the petitioners. There is no god but You, glory be to You! Truly I am
one of the glorifiers. There is no god but You, glory be to You! Truly I
am one of those who magnify. There is no god but You, glory be to You,
my Lord, and the Lord of my fathers, the ancients! My God, this is my
praise of You exalting Your majesty, my sincerity in remembering You by
professing Your Unity, and my acknowledgment of Your bounties by
enumeration, even though I acknowledge that I cannot reckon them for
their multitude, their abundance, their manifestness and their existence
from ancient times until a present in which You have never ceased to
care for me through them from when You created me and brought me into
existence in the beginning of (my) life, by enriching from poverty,
relieving affliction, bringing ease, removing hardship, dispelling
distress, and (giving me) well-being in body and soundness in religion.
Were all the world’s inhabitants, both the ancients and the later folk,
to assist me in attempting to mention Your blessing, I would not be
able, nor would they, to do so. Holy are You and high exalted, a
generous, mighty, merciful Lord. Your bounties cannot be reckoned, nor
Your praise accomplished, nor Your blessings repaid. Bless Muhammad and
the household of Muhammad, complete Your blessings upon us and aid us in
Your obedience. Glory be to You! There is no god but You. O God, truly
You hear the destitute, remove the evil, succor the afflicted, heal the
sick, enrich the poor, mend the broken, have mercy upon the young and
help the old. There is no Support other than You and none powerful over
You. And You are the Sublime, the Great. O Freer of the prisoner in
irons! O Provider of the infant child O Protection of the frightened
refugee! O He who has no associate and no assistant! Bless Muhammad and
the household of Muhammad, and give me this evening the best of what You
have given to and bestowed upon any of Your servants, whether a blessing
You assign, a bounty You renew, a trial You avert, an affliction You
remove, a prayer You hear, a good deed You accept or an evil deed You
overlook. Truly You are gracious, Aware of what You wilt, and Powerful
over all things!

O God, truly You are the nearest of those who are called, the swiftest
of those who answer, the most generous of those who pardon, the most
openhanded of those who give and the most hearing of those who are asked
of. O Merciful and Compassionate in this world and the next! Like You
none is asked of; and other than You none is hoped for. I prayed to You
and You answered me, I asked of You and You gave to me, I set You as my
quest and You had mercy upon me, I depended upon You and You delivered
me, I took refuge with You and You sufficed me, O God, so bless
Muhammad, Your servant, messenger and prophet, and his good and pure
household, all of them. And complete Your blessings upon us, gladden us
with Your gift and inscribe us as those who thank You and

remember Your bounties. Amen, amen, O Lord of all beings! O God, O He
who owned and then was all-powerful, was all-powerful and then
subjected, was disobeyed and then veiled (the sin of disobedience), and
was prayed forgiveness and then forgave. O Goal of yearning seekers and
utmost Wish of the hopeful! O He who “encompasses everything in
knowledge” and embraces those who seek pardon in tenderness, mercy and
clemency!

O God, truly we turn towards You this evening, which You honored and
glorified through Muhammad, Your prophet and messenger, the elect of
Your creation, the faithful guardian of Your-revelation which bears good
tidings and warning and which is the light- giving lamp which You gave
to those who surrender (al-muslimin) and appointed as a mercy to the
world’s inhabitants. O God, so bless Muhammad and the household of
Muhammad, just as Muhammad is worthy of that from You, O Sublime! So
bless him and his elect, good and pure household, all of them, and
encompass us in Your pardon, for to You cry voices in diverse languages.
So appoint for us a share this evening, O God, of every good which You
divide among Your servants, every light by which You guide, every mercy
which You spread, every blessing which You send down, every well-being
with which You cloth and every provision which You outspread. O Most
merciful of the merciful! O God, transform us now into men successful,
triumphant, pious, and prosperous. Set us not among those who despair,
empty us not of Your mercy, deprive us not of that bounty of Yours for
which we hope, and set us not among those deprived of Your mercy, nor
those who despair of the bounty of Your gift for which we hope. Reject
us not with the disappointed, nor those driven from Your door. O Most
Magnanimous of the most magnanimous! O Most Generous of the most
generous! Toward You we have turned having sure faith, repairing to and
bound for Your Sacred House. So help is with our holy rites, perfect for
us our pilgrimage, pardon us, and give us well-being, for we have
extended toward You our hands and they are branded with the abasement of
confession. O God, so give us this evening what we have asked of You and
suffice us in that in which we have prayed You to suffice us, for there
is none to suffice us apart from You and we have no lord other than You.
Put into effect concerning us is Your decision, encompassing us is Your
knowledge and just for us is Your decree. Decree for us the good and
place us among the people of the good!

O God make incumbent upon us through Your magnanimity the mightiest
wage, the most generous treasure and the lastingness of ease. Forgive us
our sins, all of them, destroy us not with those who perish, and turn
not Your tenderness and mercy away from us, O Most Merciful of the
merciful! O God, place us in this hour among those who ask of You and to
whom You give, who thank You and whom You increase, who turn to You in
repentance and whom You accept and who renounce all of their sins before
You and whom You forgive, O Lord of majesty and splendor! O God, purify
us, show us the right way and accept our entreaty. O Best of those from
whom is asked! And O Most Merciful of those whose mercy is sought! O He
from whom is not hidden the eyelids’ winking, the

eyes’ glancing, that which rests in the concealed, and that which is
enfolded in hearts’ hidden secrets I What, has not all of that been
reckoned in Your knowledge and embraced by Your clemency? Glory be to
You and high indeed are You exalted above what the evil-doers say! The
seven heavens and the earths and all that is therein praise You, and
there is not a thing but hymns Your praise. So Yours is the praise, the
glory and the exaltation of majesty, O Lord of majesty and splendor, of
bounty and blessing and of great favor! And You are the Magnanimous, the
Generous, the Tender, the Compassionate.

O God, give me amply of Your lawful provision, bestow upon me well-being
in my body and my religion, make me safe from fear and deliver me from
the Fire. O God, devise not against me, lead me not on step by step,
trick me not and avert from me the evil of the ungodly among jinn and
men.

Then he lifted his head and eyes toward Heaven. Tears were flowing from
his blessed eyes as if they were two water-skis, and he said in a loud
voice:

O Most Hearing of those who hear! O Most Seeing of those who behold! O
Swiftest of reckoners! O Most Merciful of the merciful! Bless Muhammad
and the household of Muhammad, the chiefs, the fortunate. And, I ask of
You, O God, my need. If You grant it to me, what You hold back from me
will cause me no harm; and if You hold it back from me, what You grant
me will not profit me. I ask You to deliver me from the Fire. There is
no god but You alone, You have no associate. Yours is the dominion, and
Yours is the praise, and You are powerful over everything. O my Lord! O
my Lord!

Then he said “O my Lord” over and over.

Those who had been gathered around him, who had listened to any of his
prayer and who had limited themselves to saying “amen” raised their
voices in weeping. They stayed in his company until the sun went down,
and then all of them loaded their mounts and set out in the direction of
the Sacred Monument.

Narrators say that the Imam continued his supplication till sunset and
after that moved towards Muzdalifah and the people also accompanied
him.**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majlisi, *Zaad al-Maad* 248-268, Kafa’mi 339-350, *Baladul
Amin*, Eloquence of Imam Husain (a.s.), Sayyid Ibne Tawus, *Iqbal*
