Some Sayings of Imam Husain (‘a)
================================

The Almighty Allah had bestowed Imam Husain (‘a) with beautiful
eloquence and spontaneity of speech, as if he issued a flood of maxims,
advices and exhortations for his tongue. Some of his shorter sayings are
mentioned below:

1 – His Eminence (‘a) said: “The wise does not speak to one whom he
fears he shall be belied and he does not ask anyone of anything if he
fears he shall not give. And he does not repose hope on one whom he does
not trust.”**[1]**

2 – His Eminence told his son Ali ibn al-Husain: “O son! Beware of
oppressing the one who has none to repel your attack except Allah.”
**[2]**

3 – His Eminence said, “Allah does not take power from anyone but He
takes away from him His obedience. And He does not take anyone’s
strength but that He ends his responsibility (duty).” **[3]**

4 – His Eminence said, “Beware of that for which you have to regret
later. Because the believer neither commits a mistake nor seeks
forgiveness and the hypocrite commits a mistake everyday and seeks
forgiveness…**[4]**

5 – His Eminence said, “Leave that which puts you to doubt towards that
which does not put you to doubt because lying creates doubt and
truthfulness accords comfort.” **[5]**

6 – His Eminence said: “O Allah, do not test me by bounties and do not
punish me with difficulties.”**[6]**

7 – His Eminence said, “If one does not have these five things there is
no good in him: Intellect, religion, etiquette, shame and good
manners.”**[7]**

8 – His Eminence said, “The miser is the one who is miserly in
saluting…”**[8]**

9 – His Eminence said, “If a person hopes for something in Allah’s
disobedience, it won’t last for long and what he fears will soon come to
him (punishment).**[9]**

10 – His Eminence said, “From the signs of acceptance are company of
intelligent people and among the signs of ignorance is debating with
people other than the infidels. And of the signs of the learned is to
criticize is own statements and its knowledge of arts and
sciences.”**[10]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 55  
 **[2]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 46  
 **[3]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 46  
 **[4]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 46  
 **[5]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf*, Vol. 3/143  
 **[6]** *Kashful Ghumma*, 2/31  
 **[7]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 55  
 **[8]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 55  
 **[9]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 246-248  
 **[10]** Ibid

11 – His Eminence said, “The believer considers Allah as his refuge and
their statements as a mirror for Himself. Thus sometimes He looks at the
qualities of believers and sometimes He pays attention to the arrogant
ones. On the basis of this in fine things and in himself in recognition
and about his consciousness and about his purity shall be utmost
tranquility.”**[1]**

12 – His Eminence said, “Whenever you hear that a person is speaking ill
of others then you shall try that he does not recognize you.”**[2]**

13 – His Eminence told a person who backbited in his presence: “O man!
Do not resort to backbiting as it is the diet of the dogs of
Hell…”**[3]**

14 – A person began to speak to His Eminence and said: If one does good
to an undeserving person it is wasted. His Eminence said, “It is not so.
Because goodness is like rain that reaches both the good and the bad
people…”**[4]**

15 – His Eminence said, “He is commanded to speak about these bounties
of religion that Allah had
given.”<sup>(</sup>**[5]**<sup>)\\ (</sup>**[6]**<sup>)</sup>

16 – His Eminence said, “Death with honor is better than a life of
degradation.”**[7]**

17 – His Eminence said, “Weeping for the fear of Allah is salvation from
the fire (of Hell)…”**[8]**

18 – His Eminence said, “One who remains worried and all his tricks
fail, then his key is caution (softness).”**[9]**

19 – His Eminence said, “One who accepts your goodness has helped you in
goodness.”**[10]**

20 – His Eminence said, “On the Day of Judgment a caller will announce:
O people! Anyone who has any arrears upon Allah may rise up. Then except
for the righteous ones, no one would arise…”**[11]**

21 – His Eminence said, “No deed of the nation is such that it is not
presented to Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime, every morning.”**[12]**

Here we conclude our discussion about some of the important sayings that
are rich  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 246-248  
 **[2]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 55  
 **[3]** *Bihar*, 78/117, *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 245  
 **[4]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 245  
 **[5]** Surah Zuhaa 93:11  
 **[6]** *Tohafful Uqool*, Pg. 246  
 **[7]** *Bihar* 44/192  
 **[8]** *Nuzhatul Nazir Fi Tanbihatul Khatir*, *Jame al-Akhbar*, Pg.
97, *Mustadrak* al-Wasail 11/245  
 **[9]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 4/323, *A’laamud Deen*, Pg. 298, *Biharul
Anwar* 78/128  
 **[10]** *Bihar* 78/127  
 **[11]** *Bihar* 93/347  
 **[12]** *Bihar* 93/347

in wisdom, morals and good manners that are related from His Eminence.
For the sake of conciseness and to avoid verbosity we do not wish to
prolong the discussion about the captioned sayings.

Among the Poems
---------------

Historical sources and Arab literature has mentioned many poetic
compositions of His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a). In some of those
compositions, His Eminence has quoted other poets to emphasize his
points, even though in our view some of them may be forgeries. A few
poems are quoted below:

1 – A Bedouin arrived at the Mosque of the Holy Prophet (s) and
approached His Eminence, Husain Ibn Ali (‘a) and stood before him while
he was surrounded by some people. Then he asked about him and was
informed that it was Husain bin Ali. He said, “My aim is also same; they
speak and they have eloquence in their speech and I have passed through
deserts, mountains and caves and have come here to speak to him and ask
him about the intricacies of Arabic.” One of the Imam’s companions said,
“If you have come for this you may pose your questions to this young
man,” pointing towards His Eminence, Husain. He went towards His
Eminence and stopped near him and saluted him. Imam (‘a) replied to his
salutation and asked him what he wanted. He replied, “I have come to you
from Harqal, Ja’lal, Ainam and Hamham.”**[1]**

The Imam smiled and said, “Except for the experts none knows about the
meanings of the words you have spoken.”

The Bedouin said, “I will tell more of these words, can you reply
according to what they say?”

His Eminence, Husain (‘a) said, “Say what you like, I would give you the
appropriate reply.”

He said, “I am a Bedouin and most of my speech consists of poetic
couplets that are part of Arab collections.”

His Eminence said, “You say whatever you like and I would reply you. The
Bedouin began to recite the couplets:

**“My heart is attracted towards vain pastimes while the time of my
youth is over.**

**While during the time of youth it (my heart) used to be extremely
joyful.**

**There were kids, pleasures and what a joyful time it was.**

**And when old age has grayed the edges of my head**

**And compelled me to use hair dye**

**I have refrained myself from vain pastimes and given up all such
things.**

**There is surprise for the man who has seen both the periods.**

**If man who is intelligent in the true sense uses his intellect in that
matter.**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Words of tribal dialects

**He would gain a lesson that would be useful for him in life.”**

Imam Husain (‘a) recited the following couplets extempore:

**“All the signs, whose effects have been destroyed, do not aggrieve
me.**

**That is like the dust and sand is scattered by the wind to all
sides.**

**Winds that whistle, and cold winds that pile clothes upon clothes (to
protect it).**

**And a cloud that moves towards the sky and comes near.**

**A black cloud that comes up, and through it blessings rain.**

**The cloud has such a lightning that does not have any deficiency.**

**The rain of that thunder is capable of flooding when it rains.**

**After that it is exhausted and no sign remains of its owner.”**

When the Bedouin heard these words he was perplexed and said, “I have
never heard a more eloquent and beautiful composition.”

Imam Husain (‘a) told him, “O Bedouin!”

**“The youth whom God has purified from the two grandfathers and exalted
him.**

**And the brilliant Sun has dressed him with its light.**

**And I have made my couplet strong and made its rhymes firm.”**

When the Bedouin heard these words of Imam Husain (‘a) he exclaimed
aloud, “May Allah bless you! People have not recognized you. May Allah
bestow you a good reward.” Then he went away from there.**[1]**

This example shows the great literary accomplishments of the Holy Imam
but there is some doubt in some portions, like it seems highly
improbable for a Bedouin to have come all the way only to ask those
things from the Holy Imam.

2 – The following couplets overflow with wisdom are also attributed to
the Holy Imam (‘a):

**“When the world causes you trouble, do not pay any attention to the
people. And except for the Almighty Allah, Who is the distributor of
sustenance, do not ask anyone for anything.**

**If you remain alive and roam from the east to the west.**

**You would not find anyone who could make you happy or
unfortunate.”[2]**

These couplets emphasize the quality of contentment and show that it is
very important not to repose faith on others. And it also warns people
not to ask anyone for anything except from Allah, Who is having control
of all affairs.

3 – His Eminence (‘a) said:

**“Become needless of the creatures through the Creator. You will
become**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Matalib al-So-ool fi Manaqib ar-Rasool*, Pg. 28-29  
 **[2]** *Kashful Ghumma* 2/34-35, *Al-Fusul al-Muhimma*, Pg. 180

**needless of the liars and the truthful.**

**And seek your sustenance from the Beneficent Lord as except for Allah
no one bestows sustenance.**

**One who thinks that people make him needless, has no reliance on
God.**

**Or if he thinks that he has obtained wealth, his step would slip from
the heights.”[1]**

In these couplets, there is invitation to take refuge in Allah, Who is
the Creator of the world and the bestower of life; and to seek
needlessness from other than Allah, because one who takes refuge from
anyone other than Him, his pursuit would fail and he would become
deviated from truth.

4 – Imam Husain (‘a) went to visit the graves of martyrs in the Baqi
cemetery of Medina and recited the following lines of poetry:

**“I call out to the inmates of the grave and they did not reply. Then
dust of their graves replied in their lieu.**

**It said, “Do you know what I have done with my inmates? I have
punctured their flesh and rent their garments.**

**And filled their eyes with dust even though they used to become
restless with a mote in the eye.**

**As for the bones I have punctured till their joints and seams
separated.**

**We separated them from each other and left them in this condition so
that they may continue to rot for ages.”[2]**

These couplets are full of invitation to gain lesson from the condition
of man and that when he is buried in the dust he is soon scattered and
his form and beauty is destroyed. Then in a short time he turns into
worthless dust.

5 – Aashi has attributed these couplets to Imam Husain (‘a):

**“Sorrow and problems increase in direct proportion to wealth.**

**O you who blackens the life. I have recognized you. O one who is the
destroyer and annihilator of all houses.**

**It is not possible for a pious to achieve piety when he finds it
difficult to maintain the family.”[3]**

In these couplets, the Holy Imam (‘a) has spoken of some special points
about the creation of life which is that as much man is involved in
worldly mater as much sorrow he shall have and he would have exerted
more for the affairs of his life.

In the same way, the Holy Imam (‘a) has said regarding someone that life
is having some attachment to piety, because he does not move towards it
while responsibility  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 231  
 **[2]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/208, *Biography of Imam Husain
(a.s.),* Pg. 233  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.)*, Pg. 232

of the family was heavy on him, as his involvement in these things stop
him from piety of the world.

6 – Irbili has narrated that the Imam (‘a) recited the following
couplets describing the defects of oppression and injustice:

**“Those whom I loved have gone away and I remain among those I do not
like.**

**I find myself with one who denounced me on my back while I do not say
anything against him.**

**As much as they can they try for my destruction although I try my best
for their well-being.**

**The evil trait person defames me continuously while I do not say the
same for him.**

**He sees the dirty flies around me that they are humming and he does
not chase them away from me.**

**Whenever the malice of his heart is cured, he tries to fan the flames
of hatred.**

**Does he not benefit from his intellect and does he not seek help of
reason?**

**Does he not see that how bad his deeds are and how due to this evil is
turning towards him?**

**O my Lord! In front of those I fear, he is sufficient and the
oppression is sufficient for the oppressor.**

**And it is rarely that he is oppressed and that the help of the Lord
does not reach him”[1]**

In these couplets, Imam (‘a) has described about the evil qualities of
human beings and one of them is oppression. That whosoever is involved
in it he continuously steps to speak ill to his brother and to oppress
him and to spoil his affairs and the when the malice of the heart
reduces he tries to fan the flames more so that he could reach up to its
daring.

Imam (a.s) in this way gives lesson to someone that if he refers to his
own intellect and ponders on his own condition, he obtains that his
oppressing his own brother is going to turn towards himself and he would
be the recipient of its sin and loss. And it is natural that if he
thinks like this continuously he would be able to uproot these defects
from himself as the scholars of ethics have opined.

7 – Abul Faraj Isfahani has claimed that Imam Husain (‘a) composed the
following couplets regarding his daughter Sakina and her mother Rabab:

**“I swear by your life, I love the house itself where Sakina and Rabab
reside.**

**I love both of them and am prepared to sacrifice all I own on them and
I do not care if someone flays me for it.”[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Kashful Ghummah* 2/34, *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 48  
 **[2]** *Al Aghani* 16/139

And others (excepts Abul Faraj) have added the following couplet:

**“Thus I would never leave them whenever they are away. Whether I
remain alive or am put below the earth.”[1]**

These couplets, in our view are of the forged ones, because Imam Husain
(‘a) is much higher that he should make public his love and affections
for his daughter and wife. It is not in consonance with his ethics. He
is much above it. These lines were concocted and falsely attributed to
the Holy Imam in order to decrease the position of Ahle Bayt (‘a).

8 – And from the lines composed by His Eminence are the following:

**“And Allah what that is in the hands of Yazid, actually from others.**

**And that he has not obtained it with honesty and honor.**

**And if you seek justice with a clear conscience you would understand a
subtle point.**

**And his mischief was nearer to him than his good deeds.”[2]**

Here we conclude our discussion about the meritorious qualities of the
Holy Imam (‘a). His Eminence was an incomparable example unique in human
intellect and a prominent example Islamic prophethood having all the
good qualities that become the foundation of all virtues.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Zikri al-Husain (a.s.)* 1/139, *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 7/209  
 **[2]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 49
