The Great Disaster in Islam
===========================

Imam Husain (‘a) in his childhood and infancy spent his life in the care
of his grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s). He showered him with his
kindness and affection and made him blessed with his love and regard and
he benefited from all these. And he tried to show him the right path and
the straight way till his senses achieved improvement and his qualities
matured even though he was just a child.

This brief period that he spent with his grandfather was the most
important period of Islamic History. Because it was during this period
that the Messenger of Allah (s) established and strengthened the pillars
of his government and he built them on the foundation of knowledge and
faith and he terrified the soldiers of polytheism and destroyed the
foundation of apostasy. And Islam in a good way and powerful arms stood
upon its own feet. And the brilliant successes of the Messenger of Allah
(s) and his companions took a shape step by step and people entered the
religion in groups and the Islamic law spread in most of the areas of
Arabian Peninsula.

In the frenzy of his manifest successes the Prophet realized that his
life was at its end and his tenure in his world was about to conclude,
because he had fulfilled the responsibility entrusted to him and
established his great religion till his steps are instrumental in the
guidance of humanity and disciplining of their behavior. On the basis of
this it was appropriate that he should say farewell to life…And we shall
discuss here some parts of the great tragedy that struck Muslims and we
shall cast a glance at that dangerous accident that happened at that
time, because those events are related to the topic of our discussion
and they fix many causes and calamities that Imam Husain (‘a) had to
bear with Ahle Bayt (‘a) and difficulties and problems that befell upon
them. All these have a close connection with these events.

Sign of Passing away
--------------------

Impending demise and separation from the life of the leader, the
salvation giver and the teacher, His Eminence, the Messenger of Allah
(s) became apparent, because continuous signs were appearing to prove
this matter, and they were as follows:

1. The Quran was revealed on the Messenger of Allah (s) twice and this
made The Holy Prophet (s) realize that the end was definitely
near.**[1]** That is why He began to talk about his passing away and
spread the word about his separation from the Muslims. He told him
daughter, the chief of the ladies of the world, Fatima that Jibraeel
used to revise the Holy Quran with him once every year but this year he
had done it twice. And this indicated that his end was near…”**[2]**

2. Secondly the following verse that was revealed:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Khasais al-Kubra* 2/368  
 **[2]** Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 5/223

**“Surely you shall die and they (too) shall surely die. Then surely on
the day of resurrection you will contend one with another before your
Lord.”[1]**

This verse was also an indication that the Messenger of Allah (s) was to
pass away very soon that made apparent his hidden thoughts and the
Muslims heard that He used to say, “If only I had known when that time
shall arrive.”

And the Surah Nasr was revealed on him and He stopped between the Takbir
and recitation and to say, “Glory be to Allah and praise be to Him. I
seek forgiveness of Allah and to Him I turn.”

Muslims became worried and shocked and they went to him fearful and
asked His Eminence and he replied, “I have received the news of my
death…”**[2]**

Muslims were worried, shocked and aggrieved and they began to find
everything meaningless because this matter had suddenly struck them and
they did not know what would befall them if the Prophet departed from
the world.

Farewell Hajj
-------------

When the Messenger of Allah (s) because aware of his definite end he
decided to go for a visit to the sanctified House of Allah so that he
may see the common Muslims. And a general congregation was arranged
there, that he may specify a reliable way for the salvation of his
followers so that it may keep them from misguidance and deviation.

The Messenger of Allah (s) went for his last Hajj in the 10<sup>th</sup>
year of Hijrah, which is known as the Farewell Hajj. And it was
announced in the public that it would be their last opportunity to see
the Prophet on that occasion at that place. He said, “I don’t know;
perhaps after this year I may not be able to see your at this place.”

He used to move about in most of the groups of people and he used to
dispense exhortation to them to truth and explain to them their success.
“O people! I leave among you two heavy things. The Book of God and my
progeny, my Ahle Bayt (‘a)…”**[3]**

The first place of refuge for the security of the community and their
protection from every deviation in faith is the same attachment with the
Book of God and attachment to the Purified Progeny as these two are the
foundations of salvation and success of the community in the world and
the Hereafter.

When the Holy Prophet (s) concluded the rituals of Hajj, he stood
besides the Zamzam well and ordered Rabi bin Umayyah bin Khalaf, a young
man to stand below the chest of his horse. Then he said, “O Rabi! Say: O
people! The Messenger of Allah (s) is telling you: Maybe you would never
see me in this condition and yourself in this condition. Do you know
what it is? And do you know what this day is?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Zumar 39:30-31  
 **[2]** Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 1/234  
 **[3]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/662

The people replied, “Why not? This is the sanctified town, the
sanctified month and the sanctified day.” After that the people agreed
to these matters. The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “The Almighty Allah
has made your blood and property prohibited just as is the sanctity of
this town, this month and this day. Have I made myself clear?”

“Yes,” they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah! Be witness! And fear Allah! Do not consider
the property of others as valueless and do not spread destruction in the
lands. Thus whoever holds a trust with him or her, should restore it.”

Then His Eminence said, “People are equal in Islam and are like Adam and
Hawwa. There is no precedence for the Arab over the non-Arab and the
non-Arab over the Arab except the fear of God (piety). Have I made
myself clear?”

“Yes,” they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be a witness! Then he said, “Do not bring
to me your family and your lineage. Bring to me your deeds so that I can
say it is such for the people and it is such for you. Have I made myself
clear?”

“Yes,” they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be a witness! Every blood (murder) that was
in the period of ignorance, we have put it below our feet (condoned it).
And the first murder that we put below our feet is that of Adam bin
Rabia bin Harith bin Abdul Muttalib.**[1]** Have I made myself clear?”

“Yes”, they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah be witness! And we have destroyed all usury
that was in the period of ignorance. And the first usury that I have
destroyed is that of Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib. Have I made myself
clear?”

 “Yes”, they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be witness! O people! In the same way to
change the sacred mouths is an increase in disbeliefs that due to which
are deviated those who have become infidels, in one year they consider
them permitted and the next year they consider them prohibited. So that
they may make equal to the number of months that Allah has made sacred.”

Then he said, “I implore you regarding kindness to women. They are weak
in comparison to you and they have no power for their selves. Rather you
have taken them as a divine trust. And by the Book of Allah they have
become sexually lawful for you. And your right is upon you and their
right is upon you. For their food and dress with kindness. And it is our
right upon them that they restrict themselves to you (in sexual
relations) and not admit anyone in your house except by your permission
and your knowledge. Then if they commit any trespass of the above  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Adam bin Rabiaya in the tribe of Bani Hazeel

you may keep away from their beds and you may beat them with a beating
that is not severe. Have I made myself clear?”

“Yes”, they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be witness! Then he said, “I implore you
regarding those whom your right hand possesses. Provide food to them
from that which you eat and give them to wear what you wear. If they
commit a crime you must deal with them as you would deal with your own
sins. Have I made myself clear?”

“Yes”, they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be witness! Then he said, “A Muslim is the
brother of Muslim. He does not deceive him. He does not betray his
trust. He does not backbite about him. He does not consider his blood
and anything from his property lawful except by his permission. Have I
made myself clear?”

“Yes”, they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be witness!”

Then Messenger of Allah (s) proceeded with his sermon, which was rich
with Islamic message and from the clear matters of Islamic law.

After that he concluded his sermon with the following words: “After me
do not turn back to infidelity that you may be misguided. And some of
you may not enslave others. I leave among you a thing that if you remain
attached to it, you shall never go astray. It is the Book of Allah and
my Progeny, my Ahle Bayt. Have I made myself clear?”

“Yes”, they replied.

His Eminence said, “O Allah, be witness!” then he turned towards them
and desired from them that what was announced to them they should
promise for it and consider it obligatory. And He said, “Know that! You
are responsible. Then those of you who are present should inform those
who are absent.”**[1]**

In this way was concluded an important sermon of the Messenger of Allah
(s), which contained all the matter for the needs of the community in
social and political fields. And he also appointed for them a leader
from his Ahle Bayt (‘a) who would perform the duty for fulfilling the
aims of the community in the economic and social fields.

Gathering of Ghadeer Khumm
--------------------------

When the Messenger of Allah (s) concluded his Hajj pilgrimage he moved
towards Yathrib. When his caravan reached “Ghadeer Khumm” the
trustworthy one of revelation descended to him and conveyed to him an
important message from the heavens that compelled His Eminence to
announce His Eminence Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) as his caliph and point
of reference after him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/90-92

At that occasion the heavenly command had a severe tone having an
urgency that it should be immediately acted upon and conveyed to the
Muslims. Revelation descended on the Messenger of Allah (s) with the
following verse:

**“O Apostle! deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.”[1]**

The Messenger of Allah (s) was warned that if he did not convey the
heavenly message, all the efforts that he had put in so far in the
propagation of faith shall be rendered void. And all the difficulties
that he bore in the path of religion shall became useless.

The Messenger of Allah (s), with a firm determination and strong
intention began to fulfill this desire of Almighty Allah. He ignored the
difficulties strewn in this path and in that scorching heat of summer he
halted at that place and issued orders that all caravans should follow
his steps. The atmosphere was so terribly hot that everyone was keeping
the corner of their outer garments below their feet so that through it
they may shield themselves from the hot earth.

The Messenger of Allah (s) ordered that people should gather and pray in
congregation with him. After the prayers concluded, he instructed the
people to construct a pulpit with camel saddles for him. They did as
bidden and the Prophet ascended the pulpit and the number of those
present was 100,000 or more according to the statements of historians.
They concentrated all their attention to listen to the sermon of the
Messenger of Allah (s).

The Messenger of Allah (s) spoke about the difficulties he had to face
and calamites he had to bear in order to bring the people from the life
of ignorance towards the respectable Islamic life. And he spoke upon
some religious laws and made it obligatory for them to act upon them.

After that he told them, “You must take care how you deal with the two
heavy things after me.”

A man from the audience called out loudly, “O The Messenger of Allah
(s)! What are the two heavy things?”

He said, “The greater heavy weight is the Book of God that its one end
is in the hands of Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime and the other is in
your hands. Then remain attached to it and you shall not go astray. And
the smaller heavy weight is my Progeny. The Kind and the Informed One
has informed me that the two shall not separate till they reach me at
the edge of the Pool. And I have petitioned my Lord regarding this for
the two of them. Thus do not try to precede them as you shall be
destroyed and do not lag behind them as you shall be destroyed.”

After that he took the hand of his successor and the door of the city of
his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Maidah 5:67. Wahidi in *Asbaab an-Nuzool*, Razi in his
*Tafsir* and others. All clearly mention that this verse was revealed on
the Day of Ghadeer.

knowledge in order to make his guardianship obligatory for the people.
Till the white of his armpits were visible and the people looked at
them. Then His Eminence raised his voice and said, “O People! Who is the
one more superior to the believers than their own selves?”

All replied in unison, “The Almighty Allah and the Prophet know better.”

Then His Eminence said, “Allah is my master and I am the master of the
believers and I am better than their own selves. Thus of whomsoever I
had been the master this Ali is also his master.” He repeated this
sentence three or four times.”

Then he said, “O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him (Ali) and be the
enemy of whoever antagonizes him; support whoever supports him and
abandon whoever abandons him; and make the truth to turn in whichever
direction he turns. Those who are present here must inform those who are
absent about this…”

The valuable sermon of His Eminence, which conveyed this divine command
thus came to an end. He appointed Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) as the caliph
and made him the leader of the nation and entrusted him with the
position of Imamate and the Muslims rushed to pay oath of allegiance for
caliphate and they congratulated him for rulership of the Muslims. And
the Messenger of Allah (s) ordered the ‘mothers of the believers’ (his
wives) to go to His Eminence and congratulate him and they did as
bidden. **[1]**

Umar bin Khattab came forward and congratulated the Imam and shook his
hands and told him, “Congratulation, O’ son of Abu Talib! Today you have
become my master and master of all believing men and women.”**[2]**

“Hissan bin Thabit” stood up and sought the permission of the Messenger
of Allah (s) to recite his poetical composition on the occasion. The
Messenger of Allah (s) accorded him the permission and Hissan began to
recite:

**“On the day of Ghadeer, their Prophet called them at the Khumm that it
was worth listening to the Prophet.**

**Then he said: Who is your Master and the Prophet? They said while they
were aware:**

**Your Lord is our Master and you are our Prophet and in mastership none
of us shall disobey you.**

**They he told him: O Ali! Get up, as I have accepted you as the Imam
and leader after me.**

**Then of whomsoever I was the master, this (Ali) is also his master. So
follow him with sincerity.**

**At that time he prayed: O Allah! Love those who love him and hate
those who**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ghadeer* 1/214-223, 225, 228, 276, 378  
 **[2]** Ahmad, *Musnad* 1/281

**hate Ali.”[1]**

On that memorable day in the history of Islam the following verse was
revealed:

**“This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion…”[2]**

Religion became complete with the mastership of Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a)
and the divine bounty for the Muslims with the lofty commands of
religion and their high status leader reached to completion, which would
enable their aspirations to reach a respectable point in life. By this
method the Messenger of Allah (s) took the last step in order to save
his community from mischief and deviation, because he did not leave the
control of the nation to their own whims and desires. He appointed a
leader and a guide for them so that he may mind the social and political
affairs of the community.

This great oath of allegiance that the great Prophet of Islam organized
for Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) is of the strongest proofs that specifies
the Caliphate and Imamate in His Eminence. In the meeting that Imam
Husain (‘a) to oppose Muawiyah’s rule he argued with the same point and
said, “So to say. You know that this Satan (that is Muawiyah) has done
with us and our Shias. You saw and witnessed it and you have received
news of it. And we also desire to question you about a matter. Thus if I
say the truth you confirm it and if I am wrong you may deny it. Listen
to what I have to say and write it down. After that you refer to those
you trust in your towns and to all those whom you rely, you present to
them all that you know about our rights. Because I fear that this right
may be trampled, destroyed and subjugated while the Almighty Allah
perfects His light even thought the disbelievers way be averse to it.”

At that time His Eminence did not leave out anything that had been
revealed in Quran about them but that he spoke about it and explained to
them and nothing from what the Messenger of Allah (s) had said about his
parents and himself his Ahle Bayt (‘a) remained but that the Imam
reiterated it at that time. To all of his statements the audience
responded with: “Yes! By Allah! Truly we have heard it.” And the
companions of companions used to say, “Yes! O Allah! It has been
narrated to me which I testify and from the companions whom I have faith
on.”

His Eminence, in order to prove his point asked, “I put you under oath
of Allah! Do you know that the Messenger of Allah (s) appointed him
(Ali) and called him with his mastership and said: It is necessary for
those who are present to inform all those who are not present?”

“Yes, by Allah!” they replied.**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ghadeer* 2/34  
 **[2]** Surah Maidah 5:3. According to Khatib Baghdadi in his *History*
8/290 and Suyuti in *Durre Manthur* 3/117 and others this verse was
revealed on Day of Ghadeer.  
 **[3]** *Al-Ghadeer* 1/198-199

The Imam’s oath of allegiance on the Eid of Ghadeer is a part of Islamic
Prophethood and a pillar of religion. So its aim is the protection of
the Ummah from the waves of false beliefs and its security from
deviation.

The Prophet’s Illness
---------------------

After the Prophet returned to Medina, day by day his health began to
decline because illness struck him and he had a very high fever as if
flames of fire were shooting up from his body. A piece of cloth that
covered the Messenger of Allah (s) was so hot that when one of his wives
or any other visitor handled it, they could sense the intensity of the
fever.**[1]** A vessel filled with water was kept near the Prophet in
which he used to dip his hands and wipe his face with the wet hands and
he was saying, “As if I feel that it is the pain of what I had eaten in
Khaiber. Or as if I see that my jugular vein is cut off and poison is
being injected into it.”

Muslims were shocked and aggrieved by these circumstances and rushed to
visit the Messenger of Allah (s) in his quarters and a crowd assembled
therein. His Eminence spoke to them in his final moments and reminded
them to keep on the right path and truth and he made bequest to them and
said, “It is near that I shall be taken away and I have told you before
so that I may have some excuse for you except that I have left among you
the Book of Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime, and my Progeny, my Ahle
Bayt (‘a).”

After that he held the hands of his successor and Caliph, Imam Amirul
Momineen Ali (‘a) and said, “This Ali is with the Quran and the Quran is
with Ali. The two shall not separate till they reach me at the
pool.”**[2]**

In this way His Eminence arranged the important matter for his community
after him so that through it they may be able to achieve all their aims
and aspirations.

Seeking Forgiveness of those Buried in Baqi Cemetery
----------------------------------------------------

When illness struck the Prophet, he became certain of his departure and
desired to visit the Muslim Cemetery to say farewell to them and pray
for their forgiveness. Thus in the darkness of the right he summoned Abu
Muhiba and when he arrived the Prophet asked him to accompany him to the
Baqi Graveyard and told him, “I have been commended to seek forgiveness
for the folks buried at Baqi and for this I desired that you accompany
me there.”

The Holy Prophet (s) set out till he reached the Baqi Cemetery. Then he
saluted the dead and told them, “Peace be on you. O folks of the grave!
Congratulations to that in which you are from that in which the people
are involved. Mischiefs have surrounded them like the parts of the dark
night as the last of them has become the first and the last is worse
than the first…”

The Messenger of Allah (s) understood from the unseen in what debasement
his community shall be involved and how there shall be deviation in
religion and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/226  
 **[2]** *As Sawaiq al-Mohreqa* 123-124

belief. How terrible mischiefs and calamities they would have to face
and what sort of ignorance is taking them towards such a life.

At that point the Messenger of Allah (s) turned to Abu Muhiba and said,
O Abu Muhiba! I have been given the keys of the treasures of the world
and (choice of) living in it forever and after that I have been given
the Paradise and I have been given the choice between them and the
audience of my Lord and Paradise.”

Abu Muhiba was astonished and he said, “May my Parents be sacrificed on
you. Take up the keys of the treasures of the world and immortality in
it and after that Paradise.”

His Eminence said: “No! By Allah! I have chosen the company of my Lord
and Paradise.”

The Messenger of Allah (s) sought forgiveness for the folks buried in
the Baqi graveyard and then returned to his residence.**[1]** Then
Ayesha came out before him while he was moaning due to headache and
saying, “O my head!”

The Prophet said, “Rather, by Allah I say! O my head! What problem would
you have if you were to die before me and I perform your funeral
rituals, put shroud over you and recite your funeral prayer and bury
you?”

This shocked Ayesha and she said, “By Allah! As if I see that in such
circumstances you would return home and sleep with one of your wives.”

The Holy Prophet smiled**[2]** and met his wives while be himself felt
in need of being nursed in his illness. After that he sought the
permission of his wives so that he may stay put in Ayesha quarter in
order to be nursed in his illness. They had no objection to it and His
Eminence came out of his residence while a cloth was tied around his
head and supported by Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) and his uncle Abbas he
entered Ayesha’s quarters.

Usamah’s Expedition
-------------------

The Holy Prophet (s) learnt that a group of people were planning to keep
the Caliphate way from Ahle Bayt (‘a) and realized that the best way to
prevent this eventuality was to send all companions to fight against the
Romans so that the seat of his government becomes empty of them and the
matter of Caliphate is easily and conveniently transferred to his
successor, His Eminence Amirul Momineen (‘a). So he ordered the senior
Emigrants and Helpers regarding this. On the basis of the statements of
historians, Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu Ubaidah Jarrah and Bashir bin
Saad**[3]** were included in this group. And he gave the command to
Usamah bin Zaid who was just a young boy and this expedition was sent
out around 26<sup>th</sup> Safar, 11 A.H.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/224. Ibne Hisham, *Biography* 4/642,
Tabari, *Tarikh*, Pg. 188, and Shia sources have mentioned that when the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) felt unwell he took the hand of Ali and
people followed behind him. Then he went towards Baqi and prayed for
their families.  
 **[2]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/224-225  
 **[3]** *Kanzul Ummal* Vol. 10/570. Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 4/66. *Tarikh
Khamis* 2/154

The Prophet told Usamah, “Move towards the place where your father was
killed and make your horse race towards that land as I have made you the
commander for this army. Thus begin your assault in the morning on the
folks of Umba**[1]** and attack them fiercely and faster than the news
reaches there. Then if Almighty Allah grants you victory on them, stay
there only for a brief period and take some advisors with you and send
spies and scouts before you…”

On 29<sup>th</sup> Safar he himself inspected the troops that they have
scattered because the senior companions had not joined the formation.
The Holy Prophet (s) became angry upon this and in spite of his severe
illness he came out and encouraged them to move forward and himself tied
a flag for Usamah and told him, “Fight in the name of Allah in the way
of Allah and fight those who have disbelieved in Allah…”

Usamah came out with his flag tied up and he gave it to Buraidah and
camped at al-Jarf.

A group of companions avoided joining the army and they ridiculed and
made fun of it and the commander.

Umar said, “The Messenger of Allah (s) has gone away and you have become
our commander?” His statements reached the Holy Prophet (s) while he had
high temperature and a severe headache troubled him. Then His Eminence
became angry and with a cloth tied on his head he expressed his
displeasure over his disobedience by ascending the pulpit and saying, “O
People! What is the matter? That some of you say regarding the giving of
command to Usamah? Previously you had opposed me when I gave command to
his father while by Allah, he was qualified for the commandership and
his son after him is also deserving of it…”

After that he came down from the pulpit and entered his quarters**[2]**
and requested his companions to join Usamah’s army and he told them,
“Prepare the forces of Usamah.”

“Send the forces of Usamah.”

“Curse of God be on one who refrains from joining Usamah’s army.”

However, it was a pity that this strict command was not able to shake
their conscience and the orders of the Prophet were not obeyed. Rather
they refrained from joining the army and offered excuses to His Eminence
while he did not accept any of their excuses. He only showed anger and
displeasure at the absence of the obedience to his orders. We have
described in detail this tragic event in the first volume of our book,
“Life of Imam Hasan bin Ali (‘a) and also discussed some of their aims.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This place is situated in Syria between Asqalan and Ramlah near
Mutah where Zaid Ibne Haritha and Ja’far Ibne Abi Talib were martyred.  
 **[2]** Halabi, *Biography* 3/227

The Prophet Allows Retaliation
------------------------------

The illness of the Holy Prophet (s) intensified and His Eminence was in
severe pain so he called Fadl Ibn Abbas and said, “O Fadl! Hold my
hand.”

Fadl held his hand and assisted him to mount the pulpit. The Prophet
told Fadl to summon people for congregation prayers; Fadl announced this
matter and people gathered.

After that the Holy Prophet (s) said, “O People! My going away from you
is near. And you would not see me among yourself at this place and in my
place and I see that except for this if there is nothing for me. Thus if
there is anyone whose back I have hit, this is my back, here you may
take revenge for it. And if I have taken anyone’s money, this is my
money. He may come and take it. And if I have harmed the reputation of
anyone, I say that he may come and take revenge for it and none should
say that he or she is scared that the Holy Prophet (s) may have malice
for me, as to have malice for anyone does not befit me and neither is it
from my manners and the best of you in my view is one who has some right
upon me and he takes it from me and after that he forgives me so that
when I meet my Creator I am not having anything upon my neck…”

By this command the Holy Prophet (s) explained justice and truth that no
reformer in the world had ever done before because to give retaliation
oneself so that one may leave the world in a way when one is not having
anyone’s right or consequences upon oneself.

So a person came forward and said, “O The Messenger of Allah (s)! My
three dirhams are with you.”

His Eminence said, “Though I am not falsifying you or asking you to
swear for it, but tell me how you got three dirhams on me?”

The man said, “Don’t you recall that a beggar came begging to you and
you told him to pay three dirhams from my pocket and I gave him?”

His Eminence ordered Fadl to return his money and after that the
Messenger of Allah (s) proceeded with this discourse and said. “O
people, if anyone of you are having concealed wealth he or she may
return it.”

So a man stood up towards His Eminence and said, “O Messenger of Allah
(s)! I am having three dirhams that I had concealed with me and I did
not spend them on the way of Allah.”

His Eminence asked, “Why have you kept them concealed?”

“I needed them,” he replied.

The Messenger of Allah (s) told Fadl to take the money and he took it
and after that His Eminence continued his discourse and said, “O People,
if anyone of you feels anything, he may stand up so that I may pray for
him from the Almighty.”

A man stood up and told His Eminence, “O Messenger of Allah (s)! I am a

hypocrite and a liar, can I be reformed?” Umar chastised him and said,
“Woe be unto you, O man! The Almighty has concealed you, why are you
revealing yourself?”

The Holy Prophet (s) told him, “O son of Khattab! Keep quiet, as the
humiliation of the world is better than humiliation of the Hereafter.”
Then he prayed for man, “O Allah, grant him truth and faith and remove
evils from him.”**[1]**

A man known by the name of Suwadeh bin Quays turned to the Holy Prophet
(s) at the end of the meeting and said, “O Messenger of Allah (s)! You
had hit my stomach with a whip and I would like to take revenge for it.”

The Holy Prophet (s) commanded Bilal to get a whip so that Suwadeh may
take his revenge.

Bilal was shocked, and he went to the lanes of Yathrib and yelled, “O
people, allow retaliation to be taken from you in this world this is the
Messenger of Allah (s) who is himself allowing retaliation to be taken
from him.”

Bilal went to the Prophet’s house and took a whip and returned to the
Prophet. He told him to give it to Suwadeh so that he may take his
revenge.

Suwadeh took the whip and came to the Holy Prophet (s) while Muslims
watched this terrible scene in horror, because the Holy Prophet (s) was
in terrible pain due to the severity of his illness. He was in terrible
pain while he was himself allowing retaliation. Suwadeh stood up near
the Holy Prophet (s) and said, “Expose your belly for me.”

The Messenger of Allah (s) exposed his belly and Suwadeh said in a soft
and sorrowful tone, “O Messenger of Allah (s) do you allow me to put my
face to you belly?”

The Messenger of Allah (s) gave him the permission and he took his face
to the Prophet’s belly and kissed it while tears were flowing on his
cheeks and he said, “Instead of revenge I seek refuge from the Prophet
against the Fire of Hell.”

The Messenger of Allah (s) told him, “O Suwadeh! Do you forgive me or
you want to take your revenge?”

Suwadeh said, “O Messenger of Allah (s)! Indeed I forgive.”

The Prophet raised his hands and said, “O Allah! Forgive Suwadeh like he
has forgiven Your Prophet.”**[2]**

Muslims were astonished and they were lost in the waves of
contemplation. They had become certain that death was imminent, because
the life of their Prophet was at its end and except for some moments
nothing else remained.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/231  
 **[2]** *Biharul Anwar* Vol. 22/508-509

The Prophet gave his Personal wealth in Charity
-----------------------------------------------

Before his illness the Holy Prophet (s) was having seven or six dinars
and he was worried about it that he may pass away from the world while
the money remained with him. So he instructed his family members to give
it away in Sadaqah but since they were occupied with His Eminence they
completely forgot about this matter. However, His Eminence was
thoughtful about it and he asked them about it and they replied that the
money was yet with them. So His Eminence told them to bring the money.
When they brought the money to him he kept the dinars on his palm and
said, “Muhammad, what do you think about your Lord that when you meet
Him while these are with you?”

After that he gave those dinars in Sadaqah and no worldly belonging
remained with him,**[1]** while during his life His Eminence had been
deprived of worldly pleasures and on the basis of traditionists he died
not even satiated with barley bread**[2]** and when he departed from the
world, his coat of mail was pawned with a Jew in exchange of three
measures of barely.**[3]** The pillow of the Prophet was of leather. It
was filled with fiber**[4]** and he used to sit on a mat. So much so
that its marks appeared on his body so the companions told him, “If you
allow we can arrange a carpet for you.”

He told them, “What I have to do with the world. I am not in the world
except like a man who stands under the shade of the tree and then goes
away leaving it.”**[5]**

One day Fatima brought a piece of bread for the Prophet. He asked, “O
Fatima! What piece of bread is it?” She replied, “It is a piece of bread
and I could not resist bringing it for you.”

His Eminence said, “This is the first meal that is entering the stomach
of your father after three days.”**[6]**

His Eminence used to remain hungry for days on end and there was nothing
to eat at his home and his family did not have any food.**[7]** Ayesha
has narrated about the abstinence of the Prophet, saying, “The Messenger
of Allah (s) was fasting and then be continued his hunger and then
fasted and then again remained hungry and then fasted again. Then he
said, “The world shall not be worthy for the Holy Prophet (s) and the
Progeny of Muhammad. O Ayesha! Allah, the glorified and the High was not
satisfied with the Ulul Azm Prophets except that they be patient in
unfavorable circumstances and favorable circumstances and He has made me
responsible for the same things for which they were responsible. And He
was not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmad, *Musnad* 6/104  
 **[2]** Bukhari 7/97, *Sahih,* Kitab At-ama  
 **[3]** Ahmad, *Musnad* 6/105  
 **[4]** Muslim. *Sahih* 3/1650, Kitab Libas wa Zeenat  
 **[5]** Tirmidhi 4/588, *Sahih* 6/60  
 **[6]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 1/400  
 **[7]** Tirmidhi 4/588, *Sahih* 4/580

satisfied except that He made me responsible like He had made them
responsible. Thus I was patient for Allah as they had been patient. I
try and there is no power except from the Almighty Allah.”**[1]**

In the same way the Messenger of Allah (s) remained oblivious to worldly
pleasures and comforts till the Almighty Allah took him up to Himself.

Thursday Tragedy
----------------

The Messenger of Allah (s) learnt of various political intrigues of
senior companions that they had undertaken to subject the Holy Ahle Bayt
(‘a) to difficulties after the Prophet passes away. They were just
waiting for the Prophet to leave the transient world so that they may
put these plans into action. So His Eminence decided to protect his
followers from deviation and help them against mischiefs and thus he
said, “Bring for me the scapula and ink so that I may write for you a
document so that you may never go astray after that.”**[2]**

Now, was there a greater bounty for the Muslims? It is a security from
the chief of the Prophets, that he did not say anything of his own so
that his followers are not led astray from their path and that they may
support the truth and recognize the true path.

This security was for the balance of the community and for their
strength and it was a guarantee of their peace and prosperity in their
lives.

This covenant was from the Prophet so that the community is not mired in
difficulties in political and economic domains.

Indeed, it was a great and unique opportunity in history for this
community but that community did not get benefit from it because they
knew the intention of the Messenger of Allah (s) that His Eminence
wanted to put in writing the appointment of the gate of the city of
knowledge and the father of his grandsons and in this way their desires
and plans shall be destroyed. Therefore one of them replied to the
Prophet, “The Book of Allah is sufficient for us…”

If the one who said this had considered that the Prophet was requesting
help in his illness or wanted cooperation in religious matters he would
not have replied with such audacity. Because he understood that the aim
of the Prophet was the appointment of Amirul Momineen (‘a) to Caliphate.

Arguments arose between the people. Some wanted the commands of the
Prophet to be obeyed and some of them opposed it. So that it should not
be that their interest is destroyed. Women spoke up from behind the
screens against this audacity towards the Prophet while He has in his
last moments. They said, “Do you not hear what the Prophet is saying?”

Umar stood up and fearing that the matter may go out of his hands he
told the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Suyuti, *Durre Manthur* 4/454 under the exegesis of the verse
46:35  
 **[2]** This tradition is narrated by Tibrani in *Awsat* and also 6/11
Bukhari and Muslim 3/1259 and others.

ladies, “You are like the women of Yusuf. When he is sick you weep and
when he is all right you mount upon his neck.”

The Prophet chastised him saying, “Leave them! They are better than
you.”

At that time a horrible conflict began in the community and a group
wanted the orders of the Prophet be obeyed and that they may become
successful. One of them shot an arrow at the aim of the Prophet and
wanted to destroy it and so he said, “The Prophet is talking
nonsense…”**[1]**

Political greed of these people made them forget the position of the
Prophet that the Almighty had purified His Eminence and had kept him
safe from taking nonsense and other defects that are found in human
beings. He had made him infallible.

Were they not aware of the words of Almighty that are intoned day and
night and that announce the perfection of the Prophet and the balance of
the personality of His Eminence? So much so that Almighty Allah says,

**“Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray; Nor does he speak
out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The Lord of
Mighty Power has taught him.”[2]**

And the Almighty Allah says:

**“Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger, the processor of
strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the Dominion, One
(to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion is not gone
mad.”[3]**

That nation had understood the verse of the Book of Allah regarding
their Prophet and none had any doubt in the infallibility and perfection
of the personality of His Eminence. But political intrigue had pushed
them towards this attitude which hurt the feelings of every Muslim. And
whenever Ibn Abbas recalled this terrible tragedy he used to lament and
tears fell on the checks like pearls and he used to say, “The Thursday!
What a Thursday it was! The Messenger of Allah (s) said, ‘Get me scapula
and ink so that I may write a document for you so that you may never go
astray.’ But they said, ‘The Messenger of Allah (s) is talking
nonsense…’”**[4]**

Indeed this was a great calamity in Islam that prevented Muslims from
their success and establishment of truth and justice among them.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** All historians of Islam have recorded this tragic incident and
Bukhari has mentioned it in many places in his *Sahih* in 4/68, 69, 6/8
but he has refrained from naming the person. In the same way it has come
at the end of Gharib al-Hadith and in *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*, 2/296,
*Tadkiratul Khawaas* Pg. 62 quoted from *Sirrul A’lameen* in clear
language.  
 **[2]** Surah Najm 53:2-5  
 **[3]** Surah Takwir 81:19-22  
 **[4]** Ahmad, *Musnad* 1/355 etc.

The Great Grief of Her Eminence, Zahra (‘a)
-------------------------------------------

A great sorrow fell on the heart of the Prophet’s beloved daughter and
the pain made her restless and grief overtook her when she learnt that
her father has about to say farewell to the world. She came to His
Eminence while he was trashing his legs in the throes of pain. She stood
besides her father and glanced at his face and heard him say, “How sad I
am!”

The pure heart of Zahra was filled with pain and sorrow and she
immediately told His Eminence, “O Father! I am also aggrieved due to
your sorrow.”

The Prophet looked at his beloved daughter to find her face a lifeless
picture and she was in a shock that could not be described. In order to
reassure her he said, “After this, your father shall not have any
sorrow.”**[1]**

These words had a shocking effect on the heart because she understood
that her father was saying farewell to her. The Prophet saw that Zahra
was sad, shocked and worried. The color of her face had faded and she
was caught in horrible waves of sorrow; so in order to comfort her he
called her near and spoke to her privately and her eyes were filled with
tears. At that time he told her a secret, and a smile appeared on her
lips. Ayesha was astonished at this and she asked, “Today I have not
seen a joy so close to sorrow.”

Ayesha asked Her Eminence, Zahra about the secret that the Prophet had
told her but she turned her face away and declined to inform her about
it. When some days had passed and Her Eminence spoke about it she said
that the Prophet had informed her, “Jibraeel used to revise the Quran
with me once a year and this year he did it twice. And I do not
interpret it in any other way except that my end is near…”

This caused her to become aggrieved. And as far as the cause of her joy
and happiness was concerned it was because the Prophet told her, “You
are the first person from Ahle Bayt (‘a) who shall meet me and I shall
be the best of those who go…And I am the best of the former ones. Do you
not like that you should remain the chief of the ladies of this
community?”**[2]**

The reason for the silencing of the flame of her grief was that he
informed her that she would be the first to join him from Ahle Bayt
(‘a). After that the Prophet reduced the weight of her sorrow and told
her, “O daughter! Do not weep when I have passed away. And say: Indeed
we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return.” And this statement
carries a reward if recited at every death.

Her Eminence, in a painful and aggrieved tone told her father, “And even
you? O The Messenger of Allah (s)?”

The Messenger of Allah (s) replied, “Yes! I too.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid  
 **[2]** *Hayatul Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/134  
 **[3]** *Ansab al-Ashraaf* 1/552

At that time the pain intensified for the Prophet and Zahra began to
weep and said to her father: “By Allah! You are just as it is said.”

**“The bright faced one! Whose face water is demanded from the clouds.
He is the guardian of the orphans and the refuge of the widows.”**

The Messenger of Allah (s) opened his eyes and told her, “These are the
words of your uncle, Abu Talib.” At that time His Eminence recited the
following words of Almighty Allah:

**“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward the
grateful.”<sup>(</sup>[1]<sup>)(</sup>[2]<sup>)</sup>**

Anas bin Malik has narrated that: Fatima came to the Prophet during his
illness with Hasan and Husain and she threw herself at him and kept her
chest upon his chest and wept severely. The Prophet restrained her from
this and she returned to her house while there were tears in the eyes of
the Prophet and he was saying. “O Allah, Protect my Ahle Bayt (‘a) and I
have kept them as a trust with every believer…”

He repeated these words thrice where he was very much aggrieved because
he knew what calamities were to befall them.

The Prophet’s Heritage for his two grandsons
--------------------------------------------

When the chief of the ladies realized that the meeting of her father
with the Lord was near she hastened to her house and brought her two
sons, Hasan and Husain while the two of them were weeping. She requested
His Eminence to bequeath them something from his great virtues with
which he had spread fragrance in the world. Then she said, “Dear father!
These are your two sons. So bequeath something for them…”

The Prophet gifted them with some of his personal characteristics due to
which he had attained superiority over all other Prophets and said, “For
Hasan shall be my awe and nobility and for Husain is my valor and
forgiveness.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansab al-Ashraaf* Vol. 1, Pg. 552-553  
 **[2]** Surah Aale Imran 3:144  
 **[3]** Ibne Shahre Aashob, *Manaqib* 3/396 *Nazm Durarus Simtain*, Pg.
212 say that Her Eminence, Fatima (s.a.) said, “O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.)! Please bestow a thing to my sons, Hasan and Husain. Then she
said, “To Hasan he gave awe and forbearance and to Husain he gave
forgiveness and mercy.” And in another tradition, “I give awe and
forbearance to the elder of them and love and satisfaction to the
younger of them.” And it has come in *Rabi al-Abraar,* Pg. 315 that
Fatima brought her two sons to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and said, “O
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), bestow something to them. He said, “May
your father be sacrificed on you. Your father does does not have
anything that he could give them.” Then he held Hasan and kissed him and
made him sit on his right thigh and said, “My gifts to this son are my
good manners and awe.” And he took Husain and seated him on his left
thigh and said, “My gifts for him are valor and kindness.”

Hasan and Husain stood up from their grandfather while they had obtained
awe, nobility, valor and forgiveness from His Eminence in inheritance.
Does it not show that could there be greater inheritance than these
qualities, as it is having no connection with the material aspects of
the world? Rather all perfections and qualities of prophethood were also
included in him.

The Prophet’s Bequest regarding his Grandsons
---------------------------------------------

The Prophet made a bequest to Ali (‘a) regarding his grandsons and this
was made three days before his demise when he said, “O father of my two
beloved ones. I implore you from the world regarding my two beloved ones
that very soon you shall lose two supports and Allah is your guardian
after me…”

When the Messenger of Allah (s) passed away, Ali (‘a) said, “This was
one of the two supports that the Messenger of Allah (s) had mentioned.”

When Her Eminence, Zahra passed away Ali (‘a) said, “This was the second
of the two supports that the Messenger of Allah (s) had mentioned.”
**[1]**

The Prophet’s Sorrow for Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------

During the time when the Holy Prophet (s) was in severe pain of his
illness, His Eminence, Husain rushed to his grandfather and when the
Holy Prophet (s) saw him, he hugged and became oblivious of the pain of
his illness and said, “What do I have against Yazid? O Allah, do not
bless him, O Allah! Do not bless Yazid…”

After that he became unconscious for a long time and when he regained
consciousness, he kissed Husain excessively while tears were flowing
from his eyes and he said, “I shall be face to face with your killer in
the presence of Allah.”**[2]**

The tragedy of Husain became certain for his grandfather in the last
moments of his life and it increased his sorrow.

Towards Paradise
----------------

The Great soul, like whom the Almighty Allah had not created anyone
either in the past or the future, finally reached the time when he was
to separate from this life so that he may enter into the neighborhood of
the Lord and be the recipient of His unlimited mercy and bounties. The
Angel of death arrived and sought permission from the Holy Prophet (s)
to enter and Her Eminence, Lady Zahra informed him that the Prophet was
busy with himself and he went away. He returned after some time and
sought the permission to enter. The Messenger of Allah (s) regained
consciousness and asked his daughter, “Did you recognize him?”

“No, O Messenger of Allah (s)!” replied Lady Fatima Zahra.

The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “He is the same one who makes the
graves inhabited and who destroys the houses and separates communities
from each other.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Saduq, *Amali*, Pg. 119  
 **[2]** Shaykh Abbas Qummi, *Nafasul Mahmoom*, Pg. 29-30 quoted from
Ibne Numa Hilli, *Matheer al-Ahzaan*, Pg. 22

Lady Zahra’s heart sank and she remembered the past and the calamity
sealed her tongue. At that time she said, “Woe on me from the passing
away of the Last of the Prophets! What a tragedy is the demise of the
greatest pious one and the separation of the chief of the selected ones.
Pity the discontinuation heavenly revelation. Today I have become
deprived of your words...”

The heart of the Prophet broke and he became kind at his beloved
daughter and said, “Do not weep as you are the first of my Ahle Bayt
(‘a) who would join me.”**[1]**

The Prophet gave permission for the Angel of Death to enter and when he
came near the Holy Prophet (s) he said, “O Messenger of Allah (s)! The
Almighty Allah has sent me to you and has commanded me to obey you in
whatever you may command me. If you say that I may take your life, I
will take it and if you ask me to leave it, I would leave it…”

The Holy Prophet (s) was astonished and he asked, “O Angel of Death!
Would you do thus?”

The Angel of Death replied to him, “I have been commanded that I should
obey you on whatever you may command me.”

Then Jibraeel descended on the Holy Prophet (s) and told him, “O Ahmad!
The Almighty Allah is desirous of meeting you.”**[2]**

The Prophet chose to meet his Lord and allowed the Angel of Death to
take up his great soul. And when the Ahle Bayt (‘a) realized that the
Prophet would separate from them in these moments, they hastened to him
and the grandsons arrived and threw themselves upon the Prophet while
they were weeping and the Prophet kissed them in excess. Then Amirul
Momineen (‘a) tried to take them away from the Holy Prophet (s) but the
Prophet prevented him saying, “Leave them alone so that they may benefit
from me and I may benefit from them as after me a sorrow shall descend
upon them…”

After that he turned towards those who had come to visit him and he told
them, “I leave among you the Book of Allah and my Progeny, my Ahle Bayt
(‘a). Then to destroy the Book of Allah is same as destroying my
practice (Sunnah) and one who destroys my practice is same as he has
destroyed my Progeny because the two shall not separate from each other
till they arrive to me at the edge of the Pool…”**[3]**

He told his successor and the gate of the city of the knowledge, Amirul
Momineen Ali (‘a), “Put my head in your lap as the divine command has
arrived. When my soul leaves my body, you take it in your hand and rub
it on your face. At that time, make me face the Prayer Direction
(Qiblah) and obey my command and you be the first to recite my funeral
prayer and do not leave me till you have entrusted me to the dust and
seek help from the Almighty Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Durratun Naasiheen*, Pg. 66  
 **[2]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 2/259, Tibrani, *Al-Mojam al-Kabir*
3/139-140  
 **[3]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal al-Husain* 1/114

Amirul Momineen (‘a) took up the head of the Prophet and placed it in
his lap and placed his hand under the chin of His Eminence and the Angel
of Death began to capture the purified soul and the Prophet became
restless in throes of death and severity of trepidation of final moments
till his purified life departed and the Imam rubbed it on his
face.**[1]**

The earth shook and the effulgence of justice and truth was extinguished
and the one whose life was effulgence and mercy for all, finally
departed from the world. And the humanity had never been struck with
such a calamity because he was a leader who bestowed freedom; a teacher
who taught had passed away. And the light that had illuminated the path
for humanity and guided them to the right path was now extinguished.

Muslims fell into sorrow and grief, they had lost their composure;
restlessness and worry surrounded them.

Muslim ladies rushed to the residence of the Messenger of Allah (s)
where wives of the Prophet had a sheet over their heads. The Prophet’s
wives used to remove their head coverings and beat their chests. And
they were beating their chests and the Ansar ladies were thrashing their
own faces in the burning grief till their throats were injured due to
their lamentation and moanings.**[2]**

Among the Ahle Bayt (‘a) the Prophet’s beloved daughter, Lady Fatima was
the one most devastated by the tragedy and she was the one most
aggrieved. She was lamenting the passing away of her father in the
following words: “O my dear father! O Messenger of Allah (s)! O
Messenger of mercy! Now there would no arrival of heavenly revelation
and Jibraeel would be separated from us. O Allah! Join my soul with his
soul and intercede for me so that I can see his face and do not deprive
me on the Day of Judgment from his rewards and intercession.”**[3]**

She moved around that purified corpse and said, “O dear father! I shall
mention the grief to Jibraeel… O dear father! The Garden of Paradise is
his repose… O dear father! It was God who called him and he accepted the
call…”**[4]**

Muslims arrived confused and shocked while they were drowned in sorrow
and lamenting the tragedy and the earth shook below their feet and they
were in such a turmoil that they had completely lost their composure and
they were all in a state of restlessness.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-*Manaqib* 237. Numerous traditions are recorded based on the
fact that the head of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) rested in the
lap of Imam Ali (a.s.). *Kanzul Ummal* 4/55, Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat*
2/262-263 etc.  
 **[2]** *Ansab al-Ashraaf* Vol. 1, Pg. 574  
 **[3]** *Tarikh* al-Khamis 2/173  
 **[4]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 2/120 Ibne Majah, *Sunan* 1/522 and it is
mentioned therein that Hammad bin Zaid said that I saw that when Thabit
narrated this tradition he was weeping and his ribs were moving up and
down.

Funeral Ceremony of the Holy Prophet (s)
----------------------------------------

His Eminence performed the funeral rituals of the Prophet and no one
shared this job with him. After that he gave the ritual funeral bath
saying all the time, “May my parents be sacrificed on you! By your
passing away it is discontinued that which is not discontinued by the
passing away of anyone other than you, that is Prophethood, the news and
the divine revelation. It was your specialty till finally others have
come to give condolence for you and you became so mixed up with the
people till all of them became equal to you. If you had not commanded
patience and prohibited excessive lamentation the tears would have
flowed till they are exhausted. But we shall observe your grief and
mourn for you and fulfill our covenant…”**[1]**

Abbas, uncle of the Prophet and Usamah passed water to His Eminence from
behind the curtain**[2]** and a fragrance spread from the body of the
Messenger of Allah (s) and the Imam said, “May my parents be sacrificed
on you, O Messenger of Allah (s)! Alive and dead of you both are
fragrant.”**[3]** And the water with which the funeral bath was given
was from a well called “Ghars” and His Eminence used to drink its
water.**[4]** Thus after the funeral bath, His Eminence was shrouded and
kept on a wooden plank.

Funeral Prayer of the Holy Prophet (s)
--------------------------------------

The first one to recite the funeral prayer was the Almighty Allah from
the height of the Arsh (throne). After that was Jibraeel, then Mikaeel
and then Angels prayed in groups.**[5]**

After that Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) recited the funeral prayer of the
Holy Prophet (s). At that time Muslims arrived to recite the funeral
prayer of their Prophet. Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) told them, “None of
you should recite his funeral prayer as an Imam because whether dead or
alive, he is your Imam.

After that Muslims arrived in groups and recited prayer on the Prophet
without an Imam while Amirul Momineen (‘a) stood at the side of the bier
and said, “Peace be on you, O Prophet and Mercy of Allah and His
blessings? O Allah! We testify that he conveyed all that was revealed to
him and he intended good for his followers and always remained concerned
for their well-being. And he performed Jihad in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muhammad Abduh, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/255  
 **[2]** *Wafa al-Wafa* 1/319. *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/263. And in
*Kanzul Ummal* 7/250 it is mentioned that Ali (a.s.) gave the ritual
funeral bath to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Fadl bin Abbas and
Usamah passed the water to Ali (a.s.). And it is mentioned in
*Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/260 that Aws bin Khuli, a Badr veteran called
out, “O Ali, I implore you in the name of Allah to allow me.” Ali (a.s.)
told him to enter and he was present when bath was being given to the
Prophet but he did not take part in any of the rituals.  
 **[3]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat*, Part 2, Pg. 281  
 **[4]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 5/261  
 **[5]** *Hilyatul Awliya* 4/78

the way of Allah till the Almighty Allah bestowed honor to His religion
and He completed His word. O Allah! Make us of those who follow that
which was revealed on him and after that keep us steadfast and keep us
with him.” And the people charted ‘Aameen’ in response.**[1]**

People passed by the Prophet’s purified corpse with their hearts broken
and sunken eyes and they were absolutely devastated by the tragedy
because the one who had guided them to truth was no more and who had
established for them such kingdom that was based on the invitation for
justice to the oppressed and to take the right from every usurper.

He was the one who had lighted the effulgence of guidance and bestowed
light in every sphere of life in all parts of the world.

The Prophet’s Burial
--------------------

After the Muslims had finished praying on that great bier and after they
had said farewell to him for the last time, His Eminence Amirul Momineen
(‘a) laid him to rest in his final repose and stood at the edge of the
grave in such a way that tears flowed from his eyes in torrents and he
spoke in a soft voice, “Patience, except regarding you is beautiful and
sorrow except regarding you is bad. Your calamity is great and before
you and after you also it would remain a great…”**[2]**

Flags of justice were rolled up into each other and pillars of truth
began to tremble and that divine bounty was raised up from the midst
that had transformed the flow of life by an illuminated reality, and
wails of the afflicted and oppressed have destroyed them that there is
no more scope for deprivation and affliction, and man with all his
aspirations that he can obtain, like good remembrance, peace and
steadfastness.

Difficulties of the Purified Progeny
------------------------------------

The Purified Progeny faced insurmountable difficulties after the passing
away of the Prophet. There was a great danger from the Arab clans that
they would take revenge from Islam and that they would attack them
because revenge taking was a general tendency of the Arabs and non-Arabs
of that period. And it was also a fact that they were filled with hatred
and malice towards the family of the Prophet and they were just waiting
for an opportunity and had their complete attention on the events. They
had firm belief that it was Ali who had shed their blood and decapitated
their sons. Thus they decided to take revenge from him and other members
of his family.

The Prophet’s family spent sleepless nights after the passing away of
the Messenger of Allah (s) and sorrow, grief and memories had surrounded
them.

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has described the level of their sorrow in the following
words, “When the Prophet passed away, the Ahle Bayt (‘a) spent the night
in such a way  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Kanzul Ummal* 7/254  
 **[2]** Muhammad Abduh, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 3/224

that neither was there sky above them nor was there earth below their
feet. Because they were the target of revenge from the near and the
distant ones…”**[1]**

Imam Husain (‘a), in his early childhood, bore these difficulties and
shared the problems that his family was facing. And also His Eminence,
by the passing away of his grandfather was deprived of the kindness that
His Eminence used to shower upon him in excess. In the same way he was
hurt by the grief that had befallen his respected father and mother and
a terrible grief fell upon him and surrounded his feelings and
sentiments.

The Prophet (s) departed to Paradise when the age of Imam Husain (‘a)
according to statement of a historian, was six years and seven
months.**[2]** At the time all his personal qualities had become
perfected in him and he recognized the reality of the situation and the
dangerous plan the people had drawn to keep the Ahle Bayt (‘a) away from
Caliphate. While they had abandoned the corpse of their Prophet and
rushed to obtain power and they began to fight for supremacy. Those
events, the natural condition of the society and other qualities and
their aspects made him recognize all this till His Eminence has
described his view in the following words, “People are the slaves of the
world and religion is like a chewed morsel for them. They kept it safe
only to the extent that they may obtain its material benefits. Then
whenever they are involved in difficulties, they become less religious.”

This natural tendency is dominant in all societies and it shall not be
changed in all periods of History.

The passing away of the Prophet was accompanied by very dangerous and
horrible events. One of them was the keeping away of the Purified
Progeny from political affairs in the country and keeping them away from
social life in a time when the community was in no way needless of the
intellectual and mental wealth of Ahle Bayt (‘a) because they had
inherited it from the Messenger of Allah (s).

In the same way the loss suffered by the community was a direct result
of separating Ahle Bayt (‘a) from Caliphate because greed and political
intrigue became common in most of the companions of the Prophet. Their
only aim in spreading political strife and disunity among the people was
to obtain power and gain benefit from the dominions.

In any case the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s) was a
terrible tragedy that befell the Muslims and the Holy Prophet (s) has
described the intensity of the situation in the following words:

**“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least…”[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Biharul Anwar* 59/194, Chapter on the passing away of the
Prophet.  
 **[2]** *Minhaj as-Sunnah*, 5/45. And it is mentioned therein that when
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) passed away Husain was not even seven
years old.  
 **[3]** Surah Aale Imran 3:144

This terrible reverting that Almighty Allah has mentioned occurred in
the general life and the most horrible example of it was the carnage of
the Purified Progeny on the plains of Kerbala and the raising up of the
severed heads of the Prophet’s descendants on spear points and the
taking of the honorable ladies of the Prophet’s household as prisoners
and taking them around the whole country.

Rule of the Two Shaykhs (Abu Bakr and Umar)
-------------------------------------------

An important step that the Holy Prophet (s) had taken to make
arrangements for keeping the system of Muslim society after him was the
appointment of Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) to the position of the
spiritual and worldly leadership of the community. This would have
ensured security and development of Muslim society and it was on the
basis of his practical experience and divine knowledge. It was such a
foolproof solution that no external factor could have affected its aim.
The selection of Ali (‘a) was on the basis of his superiority in every
aspect, as is the unanimous opinion of all Muslims and no one other than
him possessed these qualifications. We shall discuss the most important
of these below:

1 – First of all was the juristic capability of the Holy Imam (‘a) and
his proficiency in legal maters. He was the greatest point of reference
in this field in the world of Islam and the saying of Umar regarding
this is famous that: “If Ali hadn’t been there, Umar would have
perished.” And no other companion was equal to Ali (‘a) in this matter.
All are unanimous that after the Messenger of Allah (s), Ali (‘a) was
the most knowledgeable and informed person in religious affairs and
faculties of the Shariah. And also that His Eminence was the most
proficient in political and administrative capabilities. The direction
of His Eminence to Malik Ashtar is the strongest proof in this regard.
Because this document contains such valuable information and exhortation
that it does not have any peer either in secular of Islamic texts. In
this way it is a complete guide for rulers regarding their duties
towards their subjects and their rights upon them, and the duties of the
ruler in order to achieve social and political justice for the people.
The powers of the rulers and their responsibilities are fixed and those
qualities that an agent of government must possess like competence, and
perfect knowledge about the matters entrusted to him, and the necessity
of his having good morals. He should possess faith and must follow
religious practices. Other important matters are also present in this
document and neither the rulers not the subjects can be needless of
these teachings.

Numerous letters that His Eminence addressed to governors and other
officials are full of political and diplomatic wisdom and they are the
best proof that Ali (‘a) was the most accomplished and prominent persons
with regard to political administration in the Islamic and the secular
world.

In other sciences like scholastic theology, philosophy, mathematics etc.
also he was the most knowledgeable and he opened many doors of sciences
such that they exceed thirty subjects, according to what the writers
stated in his biographies. And in spite of the fact that he was bestowed
with such intellectual capabilities how could it have been possible for
the Messenger of Allah (s) not to have appointed

him at the helm of caliphate – which is the pivot of leadership and
security of the nation?

On the basis of great intellectual capabilities that the Imam (‘a)
possessed and the fact that he always endeavored for the well-being for
the common people it was necessary that His Eminence the Holy Prophet
(s) should choose him for the leadership of the community and not that
he should have selected anyone else for this position because the
Almighty Allah says:

**“Are those who know and those who do not know alike?”[1]**

Nothing can be more absurd and funny than to prefer the inferior over
the superior. This absurdity became the cause of deception in knowledge
and ignorance of the merits and the decline of the Islamic nation and
its downfall that are the prominent examples of this tendency.

2 – His Eminence Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) was the most courageous
and valiant of the people and his unique feats of bravery are on the
tongues of all the world. And it was he alone who said, “Even if all the
Arab unite to confront me, I shall not turn my back in flight.”

And this religion was established through the might of the sword of His
Eminence and it was a result of his Jihad and efforts. He was the one
who slew polytheists in important battles like Badr, Hunain and Ahzab
and he demolished the foundations of infidelity. He killed many of them
and no danger confronted Islam but that His Eminence rushed forward to
remove it immediately. The Messenger of Allah (s) always preferred him
for commandership in all the battles and entrusted the command of all
his soldiers to him. He did not participate in any battle but that
Almighty Allah bestowed victory through him. It was him that defeated
the Jews, uprooted the Gate of Khaiber, destroyed their might and
extinguished the fire of their mischief.

And valor is one of the basic factors on which the leadership of the
people depends. Because if the nation becomes the prey of attack and it
begins to break up and their leader is weak-willed and cowardly, that
nation would indeed fall into calamities and destruction and they would
be continuously subjected to defeat and subjugation.

In spite of possessing this lofty quality with all its imports how could
it have been possible for the Messenger of Allah (s) not to select His
Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) for Islamic caliphate? Because
he was with regard to being incomparable in valor and other perfections
that he had it was necessary that even if the appointment of the Holy
Prophet (s) had not been present, he was still the most qualified one
for the leadership of the Islamic nation.

3 – The most important quality that is necessary in the person, who
holds the post of leadership of the people, is self denial and
self-sacrifice, the well-being of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Zumar 39:9

people over every other thing and not restricting the war-booties and
other public-monies for his own self. These matters were the most
prominent due to which the Imam earned popularity during his time.
History knows of no ruler who had overlooked personal needs for the sake
of the people or who had never utilized public funds for his own self or
for his family, like Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a). He suffered a great deal
in this regard and tried utmost to take such a course of action that was
based on justice and truth among the Muslims. The details shall be
provided when we write about the reign of His Eminence.

4 – Justice is the most important and significant personal quality in
the personality of the Imam. Because the self of His Eminence was
overflowing with piety and restraint from divine obedience and he did
not prefer anything to the obedience of the Almighty and he used to be
severely opposed to that which was against religion and that which was
unacceptable to divine law. It was the same His Eminence who remarked,
“By Allah, if all the seven heavens and all that is below the skies is
given to me so that I may disobey God and snatch a grain from an ant, I
shall never do so.”

And the signs of justice present in His Eminence were unique and he
refused the offer of caliphate when Abdur Rahman Ibn Auf put the
condition that His Eminence would have to continue the practice of the
first two caliphs. He did not agree to act upon their personal opinions.
And if His Eminence had been inclined (power hungry) to material
benefits and worldly gains he would have agreed to the conditions and
then later acted as he found fit. But he did not even agree to do so
because he could not promise something that he opposed in principle. He
never accepted anything that possessed any kind of deviation and
wrongfulness with regard to Islamic guidance.

Justice with all its meanings had inhabited the personality of His
Eminence and it is of the natural elements that are necessary in anyone
who holds a responsible position in the affairs of Muslim community.

These were some qualities that are found in an Imam. Then how is it
possible that the Prophet could not have appointed him to the position
of caliphate? If we agree with the actual successorship that Emigrants
won the argument against the Helpers, Imam was the most eligible to the
position of successorship of the Prophet because he was the cousin of
the Prophet, his son-in-law and the father of his grandsons.

Sedillot says, “If they had accepted the real successorship which was
from the beginning in favor of Ali (‘a), it would have saved Islam from
the turmoil and bloodshed that was to plague it in the future. The
husband of Fatima united in his person the hereditary right with that of
election.”**[1]**

A careful look which is uninfluenced by elements of partiality and blind
faith would decide that the Prophet cannot appoint anyone to caliphate
and his successorship merely on the basis of his personal regard for
that person. His  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ruhul Islam*, Pg. 292

appointment of Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) was based on divine appointment
and not on his personal preference to Ali (‘a). It was because Ali (‘a)
possessed all the qualifications necessary for that office… And it is of
the weakest reports and very much against logic that the Prophet ignored
the matter of caliphate and did not issue any instructions regarding it.
Rather he entrusted the matter to Muslims and allowed them to choose
whomsoever they like! Because such a thing on the basis of what the Shia
scholars say was sure to destroy the social framework of the Muslim
community and subject the nation to untold turmoil and misery. This was
also practically seen in the history of Islam when people disregarded
the Prophet’s appointment for Imamate this caused untold calamities for
the community and the storms of mischief engulfed them as did the
selfishness and base desires. While political greed became strong in
some Muslims leaders and in order to obtain rulership and power they
destroyed themselves and put a large number of people to death through
armed conflicts in order to achieve their ambitions and selfish desires
till finally it became common place to have ones children killed and to
be bereaved and aggrieved.

Ustad Muhammad Sayyid Gilani says, “That community, in the matter of
caliphate, became so much involved in such a conflict that is not as
much seen in any other communities. They committed such acts that we
tend to dissociate ourselves from them. And the result was that lives
were destroyed, towns were devastated, villages became deserted, houses
were torched to ashes, women were widowed, children orphaned and the
majority of Muslim population was on the verge of destruction…”**[1]**

It is natural that the destruction that befell the Muslims its necessary
consequence was that the caliphate deviated from its real center that
the Almighty Allah had determined for them that it should be entrusted
to Ahle Bayt (‘a) who were equal to the Holy Quran.

In any case we shall try with utmost efforts to move towards the
exposition of truth in this our discussion regarding the events that
accompanied the reigns of Abu Bakr and Umar. We shall describe them in
detail and with the perception of reason we shall show them in more
prominence than other things. And we shall try our best to reach to the
reality of the situations.

Saqifa gathering
----------------

I do not consider any other event except the gathering of Saqifah more
dangerous for the Muslim community that the Helpers (Ansar) had
organized to obtain rulership and political power. Because it was the
foundation stone for the downfall of the community and the people as a
result had to face untold calamities and destructions. It was this
meeting from where spread self-conceit and intrigues dominated psyche of
a majority of elders of the community.

Bulis Salamah says, “Such an event occurred in Saqifa under the roof of
the Saqifa  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Athar Tashayyo Dar Adabiyaat-e-Arab*, Pg. 15

that the hidden desires and hopes were aroused. The angers spread just
as the branches of a thorny tree are full of prickly thorns
intertwined.”

This political meet initiated a long chain of terrible events among whom
was, according to the statement of researchers, was the tragedy of
Kerbala.

Imam Kashiful Ghita says,

“By Allah, if Saqifah hadn’t been there, there would have been no
Kerbala. Such that this is a branch of that same root.”

And we are compelled to ponder upon this meeting and discuss how Abu
Bakr emerged victorious in it.

Motives of Saqifah Meet
-----------------------

Many motives were responsible for the Ansar (Helpers) hastening to
organize their meet without any delay and not even waiting for the
Prophet to be laid in his final abode. Some of them are as follows:

1 – They realized the political step that the Quraish had taken against
the Imam and the plot they had devised against him. That is why they
unanimously decided to keep away caliphate from His Eminence Ali (‘a)
and signs of disobedience became apparent in them. That is why they
avoided joining the army of Usamah and they also prevented the writing
of the document that the Prophet desired in order to ensure the security
and well being of the community.

It is very likely that the Ansar had much before the passing away of the
Messenger of Allah (s) understood the animosity of the Muhajireen
(Emigrants) towards the Imam. And they knew that they would not obey the
Prophetic commands with regard to Ali (‘a) and would not accept his
authority because he had killed their ancestors in Holy war and routed
their elders in the establishment of religious authority.

Uthman bin Affan had said to the Imam, “What can I do when the Quraish
do not like you while you had killed their seventy warriors in the
Battle of Badr, whose faces where like shining gold ear rings and their
noses were rubbed on the ground before their lips.”**[1]**

Uthman has described the hatred of Quraish regarding those who were
killed in the Battle of Badr. Those, whose faces shone due to their
beauty and joy like gold trinkets while they were thrown headlong to the
ground and subjected to humiliation. Without any doubt they were sure
that the Imam could only be the one who has killed their men and the
Quraish were going to seek revenge for the blood that the Imam had shed.

Canani has versified the encouragement to the Quraish to take revenge
from the Imam for the blood he had shed of their ancestors”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 9/22-23

**“In every gathering you have humiliated those great personalities that
has hurt the eyes.**

**Allah be good for you! Do you not remember when you were emancipated
slaves of a great personality.**

**Shame on you! Do you not recall that which when a free man remembers
he feels ashamed?**

**This is the son of Fatima[1]** **who has beheaded and destroyed you
and in revenge of which he has not been beheaded.**

**Where are those stalwarts that faced difficulties and where is the
honor of the land of Mecca.”[2]**

Ibn Tawus has narrated from his father about Ali Ibn Husain (‘a) that he
said, “Why do the Quraish not like Ali (‘a)?”

His Eminence replied, “Because he sent the first of them to Hell fire
and the last of them he humiliated...”**[3]**

In any case, the Ansar realized that the Emigrant Quraish had devised an
evil plot for the Imam and that they shall not accept his authority
while it was announced on the Day of Ghadeer. Because they said,
“Muhammad thinks that this matter was to be completed for his cousin.
Far from it that it should be fulfilled.” And the Ansar became certain
that if the Emigrants took the rein of Caliphate they (the Ansar) would
have to bear terrible difficulties due to their regard to the Holy Imam.
Therefore they organized a meet to select their own candidate for the
post of caliphate.

2 – On the basis of the information received from the Prophet, the Ansar
were certain that the Ahle Bayt (‘a) would not be able to get the
caliphate and that they shall be deprived after the passing way of the
Messenger of Allah (s). The Imamite scholar, Shaykh Mufeed has narrated
that during the last illness of the Prophet when only his uncle, Abbas,
his son Fadl, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) and some close family members were
left alone in the company of the Prophet, Abbas told His Eminence, “If
this matter after you is decided among us, let us know about it and if
you know that we shall be defeated in it, inform us about it.”

His Eminence replied, “After me you shall be oppressed.”**[4]** And
before that too His Eminence had announced this among the Muslims. On
the basis of this, the Ansar themselves resorted to precaution and
organized a meeting of their own so that they may obtain power and the
Emigrants may not precede them in this matter.

3 – The Ansar were the strong pillars of the Islamic military. They had
devastated the Meccan attackers and routed their elders and killed their
stalwarts in large  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** That is Fatima binte Asad the mother of Imam Ali (a.s.).  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*  
 **[3]** Ibnul A’raabi, *Mojam,* 3/504  
 **[4]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 99

numbers. Hence they knew that if the Quraish were to gain power over
them they would definitely subject them to the worst circumstances and
extract the most terrible revenge from them.

This matter is clearly delineated in the statement of Habab bin Mundhir
that: “But we dread that after you someone comes to caliphate whose
sons, fathers and brothers we have killed.” This prophecy became a
reality, because not much time had passed when the reign of the caliphs
had barely ended that the kingdom reached into the hands of Umayyads,
and they began to oppress the Ansar and subject them to poverty and
needfulness. Muawiyah tried his utmost to extract revenge from them and
when after him the power was transferred to Yazid, he continued the same
attacks on them. Their wealth and property was destroyed and their blood
was shed in the plunder of Medina. It was such a terrible incident that
in history it has no equal.

These were some factors that caused the Ansar to organize a meeting of
their own and they endeavored by it to conceal their secret plans.

Political statement of Saad
---------------------------

When the Aws and Khazraj tribes came together at Saqifah Bani Saadah,
Saad bin Ubadah, the leader of Khazraj tribe made the opening statement
of the meet and as he was indisposed he was unable to speak in a loud
voice; his words were repeated by one of his aides. He said,

“O Ansar people! In the religion you have a precedence and you have
excellence in Islam and none from Arabs have that excellence. Because
the Holy Prophet (s) remained in his people for more than 10 years and
invited them to leave idol worship and come to worship One God. But
except for few none helped him. Or that they may give strength to his
religion and remove his afflictions and none brought faith on him till
the time the Almighty Allah selected these merits for you and kept honor
and reward for you only. And made you special for His bounties. And gave
you faith in His Prophet and belief in Allah and to defend him. And to
defend his companions and to accord honor to his religion and to fight
his enemies. All these merits were given to you. And you were the ones
toughest for his enemies till the time the Arab people willingly or
unwillingly submitted to the command of Allah. And the people in far
flung areas with degradation had begun to obey. Then the Arabs brought
faith by your swords alone. And Allah, the Glorified and the Mighty was
pleased with you and when his eyes were lit by your presence, He took
him up to Himself while he was pleased with you. Then in this matter
(caliphate) you alone should take it upon yourself as you are more
deserving of this than all others.”**[1]**

Saad’s speech contained the following significant points:

1 – He considered the contest of Ansar and their bravery, which was
incomparable  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Kamil* 2/328, *Tabari* 3/218

in the path of Islam and the respect and honor they earned as a result.
And how they had devastated the ranks of the foes till finally they
became firm and their power was established. They had a greater share in
the way of spread of Islam because they were the same who had helped and
supported the Prophet during his difficult times. That is why they were
more preferable to the Prophet and more deserving to the Prophet and
more deserving of rulership than others. “One who has put in more
efforts is more deserving of war booty.”

2 – The subjugation of the Quraishite clans who had not brought faith in
the Prophet, and those who denied his prophethood and fought him, till
he was finally compelled to emigrate to Medina. And that those who had
brought faith in him were not capable to support and defend him. On the
basis of this, a share in rulership and a portion in the share in
controlling of Islamic government, that the Prophet has established,
they did not deserve any share in the government that could not have
been established without the help of Ansar and their struggle.

Criticism against Saad
----------------------

Among the criticisms leveled against Saad is that he ignored the
Purified Progeny, which was equal in importance to the Holy Quran and he
did not make any mention about His Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen Ali
(‘a) who was the Chief of that Progeny. He was the door of the City of
Knowledge of the Prophet and was in relation to the Messenger of Allah
(s) like Prophet Harun was to Prophet Musa (‘a). Also Saad feigned
ignorance about His Eminence and he made an invitation for himself and
his people. The first arrow that was aimed at Ahle Bayt (‘a) was from
that day when Ansar and Muhajireen intentionally closed their eyes to
the superiority of the Purified Progeny so that they obtain rulership
for themselves and that they may benefit from the rewards of wealth and
gifts of rulership, and that they may benefit from the seat of power.

In any case, Saad went to such an extent in feigning ignorance about the
right of the Imam and deviated so much into mistake, while we do not pay
any attention to this act of his. Through his act he made the community
involved into mischief and calamities and a great trouble befell it.
Because the caliphate that Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet (s) had
intended for the Purified Progeny went away from deserving who were such
that they acted on Islam to the letter and observed its laws and
commands.

Saad received the punishment of his deed and as soon as Abu Bakr
obtained the seat of power he immediately went after Saad. Saad became
helpless and at last he had to relocate to Syria from Medina and Khalid
bin Walid went along with him from among his friends. In the dark of the
night they sat in ambush for him and attacked and killed him. They
composed some couplets gloating over their act of killing him:

**“We killed Saad bin Ubadah, the chief of the Khazraj. And we shot two
arrows and did not miss hitting his heart.”**

It is really strange that the political power of that time managed to
secure the services of Jinns and made them a medium of their deeds. Some
people having less intelligence accepted this explanation without
pondering over the political situation of that time.

Weakness of Ansar
-----------------

The Ansar did not possess a firm determination and steadfastness and
they were unaware of the political matters and inspite of their large
numbers they were fraught with weakness and sloth. On the basis of what
the historians say after the discourse of Saad there were arguments
among themselves. They said: “If the Muhajireen of Quraish do not accept
our claim and say that we Muhajireen are his foremost companions and
first friends, why have you debated with us in this matter?” Some of
them said: “In that case we shall say that let there be a leader from us
and a leader from you and we shall not accept anything less than this.”

When Saad saw this surrender to defeat that has conquered the hearts of
his people, he stood up and said, “This is the beginning of
weakness.”**[1]**

Indeed, the beginning as well as the end was weak because the weak
morale of theirs, the dispersal of their rows and their lack of
steadfastness became apparent in the political field. When they had
organized their own meet and kept it a top secret so that before the
Muhajireen of Quraish could learn about the events that were to come,
they may obtain political supremacy. But in this contest they had to
face humiliation and they did not gain anything out of it and finally
they lost the unique opportunity to gain power. When the Muhajireen
arrived in the meet without prior information, differences and arguments
erupted among the Ansar. The Muhajireen very soon got the control of the
situation and got the reins of the government in their hands.

Jealousy and Enmity
-------------------

Another factor that became the cause of the defeat of the Anwar was
their internal jealousy and malice. Since antiquity there was a great
hostility between the Aws and the Khazraj tribes; the two tribes
comprised Ansar of Medina. The enmity was so severe that it often led to
bloodshed. According to historians the last battle fought between these
two tribes in Yathrib was six years before the Hijrah of the Prophet.
When the Prophet arrived in Medina and witnessed such enmity between the
Aws and Khazraj that even a slightest provocation led to violence, he
tried his utmost to forge a bond of friendship among them. Though they
agreed to a truce it was an uneasy one and when two people of rival
tribes came face to face they betrayed their inner malice for each
other. According to historians there were many occasions when this
latent malice developed into arguments and fights. This same rivalry
came out in the open on the day of Saqifah. Hazeer bin Usaid the leader
of the Aws, who had extreme dislike for Saad, when he saw that his
people had selected him as their candidate for caliphate he told his
people, “If the caliphate  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Kamil* 2/328, *Tabari* 3/218

goes to Saad even once, his tribe would gain such a merit that you would
not have any share in it. So get up and give oath of allegiance to Abu
Bakr…”**[1]**

This shows the hidden enmity that the Aws had against the Khazraj that
if Saad once achieves rulership on the basis of it the Khazraj would
gain superiority over the Aws tribe. It was such a thing that was very
distasteful for the leader of Aws. And that is why that he, along with
his people paid allegiance to Abu Bakr. If it hadn’t been so the
caliphate would not have gone to Abu Bakr.

In addition to this some Khazraj people also harbored malice towards
Saad and considered the position of rulership too high for him. Because
Bashir bin Saad Khazraji who was an important rival of Saad and who was
with the Khazraj group, they also paid allegiance to Abu Bakr thus
destroying the work of Saad.

In any case, these rivalries and malice became the cause of the
caliphate going out of the hands of Ansar and landing it in the hands of
Muhajireen.

Umar’s Planning
---------------

Umar was instrumental in performing a dangerous and significant maneuver
in order to control the situation and he laid a hurdle in every matter
that led to the appointment of the Prophet’s successor, because his
partner in this mission, Abu Bakr, at the time of the passing away of
the Prophet was not in Medina. He was staying at Sunh.**[2]** So Umar
sent someone to bring him to Medina, but he feared that before Abu Bakr
could return, someone else may arrive in the field. Therefore, he stood
in the street in a horrified condition and began to roam the lanes and
by lanes of Medina and he addressed every group of people, waving his
sword and announcing loudly:

“Some hypocrites have claimed that the Messenger of Allah (s) has passed
away while by Allah, he is not dead. Rather he has gone to his Lord like
Musa Ibn Imran had gone…By Allah, the Messenger of Allah (s) would
return and if anyone says that he is dead, I would cut off his limbs.”

Whosoever said that the Messenger of Allah (s) has passed away was
threatened by Umar’s sword and was chastised by him.**[3]**

People were frightened and they fell into doubt. They were surrounded by
waves of perplexity and they could not decide whether to believe the
claim of Umar, which was their favorite wish or to believe in what they
had seen with their own eyes that the Prophet lay in his bed at home
without making any movement.

Umar was agitated like thunder and lightning and he was so excited that
his mouth was foaming. He continued to threaten anyone who dared to make
any statement about the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s). Not
much time passed when  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 2/331  
 **[2]** Sunh is a locality situated a mile from Medina and it is also
said that it is an elevated place at a distance of four miles.  
 **[3]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/178

his friend and companion, Abu Bakr arrived from Sunh and along with him
went to the Prophet’s quarters. Abu Bakr removed the cloth from the
Prophet’s face and became certain of his demise. He came out to the
people and refuted the claim of Umar. Then he addressed the groups of
people who were compelled to keep quiet even though they were devastated
by the passing away of the great one who had brought salvation to them:

“For whomsoever worshipped Muhammad, Muhammad is dead. And for
whomsoever worshipped Allah, He is alive and He has not died. And he
recited the words of Almighty as follows:

**“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward the
grateful.”[1]**

Umar did not raise any objection and he also agreed and testified to it
and said to the effect: “By Allah, it wasn’t but that when I heard the
news of the passing away of the Prophet, my legs gave way and I fell
down and my legs were not able to move.”**[2]**

Some Important Points
---------------------

If we ponder deeply on these astonishing steps taken by the two Shaykhs
we shall be able to note some important points that are worthy of
attention and research and they are as follows:

1 – Umar became an absolute denier with all certainty in the death of
the Prophet and he claimed that the Messenger of Allah (s) has gone to
his Lord like Musa Ibn Imran had gone. And that he would indeed return
to the earth. He warned with dire consequences all those who dared to
oppose his claim. Without any doubt this act of his definitely does not
prove his faith in the Prophet’s being alive. Rather it shows his
pursuit of an opportunity to reach his aim and it was in perfect
accordance with his plan that he had hatched with his group that
consisted of persons like Abu Bakr and Abu Ubaidah. The following points
prove this matter:

A – Umar was himself among those who were waiting for the Prophet’s
demise, and he had asked Usamah, “The Messenger Allah is dying, are you
going to be my chief?” This was while the Messenger of Allah (s) was
alive and he became sure of the Prophet’s death when the Messenger of
Allah (s) spoke to the people about his imminent end, and informed them
about the signs of his approaching death as we have explained in the
foregone pages.

B – Also Umar had stood at the bedside of the Messenger of Allah (s)
during his illness and he had prevented the writing of the document that
the Prophet intended to ensure that the people shall not go astray after
him. Umar interjected and said:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Aale Imran 3:144  
 **[2]** *Kamil* 2/324

“Book of Allah is enough for us.” It is but natural that he made this
statement while he had become certain of the Prophet’s imminent death.

C – The great Book of Allah has announced that every human being would
have to taste death. The Almighty Allah says:

**“Every soul must taste of death, then to Us you shall be brought
back.”[1]**

And the Almighty Allah has also said especially regarding His Messenger:

**“Surely you shall die and they (too) shall surely die.”[2]**

And Allah says:

**“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels?”[3]**

These verses are recited in the light of the day and the darkness of the
night. Was Umar unaware of these verses while he used to hear them day
and night and he used to frequent the company of the Prophet?

D – Finally the silencing of Umar and the cooling of his temper as soon
as his friend arrived while he had already announced the return of the
Prophet shows that he was acting according to a premeditated plan. He
did not say a word against what Abu Bakr said about the fact of the
Prophet’s passing away.

2 – The declaration of Umar that the Messenger of Allah (s) would return
and his warning that he would sever the limbs of anyone who said that
the Prophet was dead was not having any weight. Because cutting off of
limbs and impaling is for one who becomes an apostate or one who spreads
mischief in the land. And the mere saying that the Messenger of Allah
(s) had died does not render one liable for such a penalty.

3 – Abu Bakr in his statement on the passing away of the Messenger of
Allah (s) said, “One who worshipped Muhammad, Muhammad is dead and
whosoever worships Allah, Allah is alive and He shall not die.” And it
is proved that there is absolutely no mention anywhere of anyone from
the Muslims ever claiming to worship the Messenger of Allah (s) or that
he considered him in place of the Almighty. Rather all Muslims are
unanimous that His Eminence is the servant of Allah and His Messenger
and that the Almighty had selected him for His revelation and
prophethood.

Ansar Surprised
---------------

When the Ansar were busy in their machination in Saqifah in order to
achieve Caliphate, Awim bin Saada Awsi and Maan Ibn Adi who were
confidants of the Ansar but they were among the friends of Abu Bakr and
members of his group  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Ankabut 29:57  
 **[2]** Surah Zumar 39:30  
 **[3]** Surah Aale Imran 3:144

since the time of the Holy Prophet (s), without any announcement they
came out of the Saqifah meet, while their hearts were full of enmity and
malice towards Saad. They came running to Abu Bakr and Umar and informed
them about the Saqifah gathering. They became very much disconcerted at
this and along with the Abu Ubaidah bin Jarrah**[1]** and Salim, the
slave of Abu Huzaifah they hastened towards Saqifah and some other
people from the Muhajireen also followed them. They found the Ansar
gathered at their meeting place.

The Ansar were shocked and the face of Saad paled and he feared that the
Caliphate would go out of his hand, because he was aware of the
weakness, disunity and mutual differences of the Ansar. They had
organized this meet and kept it top secret from the Muhajireen but now
their unexpected arrival was going to render all their planning
ineffective and in spite of all their efforts to obtain allegiance they
failed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 3/62
