Umar’s Reign
============

Abu Bakr prepared the caliphate after himself for Umar and he assumed it
with utmost ease and facility without any sort of difficulty or
hardship. He caught the rulership with a firm grip and administered the
kingdom with an iron land. So much so that even the senior companions
could not dare to say anything against him. Because as it is said his
walking stick was more terrible than the sword of Hajjaj. Even Ibn
Abbas, inspite of his status and lofty position, could not express his
view about the legality of Mutah in the lifetime of Umar. The family
members of Umar were his sons and none of them were capable to have
their way with him. Here we shall discuss some policies of Umar during
his reign:

Economic Policy of Umar
-----------------------

Sources of Islamic history are unanimous that in his policies, Umar
turned away from the practice of Abu Bakr and in distributing allowances
among the Muslims he did not follow the principles of equity. Rather he
preferred some over others. He had proposed the same policy to Abu Bakr
but he had declined to accept it saying, “Almighty Allah has not
preferred anyone over others. He rather says: Charities are for the poor
and the destitute and He has not considered any people superior to
others.”**[1]**

When caliphate was transferred to him he began to enforce the policy
that he had proposed to Abu Bakr and he justified it saying, “Abu Bakr
had an opinion regarding this matter and I have another opinion. And I
shall not consider at par one who has fought against the Prophet and one
who has fought on his side.”

He sanctioned 5000 units of currency for the Muhajireen and Ansar who
participated in the battle of Badr. However those had accepted Islam
like the fighters of Badr but who did not take part in the Badr battle
were sanctioned 4000 units (Dirhams). For the widows of the Prophet he
specified 12000 Dirhams each except for Safiya and Juwairah.

These two were sanctioned only 6000 dirhams each. They did not accept
it. As for Abbas, the uncle of Allah’s Prophet, he gave 12000; for
Usamah bin Zaid it was 4000 and for his son, Abdullah it was 3000.
Abdullah expressed his displeasure at this and said, “Dear father, why
did you sanction him 1000 more than me? His father had no superiority
that my father does not have and he does not posses anything that I do
not have…”

Umar told him, “Usamah’s father was more preferred to the Messenger of
Allah (s) than your father and Usamah was dearer to the Prophet than
you…”**[2]**

Umar gave preference to Arabs over non-Arabs and the free men over
bondsmen.**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 8/111  
 **[2]** *Al-Kharaaj,* Pg. 148-149  
 **[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 8/111

This policy created class differences in the Muslim society and people
became divided into various classes, tribes and groups. Experts of
genealogy became active in their field**[1]** and this finally caused a
rift among the Arabs and their clients and the latter became jealous and
inimical to their patrons (Arabs). They began to seek evil means and it
gave rise to communal feelings. While Islam had put an end to this very
tendency and it considered the relation of faith stronger than family
relations. It had commanded the rulers to practice non-partisanship
among the people inspite of their family and class difference and
emphasized that no bias must be exercised, as no sort of rift must be
allowed in the social fabric of Muslim community.

Umar’s Critics
--------------

This policy led many scholars and writers to be infuriated by Umar and
they expressed their objections in their writings. Some of them are as
follow:

**1 – Dr. Abdullah Salam:** Dr Abdullah Salam says, “I don’t know how
Umar initiated those steps and why he chose them? Because, they caused
social and economical contradiction. It was a step that created rivalry
and arrogance among the Muslims.”**[2]**

**2 – Dr. Muhammad Mustafa:** Among those who have criticized this
policy is Dr Muhammad Mustafa and he says, “Fixing of grants in this way
had a dangerous effect in the economic life of Muslims because it
gradually brought into existence some upper classes of people who
received a good income without doing any work in return. He fixed
allowances based on two criteria: Relationship to the Messenger of Allah
(s) and precedence in Islam and for the relationship and precedence
there were classes and some divisions. In this manner Umar fixed
allowances without taking into consideration the amount work or struggle
contributed by the people and in this manner Umar utilized the public
wealth from the government’s side.”**[3]**

**3 – Alaili:** Shaykh Alaili has made this a topic of criticism in the
following words: “This economic system created a great chasm and divided
the Arab society into classes, while in the eyes of Islamic Shariat they
were all equal. But the Arab society became divided into aristocracy,
gentry and the commoners.**[4]**

These were utterances of some scholars who have openly denounced the
economic policies initiated by Umar. These policies had no trace of the
economic principles laid down by Islam and it gave rise to the
accumulation of wealth among some companions and they were able to
accumulate huge wealth and it became a cause of transformation in
Islamic life and the domination of the rich class over government
policies and they began to bring into force various policies that were
very beneficial to themselves. They opposed every reformative and
equitable  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Asbiyatul Qibliyah,* Pg. 190  
 **[2]** *Al-Ghuluw wat Tafreeq Fil Hizaaratul Islamiyyah,* Pg. 251  
 **[3]** *Ittehaajaatul Shaar Arabi,* Pg. 108  
 **[4]** *Imam Husain,* Pg. 232

policy in the country and that group put up severe resistance against
the government of His Eminence, Ali (a.s) with all their powers from the
economic factors etc. and put them into practice in order to topple the
government of His Eminence. Because his equitable policies were
preventing them from taking advantage of the superiority and sources of
wealth they had unjustly amassed.

Umar’s Arguments
----------------

Umar justified his scrapping of equitability by himself and the creation
of class system that some of the companions on the basis of their
seniority in Islam and their participation in military activities and
holy war were superior to others. These justifications show that they
have no validity. Because the Prophet had under no circumstances, never
taken into consideration anything from the public wealth to the
exception of a particular companion because of their seniority in Islam,
or their exceptional efforts and hardship that they bore. Persons like
Ammar Ibn Yasir, Bilal the Habashi and Abu Zar etc. And he did not take
into consideration the unique contribution of his cousin, His Eminence,
Ali, who was of the valiant fighters of Islam and who defended the faith
at every stage and every time. Rather, His Eminence entrusted the reward
of those warriors and their recompense to Allah in the Hereafter. That
the Almighty Allah has taken this recompense and reward on His
responsibility with this special quality.

The economic policy established through the Prophet specified absolute
equality in grants and allowances so that the society remains integrated
and united and all the types of class differences and mutual jealousies
are destroyed.

Umar’s Regret
-------------

When Umar witnessed the extreme accumulation of wealth with some of the
companions he was extremely regretful and helpless and he said, “If I
had followed the policy that I adopted in the end I would have taken the
excessive wealth from the rich and restored it to the poor.”

These steps that he had in view, are not undeserving of consideration.
Because if the excess wealth accumulated by the rich class was from the
bestowals that they had received in excess, without any doubt it all
belonged to public treasury and was necessary that he should have
ordered them to be repaid to the state so that economic balance is
created. And if the wealth comprised of business profits – which I don’t
think it was so – it was necessary to collect taxes from them, rather
than having them confiscated.

Anyway, the monies obtained in war booty, Jizyah tax and land tax belong
to the public treasury, which is for the Muslims. And it was not
permitted that some people be given preference over others and it was
necessary that it should have been equally distributed among all as the
Holy Prophet (s) had done.

Internal Policies of Umar
-------------------------

Umar tried to impose his influence by force and harshness and all,
whether his close friends and relations or others, were horrified of his
nature. Such was the

level of his ferocity that a pregnant lady approached him to ask about a
particular matter. But she became so much terrorized in his presence
that she had miscarriage.**[1]**

Umar was extremely rude and harsh especially to one who accorded some
importance to himself. Narrators say, “One day Umar was distributing
some funds among the people who were crowded around him. Then Saad bin
Abi Waqqas arrived who is famous for his exploits in the conquest of
Persia. Saad pushed the people aside and succeeded in reaching to Umar.
When Umar saw him, that how he has brought himself to the fore, he began
to thrash him with his stick, saying, “Do you not fear the power of
Allah on the earth? I wanted to show you that the power of Allah is also
not fearful of you.” And his event with Jebella also shows his rude and
harsh nature.

Jebella accepted Islam along with his companions and the Muslims were
greatly pleased due to this. Jebella arrived in the Hajj season and
while he was circumambulating the Ka’ba a man from Fuzara stepped on his
lower garment and stopped him. Jebella was furious and he slapped the
man of Fuzara.

This information reached Umar who had Fuzari summoned and ordered
Jebella to permit that man to either take revenge or compensation, or
forgive Jebella. And in this matter he was very harsh to Jebella.
Jebella apostatized and exited from the religion of Islam and fled to
Harqil. Harqil tried to pacify him and also presented him with some
gifts but Jebella lamented about his losses on leaving Islam in the
following words that expressed his deep grief and sorrow:

**“The nobles became Christian due to one slap. If I had been patient on
it, no harm was there in it.**

**Obstinacy and arrogance dominated me and for that I exchanged
blindness in lieu of eyesight.**

**If only my mother had not given birth to me. If only I had returned to
what Umar had said to me.**

**And if only I had been a quadruped grazing in wildness or even a
prisoner of the Rabia and Mudhir tribes.”**

Umar wanted to put a chain of camel tethers around the neck of Jebella
and he be taken around in this manner so that he is humiliated.

Ibn Abil Hadid has narrated for us the harshness of Umar to his family.
He says, “Whenever he was infuriated at someone, his anger did not
recede till he forced his hand between his teeth and bit them till it
bled.**[2]**

Uthman also, when Muslims criticized him and rose up against him,
reminded them about the harshness and severity of Umar so that they may
leave him (Uthman). Uthman said, “Ibn Khattab trampled you below his
feet and he hit you  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/74  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 6/342

with his hands and by his tongue he humiliated you while you were
frightened with him and you remained satisfied with him…”**[1]**

After some years, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) spoke about the policies of
Umar and the hardships of the people during his reign, saying, “After
that he (Abu Bakr) transferred the caliphate to a harsh condition, (to
Umar, who was) rude in speech, unapproachable and full of mistakes and
he put forth many excuses. And its owner was like the rider of a
ferocious beast that if he pulls at the reins it would rent the mouth of
the beast and if he lets him free it would have thrown him into
hardships; and by Allah, people fell into mistakes, hardships,
indecisiveness and controversies…”**[2]**

This policy was opposed to the practice of the Holy Prophet (s) and the
policies of His Eminence, because His Eminence lived among the people
with kindness and affection and he dealt with them with utmost mercy. He
was for them a loving father and he used to encourage people not have
any fear or reservations from him. So much so that a man came to His
Eminence while he was in a fearful condition. His Eminence told him not
to be afraid, saying, “Indeed I am a son of a Quraishite lady who ate
dried meat.”

The behavior of His Eminence with his companions was just like that of
the behavior of a brother to his brother and without that he should
address them in a way that he was having some superiority or lofty
status over them. And the Almighty Allah has described the high moral
behavior of His Eminence in the following words: **“And most surely you
conform (yourself) to sublime morality.”*[3]***

Freedom of Companions of the Prophet Restricted
-----------------------------------------------

Historians state that Umar restricted the movements of the companions of
the Prophet and he did not allow them to leave Medina. They were not
allowed to go beyond the town limits without a special permission of
Umar. This step of Umar was against the Islamic spirit because in Islam
there is general freedom to all the people. People in Islam are accorded
the freedom of thought, expression, faith and work as Islam has given
them personal rights of human beings and the government is duty-bound to
support and respect these things and provide them with this freedom. The
ruling powers do not have the right to oppose them or to restrict this
freedom subject to the condition that man does not misuse this freedom
to harm others or creates mischief in the earth.

Justification of Taha Husayn
----------------------------

Dr. Taha Husayn had defended Umar’s restrictions on the companions of
the Prophet. He says, “However he was afraid of mischief. He feared
mischief on their part. Hence he had them under surveillance at Medina,
that they may not leave the town without his permission. And they were
prohibited to go to areas not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hayatul Imam Hasan bin Ali (a.s.)* 1/197  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/162  
 **[3]** Surah Qalam 68:4

conquered yet because be feared that people there may become devoted to
them and this may cause them to become vain and arrogant. He was fearful
of the consequences of this devotion to his government…”**[1]**

This explanation is absolutely lacking in research and depth. Because if
the companions who intended to travel from Medina to conquered places,
if these companions were from the righteous and religious ones, they
indeed would have proved to be source of guidance and goodness for
people who were eager to accept Islam. From this aspect, they would
certainly have spread the religious commands and Islamic manners among
these people and they were trying to spread knowledge among them. If in
case those companions were such that they had become devotees of
material gains than they indeed deserved to be stopped from going out of
Medina. But it would be only as a custom and not as a religious law.
That too for the protection of the interests of the government and to
keep people from becoming their devotees. However in this regard, no
tradition exists that Umar restrained only some people and allowed
others. Rather he imposed travel restrictions on one and all. And it was
natural that this rule imposed by Umar was very much unpleasant for the
companions of the Prophet and an obstacle was imposed between them and
their freedom.

Officials and Governors appointed by Umar
-----------------------------------------

Treating the footsteps of Abu Bakr, Umar continued to keep away the
Hashimites from government posts and he did not accord them any share.
Rather he confirmed those who were appointed by Abu Bakr and kept them
on their former positions. And it is surprising that he did not give any
official position to well-known companions like Talha and Zubair and he
was told, “You bestowed governorship to Yazid bin Abi Sufyan, Saeed bin
Aas, this one and that from those who were of doubtful faith from the
freed slaves and sons of the freed slaves, but you paid no attention to
Ali, Abbas, Zubair and Talha?”

He replied, “As for Ali, he is above such things but these people from
Quraish, (Talha and Zubair) I fear that if they spread in the cities
they may create corruption therein.”

Ibn Abil Hadid commenting on this statement of Umar says, “One who is
fearful of making them leaders, so that they may not be greedy for
rulership and each of them may desire it for himself. How he is not
fearful that from them he appointed six persons of the same level in the
Shura committee and nominated them for caliphate? Could there be a
greater cause for corruption…?”**[2]**

Supervision of Governors
------------------------

Umar maintained strict supervision on his governors and administrators
and he did not appoint anyone for the post but that he first had their
wealth and property valued and when he used to dismiss them, he again
had their assets valued. And if  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Fitnatul Kubra* 1/17  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 9/29-30

he found any increase therein he used to have half of their wealth
confiscated and deposited in the Public treasury.**[1]**

Umar appointed Abu Huraira Doosi as the governor of Bahrain. It was
reported to him that Abu Huraira has misappropriated the wealth of
Muslims. Thus he was summoned. When he arrived Umar scolded him and
said, “You should know that I appointed you as the governor of Bahrain
while you didn’t have slippers to wear. Now it has been reported to me
that you have sold some horses for 1600 Dinars?”

Abu Huraira tried to explain the matter saying, “We had some horses who
multiplied continuously…”

Umar did not accept any excuse and he chastised Abu Huraira a great deal
saying, “I have already specified your income and allowances and this is
the excess that you must refund.”

Abu Huraira refused and said, “It is not your right.”

Umar said, “Yes, by Allah, I would give you pain in your back.”

Umar became infuriated and stood up towards him and hit Abu Huraira with
his walking stick till he began to bleed. Abu Huraira had no option but
to return the money he had misappropriated. So he said at last, “I shall
return it and present the account to God.”

Umar in that same weak logic of his replied to him, “It is in case that
it be obtained through lawful means and you have paid it on your own.
Have you brought them from the distant areas of Bahrain? People have
brought them for you and not for Allah or the Muslims. Amima**[2]** had
brought you forth only for grazing donkeys.”**[3]**

After that he halved all the assets of Abu Huraira. Umar had also
confiscated half of the assets of his following officials:

1. Samrah bin Jundab

2. Asim bin Qais

3. Mujasheh bin Masood

4. Juza bin Muawiyah

5. Hajjaj bin Ateek

6. Bashir bin Mohtafaz

7. Abu Maryam bin Mohrash

8. Nafe bin Harth

These were some officials and governors of Umar whose assts were divided
into two and a part was appropriated to the Public treasury. Historians
say, “It was Yazid Ibn Qais who had encouraged Umar to take this step.
He recited the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Fitnatul Kubra* 1/20  
 **[2]** “Amimah” was the mother of Abu Huraira  
 **[3]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 3/163

following couplets to encourage him:

**‘Convey this message to the chief of the believers that he is the
custodian of God in the matter of commands and prohibitions.**

**That he is the custodian of God among us. Our hearts would accept the
one who is the custodian of the Lord of the heavens.**

**Do not leave the folks of villages and cities to think that the
property of Allah be considered permitted for general welfare and
development.**

**Thus send towards Hajjaj and have his account taken. And also send
your agents to Jaza and Bashr.**

**And do not ignore the two Nafes. For both of them and Ibn Ghilab from
the chiefs of Bani Nasr.**

**And Asim from among them is not empty handed and he was a mere slave
of the Bani Badr sold in the market.**

**Also depute towards Noman and take his accounts and the son-in-law of
Bani Khazwan, as I know him.**

**And inquire about the assets of Shabl and also Ibn Mohrish who is
called ‘Sahib’ among his villagers.**

**Divide his assets, may our family be sacrificed on you. If you divide
it into half, he would agree to it.**

**And do not invite me to witness it as I am going to disappear but I
continue to witness the amazing times.**

**We shall return if they come. And we shall go to war if they go. Then
how come they have so much wealth and we do no have much?**

**If the trader gets musk it shall run between the parting of hair.’**

As a result of this Umar stood up and one after the other took up the
cases of each of his appointees, seized their assets and confiscated
half.**[1]**

And the meaning of these couplets is that these rulers have committed
fraud and misappropriation of public wealth. But the seizure of half of
their assets has no precedence in the Prophet’s practice. Rather their
case should be handed over to the court of law. So that if their
dishonesty is proved the legal penalty shall be applied to them. And the
confiscation of half of their property they had embezzled is
meaningless. In the same way to transfer them from one place to another
and to consider them unreliable becomes necessary.

Anyway, inspite of Umar’s strictness continuous complaints reached him
and some people complained about the governors to him, especially those
who were responsible for collecting land tax. They sent their complaint
in the form of these two couplets.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ghadeer* 6/275-276

**“We shall go wherever they go and we shall fight when they fight. Then
how is it that they have so much and we have none?**

**If the trader gets musk it shall run between the parting of
hair.”[1]**

He saw new wealth and abundance of opulence in them than were to be seen
among the common people and it was natural that this was obtained
through embezzlement as in those days, there was no fool proof method of
taking their accounts and keeping track of their financial dealings.

And here a very meaningful question remains. Umar dealt with all his
governors strictly but why did he not apply the same strict measures for
Muawiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan? He rather, accorded him special honor and he
did not subject him to any sort of accounting and inspection. One after
other complaints continued to reach Umar that Muawiyah had resorted to
embezzlement, did what he liked and committed excess. However Umar used
to find excuses for Muawiyah and instead praised him saying, “You talk
of Kisra and Caesar while there is Muawiyah among you?”**[2]**

And thanks be to Allah there is no Choesroes and Caesar in Islam. It is
mentioned in tradition that, “Choesroes was destroyed. And Caesar shall
be destroyed and there shall be no Caesar after him. And by the One in
Whose hands is my life, you shall spend their treasures in the path of
God.”

Umar used to defend Muawiyah beyond reasonable limits. And narrators
says, “Some companions mentioned to him that Muawiyah was going against
the Prophetic practice because he wore silk and brocade and used gold
and silver utensils and he does not refrain himself from any un-Islamic
deed. Umar objected to them and scolded them saying, “Leave it! Do not
complain to me about a young man of Quraish. One who smiles while in
anger and what he has is not obtained easily. And nothing could be taken
from above his head but that he discards it himself…”**[3]**

Historians say that Umar went to greater lengths to elevate the position
of Muawiyah and imbued him with a lofty soul. And the members of the
Shura committee that Umar has instituted for selecting the caliph after
him, were warned about Muawiyah that, “If you resort to jealousy among
yourselves and if you begin to oppose each other and if there is mutual
enmity among you, Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan would dominate you in this
matter…”**[4]**

And when Muawiyah became sure that the caliph would not take any action
against him and he would continue to defend him, he initiated such steps
in Syria that a power hungry king takes in order to strengthen his rule
and power.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Futuh al-Buldan*, Pg. 377  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 55/330  
 **[3]** *Istiab* (Printed on the margins of *al-Isabah*) 3/1418  
 **[4]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* (First edition) 1/187

Seclusion of Imam Ali (‘a)
--------------------------

Historians have no difference of opinion that the Holy Imam (‘a) was
highly aggrieved due to the usurpation of his rights and the ignorance
of his position. He was extremely shocked due to the misappropriation of
his inheritance. Because the people tried to ignore his status and
considered him an ordinary person not worldly of a special regard. They
completely disregarded his relation to the Prophet and his status in the
view of the Messenger of Allah (s). And His Eminence became aloof from
them and he did not participate in any of their affairs related to the
government and power. And they also did not make him participate in it.
He became aloof from them and they also became aloof from him. So much
so that he put his cheek on the earth as historians say: Muhammad bin
Sulaiman in his reply to Ja’far Ibn Makki regarding what occurred
between Ali and Uthman says:

“Both of the first two (Abu Bakr and Umar) separated Ali from his
position and deposed him and destroyed his honor in the view of the
people. Thus he became a forgotten thing.”**[1]**

Imam (‘a) in his conversation with Abdullah Ibn Umar mentioned that all
the hardships that befell him were related to his father (Umar) and
among them was giving precedence to Uthman over him.**[2]**

Anyway, he remained aloof and secluded from the people just as he had
maintained aloofness during the tenure of Abu Bakr. Imam (‘a) confined
himself to his residence, making sorrow his companion and the stars his
confidants. He used keep his head on the pillow of grief and he used to
spend his days in sadness, swallowing the draughts of anger and keeping
his fury under control. He did not meet anyone except for his sincere
companions, who were cognizant of his status and reality like Ammar bin
Yasir, Abu Zar and Miqdad. In this condition he was occupied in the
compilation of the Quran, inscribing it and pondering over its verses.

Historians are unanimous that Umar used to consult Ali (‘a) in some very
important matters and questions that were posed to him. Umar used to
refer these queries to Ali (‘a) and he did not refrain from solving
these problems. So that he may narrate the commands of Allah as it is
obligatory for the knowledgeable ones to spread the divine commands
among the people…and Umar has described this merit of the Holy Imam (‘a)
in his following statement: “If Ali hadn’t been there, Umar would have
perished.”

It is an established matter that Umar was often confronted with legal
matters that he could not solve. Hence he used to rush to Imam (‘a) and
other companions. His words have become famous that: “Everyone is more
informed than Umar, even the women.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 9/28 (Published by Daar Ahya al-Kutub
al-Arabiyya)  
 **[2]** Ibid, Pg. 54

And it is said, “All the people are more knowledgeable than Umar, even
the ladies confined in houses.”

And the research scholar, the respected Allamah Amini, has proved this
matter in such a way that there is no exaggeration in it.**[1]**

Umar and His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
----------------------------------

Imam Husain’s heart was filled with pain and sorrow because the position
of his eminent father had been usurped. And this matter was one of the
factors that contributed to his displeasure and grief. He was absolutely
aware of the reality of the situation even though he was yet of a very
young age.

Historian say, “One day Umar had climbed over the pulpit and was
delivering a sermon that suddenly he saw Husain coming towards him on
the pulpit and he was screaming, “Come down from the pulpit of my
father. Come down and go to the pulpit of your father.”

Umar was shocked and he was astonished no end. He testified to what he
had said, “You are right! My father did not have a pulpit.”

Then he picked Imam Husain (‘a) and seated him besides himself and began
to investigate who had taught him to make such a statement. He asked,
“Who has taught you this?”

Imam replied, “By Allah, no one has taught it to me.”**[2]**

A feeling full of pain but which was having complete understanding and
broad perception come to his mind. His Eminence wept upon the pulpit of
his grandfather. A pulpit which was the source of effulgence and
knowledge and he saw that it was appropriate that after the Prophet, no
one except his father, who was the standard bearer of knowledge and
wisdom on the earth, should sit on that pulpit.

Historians say, “Umar gave a lot of attention to His Eminence, Imam
Husain (‘a) and had told him that if he had any need he should approach
him. One day he came to Umar and found him in a secret meeting with
Muawiyah and he saw his son, Abdullah. He sought his permission but
Abdullah did not permit, so he returned from there with him. A day later
Umar saw His Eminence and asked him, “O Husain, what stopped you from
coming to me?”

Imam replied, “I came when you were in a confidential meeting with
Muawiyah, so I returned with Ibn Umar.”

Umar said, “You were superior to Ibn Umar because what you see over our
head, it is the Almighty Allah and after Him, you all who have placed it
on my head (the Crown of caliphate).”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ghadeer* 6/83-333  
 **[2]** *al-Isabah* 1/333  
 **[3]** Ibid. Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain*, Pg. 200-201

His politics demanded that he should accord more respect to Hasan and
Husain (‘a), the two grandsons of the Messenger of Allah (s). Hence he
sanctioned for them a share in the war booty.

One day some colored woven clothes from Yemen were received by him and
he distributed them but forgot to give any from them to Hasan and Husain
(‘a). Later he wrote to his agent in Yemen to send two garments for him
and he sent them, and he dressed Hasan and Husain in it.

Umar fixed their allowances equal to their father and that was the same
as the fighters of Battle of Badr, that is 5000 Dirhams.**[1]**

Except for the incidents narrated by us above no other event or incident
involving Imam Husain (‘a) during the Caliphate of Umar have reached us.
This was because of the seclusion and aloofness of His Eminence, Imam
Amirul Momineen (‘a) and his sons from matters related to government and
they had given preference to remain aloof from the people and did not
choose to participate in any of their matters. Because their hearts were
full of deep sorrow and grief and the Holy Imam (‘a) has announced his
grief on various occasions.

Historians say, “A difficult problem came to Umar and he was very keen
to solve it. He presented it to his companions and said to them, “What
do you say in this matter?”

They replied, “You are the point of reference and you are the position
to remove the difficulties.”

This did not please him and he recited the following words of Almighty
Allah: **“O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and
speak the right word.”*[2]***

After that he told them, “By Allah, you and I know where the point of
reference and knowledge regarding the matter is.”

They said, “At seems that you are thinking about the son of Abu Talib.”

Umar said, “Except for him, where should I go? Has any free woman given
birth to anyone like him?”

They said, “O Amirul Momineen (‘a) why do you not call him?”

Umar replied, “They have the status and greatness of the Hashemite clan
and precedence in knowledge and proximity to the Messenger of Allah (s).
They go to him and not that he comes to them (people). So get up so that
we can go to him.”

Together they hastened to His Eminence and saw him leaning on his wall
wearing a pair of trousers (Shalwar) and resting on his spade and
reciting: **“Does man think that he is to be left to wander without an
aim?”*[3]***

He was reciting till the end of the Surah and tears were flowing on his
cheeks. All  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain*, Pg. 202-203  
 **[2]** Surah Ahzab 33:70  
 **[3]** Surah Qiyamat 75:36

those people also began to weep. After that he stopped weeping and Umar
inquired from His Eminence about the difficult matter that had come to
him and His Eminence replied to him.

After that Umar told him, “By Allah, the truth wanted you but the people
did not want you.”

His Eminence said, “O Abu Hafs do not talk about this or that.” Then he
recited the verse: **“Surely the day of decision is (a day)
appointed.”*[1]***

Umar was shocked and was absolutely bewildered. He placed one of his
hands on the other and went away from there in a condition of
embarrassment.**[2]**

His Eminence Husain (‘a) and the Family of Umar
-----------------------------------------------

Some historians say that there were unfriendly relations between the
families of Imam Husain (‘a) and Umar and its reason was that Asim bin
Umar drank wine and His Eminence, Husain (‘a) testified against him in
the court of law during the reign of Uthman and the penalty was awarded
to Asim and this became the cause of enmity between the two
families.**[3]**

Assassination of Umar
---------------------

We shall not prolong the discussion on the caliphate of Umar and we
shall refrain from exploring those maters that remain, especially the
verdicts issued by Umar and some of them were his own interpretation in
contravention of express instructions of Quran and traditions. Like the
prohibition of Mutah (Fixed term marriage) etc. We shall not speak of
any of these matters because we have resorted to brevity and we have
mentioned those events above only because they were part of the actual
occurrences of that time and they had in some way or the other affected
the psyche of Imam Husain (‘a) and the events related to social and
intellectual life of the time when Imam Husain (‘a) spent his life and
it reflects the life of Imam Husain (‘a).

Anyway, what is important on us is that we should describe the events
connected with the murder of Umar and important incidents of that time.
Because some narrators consider his killing as the consequence of the
plots of Bani Umayyah that they had devised to become independent from
Umar’s rulership, so that they (the Umayyads) may impose themselves on
the Muslims.**[4]**

This matter is emphasized that Abu Lulu, Umar’s killer was the slave of
Mughaira bin Shoba and Mughaira always had a close relationship with the
Umayyads. In my view this is not a theory that could pass the test of
research because Umar’s connection with the Umayyads was natural and
stable and there was no sort of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Naba 78:17  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/79-80  
 **[3]** *Al-Munmaq Fi Akhbar-i-Quraish*, Pg. 397  
 **[4]** Among those who support this view is Ustad Alayli who has
indicated this on Pg. 34 of his book, *Samoo al-Maani fi Samoo az-Zaat,*
Pg. 34 (Second edition)

rivalry or hard feelings between them. And with respect to them Umar was
more inclined to them. He had appointed their leaders as the rulers in
Islamic lands and dominions like Yazid bin Abu Sufyan, Saeed Ibn Abil
Aas and Muawiyah etc. Umar did not seize and divide into two any of
their assets like he had done with his other governors. Rather he also
paid attention to the problems of their women in such a way that the
daughter of Utbah and mother of Muawiyah was granted 4000 units of
currency from the Public Treasury so that she may invest it in
business.**[1]**

On the basis of this Umar did not do anything that could be in
opposition to their interests. Then how is it possible that they had
devised a plan to murder Umar?

Anyway what is confirmed is that Abu Lulu had done it of his own and not
at the behest of the Umayyads. In our view, he was a young man angered
and aggrieved for the sake of his community and society. Because he saw
on his land how it has spread and how the greatness of the community was
destroyed and how their honor had been lost. And he saw Umar how he had
been in the forefront of suppressing the rights and honor of the
Persians. Umar detested the Persians so much that he used to keep them
at a distance and he had even issued orders that they must not enter
Medina before they reach the age of puberty.**[2]** He had also issued a
verdict that only Arabs shall be entitled to inheritance and Persians
and non-Arabs cannot inherit from their predecessors.**[3]**

And also that he called them ‘Alulooj’ (Wild Donkeys).**[4]** And also
that he himself went to Umar to complain to him about the hardships he
had to bear from Mughaira and the heavy land tax that Mughaira had
imposed on him. But Umar scolded him and said, “I don’t think the land
tax imposed on you is even slightly in excess…”

This matter caused animosity in his heart towards Umar and he carried a
grudge against Umar. And also when Umar passed by him he had said to
him, “I have heard that you say that you could construct a mill that can
run on the wind?”

This ridicule made Abu Lulu very displeased and he replied at once, “I
shall make such a mill of you that people would talk about it…”

And the next day he went on to kill Umar**[5]** and he hit him three
strikes and one of them was below his navel and it rent the skin of the
lower portion. Then he went to the people of the mosque and he attacked
anyone who came across him till he had injured eleven persons in
addition to Umar. After that he killed himself.**[6]**

Umar was carried to his house while his wounds were bleeding. He asked
the people around him, “Who has attacked me?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/62  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/185  
 **[3]** *Al-Muwatta* 2/520  
 **[4]** Wild donkey. This word was used to designate non-Arab
infidels.  
 **[5]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/320  
 **[6]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/185

They replied, “Mughaira’s slave.”

He said, “Did I not tell you not to allow any of these donkeys to come
near me? But you did not obey me.”**[1]**

His family summoned the physician who promptly arrived and he asked his
patient, “What is your favorite drink?”

“Nabidh, he replied.**[2]**

So they gave him Nabidh to drink but it came out through the wounds.
People said, “There is dirt in the blood.” After that they gave him milk
to drink but that also came out from his wound. Then the physician
became hopeless about him and told him, “I don’t think you shall survive
till late afternoon.”**[3]** When he became certain that his end was
near, he told his son Abdullah to calculate how much he owed. He arrived
with the figure of 86000. Then he said, “If the property of the family
of Umar is sufficient pay it from your property. If it is not sufficient
ask the clan of Bani Adi and if that too is not enough take it from the
Quraish, but beyond that do not ask anyone else.”**[4]**

If we ponder on this bequest we shall find some questions arising:

1. This huge amount that he had taken as a loan from the Public Treasury
he had utilized it for only his family expenses. And if he had spent it
in the matters of Muslim there would not have been any need to recover
it from the Khattab family. And it is without any doubt not at all in
accordance with the character of Umar that the historians have portrayed
saying that he used to be very strict and austere regarding public funds
and he did not use anything of it for his personal needs.

2. It is that he made a bequest to his son Abdullah that he should repay
his debts from his own family funds and if that is not enough it should
be supplemented by funds from the clan and this shows that he had also
spent some of the public money on the Bani Adi clan. And if not, how
could any recovery from the clan be justified? Because he had no right
on other people’s wealth even if they be his relatives. In our opinion
he had given them the money from pubic treasury and it is mentioned
about him that he was very strict with his family and clan. So much so
that he subjected them to poverty and hardship. This contradicts the
above theory and that he used to deal with them with so much austerity
and deprived them to such an extent that he considered his relatives at
par with other Muslims.

3. And his bequest to his son Abdullah that he may then seek funds from
the Quraish and pay off his debts shows a deep and firm attachment of
Umar to the Quraishites. And on the basis of the statement of historians
he was the sole representative of the Quraish clan in his activities and
he used to fulfill their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/187  
 **[2]** “Nabidh”= Wine (refer the dictionary, *Munjid)*  
 **[3]** *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 1/26. *Al-Istiab* 3/1153-1154 (Printed
on the margins of *Al-Isabah*  
 **[4]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/188

desires and aspirations.

These were some of the points derived from the bequest of Umar.
Historians have not recorded whether Abdullah fulfilled the will of his
father and repaid the outstanding amount of Umar to the Baitul Maal
(Public Treasury).

In any case when Abdullah became assured that his father would surely
die, he requested him to appoint someone on the position of caliphate
and not to leave the affairs of the community aimless and he told his
father, “O father appoint someone as the caliph over the community of
Muhammad. Because if the herder of the camels or sheep leaves his flock
without a caretaker you would say that he has abandoned his trusts. Then
how can the Ummah of Muhammad remain? Therefore appoint someone as the
caliph.”

Umar looked at him with a look of doubt and hesitation and replied, “If
I appoint anyone as caliph over them, Abu Bakr had done the same and if
I leave them, the Messenger of Allah (s) had left them free.”**[1]**

The demands of Abdullah were based on knowledge and logic because it is
not reasonable for the leader to leave the political and social affairs
of his followers just like that. And if he does so, the people shall be
surrounded in difficulties and problems and a great calamity shall
befall them. Umar has claimed that the Messenger of Allah (s) had not
paid any attention to the temporal and spiritual leadership of his
community and he did not appoint anyone as his successor. And probably
the pain intensified for Umar and had made him forget that Prophet had
appointed His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (‘a) as his successor on the Day
of Ghadeer and ordered Muslims to pay allegiance to Ali (‘a) and that
Umar was first of those who gave him the oath of allegiance and
congratulated him saying, “Congratulations to you, O Ali! You have
become my master and master of all believing men and women.”

In any case, Umar’s wounds had completely troubled him in such a way
that he was saying, “If whatever I have on the earth was of gold I would
have given all as penalty in lieu of release from divine chastisement
before I meet Him.”**[2]**

And he told his son, Abdullah, “Put my cheek on the earth.” But he did
not pay any heed to Umar. He thought that he had lost his mind. Then he
repeated his orders and again Abdullah did not respond. Finally he said
it the third time and shouted, “Put my cheek on the ground, may your
mother die!”

Abdullah came forward and put the cheek of Umar on the ground – and he
began to weep bitterly and continued to utter the words, “Woe be to
Umar, woe be to Umar. If the Almighty does not forgive him.”**[3]**

Umar requested his son to take permission from Ayesha so that he may be
buried  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/321  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/192  
 **[3]** Ibid, Pg. 193

alongside the Prophet and Abu Bakr and Ayesha accorded the
permission.**[1]** Shias have expressed the same objection they raised
against the burial of Abu Bakr saying that: If what the Prophet had
left, if on the basis of the tradition of Abu Bakr the family of the
Prophet does not inherit anything and that all of it is handed over to
the master of authority (caliph) here was no sense in taking permission
of Ayesha. And if his heir inherit, as the Ahle Bayt (‘a) believed in
that case there was no share of it remains for Ayesha. Because on the
basis of the laws described by Muslim jurists, the widow is not entitled
to inherit any landed property. In that case, it becomes necessary that
the permission of the Prophet’s heir had been sought, which was not
done.

Shura
-----

We have reached to those terrible circumstances and calamities that
befell the Muslims and the event that created a great mischief in the
Muslim world that subjected them to everlasting difficulties and
hardships. And it is the same event of Shura (consultative committee) in
which there was an open and blatant plot to deprive Imam Ali (‘a) from
his share in rulership and the entrusting of the caliphate to Bani
Umayyah so that the kindness of Quraish may be fully applied to them,
which was full of animosity and hatred towards the Holy Imam (‘a)

And Allah knows that in this discussion we have intended nothing but to
describe the condition of the period in which Imam (a.s) lived. An
incident, which in our opinion was the source of all great mischiefs and
that finally led to the tragedy of Kerbala and other calamities also.
Events that completely turned upside down and muddled the way of noble
life in Islam.

In any case, when Umar despaired of his life and saw his imminent end,
he began to think about the one who may take over the command after him
from those leaders who had taken part in preparing the ground for Abu
Bakr and he remembered them and saw that death has taken them away. At
that moment he wailed and expressed regret saying, “If Abu Ubaidah had
been alive I would have made him the caliph because he was the
trustworthy member of the community. If Saalim, the slave of Abu
Huzaifah were alive, I would have appointed him as the caliph as he
loved God too much…”

Why Umar did not mention anyone of those were alive and who had
participated in establishment of Islam? Like the chief of the purified
progeny, Amirul Momineen (‘a) and the prominent companions of the
prophet like Ammar bin Yasir, Abu Zar and others from Ansar so that he
may have nominated them for the position!

He was searching among the list of the departed companions and wished
that: If only Abu Ubaidah and Saalim were alive so that he may have
entrusted the leadership to them. Inspite of the fact that none of the
two had any sort of precedence in Holy war or service in the path of
Islam…  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid, Pg. 190

Those people asked him to appoint someone to succeed him so that he may
govern the affairs of the community, however he did not do so and said,
“I do not like that I should take the responsibility of the future of
the caliphate.”

However not much time passed but that he defeated his intention and
named the six members of Shura committee and entrusted them with the
leadership of the community. And in this way he imposed his choice on
the Muslims and this way he made himself responsible for the good and
bad future of caliphate.

Ibn Abil Hadid says, “What else could have been there before the
acceptance of responsibility and what difference was there whether he
named a particular person or devised a committee and imposed his
specific instructions on the selection of the caliph?”**[1]**

Umar with the Members of Shura Committee
----------------------------------------

Umar summoned the members of the Shura committee whom he had himself
nominated and considered them honest. Umar had also claimed that the
Prophet had also said about them that they were the people of
Paradise.**[2]** But when they arrived in his presence he addressed them
in a very sarcastic and critical manner. And for each of them he made a
clear objection. He blamed each of them to be having a particular
defect, which makes us question their nomination by Umar Historians have
recorded his comments in various ways. Some of them are as follow:

1. When he glanced at them he said, “Each of you have come to me in a
condition that you are giving movement to your devil and aspiring to
become a caliph…as for you, O Talha, did you not say that ‘If the
Prophet passes away, I would marry his widows?’ The Almighty Allah has
not considered Muhammad better than us for marrying our cousins and the
Almighty Allah has revealed for you: **“…and it does not behove you that
you should give trouble to the Apostle of Allah, nor that you should
marry his wives after him ever…”*[3]***

And as for you, O Zubair, by Allah, your heart never softened and you
have always been cruel and sharp tongued.”

And as for you, O Uthman, by Allah a heap of dung is better than you.”

And as for you, O Abdur Rahman, you are a weak man, that you fear all
the people.

And as for you, O Saad, you are having an angry disposition and you are
a mischief-maker.

And as for you, O Ali, by Allah, if your faith is weighed against the
weight of all the people of the earth your faith shall be heavier.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/260  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Kamil* 3/66  
 **[3]** Surah Ahzab 33:53

Ali arose and departed from there. Umar then addressed the audience and
said, “I recognize the status of a person that if you entrust him with
your affairs he would bring you on an illuminated path.”

They asked, “Who is it?”

He replied, “It is the same one who is going from before you.”

They asked, “What has prevented you from this.”

He replied, “There is no option in this.”**[1]**

Umar had criticized each of them except Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) whom
he considered great and confessed about his eligibility and suitability
for caliphate; and that if he had taken the affairs of the community in
his control he would have led them on the true path. However, Umar did
not consider it worthwhile to appoint him.

2. Historians say: When Shura members came face to face they said: “O
Amirul Momineen (‘a), say something about us so that we may use your
opinion as points of debate and we be guided by your views.” So he said,
“By Allah, Saad, nothing prevented me from appointing you as the caliph
except your cruelty and hard heartedness although you are a brave
warrior.”

And nothing prevents me from you, O Abdul Rahman except that you are the
Firon of this community.

And nothing prevents me from you, O Zubair except that you are a
believer in happiness and an infidel in anger.

And nothing prevents me about Talha except his arrogance and pride. And
if he becomes the caliph be would put the ring of his seal on his wife’s
finger.

And nothing prevents me from you, O Uthman, except your bigotry and your
favoritism towards your clan.

And nothing prevents me from you, O Ali except your greed for it and in
fact you are the most qualified of the people and if you get the post
you shall act on manifest truth and the right path.”**[2]**

Umar associated the members of the Shura with undesirable qualities. He
labeled Abdur Rahman Ibn Auf as the Firon of the community but
surprisingly the next moment he gave him the choice of selection and
made his opinion binding on all.

In the same way he alleged that Imam Ali (‘a) was greedy for the
caliphate but the open biography of the Imam testifies against this.
Because His Eminence neither loved power nor wished for rulership. He
argued with the caliphs that he was more qualified and worthy for the
post not because he wanted to obtain rule and power or to gain material
wealth as some of them did in this way. He also did not fall prey to
selfish desires and annihilate himself in that path or to seek material
gains  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/159  
 **[2]** *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 1/28-29

in order to gain superiority among the people.

Imam Ali (‘a) was not seeking any of these valueless things. Rather he
wanted rulership for spreading justice and establishment of truth and
the Shariah of God. This was the true desire of his life. And for the
sake of these aim he was according value to it. He had expressed this
matter in his following statements:

“O Allah, You know that what was from us, it was not a rivalry for
coming to power and neither was it for obtaining any remaining wealth
and property. It was so that I may be able to protect the signs of Your
religion. And that Your forgotten limits of (commands and prohibitions)
be established and Your oppressed servants may get security.”

His Eminence in conversation with Ibn Abbas about the level of his
distaste for power and his considering valueless of rulership while His
Eminence was stitching his sandals. Thus he glanced at Ibn Abbas and
asked, “O Ibn Abbas, what is the value of this sandal?”

Ibn Abbas replied, “O Amirul Momineen (‘a) it is of no value.”

His Eminence said, “It is better than this your caliphate, but that I
may establish the truth and remove falsehood.”

His Eminence was desirous of caliphate so that he may save its lofty
position and for establishment of social justice, to spread knowledge in
the society and to improve the general life of the populace.

3. In the third narration it is mentioned that Umar summoned the members
of the Shura committee and when they arrived to him he said to them,
“Are you all greedy of caliphate after me?”

They did not say anything in reply. He again repeated his question,
Zubair glanced at him and asked, “What is it that could keep it away
from us? You took it in your hand and acted upon it and we in Quraish
are not lesser than you, either in precedence (in Islam) nor in
proximity (in relation to the Prophet).

Umar was not able to reply to this. He said, “Shall I inform you about
yourself?”

They said, “Say it. Because even if we ask you to release us, you would
not.”

He described their aspirations and greeds and told them about their
psychology. Thus he glanced at Zubair and said, “As for your O Zubair,
you are quick tempered and angry man. If you are pleased, you are a
believer and when you are angry you are an infidel. One day you are a
human and the other you are a Satan. And if you obtain the caliphate you
would spend a day in Mecca in arguing over a measure of barley. Thus if
you come to power, I don’t know what would be the condition of people on
the day you are a Satan and what would be on the day you are angry and
the Allah Almighty Allah shall not endow you with caliphate while you
are having those defects.”

On the basis of the analysis of his psychology Zubair was found to be
having the following dangerous defects:

1. Short temper and narrow minded

2. Instability in behavior

3. Too much anger and lack of self control

4. Greed and miserliness to an extent that he could fight over a measure
of barley.

These are such undesirable qualities that anyone who is fraught with
them is absolutely undeserving of any government post. How can he become
the leader and caliph of the Muslim nation?

Then Umar turned to Talha and asked, “Shall I say it or remain quiet?”

Talha became angry with him and said, “You are not saying anything about
the good qualities.”

Umar said, “Indeed I know you very well, from the day your finger was
cut off in the Battle of Uhad. You were angry due to the pain you
suffered and the Prophet departed from this world while he was
displeased with you because of what you said on the occasion of the
revelation of the verse of Hijab.”

If the Messenger of Allah (s) had been angry with Talha, how could Umar
nominate him for caliphate and leadership of Muslims? This Caliphate is
something about which he said, “The Messenger of Allah (s) passed away
while he was pleased with the members of the Shura Committee.”

Jahiz has expressed his opinion on this matter saying, “If someone says
to Umar: You said that the Messenger of Allah (s) passed away while he
was pleased with these six persons, then how could you say to Talha that
His Eminence was displeased with him due to what Talha had said? In that
case it would be as if you have shot an arrow at him. But who could dare
to ask even something lesser than this?”

Then Umar turned to Saad bin Abi Waqqas and said, “Indeed, you are the
owner of a herd of horses, of horses with which you fight in the
battles. And you are a hunter with bows and arrows. What does the tribe
of Zuhra has to do with caliphate and community affairs?”

Saad was a warrior and except for martial affairs he did not have any
capability in administrative and community matters. Then why did Umar
nominate him as a candidate for caliphate? In the same way he has
described the ineligibility of the tribe of Saad for Caliphate and Umar
criticized it in this regard.

When he turned to Abdur Rahman Ibn Auf he said, “As for you, O Abdur
Rahman, if half of the faith of the Muslims is compared to your faith,
your faith would be proved better. However it is not suitable for this
matter that it be entrusted to a person having a defect that you
possess. And where is ‘Zohra’ (a type of weak person) and where is this
matter?

And Abdur Rahman in the opinion of Umar was a man of faith and piety.
But we don’t know where his faith was when he did not select the chief
of the Purified

Progeny, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) as Caliph and entrusted the affairs
of the Muslims to the hands of the Umayyads who plundered the wealth of
God and who made the servants of God as their own slaves? And Abdur
Rahman also, according to the admission of Umar, did not possess a
strong personality and a firm determination; then why did Umar appoint
him as a candidate for caliphate?

How could Umar make his decision binding on the affairs of the
community?

After that Umar glanced at Amirul Momineen (‘a) and said, “By Allah if
you become the caliph! If only you hadn’t a jestful nature! If you rule
over them you shall take them towards truth and the right path.”

When was the Imam (‘a) resorting to jest? Rather the Imam (‘a) always
lived a life of seriousness and had a farsighted disposition which
became obvious in his words and deeds. Now how could it be possible for
a person of a jestful nature to take the Muslims to the right path and
truth? As Umar says: This position is not suitable for a person with a
jestful disposition because it is a weakness and sloth in the
personality.”

Umar has emphasized that if the Imam obtains control over the affairs of
Muslims, he would deal with them with truth and lead them on the right
path. Then why Umar made him a mere member of Shura committee and why
did he not expressly appoint him as the caliph? Is it in the well-being
of the community that opportunity be taken away from him and the affairs
may not be entrusted to one who would act on his practice, which was
based on pure justice and truth?

Then he turned to Uthman the senior member of the Umayyad clan. It was a
clan that had always confronted Islam. Umar said to him, “Yes! The
rulership shall indeed come to you! As if I can see the Quraish handing
over caliphate to you on the basis of their friendship to you and you
have imposed the Bani Umayyad and Bani Abu Muit on the necks of the
people. And you have preferred them for showering gifts. Then a group of
wolves of Arabs would rush to you and behead you in your bed. By Allah,
if you do so and you would also do it – they would also do the same.”
Then he put his hand on his forehead and said, “Thus if it happens in
this way, remember what I have said…”**[1]**

If we ponder briefly on Umar’s statement to Uthman that he said, “As if
I can see the Quraish handing over caliphate to you on the basis of
their friendship to you…” we shall see that it was Umar who had given
the caliphate to Uthman. Because the rules he framed for the Shura were
definitely in favor of Uthman’s victory as Umar had made him a member of
Shura and the majority of them were having good relationship with
Uthman’s family. And they would never prevent Uthman’s selection neither
would they prefer anyone else to him. And in fact it was Umar who has
given the caliphate to Uthman. Also inspite of having perfect knowledge
about Uthman’s nature and his favoritism towards his clan, how could
Umar name him as a candidate of caliphate? While he was personally aware
of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/185-186 (First
edition)

danger of Bani Umayyah for Islam and he has announced this matter in his
conversation with Mughaira bin Shoba. He had said, “O Mughaira, do you
see anything with your blind eyes?”

“No”, he replied.

Umar said, “By Allah, the Bani Umayyad shall blind the eyes of Islam
like you have become blind. And after that they would blind both their
eyes and would not know where they go and from where they come.”**[1]**

Thus at the time of his death, Umar should have secured the Muslim
community from the danger of Bani Umayyads and he should not have
allowed them any share in rulership of Muslims.

The above were some narrational reports regarding his statements
addressed to members of the Shura Committee.

Procedure of Shura Committee
----------------------------

Probably I have not seen any other procedure as baseless as the
procedure of the Shura committee. It was not having any kind of
originality and balance. It was very far from the fact that it should be
representative of all views of the community. Different groups should
have been represented therein. Because in this Shura Umar had given the
view of a particular group precedence over the opinion of the people.
They were only representing their own views.

Umar summoned all of those whom he had nominated and said to them,
“Bring with you someone from the senior man of Ansar but nothing from
your affair shall be in their hands. And along with you present Hasan
Ibn Ali and Abdullah Ibn Abbas, as they a two are such close ones that
their presence I consider good for you and for them there would be no
share in your affair.”**[2]**

Umar distanced the Ansar and he did not allow them any share in
nomination and selection. Rather he made them responsible for
supervision, which amounted to their deprivation, and it implied that
they were not worth much. Because the matter was the matter of the
members of Shura and others were of no consequence…And we don’t know
what benefit existed by the presence of Hasan Ibn Ali and Abdullah Ibn
Abbas while they did not have any say in the matter of selecting the
caliph.

When he turned to Abu Talha Ansari and issued a command so that by it
the matter of Shura is strengthened and he said to him, “O Abu Talha,
Allah honored Islam through you. So select 50 persons from the Ansar and
tell them to undertake this function…”

After that he turned to Miqdad bin Aswad and ordered him similarly that:
“If five agree and one differs, behead the one. If four agree and two
disagree, those two should be beheaded; ft there is a division of three
and three, the choice of the group of Abdur Rahman Ibn Auf should
prevail. If the other three do not agree to it they…”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 12/82  
 **[2]** *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 1/28

Warning to the Companions
-------------------------

Umar warned the companions of the Prophet and told them about the danger
of Muawiyah and Amr bin Aas whenever they did not have a unified belief
and they arose in conflicts regarding the kingdom. So he said to them,
“O companions of Muhammad, become united, for if you don’t, Amr bin Aas
and Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan would dominate you in the matter of
caliphate.

The Imamite Shaykh, Shaykh Mufeed has remarked in the following way
about this statement: “By this statement, Umar intended to instigate
Muawiyah and Amr bin Aas to obtain the power of caliphate and he
encouraged them in their greed because Muawiyah was his agent and
governor in Syria and Amr bin Aas was his agent and governor in Egypt
and Umar was afraid that if Uthman becomes weak the caliphate would turn
to Ali, therefore he issued this statement so that people may convey it
to those two who were in Syria and Egypt and in case the caliphate
returns to Ali the two may seize power in the Muslim territories…”

The Imam’s Reaction
-------------------

Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) was shocked and he was extremely aggrieved and
he knew that the Shura committee was designed as a plot to keep the
caliphate away from him. His Eminence met his uncle Abbas and without
any preface said:

“O Uncle, the caliphate has gone away from us.”

He said, “Who has informed you about this?”

His Eminence replied, “He has equated me with Uthman and said that I
must respect the choice of the majority and then he said: Be with Abdur
Rahman, Saad would also not oppose his cousin Abdur Rahman and Abdur
Rahman is the son-in-law of Uthman so they shall not differ among
themselves…”**[1]**

Imam’s prediction proved true, because Abdur Rahman for his personal
reason and the expectation that afterwards the caliphate shall return to
him, entrusted the caliphate to Uthman.

The Shura was an obvious plot to cause the defeat of the Holy Imam (‘a)
that was devised to opposed that true successor of the Messenger of
Allah (s) and the gate of the city of knowledge.

Imam Kashiful Ghita says, “The Shura in its reality and essence was a
real plot and a façade which was capable to bring out the selection of
Uthman as a caliph over Muslims and though it seemed to be for the
well-being of the Muslims it brought for them a calamity that was to
remain with them forever…”

This conspiracy saddened the Holy Imam (‘a) and the malice of Quraish
increased his sorrow till after a number of years he spoke about it and
said, “When he (Umar) died he appointed one who claimed that he was of
them. Thus may Allah restore my rights from the Shura. How many
calamities I was already facing that now I was subjected to this kind of
difficulty…”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/229-230

Yes, by Allah, O Amirul Momineen (‘a), who doubts that you were the best
of the Muslims and the most superior among them in Jihad and the
foremost of them in Islam. But what a terrible time! Woe be to that time
when you were equated with such people, who deprived the Ummah from
justice and rights.

The Imam’s Acceptance
---------------------

Here a question remains to be answered, and that is why the Holy Imam
(‘a) agreed to be a component of the Shura committee inspite of the fact
that there were clear differences between the other Shura members and
His Eminence?

His Eminence has himself replied to this question that it was to expose
the contradiction in Umar’s arguments because Umar had said many a times
that prophethood and caliphate can never come together in the same
family. Then in such a case why did he nominate Ali (‘a) as a member of
Shura committee for selection of a caliph?

Problems of Shura
-----------------

The former and latter researchers have criticized the Shura and are
unanimous of its artificial nature. And its undesirable consequences
that caused untold misery for the Ummah and the mischief it created have
already been discussed by us in our previous volume titled, *Life of
Imam Hasan (‘a).* However it is pertinent to briefly mention them here
because the topic of discussion demands it:

**Firstly:** This setup was very distant from the reality of the Shura
and it lacked all the factors that could have made it successful.
Therefore it should have had the following requisites:

A – It should have represented all the classes of the community.

B – The government should not have had any interference in the matter of
selection directly or indirectly.

C – General freedom should have been given to those who were taking part
in the selection.

However Umar’s Shura lacked all these qualities and none of them were
present in that setup because it prevented the Ummah from selecting a
candidate of their choice and no one was accorded the freedom to select
a caliph of his choice. Rather the matter was entrusted to only six
persons and their view was decreed to dominate the view of all the
community. And it is a type of purification that some regimes do not
care for the aspirations of their subjects and they force things upon
them. And he also ordered the police that they must interfere in this
matter and told them: If any member of the Shura opposes the selection
of the remaining members, he shall be put to death.

In the same way he instructed them that they must limit the selection to
a period of three days and the selection makers got very little time to
choose, so that another group of people may not interfere in the matter
and their aim may not be defeated.

**Secondly:** This Shura consisted of elements opposed to the Imam and
those

harboring malice against His Eminence. Because among them was Talha of
the Tamim tribe, the clan of Abu Bakr and he competed with the Imam for
the post of caliphate and he kept the Holy Imam (‘a) from the caliphate.
And among the Shura was Abdur Rahman bin Auf the son-in-law of Uthman.
He was the most inimical among the Muhajireen with regard to Imam Ali
(‘a). According to the statements of history writers he was of those who
had helped Abu Bakr in forcing Ali (‘a) to pay him the oath of
allegiance. The Shura also included Saad bin Abi Waqqas who was full of
enmity and jealousy towards the Imam due to his brotherhood with the
Umayyads because his mother Hamna was the daughter of Sufyan bin
Umayyah. And Imam Ali (‘a) had slain their senior warriors in the way of
the propagation of Islam. And when Muslims paid allegiance to the Imam,
Saad refrained from giving his oath of allegiance. Also, among the
components of the Shura was Uthman bin Affan, the leader of the Umayyad
clan. According to the admission of the historians, Umar selected such
persons for the Shura who were absolutely inimical to the Imam and
opposed to him so that the caliphate may not reach His Eminence.

Imam (‘a) has remarked about the factors that influenced the selection
and said: However, I spread my wings when they spread their wings and
when they began to fly I also took to the air. Thus one of them gave ear
to his animosity and the other one inclined towards his son-in-law along
with the other problems.”

Anyway, this Shura, according to what the researchers have concluded,
was solely aimed at keeping the Imam from power and entrusting the
caliphate to the Umayyads.

Alaili says, “The appointing of six persons in Shura prepared the ground
for the Umayyads so that they may raise the castle of their power on the
shoulders of the Muslims.”

Sayyid Mir Ali Hindi has also concluded thus and he says, “The greed of
Umar against the interests of the Muslims made him select these six
persons from the best people of Medina without following the policy of
his predecessors and the Umayyads had a strong lobby in Medina. And that
is the reason that his selection prepared the ground for the plot and
conspiracy of the Umayyads to succeed. The same Umayyads who harbored
animosity towards Islam. And after that they came to this selection so
that through it they may find a way to fulfill their greed and build the
castle of their greatness on the shoulders of the Muslims.”**[1]**

**Thirdly:** Umar kept the Ansar away intently from this Shura and he
did not allow them any share in it while it were they who had given
refuge to the Prophet and supported Islam in its times of difficulties
and helplessness and the Messenger of Allah (s) had prayed in their
favor.

In the same way Umar did not reserve any position in the Shura for
important personalities like Ammar, Abu Zar and other senior Muslims and
most probably it was due to their inclination towards Imam Ali (‘a).
This was so because they  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Imam al-Husain,* 1/267

would not have chosen anyone other than Ali (‘a). And it was on the
basis of this that Umar kept them away from the selection committee.
Umar selected for the Shura, persons who were confirmed opponents of the
Holy Imam (‘a).

**Fourthly:** Among the curious aspects of this Shura is that Umar has
testified in favor of the Shura members that when the Prophet departed
from the world he was well-pleased with these six persons or that he (s)
has given them glad tidings of Paradise. But Umar on the other hand had
given express instructions to the police that if they delay in selecting
one from themselves, they must all be killed. On the basis of what we
have stated and according to those who have criticized the Shura that
delay in selection does not expel them from the pale of Islam and it
does not tantamount to apostasy that they should be condemned to death.
And this command was absolutely opposed to the laws of Islam, which do
not permit the killing of any man except under some specified
circumstances that the jurists have mentioned, and none of these
circumstances were applicable therein.

Here another matter remains that is in no way lesser than the objection
mentioned above. It is that Umar limited the Shura to six persons on the
argument that the Messenger of Allah (s) was well pleased with them at
the time of his passing away. Because this argument does not justify
such a selection because the Allah’s Messenger was well pleased with
many more companions when he passed away. Hence to prefer only these six
persons to them is a case of undeserving preference, which, according to
scholars of Usul (fundamentals), is an undesirable option.

**Fifthly:** Of the objections leveled against this Shura is that Umar
gave precedence to the choice of the group of Abdur Rahman bin Auf and
he considered it superior to the group having Imam Amirul Momineen Ali
(‘a), as this partiality clearly shows Umar’s leanings towards the
Umayyad powers clearly who were inimical and unjust with regard to the
Holy Imam (‘a). And we were not able to find a single reason for the
preference accorded to Ibn Auf and any kind of qualification for this
post or that he may be having any kind of superiority. Was he and his
brethren from the Muhajireen like Talha and Zubair and others were not
who had made the property of Muslims and sources of their wealth special
for themselves to an extent that they gathered incalculable wealth? They
possessed so much wealth that they could not find enough ways to spend
it. And on the basis of what the historians have stated, Ibn Auf had
amassed so much gold that they had to use hammers to break it into
pieces. Can such a person be given precedence over the Imam, while His
Eminence was the owner of generosity and perfections? And in knowledge,
piety and religiosity he had no equal and the Almighty Allah says in His
Book: **“Say: Are those who know and those who do not know
alike?”*[1]***

**Sixthly:** This Shura created a feeling of rivalry and competition in
such a way that each of them considered himself to be equal to and as
important as others while such a scenario did not exist previously. Saad
was subservient to the command of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Zumar 39:9

Abdur Rahman and Abdur Rahman was obedient to Uthman and from his
sincere friends and supporters. But after the Shura process a strange
rift developed between them. So much so that Abdur Rahman began to
conspire against Uthman and he was inviting Ali that anyone may take up
arms to fight Uthman and made a bequest to his people that after he
died, Uthman must not recite his funeral prayer…and also Zubair was the
follower of Imam (‘a) and in Saqifah he had stood on the side of the
Imam and he bore many hardships and difficulties in this regard. And he
had said in the reign of Umar, “By Allah, if Umar dies, I shall give the
oath of allegiance to Ali.” However, the Shura process imbued him with
such a feeling of superiority that he began to consider himself at par
with the Imam and he parted ways with His Eminence. On the day of Jamal
he took up the sword against Ali (‘a). In the same way the Shura created
mutual animosity among its components because each of them considered
himself as the most qualified one for caliphate and thought that he was
better than others. This animosity and conflict that developed between
them became the cause to harm the unity of Muslims and it rendered them
disunited. Muawiyah has mentioned this mater to Abil Haseen whom Ziyad
sent to meet Muawiyah and Muawiyah had asked him, “I have received
information that you are clever and intelligent, so tell me what I want
to know.”

“Ask whatever you like.”

“Tell me what destroyed the unity of Muslims and created discord among
them?”

“Uthman’s assassination.”

“You are wrong.”

“Ali’s action against you and his battle with you.”

“You are wrong.”

“Uprising of Talha, Zubair and Ayesha and Ali’s war on them.”

“You are wrong.”

“I don’t know anything else.”

“I tell you, nothing has destroyed the unity of the Muslims and divided
their views except the Shura committee that Umar had constituted of six
persons, because the Almighty Allah sent Muhammad with guidance and the
true religion so that it may prevail over all the other religions even
though polytheists may be averse. Thus he acted upon what the Almighty
Allah had commanded him, then Allah took him to Himself. And he sent Abu
Bakr to lead the prayers and he accepted him for his worldly affairs
while the Messenger of Allah (s) had selected him for his religious
affairs. Thus he acted upon the practice of the Messenger of Allah (s)
and followed the same manners and behavior till the Almighty Allah
raised him up. Abu Bakr appointed Umar in his place and he (Umar) also
continued his (Abu Bakr’s) practice and manners and after that he formed
a committee of six persons such that there was none of them who did not
want the caliphate for himself and he was

waiting that caliphate may come to his people and his self was inclined
towards it. And if Umar, like Abu Bakr had appointed anyone
specifically, there would not have been any controversy in this
matter.”**[1]**

The first effect of the Shura was the exposition of the greed and
political aspirations of some Shura members and they tried to form
parties and groups among the Islamic community so that they may be able
to occupy the seat of power and this matter prepared the ground for
future conflict that befell the Muslims.

These were some problems created by the Shura that forced the Muslims to
bear untold problems and tragedies because it created a favorable
atmosphere for the former bondsmen and their children to gain power and
control of rulership so that they may prepare a program about which
Muslims had no idea and the most obvious aspect of this conspiracy was
to obtain control over the sources of government income and to plunder
the wealth and funds of the public and also to try to oppress the
righteous people and unleash a cruel agenda against the Progeny of the
Prophet.

Mode of Selection
-----------------

When Umar departed from this world and was buried in his eternal abode,
the police officers surrounded the members of the Shura committee and
told them to organize a meeting to select a ruler for the Muslims from
among themselves so that the will of Umar may be acted upon.

They held a meeting in the Public Treasury and according to a report it
was in the house of Masroor bin Mukhrama and Imam Hasan (‘a) and
Abdullah Ibn Abbas supervised the selection. Mughaira bin Shoba and Amr
bin Aas hastened towards an audience hall but Saad scolded them and
said, “Do you want to say that we were present and were among the Shura
members?”**[2]**

This statement shows the rivalry and jealousy that existed in those
people because they were worried that Mughaira and Ibn Aas may also
attend the meet and say that they were also Shura members.

The Shura members argued with one another, each one canvassing his own
candidature and trying to prove himself as one most eligible for the
post and a great clamor and argument arose.

Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) faced them and warned them of the future
mischief and destruction in case they were following their selfish
interests and not giving any importance to the interests of the
community. Then he said, “No one has recognized anyone except me for the
invitation of truth and for doing good to relatives, so listen to what I
say and ponder upon my statements so that it may not be that after today
you see that swords are drawn for it and promises are broken for it so
that some of you may become leaders of misguidance and some become
followers of ignorant ones…”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Iqdul Farid* 5/33-34  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/68  
 **[3]** Muhammad Abduh, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 25/31

If they had paid heed to the Imam’s warnings they would have saved the
community from future upheavals and calamities and had ensured peace and
prosperity for it. However they followed selfish desires, rulership and
power worship and the prophecy of the Holy Imam (‘a) proved true. Not
much time passed when swords were drawn out, conflicts spread and
mischiefs became predominant and some of them became leaders of
misguidance and some became followers of ignorant ones.

Arguments and debates took place in that group and they did not reach a
desirable decision and the meeting ended without achieving its aim,
which the people were impatiently waiting for a decisive result. The
meeting convened for a second time but again its purpose was defeated.
Then Abu Talha Ansari addressed them with warnings, threats and
promises, saying, “No, by the One in Whose hands is the life of Umar! I
shall not give you more than the period of three days that is fixed for
you…”

On the third day, which was their last opportunity, again the meeting
was convened. A severe communal aspect became obvious when Talha
surrendered his right to Uthman, which was absolutely against the
interests of the community. And he took this step as a result of a deep
animosity he harbored towards the Holy Imam (‘a) as His Eminence had
taken a stand against Abu Bakr a cousin of Talha in the matter of
caliphate. Zubair also came forward and surrendered his vote to the Imam
because he was closely related to him. Saad also stood up and gave up
his vote in favor of his cousin, Abdur Rahman bin Auf so that he may
support him in his choice.

The choice of Abdur Rahman was binding on all and his position was very
strong because Umar had assured him about it and given him the final say
in the matter of caliphate. However he had a very weak personality and
determination and was unfit to bear the responsibility of rulership.
Therefore he decided to nominate someone else for the caliphate. He was
inclined to Uthman because Abdur Rahman was his son-in-law. Meanwhile he
had also obtained the advice of the Quraishites and they had told him to
prevent Ali (‘a) and press for the selection of Uthman, as Uthman was
the one who would enable the realization of their aspirations.

At last the terrible moment arrived that changed the course of history
and Abdur Rahman bin Auf told his nephew to call Ali and Uthman to him.

He asked, “Whom should I summon first?”

Abdur Rahman replied, “Whomsoever you like.”

Masoor went out to bring these two persons and Muhajireen and Ansars
gathered in the Mosque. Then Abdur Rahman came forward and presented to
them the matter of caliphate and said, “O people, people have gathered
from different areas and localities to which they would return, so you
tell them about your view.”

At that time, the pure one, son of the pure one, Ammar bin Yasir came
forward and he gave his counsel, which was in the interests of the
community against disunity

and conflict. He said, “If you want that there should be no discord
among the Muslims, you must give allegiance to Ali.”

Miqdad also came forward and supported the statement of Ammar and said,
“Ammar is right. If you give allegiance to Ali we shall accept and
follow him.”

It was the time when the oppressive and malicious powers gained momentum
against Islam and the statements of Ammar and Miqdad were denounced and
the senior members of the Umayyad clan demanded the appointment of
Uthman. Abdullah Ibn Abi Sarah screamed at Ibn Auf and said, “If you
want that the Quraish do not rise in opposition, you must pay allegiance
to Uthman.”

Abdullah bin Abi Rabia also spoke up and seconded his companion and
said, “If you pay allegiance to Uthman we shall accept and follow him.”

The prominent companion, Ammar bin Yasir replied to Ibn Abi Sarah
saying, “Since when you were a well wisher of Muslims?”

Ammar was right, because Ibn Sarah was never a well wisher of Muslims
and he never wished good of Islam. He was of the most inimical persons
to the Messenger of Allah (s) and His Eminence, after the conquest of
Mecca ordered that he should be killed even if he hung himself with the
covering of the Holy Ka’ba.**[1]** And if the proper method and
procedure had been followed these dirty persons and others like them
would not have been able to interfere in the affairs of Muslims, because
Bani Umayyah and other tribes of Quraish always were at the end of the
caravan and they were not accorded any importance. This was so because
they had opposed the Messenger of Allah (s) and instigated other tribes
against him and they had accepted Islam only due to the fear of the
point of the sword. Then how were they allowed to present their views
and that the rulership of the Muslims be given to them?

Debates and arguments increased between the Umayyads and Hashemites and
Ammar bin Yasir came forward in order to invite people towards the well
being of the Muslims. He said, “O people, the Almighty Allah has
bestowed greatness to us through His Prophet and favored us with His
religion. Then how long would you keep the caliphate away from the Ahle
Bayt of the Prophet?”

Ammar’s logic was full of the spirit of Islam and its guidance because
the Almighty Allah bestowed the Quraish and other Arabs with honor
through His religion and made them successful through His Prophet and
His Eminence was the honor and respect of the Arabs and it was incumbent
on them to reciprocate this favor by not keeping the caliphate away from
the Prophet’s family as the Ahle Bayt (‘a) were the protectors of
knowledge and repositories of the revelation that had descended on His
Eminence. It was an injustice to try to oppress and subjugate them.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Istiab* 3/918

Then a man of Bani Makhzum interrupted Ammar and said, “O son of
Sumaiyyah, what business do you have regarding the selection of a chief
of Quraish?”

What can be greater blindness than this from the light of Islam and its
guidance that this Makhzumi is addressing Ammar in this way and calling
him by his mother’s name who was such a respected lady in Islam and
whose sacrifices are unsurpassed that Islam is proud of them. She, her
husband, Yasir and son, Ammar were in the forefront in the establishment
of faith in the initial stages and bore all sorts of hardships and
calamities.

The matter of caliphate is related to all Muslims, that is why the son
of Sumaiyyah and others who Almighty Allah had bestowed power and honor
after they had been oppressed were now participating in it while the
Quraishite devils had no right to interfere in the affairs of Muslims,
if the proper procedure and logic had been followed.

Arguments arose between the powers of Islam and Quraish and Saad feared
that the matter would go out of their hands. So he turned to his cousin,
Abdur Rahman and said, “O Abdur Rahman, you should complete the job
given to you before the people become involved in mischief.”

Abdur Rahman glanced at the Holy Imam (‘a) and asked, “Would you agree
to follow the Book of Allah, the traditions of the Messenger of Allah
(s) and the system of Abu Bakr and Umar if we give allegiance to you?”

Imam (‘a) glared at him and understood what he wanted; and with the
logic of Islam and the manners of noble men, he replied, “Rather, I
would follow the Book of Allah, the traditions of the Messenger of Allah
(s) and my own judgment…”

The sources of law in Islam are these very things, the Book of Allah,
the traditions of the Messenger of Allah (s) through whom the problems
of the people are solved and through which the system of rulership
works. While the actions of Abu Bakr and Umar had no connection with the
sources of Islamic Law because the two of them had wide differences in
their policy. Abu Bakr’s economic policy was nearer to equality than
that of Umar where he removed equitable distribution of allowances and
brought into effect a class system. He preferred some Muslims to others.
He also prohibited the two Mutahs; that is the Mutah of the Hajj and the
Mutah of women while these two Mutahs were lawful during the time of the
Messenger of Allah (s) and Abu Bakr. And also, he imposed many of his
personal views of Islamic laws and made them a code of law. Then on
which manner shall the son of Abu Talib, who was brought up in the lap
of prophethood, act?

Ibn Auf definitely and without any doubt knew that Imam would accept the
rulership according to the divine law and manage the affairs of the
Muslims on the basis of truth and justice and he would not have given
any sort of preference to the Quraishite clan and he would have
considered them equal to other people in giving of the rights. Hence the
advantage that this group may gain against Islam and the problems that
it had created for the Muslim community would have been destroyed.

If the Imam had agreed to the condition put forward by Ibn Auf it would
not have been possible for him to follow any kind of policy for the
establishment of justice on the earth. And even if the Imam had just
apparently accepted the conditions, the Quraish would have laid hurdles
in his way and would not have left for him any venue to establish social
justice. In that case they would have been justified in rebelling
against him since he would have failed to fulfill his promises.

Anyway, when Abdur Rahman despaired of any change in the attitude of the
Holy Imam (‘a) he turned to Uthman and presented him with the same
proposal. Uthman immediately gave a positive reply and he expressed his
complete willingness to fulfill those conditions. And we think that
there existed a confidential agreement among themselves that they had
not revealed to anyone and under no circumstances would they have
appointed the Imam to caliphate even if he had agreed to accept the
conditions. He had only offered the allegiance in order to conceal their
plan; that is why he resorted to this political maneuver.

Some western historians believe that Abdur Rahman had taken advantage of
this opportunity and he did not allow a free selection.

Historians say that Abdur Rahman rushed to Uthman and keeping his hand
on his hand said to him, “O Allah, I hereby transfer the responsibility
that I had to Uthman…”

These steps fell like a thunderbolt on those of equitable disposition
because they were trying to establish the rule of God among the people.

Imam addressed Ibn Auf and said, “By Allah, you did not do it but with
the same hope which he (Umar) had from his friend (Abu Bakr). May Allah
create enmity between you two.” (Ali meant that Abdur Rahman had made
Uthman caliph hoping that Uthman would nominate him as his
successor.)...**[1]**

The Imam exposed the actual aim of Abdur Rahman in selecting Uthman,
that it was not in the interest of the community. Rather he had selfish
interest in it because Ibn Auf hoped to occupy the seat of caliphate
after Uthman. Hence it was due to his greed and political aspirations.
Imam Ali (‘a) glanced at the Quraishites and said, “This is not the
first day that you are becoming rulers upon us, I shall observe a goodly
patience and I shall plead for divine help regarding what you say.”

The Imam’s logical statement stung Ibn Auf and therefore he replied in a
threatening manner, “O Ali, do not compel us to attack you!”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The actual words of the Imam are: May Allah put the perfume of
Munshim between you two. Mushim was a female perfume vendor in Mecca and
when two warring tribes (Khuzaya and Jurham) wanted to have armed
confrontations with each other they used to apply the perfume of Munshim
and many were killed in this confrontation. Thus it became a proverb.
This meaning is explained in the *Sihah* of Jauhari, 5/41. And the
Almighty accepted the supplication of the Holy Imam (a.s.) and Uthman
and Abdur Rahman bin Auf became deadly foes. So much so that Abdur
Rahman bin Auf willed that if he died Uthman must not be allowed to
recite his funeral prayer.

The oppressed Imam could not but leave the venue of the gathering
saying, “This would also reach its end.”

The worthy son of Islam, Ammar bin Yasir came forward and speaking to
Ibn Auf said, “O Abdur Rahman, by Allah, you have abandoned him, while
he is the only one who could have established truth and spread justice
among them.”

Miqdad was of those who were absolutely devastated by these
developments. He said, “By Allah, I have not seen anything like that
which befell the members of this family after the passing away of their
Prophet. Surprisingly the Quraish left a man such that none was seen or
heard to be more just, wise and pious, if they had only supported him.”

Abdur Rahman interrupted his statement and warned him of mischief, “O
Miqdad, be fearful of Allah as I fear mischief upon you.”

In this way came to an end the Shura procedure tragedy that initiated
mischiefs for the Muslims and subjected them to a great evil. The Shura,
which was based on that it did not respect any right of the family of
the Prophet. Rather these people, in a blatant manner, tried to decrease
their worth and considered them at par with the commoners and dealt with
them with malice and animosity. It was in such a way that they had
completely forgotten what the Messenger of Allah (s) had advised about
them and they did not pay any heed to what he had said about them like
his saying that the Progeny was equal to the great book of Allah or that
it was like the Ark of Nuh, that whosoever boarded it was saved and
whoever did not, was drowned and destroyed.

Imam Husain (‘a) in the early stages of his life witnessed with his own
eyes, the atmosphere and consequences that followed it from the
spreading of political greed and terrible battles. An action that
brought into existence groups and preparing grounds for establishment of
power and obtaining rulership to get undue advantage from charity and
war booty. The poet says:

**“I see the mischiefs that have appeared.**

**And after Abu Laila the rulership is for the one who gains
supremacy.”**

This finally became the cause of coming into being of groups for
obtaining rulership and achieving their selfish aims.

Al Jahishari says, “When Yazid bin Abdul Malik died and Hisham became
the ruler, the news reached him when he was on the countryside with a
group of his friends. He immediately performed a prostration of
thankfulness and his friends also followed suit, except for a person
named Saad. Hisham objected to this and asked, “Why did you not
prostrate?”

He replied, “For what should I prostrate. For the fact that you were
with us and after that you have flown to the sky?”

Hisham said, “We shall take you also along with us to flight (scale
heights).”

He said, “In that case it is all right to prostrate.” And he prostrated
with them.**[1]**

This incident and other incidents like it are recorded by historians,
especially in the struggle for power or in that society, not for the
sake of social reformation and progress in life of the people which is
in accordance of the aim of Islam, but it was for the fulfillment of
selfish motives and for gaining power over the people.

Well, those terrible events created a gap between those people and their
religion and they unleashed a series of oppressive politics and actions
against the Purified Progeny and subjected them to terrible calamities
and all this finally culminated in the tragedy of Kerbala whose
sorrowful memory still remains in the world.

Here we conclude our discussion regarding the reigns of the first two
caliphs.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Wuzra wal Kitab,* Pg. 43
