Uthman’s Reign
==============

Muslims went to welcome Uthman in shock and anxiety and in an absolutely
distressed condition. The goodly people were agitated and they feared
for their religion and they considered the victory of Umayyads in the
kingdom as the victory of powers opposed to Islam.

Dozy believes that the success of the Umayyads was the success of a
group, which harbored enmity towards Islam.**[1]**

Whatever the Muslims had feared and dreaded became true because within a
short time, Uthman’s regime tried to make the Quraishites wealthy and
that they may plan with their leaders and chiefs. And gave them many
preferences and put them in control of the sources of the income of
Muslims and land tax, and placed the finances of the kingdom at their
disposal. They appointed to all the high posts in government, persons
from Bani Umayyah and the clan of Abi Muit and others from those who did
not accord any value for the Almighty. So much so that confusion became
supreme and corruption spread in all areas of the land.

Anyhow, when Ibn Auf hoisted Uthman as a caliph on the Muslims, Bani
Umayyah and other tribes of Quraish converged on him and declared their
complete support for the regime and they raised slogans in support of
Uthman and with slogan raising they brought him to the mosque of the
Messenger of Allah (s) so that he may announce the policies of his
regime and make known his position regarding the external and internal
matters. He climbed the pulpit and sat on the step where the Holy
Prophet (s) used to sit, though Abu Bakr and Umar never sat on that
level. Abu Bakr used to sit one step lower than the Prophet’s and Umar
used to sit yet another step lower. People remarked about this action of
Uthman and some of them said, “Today mischief has taken birth.”**[2]**

People listened with all their attention to the first political speech
of Uthman, but when he saw the crowd he became nervous and did not know
what to say. Taking control of himself he forced out a speech, which was
nothing but a confused talk, not having any kind of novelty or point of
enlightenment. Then he said, “So to say: The first ride is very
difficult. We were not an orator. Allah knows that between whom and Adam
is only a difference of one ancestor. Indeed it is a lesson.”**[3]**

After that he came down from the pulpit with a pale face and confused
condition. People looked at each other and started joking about him. And
it is necessary for us that we discuss in detail about the personal
qualities of Uthman and understand his political stances. It is also
necessary that we undertake a brief study of the events of his reign
that had definite effect on Islam and subjected the world of Islam to
untold hardships and evils. We have no option but to state those facts
because  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ittehaajaatul Shaar Arabi,* Pg. 26  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, 7/148. Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/140  
 **[3]** *Al-Maufiqyaat,* Pg. 202

those events also affected the life of Imam Husain (‘a) and they cast
light from various angles on the tragedy of Kerbala, which was itself a
definite result of those events, which in turn was the consequence of
distortion in the values of Islamic beliefs. And after this tragedy of
Kerbala, it became obvious for us that it was the result of those events
that carried its important effects that had played a very important role
in changing the principles of Islam.

Aspects of Uthman’s Personality
-------------------------------

The most important and well known aspects of Uthman’s personality are as
follows:

1 – He was a man of weak will and he lacked determination and he did not
have any sort of stability of determination through which he could have
put his intentions into practice. Also he did not possess any strength
to face and control undesirable situations in a time when the Umayyads
had gained control over the reins of affairs and were in power in all
the parts of the Islamic lands. And Uthman was not capable to take any
definite step against them or do anything to restrain them from
fulfilling their aims. On the basis of what historians have said he was
in relation to them like a dead body in the hands of a funeral
bath-giver. Marwan Ibn Hakam was the administrator of his affairs. He
gave to whomsoever he liked and deprived anyone he wanted. He spent
public wealth according to his whims and desires without paying any
attention to Islamic laws. Uthman did not have any control or choice in
the events faced by the regime because he had absolute trust in Marwan
and had entrusted him with all the matters connected to rulership.

Ibn Abil Hadid quoting from his Shaykhs says, “In fact, it was Marwan
who was the caliph and Uthman was only having the title of the caliph.”

Strength of determination has the perfect effect on the making of a
personality of man and his stability and it imparts to him personal
strength so that he may face the crises that he may come across in life.
And it is impossible that a man bereft of this quality to be able to
achieve any aim for the people or his nation. Islam has absolutely
disallowed persons of weak determination from being appointed as
community leaders. And such a person has been denied the right to
rulership because he would do nothing but expose the community to
hardships and calamities and make powerful people arrogant and they
would be encouraged to disobey his commands and the community shall fall
prey to dangers and problems.

Some historians have described Uthman to be a softhearted, weak, soft
spoken and a pliable man. However all these traits were for his own
people. As for those who opposed his regime he was extremely
hard-hearted and he exerted great pressure on them and tried much to
subject them to oppression. He dealt with them in a merciless and cruel
manner. For example he exiled Abu Zar from Medina to Rabadha, which was
a place devoid of any kind of facilities for living, till finally Abu
Zar departed from the world as a homeless alien.

Uthman also subjected Ammar Yasir, the prominent companion to a terrible
torture and he issued orders that Ammar be given a severe beating that
resulted in causing him hernia and police officers left him unconscious
on the road. In the same way Uthman ordered his policemen to beat up the
reciter of Quran, Abdullah Ibn Masood. They gave Abdullah Ibn Masood a
severe lashing and broke many of his bones and threw him out. He was
denied his share from the public treasury. In this way Uthman dealt with
his opponents who dared to raise any voice of dissent.

Yes, he was very kind and generous to his clansmen from the Bani Umayyah
and family of Abi Muit. He accorded them the tax collected from various
provinces and imposed their authority on the people. He appointed them
to all the important posts in his government.

2 – The second prominent quality of Uthman was his favoritism and
partiality towards his tribe and clan. He was so much concerned with
their welfare that he accorded all sorts of facilities to them and it is
said that if he had the keys to Paradise he would have given them also
to Bani Umayyah. He granted them preference in public allowances and
incomes. He entrusted them a great wealth and bestowed them millions
from the public treasury and made them rulers in the Islamic provinces
and lands. He received continuous complaints about them that they have
forsaken the truth, oppressed people and spread corruption in the land.
But he did not pay any attention and did not undertake any investigation
in this regard. He used to reject the complaints reported to him and he
turned the accusations upon the plaintiffs. We shall discuss these
things in detail later.

3 – The third aspect of Uthman’s personality was that he was inclined to
a life of luxury and enjoyment. He did not have any sort of inclination
towards piety and religiosity, like the Messenger of Allah (s) was
having. Thus he obtained for himself a life of opulence and riches and
made for himself splendid palaces and he spent on himself whatever he
desired from the Public Treasury. Finally he had amassed a great
quantity of wealth without at all bearing any sort of hardship. Imam
Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) has described him in the following way: “Like a
satiated camel and bulging belly, he had no worry except hoarding wealth
and misappropriating wealth from the Public Treasury.” And it was one of
the causes of objections against Uthman. We shall discuss this in detail
in the topic of the economic policy of Uthman.

These were some qualities of Uthman due to which he failed in the sphere
of politics and became a target of objections and criticism.

Administrative System of Uthman
-------------------------------

The administrative systems that were in force during the reign of Uthman
made the Quraish wealthy and planning with the chiefs and leaders and
followed a soft policy against the people of power and influence. It
ignored their acts against the law. For example, Ubaidullah Ibn Umar
committed intentional murder and he wrongfully murdered Hurzman, Jafifa
and Abu Lulu’s daughter. However, Uthman

closed his investigative file and issued a special order regarding him
in order to appease Umar’s family. This step became a cause of much
criticism and Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) went to Uthman to voice his
objection and petitioned him to punish Ibn Umar. Miqdad also demanded
similarly but Uthman paid no attention to this. Ziyad Ibn Labid,
whenever he met Ubaidullah he used to say:

**“There is no escape for you and Uthman’s refuge is not your security.
By Allah, you have shed innocent blood and the murder of Hurzman is a
serious matter.”**

**You killed him for no reason merely on the report of a reporter. Do
you blame Hurzman for the murder of Umar?**

**The foolishness dominated him and he said, ‘Yes, I blame him for it as
he had issued orders for it.’**

**While the weapon of that man was in his house and he was roaming about
here and there and every fact is established through a proof.”**

Ubaidullah complained to Uthman and he summoned Ziyad and told him to
abstain from this but he did not obey. Ziyad criticized Uthman also and
said,

**“O Aba Amr, Ubaidullah is responsible for Hurzman’s murder.**

**Thus if you forgive his crime the causes of the crime are inter
related.**

**In that case you would have wrongly forgiven him and you had no right
to do so.”[1]**

Uthman became angry with Ziyad and told him to restrain from such
statements. He also warned him of dire consequences and Ziyad stopped
himself.

Then he sent Ubaidullah from Medina to Kufa and allotted a piece of land
and that area became known by his name and it was called, “Kufiyat Ibn
Umar” (Ibn Umar’s part). These steps brought objections on Uthman from
the righteous and religious people because they saw that the caliph has
committed a clearly unlawful act in order to appease the Khattab family.

Anyhow, the administrative policies of Uthman’s reign were under the
absolute control of the selfish desires of the Umayyads. It did not
follow either the Quran or the practice of the Holy Prophet (s). Because
the Umayyads used to unjustifiably interfere in the areas of the Ummah
too much and they used to spread oppression in different provinces as
Kurd Ali believes, that these official errors of Uthman were the most
important of the causes that led to his murder.**[2]**

Officials and Governors of Uthman
---------------------------------

Uthman tried to impose the family members and clansmen on the community
and therefore he appointed them as officers and governors in the Islamic
provinces.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/239-240  
 **[2]** *Al-Idaratul Islamiyyah,* Pg. 57

Maqrizi says, “Uthman made Bani Umayyah the pivot of his
kingdom.”**[1]**

Umayyads possessed no sort of administrative capability or qualification
for discharging the responsibilities of rulership. And it was only this,
which subjected the Islamic lands to hardships and corruption and
injustice spread all around.

Historians say, “He encouraged his agents to misappropriate wealth from
Public Treasury. For example Abu Musa allowed his officials to trade in
the commodities of the people of Iraq.”**[2]**

Sayyid Amir Ali believes that Muslims had to bear untold hardships due
to injustices of the rulers and embezzlement of public wealth.**[3]**

Here we present some specific instances of Uthman’s appointees:

1 – Saeed Ibn Aas
-----------------

Uthman appointed Saeed Ibn Aas as the governor of Kufa after dismissing
Walid bin Uqbah on charges of imbibing wine. Thus this great province
was put in charge of Saeed Ibn Aas. The Kufians welcomed their new ruler
with disgust and without of any sort of joy. This was so because Saeed
was a brat, brought up in the lap of luxury and opulence and he had no
reservations against committing any kind of unlawful deed.

Historians say: Once in the month of Ramadan he asked the people, “Which
one of you has seen the new moon?” A senior companion of the Holy
Prophet (s), Hashim bin Utbah Mirqal stood up and said, “I have seen
it.” But Saeed did not accord any importance to him and he addressed
Hashim in a very crude and impolite manner, saying, “Have you seen it
with this blind eye?”

Hashim was hurt by this and he protested, “You are taunting me for being
blind in one eye, while it has gone in the path of Allah?” Actually he
had lost one eye in the Battle of Yarmuk.

Hashim ended his fasts the next day in accordance with the saying of the
Messenger of Allah (s) that: “Keep fast on sighting the new moon and end
them on sighting the new moon.” The people also followed the example of
Hashim and ended their fasts and this information reached Saeed. He
summoned Hashim at once and had him beaten severely and then had his
house burnt to ashes. This matter caused much hurt to the people and
they voiced their objection because Saeed had wrongly punished a
standard-bearer of Islam.**[4]**

Saeed exceeded all limits in oppression and cruelty because it is quoted
from him that he said: “This province (Kufa) is a rebel against the
Quraish.” This statement of his caused much displeasure and anger among
the people. The leader of the noble ones, Malik Ashtar rebutted him,
saying, “Do you consider our swords, that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *An-Nazaa’a Wat Tukhaasum,* Pg. 18  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/262  
 **[3]** *Mukhtasar Tarikhul Arab,* Pg. 43  
 **[4]** *Hayatul Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/263

Allah has made a channel of our livelihood to be rebels against your
people and yourself? By Allah, if anyone desires he shall be defeated
and suppressed in such a way that he would be humiliated and disgraced.”

The deviated regime that was imposed by the sword has blamed the
righteous members of the community to be rebels against the Quraish,
while it was Quraish, which had confronted Islam and made war against
it.

The Qaris and jurisprudents of the province supported their leader Malik
and seconded his statements. They all voiced their objections against
the oppressive policies of the governor. The police chief of Saeed
became angry and he scolded them in a severe manner. They pounced upon
him and delivered a terrible beating in such a way that he lost his
consciousness. Then he got up and left the gathering. The people
chastised him and criticized the policies of Uthman. They also mentioned
the defects of Quraish and the evils of Bani Umayyah to the public.

Saeed, at once, wrote a letter to Uthman and informed him about the
situation. Uthman wrote in reply that he must extern those people to
Syria. And at the same time he wrote to Muawiyah that they must be
taught a lesson.

These freedom fighters had not committed any crime or created mischief
or oppression that they should be punished for their acts. They had only
criticized their ruler because he had spoken against the truth and he
had deviated from the Straight Path. While Islam has allowed full
freedom of speech against the rulers and governors, whenever they may
stray from the path and oppress the people. This freedom is the right of
every citizen and the government is commanded to respect this right and
that people are accorded this freedom.

Anyhow, the administration forced the people towards Syria and there
Muawiyah had them arrested and lodged in a church. They were given a
counselor and he began to debate with them. He advised and encouraged
them to become obedient and cooperative with the ruler. However they did
not accept his counsel and they objected to him against the statement of
Saeed that the province of Kufa was a garden of Quraish. With this they
announced that the Quraish tribes did not have any sort of preference
that they should reserve the fruits of the land for themselves.

When Muawiyah failed to convince them he excused himself from Uthman
from keeping them in Syria. It may not be that those people cause harm
to Muawiyah’s rule.

Uthman excused him and ordered him to send them back to Kufa. When they
returned to Kufa they began to again speak against the evils of
Umayyads.

Saeed again reported the circumstances to Uthman and Uthman wrote back
saying that they must be exiled from there and taken to Homs and
Algeria. Thus they were exiled from their land and sent to Homs and the
governor of that area Abdur Rahman bin Khalid spoke to them in the most
terrible manner. He imposed them to the worst possible hardships and
tortured them as much as he could. On the basis of what narrators say,
when Abdur Rahman rode his horse he used to command

them to run alongside so that he may succeed in humiliating them in the
worst manner.

When they saw this cruelty of his, they agreed to become obedient to
their ruler and he wrote to Uthman about it. Uthman replied that they
should be returned to Kufa.

When they were sent out of Homs, they changed their route to Medina in
order to meet Uthman in person. After reaching there they met Uthman and
reported to him the tortures and oppressions of Saeed. But not much time
had passed when they saw Saeed there who had come to Uthman for some
official work. Saeed saw that group complaining about him to Uthman and
requesting him to depose Saeed. However Uthman did not accept their
petitions and ordered them to obey the command of their ruler. He also
ordered Saeed to go back and continue his job.

This group departed for their country before Saeed and reached there
before him. After reaching there they made a vow that as long as they
had their swords with them they would not allow Saeed to enter their
town. After that they came out with a group of Muslim people under the
leadership of Malik Ashtar and reached a place called al-Juraa and
camped there in order to prevent Saeed from entering Kufa.

When Saeed reached there they pounced upon him and spoke with him in a
severe tone and told him not to enter their city. Saeed ran towards
Uthman and complained to him. Uthman had no option but to dismiss Saeed.
So he dismissed him from the post and appointed in his stead another
governor much against his own inclination.**[1]**

Anyway Uthman subjected to great harassment and torture those who had
opposed Saeed, while these people were reciters of Quran and
jurisprudents in the country. He exiled them from their homeland for the
sake of an uncouth and wayward brat only because he was a relative of
Uthman’s. This matter became the cause of objections against Uthman not
only in Kufa but also in all the Islamic territories where he had
appointed his clansmen.

2 – Abdullah bin Aamir
----------------------

Abdullah bin Aamir bin Kareez was the son of Uthman’s wet nurse. Uthman
appointed him as governor of Basra after Abu Musa Ashari was dismissed
from that post. At that time Abdullah was only about 24 or 25 years old
when the governorship of that important province was entrusted to
him.**[2]** Although it would have been better if a senior and
trustworthy companion had been given the charge of that area so that
people may have benefited from his guidance, advice and piety and they
would have received the advantage of his righteousness and uprightness.
However, Uthman did not pay attention to this aspect and he sent
Abdullah there with the sole justification that he was the son of
Uthman’s wet-nurse. According to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/332. Abil Fida, *Tarikh* 1/168. *Al-Ansaab*
5/43-49  
 **[2]** *Al-Istiab* (Printed on the margins of *al-Isabah*) 3/932-933

reports of narrators Abdullah lived a life of luxury and wasteful
expenditure. So much so that Ashari remembers him to be a man of no
reservations.**[1]** He was the first one to wear fur clothes. He put on
a dark colored cloak and people said to him: O chief, you are wearing
bear fur. So he changed his clothes and put on a red cloak.**[2]**

Aamir bin Abdullah Tamimi criticized his policies and actions and he
also denounced the behavior and character of Uthman. Tabari has narrated
that some Muslims gathered and a meeting was arranged to discuss the
actions of Umayyads. They decided to send a person to Uthman directly so
that he may speak to him and make him aware of his deeds. They selected
Aamir bin Abdullah to meet Uthman. When Aamir met Uthman he said:

“A group of Muslims had come together to study your actions and they saw
that you committed very serious blunders. Hence, fear Allah, the Mighty
and the Sublime; turn back to Him and refrain from such an act…”

Uthman considered him lowly and turned his face away from him and told
those were around him, “Keep an eye on this man. People claim that he is
a reciter of Quran while he comes and asks me about something that has
no head or tail. By Allah, he does not know where Almighty Allah is.”

Now who was the one who had asked about something that had no head or
tail? He did not speak to Uthman except with regard to the fear of God
and for justice among the people and he accorded preference to the
benefits of Muslims and following the practice of the Messenger of Allah
(s). However this matter was very despicable for Uthman and he
considered his statement to be an ignorant question.

Aamir looked at Uthman and asked mockingly, “Do I not know where God
is?”

“Yes,” replied Uthman.

Aamir said, “I know that the Almighty Allah is in ambush.”

Uthman became infuriated and he summoned his advisors and officers and
told them about the objections his opponents had leveled against him and
also informed them about the statement of Aamir. Then he requested them
to offer their suggestions. So the son of his wet-nurse, Abdullah bin
Aamir gave a proposal and said, “O Amirul Momineen, my opinion is that
you order him to go for the Jihad so that they become involved in it and
make him busy in fighting battles. Thus they would not be after you all
the time. And that in which they shall be involved except in their
wounds and injuries…”

Others expressed their own ideas, however Uthman accepted the suggestion
of Abdullah that was necessary to deal with the opponents with severity
and strictness. He also sent away his officials with instructions to
deal with the opponents with absolute severity. He also ordered them to
arrest the people  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Kamil* 3/99-100  
 **[2]** *Al-Istiab* 2/933. *Usud al-Ghaba* 3/192

through military action and decided to deprive them of their allowance
so that they are reduced to poverty and thus they may be forced to obey
him.**[1]**

When Abdullah bin Aamir returned to Basra he decided to take revenge
from Aamir bin Abdullah, so he summoned his supporters and ordered them
to give a false testimony about him. He leveled false accusations and
allegations against him that he opposes the Muslims in matters that are
permitted by God. And that he does not eat meat, and does not believe in
matrimony and does not attend the Friday prayers.**[2]** He wrote down
their testimony regarding this and sent it to Uthman. Uthman ordered
that he be expelled to Syria. Hence he was put upon a packsaddle so that
he has a painful journey.

When he reached Syria, Muawiyah lodged him at al-Khizra (the green
palace) and sent a slave maid to him so that she may keep him under
surveillance and report his activities and matters.

That slave maid kept him under surveillance and she observed that he
rises up in the night in prayers and he comes out at dawn and after
darkness he goes back. He did not eat anything provided by Muawiyah. He
only dipped pieces of bread in water and ate them so that something
unlawful may not enter his stomach. The slave maid reported the
situation to Muawiyah and he wrote a letter regarding him to Uthman and
Uthman ordered him to present some gift to Aamir.**[3]**

Muslim people blamed Uthman with regard to this righteous man who had
advised for the fear of God and for justice among the people.

Abdullah bin Aamir in the same way remained the governor of Basra and he
behaved with them in a style quite unfamiliar to Muslims. He did not
omit any kind of sin, injustice and crime. When Uthman was murdered he
plundered the public treasury and fled to Mecca. There he joined hands
with Talha, Zubair and Ayesha and helped them financially so that they
may gather forces to confront Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a). It was also
Aamir who suggested them to march towards Basra and he dissuaded them
from going towards Syria.**[4]**

3 – Walid bin Uqbah
-------------------

After Saad bin Abi Waqqas Zuhri was dismissed from the governorship of
Kufa, Uthman appointed Walid bin Uqbah as the governor of Kufa.
Historians are unanimous that he was a transgressor from Bani Umayyah
and he was the most corrupt and most deviated one from Islam among them.
The Holy Prophet (s) had informed that Walid shall be an inmate of
Hell.**[5]** Walid’s father, Uqbah was one of the staunchest enemies of
the Messenger of Allah (s). He used to bring entrails and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/333-334. Ibne Khaldun, *Tarikh* 4/1036  
 **[2]** *Al-Fitnatul Kubra* 1/116  
 **[3]** *Al-Isabah* 3/85  
 **[4]** *Usud al-Ghaba* 3/192  
 **[5]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/334

lodge them at the Prophet’s door.**[1]** And he was also the one who
spat on the blessed face of the Prophet. The Prophet had warned him that
whenever he is found beyond the mountains of Mecca he would order him to
be put to death. When the battle of Badr was near he refused to leave
Mecca but his friends insisted that he accompany them. Uqbah told them
about the Prophet’s warning but they deceived him and told him, “You are
having a red-haired camel that none can catch. Hence if there is need to
flee you may mount it and flee from there.” Thus he accepted their
suggestion and went forward to participate in the battle against the
Messenger of Allah (s). When the Almighty Allah routed the polytheists,
Uqbah’s camel threw him on the sandy ground and the Muslims were easily
able to arrest him. His Eminence commanded Ali to strike of his neck and
Ali (‘a) stood up and sent the horrible fellow to Hell.**[2]** Therefore
the whole being of Walid was full of hatred towards the Prophet because
His Eminence had put his father, Uqbah to death. Walid became a Muslim
with those infidels of Quraish under the threat of the sword that had
slain his father.

The Holy Quran has called Walid by the appellation of ‘transgressor’.
Historians and commentators of Quran have stated that the following two
verses were revealed about him:

First: The Almighty Allah says: **“O you who believe! If an evil-doer
comes to you with a report, look carefully into it, lest you harm a
people in ignorance, then be sorry for what you have done.”*[3]***

The reason for the revelation of this verse was that the Holy Prophet
(s) sent Walid to Bani Mustaliq to collect Zakat funds. He returned to
His Eminence and said that they have not given anything to him. His
Eminence went to those people and the falsehood of Walid was exposed.
The above verse was revealed to announce Walid’s transgression.

Second: The Almighty has also said in the Quran: **“Is he then who is a
believer like him who is a transgressor? They are not equal.”*[4]***

The circumstances of revelation of this verse are that once a dispute
occurred between Walid and Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) and Walid said
to His Eminence, “Shut up! You are a child and I am senior in age. By
God, I am having a tongue broader than you. I am having spears sharper
than you and internal greatness more than you. And I am having more men
than you in my tribe!!!”

His Eminence Ali (‘a) told him, “You shut up, because you are a
transgressor.” Then the Almighty Allah revealed this verse about the two
of them, Hissan bin Thabit has versified this incident in the following
couplets:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 1/201  
 **[2]** *Al-Ghadeer* 8/273  
 **[3]** Surah Hujurat 49:6. Ibne Abde Barr in *Istiab* 4/1553 says:
Among the scholars of Quranic exegesis there is no difference of opinion
that this verse was about Walid.  
 **[4]** Surah Sajdah 32:18

**“The Almighty Allah and the mighty Book has revealed about the dispute
between Ali and Walid.**

**Thus it labeled Walid as ‘transgressor’ and the status of Ali (‘a) is
of faith.**

**Whoever is a believer and who recognizes God, can never be same as one
who is a transgressor and sinner.**

**Thus Ali received honor by Allah and Walid was badly humiliated.**

**Walid shall soon be disgraced and sent to Hell and the reward of Ali
is, without any doubt, Paradise.” [1]**

When Uthman endowed him with the governorship of Kufa, he was openly
imbibing alcohol. One day he came out of his palace in a state of
intoxication reciting the following couplets that exposed his evil:

**“I am not far from wine and the minstrel. Neither am I far from a dry
place or goodness.**

**But I fill my mouth with wine and walk in a sober way among the
people.”[2]**

Narrators say: He used to listen to music and songs and he spent his
nights in company of singers and merry-makers till the morning. He
preferred to remain awake with a Christian friend of his from Taghlib
tribe named Abu Zubayd Tai. And he had given him a place to live in the
mosque, which he later gifted it to him. Tai used to walk through the
Mosque to meet Walid at night and enjoy wine there and after that he
used to return in an intoxicated condition walking through the mosque
again.**[3]**

Historians say that Walid drank wine and in a state of intoxication led
people in morning prayers and instead of two recited four units
(Rakats). While bowing and prostrating he recited: You drink and give me
to drink. After that he vomited the Mihrab (Niche) of the Mosque and
concluded the prayers. Then he turned to those behind him and asked,
“You want me to make you recite more?”

Ibn Masood told him, “May Allah not increase your goodness and neither
that goodness that He has sent you to us.” At that moment Ibn Masood
picked up one shoe of his and thrashed Walid’s face with it. People
began to pelt him with stones and he retreated to his palace while
people were throwing stones at him. Walid was absolutely intoxicated and
quite oblivious of all this.**[4]** Regarding these defects and disgrace
of Walid, Hatiya Jarwal bin Aws Absa has composed the following poem:

**“On the day Hatiya meets the Lord he would testify that Walid is the
foremost in deceit and misappropriation.**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tadkiratul Khawaas*, Pg. 202  
 **[2]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/335  
 **[3]** *Al-Aghani* 5/135, *Muruj az-Zahab* 1/323, *Al-Iqdul Farid*
6/348  
 **[4]** *Sirah Halabiyyah* 2/314, *Al-Aghani* 5/125, *Al-Istiab* 4/1553

**When his prayers concluded he screamed, “Shall I recite more?” And he
was drunk and senseless.**

**He wanted to increase their good deeds. And if they had asked he would
have recited more than ten.**

**O Abu Wahab, they did not accept. And if they had accepted they would
have found the Shaf and Watr[1] joined together.**

**Your bridle was tightened when you moved, otherwise you would have
continued to go on like this.”[2]**

Hatiya has also written the following couplets about him:

**“He openly spoke in prayer and added some things in it.**

**He kept his mouth away from the practice of the devout of avoiding
wine. When they were about to disperse he called out aloud:**

**Shall I recite more for you, so that you may praise me? And there is
nothing good in it for me or you.”[3]**

A group of righteous and good people hastened from Kufa to Medina and
complained to Uthman about Walid. They were carrying the seal ring of
Walid that they had taken from him when he was senseless in
intoxication.

When they met Uthman they swore and testified about what they had seen
that Walid was a drunkard. Uthman chastised them and asked, “How do you
know that he drank wine?”

They replied, “The same wine that we used to imbibe in the period of
ignorance.”

In order to emphasize their veracity they gave to Uthman the seal ring
they had seized from Walid when he was intoxicated senseless.

Uthman became angry and he arose and he pushed them by their chests and
addressed them in the worst and the most acerbic tone.

They came out depressed and worried and went towards His Eminence,
Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) and informed him about the matter. The Holy
Imam (‘a) went to Uthman and said, “You have chased away the witnesses
and rendered the penal code invalid?”

Uthman’s temper cooled down and he became fearful of the consequences of
his actions. He glanced at the Holy Imam (‘a) and asked softly, “What do
you suggest?”

His Eminence replied, “My opinion is that you summon your friend. Then
if they testify against him in his presence and he does not have any
argument, you must award him the penalty…”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ninth, tenth and eleventh units of the Midnight Prayer  
 **[2]** *Al-Aghani* 5/125  
 **[3]** Ibid

Uthman had no option but to accept Imam’s advice. So he wrote a letter
to Walid and summoned him there. When Uthman’s letter reached Walid he
set out for Medina. When he arrived to Uthman, he summoned the witnesses
and they testified against Walid. Walid could not offer any
justification and in this way he became liable for penalty but no one
stood up to mete out the punishment due to the fear of Uthman. So Imam
Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) arose and went towards him. Walid abused the
Holy Imam (‘a) and said, “O harmful and unjust man!”

Aqil stood up against Walid and replied to his abuses. Walid tried to
catch hold of the Imam but the Imam pulled him and threw him on the
ground. Then he lashed him with a whip.

Uthman became angry and he screamed at the Imam, “You have no right to
do this to him.”

Imam replied to him in accordance with the logic of Shariah, saying,
“Yes, it should be worse if he is a transgressor and if he prevents the
right of Allah from being taken from him.”**[1]**

This incident proves how careless Uthman was in enforcing the law of the
Shariah and how he had no concern about its establishment.

The respected teacher, Alaili, opines regarding this event as follows:

“This story is a new thing except for gift that is from affection which
they do with us and the picture of concealing a religious thing as it
was obligatory on the caliph that he should be the first one who should
become angry at it. Apart from this his position shall be worth
criticism and for the people shall be a ground for struggle and
criticism against him. Especially his regime which came after the regime
of Umar which was well-known for its severity and strictness. So much so
that even if someone was related to him he used to be strict on him or
her also.

On the basis of this such exaggeration is not only affection, favoritism
and nepotism so that people may come together to help him. Anyway, Walid
left a bad effect on Kufa for the future generations because he gave
impetus to all sorts of immoral activities.”**[2]**

Anyway, Walid left some effects in Kufa that were undesirable because
his unbridled behavior was considered a model for others as some
companions and companions of companions were also present in it. They
transformed the city of Kufa to be a town of drunkards and people of
vice because Walid had encouraged the people towards luxuries, wine,
music and dance. Many areas of Kufa were opened for music and dance and
the number of people of vice increased in the town. Among the singers
was one Abdullah Ibn Hilal who became famous by the title of “Friend of
Iblis (Satan)”. **[3]** And Hunain Khairi was a Christian poet.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 335/336  
 **[2]** *Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 33  
 **[3]** *Al-Aghani* 2/351  
 **[4]** *Al-Aghani* 2/341

4 – Abdullah Ibn Saad
---------------------

Uthman appointed his foster brother, Abdullah bin Saad bin Abi Sarah as
the governor of Egypt and gave the income and taxes of the province in
his charge.**[1]** He was from the most dangerous polytheists and the
most inimical towards the Holy Prophet (s). No one had mocked the
Prophet more than him and he used to ridicule His Eminence saying, “I
can take him wherever I like.” The Messenger of Allah (s) has decreed
that he should be killed even if he were found hanging with the curtain
of the Holy Ka’ba.

After the conquest of Mecca he fled and took refuge with Uthman and
Uthman offered him protection. When the people of Mecca calmed down
Uthman brought him to the Prophet. His Eminence remained quiet for a
long time and after that he accorded him security and forgave him.

When Uthman went away from there the Prophet told his companions, “I did
not remain quiet but to enable one of you to get up and kill him.”

A man from the Ansar asked His Eminence, “O Messenger of Allah (s)! Why
did you not signal to me?” He replied, “It is not advisable for the
Prophet to glance in a deceitful way.”**[2]**

When Abdullah got the governorship of Egypt he began to deal with the
Egyptians with anger and oppression. He imposed more duties and
responsibilities than they could bear and he began to practice arrogance
and selfish behavior. The people became fed up with him. A group of
righteous people hastened to Uthman and complained about Abdullah.

Uthman wrote a letter to Abdullah and denounced his policies and
behavior in that province. However Abdullah did not give much importance
to this letter and he continued to behave in the same oppressive and
arrogant manner. He also got killed the person who had carried the
complaint to Uthman. This gave more impetus to anger and discontent of
the people. An organization of senior people among the Egyptians was
formed and its members, according to narrators, numbered seven hundred.

They all rushed to Uthman and they reached the Mosque. They reported to
the companions about the behavior of Ibn Abi Sarah. Thus Talha went to
Uthman and spoke to him in an acerbic tone. Ayesha also sent a message
to him that he must dispense justice to that delegation. Imam Amirul
Momineen Ali (‘a) also told him, “This delegation wants a person in the
place of another person (they want Uthman to replace the governor), that
regarding him they demand retaliation of murder. So you must depose him
and judge among them. Then if they are entitled to a right you must
accord it to them…”

Uthman accepted it unwillingly and he said, “You select a person whom I
can  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Wulaat wal Quzaat,* Pg. 11  
 **[2]** Qurtubi, *Tafsir* 7/40, Abi Dawood, *Sunan* 4/128

appoint as your governor.”

People suggested the name of Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and Uthman wrote a
letter of appointment for him as the governor of Egypt and he sent it
with some people of the Muhajir and Ansar so that they may judge between
him and Ibn Abi Sarah.**[1]**

They departed from Medina but when they reached the area known as Homs,
they saw a messenger coming from Medina. When they investigated, they
found that he was, Warish, Uthman’s slave. So they subjected him to
interrogation and found that he was carrying a letter of Uthman for Ibn
Abi Sarah. In the letter, Uthman has ordered Ibn Abi Sarah to suppress
and punish the members of this delegation. When they studied the letter
and pondered over it, they realized that it was a trick of Marwan. They
returned to Medina with the intention that they would either depose
Uthman or put him to death.

5 – Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan
---------------------------

Uthman did not appoint Muawiyah as the governor of Syria. It was Umar
who had appointed him. Uthman only confirmed the post of Muawiyah in
Syria. However, he gave him additional powers and influence. In the
words of Taha Husayn he cleared the way for him to reach to caliphate.
“There is no doubt that Uthman prepared the ground of Muawiyah so that
one day he may transfer the caliphate to the family of Abu Sufyan and
make it established in the clan of Bani Umayyah. For it was Uthman who
increased the sphere of Muawiyah’s influence. He added Palestine and
Homs to his dominions and created for him a vast area in Syria. He was
given the command of military forces all around and his army became more
powerful than the Muslim army. And also, like Umar, he allowed him to
remain in the seat of governorship for a long time. Uthman gave him more
powers than he had during the reign of Umar. When the mischief increased
Muawiyah thought that his kingdom was greater than any other kingdom and
that he was the most powerful ruler with regard to military power and
domination on the people.”**[2]**

On the basis of this, Uthman himself was the one who increased the
influence of Muawiyah and spread the limits of his dominions so he
became the most powerful, influential and strongest ruler having under
his control the most important, stable and prosperous province in the
Islamic lands.

The above was the account of some of the governors under the reign of
Uthman. They were all from Bani Umayyah and the clan of Abi Muit. And
they were given the post of governorship only because of favoritism and
partiality for them and to strengthen the influence of the Umayyads and
to bring under their control the destinies of the Muslims. Sayyid Amir
Ali has commented as follows regarding the governors of Uthman: “These
were the men whom the caliph favored! They fastened to the provinces
like famished leeches, heaping up wealth by means of pitiless
extortion.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 5/26  
 **[2]** *Al-Fitnatul Kubra* 1/120  
 **[3]** *Ruhul Islam*, Pg. 90

Economic Policies of Uthman
---------------------------

The economic policy of Uthman was the continuation of the policy of
Umar.**[1]** There was nothing new in it except what Umar had founded
that it was the very creation of class systems and preference of some
over others in matters of allowances. This policy had deviated from that
which Islam had promulgated in the necessity of observing moderation,
public welfare, economic independence, fight against poverty and
securing needs of the weaker sections and needy people. Because the
rulers do not have any right to appropriate for themselves anything from
public wealth, or that they may use it for strengthening their rulership
or personal influence, and Islam has been very severe and strict in this
regard. The Messenger of Allah (s) has said, “On the Day of Judgment the
fire of Hell shall be for those who wrongfully misappropriate public
wealth.”**[2]**

Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) has written in letter to his governor in
Mecca, Qatham bin Abbas that he must endeavor to establish truth and
justice in the land. This letter has explained the economic policy of
Islam. The letter is as follows:

“Beware of the Public Treasury. Spend its money on the poor people of
your province. Find them out (if they do not come to you) and meet their
necessities. If any surplus amount is left over after such expenditure
then send the amount to the centre so that it may meet the requirements
of the poor throughout the State.”**[3]**

The method of Islam, especially with regard to the government funds was
that the governor was duty bound to spend on the welfare of the people
in different localities and also spend it on the needy people so that no
deprived or needy person remains in the Islamic lands. However Uthman
did not accord any importance to this point. Rather he distributed
public wealth among the nobles, the rich, the Bani Umayyah and family of
Abi Muit. Such that huge wealth amassed with them and they remained busy
in spending it…

Yes, the huge wealth that was collected at the central treasury was
given away to the Umayyads and they used to claim that it is their
property and not the property of the country, because they had bestowed
all the superiorities to themselves. A sketch of wealth that Uthman had
bestowed to them and others is presented below:

Uthman’s Bestowals to the Umayyads
----------------------------------

Uthman restricted the wealth for the Umayyads and presented them with
great bestowals as follows:

1 – Harith bin Hakam: Uthman gifted the following things to his
son-in-law who was married to his daughter, Ayesha:

A – 300000 dirhams**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikh* *Iraq Dar Zer-e-Sulte Umayyan,* Pg. 22  
 **[2]** Bukhari, *Sahih* 4/104  
 **[3]** Muhammad Abduh, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/128  
 **[4]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 5/52

B – Camels that reached Medina by way of Zakat were given to him.

C – He gifted him a market in Medina known by the name of Nahruz while
the Holy Prophet (s) had given it as a charity for all Muslims.**[1]**

2 – Abu Sufyan: Uthman allotted 200000 from the public treasury to Abu
Sufyan, the leader of the hypocrites.**[2]**

3 – Saeed bin Aas: Uthman paid 100000 dirhams to Saeed bin Aas.**[3]**

4 – Abdullah bin Khalid: Abdullah bin Khalid bin Usaid married Uthman’s
daughter and Uthman ordered that 600000 dirhams be given to him. And he
wrote to his governor in Egypt that the money be paid out of the Public
Treasury.**[4]**

5 – Walid bin Uqbah: Walid bin Uqbah was Uthman’s half-brother related
through his mother. He had bestowed a large sum from the Public Treasury
through Abdullah Ibn Masood who was the treasurer. Later Abdullah asked
him to repay the loan but he did not return the sum. Instead he wrote a
letter to Uthman complaining about Abdullah. Uthman wrote a letter to
Abdullah, which mentioned as follows: Know that you are our treasurer;
so do not say anything that has been given to Walid.

Ibn Masood became angry; He threw down the keys and said, “I was under
the impression that I am the treasurer of Muslims. So if I were to be
your treasurer, I have no need of it.” After that he tendered his
resignation and settled down in Kufa.**[5]**

On the basis of this we can say that the Public Treasury in the parlance
of Uthmani policy was the property of the Umayyads and not related to
the Muslims. We leave the judgment regarding this matter to the readers
themselves.

6 – Hakam bin Abil Aas: This filthy horrible creature was the worst foe
of the Messenger of Allah (s), hence His Eminence had exiled him from
the country and said, “He should not live at the place I reside.” During
the period of Abu Bakr and Umar he remained externed from Medina along
with his sons in the same way. As soon as Uthman became the caliph he
issued amnesty to Hakam and he returned to Medina in such a way that he
brought only a goat with him and he was wearing a worn-out dress. Thus
when he arrived to Uthman, Uthman presented him with a fur cloak and a
rich and costly dress.**[6]** He also gave him 100000 in currency**[7]**
and appointed him as the collector of Zakat from the Qaza-a tribe, which
amounted to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid 5/28  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/67  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 5/28  
 **[4]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/145  
 **[5]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/31  
 **[6]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/141  
 **[7]** *Al-Ma’arif,* Pg. 194

300000. This amount was also gifted to Hakam.**[1]**

Uthman’s generosity towards Hakam made all the Islamic groups critical
of Uthman and they all objected to these policies of the caliph.

7 – Marwan bin Hakam: Marwan bin Hakam was the vizier and the special
advisor of Uthman and all the important matter connected with the regime
were in his charge. He also got a huge quantity of wealth in his
control. The following items were bestowed by Uthman:

A – One-fifth of the booty of Africa, which amounted to 500000 dinars
was allotted to Marwan. The people went against Uthman due to this
matter.

Abdur Rahman bin Hanbal, the revolutionary poet has composed satirical
verses about him as follows:

**“By Allah Almighty, indeed I swear that I have not been left free
without a purpose.**

**However you created mischiefs for us so that you may become
experienced as you did become experienced.**

**Because the two trustworthy ones have described the illuminated path
for guidance.**

**They did not secretly take away a single dirham and neither did they
keep a single dirham for selfish needs.**

**You have recalled that accursed fellow and made him your confidant,
very much against the existing practice.**

**And you gave the Khums money of Allah’s servants (Muslims) to Marwan
so that he may oppress them and you have resorted to nepotism.[2]**

B- Uthman provided him with a thousand and fifty Awqiya [One awqiya
equals seven mithqals approximately] of precious metal. But it is not
known whether it was gold or silver. However the fact is that this
allotment created a great furor in the community and Uthman was much
denounced for this misplaced generosity.**[3]**

C – He gave him 100000 from the Public Treasury. It infuriated the
treasurer Zaid bin Arqam so much that he returned the keys to Uthman and
began to weep. So Uthman scolded him and said, “Are you weeping because
I have done a good deed to my relatives (Sile Raham)?”

He replied, “Rather we are weeping because the money you would have
spent in charity during the time of the Holy Prophet (s), the same money
you have taken away. Even if you had given only a hundred dirhams to
Marwan, it would have been too much.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/28  
 **[2]** Abul Fida, *Tarikh* 1/169  
 **[3]** Halabi, *Sirah* 2/78 (Daar Ahya Thuraathil Arabi)

Uthman screamed at him, “Give up the keys, we’ll appoint someone else in
your place.”**[1]**

D – Uthman bestowed the property of Fadak to Marwan.**[2]**

E – He also allotted him the Khums money of Egypt.**[3]**

These were some examples of the misplaced generosity of Uthman towards
the Umayyads, which brought vehement denouncements of the Muslim
community. The senior members of public and those who were righteous and
noble personalities became infuriated at Uthman. This was so because
that family had always been inimical towards the Almighty Allah and His
Messenger and they had always fought against Islam. Hence it was
absolutely against truth and justice that the wealth of Muslims and
their incomes be reserved especially for the Umayyads, while it was a
time when poverty was widespread in all the regions of the Muslim
community.

Uthman’s Generosity to Nobles
-----------------------------

Uthman endowed huge wealth to all those nobles and aristocratic
personages whose power he feared. The following are some of the major
bestowals of Uthman to the influential people:

1 – Talha: Uthman presented 200000 dinars to Talha**[4]** while he
already owed 50000 to him. So Talha asked, “Take back what I owe you.”
However Uthman wrote off the amount and said, “O Abu Muhammad, it is to
honor you for your valor.”**[5]**

2 – Zubair: The caliph issued 600000 units of currency to Zubair, such
that he was astounded at the time of receiving them and inquired about
this wonderful matter so that he may put to use what he had received. He
told him that it was to enable him to build mansions in provinces and
cities.**[6]** Thus Zubair built eleven houses in Medina, two in Basra,
one in Kufa and one in Egypt!**[7]**

3 – Zaid bin Thabit: The third caliph presented a huge amount of wealth
to Zaid bin Thabit. Such was the spread of his wealth that when he died
he left behind such a huge quantity of gold and silver that it had to be
broken up into pieces by sledge hammers. And this was in addition to the
landed property that he left and its value was around 100000.**[8]**

Uthman also bestowed other properties to those who supported his regime
like Hissan bin Thabit and others, about whom the historians have
written in detail and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/67  
 **[2]** Abul Fida, *Tarikh* 1/168, *Al-Ma’arif,* Pg. 195  
 **[3]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 3/64  
 **[4]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 6/108 (Printed Daarul Fikr 1417)  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, Pg. 4/405  
 **[6]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat*  
 **[7]** Bukhari, *Sahih* 4/106  
 **[8]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/333

these properties remind us of the millionaires of our time.

The wealth of some companions increased so much that some of them feared
that the Almighty Allah would reduce their rewards in the Hereafter.
Khabab bin Arat says: “I was with the Messenger of Allah (s) and I did
not have any wealth but now I have in box in a corner of my house
containing 4000 Wafi,**[1]** and I fear that Almighty Allah be repaying
our good deeds in this world itself. (So nothing would remain for us in
the Hereafter). Faan Flutton believes that this economic policy led the
people to a life of luxury and created every sort of mischief and
corruption.**[2]**

Allotment of Land to Feudal Lords
---------------------------------

Uthman allotted tracts of land in Kufa to various persons while he knew
that those lands were the property of Muslims because they were obtained
through military expeditions.

He gave it to feudal person whether the land was in Kufa or beyond its
limits. The lands were reserved for building houses and mansions and
named “Maskinal Wujuh”. He gave the following landed properties to a
group of companions as follows:

Talha was granted the property, which became famous as Dar-at-Talhain.
It was situated in al-Kanasa locality. The caliph gifted a huge landed
property to Ubaidullah Ibn Umar and it took the name of Kufiyat Ibn
Umar. He also made land endowments to Usamah bin Zaid, Saad, his nephew,
Hashim bin Utbah, Abu Musa Ashari, Huzaifah Abasi, Abdullah bin Masood,
Salman Bahili, Musayyab Fizari, Amr bin Hareeth Makhzumi, Jubair bin
Motam Thaqafi, Utbah bin Umar Khazraji, Abu Jubair Ansari, Adi bin Hatim
Tai, Jurair Bajali, Ashath Kindi, Walid bin Utbah, Ammar bin Utbah,
Furat bin Hayyan Ajali, Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari and Umme Hani binte
Abu Talib.

In the same way Uthman gave in ownership to some people some very
profitable landed properties that were well known in history.

1 – Talha bin Abdullah was given the property called Nashasataj.

2 – Adi bin Hatim was granted the land of Al-Radd Jaa

3 – Wail bin Hujr Hazrami was allotted Radhiya Zaadar

4 – Habab bin Arat was gifted Sa-abna

5 – To Khalid bin Arafta he gave land in Hamam Ayyim

6 – Ashath Kindi got the landed property of Zeez Nabar

7 – Jurair bin Abdullah Bajali was bestowed al-Jarfain, a piece of land
on the banks of Euphrates

8 – Abdullah Ibn Masood got a piece of property in Nahreen  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Each Waafi is one Dirham and four Daaniq (Al-Qamus, root
‘Dauq’)  
 **[2]** *As-Siyadatul Arabiyya,* Pg. 22

9 – Abdullah bin Malik Zuhri received the grant of the village called
Hurmuz.

10 – Ammar bin Yasir was handed over the land called Asbeena

11 – Uthman also gave some land to Zubair Ibn Awwam

12 – He issued the ownership of a piece of land to Usamah bin Zaid but
he sold it later on.**[1]**

These were some of the lands, which Uthman had allotted to the feudal
lords while some affluent people had already purchased those lands and
therefore the Iraqis were trying to get them back. While a group of
noble class people were interested to purchase fertile lands of Iraq.
Talha, Marwan bin Hakam, Ashath bin Qais**[2]** and some persons of
Iraqi tribes purchased the lands till feudalism spread and huge feudal
estates came into being. Slaves, prisoners and nobles gathered around
landed properties and amassing of wealth, increase in relatives became
apparent for some selected few. Sinoon and Faal Hauzen believe that
allotments of these agricultural lands were made before the reign of
Uthman.

In any case this great feudalism created the class system and it gave
rise to a class struggle among the people of the community.

Appropriating Public Wealth for Personal Needs
----------------------------------------------

Uthman exhausted the public treasuries and whatever he wanted he used to
take it for himself and his family. Historians say: There were such
precious jewels present in the public treasuries that it was not
possible to compute their value. Uthman took them and with them got
jewellery made for his daughters and wives.**[3]** He himself had gone
so much ahead in extravagant expenditure that Muslims had not seen
anyone like him. Because he got a house of brick and mortar made for
himself in Medina and its door was made of teak and juniper wood. He
also kept the funds, orchards and water springs under his
control.**[4]**

He got his teeth covered with gold and wore royal garments and he
employed huge amounts from the Public Treasury for planting fields and
making houses for himself.**[5]** When he was killed he had left 30
million dirhams and 150000 dinars with his treasurer. He also left
behind 1000 camels and incomes of Bradis, Khaiber and Wadi al-Qura,
which came to be 200000 dinars. He left all this when he died.**[6]**

The economic policies followed by Uthman created a class system and it
caused untold losses to the Muslims.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Hayat al-Ijtimaiya wal Iqtisadiya Fil Kufa,* Pg. 145-146
quoted from *Futuh al-Buldan*, Pg. 272  
 **[2]** *Khatat al-Kufa,* Pg. 21, *Al-Hizaaratul Islamiyyah* 1/123  
 **[3]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/36  
 **[4]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/332  
 **[5]** Halabi, *Sirah* 2/78 (Daar Ahya Thuraathil Arabi)  
 **[6]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 3/76-77

Muhammad Kurd Ali says, “This economic policy divided the people into
two major classes. Firstly: A class which had a lot of wealth and they
had nothing to do except indulge in vain pleasures and luxuries and
secondly was the labor class who ploughed the land or worked as
artisans. These people had to bear hardships and difficulties for their
masters so that they may get some leftovers from their banquets. Absence
of balance in economic life and loss of stability in political and
social life were the two faces of reality of those times. The Umayyad
regime followed this policy during their period of rule employed wealth
in political matters. They used it as a weapon against their opponents
and an instrument of pleasing their friends and supporters.”**[1]**

With this brief statement we conclude our discussion about the economic
and monetary policy of Uthman which lad deviated from the Islamic policy
of observing austerity with regard to public wealth and the necessity of
spending it on public welfare and the poor and the deprived sections in
all areas of the Muslim dominions.

Opposing Groups
---------------

Muslims objected against Uthman most vehemently and the righteous and
good people among them took severe steps to oppose him as he had been
unduly partial to Bani Umayyah and the family of Abu Muit and had
imposed them over the Muslims. Uthman had also given in their charge the
taxes of various provinces and government posts were all given to people
of these families inspite of the fact that they continued their
oppressions and injustices. Uthman did not take any step with regard to
this. People criticized and complained to Uthman but he replied to them
with abuses and insults.

The opposing group was divided into two types of people, right and left.
Because Talha and Zubair and those attached to them were such that their
opposition to Uthman was not based on a demand for social reform even
though they pretended such a stance before simple-minded people and the
general public. Rather their aim was to reach the seat of power and
obtain the key positions in different areas in order to secure their
incomes.

As for the other groups of opponents it consisted of senior personages
of Islam and supporters of religion like Ammar bin Yasir, Abu Zar,
Abdullah Ibn Masood and others like them who had fulfilled their
covenants to their Lord and had given a good test in the path of
religion. They realized that Uthman’s regime has destroyed the Prophetic
practice and enlivened innovation. And they saw that truthful persons
are belied and in illegal way posts are given to people. In such a way
that they themselves were asking Uthman to change his practice and
follow the guidance and deal with truth among the Muslims. However he
paid scant regard to them and if he had accepted their views many
mischiefs and calamities would have been removed from the community.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Idaratul Islamiyyah,* Pg. 82

Crushing the Opponents
----------------------

Uthman resorted to absolute severity in crushing his political opponents
and critics. He directed his fury upon them and reached to extremes in
an endeavor to punish and hurt them. Some of those personages who fell
prey to Uthman’s fury were as follows:

1 – Ammar bin Yasir
-------------------

The status of Ammar in Islam is known to all because he was the
companion and friend of His Eminence, the Prophet. He bore terrible
tortures and most severe hardships in the path of Islam. The Quraish
subjected Ammar and his parents to a severe torture. His parents were
martyred in the path of religion and the Holy Quran has announced their
excellences in the following verse:

**“What! he who is obedient during hours of the night, prostrating
himself and standing, takes care of the hereafter…”[1]**

And the Almighty Allah has said regarding Ammar:

**“Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks among the people…”[2]**

The Holy Prophet (s) accorded great respect and honor to Ammar and he
was the recipient of respect and kindness from His Eminence. His
Eminence heard that a person has spoken ill to Ammar, therefore His
Eminence became very much disturbed by it and he said, “What does he
have to do with Ammar? He invites them to Paradise while they call him
to Hell fire. Indeed, Ammar is the skin between my eyes and nose (very
respected). Whenever someone reaches this status, you must refrain from
(disrespect to) him.”**[3]**

When the Holy Prophet (s) left this world for the everlasting abode,
Ammar became the most prominent companion of Imam Amirul Momineen Ali
(‘a); he attached himself to Ali (‘a) and became his servant. Ammar was
of those who refused to give oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr because
except for Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) he did not consider anyone
eligible for the successorship of the Prophet.

When Umar imposed Uthman as the caliph on Muslims, Ammar was in the
forefront of opposing and criticizing Uthman. The causes of Ammar’s
stand were as follows:

1 – When Uthman took for himself a special container having such
precious jewels that it was not possible to find their value, Imam
Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) objected to it, and Ammar endorsed the stand of
His Eminence. So Uthman

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Zumar 39:9 Qurtubi in his *Tafsir* 1/239 and Ibne Saad in
his *Tabaqat* 3/250 have stated that this verse was revealed about
Ammar.  
 **[2]** Surah Anam 3:122. Suyuti in his *Tafsir* 3/352 and Ibne Kathir
in his *Tafsir* 2/178 have stated that this verse was revealed about
Ammar.  
 **[3]** Ibne Hisham, *Sirah* 2/114

addressed Ammar saying, “O son of Mutaka,**[1]** are you trying to
insult me?” At that time he ordered his officers to arrest Ammar. They
arrested him and took him to Uthman’s house and beat him up badly till
he lost consciousness. After that they took him to the house of the
mother of believers, Umme Salma. Due to the severity of the beating he
did not regain consciousness till the time of noon and late afternoon
prayers had lapsed. When he regained consciousness, he arose, performed
the ritual ablution and performed the evening prayers and said, “Thanks
be to God, this is not the first time that I am tortured for the sake of
Almighty.”

Ayesha also became infuriated. She took out a strand of Prophet’s hair,
one of his clothes and also a slipper and she said, “How soon have you
abandoned the practice of your Prophet while his hair, clothes and
footwear are still intact.” Uthman became so angry that he did not know
what to say and how to have his mistakes excused.**[2]**

2 – Senior companions of the Prophet wrote a memorandum for Uthman in
which they told him that he had deviated from the prophetic practice.
They advised him to refrain from such tactics. Ammar took the document
and came to Uthman. He read a part of the letter and then glanced at
Ammar and asked him, “Have you come to me on their behalf?”

Ammar replied, “I am more concerned than them about you.”

Uthman said, “You lie, O son of Sumaiyyah!”

Ammar said, “By Allah, I am the son of Sumaiyyah and the son of Yasir.”

Uthman ordered his servants to tie up the limbs of Ammar and pull them
apart. Uthman himself kicked Ammar so hard in the groin that he
developed hernia, became weak and lost consciousness.**[3]**

3 – When Uthman persecuted and suppressed the great companion of the
Messenger of Allah (s), Abu Zar and exiled him to Rabadha where he
passed away as a stranger in foreign land and the news of his passing
away reached Medina, Muslims were shocked and aggrieved for Abu Zar.
While Uthman mockingly remarked, May Allah have mercy on him.”

Ammar denounced this action of Uthman and said, “May Allah have mercy on
all of us.”

Uthman became infuriated and he addressed Ammar in the worst possible
manner and the most severe way saying, “O one whose father’s mouth
foamed. Do you think I regret sending him to exile?”

Such a behavior hardly befits a commoner, what to say about Uthman, who
claims that angels were ashamed of him?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A woman suffering from incontinence  
 **[2]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/48-49  
 **[3]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/49. *Al-Iqdul Farid* 6/57 and 4/307 (Daar Kutub
al-Arbi – Beirut 1403)

Uthman instructed his servants to take away Ammar and torture and beat
him up and exile him to Rabadha also. When they were ready to depart for
Rabadha the Bani Makhzum tribesmen came to Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a)
and petitioned him to speak to Uthman and told him, “Fear Allah! You
exiled a righteous person from the Muslims and he passed in that exile
and now you want to exile him (Ammar) similarly?”

Uthman arose and shouted at the Holy Imam (‘a), “You are more deserving
to be exiled.”

His Eminence said, “If you want to do it, go ahead.”

The Emigrants gathered around him and complained and criticized him. He
accepted their plea and gave amnesty to Ammar.**[1]**

Uthman did not respect the status and position of Ammar that he had near
the Holy Prophet (s) and his seniority in Islam. He committed excess
upon him and tried much to torture and hurt him because Ammar enjoined
justice and invited towards truth.

2 – Abu Zar
-----------

Abu Zar was the companion and friend of His Eminence. He was of the
senior-most companions of His Eminence who were at the forefront in
Islam. He was the most pious of the people and he cared very little for
the world and its benefits. The Messenger of Allah (s) considered him
trustworthy at a time when he did not trust any of his
companions.**[2]** The Prophet used to entrust him with all his secrets
at a time when he did not disclose his secrets to anyone. He was one of
the three persons whom the Almighty Allah loved and He also commanded
His Messenger to love them. And he is of those three persons,**[3]** for
whom Paradise was eager.**[4]**

When turmoil appeared during the time of Uthman, and the Bani Umayyah
reserved the profits of the kingdom and the products of lands for
themselves, Abu Zar in his capacity of being a Muslims believer chose
the religion and criticized the policies of Uthman. He called Uthman so
that there be a limit to corruption and spreading of disunity among the
people. Uthman refused to follow his advice, but he did not give up. He
continued his criticism in the same way. Regarding those who Uthman had
given huge grants, he used to stand up and recite the verse:

**“…and (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it
in Allah’s way, announce to them a painful chastisement.”[5]**

This statement angered Marwan Hakam because a huge wealth that Uthman
had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/54-55, Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/173  
 **[2]** *Kanzul Ummal* 13/311 Hadith no. 36886, *Majma az-Zawaid*
9/330  
 **[3]** Three persons who were eager for Paradise: His Eminence, Imam
Ali (a.s.), Abu Zar and Ammar.  
 **[4]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/330  
 **[5]** Surah Taubah 9:34

bestowed on him had amassed with him. He became highly annoyed with Abu
Zar and complained about him to Uthman. Uthman summoned Abu Zar and
deterred him from such behavior but Abu Zar did not agree to change his
attitude. He said, “Does Uthman prohibit me from reciting the Book of
God? By Allah, I cannot offend Allah for the sake of Uthman. The
displeasure of Uthman is better for me than the displeasure of Allah.”

Uthman was infuriated and he was fed up with Abu Zar but he controlled
his anger and waited for a chance to destroy his foe.

Abu Zar’s Imprisonment in Syria
-------------------------------

The great companion of the Prophet continued to attack Uthman and from
this course of action he had the pleasure of God in view and he desired
the life of the Hereafter. He neither feared death nor was charmed by
the life of this world. While Uthman harbored malice against him and
finally deported him to Syria.

Historians say: Uthman asked the audience in his assembly, “Is it
allowed for one to borrow some money from the Public Treasury and when
it is possible to return it?”

Kaab al-Ahbar, a confidant of Uthman spoke up and gave a verdict to
support the legality of that action.

Abu Zar found this matter unbearable because since Kaab had the nature
of a Jew and his acceptance of Islam was doubtful, how could he
interfere in religious matters? So he screamed at him, “O son of two
Jews! Do you teach us our religion?”

Uthman became angry and took the side of Kaab and cried at Abu Zar, “How
much has your pain increased and how painful you have become for my
friends. Go to your place in Syria!”

Thus Uthman issued orders that Abu Zar be banished to Syria. But when
Abu Zar reached Syria and witnessed the evils and innovations of
Muawiyah that he had a free hand in using the wealth from Public
Treasury that was collected from the labors of people, he denounced
Muawiyah. He also exposed the evil deeds of Uthman among the Muslims
people. He also objected against Muawiyah when he said, “The wealth, is
the wealth of God.” And he told him, “The wealth is the wealth of
Muslims.” Abu Zar also protested against the construction of Muawiyah’s
palace, al-Khizra and said, “O Muawiyah, if this palace is being
financed from the Public Treasury it is a breach of trust and if it is
made with your money, it is extravagance…”

Abu Zar invited the people towards an awakening and warned them against
the politics of the Umayyads. He told the Syrian people, “By Allah, such
innovations have gained currency these days as are not to be found in
the Holy Quran or the traditions of the Prophet. By Allah, I see that
the truth is being effaced and untruth is becoming stronger. Truthful
people are being falsified and sinners are being given preference over
the virtuous.”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/52-53

People believed the statements of Abu Zar and testified as truth what he
said. In this way he continued to enlighten the society and he called
out for restoring the rights of the deprived. He encouraged the poor
class to demand their rights from the ruling class.

The devil Muawiyah became fearful that a revolution might occur against
him. Therefore he issued orders that nobody should be allowed to be in
the company of Abu Zar or sit with him. He told Abu Zar, “O enemy of
Allah, you incite people against us and do what you do? If I were to
kill a companion of Muhammad without the permission of Amirul Momineen
(Uthman), I would have killed you.”

Abu Zar became very much infuriated and he replied, “I am not the enemy
of Allah and neither an enemy of His Messenger. Rather you and your
father are the enemies of Allah and His Messenger. You have accepted
Islam outwardly and remain disbelievers inwardly…”

Abu Zar continued his social activities and followed the course of
causing a social awakening. He encouraged the people to rise up in
revolt. Thus Muawiyah became angry and wrote a letter to Uthman and
warned him of the danger of Abu Zar. He requested Uthman to recall Abu
Zar to Medina. Uthman replied to him saying that he may send Abu Zar
back to Medina making him ride on the bare back of a mischievous camel
with a cruel driver so that he has as painful a journey as possible.

Muawiyah sent him with some servants who neither knew about the status
of Abu Zar nor accorded him any respect. They did not permit him even
the least relief. In this manner they were taking Abu Zar to Medina such
that the skin of his thighs ruptured and he nearly died due to this
terrible journey.

When he reached Medina he came to Uthman in a decrepit and emaciated
condition. However as soon as Uthman saw him he started reviling him
without having any regard for his status. He said, “It is you who have
committed improper acts.”

Abu Zar said, “I did nothing except that I gave you a piece of advice
and you took it ill and sent me away from you. Then I advised Muawiyah.
He also did not like it and he turned me out.”

Uthman said, “You are a liar. You are nursing sedition in your mind. You
want to provoke Syria against me.”

Abu Zar advised him saying, “O Uthman, only follow Abu Bakr and Umar and
nobody would say anything against you.”

Uthman stood up and screamed at him, “What does it matter if I follow
them or not? May your mother die.”

Abu Zar said, “By Allah, you cannot accuse me of anything except that I
direct people to do good and prevent them from doing unlawful acts.”

At this Uthman was filled with rage and he said, “O courtiers! Advise me
as to

what I should do with this old liar? Should I punish him with flogging,
send him to the prison, get him killed or exile him? He has created
dissensions in the Muslim society.

Having heard this, Ali, who was present there became angry and said, “O
Uthman, I heard the Messenger of Allah (s) say: There is no speaker,
under the sky and upon the earth more truthful than Abu Zar.”

Abu Zar did not pay any heed to Uthman and he continued his mission and
went on voicing his opposition to the wrongs prevalent in the regime. He
said, “You collect children to recruit them as soldiers and you adopt
favoritism for your relatives and you make the children of emancipated
slaves proximate towards you.

In the same way he informed the people about what the Messenger of Allah
(s) had said regarding the defects and evils of the Umayyads and their
danger to Islam. He said that the Holy Prophet (s) had said, “When the
number of Bani Umayyah males rises to thirty, they will consider the
cities of Allah as their booty and slaves of Allah as their own slaves
and maids, and they will destroy the religion of Allah.”**[1]**

Uthman proclaimed that no one should be in the company of Abu Zar and he
prohibited all to even converse with him because he enjoined good and
forbade evil and he did not support Uthman’s policies.

Abu Zar Imprisoned in Rabadha
-----------------------------

Abu Zar continued his crusade and continued to flay the Umayyad policies
and the Umayyads oppression and hardships did not weaken his resolve.

Uthman who was absolutely fed up with him, decided that Abu Zar be
exiled from the Islamic lands and kept imprisoned in an uninhabited
area. Thus he sent his officials and when Abu Zar came he at once
addressed Uthman, “Woe be to you, Uthman. Have you not seen the
Messenger of Allah (s)? Have you not seen Abu Bakr and Umar? Was their
behavior also like this that you are behaving with me like oppressors?”

Uthman interrupted him and shouted, “Get away from us and leave our
cities and go away!”

“Are you banishing me from the sanctuary of the Messenger of Allah (s)?”

“Yes, and it is so because you have become disgraced.”

“Shall I leave for Mecca?”

“No.”

“To Basra?”

“No.”

“Where should I go?”

“To Rabadha, till you die over there.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hayatul Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/280-282

After that Uthman ordered Marwan that he should be immediately taken out
to Rabadha and added that he should be taken out in a humiliating
manner. Muslims were prohibited to go after him or bid farewell to him.
However righteous people did not accept it but that they should oppose
Uthman’s orders. They trampled on Uthman’s proclamations. Thus His
Eminence, Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a), Hasan and Husain, Aqil and Abdullah
Ibn Ja’far came forward to bid Abu Zar farewell.

Marwan went to Imam Hasan (‘a) and told him sternly, “Beware Hasan!
Don’t you know that Uthman has ordered not to speak to this man? If you
didn’t know it, know it now…”

Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) stood up towards Marwan and slapped the
ears of his mount and cried, “Get away, may Allah send you away to the
fire of Hell.”

Marwan ran to Uthman and informed him that his command had been
disobeyed and excess had been committed on him.

Statements of His Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a)
---------------------------------------------------------

Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) stood besides Abu Zar with tearful eyes
and he bid farewell to him in words that described his personality, “O
Abu Zar, you became angry for the sake of the Almighty. So repose hope
in the One for whom you became angry. Those people dread for their life
from you and feared from them for your religion. Thus you leave free in
their hands that for which they feared you or that for which you feared
them. Leave it! As how needy they are for that which you prevented them
from and how needless you are from that which they prevented you from.
And it shall be known tomorrow who has won and who shall be more vied?
That if the heavens and the earth are closed for a servant and he had
been pious, the Almighty Allah makes a way out for him. Nothing can give
you consolation except the truth. The truth will be your companion in
loneliness and you can get alarmed only by falsehood. Because if you had
accepted their world they would have loved you, and if you had tore with
your teeth a thing from them they would have given security to you…”

These statements throw light on the revolution of Abu Zar, which stood
for the sake of truth and for lofty principles that Islam had brought
and those people feared him in that regard. It was so because they had
usurped the wealth of the community and they played with the economy and
their future. They became afraid of him. The Holy Imam (‘a) appreciated
this spirit in Abu Zar and requested him to go away with his religion so
that he may remain safe from the mischiefs and evils of those people
because he shall be successful and happy on the day of meeting the Lord
in the Hereafter. While they shall be in loss as the Hell fire shall
scorch their faces and they shall remain in it forever.

Words of Imam Hasan (‘a)
------------------------

Imam Hasan (‘a) came forward to his uncle, Abu Zar and shook hands with
him and extolled his revolutionary spirit. Then he spoke the following
encouraging words that express the deep sorrow of His Eminence.

“Uncle! If it had not been preferable for one saying farewell to be
silent and those who follow have to go back the statement would have
been brief even though the pain may be prolonged. We are aware of the
treatment meted out to you. So separate the world from yourself along
with its remembrances and ignore its hardships with the hope in what is
to come. Have patience at this calamity till you reach my grandfather
while he is pleased with you.”

Statements of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) came forward to Abu Zar while he was fully affected
with grief and sorrow. Then he addressed him with these illuminated
words,

“O my Uncle, you need not worry as Allah has power over everything to
change what you see as Allah is in a new glory everyday. These people
have kept their world from you and you kept your religion away from
them. And how needless were you of that which they denied you and how
needful were they of that which you denied them. Thus beseech the
Almighty for patience and seek His refuge from impatience and greed, as
patience is from religion and nobility and greed does not hasten
sustenance and impatience does not delay death…”

How remarkable were these words that exposed the stand of the Umayyads
towards Abu Zar and their enmity towards him. Because they feared him
for the sake of their worldly life and they were in dread of his lofty
grades. The Imam advised him patience under all circumstances, as it
does not delay death. Imam Husain (‘a) was decorated with these lofty
morals on the day of the tragedy of Kerbala. Neither he bowed to the
Umayyads nor was he impatient in facing the great horrors and terrible
calamities.

Ammar’s Discourse
-----------------

Ammar then stepped forward with his eyes brimming with tears and bid
farewell to his friend and companion, Abu Zar, “May Allah not sympathize
with him who has put you to great trouble and may He not give rest to
him, who has made you restless. O Abu Zar, by Allah, if you had welcomed
the world of the world-seekers, they would not have turned you out, and
if you had approved of their conduct, they would have befriended you.
When you stood firm to your faith, the seekers of the world grew weary
of you. Don’t be worried as Allah is with you. These are the unfortunate
worldly-minded people who sustain the greatest loss…”

After hearing these speeches Abu Zar burst into tears and he glanced for
the last time on them and bid farewell to Ahle Bayt (‘a), who had been
sincere to him and he had been sincere to them. Then he spoke to them
words that showed his deepest emotions:

“May Allah have mercy on you, O the blessed members of the Prophet’s
family. When I saw you, I remembered the Holy Prophet (s) and blessings
surrounded me. O my revered ones! You alone were the means of solace to
me in Medina. Whenever I saw you I got the satisfaction of my heart and
peace of mind. O my elders! Just as I was a burden to Uthman in Hijaz, I
was a burden to Muawiyah in

Syria. He did not like to send me to Basra or Egypt, because he has his
foster brother, Abdullah Ibn Abi Sarah as the governor of Misreen**[1]**
and the son of his maternal aunt, Abdullah Ibn Aamir as the governor of
Basra. He has now sent me to a place, which is a desert where I do not
have any supporter other than Allah. By Allah, I know Allah alone is my
helper and for Him alone I will nor care for any wilderness…”

At that time Abu Zar’s mount began to move and headed towards Rabadha so
that he may be taken away from the sanctuary of Allah (Mecca) and the
sanctuary of His Messenger (Medina). His heart was filled with sorrow
and grief and the separation from Ahle Bayt (‘a) hurt him as they were
the mementoes of the Holy Prophet (s) in his community.

Abu Zar went to Rabadha till finally he starved to death, while the
wealth of the nation was in Uthman’s control and he was giving it all to
Bani Umayyah and the family of Abu Muit but he prohibited it to Abu Zar,
who was, in his guidance and manners, like His Eminence, Isa the Christ,
the son of Maryam.

When Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) returned after bidding farewell to Abu Zar
a group of people hastened to welcome him. They informed him that Uthman
was enraged at His Eminence because he had opposed the orders of Uthman
regarding speaking to Abu Zar and bidding him farewell.

His Eminence replied to them, “The horse’s rage is on the rein.”**[2]**

Uthman went to the Imam and cried, “Why did you oppose my commands?”

“Yes, Marwan came to me to prevent us but I drove him away but I did not
disobey your command.”

“Did you not know that I had forbidden the people from bidding farewell
to Abu Zar?”

“Is it incumbent for us to obey your orders even if they conflict with
the obedience of Allah and the truth?”

“Pay up the penalty to Marwan.”

“For what?”

“For slapping the ears of his mount.”

“My horse is over there. If he wants he can slap its ears like I did to
his mount. But, by Allah, if he abuses me I shall abuse you in the same
way. Not that it would have any falsehood in it except that it would be
truth.”

Uthman: “Why should he not abuse you if have abused him? By Allah, you
are not superior than him in my view.”

The Holy Imam (‘a) was shocked at Uthman who was so much obsessed by  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** ‘Misreen’ is a word to denote Basrah and Misr  
 **[2]** An Arabic saying

favoritism to his clan that he compares Ali (‘a) who was in relation to
the Prophet as Harun was to Musa (‘a) with a lizard son of a lizard whom
the Prophet had cursed while he was yet in the loins of his father.

Imam stood up and said to Uthman, “Do you say this to me? And compare me
to Marwan? I am, by Allah, superior to you and my father was better than
your father and my mother was better than yours. These are the
calamities that I am bearing…”

Uthman fell silent and failed to give any response and Imam (‘a) went
away from there in sorrow and pain.

3 – Abdullah Ibn Masood
-----------------------

Uthman suppressed Abdullah Ibn Masood, a prominent companion of the Holy
Prophet (s) in the worst manner and harassed him as much as he could.
Its reason was the same that we have described in the topic of Walid bin
Uqbah’s governorship in Kufa. It was so because when Walid refused to
repay the amount he had taken from the Public Treasury, Abdullah
protested against him. Walid lodged the complaint regarding Abdullah Ibn
Masood with Uthman and Uthman denounced Abdullah Ibn Masood for it. In
response Abdullah resigned from his post as treasurer and went to
Medina. When he reached Medina, Uthman was atop the pulpit delivering a
sermon. When his eyes fell on Abdullah Ibn Masood he addressed the
Muslims, “A terrible beast is coming towards you. Wherever he goes to
eat he vomits there.” (That is he is thankless to his benefactors).

Ibn Masood rebutted him and said, “I am not such! Rather I am the
companion of the Messenger in the battle of Badr and the Allegiance of
Rizwan.”

Uthman’s statement created a wave of rage and displeasure among the
people and Ayesha expressed her anger and said, “O Uthman, do you say
such things about the companion of the Messenger of Allah (s)?”

Uthman ordered his officials to expel that great companion from the
Masjid and they drove him out of there in a very humiliating manner. A
slave of Uthman, Abdullah bin Zame or Yahmoom picked up Abdullah Ibn
Masood while Abdullah’s legs thrashed besides his neck. Then he threw
him down with force and one of his teeth broke.

Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) stoop up and addressed Uthman, “O Uthman,
are you doing this to a companion of the Prophet at the complain of
Walid bin Uqbah?”

Uthman replied, “I have not done this on the complain of Walid bin
Uqbah. I had sent Zaid bin Sult Kindi to Kufa and Ibn Masood told him
that it lawful to shed Uthman’s blood.”

Imam said, “You believed Zaid, who is absolutely untrustworthy?”**[1]**
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ansaab* 5/36

After that the Holy Imam (‘a) brought Abdullah Ibn Masood to his house
and took care of him till he was completely cured of his ailments and
wounds. Uthman on the other hand broke off all connections with him and
released him. He also proclaimed that Abdullah Ibn Masood should not
leave Medina. He also stopped his allowance from Public Treasury.

Ibn Masood fell ill and was on his deathbed when Uthman came to visit
him and asked, “What do you complain against?”

“Against my sins.”

“What do you want?”

“Mercy of my Lord.”

“Shall I send a doctor to you?”

“The doctor had made me ill.”

“Shall I get you your allowance?”

“You denied it to me when I needed it and when I have become needless of
it you are giving it to me?”

“It would be for your children.”

“Their sustenance is from Almighty Allah.”

“O Abu Abdur Rahman, seek forgiveness for me.”

“I shall beseech Allah to secure my rightful share from you.”**[1]**

Uthman went away dejected without being able to gain the forgiveness of
Abdullah Ibn Masood. When Ibn Masood’s condition became serious he made
a bequest that Uthman should not recite his funeral prayer and his
friend Ammar Ibn Yasir recited his funeral prayer. The most prominent
companions performed the funeral rites and Uthman was not informed about
it. When Uthman learnt about it he became enraged and he asked angrily,
“Have you taken precedence to me?”

Ammar replied, “He had made a bequest that you shouldn’t recite his
prayers.”

Ibn Zubair, a poet, says:

**“I see that you sing a dirge at my death while when I was alive you
gave me not a morsel to eat.”[2]**

Here we conclude our discussion about the opposition of the people and
their dissent against him due to his nepotism and his excess in giving
away all the wealth of the community to his clansmen while there existed
poverty and starvation in all the areas of the kingdom.

Voices of dissent became louder and people intensified their agitation
against Uthman. It was so because he had distorted the practice of the
Prophet and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hayatul Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/275-276  
 **[2]** Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 7/163

imposed Bani Umayyah and the family of Abi Muit on the necks of the
Muslims. He had exclusively given away all the government posts to them.
He had also bestowed them all the profits accrued from the lands.

Revolution
----------

The revolution was to the extreme limit result of social solidarity and
a condition developed to seek reform as Alaili says,**[1]** “Revolution
to a great extent is a result of social awakening and a condition that
is demanding reformation because dissent became widespread and anger
became common. People talked about the oppression of Uthman, his
injustices and suppression of righteous men. These discussions took
place in all meetings and gatherings. The prominent and influential
people gathered and wrote letters to all the cities seeking their help
and asked them to send some soldiers who may overthrow that regime. The
text of their letter is as follows:

“From the first Muhajireen and the remaining ones of Shura to any of the
companions who are in Egypt. So to say: Come towards us and obtain the
Caliphate of the Messenger of Allah (s) before it is snatched away from
the hands of its owners. Because the Book of Allah has been altered and
the practice of His Messenger is changed and the laws of the two caliphs
have been replaced. Thus, by Allah, whosoever reads this letter from the
remaining companions of the Messenger of Allah (s) and those who follow
them in righteousness, they should come and obtain the rights and
restore them to us. So, please come to us if you believe in God and the
Day of Judgment so that the truth is illuminated in the same way as they
bid farewell to their Prophet, they should have said farewell to the
caliphs. Rise up as they have taken away our rights, taken control of
our finances and created a gap between our affairs and us. The caliphate
after our Prophet was the caliphate of Prophethood and Mercy and today
it has become rulership, which is like a thing caught between the teeth,
that whoever gets control over it he devours it.”**[2]**

This message describes the terrible deeds committed by Uthman’s regime
and they were as follows:

1 – Altering the Book of Allah, scrapping of laws and distancing from
its principles.

2 – Changing the practice of the Holy Prophet (s) and neglecting its
economic and social provisions.

3 – Replacing the laws of the previous two caliphs.

4 – To confine the national wealth to ones personal control and disposal
and to bestow it to ones relatives and confidants.

5 – Deviation of the Islamic caliphate from public welfare towards a
regime that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Imam al-Husain (a.s.)*  
 **[2]** *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 1/37-38

did not care for the good of the community.

The righteous and good people of different provinces decided to send
some committees to Medina in order to study the situation of the caliph
and to be informed of his condition.

Another Message to Frontier Military Officials
----------------------------------------------

Another aspect of opposition was a second message to companions posted
at the frontiers so that they may come to Medina and take over the
government. The text of that letter was as follows:

“Indeed, you have come out to perform Jihad in the way of Allah, the
Mighty and the Sublime, and you want to establish the religion of
Muhammad while your caliph has destroyed the religion of Muhammad. So
come forward to save it…”**[1]**

This letter enflamed the hearts and filled the people with rage against
Uthman. They became ready to rise up against the caliph.

Delegations from Different provinces
------------------------------------

All through the kingdom, people responded positively to the call of the
companions and they sent their delegations to Medina to study the
situation. Those delegations were as follows:

A – Egyptian Delegation
-----------------------

Egypt sent a delegation consisting of more than 400 persons and they
were under the command of Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and Abdur Rahman bin
Adis Balawi.

B – Kufian Delegation
---------------------

Kufa sent another delegation under the leadership of Malik Ashtar, Zaid
bin Sauhan Abadi, Ziyad bin Nazr Harithi and Abdullah Asim Aamiri. And
they were all under the supreme command of Amr bin Ahtham.

C – Basran Delegation
---------------------

Basra sent 100 persons under the command of Hakim bin Jabla and after
that 50 persons more which consisted among others, senior personages
like Zarih bin Ibaad Abadi, Bushr bin Sharih Qaisi and Ibnul Mahrash.

Companions welcomed the delegations and accorded them respect and honor
and they informed them about the deeds of Uthman. They encouraged and
implored them to dethrone the caliph and punish him.

Memorandum of Egyptians to Uthman
---------------------------------

The Egyptian delegation decided to hand over a memorandum to Uthman and
ask him to repent for his policies and to change his behavior to the
right path. The text of the memorandum was as follows:

“So to say: Allah certainly does not change the condition of a people
until they change their own condition. Then for the sake of God, for the
sake of God. And  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/367, *Kamil* 3/168

again for the sake of God, for the sake of God, you are on the path of
the world. So you keep the Hereafter also in view and do not neglect
your share in the hereafter, as the world shall not be better for you.
You should know that we are for Allah. We become angry for the sake of
Allah and become pleased also for His sake. We shall not lift our swords
from our shoulders till you do not repent openly or that your deviation
becomes known to all. And this statement of ours is for you and our
dispute is also with you and our excuse regarding you is with the
Almighty…”**[1]**

Uthman was worried and confused and read the letter carefully while the
revolutionaries had surrounded him. Then Mughaira rushed to him and
sought his permission to address the people and Uthman accorded
permission. However when he came to the people, they shouted at him, “O
cripple, go back!”

Then again they screamed at him, “O transgressor! Go back!”

The third time they cried at him, “O sinner! Go back!”

Mughaira returned to Uthman humiliated and degraded while he had failed
his diplomacy. Uthman then summoned Amr bin Aas and asked him to speak
to those people. He also came to them and saluted them. However they did
not reply to his salutations, because they knew he was a sinner and a
terrible transgressor. They told him, “O enemy of God! Go back!”

“O son of such a woman! Go Back! As you are neither trustworthy in our
view nor shall you remain secure.”

He returned unsuccessfully in his mission while they did not hear what
he had to say. They only considered him a despicable and degraded
creature.

Uthman Sought Imam’s Help
-------------------------

Uthman knew that except from Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) he would not
get a refuge. So he sought his refuge and implored the Imam to call away
those people to the Book of Allah and practice of His Messenger. Imam
took oaths from him that he shall fulfill his promises and only after
that did he accept his request. Then he went towards the revolutionaries
while he had the guarantee for all of their demands. When they saw him,
they said, “Go back!”

Imam: The Book of Allah shall be given to you and your complaints shall
be accepted for all that has enraged you.”

They said, “Do you guarantee all this?”

“Yes,” replied the Imam.

“We accept”

At that time senior persons and leaders of that delegation came with the
Imam and met Uthman and they complained to him regarding his
shortcomings against the Muslims. They denounced him and told him to
change his policies and behavior and to behave rightly among the
Muslims. He accepted and they told him to put  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/369, *Al-Ansaab* 5/44-45

that in writing and Uthman accepted and wrote the following document for
them:

“This is a document from the servant of God, Uthman, the chief of the
believers. To all those of the Muslims and believers who have objected
against him that it is necessary for him to act according to the Book of
Allah and on the practice of His Messenger among them. The deprived
would be given what they are deprived of, those who are insecure shall
be given security, and those who are exiled shall be brought back into
the country. No hardships shall be imposed on the people for
mobilization of armies. Allowances of the people shall be paid from the
state treasury. And Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) shall stand as a surety for
believers and Muslims and the responsibility of fulfillment of their
promises is upon Uthman.”

This document was witnessed by Zubair bin Awwam, Talha bin Ubaidullah,
Saad bin Malik bin Abi Waqqas, Abdullah bin Umar, Zaid bin Thabit, Sahal
bin Hunaif, Abu Ayyub and Khalid bin Zaid. It was written in the month
of Zilqada in the year 35 A.H.

Those people took the document and went back to their people. Imam
Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) told Uthman to come out to the people and tell
them that he would fulfill their demands and he did as advised. And he
gave them oath and promise in the name of God that he would act among
them according to the Book of Allah and the practice of the Messenger of
Allah (s). Also that he would give them their rightful share in public
wealth and that he would not restrict it to his relatives. The Egyptians
returned to their country.

Uthman Breaks the Pledge
------------------------

Uthman violated the pledge that he had given to the Egyptian delegation
and he did not fulfill the promises he had made to the Muslims.
Historians say that it was at the behest of Marwan who was his chief
advisor and Prime Minister. Marwan arrived and criticized Uthman for
what he had done and he told him,

“Speak up and announce to the people that the Egyptians have gone back
and the agreement signed with them is invalid because your statements
are publicized in different cities before the people may come to you and
you are not able to send them back…”

Uthman refused to follow his advice because he was asking him to violate
the pledge and issue a false statement. However, Marwan was speaking to
him in such a way and warning him of such terrible consequences that he
began to dread the future. Also Uthman was a man who lacked
determination and a strong will. He was just a puppet in the hands of
Marwan. Hence he finally accepted the proposal of Marwan. He ascended
the pulpit and addressed the people as follows:

“So to say: Some matters regarding their leaders had reached them from
some of these people. And when they became assured that what had reached
them was invalid, they returned to their homes…”

Muslims stood up to denounce him and Amr bin Aas shouted, “O Uthman,
fear Allah as you have put your hand into a dangerous and fatal affair
and along with

you we are also involved in it. So repent to Allah and we shall also
seek divine pardon with you.”

Uthman screamed at them, “O sons of such women! Are you present here? By
Allah, from the time I have removed you from your post your cloak has
become infested with mites.”

Shouts of protests arose from all the sides of the gathering and they
all spoke up in one voice: “O Uthman, fear Allah, O Uthman, fear Allah.”

Uthman’s limbs began to ache and his strength sapped and he was so much
confused that he could not say anything in reply. He had no option but
to express his regret for what he had done again. He then came down from
the pulpit while he was absolutely devastated and crushed and he went
towards his residence.**[1]**

Uthman Seeks Muawiyah’s Help
----------------------------

When the revolutionaries learnt that Uthman was not giving up his
policies and he continued his manners without any change or
modification, they besieged him and demanded that he should resign from
his post. However he did not agree and decided to seek help from
Muawiyah to send a battalion to save him from the revolutionaries. So he
wrote the following letter to Muawiyah: “So to say: The people of Medina
have become infidels and left off the obedience and broken the oath of
allegiance. On the basis of this dispatch some Syrian troops for us in
any way possible…”**[2]**

Masoor bin Mukhrama took the letter to Muawiyah. When Muawiyah read the
letter, Masoor told him, “O Muawiyah! Uthman shall be killed. So think
upon what he has written…”

Muawiyah expressed his real view clearly and mentioned the reality to
Masoor saying, “O Masoor! I openly say that Uthman in the beginning used
to act on that which is liked by Allah and His Messenger. However after
that he changed and Allah also changed his situation. Now is it possible
for me to change some thing that Allah has transformed?”**[3]**

Muawiyah did not give a positive reply to Uthman’s request and on the
basis of what the historians have said: He was in anticipation of
Uthman’s murder so that his murder may become a means for him to get
rulership and power. So much so that he completely ignored Uthman’s
kindness and favoritism towards his clansmen.

Dr. Muhammad Tahir Darush says: If anyone is to be blamed for the
assassination of Uthman, it is Muawiyah and he cannot be released from
its responsibility because Muawiyah was the most responsible and
important wealthy man of Uthman’s regime. Uthman approached him for
advice while he was the most  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/356 and 360, *Al-Ansaab* 5/74  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Kamil* 3/170, Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/152  
 **[3]** *Al-Futuh* 2/218

cunning of all, yet he neither arose for his help nor sent any forces
for his assistance. On the contrary he just waited for the long life of
Uthman to some to an end. And days passed in this. He sealed his fate
and allowed it to take its own course. Thus if it is allowed for one to
think that Ali or Talha or anyone else was responsible for Uthman’s
murder it is all the more suitable that Muawiyah was the one responsible
for Uthman’s assassination. If anyone other than Uthman is to be
criticized, it is Muawiyah who deserves criticism.

Anyway, when Muawiyah delayed replying to Uthman’s entreaty he wrote a
letter to Yazid bin Kurz, the agent in Syria and encouraged him to come
and save him from the revolutionaries. When Uthman’s letter reached him,
as a response they hastened under the command of Yazid Qasri however
Muawiyah ordered them to camp at Zi-Khashab and not to go beyond that.
He also made the soldiers camp at that place till finally Uthman was
assassinated.

Uthman had also written various letters to people of different towns and
cities and also to those who had come for performing the Hajj in Mecca.
He pleaded them to offer their help and assistance but none of them
accepted his pleas because the deeds that Uthman had committed were to
known to all.

Uthman Besieged
---------------

The revolutionaries besieged Uthman, while the Egyptian delegation
returned to him as soon as they realized the dangerous plot that had
been devised against them. They besieged Uthman and raised slogans
demanding his abdication. They urged him to resign from the post of
caliphate while Marwan Ibn Hakam had fanned the flames of revolt in
their hearts. Because he was telling them from the rooftop of his house:
“What do you want? It seems you have come to plunder so that these may
be obliterated. You want to take away our kingdom from us. Go away from
us…”

The patience of revolutionaries reached its limits and they decided to
kill him and cut him up into pieces and destroy him.

Marwan’s statements were reported to Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) and
he hastened to Uthman and told him, “You have not become pleased with
Marwan and he has not become satisfied with you but he deviated you from
your religion and your reason. Like a camel of a caravan, which goes
wherever, it is pulled. By Allah, Marwan is not concerned either with
your religion or your life. By Allah, he shall take you and not bring
you back and after this I am not going to complain to you again. You
have yourself destroyed your respect and made yourself involved in
this.”

Imam (‘a) left him and went away. Then Naila, Uthman’s wife, said to the
Umayyads, “By Allah, you shall kill him and orphan his children.”

Then she turned to Uthman and advised him to reject Marwan’s proposal
and not to obey him. She said, “If you listen to Marwan he shall have
you killed.”

In the due course revolutionaries surrounded Uthman. They cut off the
water and food supply and besieged him while he remained firm on his
policies and refused

to change them. People became more and more enraged towards the caliph
who had for the sake of Marwan’s obedience surrendered to the demands of
Bani Umayyah and thus became guilty of oppression.

Day of the House**[1]**
-----------------------

The fire of revolt opened up the tongues and its flames rose high
because the revolutionaries had surrounded Uthman’s house and Marwan
came out to them. Urwah bin Shayyim Leethi pounced on him and slashed
his back with a sword and he fell face down. And Ubaid bin Rufa Zarqi
went to him and wanted to behead him with a knife but his wet-nurse
Fatima Thaqafiya chided him saying, “If you wanted to kill him, you have
already killed him. What would you do with his flesh that you are
cutting off his head?” Ubaid became ashamed of this and he released him.
People moved towards Uthman and they found him on the terrace while
there was no one with him because all were infuriated and displeased
with him. They stoned him and shouted, “We are not stoning you. It is
God Who is stoning you.”

Uthman replied to them, “If God had stoned me I would not have committed
these mistakes.”

Some Umayyads gathered around him and tried to defend him. A furious
fight took place between the two parties while Khalid bin Uqbah bin Abi
Muit fled from there and Abdur Rahman bin Saihan composed the following
verses regarding him:

“**They criticize me for the Day of the house, that I was not with them,
while Khalid dressed in armor fled from the scene.”**

Among the friends of Uthman killed were Ziyad bin Naeem Fahri, Mughaira
bin Akhnas, Niyar bin Abdullah Aslami and others.

Attack on Uthman
----------------

After the Bani Umayyah people and clansmen of Abi Muit fled from around
Uthman the revolutionaries surrounded him and a group of Muslims
attacked him in the forefront of whom was Muhammad bin Abu Bakr. He
caught the beard of Uthman and said, “O Nathal! May Allah disgrace you
publicly.”

“I am not Nathal! I am the servant of God and the chief of the
believers.”

“Muawiyah and so and so and such and such and such and such, what avail
have they been to you?”

“O son of my brother! Release my beard, because your father never caught
hold of what you are holding.”

“What I have got for you is worse than taking hold of your beard.”

After that he wounded Uthman’s forehead with the point of the sword he
was holding in his hand. And Kanana bin Bushr raised the point of the
sword he was holding and drove it below Uthman’s ears in such a way that
it entered his throat. At that time he hit him with the sword. Amr bin
Hamaq Khuzai came to him and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** That is the Day of the House. The day when the House of Uthman
was stormed.

sat on his chest while he was breathing his last. Then he hit him nine
times. Umair bin Zaabi broke two of his teeth and tried to behead him
when two his wives Naila and the daughter of Shabibah bin Rabia threw
themselves upon him. Then Ibn Adees ordered them to leave him for
them.**[1]**

They left Uthman a lifeless body on the floor and the revolutionaries
did not permit the burial of Uthman. And Safadi has said: They threw
Uthman’s corpse on the dunghill for three days**[2]**so that he may be
humiliated and disgraced further. Then some of Uthman’s relatives
requested Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) to speak to the revolutionaries
and mediate about his burial. Imam spoke to them and they accorded their
permission for his burial.**[3]**

Joulid Tasheer has said regarding Uthman’s burial: They left his corpse
without funeral bath and threw him on a doorpost in such a way that his
head was severely smashed. The carriers of his bier picked him up
hurriedly and in the darkness of the night took him quickly while stones
were raining upon him and curses were following him and they buried him
at Hash Kaukab**[4]** and the Ansar did not permit them to bury Uthman
in the Muslim cemetery.**[5]** As for his two slaves who were killed
along with him, they pulled them and threw them on the hills and dogs
consumed their corpses.**[6]**

Well, the revolt against Uthman was a social revolution, which was such
an important reformation that history had never seen such an upheaval.
Its aim was to end the domination of tyrant rulers, to stop them from
injustice in matters of people and to turn Islamic life to its natural
path.

Effects of Uthman’s Regime
--------------------------

Uthman’s regime was followed by numerous evil consequences that
surrounded the Muslim people severely, because the fire of mischiefs
from end to end of the provinces had raged into flames and it caused
untold hardships and calamities for the Muslims. We shall discuss some
of the important and most terrible incidents that were direct
consequences of his regime on the Islamic world. They were as follows:

1 – Uthman’s regime paid no regard for established laws and it
intentionally became a cause for the weakening of the power of law,
because the members of the Bani Umayyah family disregarded every rule
and regulation in their pursuit of acquiring wealth and in their actions
and Uthman’s reaction to this behavior of theirs was one of indifference
and nonchalance and he did not take any firm steps against them. He even
defended, supported and justified their acts and mistakes.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ghadeer* 9/206  
 **[2]** *Tamaam al-Mutoon,* Pg. 79  
 **[3]** *Hayatul Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/303  
 **[4]** ‘Hash Kaukab’ was a garden of Jews where they buried their
dead  
 **[5]** *Al-Aqeeda wash Shariyah Fil Islam,* Pg. 45  
 **[6]** Halabi, *Sirah*

We have already discussed some instances of this type in the foregone
pages. The direct result of this was the spread of chaos and anarchy in
behavior, corruption of morals and disobedience to established laws.

2 – Uthman’s regime, during its tenure, did not consider itself means
for social welfare or general well being of the people. It was solely
aimed at amassing wealth, exploitation and domination over the people;
this matter became a cause for many groups of people looking upon the
government as an excuse for collecting booty and luxuries. And this
matter caused many groups and people came towards it for rulership and
power, and for this they gave up their lives. For example, Talha,
Zubair, Muawiyah, Amr Aas and others. No humanistic or social aim was in
their rebellion against the government of Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a).
Rather in their greed for rulership and caliphate they were blind to
everything else. And their revolt was the weakness of their spirit of
faith and spreading of discord for their personal benefit. All this
created a gap between Islamic society and Quranic authority.

3 – Uthman’s regime created an affluent class that spread seeking ease
and selfishness; and in the path of seeking sensuality and profligacy
they did not pay heed to anything else and among them were the
Quraishite families who were drowned in wealth and who remained busy in
spending their money while different social classes were impoverished,
deprived and in a pitiful condition. And this compelled the great
reformer, Abu Zar, the companion of the Messenger of Allah (s) to take a
stand against the hoarding of wealth by Quraish who had amassed wealth
in unlawful ways and he was demanding them to return it to the Central
Treasury so that it may help in economic development and social welfare
as prescribed by Islam.

4 – Uthman’s regime revived tribal bias and favoritism that Islam had
confronted and weakened because Uthman endeavored for the strengthening
of his family and spreading of power and their biased support even
though it be against the law. He furnished them with all the means of
power in such a way that they assumed the appearance of Arabian families
and the bias of the period of ignorance in pride and arrogance in
paternity and pride over lineage and descent and other problems became
general which we shall present in this book.

5 – Profit seekers appeared to obtain rulership on the basis of sword
and strength without having any regard for the well being of the
community.

Julius Falhauzen says: It was from the time when the sword was supreme
in the matter of rulership of theocratic kingdoms and the door of
mischief had opened and it was never closed completely. And at that time
safety of unity was in the presence of Imam’s person as the leader of
the group. But mostly apparently and by force and compulsion it was not
possible and the fact is that the community has disintegrated and it
took the form of groups and clans where each one was trying to impose
their political power on others. And in support of their leaders they
took up sword against the Imam who was also the ruler at that
time…”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikh* *ad-Daulatul Arabiyyah,* Pg. 50-51

Political greed spread and profit seekers were restless for power and
this caused the spread mischief and chaos in all the provinces.

6 – Taking the issue of the revenge of Uthman’s blood all such greedy
elements jumped up to create mischief and rebellion against the law.
This was just a pretext and not only from the Umayyads but from all
groups who were vying for rulership like Talha, Zubair, Ayesha and
others from those who were instrumental in the uprising against Uthman.
Now they began to harp on revenge for Uthman’s blood. In this path they
spilled rivers of pure blood for their cheap greed and they sacrificed
their relatives and sorrow spread in all lands of Islam.

These were some of the consequences of Uthman’s reign which without any
doubt had a profound effect in the changing of event and which incited
the society towards political greed and aspirations, proliferation of
pursuit for opulence and struggle for power. That they took up a
powerful confrontation and the religious government changed into
despotism and it did not have any regard for Islamic matters and the
fulfillment of its aims. And also they created a distance between the
Muslims and Ahle Bayt (‘a) who were such that the Prophet had
emphatically appointed them for Imamate and advised the Muslim community
to obey them. And that sanctity of Ahle Bayt (‘a) was openly destroyed
and the tyrant rulers that came to power, they even cut them into pieces
and began to suppress and trample them and paid no heed to their
relationship to the Prophet, which was more deserving of consideration.

Here one matter remains and it is that Imam Husain (‘a) during the
period of Uthman was in the bloom of youth and historians say that His
Eminence accompanied the forces that had gone for the conquest of
Tabristan in 30 A.H. under the command of Saeed bin Aas. This battalion
performed well and the Almighty Allah gave it victory and success and it
returned in triumph.**[1]** However another indication regarding Imam
Husain’s participation in that campaign has not reached us. And probably
it is due to the fact that the family of the Prophet was on the side of
opposition of Uthman’s regime and they effectively criticized his
policies and Uthman directed his wrath on the companions of Amirul
Momineen Ali (‘a) like Abu Zar, Ammar and Ibn Masood and he tried to
harass them and Imam Husain (‘a) witnessed these horrible events and
more pains were added to his pain and the reality of the society and
exposed the favoritism in the best way.

Some historians have claimed that Imam Hasan and Husain (‘a) defended
Uthman when the revolutionaries had besieged him, but we have proved in
an objective way the incorrectness of this report in our book, *Life of
Imam Hasan (‘a).* Here comes to an end the chapter on Uthman’s regime.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/269, Al-Abr 2/135. But the writer of
*Futuhaat-e-Islami* has not mentioned Imam Husain (a.s.) to be with this
batlion
