Period of Imam Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) Part 2
==============================================

General Battle
--------------

When the Imam became sure that there was no possibility of a truce he
readied his army in an elaborate way. Ayesha’s supporters similarly
followed, making her sit astride her camel, Askar. She was made to sit
on a Howdah covered by iron coat of mail and they came out to the
battlefield in this way.

A severe battle ensued between the two armies. Some historians say that
Imam Husain (‘a) was leading a battalion and was in the left wing. He
participated in the battle with firmness and determination**[1]** while
Ayesha’s camel, according to those who were present there was the
standard of the Basran army and people used to take refuge in it like
people take refuge under a standard.

The Imam attacked them holding the flag in his left hand and wielding
the Zulfiqar in his right. It was the sword used extensively during the
period of the Prophet in defense of faith and to fight the polytheists.

Both armies continued to fight a furious battle and Ayesha’s supporters
wanted to obtain victory and help their mother while Ali’s followers
desired to support their Imam and lay down their lives in defense of His
Eminence.

Zubair is Killed
----------------

Zubair was kind-hearted and held a position of esteem with the Holy
Prophet (s) but lust for power had deceived him and made him come out in
opposition to the Imam. In addition to this, it was his son, Abdullah
Ibn Zubair who had forced him into this calamity and created a split
between him and his faith.

The Imam was aware of Zubair’s soft-heartedness, therefore he went out
to the battlefield and called out aloud, “Where is Zubair?” At that time
Zubair was fully armed and he came out. When Imam (‘a) saw him he
hastened to him and the Imam embraced him and said to him in a kind
manner, “O Abu Abdillah, what has brought you here?”

“I have come to seek revenge of Uthman’s murder.”

Imam glanced at him and asked, “Do you want revenge for Uthman’s
murder?”

“Yes.”

“May Allah kill the murderers of Uthman. I swear to you by God, do you
remember, one day you passed by me while you were with the Prophet and
he was leaning on your hand. Then the Messenger of Allah (s) saluted me
and smiled to me. After that he glanced at you and said: “O Zubair, you
would fight Ali while you would be in the wrong with relation to him…”

Zubair recalled that event while pain and remorse was killing him and
due to that condition of his he was very much ashamed. He glanced at the
Imam, confirming the Imam’s statement.

“Yes, by Allah.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/288

“Then why are you fighting me?”

“By Allah, I had forgotten it. If I had remembered it, I would not have
come out against you and fought you.”**[1]**

“Go back.”

“How can I go back when battle is raging on both the sides? And by Allah
it is a shame that cannot be washed off.”

“Go back, before degradation and Hellfire get you.”

He pulled the reins of his horse while confusion and worry had afflicted
him.

He was going reciting the following couplets:

**“I preferred humiliation to the flame of Hell as anything made of clay
is not able to bear it.**

**Ali told me something I was not aware of. By your life, humiliation
shall be in the world and religion.**

**I said: O Abal Hasan, do not flay me more as this much is sufficient
for me.”[2]**

Imam (‘a) returned to his men and they said to him, “You went unarmed to
Zubair while he was fully armed. Do you know his valor?”

Imam said, “He is not my killer; my killer shall be a person of unknown
parentage, of not much status in a place other than a battlefield and
not in the arena of warriors. Woe be on him! He is the most wretched
human and he shall desire that his mother had not given birth to him.
Know that! He and the red-faced people of Thamud shall be
together…”**[3]**

Zubair harkened to the Imam’s call and he went to Ayesha and told her:

“Mother of believers, I am certainly not standing in a place but that I
recognize the place where I have placed my feet. Except for this
condition that I don’t know whether I am fortunate or unfortunate.”

Ayesha understood his changed mood that he has decided to leave the
battlefield. So in order to arouse his sentiments she said in a taunting
way, “O Abu Abdillah, are you scared of the sword of Abdul Muttalib’s
family?”

This ridicule almost killed him. Then his son Abdullah criticized him
through fear and trepidation and said, “You came out with full
realization but when you saw the standard of the son of Abu Talib you
knew that you shall be killed under it and therefore you became
fearful?”

Although he had not come out with full understanding and neither was he
aware of his condition. He had come out only for power and rulership.

Zubair was very much disturbed by his son’s diatribe and he said, “Woe
be on you,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 1/68  
**[2]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/363  
**[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/234-235

I have sworn that I would not fight him.”

“Release yourself from the oath by the penalty of emancipating your
slave, Sarjus.”

So he freed his slave**[1]** and stepped in the battlefield with fervor
and began his attack in order to display his valor to his son and show
him that he had fled due to his religion and not because of fear. Then
he went far away from his venue and went on in this way till he reached
the valley of Sabaa where Ahnaf bin Qais and his people were camping.
Ibn Jurmuz pursued Zubair and attacked and killed him and conveyed the
news of his killing to the Imam. His Eminence was very much aggrieved at
this. Narrators say that His Eminence picked up the sword of Zubair and
said, “This is the sword which removed many worries of the Prophet.”

Anyway, Zubair’s end was indeed regretful and sad because he had
rebelled against truth and declared war against the successor of Allah’s
Messenger and the gate of the city of knowledge of the Holy Prophet (s).

Killing of Talha
----------------

Talha came out in the battlefield encouraging the fighters to battle.
Marwan bin Hakam saw him and shot an arrow at him as revenge for
Uthman’s blood and Talha fell down bleeding.

Marwan told a son of Uthman, “I have taken revenge for the blood of your
father from Talha on your behalf.”

Talha ordered his slave to take him to a safe place where he could rest.
He took him to a dilapidated house in Basra but he died there after
sometime.**[2]**

Ayesha Leads the Army
---------------------

After the death of Zubair and Talha, Ayesha took over the command of the
army. People of Banu Zubah and Banu Najiya laid down their lives in her
defense. Historians say that they had become so much obsessed in her
devotion that they used to pick up the droppings of her camel, smell
them and say: “The dung of our mother’s camel smells of musk.”

They were surrounding her camel and did not have any other aim except
defending her and no care for any victory or help. Their singers of war
poems were chanting:

**“O group of Azadis! Defend your mother as she is your Prayer and
Fasting.**

**And keep your efforts and farsightedness prepared for the great honor
that has surrounded you.**

**It shouldn’t be that the poison of your enemy is victorious over
yours. Because if the enemy defeats you, he shall put you to death.**

**He would subject each one of you to cruelty. May your people be
sacrificed for**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/509  
**[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/243-244

**you, do not humiliate yourself.”[1]**

Ayesha was inspiring those who were at her right, at her left and in
front of her and said, “Noble men are patient!”

The Imam’s men tried to persuade Ayesha’s soldiers to stop fighting and
their war-poem singers said:

**“O our mother, you are the worst kind of mother that we know because a
mother feeds her children and is kind to them.**

**Don’t you see how many valiant ones are getting mourned and are losing
their hands and arms?”[2]**

Ayesha’s supporters cried in response:

**“We are the Bani Zabaa and the folks of the camel and we fight with
ferocity if they come before us.**

**Getting killed is sweeter for us than honey and we are fighting for
the sons of Uthman with our swords.**

**They should send back to us our leader and also Bajal.”[3]**

Battle continued to rage furiously and thousands were wounded and the
battlefield strewn with dead bodies.

Cutting off the camel’s legs
----------------------------

Imam (‘a) concluded that till the time Ayesha’s camel remained, the
battle would not come to an end. So His Eminence called out to the men
to floor the camel because its remaining would cause the destruction of
Arabs. His Eminence, Hasan (‘a) went towards it and cut off its right
foreleg and His Eminence, Husain attacked it and cut off its left
foreleg.**[4]** The camel let out such an ear-splitting squeal that
something like it had never been heard and it fell on its side and the
defenders of the camel fled to the wilderness because their idol, for
which they were sacrificing themselves, had shattered.

The Imam (‘a) ordered that the camel be burnt to ashes and its ashes
dispersed and nothing should remain of it to deviate the foolish people.
After this was done, he said, “Curse of God be on it. How similar it was
to the calf of Bani Israel?”

When its ashes were being dispersed in the atmosphere he glanced at it
and recited the following words of the Almighty:

**“…and look at your god to whose worship you kept (so long); we will
certainly burn it, then we will certainly scatter it a (wide) scattering
in the sea.”**[5]****  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/255-256 (Ismailiyan Edition)  
**[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*, Ibne Abil Hadid 1/264  
**[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*, Ibne Abil Hadid 1/254, *Ahkbaar
at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 150  
**[4]** Muhammad bin Zakaria bin Dinar, *Waqiyah Jamal*, Pg. 44  
**[5]** Surah Taha 20:97

In this manner the battle came to an end and victory fell to the share
of the Imam and his followers and the embezzling powers were humiliated
and routed.

Imam (‘a) sent Hasan, Husain and Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr to meet
Ayesha.**[1]** They went to her and Muhammad put his hand in the litter.
Ayesha was shocked and she asked, “Who is it?”

“Your unhappiest relative.”

“Are you the son of that Khathami lady?”

“Yes, I am your righteous brother.”

“Very unkind to the relatives.”

“Have you received any harm?”

“An arrow has harmed me.”

He removed the arrow from her and picked up the broken litter and in the
last part of the night took her to the house of Abdullah bin Khalaf
Khuzai to Safiya, the daughter of Harith and she stayed there for some
days.

General Amnesty
---------------

His Eminence, Ali (‘a) dealt with the people of Basra in the same way as
the Messenger of Allah (s) had with the folks of Mecca. According to
Yaqubi, His Eminence said:**[2]** “Thus the black and the red have
become safe,” and he caused no harm to his enemy but sat down to meet
the people. The healthy and the wounded ones among them pledged
allegiance to him. At that time he went to the Public Treasury and took
whatever was there in it and distributed it equally among the people.
After that His Eminence went to Ayesha who was lodged at the house of
Abdullah bin Khalaf Khuzai.

Safiya, the daughter of Harith came out and addressed Ali (‘a) in the
worst manner: “O Ali, O killer of the beloved ones, may God orphan your
children like you orphaned the children of Abdullah.”

Abdullah’s sons were killed in the battle on Ayesha’s side.

Imam did not reply to her till he came to Ayesha and commanded her to
leave Basra and go to her house and stay there as the Almighty has
commanded.

When the Imam was leaving, Safiya repeated the things she had earlier
said. Now His Eminence told her, “If I were the killer of relatives I
would have killed those hiding in this house.” And he pointed towards
the locked rooms where many of their wounded people and other rebels
were hiding and Ayesha had given refuge to them. Those who were with the
Imam wanted to attack them but the Imam restrained them and in this way
he awarded amnesty to his enemies and opponents.

Imam (‘a) sent away Ayesha in a suitable manner and also sent some women
with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Waqiyah Jamal*, Pg. 45  
**[2]** Yaqubi, 2/159, *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 2/64

her dressed as men so that she may stay in her house as the Almighty had
commanded.

Ayesha departed from Basra leaving many houses and families in mourning.

Umair bin Ahlab Zabi’, who was a partisan of Ayesha says:

**“Our mother had left in heritage the scroll of death for us. And she
did not move from her place but that we became like a rope.**

**We followed the clan of Teem due to our wretchedness, though Teem is
nothing but a family of slaves and bondsmen.”[1]**

The mother of believers put her children in the field of death because
10000 Muslims were killed in that battle according to some historians.
Half were the partisans of Ayesha and the other half supporters of
Ali.**[2]** More than anyone else, the Imam was aggrieved of this
because he knew what evil consequences and calamities this battle was to
cause.

Consequences of the Battle
--------------------------

The battle of Jamal was followed by the most terrible losses and greater
disasters in which Muslims were involved. Some of them were as
follows:**[3]**

1 – This battle opened up the way for Muawiyah to rise up in opposition
to the Imam and to step out to engage the Imam in battles. Because he
chose for himself the slogan of the people of Jamal, that was seeking
the revenge for Uthman’s blood. And if the battle of Jamal hadn’t
occurred, Muawiyah would not have dared to announce his disobedience and
rebellion against the government of the Holy Imam (‘a).

2 – The battle of Jamal spread conflict and discord among the Muslims
because before that the spirit of love and affection was dominant and
after that enmity developed among the Arab families in such a way that
people of Rabi and Yaman tribes of Basra became deeply inimical to their
brothers from the Rabi and Yaman tribes of Kufa and they cried out for
the revenge of the blood of their children. So much so that discord
remained among the members of one and the same family if some of them
were the Shias of Ali and others, partisans of Ayesha.

Historians say: Years later Basrans continued to nurture their loyalty
to Uthman and that is why Imam Husain (‘a) did not move to Basra as it
was well known for its affections for the third caliph.

3 – The battle destroyed the awe of the government and people became
emboldened to rebel against the law because it created groups that were
only seeking benefits who had no other aim except to get rulership and
to obtain control over the wealth of the country. So much so that
battles took place with all its specialties of that time.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/370  
**[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 4/539. In *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/59 the number
of people who died is mentioned as 20000  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/244

4 – The battle of Jamal opened the door of infighting among Muslims
while before that they were extremely cautious of shedding each other’s
blood.

5 – The battle became a cause for decline and backwardness of Islamic
society and it hindered the progress that was originally intended.
Because after the battle of Jamal, the Imam initiated fighting against
the rebellion and disobedience of Muawiyah and other greedy characters
that had began their activities against the government resulting in the
most terrible losses to Islam.

Wells, the philosopher says, “It was very likely that Islam would have
conquered the world if it had continued its original movement and if in
the beginning itself internal fights had not occurred among them, which
was the aim of Ayesha more than anything else, that was to defeat
Ali.”**[1]**

6 – The battle trespassed the sanctity of the Holy Progeny whom the Holy
Prophet (s) had equated with the Book of Allah and compared them to the
Ark of Salvation and safety for the people. And from the same day swords
were pulled out against the Progeny of the Prophet and the
pledge-breakers began to consider shedding their blood and captivating
their children lawful. Hence the Bani Umayyads did not take into
consideration any sort of sanctity and honor of those people in the
event of Kerbala.

These were some of the most terrible consequences of the battle of
Jamal, which created the greatest harms for the Muslims in all periods
of history.

** **

Qasiteen (Rebels)
-----------------

The Holy Imam (‘a) had hardly become free from the battle against the
Nakiseen (Pledge-breakers) as the Holy Prophet (s) had named them, when
he had to prepare for the battle against the Qasiteen, as the Holy
Prophet (s) has also labeled them.

Imam decided to move from Basra to Kufa to prepare for the battle
against the greatest enemy, Muawiyah bin Abu Sufyan, who had fought
against the Messenger of Allah (s) and had made great efforts in this
regard. Muawiyah was not in any way less than his father in his enmity
towards Islam and Muslims. The early Muslims used to view with suspicion
and doubt their acceptance of Islam and he was able to by deceit and
fraud control the second caliph and had obtained a lofty position near
him, till he made him the governor of Syria; and tried much to support
and strengthen him. After his death, Uthman let him continue in his post
and expanded his power and Muawiyah remained in Syria like a person who
is desirous of power and rulership. On the basis of this he saw for
himself a golden opportunity and he bought the loyalties of people and
utilized the economy of the province for strengthening his position.

After the deeds that Uthman had committed it was obvious to Muawiyah
that he would be killed. When Uthman was besieged and requested
Muawiyah’s help, Muawiyah delayed sending assistance and was waiting for
the time when Uthman  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shaykh al-Madheerah, *Abu Hurairah*, Pg. 173

would be killed. After that Muawiyah took the shirt and blood of Uthman
as his medium to obtain power. The battle of Jamal also showed him how
the matter of seeking revenge for Uthman’s blood could be utilized for
obtaining rulership and kingdom.

Historians say: He made the killing of Uthman a big issue and considered
it to be a very serious matter. And took it as a pretext for
strengthening his power.

Imam (‘a) was observing extreme precaution in his religion, therefore
neither he planned against anyone nor he expressed his support for any
party. Rather he acted in the most open manner. Hence he refused to
allow Muawiyah to continue as the governor of Syria because to allow him
to continue at his post would be a support for oppression and
strengthening of injustice.

Anyway, the Imam came out with his armed forces from the battle of Jamal
in Basra and moved to Kufa in order to make it his capital and
residence. As soon as he reached Kufa he began to prepare for
confronting a powerful enemy and one who was popular and supported by
all his people (Syrians).

After the Imam’s victory in Jamal, Sharii in the following couplets,
encouraged him to go out against the Syrians:

**“Tell this Imam that battle has ended and the bounty is completed for
him.**

**We are free from fighting the pledge-breakers while a horrible serpent
is present in Syria.**

**Which is spewing venom and whomsoever it strikes has no cure. So shoot
it down before it could strike.”[1]**

Sending of Jurair
-----------------

Before the Imam could take up the matter of crushing the rebel in Syria,
he sent Jurair bin Abdullah Bajali to him to call him to obedience and
to enter into that allegiance with which the Muslims had entered to the
Imam. He also sent a letter to him.**[2]** In which he called him in the
briefest but clear statements that he should come to the right path. And
he said: Wisdom guides those who seek guidance and those whose inner
conscience the Almighty Allah has illuminated.

Jurair came to Muawiyah and delivered the Imam’s letter. He also advised
him extensively and warned him. Muawiyah heard him but didn’t say
anything in reply. He refrained from it for a long time, because he did
not have any other option but to decline peace and postpone the matter.

Muawiyah and Amr Ibn Aas
------------------------

Muawiyah realized that he would not be able to dominate the events
without joining Amr Aas, who was the most cunning of the Arabs. So he
wanted his help for political victory through his plots and
machinations. Therefore he wrote to him  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 117  
**[2]** *Ar-Risalah fi Waqiyatus Siffeen*, Pg. 27-30

inviting him to Damascus.

Ibn Aas according to historians, was displeased with Uthman due to his
suspension at the latter’s hand and he was instigating people against
Uthman. He encouraged them to rise up in revolt against the third
caliph. Amr Aas was of those who had prepared the ground for revolution
against Uthman. When he became assured that the uprising against Uthman
was certain he returned to his land that he owned in Palestine and began
to reside there and closely followed the news concerning Uthman.

When Muawiyah’s letter arrived, Amr Aas continued to remain busy in his
work and sought advice from his two sons Abdullah and Muhammad.

Abdullah who was a man of righteous inclinations suggested that he
should remain aloof and not to reply anything to Muawiyah till Muslims
are united once more and then they could join the Muslims.

His son Muhammad who was greedy for that which the youth of Quraish had
been covetous liked progress and fame and therefore he suggested to his
father to join Muawiyah so that they should get some share from his
worldly possessions.

Amr told his son, Abdullah: “You have advised us that which is good for
our religion,” and he told his son, Muhammad, “You have suggested that
which is beneficial for our worldly life.” Thus that night he remained
sleepless debating whether he should join Ali and be like other Muslims
so that whatever shall be for them would also be there for him. And to
take up that which they had taken upon themselves except that he should
achieve from this world but would decide his fate in the Hereafter. Or
that he should join hands with Muawiyah and obtain material wealth that
he anticipated while he had not forgotten the governorship of Egypt and
he continuously used to lament at its loss. His couplets are recorded
from him that night that describe his mental struggle.

The dawn had not broken but that he gave precedence to his world before
his Hereafter and decided to join hands with Muawiyah. So he set out for
Damascus accompanied by his two sons. When they reached he began to
lament among the Syrians like a woman, “Alas, for Uthman! I am grieving
for shame and religion!”**[1]**

We ask: O Ibn Aas! May God Kill you! Are you lamenting for Uthman? While
you had instigated people against him? And encouraged enmity towards
him? Even when you came across quadrupeds you used to incite them
against Uthman so that they may shed his blood.

At that time he had gambled his life for power with so much ferocity
that he made people forgetful of their religion and they committed all
the things that the Almighty Allah had prohibited.

When he met Muawiyah he began to speak about the battle against Imam.
Ibn Aas said, “As for Ali, by Allah! Arabs do not consider you and him
equal in any matter  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/274

and in the battle he has an advantage that no one of the Quraish has
except that you be oppressive to him.

Muawiyah expressed his view regarding the battle against the Imam and
said: “You are right, but we shall fight for that which is in our hand
and we shall put the responsibility of Uthman’s blood on him.”

Ibn Aas ridiculed him saying, “Woe be to me, you are the one who
deserves to say the least about Uthman.”

“Woe be to you, why?”

“But you abandoned him while the Syrians were with you. So much so that
Yazid bin Asad Bajali asked for help and he went towards him. And as far
as I am concerned I openly deserted him and ran away to
Palestine…”**[1]**

Muawiyah knew that Ibn Aas would not be sincere with him and he saw
wisdom in making him his confidant and that he may reward him for his
religion. So he clarified further and said, “O Amr, do you love me?”

“What for?” For the Hereafter? By Allah the Hereafter is not with you.
Or for the world? By Allah, it shall not be so till I remain your
partner in it.”

“Are you my partner in it?”

“Write Egypt and its surrounding areas for me.”

“You will get what you want.”

Thus he wrote the governorship of Egypt for him and also fixed
remuneration for him**[2]** so that he may confront the successor of the
Messenger of Allah (s). And in this way he won over the heart of the
most cunning Arab and a senior member of Quraish. He was the person
aware of the condition of the people and he knew that how he could
dominate the events.

Sending back of Jurair
----------------------

When Muawiyah’s job was over and his position became established, he
sent back Jurair and along with him sent a letter addressed to the Holy
Imam (‘a). Therein he put the responsibility of Uthman’s blood on Imam
(‘a) and he announced the unanimity of Syrians to fight His Eminence if
he does not hand over to them the killers of Uthman and entrusts the
caliphate to the consensus of Muslims.

Jurair departed for Kufa and informed him about the refusal of Muawiyah
and told him about the topic the Syrians were according importance with
reference to the Imam.

Imam decided to once again complete the argument for him and therefore
he sent another messenger so that he may invite him to obedience and to
enter that which the Muslims had entered. But this did not produce any
result because Muawiyah became assured that he was capable of
confronting and opposing the Imam and he became determined on his
deviation and apostasy.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh*, 2/162  
**[2]** *Iqdul Farid* 4/345

Uthman’s Shirt
--------------

Muawiyah with deceit and intrigue incited the simple- minded people of
Syria in the grief of Uthman because he used to display Uthman’s
bloodstained shirt from the pulpit and this made them lament more. He
also instructed his preachers to magnify this matter and instigate the
people to seek revenge for Uthman’s blood. And whenever their grief
abated to some extent, Ibn Aas said in a taunting manner, “Chase the
young one of the she-camel and make her disconcerted.”**[1]**

Muawiyah also took out Uthman’s shirt for them and they again became
aggrieved for him. They swore that except for nocturnal emission they
would not put bath water on their body for ritual bath. And they swore
that they would not go near their women and not sleep on their beds till
they kill the murderers of Uthman.**[2]**

Their hearts burst to rise up in battle to seek the revenge for Uthman’s
blood. Muawiyah convinced them that Ali was responsible for Uthman’s
murder and he was shielding his killers. They reached to such a
condition that they were more eager for the battle than Muawiyah
himself.

Muawiyah’s Mobilization of Army towards Siffeen
-----------------------------------------------

Muawiyah understood that except for battle there was no other option
because Imam in his own religion did not either openly showed off nor
was there any intrigue in his plans. He did not let him continue as the
governor of Syria and did not entrust him with any post in the
government. Rather he had removed him from all government machinery.
Because he had become aware of his defects in his faith and his evil
intentions regarding Islam and Muslims.

Muawiyah set out with a huge army of Syrians and sent out scouts
(advance guards) before him while he made his companions camp at the
best place nearest to the Euphrates and he took control of the Euphrates
and considered it his first victory and thus he deprived his enemy from
water and posted his soldiers there as a preparation for beginning the
battle and arranged his forces for the main confrontation.

Imam comes out for the battle
-----------------------------

Imam (‘a) became ready for the battle and sent out preachers in Kufa to
mobilize people to rise up for Jihad and confront Muawiyah after they
had obtained the great victory of Jamal.

Imam Husain (‘a) delivered great awakening sermons. After praise and
glorification of Allah he said as follows:

“O people! You are the chosen and selected companions to finish off that
which has been created among you and to make efforts to ease what has
been made difficult for you. But you should know that battle is an open
mischief and a bitter  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This is a proverb which means: Remind them of some sorrows so
that they become distressed (Tr.)  
**[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/277

thing. Thus whoever is ready for it should prepare the necessary
provision. And he must not fear for their wound before they are
inflicted on him.

Know that! He shall be their friend and whoever moves towards it before
its time and before its appointing of the manner and pursuit, then he
shall be the nearest that the people shall not gain anything from him
and he would have thrown away himself to perdition. We implore the
Almighty that He may give you power by His help.”**[1]**

This sermon was full of encouragement to hasten for the battle and
complete preparation for it. And to make them careful in understanding
the requirements of success and means of obtaining victory on the
enemies. And that carelessness and sloth shall result in defeat and
humiliation. This sermon also proves the wide knowledge of the Imam
regarding military affairs and problems connected with war.

After the speech of the Prophet’s grandson, people presented themselves
for battle and began to arrange their forces and when their provision
and preparations were ready Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) departed with them
to fight the son of Abu Sufyan. He dispatched the vanguard before him
and instructed it not to initiate the battle against the Syrians till
His Eminence reaches to them.

The Iraqi army came out like a flood and they were convinced that they
were going to battle disobedient powers that were against Islam and who
were enemies of their aim.

Along the Imam’s journey numerous events occurred but prolonging our
discussion by narrating them in detail here is uncalled for. We would
mention them in a passing manner.

Obtaining control over the Euphrates
------------------------------------

Imam’s men could not find a way to reach Euphrates because Muawiyah’s
forces had surrounded the river and they strictly forbade the Imam’s
forces to draw water from there.

When Imam (‘a) saw this situation he dispatched a messenger to Muawiyah
to ask him to accord permission to use the river water. However the
dialogue did not produce any result but rather they persisted in their
prohibition and they wanted to keep them deprived like Uthman was
deprived of water when he was under siege.

The Imam’s soldiers were afflicted with severe thirst and Ashath bin
Qais came out to His Eminence and asked permission to begin the battle
and to compel the enemy forces to give up their control over the
Euphrates. Imam (‘a) had no option but to accord the permission.

Furious battle ensued between the two armies and the Imam’s forces
emerged victorious and they took the Euphrates under their control. They
wanted to pay back in their own coin and to deprive them of the water
from Euphrates in the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/186 (Ismailiyan Edition)

same way as the soldiers of Muawiyah had acted with them. However the
Imam did not permit this and they acted as gentlemen and righteous
people and allowed them use of river water.

Decadence and degradation were of the basic elements of the Umayyads and
a part of their personal trait because in the plains of Kerbala also
they repeated the same act they had performed in Siffeen and they cut
off the water supply from the Euphrates for Imam Husain (‘a) and his
entourage and the ladies and children of the Prophet’s household were
not given a drop from the river so that thirst may defeat them and lack
of water may burst their hearts and the Umayyads did not pay heed to any
voice of conscience and their hearts did not soften that they should
have given a little water and proved their kind heartedness.

Messengers of Armistice
-----------------------

Imam (‘a) very carefully refrained from shedding the blood of Muslims
and in order to make peace and ceasefire he made many efforts. He
dispatched Adi bin Hatim, Shabth bin Rabi, Yazid bin Qais and Ziyad bin
Hafasa to Muawiyah in order to invite him to save the blood of Muslims,
remind him of the Hereafter and warn him that if he desists they would
to face the same fate as the folks of Jamal. But the son of Hind did not
respond to these demands and continued to remain on his misguidance and
deviation and hoisted the responsibility of Uthman’s murder on the Imam.
Because his military power, unity in his forces and his obstinacy on
seeking revenge for Uthman’s blood incited him to disobedience.

Agents for making peace returned unsuccessful and they became convinced
that Muawiyah intended to fight and he was not at all inclined to peace.
They informed the Holy Imam (‘a) about this matter. His Eminence became
prepared for the battle and called the people for war.

The Battle
----------

Imam (‘a) prepared his men with their flags for the battle and he
commanded his soldiers that they must not begin hostilities as he had
ordered in the battle of Jamal. And also not to pursue anyone who flees
from the battle. They must not attack the wounded or trample the dead.
They should not attack the women. These and other instructions issued by
the Imam displayed the code of war in Islam.

Battalions from the army of the Imam came out against battalions from
the army of Muawiyah and the two groups fought the whole day or a part
of the day. Then they used to halt the fighting without an all out war
taking place between them. From these circumstances the Imam hoped that
Muawiyah may become inclined to making peace and refraining from
bloodshed.

These conditions continued for some days of the month of Zilhajj, till
the month of Mohurrum arrived. And these were the months in which, in
Islam and in pre-Islamic age hostilities were prohibited. The two armies
refrained from fighting the whole month and they got the opportunity to
meet each other in peace because they gave assurance of ceasefire to
each other and no fighting took place among them.

Envoys of peace also tried to bring peace between the two opponents but
they did not achieve any result while the dispute among the two parties
had intensified. People of Iraq were calling the Syrians for unity and
asked them to join in the allegiance to the Imam. On the other hand the
Syrians were determined to seek revenge of Uthman’s blood and they
refused to pay allegiance to the Holy Imam (‘a). They wanted caliphate
to be handed over to the Shura Committee of Muslims.

When the month of Mohurrum concluded they began to fight again but the
battle did not take up the form of an all out war. It remained as
sporadic fighting. A battalion fought a battalion and a regiment fought
a regiment.

Both the groups finally tired of this sporadic fighting and they were
goading for an all out battle. Therefore the Imam (‘a) prepared the
soldiers fully and Muawiyah also did the same. The two armies entered
into furious battle and terrible fighting followed. And the right wing
of the Imam’s army was placed at the back and the Imam accompanied by
Hasan and Husain participated in the battle**[1]** But as for the left
side his soldiers, that is Rabia continuously fought valiantly. Writers
say: “After today no excuse shall remain with Arabs if you receive any
harm while the Imam is amidst you.”

Rabia took oath for death and remained steadfast in the battle. And on
the right the soldiers continued their efforts under the command of
their general, Malik Ashtar. And the battle continued to rage on with
ferocity. Weakness and signs of defeat became apparent in Muawiyah’s
army and he decided to flee the battlefield but he recalled the couplets
of Ibnul Itanabe that were as follows:

**“I do not like courage, effort and moving forward against the
magnanimous warrior.**

**And that I give my property unwillingly or to earn praise with
profit.**

**And my words, when my life is in distress and anxiety; in your place
would you praise him or you will sit quietly?”**

Restraining Hasan and Husain (‘a) from the Battle
-------------------------------------------------

Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) restrained the two grandsons of the Messenger
of Allah (s) from taking an active part in the battle. His Eminence
said, “Protect these two youths (i.e. Hasan and Husain), in my place. So
that as a result of their killing the Progeny of the Messenger of Allah
(s) should not be cut off.”**[2]**

Imam (‘a) was making great efforts to keep the two beloved ones of the
Messenger of Allah (s) safe because they were the means of continuation
and survival of the generations of His Eminence.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 2/305 & 3/86  
**[2]** *Nahjul Balagha* 11/200 (Ismailiyan Edition)

Ammar’s Martyrdom
-----------------

Ammar bin Yasir was the most prominent face in the group of Imam (‘a).
He was the one who made the greatest efforts and he was the most patient
of them in the path of Islam. Since the passing away of the Prophet he
had followed Ali (‘a) and always accompanied him because he was certain
that His Eminence was with the truth and truth was with him as the
Messenger of Allah (s) had informed.

At the time of the battle of Siffeen, Ammar was an aged man of ninety
but his heart and perception were safe from ageing because in that
battle he seemed to be a young man and he fought the battalion of Ibn
Aas. He pointed to their standard and said, “By Allah, thrice have I
fought this regiment and this one is not the best of them.” When he saw
his men sitting back in the battlefield he told them, “By Allah, even if
they chase us till Nakhala Hajr I shall still believe that we are on the
right and they are on falsehood.”

Narrators say: One morning during the days of Siffeen he took up his
position early in such a way that he was eager to see the Messenger of
Allah (s) and to meet his parents. So he hastened to the Holy Imam (‘a)
and sought his permission to enter the battlefield so that maybe he is
blessed with martyrdom, but the Imam did not accord permission to him.
However he persisted in his pleading and at last the Imam relented to
his entreaties. Yet the Imam wept bitterly to see Ammar departing.

Ammar departed for the battlefield while his powers were at maximum and
he achieved his desires that he had been allowed to proceed towards his
martyrdom. He was elated and joyous at this and he called out aloud,
“This day I shall meet my favorite ones, Muhammad and his companions…”

The battalion in which Ammar was fighting its standard bearer was Hashim
bin Utbah Mirqal. He was a Muslim cavalier and a righteous person, one
of the best friends of the Imam and the most sincere of them. He had
only one healthy eye.

Ammar went towards him and sometimes he spurred him severely to the
battlefield and said: “Move forward, O One-eyed man!” At other times he
addressed him in a kind manner and said: “May my parents be sacrificed
on you! Attack!” Hashim said: “May God have mercy on you. O Abul Yaqzan!
You are a man who considers a battle as light and in the same way shall
crawl ahead; maybe we can achieve what we desire.” At last Hashim was
fed up and launched an attack reciting the following Rajaz (War poem):

**“They have denounced me severely and not said anything less. I have
gambled my life and I shall not return.**

**I am that one-eyed man who finds his own place. Either I shall defeat
or be defeated.**

**I made great efforts in life and now I am fed up with it. I shall stop
them with my spear.”**

This Rajaz shows his determination and his disgust with the life of this
world. When he jumped into the battle with ferocity and zeal Ammar was
fighting alongside him, reciting the following Rajaz:

**“We fought you for the revelation of Quran and today we fight you for
its interpretation.**

**A fight that separates the head from the body and separates two
friends.**

**It is that the right is restored to its position.”**

Ammar, with a sincere faith, fought the polytheists on the side of the
Messenger of Allah (s) and in defense of monotheism he participated in
severe confrontations. And with the brother of the Messenger of Allah
(s) he fought for the defense of the interpretation of Quran and in
defense of the Imam of the Muslims. Thus what gifts and favors Ammar
bestowed on Islam!

Ammar entered into a furious battle with the powers of embezzlement and
the fighting intensified. Finally the filthiest one of humanity, a
person named Abul Ghadiya attacked him and hit him with his sword
injuring him fatally. Ammar, the one with a lofty belief and faith fell
down while he was with intense thirst and lay writhing in his own pure
blood. A lady brought a bowl of milk for him and when he saw her he
smiled and became certain that his end was near and in a satisfied tone
said, “The Messenger of Allah (s) told me: Your last drink of the world
would be a bowl of milk and an unjust group shall kill you.”

Not much time passed when he breathed his last and with his death,
closed the most illuminated and prominent page of belief and Jihad. And
that brave warrior who had illuminated his life and thoughts with
sincerity and struggle departed up to the Almighty.

While Ammar was gone to the battle, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) was
continuously restless and he used to say, “Get me some news of the son
of Sumaiyyah.”

A group of soldiers went out in search of Ammar and found him martyred
soaked in blood. They rushed back to the Imam and informed him about
Ammar’s martyrdom.

The Imam was devastated by the shock and his strength sapped. A wave of
pain passed over his countenance, because he had just lost a brother and
a friend.

The Imam moved towards the place of Ammar’s martyrdom with his heart
filled with grief and his eyes filled with tears. Commanders of the army
aggrieved at the loss of a great warrior also accompanied him.

When the Holy Imam (‘a) reached that place of Ammar’s martyrdom, he
threw himself upon him and kissed him. Then he wept bitterly and
expressed his grief in fiery words and said: “One who does not accord
any importance to son of Yasir of those killed among the Muslims and is
not afflicted with a great sorrow is not a righteous person. May Allah
have mercy on Ammar on the day he became a

Muslim. May Allah have mercy on Ammar on the day he is martyred. May
Allah have mercy on Ammar on the day he shall be raised. I saw Ammar
that whenever the Messenger of Allah (s) named four companions, Ammar
was fourth of them and whenever he names five companions, Ammar was
fifth of them and none of the senior companions of the Prophet had any
doubt that on more than one occasion the Paradise had been made
incumbent for Ammar and no two persons (had doubt in it). Thus
congratulations to Ammar for gaining Paradise.”

Imam (‘a) took the head of Ammar in his lap while tears were flowing on
his cheeks.

Imam Hasan (‘a) and others also came forward and lamented for the great
martyr in sorrow and grief. After that Imam (‘a) arose and buried Ammar.

Historians say: When the news of Ammar’s martyrdom spread, consternation
arose among the soldiers of Muawiyah because they had heard that the
Holy Prophet (s) had said: “An unjust group shall kill him (Ammar)” And
it became clear to them they themselves were these same people about
whom the Messenger of Allah (s) had stated as above. However, Ibn Aas
was able to remove the discord by saying that whosoever has brought
Ammar to the battle is the one responsible for his death. The gullible
Syrians believed what Ibn Aas told them.

After the martyrdom of Ammar the battle intensified further while the
forces of Muawiyah had fled and weakness had become obvious in his
fighters.

Ibn Aas’ Ruse
-------------

The most horrible trick ever played in all of history of all the nations
was the one enacted by Ibn Aas. It was hoisting the pages of Quran on
points of spears. R. Miller has described it as the worst type of joke
ever played in the history of humanity.**[1]**He says: I believe that
this was not an extempore trick and a sudden matter because it was
probably as a result of a secret pact between Ibn Aas and Ashath bin
Qais, an Iraqi commander. The two of them had been in secret contact
throughout the battle. Dr. Taha Husayn also holds this belief and he
says: “It is not unlikely that Ashath bin Qais, the most cunning of the
Iraqi people in secret contact with Ibn Aas the most cunning one of the
Syrians, hatched a plot so that people may fight among themselves. Then
if the Syrians were to emerge victorious, what could be better than that
but if they feared defeat or were about to be routed, they would raise
Quran aloft the spears and in this way create discord among the men of
Ali (‘a) and fan the flames of conflict among them.”**[2]**

Anyway when the defeat of Syrians became obvious and their forces began
to disperse, Muawiyah rushed to Amr Aas in shock and sought his view.
Amr advised him to raise the Quran.

Muawiyah at once ordered that approximately 500 copies of Quran should
be  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Aqida wa Shariyat dar Islam*, Pg. 190  
**[2]** *Al-Fitnatul Kubra* 2/89

raised on spears and clamor of Syrians rose up in unison. All of them
spoke in one voice, “This Book of Allah, from its opening till the end,
is between you and us. Who would defend the borders of Syria after the
people of Syria are destroyed? Who would defend the borders of Iraq
after the Iraqis are destroyed? Who would go for Jihad to Rome? Who
would defend against the Turks? Who would confront the infidels?”

This call fell like a bolt of lightning on the Iraqi army which
transformed them completely and like waves they rushed to the Imam and
cried, “Muawiyah has come to you with sincerity, he has called you to
the Book of Allah. You must accept his offer.”

The Imam was greatly affected by the fraudulent proposal and he knew
that it was a result of their military defeat. They had no aim except to
deceive the people and they had raised Quran not because they had faith
in it. It was only to fool their opponents. It was a matter of great
regret that they did not take into consideration the moments of their
future-making of history and they did not keep in view the future of the
Ummah while not more than a few moments remained for the annihilation of
oppression and destruction of the foundations of injustice.

How terrible and regretful it was that they remained obstinate on their
rebellion and enmity. Twelve thousand person from among them having
marks of prostration on their foreheads, they came out and addressed the
Imam by his name, “O Ali, you must reply positively to these people who
have called you in the name of this book. Otherwise we shall kill you
like we killed the son of Affan. By Allah if you do not relent we shall
make good our threat…”

The Holy Imam (‘a) spoke to them in a sorrowful and kind manner so that
he may root out the spirit of rebellion from them. However the Imam’s
words remained ineffective and they continued in their deviation and
they were stubborn on forcing the Imam to accept the truce. Ashath bin
Qais was instigating them for this and in a loud voice he demanded that
the offer of Syrians be accepted.

Imam (‘a) had no option but to accept the offer and therefore he ordered
that hostilities be stopped while his heart was shattered by grief and
sorrow. Because he had become certain that falsehood had won over truth
and all the efforts and sacrifices of his army had been in vain.

The traitors insisted upon the Imam that he should call back Malik
Ashtar from the battlefield while he was just inches from victory.

Imam (‘a) sent a message to him to come back but he paid no heed to this
and he told the messenger, “Tell my master that this is not the time
that you should prefer to keep me away from this opportunity. I am sure
that the Almighty Allah shall bestow victory for us. Thus do not put me
to haste…”

The messenger returned and conveyed Malik’s response to the Imam. Those
uncivilized people began to scream in denouncing the Holy Imam (‘a).
They said, “We don’t see except that you had ordered him to fight on.”

Imam (‘a) was in a great difficulty in front of them. So he told them,
“Did you see me speak in a secret manner with my messengers? Did I not
speak to them in presence of you all?”

However they remained adamant on their waywardness and said, “Tell him
to come back immediately or by Allah we shall depose you…”

They were determined to create mischief and it was very likely they
would have harmed Imam (‘a). Therefore His Eminence issued an emphatic
order that Malik should leave the battlefield.

Malik obeyed the instructions while the Syrian army was routed and as he
returned to the Imam he asked Yazid, the Imam’s messenger, “Has this
mischief appeared due to the raising of copies of Quran?”

“Yes”

Ashtar understood the deceit of Ibn Aas and he said, “By Allah, when the
Qurans were raised I understood that discord and conflict would indeed
develop and this was a plot of the son of that unchaste woman. Do you
not see victory? Don’t you see what conditions they had created? Don’t
you see what Allah is doing for us? Is it right to leave them and turn
away?”

Yazid told him about the terrible circumstances and dangerous atmosphere
in which the Imam was caught and he said, “Would you prefer that you
become victorious while Amirul Momineen (‘a) has to bear calamities at
the hands of his enemies?”

Ashtar said what befits a believer, “Glory be to Allah! No by Allah, I
would not like that!”

“It is only they who told the Imam, ‘Tell Malik to come back or we shall
kill you with our swords like we slew the son of Affan, or we shall hand
you over to your enemy?’”

Immersed in grief and deserted by sorrow, Ashtar returned while all his
hopes were shattered.

He went towards the people and scolded them severely asking them to
leave him to attack the enemies because victory and success was very
close.

Those transmogrified people paid no heed to Malik’s statements and being
firm on the way to degradation and humiliation said: “No! No!”

“Give me only respite equal to the jump of a horse because I am sure of
victory…”

“In that case we shall become your partners in sin…”

Ashtar argued with them with logic and reasoning and he criticized their
belief. He said, “Tell me, when the stalwarts have been martyred and the
lowly ones among you remain in their places – when were you on the
right? Whether it was of that time when you were killing the Syrians or
now when you have stopped fighting and are on falsehood. Or now that you
have refrained from fighting are you on the

right? In that case those of you were killed, whose greatness you do not
deny, and who were better than you, are all in the fire of hell…”

These brilliant arguments did not succeed to change their stance. They
said. “O Ashtar! Leave us! We fought them for the sake of Allah. We
shall not obey you. Go away from us!”

When Ashtar became certain that they cannot be reformed he gave them a
severe reply and he frightened them of the consequences of this mischief
and that after this they would never get any respect.

In fact they never received any honor after that because the rightful
rulership slipped from their hands and their power went into Muawiyah’s
hands and he subjected them to terrible difficulties.

Malik petitioned the Imam to fight them but the Imam refused because
definitely the majority of the representatives in the Imams army were
opposing the Imam and starting battles against them would have worst
consequences because the Ummah shall become an easy morsel for the
Umayyads.

Imam (a.s) bowed his head while waves of pain and sorrow surrounded him.
For a long time he thought of the bitter results that these disobedient
people had created.

Historians say: They thought that the Imam’s silence implied his
consent. They cried, “Ali, Amirul Momineen has accepted arbitration and
has agreed to follow the command of Quran.”

Imam (a.s) was immersed in sorrow. The control of the affairs had gone
out of his hand and his soldiers had rebelled against him. The Imam
could not do anything about it. He describes what befell him in the
following words, “Yesterday I was the chief and today I am ordered!
Yesterday I was refusing it and today I am refused…”

Arbitration
-----------

The Imam’s difficulties and hardships at the hands of his rebellion army
were not limited to this. A far greater problem appeared because the
disobedient people under the leadership of Ashath bin Qais insisted on
the selection of Abu Musa Ashari who was more severe and mischievous
enemy of the Imam. This was so because they knew that Abu Musa would
definitely depose the Imam from caliphate and appoint in his place a
candidate of their choice. They all besieged the Imam from all sides and
raised the slogan: “We want Abu Musa!”

Imam (a.s) prevented them and he refused to allow the selection of Abu
Musa. He said, “In the beginning you turned away from me. Now do not
disobey me. I have decided not to appoint Abu Musa.”

They remained adamant on their misguidance and disobedience and they
said, “We shall not accept anyone else because we would befall into that
which he had warned us of.”

The Holy Imam (a.s) told them about the real condition of Abu Musa and
his opposition to His Eminence and said, “He is not reliable, he has
separated from me and he instigated people against me and then he ran
away from me till finally I gave him amnesty. We shall appoint Ibn Abbas
(for arbitration).”

They refused the appointment of the Ibn Abbas. Imam (a.s) then proposed
the appointment of Malik Ashtar but they remained adamant on selection
of Abu Musa Ashari. The Imam had no option but to relent and accord his
consent.

Arbitration Document
--------------------

The two sides decided to appoint Ibn Aas from the Syrian and Abu Musa
Ashari from the Iraqi side as arbitrators. And that they should compose
a document and they decided that they would act according to their
judgment. They wrote in the document a text that Tabari has narrated as
follows:

In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. This is the agreement
between Ali Ibn Abi Talib and Muawiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan. This decision of
Ali will be effective on the people of Iraq and those who are in his
community or ordinary believers with them. And this treaty of Muawiyah
will be applicable to the people of Syria and those who are with
Muawiyah. We accept the command of Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime and
Book of Allah and except for the Book of Allah no decision would be
applicable to us and we shall act upon whatever is present from the
beginning to the end in the Book of Allah and that we shall make popular
what this Book orders to enliven and we shall stop whatever it commands
to be stopped. All the arbitrators, that is Abu Musa Ashari, Abdullah
bin Qais and Amr bin al-Aas al-Qarshi will follow whatever decision they
find in the Book of Allah. They shall act on the practice that is based
on justice and equity and that upon which all shall be in agreement and
no one shall be opposed to it. Both the arbitrators shall take oaths and
pledges from Ali and Muawiyah and their soldiers and other reliable
people also that the lives and properties of both of them will be
protected and whatever these two decide in that the whole community will
co-operate with them and this pledge will be incumbent on the Muslims of
both parties that whatever is written in this treaty is accepted by us
and I have made the decision of both the arbitrators compulsory on all
Muslims. All these people shall remove their weapons and all would
observe peace. They can go wherever they like. Their lives, properties,
women and children shall be secure. All shall observe peace whether
present or absent and the oath and pledge of the Almighty shall be on
Abdullah bin Qais and Amr bin Aas that they decide the matter of the
community and that they do not once more make them involved in war and
discord. It is another thing that someone may not accept their decision
and the duration of this judgment shall be till the month of Ramadan and
if these two arbitrators like to increase this duration they can do so
with mutual agreement and if one of the two arbitrators dies the Amir of
the followers shall appoint another judge in his place and that person
shall be selected from just and equitable persons. And the place of the
judgment of these two shall be a place that is between the people of
Kufa and Syria. These judges

may take the testimony of whosoever they like on the verdict and they
shall write down their testimony and this verdict and those witnesses
shall support them in their verdict. And they shall oppose those who
intend to nullify it. O Allah! We seek Your help against the one who
rejects this verdict.**[1]**

A group from each party signed the document and brought it into force.
This agreement fulfilled the aspirations of Muawiyah and he survived the
danger to his life and the lives of his followers.

The most remarkable point about this document is that it mentions
nothing about the revenge of Uthman’s blood. Not a slightest objection
is mentioned about it. Rather it speaks of peace and amity between the
two groups. I believe that this document was written without the Imam
having any say in it because His Eminence had left his army men to do as
they like.

The Imam’s Return to Kufa
-------------------------

Imam left Siffeen for Kufa; we don’t think that any writer is able to
describe in reality the calamity that befell the Holy Imam (a.s).
Because His Eminence returned in great shock as he was aware that the
falsehood of Muawiyah had become stable and strong and his position had
become established. He saw that his own soldiers had become rebels
because when he called them they did not harken to his call. This was a
result of their involvement in mischief and hardships. Historians say
that they used to abuse and kill each other. They also used to oppress
each other. The most dangerous thing that arose was the problem of the
Khawarij about which we shall discuss soon. It was a disease that was
destroying the ranks of Iraqis and the biggest danger that came to them
and had broken the unity of the Imam’s army and which spread fear and
terror in their ranks.

Imam (a.s) reached Kufa and saw that people were afflicted due to the
loss of the lives of their dear ones in the Battle of Siffeen because
those who were killed in Siffeen were many times more than those who
died in Jamal.

With the Mariqeen
-----------------

Narrators say: the Messenger of Allah (s) had named the people of
Nahrawan as Mariqeen and he commanded Amirul Momineen (‘a) Ali (a.s) to
fight them just as he ordered fighting against the Nakiseen and
Qasiteen.

The obvious fact is the method of thinking of Khawarij, deviation in the
movement and obstinacy on ignorance and disobedience because they based
their philosophy on bigotry and lack of contemplation and perception.
Their slogan for which they sacrificed themselves was: There is no
command except of Allah. However not much time passed but they began to
accept that sword was necessary for rulership and they spread terror and
mischief in the land, which we shall explain below.

Anyway, when Imam returned from Siffeen to Kufa they did not enter Kufa.
They went to Hurura and became to be called Hururis. On the basis of
what historians  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/53-54

state, they numbered 1200. They selected Shabth Ibn Rabi as their
commander and Abdullah Kuwa Yashkari to lead them in prayers. They
vacated the Imam from caliphate and entrusted the caliphate to a Shura
committee of Muslims.

The Imam was infuriated at their rebellion and he dispatched Abdullah
Ibn Abbas to meet them emphasizing that he must not speak or deal
harshly with them till the Imam reaches them. But Ibn Abbas was
compelled to debate with them and he was talking to them when Imam
arrived. He prohibited Ibn Abbas from arguing with them. He said, “By
Allah, this is the occasion that whoever succeeds in this shall be
successful in the Hereafter. And one who talks unrightfully in it shall
be blind and deviated in the Hereafter.”

Then he asked them, “Who is your leader?”

“Ibn Kuwa.”

“What has forced you to disobey us?”

“Your arbitration in Siffeen?”

“I put you under oath of Allah. When they raised the Quran and you were
telling me to accept the truce did I not tell you that I knew them
better than you? They are not religious and people of Quran. I have
lived with them. When they were children and when they grew up. They
were the worst children and the most mischievous adults. Move forward
with the truth and rightfulness because those people have raised Quran
as a ruse. But you refused to accept my view and told me to accept the
truce. Recall what I told you and how you opposed me. And when you did
not accept anything except Quran we imposed the condition on the
arbitrators that they should only follow the commands of Quran. Then if
they had acted according to the command of Quran I would not have
opposed it. If they had refused we would also have refused to accept
their decision.”

This brilliant argument refuted all their doubts because they were
themselves responsible for every mischief and corruption that had taken
place and in this regard the Imam has not committed anything wrong.

They asked His Eminence, “Do you think it was an act of justice to
appoint some people as arbitrators over loss of human lives?”

“We did not appoint people as arbitrators, rather we appointed the Quran
as arbitrators. This is the Quran which is a writing between two covers,
that people speak by it.”

“Tell us why you fixed a period of respite between you and them.”

“So that the ignorant may know and the knowledgeable may investigate and
perhaps the Almighty Allah may set right the affairs of this community.”

The Imam refuted all their objections and compelled them to accept as
right what all he had said. Then he said to them in a kind manner,
“Enter your city, may Allah have mercy on you.”

They agreed to do so and all of them entered Kufa with Imam (a.s)
however they retained their beliefs and spread their view among the
gullible people so that they may also start expressing these distorted
beliefs. Their awe became powerful and they began to spread their fear
among the people and misguided the people to depose the Imam and called
them to entrust the caliphate to a consultative committee.**[1]**

The Two Arbitrators hold a Meeting
----------------------------------

Muawiyah regained his forces and stabilized his position after the
collapse that had befallen him. He sent his messengers to Imam Ali. He
asked him to fulfill the arbitration and to allow the arbitrators to
hold a meeting. He hurried to do that because he knew that discords and
misfortunes had befallen the Iraqi troops and they had divided into
tribes and parties, and he knew that Abu Musa al-Ashari was deviated
from the Imam as well. Accordingly, he intended to add another victory
to his victory. The Imam (‘a) responded to him. He sent four hundred men
under the leadership of Shurayh bin Hani al-Harithi. Among them there
were Abdullah bin Abbas to lead them in prayer and undertake their
affairs, and Abu Musa al-Ashari, who was chosen for the arbitration. And
so did Muawiyah. He sent Amr bin al-Aas with four hundred men. He
supplied him with sufficient information about the dull one, Abu Musa,
saying: “You will face a man with a long tongue and a little reason!
Therefore, do not employ your entire mind against him!”

The misguided judges**[2]** arrived in Adhruh or Doumat al-Jandal.
Meetings and arbitrations were held there. The cunning one, Amr bin
al-Aas, met the weak-minded and dull Abu Musa. He gave him three days’
time. He chose a special place for him. He gave him delicious food and
drinks. He did not discuss the affair with him until he completely
understood him and after bribing him. When he knew that he had dominated
him, he talked with him with gentleness and leniency. He showed towards
him admiration, reverence, and magnification. He said to him: “O Abu
Musa, you are the chief of the companions of Muhammad (‘a)! You have an
excellence and precedence over them. You see that this community has
fallen into blind sedition with which there is no safety. Therefore, is
it possible for you to be the blessed one of this community, that Allah
may spare their blood through you? Allah says about one soul: (and whoso
saves the life of one, it shall be as if he had saved the life of all
mankind). What about saving of the lives of these people?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/469-472  
**[2]** Suwaid bin Ghafla has narrated: I came with Abu Musa Ashari at
the bank of river Euphrates during the caliphate of Uthman. Thus he
narrated a tradition of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) saying: I
heard His Eminence say: Bani Israel developed discord till two misguided
judges were sent to them, who were deviated and they deviated others who
followed them. My community would also be like that till two judges are
sent who are themselves deviated and they would deviate all those who
follow them.I told him, “O Abu Musa! Beware that you may not be one of
them.”He (the narrator) says: He removed his cloak away from himself and
said, “I seek Allah’s refuge from it like I have removed this cloak of
mine.” (*Nahjul Balagha* 13/315)

When was Abu Musa the chief of the Prophet’s companions? When did he
have merits and precedence in Islam? These words played with his soul,
and he asked how he could decide the conflict.

“You depose Ali bin Abi Talib,” replied Amr, “and I depose Muawiyah bin
Abi Sufyan. We choose for this community one who has no part in the
discord nor has he plunged his hands into it.”

Abu Musa asked him about the person who would be nominated for the
caliphate.

Amr understood Abu Musa’s desires and inclinations towards Abdullah bin
Umar, so he said: “He is Abdullah bin Umar!”

Abu Musa al-Ashari was very delighted at that. He asked him for
covenants to fulfill what he had said:

-How can I be sure of that?

-O Abu Musa, now surely by the remembrance of Allah are the hearts set
at rest! Take promises and covenants until you are satisfied!

Then he gave him promises, covenants, and strong oaths, to the extent
that he swore by all the sacred things to fulfill what he had said. The
Sheikh who was old in age but small in mind (Abu Musa) was astonished at
the cleverness that Amr bin al-Aas had. As a result he expressed his
satisfaction and acceptance.

Their agreement on the time when they would meet was announced to the
people.

Then came the terrible hour when the course of history changed. People
gathered to receive the decisive result of this arbitration for which
they were waiting impatiently. The cunning person, Amr bin al-Aas, and
the deceived one, Abu Musa, came to the pulpit to announce the decision
they had reached. Amr bin al-Aas turned to Abu Musa and said to him:

-Rise and address the people, O Abu Musa.

-You rise and address them!

-Glory belongs to Allah! Shall I precede you while you are the Sheikh of
the companions of Allah’s Apostle? By Allah, I will never do
that!**[1]**

-Is there anything in your soul?

Amr took a strong oath before Abu Musa to conform to the promise he had
given to him. As for Abdullah bin Abbas, he knew about Amr bin al-Aas’s
trick. The plot that this cunning person made manifested itself.
Abdullah turned to Abu Musa and said to him: “What a pity! I think he
has deceived you! If you have agreed on an affair, then advance him and
made him speak before you! Amr is a treacherous man. I do not think that
he has given you consent about that which is between you and him! He
will oppose you when you rise among the people!”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Iqdul Farid* 4/347

However, the low person (Abu Musa) paid no attention to Abdullah bin
Abbas’ speech. He went quickly towards the pulpit. When he ascended, he
praised and lauded Allah. He called down blessings upon Muhammad, and
then he said: “O people, we reflected on our affair and knew that the
closest thing to security, righteousness, sparing blood, and bringing
together the friends is our deposing Ali and Muawiyah. I depose Ali as I
take off my turban (and he took off his turban). We have appointed as a
caliph a man who was a companion of Allah’s Apostle (‘a), and his father
was also a companion of the Prophet (‘a). He became prominent through
his precedence in Islam. He is Abdullah bin Umar!”**[1]**

He lauded him with a good laudation and gave to him good qualities and
noble descriptions. Abu Musa turned away from Imam Ali (‘a) who was the
Prophet’s self and the gate of the city of his knowledge. He nominated
Abdullah bin Umar, who did not know how to divorce his wife properly as
his father said about him. What a bad time it was that such a low person
should control the Muslims and impose his opinion on them. Anyway, Amr
bin al-Aas lauded and praised Allah. He called down blessings upon the
Prophet (‘a) and then he said: “O people, Abu Musa Abdullah bin Qais has
deposed Ali and removed him from this matter, and he is the most aware
of him. Now, I depose Ali as he has done, and I appoint Muawiyah (as a
caliph over you and me. Abu Musa has written in the document that Uthman
was killed as an oppressed martyr,**[2]** and that his heir has the
right to avenge his blood in any case. Muawiyah was a companion of
Allah’s Apostle himself, and his father was a companion of the Prophet.
So he is the caliph over us. We have to obey him and pledge allegiance
to him to avenge Uthman.”

The dull, deceived person (Abu Musa al-Ashari) said to Amr bin al-Aas:
“What’s wrong with you! May Allah curse you! You are like a panting
dog!”**[3]**

Amr bin al-Aas rebuked him after he had used him as a bridge to cross
over. He said to him: “You are like a donkey carrying books!”

Yes they were like a dog and a donkey. They really described each other.
Abu Musa set off towards Mecca carrying with him shame and disgrace
after making this blind sedition and the rip which could be not mended.
He left behind him the true Imam moaning due to his (Abu Musa’s) silly
arbitration. Through his arbitration, he recorded for the Iraqis shame
and disgrace that history would not ever forget.

The Iraqis were drowned in trials and tribulations and had become
certain of the misguidance in which they had fallen. Ashari fled to
Mecca, taking disgrace and humility for himself and his sons**[4]**
because he had openly breached the trust of Muslims.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/70-71  
**[2]** This is other than the document written after the cessation of
hostilities.  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/124-125, *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 1/118  
**[4]** People ridiculed the sons of Abu Musa Ashari and made fun of
them. For example Farazdaq heard Abu Burdah, Abu Musa’s son saying: Why
shouldn’t I be proud when I am a son of one of the arbitrators? Farazdaq
retorted: Know that one of the two was a fool and the other one a
transgressor. So you may become the son of whichever of them you like.
(*Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 19/353) A man looked at one of the sons of Abu
Musa walking in vanity, so he said to him: Look at the way he is
walking; as if his father had deceived Amr Aas!

Poets of that time composed many satirical verses disparaging Abu Musa
Ashari. Aiman bin Kharim Asadi says:

**“If these people had wanted freedom from misguidance they would have
sent Ibn Abbas to you.**

**May Allah honor his father, what a great man he is that there is none
like him who could solve the difficulties of the people.**

**But they sent an old man from Yemen to you, who does not know the
fraction one-fifth in one-sixth.**

**If Amr were alone before him he would have put him in such a ditch as
if the goat star was among the billy goats.**

**Tell Ali, instead of complaining to him, the statements of a person
who does not refrain from saying the truth.**

**O Abul Hasan, Ashari is not reliable that you deal with him in trust,
because the weeds may again re-form.**

**Thus discuss your proximate companion as son of your uncle, Abbas is
aggrieved.”[1]**

Muawiyah achieved victory because the Syrians returned to him and
saluted him with the title of “Amirul Momineen”. But the Imam’s army
returned in such a way that his soldiers were drowned in discord and
conflicts. Some were disgusted with others and they understood the
mischief that their own hands had wrought.

Imam Hasan (a.s) delivered a long sermon and invited them to affection
and love. Abdullah Ibn Abbas and Abdullah Ibn Ja’far also spoke and
their speeches condemned the arbitration. They motivated the people
towards obedience and to give up controversies.**[2]** Some people
accepted them and some rebelled and remained on their disobedience.

When the news of arbitration reached Imam (a.s) he was highly aggrieved
and he gathered the people and addressed them with an effective speech
about his pain and sorrow as a result of their disobeying his commands
against cessation of hostilities and letting victory to go out of their
hands. He said:

“Praise be to Allah. However severe hardships and disasters may occur I
still testify that there is no God except Allah, the One. And that
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger. So to say: Opposition to a
well-wisher creates regret and humiliation and I had commanded you
regarding these two men and this arbitration and told you of my sincere
views. That if you had obeyed, it would have proved beneficial for you.
But you left everything except what you wanted. I was with you like the
poet of Hawazin says:

**“I commanded them on a sensitive moment but they did pay attention to
it even the next afternoon.”**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 1/529  
**[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/129 & 134

Indeed the two persons you had accepted for arbitration, have
disregarded the command of Quran and delivered a verdict on their
conjecture because on the basis of this they have considered unlawful
what was lawful and considered lawful whatever was unlawful. At that
time they breached our trust in their decision. Thus no one of them
either dispensed guidance nor spoke the right word. Allah, His Messenger
and the righteous believers are disgusted of their deeds. Thus get ready
for Jihad and to move forward. Report to the cantonment Monday morning,
if Allah wills.”**[1]**

Armed forces of the Imam (a.s) got ready for journey at the place the
Imam had appointed. His Eminence wrote a letter to the people of Basra
and sought their help. Some battalions of Basra joined his forces.

Mutiny of the Mariqeen
----------------------

Imam (a.s) moved towards Syria with his troops but not much time passed
when he received news of rebellion and mischief of the Kharijis and
their reverting to their views.

Historians say: A group of them came out of Kufa and some people of
Basra holding similar views joined them. They went to Nahrawan and
camped over there. They then initiated corruption and destruction and
considered lawful the shedding of Muslim blood and considered them as
infidels.

A companion of the Prophet, named Abdullah bin Khabbab Ibn Arat passed
by them. They rushed to him and asked his name and then inquired about
his beliefs about the Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a). He praised the Holy
Quran and they became infuriated and they tied his arms and took him
along with his pregnant wife under a palm tree. A fresh date fell down.
One of them hurried to it and put it in his mouth. They objected to it
and he spat it out. Another one of them drew his sword, struck with it a
pig belonging to a Zimmi non-Muslim and killed it. One of them then
shouted at him, “This is mischief in the land.”

The man hurried to the owner of the pig and satisfied him. When Abdullah
bin Khabbab saw that, he said to them: “If you are truthful in what I
see, then I feel no fear of you. By Allah, I have made no mistake in
Islam. I am a believer, and you have given me security. You have said:
‘There is no harm on you!”

However, they paid no attention to his speech. They brought him along
with his wife. They made him lie down at the bank of the river. They put
him on that pig which they had killed. Then they killed him. Then they
walked towards his wife, who was shaking with fear. She knew that the
ghost of death was upon her. She was looking at her dead husband. She
asked them for mercy and begged them, saying: “I am merely a woman! Do
you not fear Allah!”

However, they paid no attention to her asking for mercy and beseeching.
They hurried towards her as dogs. They killed her and split her belly
open. Then they  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/140-141

went to three women and killed them. Among them there was Umm Sinan
al-Saydawiya, a companion of the Prophet (‘a). The evil of the
Kharijites did not stop at this. They persecuted the people, spread
terror among them, and wrought corruption in the land.**[1]**

They began to spread terror and destruction in all the areas. Imam (a.s)
send Harth bin Musa Abadi to them to ask them the reason for their
terrifying the innocent people and that they should accept the sanctity
of the blood that Allah has prohibited.

The messenger was killed before he could convey his message.

Battle against Mariqeen
-----------------------

The Imam’s companions did not consider it advisable to move towards
Syria leaving behind them the Kharijis to wrought havoc with their
families and properties. This was so because the Kharijis had absolutely
no reservation against looting and plunders and they considered all
Muslims as apostates and thought that it was permissible to shed their
blood. So the companions suggested to the Imam that they first attack
and finish off the Kharijis and only after that proceed against
Muawiyah. Imam accepted their suggestion and marched with them till they
came to Nahrawan. When they reached in the neighborhood to Kharijis they
sent a message to them to hand over to them the killers of Khabbab and
his wife. In the same way they asked first for the surrender of the
murderers of Harth bin Musa and then ordered them to join the battle
against Muawiyah. Only after that would their problems be solved.

They replied to the Imam: “There is no option between us except to fight
it out; except that you confess you infidelity and do repentance like
us.”

Imam was highly affected by this and he said, “Shall I bear witness
against myself that I am an infidel after my faith in Allah, and after
Jihad with Allah’s Messenger? If I do, then I have gone astray and I am
not among the rightly guided…”**[2]**

Sometimes Imam gave them advice and sometimes he conveyed information
till many of them came out and returned to Kufa and many joined the
Imam’s forces. The third group separated for battle under the leadership
of the Khariji chief, Abdullah bin Wahab Rasibi who had the mark of
prostration on his forehead. They comprised in all three thousand
soldiers.

When the Imam was hopeless of guiding them or taking them back to the
way of the truth, he mobilized his troops and commanded them not to
start fighting until they begin. When the Kharijites saw that readiness,
they got ready too. As their souls and hearts were full of yearning for
fighting as the thirsty yearned for water, they called each other: “Is
there anyone who wants to go to Paradise?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/141-142, Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/81-82  
**[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/143-144

They all responded to that and strongly attacked Imam Ali’s troops,
saying: “No judgment except Allah’s!” The Imam’s horsemen formed two
parties. One party went to the right wing and the other to the left. As
for the Kharijites, they were rushing between the two parties. The
Imam’s companions received them with arrows. It was only an hour and
they all were killed. None escaped death except nine persons.**[1]**

When the battle came to an end, the Imam asked his companions to look
for Dhu al-Thadya**[2]** among the killed. They carefully looked for him
but they did not find him. They returned to Imam Ali (‘a) and told him
that they had not found the man. He asked them to look for him, saying:
“I have never lied nor have I been accused of lying. May Allah have
mercy on you! Look for the man! He is among the killed!”

They went and looked for him. One of the Imam’s companions found him,
and he hurried to the Imam and told him about it. The Imam said: “Allah
is great! I have not fabricated a lie against Muhammad! He (Dhu
al-Thadya) has a defective hand that has no bone. At the end of it there
is a nipple like that of a woman’s breast and there are five or seven
strands of hair on it whose ends are crooked.”

The Imam ordered the corpse of Dhu al-Thidiya to be brought. It was
brought before him. He looked at his arm and found it pointed like a
breast of a woman and there were black strands of hair on it. When the
Imam saw that, he prostrated himself before Allah. Then he divided among
his companions the Kharijites’ weapons and animals. He returned the
equipment and the servants to their owners.

...in the same way as he had done with the people of Jamal.

The battle of Nahrawan which was the result of the battle of Siffeen
ended in this way. It left behind powerful effects in foundation that
became apparent in the world of Islam. Like the army of Hururiya that
specialized in rebellion against the government and spreading terror and
corruption in the lands. This caused untold disasters in the country and
mired the people in dissensions and bloodshed.

The most remarkable trait of the Khariji religious denomination was
ascribing infidelity to every Muslim who did not ascribe to their dogma.
They considered it lawful to shed their blood and plunder their
properties.

And in my view most of the terrible cruelties that occurred in the
battle of Kerbala are connected to these transmogrified people as all
human qualities had gone away from them because most of the people of
that army were influenced by these qualities and created the most
horrible circumstances.

After effects of the Battle
---------------------------

These battles left behind the most terrible and severe consequences and
hardships. Not only the Imam was involved in it but the whole of Islamic
community was surrounded by them. Because they brought an everlasting
mischief to the world of Islam and created difficulties that were to
endure forever. Some of them were as follows:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Milal wan Nihal* 1/107  
**[2]** Like a breast nipple (Tr.)

Muawiyah’s victory
------------------

It accorded opportunity to Muawiyah, the governor of Syria to become the
first of the governors to proclaim himself as the caliph. He has
described his victory over the Imam in the following words: “After
Siffeen I fought Ali without an army and without much difficulty and
planning.”**[1]**

As for the Imam, he was sidelined from political and military power for
even though he tried to mobilize forces people refused to pay heed.

These battles dragged the Islamic caliphate towards tyrannical rulership
because not the slightest resemblance to Islamic politics or logic of
Quran was seen in it. Because the job of rulership had reached to
Muawiyah who considered the wealth of Allah as his personal property and
made servants of Allah (people) as his slaves. And he compelled Muslims
to that which they did not like.

Dissipation of Imam’s army
--------------------------

All the military powers in the army of the Imam scattered. Discord and
dissension spread among them especially after the battle of Nahrawan
because the spirit of fighting had died in them.

Balazari says: “Muawiyah sent Ammarah bin Uqbah to Kufa to spy on the
position of the Imam’s army. He wrote to Muawiyah that companions of the
Imam and their pious ones were displeased with Ali. They have abandoned
him to his fate. On the basis of this commanders and people of the
country are destroyed for him. Enmity has developed among them and they
are badly divided.”

Muawiyah smiled and said to Walid bin Uqbah, “Do you consent to your
brother becoming our spy?” Walid said to his brother Ammarah:

**“If you think correctly O son of my mother! Ammarah will not rise up
to revenge for the blood.**

**He resides in an area surrounded by the revenge seeking sons of Affan
and he walks between the hare and the bridge.**

**You walk in contentment and power as if you have not any knowledge of
the commander of Ibn Amr.”[2]**

Imam’s forces were involved in mischief and corruption and the Imam
inspite of his oratorical powers was unable to bring them to senses and
destroy rebellion and disobedience that had become a part of their
nature.

Among the factors that gave rise to rebellion among the Imam’s troops
was that Muawiyah wrote to a group of prominent Iraqi commanders like
Ashath bin Qais and he promised them wealth and money and also promised
that he would provide them with huge wealth and posts if they could
perform destructive activities in the Imam’s troops. They accepted his
offer and by themselves they spread false  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/156  
**[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/157

rumors and misguided the public opinion and disseminated the spirit of
dissension and controversies among the people**[1]** in such a way that
their propaganda had a profound effect on the troops and they became
rebellious and disobedient to the Imam.

The absolute majority in the cantonment of the Imam was aspiring to
obtain huge wealth and properties through their leadership (the caliph)
and aimed to get as much benefit as possible while the Syrians were
exactly opposed to this.

Hajjaj bin Khazine says to Muawiyah, “You have become strong with
something other than with which Ali was strengthened. Because with us is
a group that if you speak they shall remain silent. And if you command
them they shall not question you while with Ali are such people that if
he speaks they also start talking and if he is silent, they begin to
question him.”**[2]**

Conquest of Egypt
-----------------

Hardships and troubles of the Imam did not end at an appointed time,
rather problem continued to occur without any respite and that also in
the most severe manner. His Eminence had yet not become free from the
battle against the Mariqeen when he became involved in the internal
problems of the country. Because Muawiyah seized control of some
provinces and on the other provinces he launched attacks and spread awe
and terror among the people. Because he had became certain of the
weakness and laxity of Imam’s troops and their involvement in discords
and dissensions. Therefore he decided to take over Egypt which was the
heartland of Arabian lands. Muawiyah made it a morsel for his vizier and
the maker of his kingdom, Amr Aas, so that he may utilize its income and
wealth for himself.

Imam (a.s) had selected the great leader, Qais bin Saad Ansari, for the
governorship of Egypt. He was a prominent personality of Islam and
followed good policies, had a deep contemplation and farsightedness and
in the days of hardship he administered Egypt with truth and justice and
he solved the internal problems and spread friendship and kindness among
them. Imam dismissed him and in his stead appointed the purified man,
Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr.

The condition of Egypt became serious and Uthmani claimants appeared in
the land. The Imam dismissed Muhammad and appointed in his place Malik
Ashtar Nakhai who was the most sober person with regard to the Imam and
most serious of them. However he had just reached Qulzum when he passed
away.

Historians are unanimous that Muawiyah deceived the tax collector of
Qulzum. He fed poisoned honey to Malik and killed him as Muawiyah and
his companion Amr Aas after that have remarked and said, “Allah has
soldiers of honey.”

Muawiyah prepared an army for taking over Egypt and gave it under the
command  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/157  
**[2]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 155

of Ibn Aas. When Imam (a.s) understood this matter he retained Muhammad
on the governorship of Egypt and promised to send him more troops and
monetary help and he called the people of Kufa to go to Egypt for
helping their brothers. But they did not accept the Imam’s advice. Imam
(a.s) insisted upon them and sought their help but except for some
soldiers no one accepted his call, as if he were sending them to death.

Imam (a.s) sent them towards Egypt but not much time passed when His
Eminence received the news that Amr Aas has taken over Egypt and the
Imam’s representative, that is Muhammad, had been killed by him and his
corpse was burnt to ashes.

Imam (a.s) recalled the troops and delivered a sensational sermon to the
people of Kufa denouncing them for their sloth and laziness in obeying
his commands.

Anyway the takeover of Egypt increased the power of Muawiyah and it
motivated him to wage an attack on the Iraqis in their own land.

Attacks
-------

Muawiyah was not satisfied with his conquest of Egypt, rather be began
to spread awe and terror in the cities that were under Imam’s control so
that people in those areas may know that Ali (a.s) had lost all power
and he was no more able to defend them and prevent harm from them.

Muawiyah began to form battalions and appointed them to move forward in
the interiors of provinces and spread mischief and bloodshed. Along with
this he also sent out some people well-known for their malicious nature
and bereft of every human quality as commanders of those battalions
against partisans of Ali (‘a). They conducted swift raids and attacks on
some special provinces which we shall describe as follows:

Attack on Iraq
--------------

Muawiyah sent four military units to attack Iraq and the neighboring
provinces and areas. So that the hearts of Iraqis are filled with fear
and terror and thus whenever the Imam calls them for Jihad they should
not accept. Some Iraqi provinces that were attacked are as follows:

1-Ainut Tamr: Muawiyah dispatched Noman bin Bashir Ansari at the head of
1000 strong battalion to Ainut Tamr where Malik Kaab was the governor.
He also had an army of 1000 but he had no information about the attack
of Syrian. He had permitted his soldiers family leave and they had all
gone to Kufa except for a hundred soldiers who remained with him. When
Muawiyah’s army attacked he displayed valor in defending himself and
fifty men rushed to his assistance. When Noman saw them he was shocked
and fled from there because he thought that other people would follow.

When the news of this attack reached the Imam he stood up among his
soldiers and delivered a sermon to them and called them to help him.
Then he said:

“O people of Kufa! Whenever a group approaches you or some riders come
to you, each of you lock up your house and like cockroaches enter your
holes to rest. Like birds take shelter in their nests. By Allah,
degraded is the one that you helped. Everyone who is pleased with you
with a broken bow without an arrow he attacks with it and you remain
satisfied with him. Thus evil and helplessness may be upon you that you
were called and spoken to but neither you met with clear conscience nor
were helpers in battle. I have become deaf to you that I cannot hear,
and dumb such that I don’t think and blind such that I do not
see.”**[1]**

2- Haiyyat – Muawiyah sent Sufyan Ibn Auf with 600 troops to attack
Haiyyat and told him that after he has attacked Haiyyat he should
proceed to Anbar and Madayan and inflict plunder and torture on the
people there. Sufyan departed with his troops to Haiyyat but he did not
find anyone there. Then he proceeded to Anbar and there he found a
military cantonment of the Imam consisting of 200 persons. He attacked
and fought them and killed Ashras bin Hisaan Bakri along with his 30
companions. Then they plundered the city of Anbar and returned happily
with the loot to Muawiyah.

News of Anbar reached to His Eminence, Ali (a.s) who was highly affected
and very much shocked by this tragedy. Since he was indisposed he did
not deliver any speech therefore he wrote a letter that may be read out
to the public of that area. In the condition that His Eminence was there
near to that place so that he may listen to its reading. The text of the
letter is as follows:

“So to say: Know that! Jihad is a door from the doors of Paradise and
one who leaves it carelessly shall be dressed in the garments of
disgrace and calamities shall surround him and he shall become
humiliated. He shall fall from his position and he shall be far from
justice and equity. I have called you for day and night, openly and
secretly for jihad against the people so that you go after them before
they attack you, because no people were attacked in their homes but that
they were humiliated. You pointed fingers at each other and showed
laziness and my suggestion was very difficult for you. And you disobeyed
my commands and disregarded my suggestions. So much so that attacks came
on you from all sides. It is a pity that their riders entered Anbar and
killed Ibn Hisaan Bakri, confiscated armory and killed righteous people.
I have received information that a Syrian entered a house of a Muslim or
a protected non-Muslim and snatched away her anklet, bracelets and
necklace. Alas, the heart is dying and it is sorrowful and grief flames
up that there people are putting such efforts in their falsehood while
you all are so much lazy even though you are on the right. Then how bad
and humiliating is the condition in which you are involved. And you are
the target of every archer. They attacked you by the night and you do
not launch any attack. Disobedience of Allah continues and you agree to
it. If I tell you to attack your enemies in summer you say who would
fight in such hot climate, give us respite till the end of summer. And
if I tell you to fight them in winter you say…summer, winter all  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In *Tarikh Tabari* Pg. 133-134: “And neither a reliable
brother.”

there are your lame excuses. From summer and winter? When by Allah, you
are afraid of fighting. O men look-alikes! O those who think like
children and those who ponder like women in bridal chamber! Alas, if I
only had never seen you. If only Allah had taken me away from you. As
you have filled my breast with anger and you forced me to drink goblets
of false accusations. By your disobedience you have destroyed my
opinion. So much so that Quraish say: the son of Abu Talib is valiant
but has no military knowledge. May Allah forgive their ancestors. Is
there anyone among them more firm in fighting than me?**[1]** I started
fighting since the age of twenty and now I have passed sixty. As for the
one who is not obeyed, he has no venue.”**[2]**

These statements indicate the deep anger and severe despair from his
companions that their hearts were full of fear of Syrians and
degradation and they had accepted humility and they sat inside their
homes in terror till the Imam had to spend the rest of his days in
extreme difficulties.

3- Waqsa: Muawiyah sent Zahhak bin Qais Fahri to Waqsa to attack the
Shias of Imam in that area and he gave 3000 men under his command.

Zahhak set out and plundered the wealth of people and whosoever he
suspected of being obedient to the Imam he used to kill him. He
continued his movement till he reached Qutqutana taking with himself
fear and death. Then he moved and ended his mission at Samawa. Then he
returned to Syria.

When these reports reached to the Imam (a.s) he stood among his troops
and delivered a sermon and he called them to confront this oppression,
however no one responded to his call. Then His Eminence said: “By Allah,
I would prefer to have one Syrian instead of ten of you and to have used
you like a goldsmith (with careful deliberation). I would like to face
them with perception. May Almighty Allah give us patience to bear
hardships and to behave nicely with you.”

After that the Imam moved to Ghariyyin alone so that he may confront
that oppression. Abdullah Ibn Ja’far joined him with a horse. His
Eminence climbed upon it.

When people saw this condition some of them hurried to His Eminence. His
Eminence (a.s) sent Hujr bin Adi with 400 men to fight Zahhak so that he
may proceed to find him but could not get them and they returned.**[3]**

Attacks of Muawiyah continued on Iraq in this way without having to face
any kind opposition. Muawiyah had become confident of victory as a
result of the sloth of the Imam’s companions.

Attack on Hijaz and Yemen
-------------------------

Muawiyah dispatched Busr bin Artat with 3000 men to Hijaz and Yemen.
They moved towards Yathrib but did not meet any resistance from the
people. Busr went upto the pulpit and in a loud voice lamented the
murder of Uthman and put awe  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** According to a narration he was not even twenty years old at
that time.  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/201-202  
**[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/197-198

and fear in the hearts of the people.

He took the allegiance from the people of Yathrib for Muawiyah. Then he
moved to Yemen where Ubaidullah Ibn Abbas was the governor appointed by
the Imam. Ubaidullah fled from there and came to Kufa.

Imam (a.s) appointed in his place, Ubaidullah Harithi but Busr killed
him and also put his son to the sword and he went to two children of
Ubaidullah and slew them. When the news of their death reached their
mother, she was devastated in their sorrow recited some well-known
couplets.**[1]**

Muawiyah’s rule was established on the foundation of killing of innocent
people and beheading of children and spreading of terror and fear in the
towns.

When this terrible news reached to the Imam, his strength gave way, his
heart burst with grief and he stood among the troops and delivered a
sermon. He spoke to them about the hardships and calamities that had
befallen him through their hands.

“I have received information that Busr has taken over Yemen. By Allah, I
think it is due to their union in falsehood and due to your disunity in
your rightfulness and your disobedience of your Imam in rightfulness and
their obedience and their trusts with their leaders and your breach of
trust and their peacefulness in their lands and your mischief that these
people shall obtain the kingdom. Because if I keep up with you as trust,
I fear that their group shall take it away. O Allah, I am disgusted of
them and they are disgusted of me. I am tired of them and they are tired
of me. Thus give me someone better than them and give them someone worse
than me. O Allah, Destroy their hearts like salt dissolves in water. O
Allah, I prefer to have one thousand cavalries from the family of bin
Ghanam.”**[2]**

“They are such that whenever you call them they come to you like rain
after a long summer.”

After that he descended the pulpit**[3]** while he was in sorrow and
grief and became helpless of his companions. And they were such that
their organs were slothful and their feelings empty of sensation and
perception was also lost to them.

These were some of the attacks that Muawiyah wrought on Iraq and other
areas of Islamic lands that were under the control of the Imam. They
aimed at weakening and shaking the faith of the people in those areas
from the capability of the Imam from their support in confronting
oppression and it was to display the military power of Muawiyah and to
strengthen the morale of the soldiers and his army that was spread in
the lands.

Anyway, these attacks exposed a great part of weakness and rebellion in
the Imam’s troops till Muawiyah began to consider a general attack on
Iraq to conquer it and destroy Imam’s rule. And it was clear that if he
had done so he would have  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/383-385  
**[2]** An Arab tribe famous for its valor and dynamism.  
**[3]** Muhammad Abduh, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/63-66

found it easy. And he would not have had to face any sort of difficulty
or resistance because those people had become used to a comfortable life
and were fed up of fighting.

Chaos and Disorder of Khawarij
------------------------------

Terrible hardships descended on the Holy Imam one after the other
because attacks on Muawiyah created havoc in Iraq and other areas and
fear and terror filled the hearts of citizens. The Imam was not able to
defend the security and save the people from oppression as his troops
refused to obey him and they had announced their disobedience and
rebellion. His Eminence was in no way able to exercise his will upon
them.

Among those hardships was the mischief of Khawarij because His Eminence
had not completely destroyed them at Nahrawan. Rather he had only
annihilated a group of them, however the majority of them remained and
they lived along with His Eminence and were awaiting for an opportunity
to attack him. They also incited the people to shun His Eminence as they
considered themselves safe from his power and were sure that he would
not be able to punish them.

They were greedy for his justice and his soft heartedness had deceived
them. On the basis of this they used to criticize His Eminence and
object to him. One of them interrupted the sermon of the His Eminence
and recited the verse of Quran:

**“Surely if you associate (with Allah), your work would certainly come
to naught and you would certainly be of the losers.”[1]**

Imam (‘a) replied with another verse of Quran:

**“Therefore be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true and let not
those who have no certainty hold you in light estimation.”[2]**

Kharit bin Rashid Saami came to the Imam (‘a) with 30 persons and said,
“O Ali, by Allah, I shall not obey you, I shall not pray in your
leadership and tomorrow I shall go away from you.”

Imam (‘a) dealt with him in a kind manner and spoke to him with logic
and reasoning and left him on his condition. He did not cast him in
prison, rather he left the way open for him and that man went to his
tribe (Bani Naajiya) and he informed them of what had occurred between
him and the Imam. After that in the night he came out to fight the Imam.
Numerous disasters in the attack of Kharit and his rebellion came into
being and historians have recorded them in detail.

Anyway a great responsibility in most of the terrible events that
occurred in the Islamic world was on the Khawarij because they had
dragged the future of the community to destruction in the most important
of its historic periods. While the victory of Imam (‘a) had become
certain and the defeat and death of Muawiyah was imminent and just a few
moments away when Malik Ashtar and troops of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Zumar 39:65  
 **[2]** Surah Rum 30:60

Imam (‘a) were about to storm his tent, those Khawarij in the Imam’s
army forced the Imam (‘a) to accept arbitration, thus destroying a
victory that was very near.

Supplication of the Imam (‘a) for himself
-----------------------------------------

Imam (‘a) was surrounded by terrible waves and frightful events because
he saw that the falsehood of Muawiyah had become strong and his position
has reached its end. And he saw himself in Kufa in such a way that Arab
wolves who disliked his justice and were displeased of his equity had
surrounded him from all sides and they were trying to prevent the
fulfillment of his aspirations from the roots, some people were seeking
power and some rebelled.

The important problem that made the Imam sleepless was the
disintegration of his troops and their mutual aloofness had afflicted
each of them. His Eminence was helpless even though he was having
authority over them. He was aware what their future shall be and in what
they shall be involved after him; therefore he told them,

“Indeed! After me you shall fall into humiliation and sharp swords and
class competition that oppressors shall consider as a practice for you.
They shall disperse your unity and make you weep and fill your houses
with poverty. Very soon you shall wish you had seen me and helped. You
will know that what I am telling you is truth. The Almighty Allah shall
not leave unpunished those who have wrought injustice or committed
criminal acts…”**[1]**

Advice and good counsel of His Eminence did not have any effect on those
people because they had gone much ahead in misguidance and their beliefs
of ignorance age came back to them.

Imam became disgusted with them and he wished that he is distanced from
their life and in his numerous sermons he used to say: When would the
most evil of Ummah be sent? He continued to supplicate and with a
sincere heart he became attached to the realm of the Lord as he got
comfort from Him.

Balazari has narrated from Abu Salih that he said, “I saw Ali holding
the Quran on his head, so much so, that I could hear the rustling of its
pages while he was saying:**[2]**

“O Allah, I ask them for the sake of whatever is in the Quran but they
prevented it from me. O Allah, I have become disgusted with them and
they are fed up with me. They have resorted to such behavior with regard
to me that had not been seen. Thus give me that which is better than
them and give them someone who is worse than me and destroy their hearts
like salt dissolves…”

The Almighty Allah accepted the supplications of His great devotee and
after a brief period transferred him to the sanctified abode in the
company of prophets and truthful ones and gave him salvation from a
society that did not prefer justice and was disgusted of equity while He
imposed the worst characters on them. They tried  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/155  
**[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/156

to oppress and humiliate them and they considered the innocent as guilty
and unjustly penalized those who were not guilty of any sin. They used
to kill them only on the basis of false allegations. It was the time
when the people woke up and realized what wrong they had committed with
regard to the Imam and they saw their shortcomings, disobedience and
lack of support and assistance to His Eminence and they regretted their
past deeds and stance.

These were some of the after effects of those battles as a result of
which the Imam was involved in so many hardships and bore terrible
calamities that not His Eminence alone but the world of Islam was
completely involved in them because great difficulties and problems
befell the Muslims and they were drowned in a great mischief.

Imam Husain (‘a) was present in all these terrible disasters that befell
his eminent father and he knew the facts behind them and it had become
clear to His Eminence how much they were averse to his father because he
was sincere in his religion and he wanted to invite the people to the
path of truth and justice and lead them on such a way so that no
oppressed or deprived person remains in any of the Islamic provinces.

In any case, these battles actively affected the creation of the tragedy
of Kerbala. That tragedy did not occur except that after it the morals
shattered and religious and social views were destroyed and opportunism
and social disintegration became common because the wealth gathering of
Quraish began to control the affairs of society and in all places
created corruption and it destroyed the foundations of morals that Islam
had established and it was worse of their steps and also their spreading
of enmity and malice towards Ahle Bayt (‘a), who were the source of view
and understanding of this community. Till finally they openly cut into
pieces their bodies in the desert of Kerbala and together slew them in
such a terrible manner as has no equal in the history of humanity.

Demise of the Rightful Government
---------------------------------

Neither in the history of western lands nor in any other place was seen
a ruler like Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) in justice and purity and one who
preferred the truth because His Eminence according to unanimity of
historians was never inclined to his sentiments and never obeyed any
selfish desires. Rather in a clear way and a perfect manner he followed
in the practice of the Messenger of Allah (s). And therefore he always
acted with absolute seriousness and perfect sincerity towards the
Muslims. During his rule he tried his best to elevate the standard of
Islam and establish the principles that served to remove every type of
discrimination and injustice from among the Muslims.

The most important problem that he addressed was to establish the
government funds for spending only on those ways sanctioned by religion
and he did not utilize even a single penny in any other way. He never
compelled them and if he had bribed the consciousness of people like how
Muawiyah did, profit seekers in the

army of His Eminence, like Ashath bin Qais and other military chiefs who
were embezzlers and mercenaries would not have objected to him.

His Eminence exercised extreme precaution with regard to public funds.
He made great efforts in this regard and bore many hardships on this way
so that economic justice may be established among the people.

Abdullah bin Razeem says: I came to His Eminence on the Eid of
sacrifice. His Eminence brought Harira dish for us.**[1]** I asked him,
“May Allah have mercy on you, why have you not brought something for us
from these delicacies? Because Allah has created so many good things.”
His Eminence replied, “O son of Razeem, I heard the Messenger of Allah
(s) say: Nothing is allowed from the wealth of Allah for any caliph
except two vessels; one for himself and his family another for
presenting to other people.”**[2]**

All those who had surrendered to selfish desires and sensualities
criticized the policies of His Eminence and made every kind of effort to
bring down his government and set up a regime that shall be beneficial
to their political and economic interests.

It is established that Imam (‘a) knew how to attract the obedience of
people and how to spread his influence and power on those who criticized
him. But such a thing would have been possible only when he had divided
his religion into parts and had followed the way of deceit and fraud and
had become like other power hungry and greedy rulers. It is natural that
deviation from the truth and betrayal of the interests of the community
was not acceptable to His Eminence, Ali (‘a) and his high values
rejected it because neither power deceived him nor the crowding of
people around him increased his honor or their dispersing away from him,
as he has himself said, increased his loneliness.

Imam (‘a) had true faith in religion and considered it necessary that
faith should dominate the hearts of the people and their thinking and it
should not be that any effect of selfish interests and inadvisable hopes
should exist in them. Such a kind of sincere faith was created for some
of the persons who were his closest confidants like Hujr bin Adi, Malik
Ashtar, Adi bin Hatim and Mitham Tammar and others like them. Those who
had gained from his guidance. Those who recited the Quran and considered
it indisputable and who performed the obligatory duties with care, who
enlivened the Sunnah and eliminated innovations just as His Eminence has
himself described that most elders of his army and community were not
able to understand his aims and aspirations and did not recognize his
high values in his brilliant policies that guaranteed the rights of the
oppressed and recipients of injustice.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Flour mixed with milk or oil  
**[2]** Shamsuddin Abul Barakaat, *Jawahirul Matalib dar Manaqib Imam
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)* 1/283, facsimile copy at Amirul Momineen
Library

Imam (‘a) observed extreme precaution in his policies and on the model
of the policies of the Messenger of Allah (s) he formed his religious
and moral values. Therefore he spread truth with all its meanings and in
no way allowed dominance of opportunity. He did not allow any power to
the wealth collectors of Quraish who considered all people rebels.

Powers deviated from the path of truth came to confront the Imam and
flamed the fire of war and stopped the movement of the Imam in
establishment of justice and they created hurdles and obstacles in this
path. The Imam became sad and sorrow remained in his place while some
opportunist wolves attacked him. Among those terrible disasters that
befell the Imam the most important was internal sorrow and the Khawarij
were inciting it. They lived with him and displayed open enmity towards
him and spread mischief and dissension and were waiting for an
opportunity to attack him.

Conference of Mecca
-------------------

Some Khawarij groups went to Mecca and held a meeting there to
investigate the deaths of their partisans in Nahrawan. They discussed
the terrible events current in the Muslim community and the dissension
and discord that had spread in Muslim society. In their view all this
was related to three persons: Imam Ali (‘a), Muawiyah and Amr Aas. After
exchange of views they decided to assassinate them and in order to put
this plan into effect they summoned the following people:

Abdur Rahman bin Muljim was appointed to assassinate Imam Ali (‘a).

Hajjaj bin Abdullah Sareemi took up the job of killing Muawiyah.

Amr bin Tamimi accepted the duty of eliminating Amr Aas.

They unanimously decided that the assassinations shall be carried out on
the 18<sup>th</sup> night of the month of Ramadan at the time when those
three persons come out for the Morning Prayer. They stayed in Mecca for
the month and performed Umrah in the month of Rajab. After that they set
out to accomplish their respective tasks.

Valueless Opinion
-----------------

Among the useless views that have come into some books is the opinion of
Dr. Badi Shareef that blames the assassination of His Eminence, Ali (‘a)
on the Iranians!**[1]**

Was the Doctor aware of the lineage of Ibn Muljim that he was an
Iranian? He was but a member of Murad tribe of Arabs that resided at
Kufa.

Dr. Noori Jafari has remarked as follows about his views, “Who knows it
might be the inclination of Iranians towards His Eminence, Ali (‘a) that
these writers became inimical to them and heaped unjustified allegations
on them.”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *As Saraa Bainal Mawali wal Arab*  
**[2]** *As Saraa Bainal Mawali* and *Mabadi al-Arab*

The Umayyad Plot
----------------

Historians have mentioned this important event observing great
precaution and they have not fully exposed the reality and what we
believe to be the fact and reality is that it was not the conspiracy of
the Khawarij alone. Rather the Umayyad Party had a significant role in
it. The following points support our views:

1 – Abul Aswad Duali in a part of his poetical composition lamenting for
Imam (‘a) has put the responsibility of the Imam (‘a) on Bani Umayyah:

**“Tell Muawiyah bin Harb that may the eyes of those who rejoice at the
misfortune of others not be pleased.**

**Did you not make us sorrowful by eliminating the best of people in the
month of fasting?**

**You have killed the one who was the best of those who rode on
quadrupeds and sailed on boats.”[1]**

These couplets mean that it was Muawiyah himself who had aggrieved the
Muslims by the martyrdom of Imam, who was the best of the people and he
Muawiyah was responsible for the Imam’s murder. It is natural that Abu
Aswad did not relate this crime to Muawiyah without having become
certain of this matter because he was very careful in whatever he said.

2 – Qadi Noman Misri who is an ancient historian has mentioned that
Muawiyah himself sent Ibn Muljim for assassinating the Imam. He says: It
is said that he (Muawiyah) secretly appointed him (Ibn Muljim) for this
purpose (to eliminate the Imam) and he promised him a special
reward…”**[2]**

3 – Among those factors that show the participation of the Umayyad party
in this conspiracy is that Ashath bin Qais was backing Ibn Muljim and he
was with him at the time of attack and told him, “Save yourself as the
morning shall expose you.” When Hujr bin Adi heard this he cried to him,
“O one-eyed man! You killed him!” Ashath was the most powerful element
of the supporters of Umayyads and it is this same person who forced the
Imam (‘a) to accept arbitration and just a few days before the Imam’s
martyrdom he had threatened to kill the Imam. Also he was a spy of
Muawiyah in Kufa.

The conspiracy, according to historians, was carried out in extremely
secret and concealed manner. Then what was the reason that Ashath should
know about it and he should support him and what if there wasn’t an
external support for Ibn Muljim?

4 – The conference of the Khawarij was held in Mecca during the Hajj
season. Mecca was without any doubt, full of agents of the Umayyad party
who had shifted to Mecca in order to create enmity and opposition to the
Imam’s government. Most  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/395  
**[2]** *Al-Manaqib wal Mathalib*, Qadi Noman Misri, facsimile copy at
Imam Hakim Library

probably they introduced (pointed out) the Khawarij who were the most
inimical people with regard to the Holy Imam (‘a) and they gave complete
support to them especially that they take steps to eliminate the Imam.
That which supports this view is that the Khawarij stayed in Mecca after
the conclusion of the Hajj season till the month of Rajab and after
performing Umrah started on their plot and probably during this period
they continued to be in contact with the Umayyad party and other groups
opposed to the Imam’s government.

5 – That which gives certainty to that the Umayyad party had a special
role in this, was that Ibn Muljim was a teacher of Quran**[1]** and he
received stipend from the Public Treasury and he had no personal wealth.
Then how could he purchase a sword for a thousand units of currency and
the poison for another thousand with which he attacked the Imam? In
addition to the money he gave to Quttam as dower which consisted of
three thousand units of currency, a slave and a slave girl?

All these things indicate that Ibn Muljim had received monetary help
from the Umayyads for assassinating the Imam.

6 – Another point that lends more support to the theory that Ibn Muljim
was on the payroll of Umayyads is that he had an obvious connection with
Amr Aas and for a long time had been his supporter because when Amr Aas
conquered Egypt, Ibn Muljim was with him and had a place of respect near
him. So much so that he ordered him to stay near him.**[2]** It is also
likely that he informed Amr Aas of his agreement with two helpers in the
plot of killing him (Amr Aas), the Imam and Muawiyah. Therefore Amr Aas
did not come out for the prayer himself. He sent a substitute and was
saved. It was not accidental; it was as a result of the plot which had
the backing of Amr Aas.

These were some factors on the basis of which it seems that the Umayyad
party had a definite role in planning the Imam’s assassination and its
execution.

Imam’s Assassination
--------------------

The month of Ramadan, that is the month of the revelation of Quran
arrived for the Muslims and Imam (‘a) was certain that he shall be
transferred to the eternal abode during this great month. That is why he
used to break his fasts with barley bread and a piece of salt. On the
basis of what historians say he never had more that three morsels. His
Eminence used to spend the nights of this month in worship. When the
18<sup>th</sup> night arrived, the Imam perceived the shattering
calamity that was to befall him and he looked sorrowful and aggrieved.
The stars were seen to be trembling and their shivering light fell on
the earth; as if they were throwing a forlorn light on the face of the
earth. At that time he said, “Neither have I lied nor been lied to. This
is the night that I have been promised.”

The Imam (‘a) remained awake the whole night reminiscing about his Jihad
and his great efforts in the path of Islam and his attachment and
longing to meet his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Lisanul Mizan*: 3/440  
**[2]** *Lisanul Mizan*: 3/440

cousin, the Messenger of Allah (s) increased so much that he complained
to His Eminence about the hardships he had suffered at the hands of the
Ummah.

Imam (‘a) concentrated all his thoughts and feelings for the Almighty
Allah. Dawn had not yet broken upon the dark night when the Imam arose,
performed a fresh ablution and prepared to leave the house. The pet
geese in the courtyard came out before him and cackled loudly as they
had the premonition of the impending tragedy that was to strike the
lands of Arabs and Muslims.

The Holy Imam (‘a) understood from their unrest that a calamity was
about to befall: “There is no might and strength except by Allah. These
are the petitioners that reciters of dirges shall be following
them.”**[1]**

The Imam set out for the house of God (mosque) and as per his habit
awoke people for worship of the Lord. After that he stood up to pray.
When he bent to prostrate for the Almighty and recite words of divine
praise that filthy sinner, Abdur Rahman Ibn Muljim, attacked him
shouting the slogan of Khawarij: “The rule is for God and not for you.”
And he hit the Imam’s forehead with the sword. The blessed forehead
which excessively prostrated on the earth for the Lord, split. The
strike sliced the Imam’s head till his holy brain. The brain which
except for the well being of the people and gathering justice for them
had not been occupied with anything else.

When the Imam (‘a) felt the sword, a smile appeared on his lips and his
voice echoed in the vicinity of the mosque: “By the Lord of the Kaaba, I
have succeeded.”

O Amiral Momineen (‘a)! You were the first successful one and the
greatest one to gain benefit from the pleasure of the Almighty Allah.
You remained with the truth from your youth and in your religion you had
no hypocrisy and you did not give preference to the pleasure of anyone
to that of the Almighty Allah’s. You performed Jihad and fought to exalt
the word of God in the earth. With his soul and being, he put his life
at stake for the Messenger of Allah (s) and supported him.

You became successful and principles of your belief succeeded and you
alone established the illuminated custom and you bestowed illumination
to the sky of the world and fed the generations with the essence of
truth and justice.

When the news of attack on the Imam spread, people rushed to the Masjid
and found His Eminence lying in the Mihrab uttering the remembrance of
Allah and he had lost a lot of blood. They carried him to his residence
while they were all weeping bitterly and in extreme grief. They were
lamenting:

**The Imam of truth and justice is martyred.**

**The father of the weak and poor is martyred.**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muruj az-Zahab* Pg. 413

Ladies of the house of His Eminence rushed forward to receive him
lamenting; His Eminence told them to be patient.

Imam Hasan (‘a) was deep in weeping. The Imam glanced at him and said:
“My son, do not weep, for you shall be martyred by poison and your
brother would be martyred by the sword.”

Imam’s prophecy proved true and not many years passed when Muawiyah had
Imam Hasan (‘a) assassinated through poison, splitting up his liver. And
swords and spears cut up into pieces the body of His Eminence, Imam
Husain (‘a) and his parts of his holy body were strewn in the desert of
Kerbala.

Historians say: Imam Husain (‘a) was not present in Kufa at the time of
the attack on Imam (‘a). He was at the cantonment of Nakhila commanding
a battalion from the army that was being prepared to fight against
Muawiyah. Imam Hasan (‘a) sent a messenger to him and informed him what
had happened to their father. His Eminence returned to Kufa while he was
deep in sorrow and he found his father on the verge of death. Then he
threw himself upon him while tears flowed on his countenance and he
kissed his blessed father.

The great Imam made a bequest to his sons to follow lofty morals and
human values and told them not to kill anyone except his murderer and
not to make his assassination an excuse to create mischief and bloodshed
among the Muslims like the Umayyads had done on the killing of their
leader, Uthman.

Towards the Eternal Abode
-------------------------

Imam (‘a) while reciting the verses of Quran was involved in the throes
of death. The last words that passed his lips was the saying of
Almighty:

**“For the like of this then let the workers work.”[1]**

At that moment his purified soul flew out and the angels of the
Beneficent Lord took it…The foundation of justice on the earth weakened
and the signs of religion became concealed from the eyes. That refuge
for the oppressed and the deprived, and the one who bore all hardships
to establish truth and justice in all the lands of his dominions passed
away.

The two grandsons of the Messenger of Allah (s) stood up to perform the
last rites of their beloved father. Gave bath to his holy corpse, put on
the shroud cloth and in the last hours of the night buried him at Najaf
al-Ashraf, his eternal abode.

Along with him was buried social justice and human values.

Historians say: When the news of Imam’s martyrdom reached Muawiyah, he
was overjoyed and announced the day of the Imam’s martyrdom as a feast
in Damascus. Because his aspirations had been fulfilled and now the
possibility had developed for him that he could make his kingdom a means
for killing the Muslims and to take them to slavery and force them to
that which they did not like.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Saffat 37:61

Effects of the Imam’s Government
--------------------------------

The Imam’s government left many influences on the Islamic society.
Probably the most important of them are as follows:

1 – He manifested Islamic reality with all its powers in the world of
politics and rulership, because in his government the Imam wanted to
remove social inequalities that had appeared among the people and
promote unity among them in spite of the communal and religious
differences. So that all the groups are dealt with justice and equity.
And no group should be accorded any preference. This policy of His
Eminence made him very popular among the people. His Eminence, Ali (‘a)
on the basis of establishment of justice and equality, remained in that
same way in the hearts of the masses. People of noble inclinations
became his supporters and they looked upon him as the greatest social
reformer on the earth and considered him as the most prominent well
known person of his time. Ayman bin Khareem Asadi addresses the Bani
Hashim and especially says about the Imam:

**“Shall we consider others equal to you, while between you and them is
selfish desire.**

**They are ground for your feet and you are the sky for their heads and
eyes.”[1]**

2 – Principles and illuminated views of the Imam continued behind the
Umayyads and were also present in their own palaces and they looked at
these principles with trepidation which used to challenge their power in
such a way that Muawiyah ordered that the Imam should be abused from the
pulpits so that his respect is reduced and that they may incite the
people to disregard and forget his lofty status and position.

3 – The great social justice which the Imam’s government had taken up as
its slogan was the main factor that caused hardships and calamities for
his descendants. They were subjected to all sorts of atrocities,
tortures and killings at the hands of the tyrant rulers as the Prophet
had prophesied about it. Abu Ja’far Iskafi has narrated that the Holy
Prophet (s) came to Her Eminence, Fatima and found Ali sleeping. Her
Eminence, Fatima wanted to wake him up but the Holy Prophet (s) said,
“Leave him as he shall remain too sleepless after me and my Ahle Bayt
would suffer untold hardships due to him.”**[2]**

Fatima (‘a) began to weep. His Eminence told her, “Do not weep, as he
shall be with me in the lofty position near me.”

Umayyad and Abbasid regimes endeavored too much to oppress the Imam’s
descendants because they were attentive to the rights of the oppressed
and the afflicted and they had taken as their slogan the lofty
principles that Amirul Momineen (‘a) had taken as his slogan and
struggled to establish it during his lifetime. The Imam’s son, who was
the most prominent and hardest effort maker in this regard was His
Eminence, Husain (‘a) who set out for Jihad ready for  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Aghani* 1/21  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/107

martyrdom and despaired of life so that he may help the principles of
his grandfather and father and to exalt the standard of Islam and defend
its honor and bring down the flags of polytheism and apostasy and to
untie the knots of slavery and servitude.

Imam (‘a) during his short tenure of rulership had an original view to
confront with injustice and oppression because his great companions like
Hujr bin Adi, Amr bin Hamaq Khuzai, Abdullah bin Afif Azadi and others
like them who were brought up in the school of thought of the Imam stood
up against the Umayyad regime and by one uprising after another
destroyed their arrogance and oppression and they made them worried.

The Imam’s government was the school of confrontation and revolution and
a school for creating a religious view and social understanding.

Here we conclude our discussion about the important after effects of the
Imam’s government.
