Caliphate of His Eminence, Hasan (‘a)
=====================================

Imam Hasan (‘a) took the reins of Islamic caliphate in his hands after
his father. His Eminence took over the leadership of the community in
such a way that mischiefs had created a serious trouble in it. Battles
and groupism had created discord in their army and no public department
remained immune from the attack of the Umayyads because the general
views of the people and nobles had inclined to consider Muawiyah to be
of higher rank and before the Imam’s martyrdom as well as after it, they
maintained close contact with Muawiyah and played a significant role in
dispersing the Imam’s troops at the time of the defeat of the army of
Muawiyah.

Anyway, Imam Hasan (‘a) after taking over the caliphate prepared for war
and issued orders that a public meeting should be arranged in Kufa
Mosque and the armed forces and other people attended the meet. Imam
Hasan (‘a) delivered an eloquent and effective sermon. He spoke of
creating unity and gathering of forces and warned them of the propaganda
of the Umayyad regime that was aimed to disunite the people. He called
the people to join the forces to fight against Muawiyah.

When the people heard these words they were terrified and their tongues
became dumb. None of them responded except the great warrior, Adi bin
Hatim, who stood up and announced his complete support to the Imam and
he denounced the stance of the Kufians devoid of their support towards
the Imam which would lead to their imminent defeat. It became clear to
the Imam and other people that the army was not prepared for war because
they had given up obedience and they had stepped in the field of
rebellion.

According to Shaykh Mufeed after the efforts of certain sincere
supporters of the Imam some people were mobilized to go forward in
battle. Most of them comprised of Khawarij, doubters and greedy
elements. These elements did not have any regard for the Imam’s aim
because they had made embezzlement and disloyalty as their habit.

Narrators say: Imam (‘a) appointed Ubaidullah Ibn Abbas as the
commander-in-chief of his forces. Muawiyah had killed two of his sons so
that it may make him sincere due to this. However when he faced
Muawiyah’s forces Muawiyah threw the rope of deceit towards him and
promised him 1000000 Dirhams, half of which would be payable upfront and
the balance after he had crossed over to him.**[1]**

Ubaidullah’s mouth watered and he gave a positive reply to Muawiyah. He
deviated from the truth and joined the forces of oppression and
injustice while he had 8000 soldiers with him.**[2]** He did not pay any
heed to humiliation and embezzlement. He completely disregarded the
terrible harm he had brought for the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/27-29  
 **[2]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh*, 25/214

troops of his cousin as a result of which all the unity and stability of
the troops was destroyed.

The breach of trust was not limited to Ubaidullah. Other commanders of
the Imam’s troops also defected to Muawiyah. And they left the Imam
crushed in disunited troops and they left him in sorrow and pain.

The Imam’s hardships and problems were not restricted to the defection
of his commanders because the Imam’s problems increased further and
regiments of that army committed atrocious acts against the Holy Imam
(‘a) as follows:

1 – Cruelty to the Imam
-----------------------

The filthy character, Jarrah bin Sinan committed cruelty on the Imam and
with a spear wounded the Imam’s thigh. The Imam was terribly wounded and
he fell down and was taken for treatment.**[1]**

Another person, during the prayers, attacked the Imam with a
sword.**[2]** Yet another man shot an arrow at the Imam though it caused
him no harm. Imam**[3]** became certain that the Kufians were bent on
killing and assassinating His Eminence.

2 – Associating Infidelity with Imam Hasan (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------

That army was also sick in its faith and religion in such a way that
they alleged the grandson of the Prophet and his darling to have become
infidel and left the religion. Thus Jarrah bin Sinan stood up in front
of His Eminence and cried, “O Hasan! You have committed polytheism like
your father did…!”**[4]**

This was the view of most of the Khawarij and they inculcated this same
view among the troops.

3 – The Great Breach of Trust
-----------------------------

The great breach of trust that the commanders of the army committed was
that they wrote to Muawiyah and guaranteed to him that whenever he liked
they would hand over the Imam to him as a prisoner or assassinate
him.**[5]** And this matter made the Imam very cautious that it may not
be that he is taken a prisoner and handed over to Muawiyah and then
Muawiyah does a favor to him by giving him amnesty. And this matter of
Bani Umayyah doing favor to the family of the Prophet may be established
as His Eminence has said regarding this in his statements after the
treaty.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 2-12  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/106  
 **[3]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/106-107  
 **[4]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/105  
 **[5]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/203

4 – Plundering Sources and Capital of Imam Hasan (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------------

The debased persons from among the people of Kufa busied in plundering
the sources and necessities of life of the Holy Imam (‘a) and they
pulled away the carpet from under him just as they had snatched away the
cloak of His Eminence.**[1]**

These were some of the terrible blows dealt by that army which had taken
up breach of trust as its profession.

Treaty
------

In front of these dark mischiefs the Imam assumed a stance of
farsightedness along with knowledge and observed that depths had been
illuminated by wisdom because the Imam understood that there were two
options before him, first to begin war against Muawiyah or to make peace
with him.

1) He could have initiated war against Muawiyah while the Imam knew that
Muawiyah would indeed be victorious. Or that he himself, his companions
and members of his Ahle Bayt who were representations of Islamic values
should be eliminated and by their martyrdom Islam would have been
deprived of its leaders and missionaries without any advantage accruing
to the religion because Muawiyah had with all his capability given this
responsibility to the Imam in a very diplomatic way that he should
choose either of the two options and he had put a thousand veils on the
sacrifices of His Eminence. Or that His Eminence should have become a
prisoner of Muawiyah and would have had to bear the favor of Muawiyah
which would have become the cause of Bani Umayyah gloating at it.

2) The next option to make peace with Muawiyah and for the sake of Islam
defend its warriors and missionaries and by his treaty expose the true
face of Muawiyah and tear away the thick veil that he had cast on his
evil deeds. The Imam chose this second option inspite of the fact that
there was a thorn in his eye and a bone stuck in his throat.**[2]**

Historians say: His Eminence gathered his troops and presented them the
options of war or peace. Shouts arose from all sides: “We shall remain
where we are.”

They accepted humiliation and were pleased with degradation and deviated
from the path of truth. Imam had become certain that they had lost all
senses and perception and he was not capable to force them for his
obedience and war. On the basis of this he had to accept the treaty with
bitterness and displeasure.

That treaty was a bitter and unbearable one that the religious law
considered it obligatory and intellect knew that it was necessary and
the social conditions which were full of political problems were
demanding it because if he had initiated a war his troops would have
indeed been defeated and the community as a result of this would have
been involved in untold calamities and there would have been no limit to
it.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh*, 2/214  
 **[2]** *Hayatul Islam* 1/123

We have discussed in detail the circumstances of treaty, its terms,
causes and the useless talks of the critics in our book, *Life of Imam
Hasan (‘a).*

Reaction of Imam Husain (‘a)
----------------------------

What is confirmed is that Imam Husain (‘a) was in principle in agreement
with his brother in opting for the treaty and it was with his advice
because the conditions were such that necessitated armistice and there
was no other option. However there exist fabricated traditions that go
against what we have stated. And it is that Imam Husain (‘a) was
displeased with the treaty and wanted to oppose it but his brother
restrained him and said: I shall put you in a house and seal it with
plaster till the treaty is complete. His Eminence, Husain (‘a) saw that
loyalty demanded that he should obey his brother and not oppose him. On
the basis of this he supported him in this matter. We have completely
refuted and disproved this theory supported by proofs in our book, *Life
of Imam Hasan (‘a).*

Adi bin Hatim
-------------

When the treaty was concluded Adi bin Hatim along with Ubadah bin Umar
hurried to Imam Husain (‘a) while his heart was burning in fury and he
called the Imam to begin the battle and said, “O Aba Abdillah, have you
exchanged honor for humiliation and accepted the minority and closed our
eyes from the majority? Today you listen to us and then oppose us
forever! Leave Hasan to what he thinks about peace treaty and mobilize
your Shias and people of Kufa. I and my companions have taken it as our
priority that the son of Hind shall not come of his own accord but that
we shall strike his head with our swords.”

His Eminence, Husain (‘a) said: “We have accepted it and we have made
oath and covenant and there is no way we could break the
pledges.”**[1]**

If Imam Husain (‘a) had any option to dominate the events he would have
opted to fight and confronted Muawiyah in the battle but all the options
were closed for him and his brother and he saw that there was no way for
them except to make peace.

Transformation of Caliphate
---------------------------

The Islamic caliphate underwent a change from its real function and
characteristics that its maker had intended in a tyrannical and despotic
rulership that not a shadow of justice existed in it and it had no
resemblance to truth.

Despots from the Umayyad regimes were imposed on the community and began
humiliating and suppressing them, plundering their wealth and forcing
them to slavery. One of the writers says: “The end of a caliphate which
was on the right path and its transfer to Bani Umayyah bore important
consequences: The Umayyad clan became victorious over the Bani Hashim.
Its meaning is that the nobles of Quraish, the rich people and traders
became victorious over the people of principles and values.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 220

The victory of Muawiyah brought defeat to all efforts to prevent the
evil of the wealth hoarders of Quraish. It was the defeat of Hilful
Fuzool.**[1]** A defeat for values and principles and victory for deceit
and political intrigue from the previous ones and the wealth hoarders.
This defeat left a terrible effect on Islam and Muslim generations.”

And also Nicholson says, “Muslims considered the victory of Bani Umayyah
under the leadership of Muawiyah to be the great victory of the
idol-worshippers who had been inimical to the Prophet and his companions
and fought against Allah’s Messenger (s) till the Prophet exiled them.
Till the time the Muslims, along with the Prophet fought in Jihad and
confronted them with patience till the Almighty Allah rewarded them with
victory and the foundation of Islam was laid on their shriveled faces.
That easy religion which understood both the happiness and unhappiness
of the people. And the joy of the group that considered poor people as
degraded, humiliated the deprived and plundered wealth, was destroyed.

In any case after the treaty the Islamic world was involved in a great
disaster and from the world of comfort, security and stability it was
changed into a world full of injustice and oppression because the
Umayyads after coming to power very fast began to commit tyranny and
suppress the Muslims and forced them to that which they did not like.

The Kufians also more than others, bore many hardships and terrible
calamities because the administration of the ruler made them severely
accountable for their support to the Imam in the battle of Siffeen and
their cruel ones like Mughairah bin Shobah and Ziyad bin Abih were
selected for these functions. They initiated a terrible punishment that
continued on the people without any respite. It was a time when Kufians
due to their misfortune that they had got as a result of their not
obeying and supporting Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) and his son Imam Hasan
(‘a). And their sending delegations and writing letters to His Eminence,
Husain (‘a) to insist him to come and save them from the cruelty of the
Umayyads and emancipate them. But it is astonishing that when the Imam
responded to them positively their swords were drawn upon His Eminence
and they cut up his body and those of his children in the desert of
Kerbala.

Here comes to an end our chapter on the Demise of the Rightful
Government.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is an oath that: Hashim, Zohra and Teema came to Abdullah bin
Juda’n and pledged to defend oppression and oppressor and to remain with
the truth (Tr.)
