Muawiyah’s Rule
===============

After the peace pact the Muslims welcomed Muawiyah’s rulership with
terror and fear because they were aware of the reality of his affair and
were cognizant of his way of thinking and his beliefs and faith. On the
basis of this they feared him for their religion, life and property and
that which they had dreaded happened. Thus no sooner did he gain power
over the provinces that he began to spread injustice, oppression and
mischief in all lands.

Historians say: He adopted such a policy for Muslims that before this
they had not known it because the sign of his policy was death and
destruction. As if it were an axe of destruction for all human and moral
values while in his time the idol worship was revived though all the
people were hateful of it.

Sayyid Amir Ali says: “With the rise of Muawiyah the oligarchic rule of
the heathen times displaced the democratic rule of Islam. Paganism, with
all its attendant depravity, revived, and vice and immorality followed
everywhere in the wake of Umayyad governors and the Syrian soldiery.
Hijaz and Iraq groaned under the usurper’s rule; but his hold on the
throat of Islam was too strong to be shaken off with impunity. The
wealth which he pitilessly extracted from his subjects, he lavished on
his mercenaries, who in return helped him to repress all
murmurings…”**[1]**

What is confirmed and proved is that the people did not willingly
support Muawiyah in his policies. Their support was obtained forcibly
from them on the point of sword. Muawiyah has himself confessed to this
matter and in his statement to multitudes of crowds he has said: “By
Allah! I have not achieved rulership for the sake of love you have for
me, or that you are happy for my rule. Rather I have fought you with the
sword. If you have seen that I have not strengthened all of your
congregation, then accept less from us…”

After the treaty when the community came to him like a morsel he
delivered an acerbic speech at Nakhila and spoke of his tyranny and
force on the people and lack of any regard for the rights of people. He
clearly declared, “By Allah, I did not fight you to make you pray, fast
and perform the hajj or pay Zakat. You already perform these duties. But
I fought you so that I may rule over you and the Almighty Allah has
given this to me while you were not desirous of it.”**[2]**

This speech indicates the mischievous aspects of Muawiyah because he on
the basis of rulership and power indulged in bloodshed of Muslims and
spread sorrow and grief in their houses.

We are compelled to investigate the political progress of Muawiyah’s
regime and the great disasters which were contemporary to his period
because according to our belief these were the factors that led to the
rising of His Eminence, Imam Husain  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ruhul Islam*, Pg. 296  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/262, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 16/46

(‘a) from that aspect that His Eminence witnessed the deprivation and
problems of the Muslims in which they were involved and deviation and
helplessness from social defects of Umayyad regime; therefore His
Eminence (‘a) began his great revolution after the death of Muawiyah. It
was a revolution aimed at social awakening and as a result uprooted the
Umayyad rule and destroyed all its signs indications. Some of Muawiyah’s
political stances were as follows:

Muawiyah’s Fiscal Policy
------------------------

Muawiyah in no way observed any policy that could be termed as a policy
to solve economic or monetary problems. It was solely aimed at acquiring
wealth for himself and hoarding it under his control and spending it
according to his desires and inclinations in such a way that he gave his
great wealth to those who were his partisans while he deprived his
opponents from even the ordinary share to which they were legally
entitled. He used to seize properties and impose unjustified taxes.

Muawiyah’s regime had absolutely no sign of Islamic economics policy
which was aimed at solving economic problems in the best way because
Islamic fiscal policy was encouraged for increasing personal income and
fighting unemployment and poverty and it considered the government
wealth as the property of people which should be utilized for
development and progress of the society. While Muawiyah spread poverty
and needfulness among the majority of the people and confined the
hoarding of wealth for a minority who were connected to the regime. Some
of the special features of his fiscal policy were as follows:

Economic Deprivation
--------------------

Muawiyah imposed an oppressive economic policy in provinces that were
opposed to his regime. He spread helplessness and needfulness in those
provinces so that the people there may not be able to rise up in his
opposition. Some of the provinces that were subjected to oppressive
fiscal policies were as follows:

1) Yathrib
----------

Muawiyah initiated the weakening of Yathrib and he did not spend
anything on the people of this province because it was an area inhabited
with persons opposed to his regime and many of the personalities who
were critics of the Umayyads or who were aspirants for power and
rulership resided therein.

Historians say: He compelled them to sell off their properties and he
purchased them at a meager price. He sent his tax collectors to tax
their profits but they refused and came to their governor, Uthman bin
Muhammad and said: “All this money belongs to us. Muawiyah in their
profits has acted with discrimination. He did not give us a single
dirham or more than that till we fell to hard times and hunger has
befallen us. At that time he bought over our properties at one-hundredth
the value.” The governor of Medina replied in an acerbic and a nasty
tone.

The respected companion, Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari went to Muawiyah but
he in order to humiliate him did not accord permission to meet him.
Jabir returned from there. At that time Muawiyah sent 600 dirhams for
Jabir but Jabir returned them

and he wrote to him:

“I select contentment over wealth when the two of them come together.
Just as I select the cool drinking water. Whenever I become needless I
shall consider myself the ruler while there are many who are ruled but
themselves are never rulers.

I shall wear the dress of modesty while I see the position of wealth and
would not dishonor my respect for it.”

And he told Muawiyah’s messenger: “Tell him that by Allah, O son of
Hind, the liver-eater, you shall not find any good thing in your scroll
of deeds as I shall be the cause of it.”

Poverty spread into the homes of Ansar and they were involved in such
bad circumstances that none of them were able to even purchase a camel
to utilize it for their needs. When Muawiyah was going to Hajj some of
the Ansar went to meet him while most of them were on foot. He said:
“What has prevented you from welcoming me in the usual way of welcome.”

Saeed bin Ubadah said, “Lack of mounts, poverty, hard times and your
favoritism to others have prevented us.”

Muawiyah said in a mocking way, “Why do you not use the camels of
Medina?”

Saeed replied in such a sharp logic that it pierced like an arrow, “We
slaughtered them on the day of Badr, the day we killed (your brother)
Hanzalah bin Abu Sufyan.”**[1]**

Muawiyah’s policy was aimed that hunger should spread in Medina and
people should be deprived from gifts and endowments. Abdullah bin Zubair
wrote to Yazid in his letter: “By my life what you hold in your hand
from our rights, you do not give a small part of it and you deny a great
part of it…”

Muawiyah ordered the central government authority in Medina to increase
the price of essential commodities so that hunger and deprivation
increases. Yazid has mentioned this in his letter to the people of
Medina and promised them good behavior if they submitted to his
rulership. In that letter he says: “They have my covenant that I shall
fix the price of wheat same as the wheat in our possession and the
allowances that they claim were stopped during Muawiyah’s time shall be
restored to them.”**[2]**

Muawiyah appointed as governors of Hijaz sometimes Marwan bin Hakam and
sometimes Saeed bin Aas. He dismissed one and appointed the other. Both
of them went all the way to subject the populace of Medina to poverty
and humiliation.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf*, Vol. 1, Part 2/73  
 **[2]** *Al Imamah was Siyasah* 1/177

2. Iraq
-------

Muawiyah subjected Iraq to the worst of punishment because it was the
original center of opposition and it was the only province discontented
with his regime. Mughairah bin Shobah, the governor of Kufa, cancelled
the allowances of Kufians from the public treasury. Umayyad ruler who
succeeded Muawiyah also continued this policy of injustice and
oppression of Iraq and depriving the people. So much so that even the
most just of them, Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz did not observe equity with
regard to parity between the allowance of Syrians and Iraqis. He gave a
raise of 10 dinars for the former but no raise was allowed for
Iraqis.**[1]**

During the Umayyad rule different kinds of tribulations befell the
Iraqis, such that the Iraqis began to organize continuous armed
uprisings against the Umayyads regime.

3. Egypt
--------

Egypt was involved in more economic suppression because Muawiyah wrote
to his agent there: “Give a raise of one Qeeraat to each of the Copts.”
But his representative objected to this and said: “How can I give them
any raise while it was decided that they would not be given any
raise?”**[2]**

Economic hardships also spread to other Islamic lands so that people may
remain involved in their own problems and thus may not be able to put up
any sort of opposition to the despotic regimes.

Prosperity in Syria
-------------------

While the Islamic lands were involved in hardship and deprivation, we
see that Syria was living in perfect comfort and the prices of essential
commodities there were the lowest because they were loyal to the Umayyad
clan and were always trying for stability for their regime, therefore
luxury was made widespread there. That which supports this assertion is
the letter of Yazid from which we had quoted previously.

The Syrians also were given preference over other people. Thus Malik bin
Hubaira in his conversation with Haseen bin Numaira has indicated this
and he says: “Hurry up so that we may give allegiance to this young man
(Khalid bin Yazid) because we have brought his father to power and he is
our cousin. You know our position with his father that how he had given
us a position among the Arab multitudes.”**[3]**

Muawiyah Employed wealth for strengthening his rule
---------------------------------------------------

Muawiyah used the central treasury for lending stability to his
rulership and power and employed it as a weapon to make himself capable
of leadership of community and the chieftainship of the kingdom.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Iqdul Farid* 6/220  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.)* 1/302  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/535-536

Sayyid Amir Ali says: “The wealth which he pitilessly extracted from his
subjects, he lavished on his mercenaries, who in return helped him to
repress all murmurings.”**[1]**

This policy was a new thing for the Muslims that none of the caliphs
before that had even considered. The Umayyad caliphs after that also
continued the same policy of using wealth as a means of strengthening
their power.

Dr. Muhammad Mustafa says, “Of the elements of the Umayyad policy was
the use of wealth as a weapon for intimidation as well as for winning
loyalties because a group of people was deprived and he lavished too
much on other groups so that it may be a price for their conscience and
should be a guarantee for their silence.”**[2]**

Shokri Faisal considers wealth as one of the two basic factors before
which the Islamic society humbled in a strange manner. It was among all
the factors of political mischief and the dominance of the ruling class
from Quraish and also one of the factors for creating dissensions
between the Arabs and non-Arabs and even among the Arabs
themselves.**[3]**

Muawiyah’s great bestowals to his clansmen
------------------------------------------

Muawiyah made huge bestowals of wealth to his clansmen and put them in
charge of exceeding wealth**[4]** so that it may strengthen their
position and spread their dominance in the Islamic world while he spread
needfulness and deprivation in most other groups of the community.

Amr Aas sanctioned the Tax of Egypt
-----------------------------------

Muawiyah sanctioned all the tax collected from Egypt to Amr Aas and made
it a morsel (luxury) for him as long as he (Amr) lived. This was
recompense to Amr Aas for helping Muawiyah against Amirul Momineen (‘a)
the standard bearer of truth and justice on the earth. We have already
mentioned the details of those events in the forgone pages.

Largesse upon the supporters
----------------------------

Muawiyah made huge bestowals to his own supporters and those who were
inimical to Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) and in this he resorted to
unjustified expenditure. Narrators say: “Yazid bin Munabba came to
Muawiyah from Basra and complained about his indebtedness. Muawiyah
ordered that 30000 be issued to him from the Public Treasury. When he
took the amount and was leaving, Muawiyah said: Give him another 30000
for his role in the Battle of Jamal.**[5]**

Muawiyah gifted this large amount to him for his and his brothers’ role
in the battle of Jamal in helping the rebels who were plundering the
Public Treasury. In  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ruhul Islam*, Pg. 296  
 **[2]** *Ittijahaatul Shi’r Al-Arabi*, Pg. 27  
 **[3]** Shukri Faisal, *Al-Mujtima-aatul Islamiya fi Qarnil Awwal*, Pg.
50  
 **[4]** *Al-Fakhri*, Pg. 104-105  
 **[5]** *Al-Iqdul Farid* 2/68

this way Muawiyah helped and rewarded the opponents of the Imam. History
has recorded numerous examples of this kind.

Purchase of Faith
-----------------

Muawiyah had opened a new chapter in his economic policy and it was the
buying up of people’s faith, trust and consciences because delegations
of Arab nobles came to him and he gave each of them a hundred thousand
but gave 70000 to Hinat, the uncle of Farazdaq. When Hinat realized this
he became infuriated. He came back to Muawiyah and said, “You have
humiliated me in the eyes of Bani Tamim. My origin and genealogy is
correct. Am I not of old age? Am I not being obeyed among my people?”

“You are.”

“Then why you gave me less than my people? And gave more to those who
opposed you than those who supported you?”

Muawiyah sat in a shameless manner, “I have purchased their faiths and
left you on your religion.”

“Purchase my religion also.”

Muawiyah ordered that the remaining cost may be paid to him.**[1]**

This harmful matter clearly shows the way those people had
transmogrified and how they had sold their consciences for worldly
wealth.

Deficiency of Central Treasury
------------------------------

As a result of these wasteful expenditures in endowing largesse for
purchasing people’s consciences and religion a serious shortage
developed in the Central Treasury and the government was not able to
even pay the rightful shares of the workers. Muawiyah was compelled to
write to Amr Aas and ask for his help from tax of Egypt that he had
given to him. Muawiyah’s letter said, “So to say: Petitioners from Hijaz
and visitors from Iraq have increased and I have nothing in excess after
paying the military. So help me from the collections of Egypt…”

Amr Aas did not accept his request and he raised objection to him and
reminded him of his favors on Muawiyah. He wrote the following couplets
to him:

**“O Muawiyah if you have become such a miser you should know that I
have not received Egypt in inheritance.**

**I have not obtained it free. It was a condition that I demanded and I
had to fight a severe battle for it.**

**If my collusion with Ashari hadn’t been there you would have had to
bear very hard times like the bleating of a hungry camel.”**

When Muawiyah read these couplets he was very much affected and after
that he never told anything to Amr Aas regarding the taxes of
Egypt.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/159-160, *Al-Kamil,* Ibne Athir
3/468  
 **[2]** *Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 222

Confiscating the properties of citizens
---------------------------------------

After his wasteful expenditure and excess Muawiyah was compelled to
confiscate unrightfully the properties of people to compensate shortages
in his royal treasury. He confiscated the inheritance left by Hinat,
Farazdaq’s uncle. Farazdaq objected to this action of Muawiyah and
denounced him in the following lines of poetry:

**“Your father and my uncle, O Muawiyah, left inheritance and
inheritance is given to a person’s surviving relatives.**

**Then why did you take over the property of Hinat while the inheritance
of Abu Sufyan is indeed your right.**

**If this had happened in the age of ignorance it would have been with
regard to those whose inheritors are few.**

**If in religion there is something else, you have usurped our share or
left only a little of it (like water that is left in the throat of the
person who drinks it).**

**Am I not the most respectful of the people in my class and family with
regard to the afflicted neighbors?**

**No one is born after the Prophet and his progeny like Hisaan who is
most proximate to them among the people.**

**My family is besides the Pleiades and the moon and the stars are less
in brilliance to it.**

**I am the son of a high mountain as the number of sand particles and
the root of the earth is my root. So who could be equal to it?**

**My ancestors are numerous, O Muawiyah! They are illuminated and the
wind guards around their raiments.**

**They were from the generations of kings and your family from Abde
Shams cannot be equal to them.”[1]**

The above couplets mean that the inheritance left by Sakhr, grandfather
of Muawiyah was transferred to his inheritors while the inheritance of
Farazdaq’s uncle was confiscated by Muawiyah. And if this had occurred
during the pre-Islamic age Muawiyah would not have been able to take it
because the family of Farazdaq was of the most prominent clans of Arabs.

Agricultural Income
-------------------

Muawiyah deprived the people from annual agricultural income to cover
his expenditure and in this matter he resorted to severe oppression and
force on the people. According to historians he extracted upto 10
million Dirhams and it became**[2]** such an obstacle that Muslims were
completely alien to it. But the succeeding caliphs also followed the
same practice after Muawiyah and they forced Muslims to pay such heavy
taxes.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ibne Athir* 3/468, *Diwan-i-Farazdaq,* 1/502-503  
 **[2]** *Tarikh Tamaddun Islami* 1, Part 2/276

Plunder carried out by governors and Agents
-------------------------------------------

Rulership in the period of Muawiyah became a source of plundering and
usurpation of wealth and a means for gathering wealth and
misappropriating property.

Anas bin Abi Unaas said to Haritha Ghadani, a supporter of Ziyad Ibn
Abih, when he became the governor of Surraq a province of Ahwaz:

**“O Haritha bin Badr, you have become associated with rulership. So
remain therein like a field mouse and indulge in breach of trust and
theft.**

**Enjoy with the Tamim in wealth as wealth is a tongue that man speaks
to it in awe.**

**O Haritha, a thing that you have obtained, do not consider it
valueless as your share in the two Iraqs is Surraq.”[1]**

Also Uqbah bin Hubaira Asadi has described the oppression of government
agents and their usurping of wealth in the following manner:

**“O Muawiyah, we are humans, deal with us as men, we are not mountains
and iron.**

**You have usurped our land and destroyed it. Does a tree or a trunk
remain intact in it?**

**I find myself in a community that is destroyed and Yazid and his
father rule over it.**

**Can we covet caliphate while we are already destroyed? Neither you nor
me shall remain alive.**

**From arrogance of caliphate and rulership free the oppressed and
slaves and come to the right path.**

**Observe equity among us before the troops abandon soldiery and pounce
upon you.”[2]**

Muslims bore different types of atrocities from the agents and tax
collectors because they were experts in plunder and thus they did not
find anything with anyone but that they used to somehow seize and
appropriate it.

Tax collection
--------------

Tax collection depended upon the whims and fancies of the collectors.
The agent Khana asked Amr Aas about the tax that was payable to him. Amr
Aas scolded him and said, “Even if you had paid me from the earth to the
sky I would not have told you the limit of your tax liability. You are
our treasurers. When our expenses increase we shall increase it on you
and when they reduce we shall reduce them on you…”**[3]**

These oppressive steps destroyed all the rules of justice and equality
that Islam had brought.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ash-Shi’r wal Shu’ara*, Pg. 494-495  
 **[2]** *Khazaanatul Adab*, 2/260  
 **[3]** *Tarikh Tamaddun Islami* 2, Part 4/359

Hoarding of Gold and Silver
---------------------------

Muawiyah ordered Ziyad bin Abih to collect all the gold and silver for
him. Ziyad and his agents began to forcibly seize any quantity of gold
and silver that people had in their possession and dispatched it all to
Damascus.**[1]** This matter made life difficult for the people and
deprivation began to kill them.

Economic Progress Paralyzed
---------------------------

Economic progress became paralyzed in all the areas and agriculture and
trades declined and the public economy became involved in decadence as a
result of wasteful expenditure and excess of Muawiyah. In such a way
that Abdullah bin Hamam Saluli has announced this matter and he wrote
some couplets on this topic on a piece of paper threw it in the Mosque
complaining about the terrible oppression and horrible injustice that
Muawiyah and his agents were committing upon the people:

**“Tell Muawiyah the son of Sakhar, that the province of Sawad is
destroyed and no longer any Sawad remains.**

**I see our agents stone-hearted for ourselves because for the sake of
their personal benefits they have oppressed people.**

**Can you do something immediately and remove corruption from your
subjects?**

**And that you may dismiss those who are always following their selfish
desires and those who are destroying the cities due to their
foolishness.**

**As much you tell them to refrain from greed and covetousness as much
they shall persist in deviation.”[2]**

Through these couplets Saluli described the economic conditions and
domination of the rulers in oppressing the subjects. He has demanded the
government to dismiss such officials and change their behavior because
they indulged in destroying the provinces, sucking of people’s blood and
following their selfish desires.

Muawiyah’s Justification
------------------------

Muawiyah believed that the funds of Muslim community and central
treasury were his personal properties and that he could utilize them in
any way he liked; so much so that he says: “The earth is for the Lord
and I am His representative. So whatever is taken from the wealth of God
is my property and whatever I leave, it is allowed for me.”**[3]**

Such a logic was absolutely opposed to the spirit of Islam and its
viewpoint because Islam based the principles of economy on the
foundation that government funds belonged to the Muslim Community and
the government is duty bound to take care of the funds and endeavor to
increase them and the ruler or others had no  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.)* 1/301. *At-Tamaddun
al-Islami* 2, Part 4/359  
 **[2]** *Al-Islam wal Hizaaratul Arabiyya* 2/149-150  
 **[3]** *Life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.)* 1/301

right to play with the economy of the nation and spend from public
wealth according to their whims and desires because such an action would
spread poverty and unemployment and subject the country to economic
difficulties.

Islam considered poverty a social evil and an epidemic and it is
necessary to confront and remove such things in every way possible. The
head of the regime is not allowed to restrict anything from public
wealth. The viewpoint of Islam is thus. But Muawiyah (in an inarguable
manner) did not pay attention to this and he spent the wealth of Muslims
according to his personal whims and desires.

These were some examples of the fiscal policies of Muawiyah which were
bereft of the spirit of balance and which caused widespread poverty and
deprivation in the country.

Policy of disintegration and favoritism
---------------------------------------

Muawiyah based his policy on creating disunity among the Muslims and
their disintegration and made the spirit of disunity and enmity
predominant among them because he believed that the regime cannot gain
stability except through destroying the unity of the people and there
should be widespread mutual animosity among the members of the
community.

Aqqad says: Muawiyah had an excuse (intrigue) that he repeated and used
it fully and became dominant in it and before his enemies in his
kingdom, whether Muslims or non-Muslims he used it for them and it was
based on sowing dissension and creating conflicts in the ranks of
enemies and encouraging mutual enmity among them by putting doubts in
their mind regarding each other. Some of them were members of his own
clan and family…he could not bear to see two important persons united on
something and he used to sow enmity between them so that he could
overpower them.”**[1]**

Muawiyah disintegrated the Muslims and broke the relationship of Islamic
brotherhood that the Holy Prophet (s) had established and based his
society on.** **

Oppression of Non-Arabs
-----------------------

Muawiyah tried his utmost to oppress and humiliate people of non-Arab
origin. So much so that he wished to eliminate all of them completely.
Historians say: He summoned Asnaf bin Qais and Samrah bin Jundab and
told them: I see that the population of redskins has increased and that
could be a problem for us in the future and may precede us. As if I can
see them dictating to the Arabs on administration, therefore I have
decided to eliminate half of them and keep their other half under
surveillance. So that they may help in industry and keep the roads etc
in perfect condition.”

Asnaf and Samrah did not like this draconian step and they spoke very
kindly to him and dissuaded him from this plan.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muawiyah fil Mizaan,* Pg. 64  
 **[2]** *Al-Iqdul Farid* 3/413

Muawiyah established the practice of cruelty on slaves and the regimes
that succeeded him spread cruelty and deprivation inspite of the fact
that they used to participate in military affairs and other government
matters. The poet says regarding the oppressions done on these non-Arabs
as follows:

**“Whenever you see the Umayyads, Ibn Zubair or those Arab rulers,
convey the message to them.**

**That non-Arabs are writhing in hunger and battle and they complain to
the caliph.”**

A Khorasani person addressed Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz and requested him to
deal with them with justice. He says, “O Amiral Momineen, one thousand
non-Arab people are going to war without getting any allowance or
livelihood and like them the Zimmis (non-Muslims) who have become
Muslims and also pay tax.**[1]** This was at the time when Shobi, the
judge of Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz had become disgusted with the Mosque as he
abhorred the rubbish of his house because people of non-Arab origins
used to pray therein.**[2]** So much so that the non-Arabs were
compelled to make a separate Masjid for themselves and called it
Masjid-e-Mawali.**[3]** They used to pray in this mosque.**[4]** Khuda
Bakhsh is of the view that the factor that compelled them to recite
prayers in that mosque was that they saw the bigotry of the Arabs
against them and they did not permit them that to pray with them in the
same Masjid while Mawali (non-Arabs) behaved very kindly with Arabs and
used to invite them to the path of guidance and say: “We do not deny the
differences of the people and their precedence over others and we don’t
consider master and slave and the nobles and lower class people as
equal. Rather we say that the superiority of man is not on the basis of
their parentage or genealogy, it is due to their nobility, deeds and
morals and their valor. Thus anyone who does not have courage and valor
is not superior even if he may be from Bani Hashim because the honorable
is one whose deeds have given him honor and superior is one whose
bravery has bestowed them superiority.”**[5]**

Umayyads and those people having same views did not understand this
logic which is taken from the reality of Islam and its guidance. That
Islam had ordered the spreading of equality and justice among all people
without any discrimination between them on the basis of race.

Anyway, this policy of racial discrimination spread dissensions and
enmity among the Muslims and created discord in them. And also the
non-Arab Muslims become ready for every uprising against the Umayyad
regime in such a way that at last they were the active power that
destroyed the Umayyad rule and eliminated all their signs.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 6/559. *Al-Kamil* 5/51  
 **[2]** Ibne Sa’ad, *Tabaqat* 6/251  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, Events of year 254  
 **[4]** *Al-Hizaaratul Islamiyya* 1/43  
 **[5]** *Al-Iqdul Farid* 3/410

Tribal Prejudice
----------------

Along with the policy of groupism and creating dissensions that the
Umayyads resorted to, they also revived tribal prejudice. Among the
terrible examples of this painful confrontation was that the Umayyads
incited communal discord among the people and ensured their
non-interference in political matters. This has become known from
Arabian poetry so that people may keep away from the cruelty and
oppression that Muawiyah heaped on them.

Historians say: Muawiyah took new steps to revive the ancient tribal
enmity between Aws and Khazraj. In this way he wanted to devalue them
and that their respect in the Islamic and Arab world may be lost. Also
he created bigotry among the Yemenites towards the Egyptians so that he
may incite the fire of mischief among them and there should be no unity
between among them to speak up or to cause harm to his regime.

Muawiyah’s officials acted upon the destructive policies of Muawiyah.
For example Ziyad bin Abih used to make tribes fight each other and
enflame the fire of mischief among them so that they may remain involved
in it and may continue under his power. Falhauzen says: Ziyad knew how
to make tribes fight against each other and keep them under his power
and he incited them to work for him and he encouraged them in this
way…”**[1]**

Historical sources contain many examples of different types of tribal
battles that Muawiyah and his agents created and which spread enmity and
malice among Muslims and Islam. People were involved in great problems
due to them and all fruitful activities were made to serve Muawiyah’s
aims. He opposed the call of the Prophet (s) that had invited people to
brotherhood and mutual affection.

Policy of intimidation and violence
-----------------------------------

Muawiyah ruled the people with policy of intimidation and violence and
considered their destiny and value to be worthless. After the treaty he
announced that he had fought Muslims only to obtain rulership and power
and shed their blood and he completely disregarded all conditions he had
accepted from Imam Hasan (‘a) and declared that he would not fulfill any
of them. He openly expressed his arrogance and cruelty when he said, “We
are such an age that if we give respite to someone he would become
elevated and if we suppress anyone he shall fall into oblivion…”**[2]**

His agents and governors also acted upon this deceitful manner. Utbah
bin Abu Sufyan delivered a sermon in Egypt and said: “O you most
humiliated people! I have kept my nails for you so that the evil doers
among you may be reformed. And I wanted that you all should be reformed
if your corruption still remains on you. Then except for criticism of
government and denouncing it, you did not intend anything else. By
Allah, we shall break whips upon your backs. Thus if you could cure your
pain, what could be better than it? And if it is not so, the sword would
be  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *ad-Daulatul Arabiyyah*, Pg. 207  
 **[2]** *Nihayatul Arab* 6/7

after you. What wisdoms we had but your hearts did not understand them
and the advises that we gave were met with your closed ears. If you
continue in your disobedience, I am not miserly in punishing…”**[1]**

In another sermon to Egyptians he says, “O people of Egypt! You must not
be like a sharpened sword with which the Almighty Allah has slaughtered
one that was Uthman. Thus creating mischief and trampling the prophetic
practices and putting yourself in the terror of falsehood after having
attached yourself with truth. That by Allah I shall trample you in such
a way that after that no life shall remain in you till you forget even
what you know.”**[2]**

The sentences of his sermons indicate the level of his animosity to the
community and his complete disregard to all its values and aims.

In the same way one of those governors who had become deniers of truth
and justice was Khalid Qasri who gave a speech in Mecca and threatened
the society with destruction and annihilation and he said, “O people, it
is necessary for you to obey and move with the congregation and beware
of doubts, by Allah if anyone is brought to me who criticizes his
leader, I shall crucify him in the sanctuary (Ka’ba)…”**[3]**

This condition was found in all agents and governors of the Umayyad
regime.

Walid bin Yazid says:

**“Forget the memory of Sa’ad as we are more in number and wealth.**

**We are such that we became rulers of people by force and consider
punishing and humiliating them as lawful.**

**We take them towards degradation and humiliation and except for
misfortune have nothing else for them.”[4]**

These couplets show to what extent he considered the community as lowly.
Therefore he, along with rulers of his family, ruled people by force,
humiliated them and led them to the pit of destruction.

And also there is the statement of Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan who delivered
a sermon in Yathrib before the children of Emigrants and Helpers and he
said: “Know that, I solve the problems of this community only with the
sword so that you come to the path. You have remembered the first of the
Emigrants but you have not acted like them. You order us to observe fear
of Allah but you neglect your own selves. By Allah, if after this anyone
commands me piety, I shall kill him…”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mubarrad, *Tahzeebul Kamil* 1/17  
 **[2]** *Al-Iqdul Farid* 4/137  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 6/464  
 **[4]** *Life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.)* 1/307, *Ibne Athir*
5/282  
 **[5]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 45/391-392

This address indicates the transgression of that criminal because he had
no option remaining for solving the problems of the community except
bloodshed and spreading injustice and intimidation. However spreading of
justice, comfort and prosperity among the people was something that
neither he thought about nor other Umayyad rulers had in their
imagination.

Considering the poor people as despised
---------------------------------------

The Umayyad regime in all its periods, based its rule on wreaking
injustice on the poor and considering the weakened section of people to
be despised. Historians say: Bani Umayyads permitted poor people to
enter government offices only after all the people had been dealt with.
Ziyad bin Abih asked Ajlan, the sentry of his court: “How do you behave
with the people?”

“First I accord preference by family status secondly by their elegance
and thirdly by their manners.”

“Whom do you admit last?”

“Those whom even God does not accord importance.”

“Who are those people?”

“Those who wear summer clothes in winter and warm clothes in
summer.”**[1]**

This policy destroyed the principles of justice and equality that Islam
had brought because is not supportive of any discrimination between
Muslims and it considers them equal like the teeth of a comb.

Policy of Deceit and Intrigue
-----------------------------

Muawiyah based his rulership on the foundations of deceit and intrigue
and in none of his political activities there was any shade of
rightfulness because a sleeping and stagnant conscience does not
understand truth and does not perceive reality. History has recorded
many examples of his intrigues and some of them are as follows:

1. When Muawiyah had the great leader, Malik Ashtar poisoned, he glanced
at the people of Syria and said, “Ali had sent Ashtar to Egypt, then
pray God to protect you from him.”

People of Syria imprecated Malik in every ritual prayer**[2]** and when
Muawiyah received the news of his passing away he informed the Syrians
that his death was due to their prayers because they belonged to the
party of God. After that he whispered to Amr Aas, “God has an army of
honey.”**[3]**

2. From the intrigue and frauds of Muawiyah was that when the Imam (‘a)
sent Jubair Bajali to him and called him to pay allegiance, Muawiyah
summoned Sharehbil Kandi who was the most prominent personality of Syria
and instructed a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nihayatul Arab* 6/86  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 6/76  
 **[3]** *Biharul Anwar* 3/591, with a little difference

group of confidants that each of them should separately meet Sharehbil
and remind him that Ali had killed Uthman. When Sharehbil arrived,
Muawiyah informed him about the arrival of Jubair and that he was asking
to pay allegiance to Ali but he had not paid him allegiance in order to
first know the view of Sharehbil because the Imam had killed Uthman.

Sharehbil asked for some time to consider the matter. When he came out
every person of that group met him separately and informed that Imam was
responsible for Uthman’s murder. Sharehbil did not doubt their
truthfulness and he hurried back to Muawiyah and said, “O Muawiyah,
where are the people? Indeed Ali has killed Uthman. By God, if you give
him allegiance, we shall throw you out of Syria and kill you.”**[1]**

Muawiyah told him in a deceitful manner, “I shall not oppose you. I am
nothing but a citizen of Syria…”

Through such frauds he established the foundations of his power and
based his kingdom on them.

3. Another kind of his fraud with the people of Syria was that he wrote
a letter to Qais bin Sa’ad, a leader of his time, and promised him
governorship of Iraq and governorship of Hijaz to any person from his
family who liked it if Qais supported him. Qais replied him negatively
in harsh words but Muawiyah told the people of Syria that Qais had given
him allegiance and told them to pray for Qais and forged a letter and
saying that Qais had sent it to him. After that he read it out for the
people of Syria as follows:

“So to say: Indeed the murder of Uthman was a terrible disaster in
Islam. And I have pondered on myself and my religion and saw that it is
not possible for us to back that community which has killed the
sanctified, righteous and pious Imam of Muslims. We seek Allah’s
forgiveness for our sins and that we have entered into a peace pact with
you and I would like to battle those who have killed the oppressed
guiding Imam. Thus let me know how much money and how many men you
require so that I may send them to you immediately…”**[2]**

In this undesirable manner Muawiyah deceived the people of Syria and
sent them to fight the successor of Muhammad and the gate of his
knowledge.

4. Deceit and fraud was one of the elements of Muawiyah’s nature and
character, and principles that shaped his policy in such a way that his
son, Yazid was surprised when people paid allegiance to him and praised
him and he told his father, “O chief of believers, we don’t know whether
we are deceiving the people or the people are deceiving us?”

Muawiyah replied, “You may deceive whomsoever you want. Show yourself to
be deceived by him till you obtain what you want. At that time you would
have  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/71-73  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 6/60-62

deceived them.”**[1]**

Muawiyah breathed with cunning and fed it to the people of his kingdom
till a generation came into being and these qualities became a part of
their nature.

Spread of opportunism
---------------------

Muawiyah’s regime took steps to spread opportunism and benefit-seeking
among the people while Islam has taught the importance of truth and
selflessness. While in the view of most people it was not having any
value. Among their qualities was their waywardness and unrestrained
character. Historians have narrated that: Yazid bin Shajrah Rahawi came
to Muawiyah and when he was listening to Muawiyah’s address, a stone hit
and injured him but he did not pay any attention to it and showed no
reaction. Muawiyah asked him, “What has happened to you?”

“What, O Amirul Momineen (‘a)?”

“Why are you bleeding in your face?”

“I was so engrossed in the address of chief of believer that I did not
notice anything else till the chief called my attention to it.”

Muawiyah was astounded and he said, “He has done injustice that has made
you of those having an allowance of one thousand and taken you out of
the row of the people of Siffeen.”

At that time he ordered that 500,000 Dirhams should be paid to him and
he increased his allowance by a thousand.**[2]**

This phenomenon was predominant in all the periods of Umayyad power.
Just as historians have stated that Ismail bin Yasar was a supporter of
Ibn Zubair but when the Merwanids emerged victorious over the clan of
Zubair, Ismail switched his loyalties and joined the party of Marwan.

One day he had gone to meet Walid and he made him wait for hours. When
he was given permission he entered weeping. Walid asked the reason for
his lamentation. He said, “You kept us waiting while I and mother have
joined the Merwanids.”

Walid excused himself but he continued to cry in that same way. Walid
comforted him. At that time Walid ordered that he be given a nice
present. When he came out a person who knew him followed him and asked
about his claim of loyalty to the Merwanids that since when had he
become a partisan of Merwanids?

He replied, “Our enmity to Merwanids is same as the enmity of our father
Yasar at the time of his death till he cursed Marwan bin Hakam to obtain
the proximity. And it is the same thing that encouraged his mother also
that in order to obtain Allah’s proximity, instead of reciting the
rosary (praising God) she used to curse the progeny of Marwan.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mubarrad, *Kamil* 1/305  
 **[2]** *At-Taaj fi Akhlaaqil Mulook*, Pg. 111-112  
 **[3]** *Al-Aghani* 4/410

Historians have recorded numerous examples of such frauds that were
common in that time and without any doubt it was the consequence of
Umayyad policies that they were raising their generations on selfishness
and deviation from the truth.

Insult and Unrestrained Behavior
--------------------------------

Muawiyah was famous for his insulting manners and unrestrained behavior.
Ibn Abil Hadid says: “During the time of Uthman, Muawiyah was well-known
for unrestrained nature and he committed every kind of infamy. He had
been careful to some degree during the time of Umar due to his fear but
he still used to wear silk and brocade and used gold and silver utensils
and he used to ride on saddles decorated with gold while he used to don
silk and brocade garments. At that time he was a young man having the
arrogance of youth and its effects and was intoxicated with power and
rulership. Books of biography say that he used to imbibe wine in Syria
during the period of Uthman…

In the same way he used to listen to songs and rock and swing and gave
rewards to singers and musicians. It was nothing wrong in his view. And
his son, Yazid also was affected by this and he was always intoxicated
with wine and he was absolutely unrestrained. All subsequent caliphs of
Bani Umayyah followed these manners.

Jahiz says: Yazid, that is Muawiyah’s son, never passed an evening
without intoxication and never started a day without a drink. Abdul
Malik bin Marwan drank (wine) once a month and he did not perceive
whether he was in the sky or in water… Walid bin Abdul Malik drank
alternate days and Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik drank once in three days.
Hisham drank every Friday eve. Yazid bin Walid and Walid bin Yazid were
always listening to songs and music and drinking wine. However Yazid bin
Walid was always in one of the two conditions. He was either ecstatic in
songs and music or intoxicated with alcohol. Marwan bin Muhammad drank
every Monday and Friday night.**[1]**

In the year 119 A.H. Hisham bin Abdul Malik appointed Walid as the Amir
of Hajj (leader). He carried dogs with him hidden in caskets. One of the
boxes containing a dog fell down…In the same way he carried domes in
order to renovate the Ka’ba and fixed them on the Ka’ba. He also brought
with him quantities of wine. He wanted to fix the dome on top of the
Ka’ba and to sit inside it. However his companions warned him and said,
“We shall not be able to save you and ourselves from the people.” So he
decided not to perform that antic.**[2]**

During the caliphate of Walid bin Yazid when Ali bin Abbas came to him
while he had brought Ibn Shuray from Kufa. And he told Walid without any
preface that, “By Allah, we have not been sent but to ask you about the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet…”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *At-Taaj fi Akhlaaqil Mulook*, Pg. 258-259  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 7/209-210

Ibn Shuray smiled and said, “If you asked me about them you would find
me ignorant.”

“I have been sent to you to ask you about Qahwa (wine). Tell me about
wine.”

“O Chief of believer, ask me whatever you like.”

“What do you say about water?”

“I don’t know. I am ignorant about it.”

In the same way he continued to ask him about different drinks till he
reached to wine: “What do you say about wine?”

“Ah! It is my life!”

“You, by Allah, are my life!”**[1]**

Walid sent message to his deputy in Kufa and instructed him to send all
shameless poets to him so that they may entertain him. This was at such
a time when people were taunting him for waywardness in all parts of his
kingdom. He wrote to his governor in Khorasan and asked him to send him
musical instruments. A poet contemporary to him ridiculed him as follows
in his composition.

**“O trustful one of God! Good news to you! Good news to you! Good news
to you! Those camels on which were loaded goods and commodities in
excess. Those asses of theirs on which wine is loaded and on which a
drum is affixed.**

**In this world it is all for you and in Paradise also you shall have
all comfort.”[2]**

Pleasure seeking and vain past times became dominant in the society and
the people surrendered themselves to transgression and sinful deeds
became their habit such that it is narrated that an old man was brought
to Hisham bin Abdul Malik while singing girls, wine and harp were in his
company. Hisham said, “Hit the drum on his head.” That old man began to
cry. A person from the audience said, “Be patient.” The old man said,
“Do you think I am crying because of the beating? I am weeping because
he has considered the harp so lowly that he is calling it
‘drum’”.**[3]**

The manners and customs of the Umayyads followed the manners and customs
of Muawiyah. Singing and music and every type of unrestrained behavior
had spread in all areas so that the foundation of the community may be
destroyed and their religious and social views may become distorted.

Spread of Unrestrained behavior in Mecca and Medina
---------------------------------------------------

Muawiyah intentionally spread profanity and unrestrained behavior in the
two holy places so that their sanctity may be destroyed and their
honorable position in society and in the hearts of the people may be
eliminated.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nihayatul Arab* 4/93, *Iqdul Farid* 4/456-457  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 7/224-225  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 7/203-204

Alaili says: “Umayyads used to encourage the view that unrestrained
behavior was lawful in the holy places of Mecca and Medina because a
group of poets and eunuchs among whom was Umar bin Abi Rabia were hired
so that the two centers of Mecca and Medina may be introduced in an
inappropriate way so that they may not seem capable of religious
leadership.”

Asmai has said, “I entered Medina but except for eunuchs I did not see
anyone else and people were narrating stories and relating
jokes.”**[1]**

Gatherings of music and songs became common in Medina and the governor
also attended these programs and participated in them actively. In this
way the spirit of morals was completely disintegrated and people became
aloof from those lofty values that Islam had brought.

Considering religious values unimportant
----------------------------------------

Muawiyah considered all religious values unimportant and he ignored all
the laws that Islam had brought. On the basis of this he used vessels of
gold and silver and considered usury lawful. He used perfume in the
condition of Ihram and trespassed laws.**[2]**

Most of the Islamic laws in the major period of Umayyad rule were
rendered useless. Thus Kumayt, the poet of Islam says regarding this:

**“The laws were not applied because we are in such a community which is
having a contrary belief.**

**Are you and we followers of a book so that we may act according to
it?**

**As if these were foolish ones who commanded and prohibited according
to the Book of God.**

**We see rulers of evil character that how long they have ruled and the
pain and problems of the people also prolonged.**

**We have not seen worse examples of injustice than the oppression of
our rulers.”[3]**

Muawiyah considered light the commandments of Islam and looked upon them
with disdain.

Narrators say: When he became victorious it was said to him: “Why do you
not reside in Medina as it is the town of (Prophet’s) Migration and the
tomb of the Prophet is situated there? “He replied, “In that case I
shall become deviated and not be of the rightful ones.”**[4]**

All the Bani Umayyah caliphs followed this stance of Muawiyah. For
example,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sammawal Maani fi Samma waz Zaat,* Pg. 30  
 **[2]** The sources of this event are mentioned in the second part of
*Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)*  
 **[3]** *Al-Hashimiyaat,* Pg. 111  
 **[4]** Qadhi Noman Misri, *Al-Manaqib wal Mathalib*, Pg. 70

Yahya bin Hakam asked Abdullah bin Ja’far: “Why did you leave the dirty
town (city of Prophet)?”

The son of Ja’far objected to this and he cried, “Muhammad (s) had
called it “Tayyabah” (Purified) and you call it “dirty”? You have
separated in the world and therefore you shall also be separated in the
Hereafter.”

Yahya said, “By Allah, if I die and am buried in the sacred land of
Syria it is more preferable to me than being buried in Medina.”

The son of Ja’far said, “You have preferred the neighborhood of Jews and
Christians to the neighborhood of Muhammad (s) and the
Emigrants.”**[1]**

Joining Ziyad with his lineage
------------------------------

An example of Muawiyah’s disregard for Islamic values is relating Ziyad
bin Ubaid Rumi to his lineage without a legal proof merely on the basis
of the sole testimony of Abu Maryam the wine-seller, a thing that does
not prove lawful relationship and by this act he had gone against the
statement of Holy Prophet (s) when he said, “The child is related to the
father and stoning is decreed for the fornicator.”

Muawiyah adopted this tactic for political aims and to strengthen his
rulership and power…a curious matter with regard to this is that Nasr
bin Hajjaj in the presence of Muawiyah spoke angrily to Abdur Rahman bin
Khalid bin Walid about Abdullah, slave of Khalid bin Walid. Muawiyah
ordered his sentry to remove the two as long as the court was in
session.

When the session concluded Muawiyah ordered to get him a stone and
placed the lapel of his cloak on it. Then he allowed the two persons to
enter. They presented their quarrel to him regarding Abdullah. Then Nasr
told Abdur Rahman, “My brother and father have made a bequest to me that
he (Abdullah) is born through him.”

Abdur Rahman replied, “He is my slave and the son of slave and
maidservant of my father was born on his bed.”

Muawiyah issued his judgment in the matter and said, “Take this stone
and give it to Nasr bin Hajjaj because Muhammad (s) has said: The son
belongs to the father and the stone is for the fornicator.”

Nasr glanced at him and said, “Why did you not issue this judgment in
the case of Ziyad?”

Muawiyah said, “That was the order of Muawiyah and this is the command
of Muhammad (s).”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansabul Ashraf*, Vol. 1, Part 1  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 8/131. *Al-Iqdul Farid* 6/133-134
