At Your Service, O Chief of the Noble Ones!
===========================================

I recall your day in Kerbala when you were presenting the sacrifice of
your Ahle Bayt and companions. A sacrifice, purely for the sake of Allah
and with pure faith; when Islam would never have succeeded in its
confrontation with oppression and apostasy without your exemplary
sacrifice. Such a sacrifice that none but you were capable of offering.

You are the greatest conqueror! You were able to fill the pages of
existence with your determination and you solved the most difficult
problems in a way that it was its only solution. But this could not be
accomplished except by giving your blood, which was imbued with the
fragrance of prophethood and revelation. You annihilated the degraded
tyrannical rulers of Bani Umayyads who had destroyed the social system
and pushed people to a political mirage. They bought over the pillars of
nation and historians, put them in degraded deviations and in the lowest
rank of debasement. So much so that the flame lit by the Holy Prophet
(s) was put out and its place was taken up by the idol-worship of
Quraish. They installed idols in all gatherings and pulpits in the
nation of Islam so that the flame of guidance, faith and the lofty
examples and elements of ethics of the nation could be destroyed. It was
the reason that the ways of guidance may disappear and become concealed
so that Islam, with its true value may disappear and its foundations may
be destroyed.

But we beseech to you! O great Victor! That you rose up and took up all
the sides of the Islamic world in your hands by a call that announced
the coming of the new dawn so that Muslims may understand your
messengership. You heralded a new historical period and kept its
greatness preserved and to consider its manners good that it may remove
from them the filth of slavery and release them to the fields of
liberation so that they may participate in building of civilization and
join the caravan of history.

Chief of the noble men! By your great revolution you have changed the
nature of humanity that had been mired in lowly filth and had become
absolutely helpless even for themselves. So he stood up at once, with an
astonishing spirit and led it on the path of everlasting life. He
establishes miracles and announced the statements of Allah with
unlimited faith.

Yes! That is the faith that percolated to depths of his being and
personal qualities that made it easy for him to face such terrible
circumstances. Such a tragedy that melts the hearts of humanity and
defies logic… when he saw his companions side-by-side moving towards
death at great speed. They were such that history has not seen people
more truthful, orthodox and loyal. He saw the stars of Ahle Bayt and his
sons; that in the spring of their youths they were becoming morsels of
the swords and spears.

He saw the harem ladies of the family of prophethood wailing due to
impending calamities and tragedies and the killing thirst that made them
call out for help to

him while there was nothing he could do to solve their problems. At that
time, when every living person was losing self-control, the grandson of
the Prophet stood up and spoke up the truths from the depths of his
heart and faith: “This has become easy for me to bear because I know
that Allah is seeing all this…”

Yes! Allah indeed saw your tribulations and calamities you suffered in
that tragedy were on the way of Islam.

My chief! O father of noble men! In recompense of the different tortures
you bore and various calamities you suffered, the Almighty Allah
bestowed you numerous blessings in the Hereafter. He created the High
Garden for you and appointed you at the highest level so that you may
take whatever you may desire. He made you the chief of the Youths of
Paradise, the intercessor whose intercession is accepted.

However in this mortal world, your remembrance remains fresh and it
continuously makes people humble before your exalted position and your
remembrance is so closely attached to the world as the days and nights
are connected.

While your enemies are routed and scattered and their history has been
buried with the unknown, degraded and humiliated people.

You are the only one who remained in the lyric of freedom of every
generation and your flag shall continue to fly so that reformers may
gain lesson from you to benefit the humanity.
