Objection of Imam Husain (‘a)
=============================

Imam Husain (‘a) objected to Muawiyah for taking Ziyad as his brother
because it was absolutely against the command of Muhammad (s). Imam
Husain (‘a) sent a memorandum to him containing many crimes that
Muawiyah had committed. It was mentioned in that denouncement: “Did you
not claim that Ziyad the son of Sumaiyyah born on the bed of Ubaid
Thaqif is the son of your father while Muhammad (s) has said: The son
belongs to the father and the fornicator is to be stoned. You have
willfully abandoned the practice of Muhammad (s) and followed selfish
desires without any guidance of Allah.”

This action of Muawiyah caused great anger and unhappiness to the
righteous and religious people as we have described in detail in our
volume titled, *Life of Imam Hasan (‘a).*

Muawiyah’s Animosity towards the Prophet
----------------------------------------

Muawiyah was very inimical towards the Prophet (s) in such a way that
during his caliphate, he did not recite Salawat on His Eminence for
forty Fridays. Some of his friends asked the reason for this. He said,
“Nothing prevents me from his remembrance except that some people begin
to feel greatness (proud).”**[1]**

Once he heard the Muezzin recite: “I witness that there is no God except
Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (s).” He could not
remain quiet and he said, “May Allah bless his father! O son of
Abdullah! You had great courage and you did not like for yourself but
that your name should be with the name of the Lord of the
worlds.”**[2]**

Among the indications of Muawiyah’s malice towards Holy Prophet (s) is
the matter that Matraf bin Mughairah has narrated:

“I went to Muawiyah along with my father. My father used to visit him
often and upon returning speak about Muawiyah and his intelligence, and
he used to be astonished at him. Finally when he returned one night he
did not even eat his dinner and I found him depressed. I waited for a
while thinking that this depression was only because of something
related to us. At last, I asked him, ‘Why do you look so aggrieved
tonight?’ he replied, ‘Today I am coming from the worst infidel and the
vilest person.’ I asked, ‘Who is that?’ My father replied, ‘Today, I
told him (Muawiyah) in private: O Master of the faithful! You have
reached an age when it would have been better if you had acted justly
and nicely and looked at your brothers (i.e. Bani Hashim) with kindness
and improved relations with them. By Allah! Today they have nothing,
which you may fear and you shall always be praised due to this good deed
and rewarded by Allah.’ Muawiyah said, ‘Alas! Alas! How can I hope for
the endurance of remembrance? See, a man of the Teem tribe (i.e. Abu
Bakr) became a ruler. He acted justly and did what he should have  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *An-Nasaaih al-Kafiya* Pg. 116  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 10/101

done, till he finally died, and with him his memory also perished; just
his name, Abu Bakr remains. Then a man from Adi tribe (i.e. Umar) became
the ruler. He struggled for many years till he finally died and his
memory also ended, except that just his name is mentioned as Umar. But
see how the name of Ibn Abi Kabsha**[1]** is called out five times a
day: “I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of God.” Now after this
which deed of mine and name shall endure? By Allah, there is none except
Him, except that they shall be buried (destroyed).’”**[2]**

This matter shows the shaky religious belief of Muawiyah and it is that
it was nothing but a thin veil that he had put over himself. It shows
that same inclination towards the period of ignorance and being affected
by it to the utmost limit.

Apostatic tendencies were present in most of the Umayyad rulers. Walid
in one of his drinking bouts denied the Day of Judgment and raising up
of the dead:

**“Turn the goblet on the right and not to the left.**

**Give it to drink and at that time when it is incensed with aloe wood.
A wine that is first placed in a pitcher.**

**It is laced with Perfume of bondmaids and camphor of dignity.**

**I am sure that I shall not be raised to be sent to Hell.**

**I raise people so that they may mount the ass of religion.**

**And leave to destruction those who aspire for Paradise.”[3]**

Many of the Bani Umayyad governors also bore apostatic beliefs. For
example Hajjaj addressed Allah in presence of a crowd and he said, “Is
your Prophet higher or your caliph?” He meant to say that Abdul Malik
was greater than the Prophet.**[4]**

In the same way he used object to those who visited the Prophet’s tomb.
He used to say, “Woe be those who go around the wooden planks and
decayed body. Why don’t they circumambulate the palace of Abdul Malik,
chief of the believers? Do they not know that the caliph of all is
better than his or her Prophet?”**[5]**

In this way the machinery of Umayyad regime was involved in insulting
the Prophet of Allah (s) and in ridiculing his Prophethood.

Transforming the realities of Islam
-----------------------------------

Muawiyah encouraged transforming of the illuminated realities of Islam
that established for all the communities movements of Jihad and
movements for making the future. And he encouraged Muslims not to
protest against the oppression of oppressors and calamities of tyrants.
It was the slogan of the great companion of Abu Zar Ghiffari who had
truly understood Islam and who raised the banner of protest against the
Umayyad regime when he demanded Uthman and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A derogatory title given by the Quraish infidels to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 5/129-130  
 **[3]** *Risaalatul Ghufran*, Pg 304  
 **[4]** Maqrizi, *An-Niza Wat-Takhasum,* Pg. 43  
 **[5]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 15/242

Muawiyah to act with justice with the oppressed and downtrodden people
and distribute the wealth of the nation among the poor and deprived
sections of the community.

Muawiyah intended to destroy this religious view and shatter this
responsibility. Therefore he instituted groups of tradition forgers who
considered social protest an innovation and he ordered them to forge
traditions and attribute them to the Prophet, the great freedom-giver of
humanity making it compulsory for people to accept without protest all
sorts of injustices at the hands of tyrant rulers. Some examples of such
forged traditions are as follows:

1. Bukhari through his chain of narrators has quoted from the Messenger
of Allah (s) that he said to his companions, “After me you shall see
that they have restricted some things for themselves and you shall see
some things that you consider wrong.” They asked, “O the Messenger of
Allah (s), what do you command us in this matter?” He replied, “Give to
them their rights and ask your rights from the Almighty Allah.”**[1]**

2. Bukhari has narrated through his chains of narrators that the Holy
Prophet (s) said, “You will see after me, selfishness (on the part of
other people) and other matters that you will disapprove of.” They
asked, “What do you order us to do, O Allah's Apostle? (under such
circumstances)?” He said, “Pay their rights to them (to the rulers) and
ask your right from Allah.” **[2]**

3. Muslim has narrated through his chain of narrators that Salama b.
Yazid al-ju'afi asked the Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon him):
Prophet of Allah, what do you think if we have rulers who rule over us
and demand that we discharge our obligations towards them, but they
(themselves) do not discharge their own responsibilities towards us?
What do you order us to do? The Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon
him) avoided giving any answer. Salama asked him again. He (again)
avoided giving any answer. Then he asked again-it was the second time or
the third time-when Ashath b. Qais (finding that the Holy Prophet was
unnecessarily being pressed for answer) pulled him aside and said:
Listen to them and obey them, for on them shall be their burden and on
you shall be your burden.**[3]**

4. Bukhari through his chains has narrated from 'Arfaja who said: I have
heard the Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon him) say: Different
evils will make their appearance in the near future. Anyone who tries to
disrupt the affairs of this Ummah while they are united you should
strike him with the sword whoever he be.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bukhari, *Sahih* 9/59  
 **[2]** Bukhari, *Sahih* 9/59  
 **[3]** Bukhari, *Sahih* 9/59, *Sahih Muslim* 3/1474-1475, Tr. No.
1846  
 **[4]** Bukhari, *Sahih* 9/59, *Sahih Muslim* 3/1479 Tr. No. 1852

Muawiyah’s Behavior with Ahle Bayt (‘a)
---------------------------------------

Muawiyah tried his utmost to reduce the respect and value of Ahle Bayt
(‘a)**[1]** while they were the heritage (memento) and the perceptive
nerve of this community. He employed the most terrible means to distance
them from the field of Islamic life. He employed the following means for
his purpose:

1. Control over Preachers
-------------------------

Muawiyah put preachers in all areas under his control so that he may
distance the people from Ahle Bayt (‘a)**[2]** and that they may spread
misguided statements and reduce their importance and accord strength to
the Umayyad regime.

2. Using the centers of Education
---------------------------------

Muawiyah transformed the centers of education like the school and
instructions classes in order to feed the children and youth enmity and
malice towards Ahle Bayt (‘a) so that a generation of opponents may come
into being.**[3]** It was a very important machinery which imprinted the
hearts of the youth with malice towards the progeny of the Holy Prophet
(s).

3. Fabricating Traditions
-------------------------

Muawiyah established special networks for forging traditions and these
were the worst networks devised to destroy Islam. He instructed them to
fabricate traditions and attribute them to the Holy Prophet (s) so that
the value of Ahle Bayt (‘a) may be decreased. The prominent members of
this group of tradition fabricators were as follows:

1. Abu Huraira Doosi

2. Samra bin Jundab

3. Amr bin Aas

4. Mughairah bin Shoba

These persons fabricated thousands of traditions and attributed them to
the Holy Prophet (s) such that on the basis of the policy of the regime
they are divided into some groups and they are as follows:

First Group: Fabrication of traditions in praise of companions so that
they may be equaled in rank to the Ahle Bayt (‘a). Imam Muhammad Baqir
(‘a) has pointed out more than a hundred ‘traditions’ in this group that
are of this type:

A – Umar is a ‘Mohaddas’, that is one with whom the angels speak.

B – Tranquility speaks from the tongue of Umar.

C – An angel brings inspiration to Umar

D – Angels are ashamed of Uthman.**[4]**

And numerous traditions like these have been fabricated in praise of
companions.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/161, Second edition  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/161, Second edition  
 **[3]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/161, Second edition  
 **[4]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/161, Second edition

Ibn Arafa Muhaddith alias Naftuyya says: Most traditions fabricated in
praise of companions were fabricated during the Umayyad period in order
to get into their good books as they were of the view that they shall be
able to humiliate the Bani Hashim…**[1]**

In the same way traditions were concocted to mimic similar statements of
the Messenger of Allah (s) in praise of the Holy Ahle Bayt (‘a). For
example the saying that: Abu Bakr and Umar are two chiefs of aged people
of Paradise. This blatant fabrication was in confrontation of the
Prophet’s statement that is Mutawatir (widely related): Hasan and Husain
are two chiefs of the youths of Paradise.**[2]**

Second Group: Fabrication of traditions that denounce the purified
progeny and reduce their value. Muawiyah gave 4000 dirhams to Samra bin
Jundab so that he may deliver a sermon before the Syrian people and
state a tradition purporting to say that the following verse of Quran is
regarding Ali (‘a):

**“And among men is he whose speech about the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries. And when he turns
back, he runs along in the land that he may cause mischief in it and
destroy the tilth and the stock, and Allah does not love
mischief-making.”[3]**

Samra bin Jundab related this matter to them and he took away a great
prize from the Public Treasury of Muslims…**[4]**

Among the statements fabricated by those people is a ‘saying’ of the
Holy Prophet (s) with regard to the family of Abu Talib that: “The
family of Abu Talib is not my well-wisher. My well-wishers are the
Almighty Allah and the righteous believers.”**[5]**

Amash has narrated that when Abu Huraira came with Muawiyah in the year
of congregation (year 41 A.H.) to Iraq he went to the Kufa Masjid and
when he saw that a large number of people have come to welcome him, he
kneeled down on the ground and slapped his cheek saying: “O people of
Iraq, do you claim that we attribute falsehood to the Messenger of Allah
(s)?**[6]** And I shall burn myself in fire (of Hell)? While I have
heard from the Messenger of Allah (s) that he used to say: “There is a
sanctuary for every Prophet and my sanctuary is in Medina from Eir to
Thoor. Thus whoever creates a disaster therein shall be cursed by Allah,
the angels and all the people. By Allah, I testify that Ali has
committed a disaster therein.”

When this statement of Abu Huraira reached Muawiyah he rewarded him and
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *An-Nisaih al-Kafiya*, Pg. 89  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)*  
 **[3]** Surah Baqarah 2:204-205  
 **[4]** *An-Nisaih al-Kafiya*, Pg. 64  
 **[5]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/64, Vol. 11/42 & Vol.
12/88  
 **[6]** Faqihul Islam, Allamah Shaykh Mahmud Aburiya in the book, *Abu
Hurairah* Pg. 236

accorded him great respect and also made him the governor of
Medina.**[1]**

There are other fabricated traditions of the same kind that cast
aspersion on the purified progeny. The same purified progeny which was
the source of belief and perception in the world of Islam.

Third Group: Fabrication of traditions in praise of Muawiyah for
purifying the blemish of confronting Islam by him, his father and his
family and for concealing that which has been related by the Prophet in
their denouncement. Some of these ‘traditions’ are as follows:

1. The Holy Prophet (s) said: “Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan is the most
forbearing and forgiving person of my community.”**[2]**

2. The Holy Prophet (s) said: “My confidant is Muawiyah bin Abi
Sufyan.”**[3]**

3. The Messenger of Allah (s) said: “O Allah! Teach Quran to him
(Muawiyah) and protect him from divine chastisement and admit him into
Paradise…!”**[4]**

4. The Holy Prophet (s) said: “Whenever you see Muawiyah on my pulpit
delivering a sermon,**[5]** you must accept (what he says) as he is my
trustee in this nation.”**[6]**

Other fabricated traditions indicate Muawiyah’s mental confrontation
against Islam and it is that he endeavored to eliminate and destroy the
religion.

Fabricated Traditions Regarding Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------------------

Among the traditions fabricated against Imam Husain (‘a) is that they
narrated that His Eminence went to meet Muawiyah on Friday while
Muawiyah was on the pulpit reading a sermon. A person from the audience
said to Muawiyah: Allow Husain to address from the pulpit. Muawiyah
said: “Woe be to you. Leave me, so that I can express praise and glory.”
After that he praised and glorified the Almighty and he glanced at
Husain and asked, “O Aba Abdillah! I ask you, am I not a son of Meccan
valley?

“Yes, by the One who sent my grandfather as the herald of glad tidings.”

“O Aba Abdillah, I ask you, am I not the maternal uncle of the
believers?”

“Yes, by the One who sent my grandfather with prophethood.”

“I ask you, O Aba Abdillah, am I not the scribe of revelation?”

“Yes, by the One who sent my grandfather as a warner.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/68  
 **[2]** *Tatheer al-Jinaan* (printed at the end of *As-Sawaiq
al-Mohreqa,* Pg, 12)  
 **[3]** *Tatheer al-Jinaan*, Pg. 13  
 **[4]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/120-121  
 **[5]** This ‘tradition’ was fabricated to counter the authentic
tradition of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) in which he said:
Whenever you see Muawiyah reading a sermon from my pulpit, cut off his
head. *Biharul Anwar* 33/196, Tr. No. 481  
 **[6]** *Tarikh* Baghdad 1/259, but on Vol. 2, Pg. 181 it has come:
“kill him”

After that Muawiyah came down from the pulpit and Husain ascended the
pulpit and praised and glorified the Almighty Allah in such a way as
none from the previous and latter ones had ever done. Then he said: “My
father from my grandfather and my grandfather from Jibraeel and Jibraeel
from the Almighty Allah has narrated that below the leg of the Throne of
the Arsh (Heavens) is a green leaf of lilac and it is inscribed on it:
There is no god except Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (s).
O Shias (partisans) of Amirul Momineen (‘a) none of you shall come on
Day of Judgment but that the Almighty Allah shall admit him or her to
Paradise.

Muawiyah asked him, “O Aba Abdillah, I ask you, who are the Shias of
Amirul Momineen (‘a)?” His Eminence replied, “One who does not talk ill
of the two Shaykhs, Abu Bakr and Umar and who do not speak ill of Uthman
and who do not speak ill of you, O Muawiyah.”

Hafiz Ibn Asakir has remarked in connection with this ‘tradition’: “This
tradition is alien and I don’t see its chain of narrators reach upto
Husain.”**[1]**

Muslim people became involved in great turmoil due to these concocted
traditions. ‘Traditions’ that became to be recorded in books of
tradition and many Muslims thought that they are authentic. Therefore
they began to regard Muawiyah as a respectable personality and they
included him in the first group of companions of the Prophet who were
very much steadfast in their religion. While if they had really learnt
of the reality of these ‘traditions’ they would have become disgusted
with him as Madayani has said.**[2]**

The fabricated traditions were not restricted to praise of Muawiyah and
devaluation of Ahle Bayt (‘a). They were also fabricated on the subject
of religious legislations and in this sphere they mixed in them
controversial and absurd matters and showed the reality of Islam in
unfavorable light and destroyed the beliefs of Muslims.

Imprecation of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a)
----------------------------------------

Muawiyah was in the forefront in enmity to His Eminence, Imam Amirul
Momineen (‘a) and he openly announced curse and imprecation on His
Eminence, in private and public gatherings and ordered all his officials
and governors to speak ill of His Eminence among the people. Invoking
curse on Imam (‘a) became widespread in all areas of Islamic lands.
Muawiyah himself delivered a sermon to the people of Syria and told
them:

“O people, the Messenger of Allah (s) told me, ‘After me you shall
become the caliph. So select the holy land (of Syria) as there are
righteous people over there’, and I selected you. So curse Abu
Turab.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh*, 14/113-114  
 **[2]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 11/46  
 **[3]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/172

The people of Syria imprecated the Imam in response. Muawiyah also spoke
to these beasts and said, “What do you think of a man that is Ali – who
did not do good to his brother, Aqil? O people of Syria, Abu Lahab the
uncle of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) is denounced by the Quran.”**[1]**

Historians say: Whenever Muawiyah read the sermon he used to conclude it
on the statement: O Allah, Abu Turab has apostisied from Your religion
and has gone off from Your path. Thus You curse him severely and involve
him in a painful chastisement.”

They used to utter such nonsense from the pulpits.**[2]** And when
Muawiyah appointed Mughairah bin Shoba to the governorship of Kufa, the
most important instruction he gave him was that he should not allow any
shortcoming in speaking ill of the Imam (‘a), invoking blessings on
Uthman, finding defects in Ali’s supporters and in distancing them.
Mughairah remained the governor of Kufa for seven years and during this
period he did not give up the criticism of Ali and speaking ill of His
Eminence.**[3]**

By this Muawiyah wanted to distance the people from their regard towards
His Eminence. And that a distance be created between the principles of
His Eminence and the people; principles that even pursued Muawiyah in
his palaces.

Dr. Mahmud Sabhi says: “The Imam had become a lifeless body that neither
he prevented their power nor he personally threatened them. This matter
(of speaking ill about Imam) was not a thing except that the principles
of His Eminence in rulership and his political view after his passing
away also like during his lifetime made life dark and difficult for
them.”**[4]**

Imam (‘a) was the standard bearer of human justice and the greatest
example of this religion.

Jahiz says: “Whenever prominence and superiority in Islam is mentioned,
whenever we speak of fighting for and defending Islam, whenever we talk
of religious knowledge and whenever people argued among themselves about
piety, no one was ever able to recognize anyone with all these qualities
except Ali.”**[5]**

Hasan Basri says, “By Allah, yesterday a man passed away from among you
who was the thrower of an arrow from the arrows of Allah, the Mighty and
the Sublime. (He conveyed divine messages). Thus after the Prophet (s)
he was the captain of this nation and one having its superiority and
excellence and the closest relative of Muhammad such that neither was he
disgusted of the command of Allah nor embezzled the wealth of God. He
presented his endeavors to the Quran and the Quran in return admitted
him to the fruit laden orchards and blooming gardens.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/172  
 **[2]** *An-Nasaaih al-Kafiya* Pg. 87  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/253  
 **[4]** *Nadhariyatul Imam Ladai ash-Shiaul Ithna Ashariya*, Pg. 282  
 **[5]** *Al-Islam wal Hizaaratul Arabiyyah* 2/145

Yes! He is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a).”**[1]**

The curses that Muawiyah and his governors laid on His Eminence made
apparent the excellences of His Eminence because the Imam became an
illuminated page of history for the people and became known in the
society. His Eminence’s first voice raised the rights of people and
established social justice on the earth. They survived centuries and
eons and those regimes that were opposed to Imam, be they Bani Umayyah
or Bani Abbas were all destroyed and no sign or influence of them
remains today. Imam alone was that person who remained on the heights of
the fort of greatness and nobility. Because he was the first standard
bearer of humanity and its lofty and greatest leader. The brief rule of
His Eminence became an example of ideal government for the eastern ruler
and the official foundations that continued to serve as the torch of
guidance for those who want to form a government based on justice and
truth and to build the future of nations while Muawiyah’s regime
remained as an example of breach of trust, mercenary groupism and
oppression on people and considering them lowly.

Concealing the Merits of Ahle Bayt (‘a)
---------------------------------------

Muawiyah with all his powers tried to conceal the merits of Ahle Bayt
(‘a) and he made their greatness distant from the view of Muslims and he
prohibited the spreading of sayings of the Prophet in their praise.

Historians say: After the treaty, Muawiyah went for Hajj to the House of
Allah and he passed by a group of people. They stood up to pay respect
to him but Ibn Abbas did not stand up in his honor.

Muawiyah looked at him and asked, “O Ibn Abbas, what has stopped you
from rising up like your companions have stood up? Is it the effect of
some anger about the battle of Siffeen? O Ibn Abbas, my cousin, Uthman
was killed unjustly.”

Ibn Abbas replied him logically, “Umar bin Khattab was also killed
unjustly and he entrusted the affair to his son. His son is here,” so
saying he pointed towards Abdullah Ibn Umar.

Muawiyah replied to him without any logic,

“A polytheist had killed Umar…”

Ibn Abbas said, “Who killed Uthman?”

Muawiyah said, “Muslims killed him”.

Ibn Abbas took control over the reins of Muawiyah’s reasoning and said,
“This matter further refutes your argument. If Muslims killed and
abandoned him, it is nothing but right.”

Muawiyah could not afford a reply and he took up the matter that in his
view was more important than Uthman’s blood and said: “I have written to
all provinces and prohibited the mention of good qualities of Ali and
his Ahle Bayt (‘a), so restrain  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Maghazali, *Manaqib*, Hadith no. 69

your tongue, O Ibn Abbas.”

Ibn Abbas shot an arrow of reply full of logic and eloquent proof to
Muawiyah, “Do you prohibit us to recite the Quran?”

“No”

“Do you prohibit us its interpretation?”

“Yes.”

“Then, shall we read it and do not accept what Allah means to say in
it?”

“Yes.”

“Now what is more incumbent on us? Reading or acting upon it?”

“To act upon it.”

“How can we act upon it if we don’t know what Allah has meant to say in
it?”

“Ask about it from one who interprets it in such a way that it is
different from what you and Ahle Bayt (‘a) interpret it.”

“Indeed, the Quran is revealed on our Ahle Bayt (‘a). Now shall we ask
about it from the progeny of Abi Sufyan and progeny of Abi Muit?”

“Read the Quran but do not talk about what Allah has revealed about you
and the Messenger of Allah (s) has said regarding you and do narrate
other things.”

Ibn Abbas eyed him with ridicule and recited the statement of the
Almighty Allah:

**“They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers
are averse.”[1]**

Muawiyah cried at him, “Leave me! And restrain your tongue from me. If
you want to do it, do it secretly and do not say anything to anyone
openly…”**[2]**

This conversation proves the depth of the mediums employed by Muawiyah
to oppose Ahle Bayt (‘a) and to conceal their merits.

Muawiyah’s malice with regard to the Imam reached such a level that at
the time of victory of Amr Aas over Muhammad bin Abi Bakr in Egypt and
his killing when Amr Aas obtained Muhammad’s letters and mementoes the
most important of them beings letters sent to him from Imam Ali (‘a)
which were best political documents, he (Amr Aas) sent them to Muawiyah
and when he saw them he told those who were around him, “We do not say
that these are from the letters of Ali bin Abi Talib, but we say that
these are from the letters of Abu Bakr that were with him.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Taubah 9:32  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/349-351, *Kitab Sulaym bin Qais*,
Pg. 164-165  
 **[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 6/72

Preventing the Remembrance of Imam (‘a)
---------------------------------------

The Umayyad regime committed such excess in their enmity to Imam Amirul
Momineen (‘a) that they proclaimed that every newborn child who is named
‘Ali’ must be eliminated. This news reached Ali bin Rubah who was
terrified and he said, “If anyone calls me Ali I shall not leave him,
because my name is ‘Ulay’ (with vowel ‘O’ on ‘Ain’).”**[1]**

Historians say: Scholars and traditionists restrained from mentioning
the Imam and narrating traditions from him due to the fear of Bani
Umayyah. Whenever they intended to relate something from him they used
to say, “Zainab’s father has reported…”

Narrated Moammar from Zuhri from Akrama from Ibn Abbas that the
Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, prevented
rain over the Bani Israel due their ill behavior with regard to their
prophets and their discord in their religion and Allah subjected this
community to yearly famine and prevented rain from them due to their
enmity to Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a).”**[2]**

Moammar said, “Zuhri narrated to me a tradition during one of his
illnesses that I had not heard before or after that; he narrated from
Akrama and when he recovered from his illness he regretted relating to
me that tradition. He said. “O Yamani, hide this tradition and do not
narrate it in my name because they (Bani Umayyah) do not forgive anyone
who praises Ali or mentions him.”

Moammar asked, “Then why did you, along with them speak ill of Ali while
you had heard what you heard?”

Zuhri said, “It is enough, they made us participate in their important
affairs and we followed them in their selfish motives…”**[3]**

Muslims became involved in terrible circumstances due their devotion to
the Imam and in this regard they resorted to utmost precaution in this
matter.

Shabi says: “What can we do about Ali? If we befriend him we lose our
world and if we hate him we lose our religion.”

The poet says, “Devotion to Ali (‘a) is a terrible blow that its memory
makes us shudder.”

These were some of the calamities that Muslims bore due to their love
for Ahle Bayt (‘a) which is a part of their religion.

Behavior with Shias
-------------------

During the time of Muawiyah, Shias in all areas were made targets of
oppression and they were subjected to terrible tortures because Muawiyah
dealt with them in the most atrocious manner and took severe revenge
from them with cruelty and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 7/319  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 11/14  
 **[3]** Ibne Maghazali, *Manaqib*, 141-142, Hadith no. 186

rode the mount of his regime on the bodies of their sacrifices. Thus
Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) has mentioned examples of atrocities of
Umayyads on Shias of Ahle Bayt (‘a) in all provinces and he says, “Our
Shias were being killed in all towns and their limbs were being cut off
merely on suspicion. Anyone who remembered our devotion and leadership
was cast into prison or his property was destroyed or his house was
ruined.”**[1]**

Also a Shia man with regard to difficulties and calamities that Shias
bore has remarked in the following way to Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah, “We
were so much involved in calamities because of our devotion to you that
people were killed in it, testimonies were made redundant and we became
helpless in cities and bore tortures till I decided to go away from my
motherland and continue to worship till the day of meeting with Allah.
However, this would have become a cause for me to have remained ignorant
of the position of Progeny of Muhammad and I also decided to rise up in
with the Khawarij as their and my view about the rulers is same. They
rose up and they were killed.”**[2]**

Muawiyah did not refrain from any kind of atrocity in order to obtain
the security of his regime and power. Shias were the most potent danger
for his regime. Therefore he employed the most severe methods to
eliminate them. Some of the steps that Muawiyah took in this regard are
as follows:

Mass Killings
-------------

Muawiyah went to extremes in shedding the blood of Shias and ordered the
chief military executioners to pursue the Shias and execute them
wherever they might be. Thus Busr bin Artat after this proclamation
killed 30000 persons. These were in addition to those who were burnt to
death.**[3]**

Samrah bin Jundab put to sword 8000 people from the citizens of
Basra.**[4]**

Ziyad bin Abih was the most atrocious of the killers in this matter. He
used to cut off their limbs and gouge out their eyes and employed such
various kinds of tortures on Shia people that it is not even possible to
describe them all due to their severity and cruelty.

Eliminating Great Shia Thinkers
-------------------------------

Muawiyah indulged in the elimination of prominent Shia personalities and
their thinkers in such a way that he took a group of them to the killing
fields and filled their houses with sorrow and grief. Some of such
personalities were as follows:

1. Hujr bin Adi
---------------

Hujr bin Adi raised the banner of protest and in defense of rights of
oppressed people he took up arms and he defeated the aim of the Umayyad
rulers who had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 11/43  
 **[2]** Ibne Sa’ad, *Tabaqat* 5/95  
 **[3]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/10-17  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/237

taken the destinies of the people as their playthings and changed them
into their personal fiefdoms and destroyed everything…

Hujr considered death as nothing serious and ridiculed life and relished
the taste of martyrdom for faith and became a defender of the religion
of Ahle Bayt (‘a).

Hujr bore terrible difficulties and calamities when he saw that the
administration of the regime was openly abusing Amirul Momineen (‘a) and
forcing the people to become aloof from His Eminence. Thus he spoke up
against it and denounced the rulers of Kufa.

Ziyad bin Abih declared that it was lawful to kill Hujr. He got him
arrested and with a group of his supporters dispatched him as a prisoner
to Muawiyah. They were stopped at ‘Maraj-e-Azra’ till the order of their
execution was issued from Damascus. Executioners appointed for this job
carried out their duty and his body fell to the ground smeared in the
blood of martyrdom and greatness so that it may illuminate the path of
life for the people without injustice and rebellion.

Protest of Imam Husain (‘a)
---------------------------

When Imam Husain (‘a) received the news of Hujr's martyrdom he was
devastated with sorrow. He wrote a letter of protest to Muawiyah
pointing out his ill deeds and he also reminded him of the most terrible
and atrocious action of his with respect to Hujr and his companions.
Imam Husain (‘a) also flayed the crimes and innovations that Muawiyah
had committed:

“Are you not the one who killed Hujr, brother (a member of the tribe) of
Kinda, (and his companions) those who prayed, the worshippers who
condemned oppression, regarded as great sins the heresies, and did not
fear the censure of any censurer? Unjustly killed them out of aggression
after your giving them a strong oath and sure covenants that you would
not punish them according to an incident (that had happened) between you
and them nor according to malice you had harbored against them.”**[1]**

This letter of protest contains the following points:

1. A severe objection against Muawiyah’s killing of Hujr and his
companions without any crime committed by them or their having spread
mischief in the land.

2. It praised the brave qualities of those martyrs, the brave ones of
them as all had objected to injustice and considered seriously rising up
against oppression, innovations and evils that Muawiyah’s regime had
initiated. They were of those who hastened to the field of Jihad for
establishment of truth and to confront falsehood.

3. That memorandum stated that Muawiyah had previously made agreement
with Hujr and his companions that he would ensure them security and that
he would not go back on his word and he would cause them no harm. But
Muawiyah disregarded the promise and did not fulfill it in the same way
as he violated the terms of his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/372-373. Kishi, *Rijal* 47, Tr.
No. 97

treaty with Imam Hasan (‘a). Rather he violated each and every term as
he has announced in his address at Nakhila.

Hujr’s murder was a great disaster in Islam and objections continued to
be raised against Muawiyah due to this from all parts of Islamic lands
and we have described them in detail in our book on Imam Hasan (‘a).

2. Rushaid bin Hijri
--------------------

In the days of great calamities that Shias bore under the son of
Sumaiyyah (Ziyad) Rushaid Bin Hijri was involved in the most terrible
adversities because Ziyad sent his officials to him and when he came to
him he cried to him. “Did your friend (His Eminence, Ali) tell you what
we shall do with you?”

Rushaid replied with truthfulness and faith to him, “You would cut off
my hands and my feet and that you would crucify me.”

That dirty man ridiculed this and said, “By Allah, I will prove his
prophecy wrong. Set him free.”

His men released him but that rebellions Ziyad regretted it, and he told
them to arrest him again. Then he shouted to him, “We can find for you
nothing better than what your friend said. You will bring about evil to
us if you remain alive. Cut off his hands and feet.”

The executioners at once amputed the limbs of Rushaid but he did not
care for the pain that afflicted him.

Historians say: He spoke about the evils of Bani Umayyah and caused
awakening in the people for revolution which angered Ziyad greatly and
he ordered that Rushaid’s tongue be cut off.**[1]** The tongue which was
demanding truth and justice and which was protesting in favor of the
rights of the poor and deprived.

3. Amr bin Hamaq al-Khuzai
--------------------------

Among the martyrs in the path of religion was Amr bin Hamaq al-Khuzai.
The Prophet prayed for him: “O Allah! Make him enjoy his youth.” The
Almighty Allah answered the plea of His Messenger and even when Amr
reached the age of eighty not a single hair of his beard was seen to
have grayed.**[2]**

Amr learnt the mannerisms of Ahle Bayt (‘a) and benefited from their
sciences and became a prominent Shia personality.

As a result of the great mischief that had started due to the rulership
of that tyrant Ziyad and their pursuit of Amr, Amr became sure that the
regime was after his life. So he, along with a friend, Rufa bin Shaddad
fled from Kufa and took shelter in a cave and after that he went to
Mosul.

The police became tense and they set out in search of Amr. But Rufa was
able to escape and they could not lay their hands on him. They took Amr
as prisoner to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Safinatul Bihar* 1/522, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/294  
 **[2]** *Al-Isabah* 3/53

Abdur Rahman Thaqafi the governor of Mosul. He reported the arrest to
Muawiyah. Muawiyah ordered that he be executed with nine stabs of dagger
because he had stabbed Uthman Ibn Affan.

Executioners began to stab him but he passed away in the very first
stab. At that time they severed his head and sent it to the tyrant at
Damascus. He ordered that it be taken around in Syria.

Historians say: It was the first severed head in Islam that was taken
around in different areas. After that Muawiyah ordered that it be taken
to his wife Amina, daughter of al-Shareed who was in one of Muawiyah’s
prisons. The head was brought and put into her lap while she was
inattentive and had no information about her husband’s affair. She was
shocked and on the verge of death. After that she was taken from the
prison to Muawiyah. A dialogue ensued between her and Muawiyah which
proves Muawiyah’s baseness and his disregard for Arabian Islamic values.
That is good behavior to ladies and not punishing them for the actions
of their husband.

Imam Husain's Memo
------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) was greatly affected when he learnt of Amr’s murder and
he wrote a memo to Muawiyah enumerating his evil deeds and his
atrocities that the community of that time was bearing. This memo was
especially about Amr:

“Are you not the one who killed Amr bin Hamaq, companion of the
Messenger of Allah (s), may Allah bless him and his family, the
righteous servant (of Allah)? Worship exhausted him, and so his body
became weak and his face yellow. That was after you had given him
security and given to him some of Allah’s promises and covenants, to the
extent that if you gave them to a bird, it would come to you from a peak
of a mountain. Then you killed him showing audacity to your Lord and
making light of that covenant.”**[1]**

Muawiyah violated his covenant that he had made at the time of treaty
that he would not harm this respected companion of the Prophet.

4. Awfa bin Haseen
------------------

Awfa bin Haseen was of the righteous Shias in Kufa and one of the famous
and prominent personalities there. He was a severe critic of Muawiyah
who made the people aware of his evil deeds and atrocities. And when the
son of Sumaiyyah (Ziyad) learnt of this he ordered his policemen to
arrest him. As soon as Awfa came to know about it he went into hiding.
One day when Ziyad was watching a parade, Awfa passed before him. Ziyad
was not sure about his identity so he inquired about it and Awfa’s name
was mentioned to him. He issued orders for his arrest.

When Awfa was brought to him, he asked him his view regarding his
policies. Awfa criticized and objected against Ziyad. Ziyad issued
orders that he be executed and the executioners attacked him with their
swords and he fell down lifeless.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/382, *Ikhtiyar Ma’rifatur Rijal,*
Pg. 47, Tr. No. 97  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/462, Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/235-236

5. Hadhrami and his companions
------------------------------

Abdullah Hadhrami was a companion of Ali (‘a) and one of his sincere
partisans. He was also a military officer about whom the Imam said
during the battle of Jamal, “O Abdullah glad tidings to you as you and
your father are from the police of al-Khamees because the Messenger of
Allah (s) informed me about your name and that of your father’s that you
two shall be from al-Khamees police.”**[1]**

When Imam Ali (‘a) was martyred, Abdullah was devastated at the tragedy.
He left Kufa and built a monastery cell for himself so that he may
worship therein. He was joined by a group of his Shia friends there in
worship.

Ziyad ordered that he should be brought to him. When he was brought,
Ziyad issued an order for his execution and he was executed
unjustly.**[2]**

The tragedy of Abdullah was like the tragedy of Hujr bin Adi because
both of them were innocent and they were killed unjustly for no fault of
theirs except that they were devoted to the Progeny of the Messenger of
Allah (s).

Objection of Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) was devastated at the news of the killing of Hadhrami
and his righteous companions. He protested against it by sending a
memorandum to Muawiyah. His letter included the following: “Did you not
have Hadhrami killed when Ziyad wrote to you complaining that he was a
Shia of Ali and you wrote to him: Kill anyone who is on the religion of
Ali? And Ziyad killed him and as per your order had him cut into pieces
while the religion of Ali is same as the religion of his cousin (s)
which has enabled you to occupy the position that you are now in, and if
he hadn’t been there, the greatness of your father and you would have
had to bear difficulties of two journeys, journey of winter and journey
of summer.”**[3]**

This letter of protest clearly explains that it was Muawiyah who issued
orders to kill anyone who followed the religion of Ali (‘a) inspite of
the fact that it was the same religion of the Holy Prophet (s). It also
shows that Ziyad, after having them killed had them cut into pieces in
order to take his revenge from them for their devotion towards the
Progeny of the Messenger of Allah (s).

6. Juwayriyya Abadi
-------------------

Among the famous companions of Imam Ali (‘a) was Juwayriyya bin Mushar
Abadi. During the terrible circumstances through which the Shias lived
during the reign of Ziyad in Kufa he was pursued and then orders were
issued to have his limbs amputed and then to have him crucified on a
short trunk of palm tree.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ikhtiyar Ma’rifatur Rijal,* 6/Tr. No. 10. *Al-Ikhtisas*, Pg. 7.
*Biharul Anwar* 42/151, Tr. No. 18  
 **[2]** *Ilalush Shara-I*, Pg. 212 & 216, *Biharul Anwar* 44/3 & 9  
 **[3]** *Biharul Anwar* 44/213  
 **[4]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 2/290-291

7. Saifi bin Faseel
-------------------

Saifi bin Faseel was a person of a solid Islamic faith who showed an
unmatchable example of firm faith because he spoke up against the tyrant
Ziyad in his very presence. When he was brought Ziyad shouted at him, “O
enemy of God, What do you say about Abu Turab?”

“I don’t know who Abu Turab is.”**[1]**

“You very well know him, do you not know?”

“Yes, I know him.”

“He is only Abu Turab.”

“Never, he is Abul (father of) Hasan and Husain.”

The police chief of Ibn Ziyad scolded him and said, “The Amir is saying
that he is Abu Turab and you refute it!”

That great brave man cried at him and ridiculed his chief saying, “If
the Amir is saying something wrong, should I also say it? Shall I
testify falsely like he has falsely testified?”

Pride and arrogance of the tyrant was defeated and he didn’t know what
to reply. At last he said, “This has increased your crime.”

Then he ordered his men, “Get me the cane.” They brought the cane to
him. He asked: “What do you say?”

The brave and fearless man with a firm determination and without any
worry said, “It is the best statement that I said with regard to the
right of a person from the believing servants of God…”

That blood-shedder told his executioners, “Beat him so hard that his
shoulder falls down.”

They rushed to him and beat him so hard with their sticks that he fell
down. At that time he told them to stop the beating and asked him,
“Good! What do you say about Ali?”

That cruel man thought that the torture would take him away from his
faith, therefore he said, “By Allah, even if you cut me into pieces by
swords and knives I would not say anything other than what you have
already heard.”

The murderer lost his temper and he screamed, “You must invoke curse on
him or I shall cut off your head.”

Saifi shouted at him, “By Allah, in that case before that you cut off my
neck if you don’t want anything else. I am satisfied with the Lord, but
you shall be an unjust oppressor.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Umayyads had given this derogatory title to Imam (a.s.)
which was the name of a bandit. This matter is mentioned in *Tarikh*
*Siyasi Daulat Arabi*. And also in *Al-Aghani* 13/168 it is mentioned:
Ziyad used to insult the Shias and he used to call them by the title of
‘Turabiya’ (Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/277)

At that time he ordered that Saifi be bound in chains and shackles and
thrown in a dungeon.**[1]** And after that he was sent along with Hujr
bin Adi and was martyred with him.**[2]**

8. Abdur Rahman Anzi
--------------------

Abdur Rahman Anzi was one of the best Shia men. Ziyad’s mercenaries
arrested him. He asked them to allow him to go and meet Muawiyah in
person. May be he would give him amnesty. His captors agreed to his
request and sent him in captivity to Damascus. When he arrived before
the tyrant, Muawiyah asked him, “Well, O brother of Rabia, what do you
say about Ali?”

“Leave me and do not ask me that, as it is better for you…”

“By God, I shall not release you…”

That brave-hearted man began to narrate the merits and excellences of
the Imam and praised the status and position of His Eminence: “I testify
that he is the one who remembers Allah in excess and commands
rightfulness and establishes justice and restrains people from sins…”

Muawiyah became infuriated and reiterated the excuse of Uthman that may
be he would speak ill of him and become liable for capital punishment.
So he asked him, “What do you say about Uthman?”

He told him about his views about Uthman and Muawiyah boiled with rage
and screamed at him, “You have killed yourself!”

“Rather I have killed you, is there no one present from the tribe of
Rabia?”

Abdur Rahman thought that his clansmen would defend him and rush forward
to have him released. However, none came to his help and when Muawiyah
became assured that he had none for his defense he sent him to Ziyad,
the tyrant, and ordered him to have him executed. Ziyad in turn sent him
to Qassun Naatif**[3]** and had him buried alive.”**[4]**

This valiant personality raised the standard of truth and took up the
hammer of demolishing the forts of oppression and in the way of defense
of the most sanctified matter of Islam, reached martyrdom.

These were some of the martyrs among the prominent personalities of
Shias who had taken up the torch of freedom and illuminated the path for
other revolutionaries who destroyed the grandeur of Umayyad regime and
who endeavored for its destruction.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/266-267  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/371  
 **[3]** Qassun Naatif is a locality near Kufa  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh*, 5/276-277

Prominent Shia Personalities who bore tortures and sorrows
----------------------------------------------------------

Muawiyah subjected a large group of prominent Shias to intimidation,
threats and terror. Some of them were as follows:

1. Abdullah bin Hashim Mirqal

2. Adi bin Hatim Tai

3. Sa’sa bin Sauhan

4. Abdullah bin Khalifa Tai

Muawiyah subjected these senior members of Shia community to severe
persecution and his mercenaries pursued them hard and intimidated them.
We have described in detail there terrible circumstances in our volume
titled, *Life of Imam Hasan (‘a)*.**[1]**

Intimidation of ladies
----------------------

Muawiyah did not rest content merely by torturing and hurting Shia men.
He also made ladies targets of his oppression and subjected them to the
most terrible fear and had them terrorized. He ordered his governors to
send some of them to him and they complied with his commands. Among the
ladies who bore the brunt of his evil were:

1. Zarqa binte Adi, 2. Ummul Khair Barqiya, 3. Sawdah binte Ammarah, 4.
Ummul Baraa binte Safwan, 5. Bukara Hilaliya, 6. Arwa binte Harith, 7.
Akarsha binte Atrash, and 8. Daramia Hajooniya.

Muawiyah behaved with them with the worst type of behavior and exhibited
great pride and arrogance to them and insulted them and expressed his
power to take revenge from them instead of taking into consideration
their weakness and helplessness. We have described in detail in our
volume on Imam Hasan (‘a) how he insulted them in public.**[2]**

Demolishing Shias houses
------------------------

Muawiyah proclaimed to all his governors to have the houses of Shia
people demolished and they diligently followed these commands**[3]**
leaving the Shias of Ahle Bayt (‘a) shelterless while they had no
justification for these merciless actions except that they wanted to
distance the people from the power of the Messenger of Allah (s).

Depriving Shias from Public Treasury
------------------------------------

Among the atrocities that the Shia were involved in the tenure of
Muawiyah was that Muawiyah had written to each of his governors
regarding the stipulation of allowances of people: “Take care, that if
you have a proof that anyone of them is devoted to Ali and his Ahle Bayt
you must remove his or her name from the register of stipends and cancel
their allowance.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/377-403  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/404-423  
 **[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 11/43  
 **[4]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 11/45

His governors willingly took upon this task of scrutinizing the
registers to see if any Shia name appeared therein. If they found any
such name they immediately removed it from the register and cancelled
the stipend of that particular person.

Testimonies of Shias not accepted
---------------------------------

Muawiyah tried his best to abuse the Shias and render them valueless
socially. Therefore he ordered his governors not to accept the
testimonies of Shia people**[1]** in any legal matter or judicial affair
so that they may be abased and suppressed and their humiliation is
maximized.

Banishment of Shias to Khorasan
-------------------------------

Ziyad bin Abih decided to purge Kufa of Shias and thus have them
scattered. So he banished 50000 Shias to Khorasan, an eastern province
of Iran.**[2]**

By this act Ziyad hit the first nail into the coffin of Umayyad regime
because the group of those exiles to Iran spread Shiaism in the lands
till finally that province became the center of revolt against the
Umayyads under the leadership of Abu Muslim Khorasani which brought the
downfall of Umayyad rule.

These were some of the calamities on Shias during Muawiyah’s rule that
they were subjected to various tortures and intimidation. The terrible
disasters that befell them were the most important of the factors that
led to the rising of Imam Husain (‘a), because His Eminence raised the
banner of revolution so that he may release them from their afflictions
and difficulties and return to them peace and security.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/386, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*
11/44  
 **[2]** *Tarikh Shaoob al-Islamiya* Pg. 123
