Imam Husain’s Revolution: Activities and Programs Part 1
========================================================

Imam Husain (‘a), just as he has himself mentioned, did not initiate his
great revolution for something useless or to project his own image. He
neither undertook it for creating mischief and oppression. Rather, His
Eminence moved out to reform the condition of the country so that he may
establish social justice among the people and destroy factors of
terrible humiliation the people were subjected to under the yoke of the
Umayyad regime. That he may release them from tethers of degradation
that the tyrant rulers had tied them in.

Imam (‘a) initiated his mission against the ruling tyrant so that he may
restore to the people their capabilities and nature that they had lost.
And to get back the respectable nature to its original position so that
through it may be established a rule of justice and equity under the
leadership of the Imam and every type of social discrimination is
destroyed. Also that life may be established on the foundation of love
and brotherhood as that is the rule of God, the Creator and giver of all
existence and not the regime of Muawiyah which was based on killings,
murders and trampling of human values and suppression of social
activities and humanity.

Imam (‘a) began his great revolution so that through it he may open the
Book of Allah and make his uprising a lesson for people of reason. Thus
he illuminated the path and fixed the aim and bestowed enlightenment to
the thinking ones. And through that revolution he demolished the
obstacles that the Umayyads had installed to prevent the progress of
Islam and its followers. Hence after that revolution, no negative effect
or dangerous plots of the Umayyad regime remained in the world of Islam.
Because, after the slaying of the Imam, the people rose up like valiant
lions and they did not give any importance to their life and safety.
They all arose with a firm determination to take up arms against the
tyrannical regime of Umayyads and one after other, revolts rocked the
Umayyad rule till finally the unjust regime was uprooted from Islam and
their ego was annihilated.

Imam (‘a) did not initiate his revolution till the time all options had
been exhausted for him and no hope remained for the reform of the
community and there was no other way for him. He had become certain that
nothing could reform the condition of the community except the sacrifice
of his life. This was the only way to transform the life of the nation
and to install the standard of truth on the earth.

I believe that the most important thing for the readers is to learn
about the causes of Imam’s revolution and the program of his mission.
And this is what we shall discuss in detail in the coming pages.

Causes of the Revolution
------------------------

Some religious responsibilities and social duties etc. had surrounded
the Imam (‘a) and persuaded him for the revolution. They prepared him
for sacrifice and staking his life. Some of these responsibilities were
as follows:

1. Religious responsibility
---------------------------

Islam has fixed the responsibility of all the disasters and calamities
that befall the people of Islamic lands and all those things that are
not beneficial for them upon all Muslims. No one is absolved of this
answerability and Islam has not accepted such a thing. Muslims cannot be
aloof and careless about whatever happens in the Islamic world. While
the Holy Prophet (s) has announced this responsibility and said: “Each
of you is responsible and each of you is caretaker of all who are under
you.” Thus Muslims are responsible to God, that they must have concern
for the society, defend the advantages of the country and remain aware
of their community.

It was due to this great responsibility that the Imams confronted the
atrocities of the Umayyads and destroyed their plans of enslaving the
community, humiliating the people and usurping their property. His
Eminence has spoken in his address to Hurr and his companions about that
which was made incumbent on him by Islam and on the basis of which he
performed jihad against the tyrant regime of Yazid.

His Eminence said:

“O people! The Messenger of Allah (s) has said: ‘One who sees a tyrant
ruler considering the unlawful things lawful, ignoring the command of
God, opposing the practice of the Messenger of Allah (s) and deals with
people in a sinful and oppressive way, but by word or action he does not
object to it, the Almighty Allah has the right to convey him to his
place.’”

Religious duty made it incumbent on the Imam to rise up against the
Umayyad regime. A regime which considered the unlawful things lawful,
trampled His laws, and opposed the practice of the Messenger of Allah
(s) and a group of Muslim scholars have stated clearly that it was
obligatory for the Imam to start a Jihad in defense of Islam. Some of
the scholars who mention this are as follows:

A – Imam Muhammad Abduh: Under the discussion of just and unjust rule
according to Islam, Imam Muhammad Abduh has alluded to the uprising of
the Imam against Yazid’s regime and has considered the Imam’s uprising
as a religious duty. And he says: “If a just rulership is established in
the world that applies the law of Shariah and at the same time there is
another regime that does not apply the laws of Shariah, it is incumbent
upon all Muslims to support the former and abandon the latter…and in
this way was the uprising of Imam Husain (‘a) the Prophet’s grandson
against the leaders of injustice and oppression. Who had forcibly
usurped the affairs of Muslims under the kingship of Yazid Ibn Muawiyah,
may Allah degrade him and his supporters also, that is the Caramatees
and Nawasib.”**[1]**

B – Muhammad Abdul Baqi: Ustad Muhammad Abdul Baqi Sarwar says regarding
religious and social duty that it became obligatory for the Imam to take
a stand against Yazid’s regime. He says: “If Husain (‘a) had given
allegiance to Yazid, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tafsir al-Manar* 12/183

transgressor and profligate, who made wine and fornication lawful,
degraded the status of caliphate by sitting with singers and women,
arranged drinking parties in official places, decorated dogs and monkeys
with gold ornaments while hundreds of thousands of Muslims remained
starving and deprived, it would have implied the legalization of all
these things.

If Husain (‘a) had pledged allegiance to Yazid while he was a successor
of the Messenger of Allah (s), this verdict would have decreed all those
things lawful in the view of people and Husain’s silence would also have
implied his approval of these sinful activities. His silence against
these things would have amounted to sin and crime according to Islamic
law… The status that Husain was having during the time of Yazid not only
in the Arabian Peninsula, but in all the Islamic lands, his position
among the Muslims and his proximity to the Prophet of the Lord of the
worlds and on the basis of this after the passing away of the greatest
personality of Muslims, from the aspect of knowledge, piety, ancestry
and circumstances he was the foremost person of the nation. Because he
was having the responsibility of defending the Islamic heritage. On the
basis of this he considered it his duty when he was called to help in
order to stop the evils. Especially that he stops the evils because they
were committed and encouraged by those who were occupying the seat of
vicegerency of the Prophet.

Secondly: His Eminence had received allegiance for caliphate in the
Arabian Peninsula and thirty thousand letters of support were received
by him from Iraq from the people of Kufa and Basra. And they promised
the Imam that they would support him in his fight against Yazid bin
Muawiyah. Repeated entreaties insisted that the Imam must rise up
against the tyrant regime. So much so, that a leader of these
petitioners, Abdullah bin Haseen wrote: “O Husain! We shall complain
against you to Allah on the Day of Judgment.” How was it possible for
Husain (‘a), who had religious modesty and Islamic shame to have
continued to witness these terrible things without taking any action?
How is it possible for him not to reply to their calls for help? On the
basis of this, he answered their call positively just as Islamic Shariah
has stated and he moved to Iraq.”**[1]**

This view is the final argument as it is with Islamic proofs that makes
it incumbent for the Imam to perform Jihad against the tyrant regime of
his time.

C – Abdul Hafeez Abu Saud: Ustad Abdul Hafiz Abu Saud says: “Imam Husain
(‘a) after that – that is the death of Muawiyah – realized that it was
his minimum duty to announce his denial to Yazid’s allegiance and to
take the allegiance of Muslims for himself for the defense of Islam, for
removing oppression and Yazid’s destruction.**[2]**

D – Dr. Ahmad Mahmood Sabhi: Among those who expressed their views on
this subject is Dr. Ahmad Mahmood Sabhi. He says: “In the rising of
Husain (‘a) the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *At-Thair al-Awwal fil Islam,* Pg. 79  
 **[2]** *Sibtar Rasool,* Pg 133

acceptance of Yazid’s allegiance would have been a deviation from the
principles of religion because he considered the transformation of
religions successorship into dynastic rule as nothing but a Herculean
innovation which had entered Islam. And from that aspect the appointment
of Yazid, even though he had such vile habits and was addicted to wine
and indulged in playing with monkeys, to the post of successorship of
the Prophet was the greatest crime in religion of Islam. Such that
whoever were party to that crime or pleased at that, would be
responsible for that crime. And that also that a person doing this be
the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s)! In such
circumstances the rising of Husain (‘a) was a matter that more than
propagation and belief he should be concerned with politics and war
first.”**[1]**

E – Alaili: Alaili says: Responsibilities are there upon the caliph,
such that if he does not fulfill them, it would be incumbent on the
people to depose him. The community is obliged to take up arms against
him and it is unanimous verdict of all Muslims that making effort in
this regard is obligatory. On the contrary if the ruler is not such, it
would be wrong to protest against him and the consequences of opposition
in this case would be very bad. Moreover one who legislates is more
obliged to respect the law, than any other person in every way. His
responsibility in this regard is more. And whenever the ruler becomes a
transgressor, openly commits evils and ignores God, His Messenger and
believers, respect to such a person would tantamount to be respect of a
transgressor and evil man and trusting him would be nothing except
trusting ego and open transgression. It is the same thing that is
mentioned in the solution-giving statement of His Eminence: “Yazid is a
corrupt man, who imbibes wine, puts to death the soul which Allah
forbids to be harmed and declares his debauchery in public.”**[2]**

These were some views that reject the allegation of those who say that
the Imam (‘a) had no right to take up arms against the tyranny and
oppression that Yazid had wrought.

2. Social Responsibility
------------------------

Imam had a great responsibility on the basis of his social position with
regard to the community against the oppression and injustice that the
Umayyads had wrought upon it. Who could have been more deserving to
defend the nation and to remove calamities from them? He was the
grandson and the beloved one of the Messenger of Allah (s). The religion
(of Islam) was the religion of his grandfather. The community (Muslims)
was the community of his grandfather. He was having the first preference
for the responsibility of leading the Ummah.

Imam Husain (‘a) was certain that he had a responsibility with regard to
this community and the selection of remaining silent and lack of
uprising against the Umayyad regime which was unjust and tyrannical, was
in no way effective in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nazaria Imamate Nazd Shia Ithna Ashari,* Pg. 334  
 **[2]** *Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 94

changing the society. Therefore His Eminence took up this great
responsibility on his shoulders and fulfilled his duty with
trustworthiness and sincerity and sacrificed his life and that of the
members of his family and his friends so that he may turn the Islamic
justice and Quranic law to the sphere of life.

3. Completion of Argument for Imam Husain (‘a).
-----------------------------------------------

The argument was completed for the Imam to declare Jihad and
confrontation against the powers of injustice and apostasy because he
continuously received letters and representations from the important
Islamic center of the city of Kufa. The people’s letters cast the divine
responsibility on His Eminence. If the Imam had not replied positively
to the petitions of the people to save them from oppression he would
have been indeed answerable to God and its responsibility and completion
of argument would have remained on him forever.

4. Defense of Islam
-------------------

The most important factor that motivated the Prophet’s grandson to
undertake an uprising was to defend Islam from the dangers of the
Umayyad rule. The regime that wanted to destroy Islam, uproot it
completely and annihilate its values. Because when Yazid sat on the seat
of caliphate he announced his disbelief and apostasy in the following
words:

**“The Hashemites played a game to get rulership. Neither came any news
nor any revelation.”**

The above couplet clearly exposes the infidelity of period of ignorance
which Yazid followed. Because Yazid had no faith in revelation, book,
Paradise and Hell. And the grandson of the Prophet realized that if he
did not take up arms in defense of religion, the grandson of Abu Sufyan
would launch an attack on him and Islam would have remained only in
name. On the basis of this, His Eminence initiated his great revolution
and sacrificed his blood for the religion of Allah. His blood which was
imbued with the fragrance of prophethood, became a balm for this
religion. It is definite that if His Eminence had not sacrificed his
life, neither the name of Islam had survived nor its customs. The
religion would have become the disbelief of the period of Ignorance,
sensualities and transgression and all the efforts and hardships of the
Holy Prophet (s) for the well-being and guidance of the community would
have been in vain. Thus the Messenger of Allah (s) had learnt from the
unseen knowledge the future turmoils of his nation and its afflictions
at the hands of Quraish. He also knew how Husain (‘a) would rise up in
defense of faith and lay down his life for it. That is why he said in
his most sublime saying: Husain is from me and I am from Husain. Indeed
it is a fact that the Prophet was from Husain because his sacrifice was
in defense of Quran and his pure blood would continue to water the tree
of Islam for ages and eons.

5. Protecting Islam
-------------------

The most important factor for which Imam Husain (‘a) undertook a
revolution was to clean up the Islamic caliphate from Umayyad filths
that they had usurped unjustly…because the caliphate of that time was
not a medium of establishment of injustice and removal of backwardness
and mischief from the world in a way Islam desired.

Islam considers the institution of caliphate as an important agency for
spreading truth and justice among the people. Therefore if the caliphate
is righteous all the nation shall also be righteous and if caliphate
deviated from its responsibility the community shall fall into terrible
turmoil and calamities. That is why Islam has issued detailed
instruction about the matter of caliphate and decreed that it should
necessarily be headed by a person having a good nature and morals and
one who possesses good qualities of justice, trustworthiness and
knowledge of the needs of the community in the fields of economics,
organization and politics. And one who lacks these qualities is
prohibited to claim caliphate…Imam (‘a) mentioned these qualities in his
first letter to the people of Kufa and stated that one who claims the
caliphate of Muslims must necessarily have these traits in a sufficient
measure. His Eminence said, “I swear by my religion, he is not an Imam
that does not act in accordance with Quran, treads the path of equity,
believes in truth and guards his self for the sake of God.”**[1]**

So only one who is imbued with these traits has the right to present
himself for the leadership of community and their caliphate and one who
is not having these qualities has no right to take up this post which is
an important position delegated by the Prophet…

Islamic caliphate is not only dominance over the nation. It is the
vicegerency of the Prophet and a continuation of his illuminated
personal rulership. Imam Husain (a.s) realized that the position of his
grandfather had fallen into the hands of a drunkard who did not
recognize anything apart from his sexual desires and selfish desires. On
the basis of this His Eminence rose up so that he may restore to it an
illuminated existence and brilliant future of the Islamic Caliphate.

6. Freeing the Aspirations of the Nation
----------------------------------------

During the time of Muawiyah and Yazid the Islamic community did not have
its intentions and any kind of freedom. It was like a lifeless body
absolutely bereft of any sensation or capability because it was tied up
in chains of slavery and suppression. Their thinking and foresight was
curbed completely and between them and their intention was the wall of
the Umayyad regime.

The tyrannical regime of the Umayyads had succeeded in destroying and
paralyzing the feelings of the people and made them absolutely powerless
to do anything against the rule. Though they were supportive of Imam
Husain (‘a) in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/353

their mind they were not capable of following their conscience because
the Umayyad regime of that time had taken full control of their
destinies. They were like lifeless idols without any feeling and
movement. They had no determination or intention to take any step. They
were dressed up in raiment of humiliation and suppressed by the lashes
of the Umayyads. They were downtrodden and rendered completely
valueless.

Imam stepped in the field of Jihad and sacrifice so that he may bestow
the spirit of respect and honor to the community. The martyrdom of His
Eminence was the changing point in the history of Muslims and their
life. Suddenly there was a complete change in them and they became armed
with determination and resolve and all those obstacles that had
restrained them were removed and they were released. The clouds of fear
and submissions that had enveloped them changed into a revolution and
confrontation. They undertook many uprisings one after the other whose
slogan was: “O blood of Husain! we shall take the revenge of Husain!”
These slogans struck like lightning the thrones of the Umayyad regime
and destroyed their power.

7. Freeing the National Economy
-------------------------------

Economy of the nation, the lifeblood of social and individual life had
been completely destroyed. Because the Umayyads in a blatant manner had
taken over the full control of Public Treasury and kept all the funds,
war booty and other incomes at their own disposal. They had got hold of
a great treasure and accumulated such wealth in their houses that they
could not think up of enough channels to spend it. Muawiyah declared to
the Muslims that the wealth belonged to God and not to the Muslims and
that he was more deserving of it. Saeed bin Aas said: “The towns and
habitations are the gardens of Quraish.”

The Umayyads employed public funds to further their political aims which
were in no way related to the well being of the community. Their
significant expenditures were in the following instances:

A) Purchasing consciences and faiths as we have explained many such
instances in our discussion on the economic policy of Muawiyah.

B) The Umayyads also utilized a great part of public funds in forming
committees for fabricating traditions of the Prophet that would exalt
the position of Umayyads and decrease the status of Ahle Bayt as we have
already explained in detail in the previous chapters.

C) They made huge grants, gifts and rewards to nobles in order to
prevent them from objecting against the unlawful activities of the
regime to curb the rights of the people.

D) The Umayyads spent without any kind of restraint on vices of wine,
dance and songs. That is why their houses had become full of instruments
of vice and sensuality and professionals of these activities.

These were some of the ways in which public funds were spent in a free
and open

manner while the general populace was suffering poverty and hunger.
Destitution had increased and the shadow of deprivation was seen in all
lands of Islam except for Syria where all the luxuries and riches were
obvious. For Syria was the strong fort that the Umayyads were defending
with their injustice and atrocities.

Imam Husain (‘a) rose up to support the economy of the nation and to
restore to people a life of balanced livelihood.

His Eminence confiscated the land tax that was being transported to
Muawiyah. He also took over various funds that were on way to Damascus
Treasury during Yazid’s rule and distributed all these funds among the
poor and needful people. More than anything else what pained him most
was that he saw that poverty was prevalent in people while nothing was
being spent on them from the Public Treasury.

8. Social Injustice
-------------------

Social injustice had spread in all the nooks and corners of the Muslim
dominions. There was no place that escaped the atrocities of the
Umayyads. Following are some examples of their excesses:

A. Absence of peace: Peace had disappeared from all over the country and
fear and terror surrounded all the people. Because the Umayyads were in
the forefront to unleash their oppressions in such a way that the
innocent were punished instead of the offenders and the non-sinners were
penalized instead of the sinners. They used to cast into dungeons people
who had not committed any crime simply on the basis of doubt or
allegations. A large number of people were also put to death. People
used to say in the time of Ziyad: “Leave Saad as Saeed has died.” None
could be found except that he was terrorized of oppression regarding his
life and property. On the basis of this, Imam (‘a) undertook an uprising
in order to save the people from this terrible oppression.

B. Considering the people lowly: The political line of action of the
Umayyads was to humiliate the community and to consider the Muslims
lowly. One of their signs of their subjugation of people was that they
used to brand the necks of Muslims like cattle are branded and which
indicated slavery. They also used to brand the palms of Muslims with a
sign so that they may be considered slaves, as the slaves of Rome and
blacks were considered.**[1]** Imam (‘a) hastened to the field of Jihad
so that he may bestow the Muslims honor and respect and release them
from the darkness of oppression that had afflicted them.

9. Terrible Atrocities on Shias
-------------------------------

Imam (‘a) was aggrieved at the atrocities unleashed on the Shias during
Muawiyah’s rule because Muawiyah left no stone unturned to oppress and
torture them and to have them killed in the worst possible manner. So
much so that he told Imam Husain (‘a), “O Aba Abdillah! You know that I
kill the Shias of your father and give them funeral bath, wrap them in
shrouds, recite funeral prayer and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikh Tamaddun Islami*

consign them to the grave.”**[1]**

Muawiyah tried his best to annihilate the Shias as we have already
discussed in the chapter on Muawiyah’s rule:

A. Executing their important personalities like Hujr bin Adi, Amr bin
Hamaq Khuzai, Saifi bin Faseel and others.

B. Crucifying them on date palms.

C. Burying them alive.

D. Demolishing their houses.

E. Not accepting their witnesses.

F. Depriving them from the fixed stipend from Baitul Maal.

G. Terrorizing their ladies and intimidating them.

H. Spreading murder and terror in their areas.

These and other atrocities that the Shias were involved in, pained Imam
Husain (‘a) to such an extent that he was compelled to write to Muawiyah
complaining about his acts of oppression against the Shias as we have
already explained in the chapter on Muawiyah’s rule.

The cruel steps that the Umayyad regime took against the Shias were
among the factors that motivated Imam Husain (‘a) to undertake an
uprising against Yazid so that he may emancipate the Shias from these
terrible circumstances and to defend them from injustice and oppression.

10. Destroying the name of Ahle Bayt (‘a)
-----------------------------------------

The foremost cause of the uprising of the Imam was that the Umayyad
regime was trying its utmost to destroy the remembrance of Ahle Bayt
(‘a) and to remove their merits and virtues from the minds of the
people. In this regard Muawiyah was worst and he resorted to the most
dirty means to achieve this, some are as follows:

A. Fabrication of traditions for reducing the value of Ahle Bayt (‘a).

B. Employing government machinery and educational institutions to train
and bring up their children inculcating them with enmity towards Ahle
Bayt (‘a).

C. Punishing those in the most terrible manner who mention the
excellences of Ahle Bayt (‘a).

D. Imprecating them from the pulpits, minarets and in their Friday
Prayer sermons.

Imam Husain (‘a) arranged a great political gathering in the Holy Mecca
and informed the people about the dangerous program Muawiyah had
designed to remove the Ahle Bayt from the sphere of Islam…His Eminence
stepped out for Jihad immediately and he preferred an early death
instead of being compelled to hear the name of his father abused from
pulpits and minarets.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/231

11. Destruction of Islamic Values
---------------------------------

The Umayyads dared to destroy the Islamic values in such a manner so
that no sign of it remains in the life of Muslims. Some of their steps
were as follows:

A. Unity of Muslims
-------------------

The Umayyads spread discord and conflict among the Muslims and enlivened
tribal prejudices and fights among clans and Arab tribes so that no
unity is created among the Muslims.

Yazid encouraged Akhtal to denounce the Ansars, who had given refuge to
the Prophet and in the days of trouble and hard times of Islam they
supported the religion of Islam.

The poetry of the Umayyad period was mainly concerned with shameless
insults to some people. Some poets devoted their artistic capabilities
only to degrade their rival tribes and clans. The Umayyad poetry was
devoid of any sort of social or humanistic aim and it was only concerned
with abusing and flaying their competitors. In this way it opposed the
formation of unity that Islam desired for its followers.

B. Equality:
------------

Umayyads destroyed justice and equity that Islam had announced because
they gave preference to Arabs over non-Arabs and promoted an atmosphere
of fear full of convulsions and political groupism among the Muslims,
the consequences of which was that non-Arabs began to write books
against the Arabs and the Arabs wrote books pointing out the defects of
non-Arabs. The person who was foremost in inciting such tendencies was
Ziyad bin Abih. He was such that he harbored a great malice towards the
Arabs and he ordered writers to denounce their opponents in their
writings.

This evil policy was opposed to the spirit of Islam which has appointed
all the rights and duties among the Muslims without any tribal
discrimination and established equitability.

C. Freedom:
-----------

Throughout the Umayyad regime there was no sign of freedom in the sphere
of people’s life. Because they were dealt with very severely if they
tried to do anything according to their will but it was not in
accordance with the ruler’s wish so that no one could demand his or her
right or to say anything for general good. So much so that the regime of
guillotine and sword was established.**[1]**

The chief of noble men rose up so that humans, Muslims and other people
may be liberated from social injustice and the rights of people that
were usurped during Muawiyah’s rule may be restored.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Leather mat on which beheading is done

12. Trampling of the society
----------------------------

During the Umayyad period the society had sunk into decadence and all
Islamic values had disappeared. The most important causes of decadence
that appeared were as follows:

1. The society was deprived of spiritual training regarding which no
other caliph other than Ali (‘a) paid any attention. His Eminence had
paid special attention to it but the terrible incidents obstructed his
way when he wanted to reform the society and better their morals.

2. The Umayyad regime tried to destroy the fabric of the society and to
deviate it. They instead forced upon the society everything that was far
from the reality of Islam and Islamic guidance. These two factors
according to our view were responsible for taking the society towards
decadence…The signs of that decay and decadence were as follows:

A. Oath breaking: Most people of the society did not consider it sinful
to break oaths and promises because such a thing was considered usual in
the society of that time. Arab kings encouraged them in this regard.
That is why they announced in their statement of Nakhila: “Every oath we
had made to Hasan, we shall not fulfill.” And they intentionally broke
all pledges they had made to Imam Hasan (‘a). It was one of the most
prominent characteristics of the Kufians. That is why the greatest
pledge they had made to help and assist Imam Husain (‘a) was
subsequently broken by them. Thus they broke the pledge they had made to
the Almighty. They failed to help him. Nay they even became instrumental
in his martyrdom.

B. Not refraining from lies: The maladies that afflicted the society
included not refraining from lying. Especially the Kufians were more
involved in it. That is why when they had surrounded Imam Husain (‘a) to
slay him, His Eminence posed a question to the commanders of the army
who had previously written to him inviting him to Kufa:”

“O Shabth bin Rabi’! O Hijaar bin Abjar! O Qais bin Ashath! Did you not
write that the fruits were ready and the orchards had become green and
you shall find an army at your disposal?”

Those filthy people were absolutely unashamed to lie. They all
responded. “We never did that!”

The Imam was astounded. He said, “Glory be to Allah! You indeed did so!”

While the fact was that the crimes they had committed were responsible
for the society being involved in calamities and disasters. Their
leaders used such people as instruments of injustice and oppression on
the Muslims.

C. Selling of consciences: The worst condition towards which the society
was headed is best seen in the readiness of the people to sell their
consciences to the rulers. We have explained this in detail in the
chapter on the reign of Muawiyah.

D. Attracting people to vices: The society was fully attracted to vices
and vain pastimes. The Umayyads directly promoted a life of waywardness
and they openly tried to deviate the beliefs of the people so that they
become absolutely against the balance life advised and commanded by
Islam.

These were some of the maladies that the society was involved in and
decay and waywardness was widespread in the people. Imam Husain (‘a)
took up the uprising to destroy that decadence into which the Muslim
society of that time was sinking.

13. Defending his own rights
----------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) rose up to define his own rights that the Umayyads had
usurped from him. The most important of these were as follows:

A. Caliphate: Like his father, Imam Husain (‘a) also had faith that the
Progeny of Prophet was more deserving of his successorship than others.
Because they were the Ahle Bayt of Prophethood, mine of messengership
and the place of the coming and going of Angels. The Almighty Allah
began creation with them and ended it on them. On the basis of the
statement of His Eminence he was brought up since childhood with this
very belief. That is why he rushed to Umar and shouted, “Get down from
my father’s pulpit and go on the pulpit of your father.”

Such a feeling was not unique to only Imam Husain (‘a). It was found in
all the Imams of Ahle Bayt (‘a) because they all believed that Caliphate
was one of their rights, because they were the closest people to the
Holy Prophet (s) and ones most aware of the aims of His Eminence…

Another point worth mention is that according to the terms of the treaty
Imam Husain (‘a) should have been accepted as the de facto caliph as he
was according to Shariah. Because Muawiyah had agreed not to transfer
the caliphate to anyone else after himself. After Muawiyah, the
caliphate should have returned to Imam Hasan (‘a) and if anything
happened to him it would go to Imam Husain (‘a).**[1]**

On the basis of this, the allegiance of Yazid was not lawful and Imam
Husain (‘a) did not revolt against a lawful Caliph of Islam as the
Umayyads believe and allege. Rather he had risen up against a tyrant who
had usurped his right of caliphate.

B. Khums: Khums is the obligatory right for Ahle Bayt (‘a) as clearly
explained in Quran and too many traditions have been recorded about it
but the previous regime had usurped it and did not pay anything from it
so that the Alawites may not muster the power to revolt. Imam Husain
(‘a) told this to Abu Huraira when he refrained him from rising up
against Bani Umayyah: “Woe be unto you, O Abu Huraira. Bani Umayyah
usurped our property and we remained patient on it.”

Most probably the Imam meant to denote Khums by this. In the panegyric
that Dibil Khuzai recited for Imam Reza (‘a) in Khorasan, he has
mentioned this point:

**“I see that their right has been distributed among others and their
hand has become empty of their rights.”**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/298, *Al-Isabah* 1/333

Imam Reza (‘a) was moved by these lines and spreading his palms said:
“By Allah, they are empty.”

Denying the Khums funds to the Alawites became the most important cause
of their economic difficulties. Probably through his uprising, Imam
Husain (‘a) wanted to restore this right to Ahle Bayt (‘a).

14. Enjoining Good
------------------

The strongest motive for Imam Husain (‘a) in his uprising was the
establishment of enjoining good which was one of the primary principles
of religion and the Imam was the person having greatest responsibility
towards it.

Imam (‘a) in his bequest to his brother, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyah, has
explained the aim of his uprising against Yazid. His Eminence said: “…I
am not taking up arms in order to make merry, or be ecstatic over what I
possess. I am not making mischief, nor exercising oppression. But I am
ready to fight for the sole goal of seeking reform of the Ummah of my
grandfather, the Apostle of Allah (s). I want to enjoin good and forbid
evil…”

Imam (‘a) rushed to the fields of Jihad so that he may lay the
foundation on which Islamic respectable life may be built up. Pillars of
foundation that had been demolished during the period of Umayyad regime.
Because in their time the good had become evil and the evil had become
good. Imam (‘a) objected against them on many occasions. The most
well-known of these instances is the speech His Eminence delivered
before the Ansar and Muhajireen denouncing their attitude of supporting
the tyrants, obstructing the truth and preferring a life of comfort and
luxury as we have already mentioned in the first part of this book.

Regarding the matter, His Eminence said the following to his companions
on the day of Ashura, “Do you not see that truth is not acted upon and
falsehood is not being removed so that a believer creates in himself the
love of proximity of his Lord?”

His Eminence preferred death to life because he witnessed that the truth
was being destroyed and falsehood was becoming stronger.

15. Uprooting Innovations
-------------------------

Umayyad regime dared to spread innovations among the Muslims and its aim
was not but the destruction and defeat of Islam. Imam (‘a) indicated
this in his letters to people saying, “The Sunnah is gone and innovation
has become alive.”**[1]**

Imam (‘a) rose up so that the innovations that Umayyads had spread may
be destroyed and to enliven the Sunnah of his grandfather that they had
destroyed. On the basis of this the ever living aim of His Eminence was
uprooting ignorance and hoisting the flag of Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/357

16. Order of the Prophet
------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s) had been informed through the Unseen about dangers
that Islam would face at the hands of Umayyads in future. He also knew
that the reformation of message and restoring eternality to its
principles was not possible except through the sacrifice of his
grandson, Imam Husain (‘a). Therefore it was incumbent on His Eminence
to don the coat of mail and take up arms for the defense of faith. That
is why His Eminence had ordered sacrifice. Therefore His Eminence,
Husain (‘a) stated this reply to the sincere advisor refraining him from
going to Iraq. Imam Husain (‘a) told him as follows: “I have been
commanded and I am going to fulfill the command…”

Historians have said, “The Messenger of Allah (s) prophesied to the
people the martyrdom of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and also informed them
about the great calamities that would befall him and he always expressed
sorrow at his killing and cursed his killers.”

In the same way Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) has also spoken about the
impending martyrdom of Imam Husain (‘a) as we have discussed in the
previous volume and quoted the widely narrations in this regard…

Imam Husain (‘a) had perfect knowledge of what was to befall him because
he had heard it all from his grandfather and father and he had become
certain of his martyrdom. He had no more hope for living and went on the
way of sacrifice and fulfillment of the command of his grandfather; he
moved towards death with full determination.

17. Respect and honor
---------------------

Of the most important factors for which the chief of the nobles
undertook an uprising were ‘respect and honor’. Because the Umayyads
wanted to force him to humiliation and degradation. But His Eminence did
not accept it. He continued to live in honor under the shade of swords
and spears. His Eminence has himself explained this matter on the day of
Ashura: “Know that this man of evil ancestry has given two options. To
pull the sword or face humiliation. Never could we accept humiliation.
Allah, His Prophet and noble and valiant ones would never accept it for
us. That we prefer the obedience of lowly ones to sacrifice in spite of
the testimony of these great people…”

His Eminence then said: “I don’t see death except success and I don’t
see life with oppressors except as deceit.”

His Eminence happily laid himself in the lap of death to bestow respect
and honor to humanity and sacrificed everything for his independence and
honor.

18. Deceit and tyranny of Umayyads
----------------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) was certain that the Umayyads would never leave him
alone and would leave no stone unturned to conspire against him and make
his life difficult till he gives them the pledge of allegiance.

Imam was the most prominent personality of the Islamic world and Muslims
had

much regard and devotion to him because His Eminence was the grandson of
their Prophet and Chief of the Youths of Paradise. And it is natural
that such a thing was unbearable for the Umayyads that someone should,
with all his dominance and lofty status be present in all the lands
because such a thing posed a great danger to their kingdom.

The Umayyads were sworn enemies of the Prophet because in the Battle of
Badr he had eliminated their elders and humiliated them absolutely.
Yazid was waiting for an opportunity to take revenge from Ahle Bayt for
the Battle of Badr. Narrators say that he said:

**“I am not from Khandaf if I do not take revenge from the descendants
of Ahmad.”**

When he had taken his revenge and satiated his malice by shedding blood
he began to cry and said:

“We have killed their elders of elders and taken revenge for Badr; thus
our account is leveled.”

Umayyads were well known for their deceit and oath- breaking. Because
Imam Hasan (‘a) made a peace treaty with Muawiyah and surrendered the
Caliphate seat to him. In spite of this Muawiyah betrayed his trust and
had him poisoned. And they had also given guarantee of security to
Muslim Ibn Aqil but again they betrayed the trust…We have mentioned many
examples of those whom Muawiyah had put to death because he feared
danger from them.

Imam Husain (‘a) declared that the Bani Umayyah would not leave him. His
Eminence told his brother, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyah: “Even if I enter into
the holes of reptiles they would take me out and kill me.” Also His
Eminence told Ja’far Ibn Sulaiman Zai-ee: “By Allah, they would not
leave me till they do not take out my heart from inside me.”

Imam (‘a) stood up against them and declared war and died an honorable
death that was to shake up the throne of their tyranny and destroy their
injustice and rebellion.

These were the factors that compelled the chief of the nobles to revolt
against Yazid’s regime.

Valueless Opinion
-----------------

A group of bigoted supporters of Bani Umayyah have considered the Imam’s
uprising to be aimed at obtaining rulership and wealth of the country.
This view is a sign of their malice towards Imam (‘a). And it is because
of the victory that His Eminence achieved with regard to his blessed
aim. It was a victory no other reformer of the world had ever achieved.

Probably some of them may be excused for being ignorant of the facts of
the mission of Imam Husain (‘a) because the Imam (‘a) was certain that
his revolution would be defeated in the martial field as his enemy was
having the support of a

huge army and had a lot of power while the Imam had no army to obtain
rulership. If it was as they claimed that his aim was rulership, when he
got the news of the martyrdom of Aqil and the about turn of the people
of Kufa, he could have gone back to Hijaz and again started gathering
forces to achieve his aim.

Imam (‘a) knew that the circumstances were in every way favorable for
the Umayyads and nothing was in his favor or benefit.

Ibn Khaldun says: “Husain’s defeat was a foregone conclusion because
Husain (‘a) had nothing with which he could have defeated the Umayyads
because the Mudhir tribe was bigoted to the Quraish and the Quraish was
malicious to the clan of Abde Manaf and the family of Abde Manaf was
hateful to the Umayyads. And the Quraish was aware of this and other
people also know it.”**[1]**

Imam’s revolution was aimed at the restoring of their honor and respect
that they had lost and which they had never expected. Therefore the
Imam’s uprising against Yazid’s regime was on the basis of Islamic
values that had been plundered by the Umayyads and which they were
cutting up into pieces and destroying them…

One of the contemporary writers says: “We have the right to ask what was
the aim of Husain (‘a) and why he rose up? If this aim was to eliminate
Yazid so that he may take up the Caliphate for himself that he had eyes
on we have not seen the insistence in His Eminence himself that he try
to go to Kufa in spite of the fact that the people had distanced from
him and submitted to Ibn Ziyad and they had aimed themselves to confront
the Imam. Even those not having a wide view knew that whatever His
Eminence was doing was not in any way improper. If Husain (‘a) had
lacked perception he would have turned back to Mecca so that he may once
again muster up means to achieve the Caliphate. If he had aimed to
obtain the seat of caliphate since the beginning and when the news of
killing of his cousin reached him he would have marched forward along
with his family members to take revenge for it as some historians have
claimed. And if their aim had been such, while he had hardly ninety
people of them and if he had gone to take revenge they would all have
been killed and thus he would have sacrificed his life for an aim which
was less in value and based on revenge.

Apart from this, his duty in revenge would have been such that he would
have turned back and gone to gather relatives and supporters so that a
group of revenge-seeking persons would have come into being.

On the basis of this, the matter was not connected with revenge and he
had no personal motive in it. Rather, the matter was concerned with the
Ummah and the problem was related to truth. The movement was the
movement of sacrifice, such that he desired to establish an example of
sacrifice. That Imam Husain (‘a) did not try to enter Kufa when he
learnt that people had turned away from him and his giving up the plan
of armed opposition was that he may hoist a flag through his sacrifice
for the few people who had some regard for faith and who were in search
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muqaddimah* Pg. 171, Qaidah 30

for a leader who moved to struggle against them and make efforts in this
regard. And also that the movement of their human consciousness and
their despair from being able to obtain their rights had become
obvious.”

This discussion contains the illuminated reality present behind the
mission of Imam Husain (‘a) because His Eminence had no personal motive
in mind. Rather his aim was to reform the Ummah and to keep them safe
from the hands of Umayyads.

Charting out the Course of Revolution
-------------------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) studied deeply the aspects of revolution and his
methods were based on complete knowledge and faith and he charted out
the program in accordance with it. He decided to employ all his powers
in confrontation and to sacrifice everything to save the Ummah, which
was involved in hardships at the hands of the political rulership. And
he wanted to achieve the liberation of their aspirations.

The German Orientalist, Morbin has studied the planning of Imam Husain
(‘a) for his revolution and he believes that the Imam began to expect
victory in the first stage itself and he was sure that he would indeed
succeed in his aim. Because the movement of Imam (‘a) against Yazid was
as he has said: “A firm determination such that it was difficult for him
to surrender himself to the demands of Yazid. And immediate victory was
also very difficult for him. On the basis of this he marched forward
with his family members and companions so that future victory would be
achieved in it after he had passed away. By these means he enlivened a
matter that had been suppressed and apart from this he had no hope of
life for himself.”

The chief of the nobles was certain that the reality of Islam was not
possible that it would succeed but with the sacrifice that he presents
with greatness. That is why he became determined and with faith decided
to present great sacrifices, some of which were as follows:

1. Sacrificing his own life
---------------------------

Imam (‘a) declared his determination to give up his life and he made
this clear in Mecca among the Muslims that the parts of his body would
be strewn between Nawawis and Kerbala and he also spoke of his martyrdom
during the journey to Iraq. He dwelt on the similarity between himself
and his brother, Yahya bin Zakaria. That is, his severed head shall be
presented to the tyrant of that time from the Umayyads just as the
severed head of Yahya (‘a) was presented to the tyrant of Bani Israel.

His Eminence was determined to be martyred and he considered life
valueless so that the standard of Islam is hoisted and the word of God
is exalted on the earth and in the same way he remained firm on his
resolve. And when the multitude of soldiers had surrounded him, he was
in no way worried while those mercenaries had mercilessly slaughtered
his supporters. Such was the horror of the tragedy that

human consciousness is shocked by the magnitude of the disaster.
However, His Eminence was the most steadfast and valiant among the
people in that terrible calamity. None was seen to have had more
determination and resolve neither before that or afterwards. History is
not able to find a greater example of such determination and powerful
resolve in any period that influenced the life of people with such a
sacrifice that it seemed a bolt of lightning had struck the oppressors
and its echo is still heard among the unjust people.

2. Sacrificing his family Members
---------------------------------

The chief of the nobles initiated his movement with such conviction that
no other social reformer had taken such a step in the whole world. It
was that he inculcated the sacrifice-giving belief in order to establish
justice and spread truth and righteousness among the people.

For this sacrifice, His Eminence charted out a program and he considered
it an important duty of his. When he was in Medina and when Umme Salma,
the Prophet’s wife rushed to stop him from leaving Medina, he mentioned
this and informed her about his martyrdom and the martyrdom of his
children…

Armed with this faith His Eminence rushed forward to the field of Jihad
and saw his chosen companions competing with each other to give up their
lives in his service. They were such that humanity has well recognized
their loyalty to truth. He was seeing the stars of Ahle Bayt and his
sons that how in the prime of youth their bodies were being cut up by
swords and spears and His Eminence was advising them patience and
steadfastness and saying: “Be patient O’ my nephews. Have patience O’ my
Ahle Bayt! After this you shall never face humiliation and
degradation.”**[1]**

The whole world was shocked by this great sacrifice which has shown
nobility of faith, loftiness of aim and greatness of principles for
which His Eminence took up confrontation. Without any doubt, this
movement will remain for centuries and generations in the same way so
that it can illuminate the way for the people and which may offer to
them the best of lessons in loyalty and sacrifice.

3. Sacrificing his property
---------------------------

The chief of the nobles sacrificed all his property and whatever he
possessed in the path of Quran and the way of religion. For the Umayyad
beasts moved to the camps of His Eminence after his martyrdom and
plundered whatever they could find over there. So much so that even
sheets and head coverings were not left for the ladies. The plunderers
took away these also. In this way they exhibited a decadent behavior and
their conscience which had been completely transmogrified.

4. Taking the ladies of his family with him
-------------------------------------------

One of the important aspects of his planning for the great revolution
was that he took along the ladies of the family of prophethood to
Kerbala while he knew that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Biharul Anwar* 45/36

they would have to suffer untold hardships. When Ibn Abbas restrained
him from this step he told him: “Indeed Allah has desired to see them in
captivity…”**[1]**

Through this His Eminence wanted to fulfill his everlasting message in
liberating the Ummah from the slavery of the Umayyads…Those exalted
ladies had a very significant role in the overall goal of the chief of
the martyrs. They awakened the people from a sleep that had overpowered
them and destroyed the awe of the Umayyad rule. The door of opposition
to that regime was opened by them. If it hadn’t been so none would have
dared to utter a single word against the tyrants and transgressors.
Whoever studied the aim of the Holy Imam (‘a) deeply has understood this
meaning. Some scholars and writers have pointed out this matter and some
of them are as follows:

A. Imam Kashiful Ghita: Imam Shaykh Muhammad Husain Aale Kashiful Ghita
(q.s.) in many of his writings has emphasized that the coming out of
Imam Husain (‘a) with his family members towards Kerbala was to perfect
the aim and to reach his objective of destroying the Umayyad rule and he
says: “Have you any doubt that if only Husain and his sons had been
martyred and those noble ladies had not stepped forward in these
circumstances to confront those tyrants the killing of His Eminence
would have indeed been forgotten and no one would have arisen to take
the revenge of his blood. His blood would have been wasted. Husain knew
that there was no other option for him. No one, other than those great
ladies, was capable of the tasks they accomplished. Hence it became
incumbent for His Eminence to take them along and it was not only to
have them made captives in oppression. It was actually because of a
political point of view and deep thought, that is the completion of aim
and achievement of objective of destroying Yazid’s rule and that he
rushed to finish them off before the people may apostatize to their
former infidelity of the period of Ignorance and that they destroy
Islam…”**[2]**

B. Ahmad Fahmi: Ustad Sayyid Ahmad Fahmi says, “Husain (‘a) realized
that he would be martyred because he was aware of the evil, debauchery
and tyranny of Yazid. After the killing of Husain, Yazid would have got
a free hand to torture the progeny of the Prophet (s), kill the innocent
children, defile the honor of ladies and take them and remaining
children from wilderness to wilderness and from town to town seeing
which the people would be shocked that no greater revenge can be taken
from women and children after killing their men and youths.

Under such circumstances His Eminence wanted to take revenge from Yazid
in his caliphate and to destroy him while he was in full power and
position. And in fact it happened in the way His Eminence had desired.
What Yazid and his group did had a profound effect on the conscience of
the community because he had behaved in such a horrible manner with the
progeny of prophethood, put to such disrespect, ladies who had not seen
anything but chastity, purity and honor. These actions of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Biharul Anwar* 44/364 (With a little difference)  
 **[2]** Imam Kashiful Ghita has discussed this in detail in his book,
*As-Siyasatul Husainiyah*

theirs motivated the poets to versify the defects and evils of the
Umayyads. The majority of Muslims began to despise the Umayyad Caliphate
and the hearts of believers were enraged. On the basis of this, Husain
(‘a) killed more severely than his own slaying.”**[1]**

C. Ahmad Mahmud Sobhi: Dr. Ahmad Mahmud Sobhi says: “At the time he (His
Eminence, Husain) did not accept but that he took his family members
along with himself. So that people may see how evil his enemy was such
that he neither did anything acceptable to religion nor anything
permitted by humanity. Therefore whatever is done to them along with the
spilling of his blood in the desert would not go in vain and that severe
allegations are made against him when there was no impartial witness
upon everything that passed between them and their enemies.”

Khanam Dr. Binte Ash-Shati says: “Zainab, Husain’s sister, destroyed the
victory of Ibn Ziyad and Bani Umayyah and she put drops of fatal poison
in the goblets of the victors. And all political events that occurred
after that like the revolt of Mukhtar, revolt of Ibn Zubair, downfall of
Umayyad regime, establishment of Abbaside rule and after that the
strengthening of Shia school of thought. The founder and originator of
all these was Zainab al-Kubra.**[2]**

We wish to ask what would have been the circumstances if Husain (‘a) had
been killed with his men without any witnesses from his side. The enemy
would have shown the incident according to their routine and thus the
martyrdom of Husain (‘a) in the desert would have been in vain…”**[3]**

These were some of the views in support of our own opinion. That is the
aim of Imam Husain (‘a) in taking his ladies and children along with him
to Kerbala was only to enlighten the general views and to explain the
lofty aims for which he had undertaken an uprising. The chief of these
aims being the elimination of the Umayyad rule whose danger was always
perceived on Islamic belief.

Another view is also prevalent that Late Allamah Shaykh Abdul Wahid
Muzaffar has explained. It is that His Eminence, Husain (‘a) took his
family with him for the fear that the Umayyads would arrest them and put
them into their prisons. He says, “If His Eminence, Husain (‘a) had left
the ladies in Medina, the government would have taken them under their
control; rather they would have been arrested openly and cast into dark
dungeons. In such circumstances, His Eminence would have had to choose
one of the two options each of which was alone sufficient to destroy his
objective:

One that he surrenders to the enemies and obeys them so that they may
release his honored women and children while it was against the reform
expected from the Imam that he had considered so necessary that he bore
all hardships.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 167  
 **[2]** *Batla Kerbala,* 176-180  
 **[3]** *Nazaria Imamat Nazd Shia Ithna Ashari,* Pg. 343

Or that he should continue to propagate his message and leave his family
ladies at the mercy of the enemies while the ladies were such that they
had always been secure in the veil of revelation, greatness and majesty.
This was something that the modest spirit of Husain (‘a) could never
accept and no sort of shame and modesty hindered the Bani Umayyah and no
one in the Islamic world was capable of stopping them.

Bani Umayyah had no qualms in committing any kind of evil deed but their
efforts were concentrated only for achieving their aims. They tried all
means to reach their objectives even if the means were against religion
and reason.

Have you not heard that the Umayyads cast into prison the wife of Amr
bin Hamaq Khuzai, wife of Ubaidullah bin Hurr Johfi and wife of Kumayt
Asadi also?**[1]**

Anyway, Imam (‘a) by his going out with the ladies destroyed the
political program of Umayyads and shattered all signs of oppression that
Muawiyah had established because the ladies of the family of revelation
took upon themselves the active role to enlighten the society and create
awareness in the people. They made them cognizant about the true face of
the Umayyads and tore away the disguise of religion that the Umayyads
had donned. If these ladies hadn’t been there the effects of Imam
Husain’s revolution would have been lost.

The greatest factor which made the revolution of Imam Husain (‘a)
eternal is this very decision of taking along with himself the ladies of
the Prophet’s household. This resulted in the spread of social
reformation throughout the periods of history which had a prominent role
in creating general awareness. They took up the standard of faith that
the Imam had hoisted and they propagated the principles for which the
Imam (‘a) had given up his life. That is why the granddaughter of the
Prophet and sister of Husain, Zainab binte Amirul Momineen, stepped
forward to the field of Jihad. While they were demolishing the forts of
oppressors and through his sacrifice her brother was destroying their
victories and giving them defeat and humiliation in their fate and was
filling up their houses with grief and sadness.

Leader of Husain’s caravan, lady of the family of prophethood, Her
Eminence Zainab (‘a) rushed to the battlefield while she drove away the
mercenaries from her brother, the great Imam. She came forward till she
came and stood over the mortal remains of her brother. The eyes of the
army were fixed on her. All the ears were attentive to hear what Her
Eminence had to say regarding the terrible calamities that had befallen
her one after another.

Her Eminence, with absolute calmness, without being worried and shaken
by the mountains of calamities looked up at the heavens and with the
fervor of faith and warmth of belief said:

“O Allah, please accept this sacrifice from us.”

By this statement she threw the first spark of revolution against the
Umayyad  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tauzeeh al-Ghaamiz min Asraarus Sunan wal Faraidh,* Pg. 297-298

regime after the passing away of her brother. That army wished it had
sunk into the earth. Because they realized what infamy they had
committed and how they had destroyed the principles of Islam and centers
of knowledge and faith.

When the prisoners of Ahle Bayt neared Kufa a huge crowd of Kufians came
out to see the captives. The chief lady of the Prophet’s family
delivered sermons to them that had them shocked and bewildered. People
were astonished and neither could they pay attention nor understand how
their houses fell into mourning. They were grieving their terrible
destiny because of the sin they had committed. When Her Eminence reached
the palace of that rebellious tyrant, the big Satan faced her gloating
over his success. He tauntingly asked, “How do you consider God has
treated your brother?”

The lady of Bani Hashim glared at him and with great daring replied,
“Nothing but good! They were a people for whom God had decreed death and
they went forward (bravely) to their resting places. God will gather you
and us together. You will plead your excuses to Him and we will be your
opponents before Him. At that time you shall see who is successful. May
your mother mourn for you, O son of Marjana.”

These statements exposed Ibn Marjana and disgraced him in a way that was
worse than a wound caused by spears.

When they reached Syria, through her effective sermon she shook up the
throne of Umayyads. In this way she obtained a victory that not even
well-armed armies could have achieved.

The decision of Imam Husain (‘a) to bring along with himself his
household was based on a deep knowledge and foresight through which he
was able to achieve a stupendous victory.

Here we conclude our discussion on the factors and causes responsible
for the rising of Imam Husain (‘a).

In Mecca
--------

After His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) announced his absolute denial to
give allegiance to Yazid. He set out, with his family and children to
Mecca which was the sanctuary of God and His Messenger and he took
refuge in the sacred house of Allah because the Almighty Allah has
granted security and peace to His servants in it.

Imam (‘a) turned to the city of peace so that he may remain safe and
secure from the mischief and oppressions of the Umayyads.

Historians say that His Eminence set out on the night of Sunday,
28<sup>th</sup> Rajab**[1]** while consternation had fallen on the
people of Medina because they were seeing that the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maqrizi, *Khatat* 2/286 Printed by Ahya al-Uloom-Lebanon. Ibne
Jauzi, *Munatzim,* 5/324 *Al Ifada min Tarikhul Aimmatus Saadah*. And in
*Al Futuh* 5/34 it has come that: His Eminence departed after three
nights of the month of Shaban had passed.

Prophet’s clan was leaving their town, never to return again.

The caravan left Medina moving swiftly while the Imam (‘a) was reciting
the words of God, “My Lord, deliver me from the unjust people.”**[1]**

The Holy Imam (‘a) has compared his mission to that of His Eminence,
Musa (‘a) against Firon. The mission of His Eminence against the tyrant
of his time, the Firon of this Ummah was same so that he may establish
truth and raise the lofty edifice of justice.

Imam (‘a) selected the route frequented most by travelers and he did not
diverge much from it. Some of his friends suggested to His Eminence,
like Ibn Zubair that he should leave the general route lest the Umayyad
agents may pursue and arrest him. However, the Imam (‘a) replied with
perfect calmness and unabashedly, “No, by Allah! I would never leave
this route till we decry the houses of Mecca or that Allah brings the
command of that which He likes.”

Imam (‘a) was satisfied with all the commands that God had destined and
he never weakened in this resolve. And those terrible disasters that no
man could have borne, failed to weaken his determination. During his
mission he used to quote the couplets of the poet, Yazid bin Mufragh:

**“Neither do I harass the birds in the morning, nor may Yazid summon
me.**

**That day I shall be disgraced with fear of death while it is behind me
so that I may run away from it.”[2]**

His Eminence was sure while he was firm on his great resolve that death
was in his pursuit to allow him to live without disrespect and disgrace
and that he does not surrender before Yazid…Some narrators say that His
Eminence was reciting the following couplets:

**“If a person does not support his wives and children he shall be
terribly disgraced.**

**Tomorrow, before Yazid may reach his aim, we would have accepted death
in the east and west.**

**We shall rush forward like blazing fire such that even if a lion sees
it, he would not dare to confront.”**

These couplets inform us about the determination of His Eminence to
accept death and his firm resolve never to accept the allegiance of
Yazid.

With Abdullah bin Muti’
-----------------------

On the way, Abdullah bin Muti’ Adawi hastened forward to welcome His
Eminence and he said, “O Aba Abdillah, may I be sacrificed for you,
where do you head?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Qasas 28:21  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/342

“I am going to Mecca. When I reach there I shall seek the advice of
Allah what I do after that.”

“O son of the daughter of Allah’s Messenger, may Allah destine good for
what you have intended. I am making a suggestion to you, please accept
it.”

“What is that?”

“When you go to Mecca, beware so that Kufians may not deceive you
because your father was martyred there and your brother was attacked and
injured in such a way that he almost died. So maintain the honor of the
sacred sanctuary as you are the chief of the Arabs in your time. Thus if
you are eliminated, your Ahle Bayt shall also be finished.”

Imam (‘a) thanked him and prayed for his well-being.**[1]**

The Imam’s caravan Imam moved forward and continued fast without
worrying for anything till they reached Mecca. When His Eminence decried
the mountains of Mecca he recited the verse of Quran:

**“And when he turned his face towards Madayan, he said: Maybe my Lord
will guide me in the right
path.”<sup>(</sup>[2]<sup>)(</sup>[3]<sup>)</sup>**

The Hijrat of His Eminence to Mecca was like the Hijrat of Musa (‘a) to
Madayan; because both of them had fled from the Firons of their time and
migrated to confront tyranny and rebellion.

Imam Husain (‘a) in Mecca
-------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) reached Mecca on Friday, the third Shaban**[4]** and
stayed in the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Jauzi, *Muntazim,* Part 5, Pg. 327. *Al-Futuh* 5/34-35. And
in *Tarikh* *Ibne Asakir* 14/182 it is mentioned: His Eminence, Husain
(a.s.) passed by Ibne Muti’ when they were busy at the well. So he asked
His Eminence, “Where are you going, may my parents be sacrificed on
you?” His Eminence replied, “I am going to Mecca.” And His Eminence
showed him one of the letters he had received from the people of Kufa.
Ibne Muti’ told him not to go there. But the Imam did not accept his
suggestion. After that Ibne Muti told him that their work at the well
was complete and that they had already struck water. He requested the
Imam to pray that the water be potable. Imam (a.s.) told him to get some
water from it which was immediately presented to him. He tasted some of
it and directed that the remaining be returned to the well. The water of
the well became potable. And in *Waseelatul Maal fee idda manaqibul
Aal,* Pg. 185 it is quoted from Safiuddin that: Abdullah came to His
Eminence, Husain (a.s.) and said, “May I be sacrificed on you, where are
you going?” His Eminence replied, “Right now I am going to Mecca and
after that I shall seek divine counsel and do as Allah wills.” He said,
“May Allah keep you all in good health and make us be sacrificed on you.
You be the caretaker of the Sanctuary as you are the leader of Arabs and
the people of Hijaz do not consider anyone your equal. People shall come
to from all over. Do not leave the vicinity of the Sanctuary, may my
paternal and maternal uncles be sacrificed on you.”  
 **[2]** *Al-Futuh* 5/37  
 **[3]** Surah Qasas 28:22  
 **[4]** Ibne Jauzi, *Muntazim*, *Al-Ifada min Tarikhul Aaimmatus Saada*

house of Abbas Ibn Muttalib.**[1]** The people of Mecca welcomed him
according to his honor and they met him day and night and inquired from
him about religious laws and traditions of the Prophet.

Ibn Kathir says, “In Mecca people met him, sat around him and heard his
talks and took benefit from whatever they heard from him and whatever
they heard him narrate, they used to note it down.”**[2]**

Through spiritual magnetism, His Eminence attracted the hearts of the
people towards him. People used to make a circle around him so that they
may satiate their souls with the continued light of his grandfather that
spread knowledge and effulgence in the earth.

Attention of Hajj Pilgrims and Umrah visitors towards His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All those people who came from various provinces for the Hajj and Umrah
of the House of Allah, also began to make it a point to pay visits to
His Eminence**[3]** and they also called others to the Holy Imam (‘a).
They used to sit besides him. One of them used to ask him about
knowledge and traditions and other asked him beneficial things and
obtained complete information from him so that through those lights they
may be guided in the darkness of their life.**[4]** Imam (‘a) did not
waste a single second of his time without spending it to spread his view
and social awareness. His Eminence used to advise the people to remain
awakened and warned them of the Umayyad policy as its aim was to enslave
the Muslims and humiliate them.

Consternation of Ibn Zubair
---------------------------

Ibn Zubair had fled from the allegiance of Yazid and taken refuge in
Mecca and the frequenting of people in Imam’s company and their devotion
and respect to the Imam was very distasteful to him, because he himself
was devoid of a pleasing nature and kindness.

Zaid bin Ali Juzani says, “He had such qualities that with them he was
unfit for caliphate because he was miserly and inhospitable. He had bad
habits and was jealous of others. He expelled Muhammad bin Hanafiyah and
exiled Abdullah bin Abbas to Taif.”**[5]**

Among his personal traits were lowliness and miserliness. A poet has
said thus about him:

**“By your Lord I have seen Ibn Zubair trying to obtain caliphate at the
cost of a date fruit.”[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/207 and in *Akhbarud Daul,* Pg. 229 it
is mentioned: His Eminence arrived at Sha’b Ali  
 **[2]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah*: 8/151  
 **[3]** Ibne Sabbagh, *Al-Fusul al-Muhimma*, 183, *Waseelatul Maal fi
ad Manaqibul Aal*, 185  
 **[4]** *Nahzatul Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 57  
 **[5]** *Fawaatul Wafayaat* 2/173  
 **[6]** Ibne Qutaybah, *Al-Ma’rif,* Pg. 225

During his brief rule the people were troubled with hunger and
deprivations. They were involved in different types of problems. Their
poets have versified their despair and hopelessness in the following
way:

**“Slaves complain to the caliph and bemoan anger and starvation.**

**What was our fault and what had distressed us that which king had
become dominant on other around us.”[1]**

Ibn Zubair used to hunt the simple people, deceive the less intelligent
ones and made a show of piety and abstemiousness just as Imam Amirul
Momineen (‘a) has described him: “He uses the trap of religion to hunt
for the world.”**[2]**

It is confirmed that he revolted against the Umayyad regime not for the
sake of Allah. Actually he wanted to obtain kingdom and power. Abdullah
bin Umar had expressed this reality when his wife insisted on him to
pledge allegiance and she reminded him of his obedience and piety. So he
said, “Have you not seen those donkeys of Muawiyah on whom he traveled
for Hajj and they were grey? Ibn Zubair does not want anything except
that.”**[3]**

Anyway, nothing was more unbearable for Ibn Zubair except the matter of
His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a). Because he knew that in the presence of
Imam Husain (‘a) no one would pledge allegiance to him. Since His
Eminence was the grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) and there was no
one equal to him on the face of the earth as Ibn Kathir has said.**[4]**

Oakley has also emphasized this matter and he says: Ibn Zubair perfectly
knew that as long as His Eminence, Husain (‘a) remained, all his efforts
shall be in vain. But were he to get some harm the way of caliphate
would become easy for him.”

Ibn Zubair suggested to Imam Husain (‘a) to go to Iraq so that he may
get relief. He used to ask him, “What hinders you from going to your
Shias and Shias of your father? By Allah, if I had such supporters, I
would never have left them.”**[5]**

Ibn Zubair was not really sincere to the Holy Imam (‘a) and he was not
having any true concern towards the Holy Imam. He only wished that His
Eminence may go away and he be relieved of worry regarding his presence
in Mecca. However, the Imam was not ignorant of his true intentions. His
Eminence told his companions, “This one”, pointing to Ibn Zubair,
“Nothing in the world is better for him except that I leave Hijaz. He
knows that people do not consider me equal to him. He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 7/48  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 7/48  
 **[3]** *Al-Mukhtar,* Pg. 95  
 **[4]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah*: 8/151. And in *Waseelatul Maal*, Pg.
185 it is mentioned: The presence of Husain was unbearable for the son
of Zubair, because as long as Husain (a.s.) was in that area the people
would not give allegiance to him and he would not be able to gain from
them what he wanted.  
 **[5]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 4/170, (First events of year 60)

wishes I go away from here so that he may get a free hand.”**[1]**

The Umayyad regime also did not pay much attention to Ibn Zubair. It
focused all its efforts on Imam Husain (‘a).

Ghazzali’s view
---------------

Shaykh Muhammad Ghazzali thinks it was unlikely that Ibn Zubair
suggested Imam Husain (‘a) to go to Iraq so that he (Ibn Zubair) may get
a free hand. He says: “Abdullah Ibn Zubair was most God-fearing and
there was no one more rooted in Islam than him that he could have
stooped to such a lowly act.”**[2]**

This view is absolutely against reality. Ibn Zubair had no sort of
religiosity because it was he who had flamed the fire of Battle of Jamal
and who instigated his father to take part in it. He was that same who
sacrificed everything to obtain wealth and power. He was the most
malicious foe of the Purified Progeny. For someone like this, is it
possible that he could be pious and rooted in Islam?

Cheap view
----------

Among the cheap opinions is that of Anees Zakaria who is well-known for
his loyalties towards Bani Umayyah. He says: “One of the most important
factors that led to the uprising of Imam Husain (‘a) was the instigation
of Ibn Zubair to His Eminence to move to Iraq to organize a revolt which
had a deep effect on the Imam’s thinking.”**[3]**

This statement is absolutely baseless because Imam Husain (‘a) did not
pay attention to the suggestion of Ibn Zubair and he was not deceived by
it. Rather there were other factors that motivated the Imam (‘a) to head
towards Iraq, that we have explained in detail in the previous chapter.

Anxiety of the local regime
---------------------------

The local regime of Mecca fell into anxiety by the coming of the Imam
and it feared that the Imam may make it the centre of his politics for
his call and make it the locale of announcement against the Damascus
regime. Therefore, Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq, the governor of Mecca hastened
to Imam Husain (‘a) and asked, “What has brought you here?”

“I have come for Allah and the refuge of this House…”**[4]**

Imam (‘a) took refuge in the sacred House of Allah which guaranteed
security and protection from all oppressions for all those who entered
it.

Ashdaq did not pay any heed to the Imam’s reply. Instead he wrote a
letter to Yazid informing him about the arrival of Holy Imam in Mecca
and also about the constant stream of visitors who met the Imam, their
crowding around him and their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/38. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/383  
 **[2]** *Min Ma’alimul Haqq,* Pg. 139  
 **[3]** *Ad-Daulatul Amawiya fish Shaam,* Pg. 54  
 **[4]** *Tadkiratul Khawaas*, Pg. 237

congregations in honor of Imam Husain (‘a). He also mentioned that this
could create a great danger for the Umayyad regime.

Yazid’s Anxiety
---------------

When Yazid learnt of Husain’s denial to his allegiance and along with it
that he has fled to Mecca, made it a center of his mission and that
people of Iraq were sending letters and delegations to Imam for his
allegiance, he (Yazid) was filled with anxiety. He penned a letter to
Abdullah Ibn Abbas, the text of which was as follows:

“So to say: Your cousin and the enemy of Allah and Ibn Zubair have
refused to pledge my allegiance and gone to Mecca. And they intend to
spread mischief and they have put themselves in mortal danger. But Ibn
Zubair shall be killed by sword and finished but as for Husain, I wish
to make excuse for your Ahle Bait regarding him. I have heard that some
Shias of Iraq write to him and he corresponds with them. They are
promising him the caliphate and he is promising leadership. You know
what relationship exists between you and us. And for what reasons has
Husain has cut off these relations and sanctities? You are the leader of
your Ahle Bayt and chief of your nation. So you meet and speak to him
and restrain him from this mischief. If you are able to stop him, he
shall be accorded security and honor from us. I will issue for him that
which my father had issued with regard to his brother. If he wants more
I guarantee whatever he wants. I guarantee whatever he demands and I
shall fulfill your guarantee and I shall give him a position and give
him strong pledges and oaths till he agrees to my proposals and he shall
trust all the points. Hasten in replying to my letter and stating your
demands. And peace be on you.”

He concluded his letter with the following couplets:

**“O rider who rides the mount with speed and moves fast.**

**Move to Quraish in spite of the distance, there is God between me and
Husain and relationship.**

**Whatever I pledge Him standing near the Ka’ba, tomorrow he shall
fulfill it.**

**You have considered your people important due to the pride in your
mother. A mother, by my life, the palace of chastity and greatness.**

**She was such that none could be her equal, daughter of the Prophet and
the best of men and all know this.**

**I know or I think in the way I think it is. Such that even my
expectation shall prove true.**

**That for which you call him for, shall kill you or the consequences
shall befall him.**

**O my people, do not light the fire of war that has been extinguished
and hold tight the rope of peace-treaty.**

**Those who preceded you tried to resort to fighting and communities
were destroyed in it.**

**So be just for your people and do not pull them to mischief because
sometimes the feet of mischief-making people slip.”**

This letter proves the foolishness of Yazid because he thought that the
Imam had organized the uprising to obtain wealth and riches and he was
not aware that the Imam had taken a stand against him for the sake of
the Almighty Allah and that he aimed only for the reward of the
Hereafter.

Response of Ibn Abbas
---------------------

Ibn Abbas replied to him as follows: “So to say: I received your letter
in which you have continuously mentioned about the flight of Husain and
Ibn Zubair to Mecca. As for Ibn Zubair, he is a man cut off from us and
who is involved in his selfish desires. Apart from this he conceals
malice for us like the flint stone conceals fire. He has saved the
malice so that Allah may not release his prisoner so you may have your
view about him…And for Husain, when he entered Mecca leaving behind the
sanctuary of his grandfather and the house of his father, I asked him
about his mission and he told me that your officials have ill-treated
him in Medina and spoke ill to him. Hence he came to me and took refuge
in the sanctuary of Allah. I shall meet him regarding what you have
written and I shall not refrain from dispensing good counsel so that
Allah may bring about unity and the fire of mischief of war and conflict
will be put out. And may Allah keep the blood of the community safe.
Thus, have fear of God, secretly and openly and you must not ever be
such that displease the Muslims or that you sit in ambush to oppress
them. Or that you dig a pit for them because those who dig a pit for
others fall into it themselves. And many are the hopeful ones who do not
fulfill their desires. So for yourself choose the recitation of Quran
and spreading of Sunnah. You should be fasting and praying such that the
vain pastimes of the world and sinful activities may not hinder you from
them. As whatever keeps you occupied from Allah shall harm you and shall
be destroyed and whatever keeps you occupied in the matters of the
Hereafter, shall profit you and it shall be lasting. And peace be upon
you…”**[1]**

This letter contains the following points:

1. Bani Hashim had no connection with Ibn Zubair and they were not
responsible for his revolt. Because he was inimical to them and was
waiting for an opportunity to take revenge and he had a negative opinion
about them.

2. Imam Husain (‘a) came to Mecca from Medina not to create mischief.
But it was due to the ill-behavior of the officials of Yazid to him. He
came to Mecca to take refuge in the sanctuary of Allah’s house.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tadkiratul Khawaas*, Pg. 237-239, Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/207
