Imam Husain’s Revolution: Activities and Programs Part 2
========================================================

Deposition of Governor of Medina
--------------------------------

Walid bin Utbah bin Abu Sufyan became the governor of Medina after the
deposition of Marwan. On the basis of what historians say: He was a
cunning and sharp man. He was peace-loving and he did not like mischief.
When Imam Husain (‘a) refused to give allegiance for Yazid, he did not
force His Eminence or dealt with him severely and he did not compel His
Eminence to something against his will. Rather he created a favorable
condition for His Eminence to go to Mecca, without putting any hindrance
in this regard with the holy Imam even though Marwan had urged him to be
tough with Husain (‘a). However he did not agree to this.

The Umayyads informed Yazid about his stance and soft approach to His
Eminence. He was enraged and he deposed him from the
governorship.**[1]** And he transferred the position to the harshest of
the Umayyads, Amr Ibn Saeed Ashdaq,**[2]** who was well known for his
cruelty and tyranny. After getting the appointment in the month of
Ramadan he went there and lead the congregation prayer of Isha (Night
Prayer). In the morning he came out to the people wearing a red dress
and a scarlet turban. The people regarded him with critical eyes. He
mounted the pulpit and said:

“O people of Medina! What’s wrong with you that you stare at me like
that? As if you shall slay me with your swords. Have you forgotten what
you have done? If revenge had been taken from you in the first instance
you would not have repeated it. You have been deceived that you have
killed Uthman, you got him as a patient and forbearing Imam from whom
anger had gone away and his ego had been destroyed. So take care of
yourselves, as an Imam has got authority over you who is in the prime of
his youth. He is having long hopes, a firm base and powerful bones. Who
has the eye on the present circumstances and he has faced all of them.
And if he chews, he swallows and if he kicks, he shatters into pieces.
Neither is he afraid of any desert nor any stick creates sound for him.”

And in his discourse he mentioned about Ibn Zubair and said, “By God! We
shall pursue him and if he enters the Kaaba we shall rain fire on it
even if the people don’t like it.”**[3]**

The tyrant’s nose began to bleed on the pulpit. A man threw a turban to
him and he cleaned he blood with it. A man spoke up in malice, “By the
Lord of the Kaaba! Blood in a turban on the pulpit is an evil which
shall become widespread and known to all.”**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah*: 8/148  
 **[2]** “Ashdaq” had got this title due to his boastful way of speaking
(that is he did not accord respect to anyone). It is said that he was
given this title because his chin was crooked. This matter is mentioned
in *Al-Bayan wat Tibbiyyin* 1/315. And it is said that due to his excess
badmouthing about His Eminence, Ali he was affected with crookedness of
the throat. This point is mentioned in *Mojam ash-Shoara,* Pg. 231  
 **[3]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 4/268  
 **[4]** *Simtun Nujoomul Awaali* 3/57

It has been narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s) that he said, “A
tyrant from the tyrants of Bani Umayyah shall get nosebleed while on the
pulpit.”**[1]**

Ashdaq decided to quell opposition with an iron hand because his
predecessor, Walid had been deposed only because of his soft approach to
His Eminence, Husain (‘a). Maybe one of the reason why Imam Husain (‘a)
left Mecca was that he was concerned about the tyranny of this tyrant
and it was feared that he may kill Imam (‘a) while he were in the
sanctuary of God.

His Eminence, Husain (‘a) with Ibn Umar and Ibn Abbas
-----------------------------------------------------

When his Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) arrived in Mecca, Abdullah Ibn Abbas
and Abdullah Ibn Umar were settled over there. Both of them hastened to
welcome the Holy Imam (‘a) and pay their respects to him. Though
actually they wanted him to go away from Mecca. So Ibn Umar said to His
Eminence:

“O Aba Abdillah! May God have mercy on you. Fear Allah as your return is
to Him. You are aware of the enmity of the people of this clan (Bani
Umayyah) towards you. A person from them – Yazid bin Muawiyah – has
become the ruler. I think that people would be lured by wealth and
riches and they may kill you. And a large number of people would be
killed because of you because I have heard the Messenger of Allah (s)
say: “Husain shall be killed and if they kill him or desert him or do
not help him, the Almighty Allah shall degrade and humiliate them till
the day of Qiyamat. I suggest that you make a peace treaty so people may
join it and remain patient as you had maintained patience with Muawiyah.
Perhaps the Almighty Allah would judge between you and the unjust
people…”

The chief of the nobles asked him, “I should pledge allegiance to Yazid
and make peace with him? While the Prophet (s) has said what he said
regarding him and his father?”

Ibn Abbas began to speak and said to His Eminence: “O Aba Abdillah! You
are right. The Prophet said during his lifetime: What I have to do with
Yazid? May Allah not bless Yazid. He would kill Husain, my (grand)son
and the son of my daughter, and by the One in Whose hand is my life, my
son would be killed among a people and they shall not help him, such
that Allah would create a contradiction between their word and deed.”

Ibn Abbas and His Eminence, Husain (‘a) began to weep. Then His Eminence
looked at Ibn Abbas and said, “O Ibn Abbas! Do you know that I am the
son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s)?”

“Yes, by Allah!...I know that except for you there is no one in the
world who is the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s) and
that it is obligatory for this Ummah to help you just as Prayer and
Zakat is obligatory. Such that each of them would not be accepted
without the other…”

His Eminence, Husain told him, “O Ibn Abbas! What do you say regarding
the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Majmauz Zawaid* 5/240

people who drove out the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah
(s) from his home and abode, from the tomb and sanctuary of His Prophet
and the neighborhood of his grave and the place of his Hijrat? And they
terrified and harassed him such that neither could he get peace at any
place nor could he take refuge in a locality. They are determined to
kill him and shed his blood even though he has neither associated anyone
with Allah nor sought the help of anyone other than Him. And neither has
he deviated from the principles followed by the Messenger of Allah (s)…”

Ibn Abbas agreed to what he had said and in support of His Eminence
said, “I have nothing to say about them except that they have
disbelieved in God and His Prophet and they do not go to pray except
that they be tired and bored by it. They show-off their religiosity and
except for a few none remembers Allah. They roam about among these and
those whom Allah misguides cannot find a path towards Him. By way of
example of these is that a great punishment shall befall. As for you, O
son of the Messenger of Allah (s), you are the head of the pride of the
Messenger of Allah (s), so do not think of son of the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (s) that the Almighty Allah is unaware of what the
oppressors commit. I testify that one who avoids your company or those
who wage war against you and your Prophet, he shall never gain
anything…”

Imam Husain (‘a) agreed to what he said and remarked, “Yes, by Allah!”
At that time Ibn Abbas told him about his decision to help the Imam and
he said, “O son of the Messenger of Allah (s), may my life be sacrificed
on you. As if you want me. And want me to help you. By the God, except
Whom there us no deity. If I fight with this sword for you to the extent
that both my hands are separated from my shoulders I would not have
fulfilled even one part of the right. Even then I am at your service and
waiting for your order.”

Ibn Umar interrupted the statement of Ibn Abbas, turned to His Eminence
and said, “Give up your decision, return to Medina right now and become
a part of peace of this community. And do not go away from your native
place and the sanctuary of your maternal grandfather, the Messenger of
Allah (s). Do not take any responsibility for these people when there is
no benefit in it for them. If you like, do not pay allegiance, you are
free to follow your view because Yazid bin Muawiyah may not live for
long and the Almighty Allah shall issue His command for you.”

Imam disagreed with him and rejected what he suggested, “It is a pity
forever. As long as the sky and the earth remain, I ask you O Abdullah,
am I guilty according to your opinion? Thus if I am on the wrong, turn
me back. I shall accept it and agree to what you say.”

Ibn Umar said, “By Allah, No! Allah does not blames the son of the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s) and no one like Yazid Ibn
Muawiyah is equal to you in purity and proximity to the Messenger of
Allah (s). However, I fear that they shall smite this illuminated face
of yours (killing you). And you shall see in this

community that none shall support you. So come back to Medina with us.
If you like you may withhold the oath of allegiance and remain in your
house.”

Imam (‘a) addressed him and informed him about the evil and bad
intentions of Bani Umayyah towards His Eminence, saying, “Alas, O Ibn
Umar, these people would never leave me. As long as I am present and
they could not get hold of me they will try all means to compel me to
give allegiance or put me to death. Do you know, O Abdullah! How
worthless is the world for Allah. That an oppressor of Bani Israel
brought the severed head of Yahya bin Zakaria while that head was
speaking to them to perfect the argument. Do you not know, O Abu Abdur
Rahman! The Bani Israel used to kill seventy prophets from dawn to
sunrise and after that sit in the market conducting their business as
usual, as if they had not done anything? The Almighty Allah did not
requite them immediately; but later He caught hold of them with a strong
grip!”**[1]**

This conversation shows that His Eminence had made a firm determination
to rise up against Yazid, because he was not likely to leave the Imam to
his condition. So there were only two options. Either he pledge
allegiance humiliating his Islam and defiling its sanctity or lay down
his life with honor and respect. His Eminence gave preference to death
for the sake of the honor of his community and its sanctities.

Bequest of Imam Husain (‘a) to Ibn Abbas
----------------------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) turned his attention to Ibn Abbas and made the
following bequest to him and said, “You, O Ibn Abbas, are the cousin of
my father. I know you since the time you have continued to enjoin good
in this same way. You were with my father and you made suggestions that
were good and beneficial. My father used to take you in his
consultations and sought your opinion. You also responded with sincere
advices. So go to Medina in the safety of Allah and do not conceal any
of your news from me. Till I see those people giving me a positive reply
and agree to help me I shall make this place as my residence. When they
leave me, I shall select another place. And by the words by which
Ibrahim sought refuge at the time of being thrown into the fire, I shall
also take refuge from these words. Allah is sufficient for me and the
best of the helpers. And the fire became cool and safety for
him…”**[2]**

Letters of Imam Husain (‘a) to Leaders of Basra
-----------------------------------------------

Imam (‘a) wrote to five chiefs of Basra and he requested them for help
and taking of his right by uprising. And he wrote letters to the
province leaders. Some of them were as follows:

1. Malik Ibn Musamma Bakri, 2. Ahnaf bin Qais, 3. Mundhir bin Amr, 4.
Masud bin Amr, 5. Qais bin Mitham,  and 6. Umar Ibn Abdullah bin
Muammar**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Futuh* 5/38-43  
 **[2]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 1/193  
 **[3]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/23

“So to say: Know that the Almighty Allah chose Muhammad (s) among His
creatures and bestowed him with the honor of His prophethood and
selected him for His messengership. After that He called him to Himself
in a condition that he may dispense sincere advices to His creatures and
deliver the message he was sent with. My family members were saints,
successors and his legatees and the most eligible for his position but
the people considered themselves more superior to us and we did not
object and we did not like conflicts while we know that we were more
rightful for that which they had taken for themselves. I am sending my
messenger to you with this letter and I call you by the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of His Messenger because the Sunnah has been destroyed
and innovation has come into being. So if you listen to what I say, I
shall guide you to the right path…”**[1]**

This letter has clearly explained that caliphate is the right of Ahle
Bayt (‘a) because they are the most proximate to Prophet and the most
well-versed in knowledge with regard to the aims of His Eminence.
However those people had taken the caliphate to themselves and the
Purified Progeny could not but remain patient on it. Because they did
not like mischief and they desired unity of Muslims. In the same way
this letter contains the call for truth and all its profundities and
meanings. Because it has invited them to help in the revival of the Book
of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet as the Umayyad regime had
purposely distanced them from public life.

Some writers have expressed opinions about the letter of Imam Husain
(‘a) to the people of Basra and stated:

“This letter of Imam Husain (‘a) to the people of Basra shows how aware
he was regarding his responsibility and he was moving forward with it.
That is why the people of Basra had not written to His Eminence and they
had not invited him to their city like the people of Kufa had done. On
the basis of this His Eminence wrote to them and informed them about the
facts. Because when His Eminence decided to rise up for religion and his
community, his determination was from the depths of the spirit and
conscience and not because of the invitation of the people of Kufa.”

Anyway, Imam (‘a) sent his letters with his slave named Sulaiman to
Basra. His patronymic was Abu Razeen. He traversed the distance very
soon and conveyed the letters to the addressees.

Reply of Ahnaf bin Qais
-----------------------

Ahnaf bin Qais, the Iraqi leader, replied the Imam in the following
words without adding anything else:

**“Therefore be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true and let not
those who**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/375

**have no certainty hold you in light
estimation.”<sup>(</sup>[1]<sup>)(</sup>[2]<sup>)</sup>**

He wanted to suggest that the Holy Imam (‘a) should remain patient and
that he should not be influenced by those who have no faith in Allah and
those who have no worth in the view of Allah.

Evil Deeds of Mundhir bin Jarud
-------------------------------

 Mundhir bin Jarud was of the worst and evil-minded person of the Arabs.
He arrested the Imam’s messenger and sent him to Ibn Ziyad who was his
son-in-law so that he may prove his sincerity and loyalty to Ibn Ziyad.
Ibn Marjana had him executed the night he (Ibn Marjana) set out for
Kufa.**[3]**

Some historians have justified the actions of Mundhir and they say that
he was helpless because he feared that the messenger might have been
sent by Ibn Marjana to test him. That is why he had him sent to Ibn
Ziyad. This justification is unacceptable because first he should have
investigated the matter to find the truth.

Positive Reply of Yazid bin Masud
---------------------------------

The great leader, Yazid bin Masud Nahshali, gave a positive reply to the
call of truth and on the basis of his faith and spirit of belief he rose
up to help the Holy Imam (‘a). He organized a public meeting and invited
the neighboring tribes including:

1. Bani Tamim, 2. Bani Hanzalah, and 3. Bani Sa’ad.

When these tribes arrived he stood up to address them. First he turned
to Bani Tamim and asked, “How do you consider my position among you and
my ancestry?”

Bani Tamim raised its voice and they guaranteed him absolute loyalty and
acknowledged their respect to him. They said in one voice, “Hear! Hear!
By Allah, you are the support of the poor and the center of pride and
you are central to respectability. You have superiority over all…”

He was pleased with their support and he continued his discourse, “I
have gathered you for a purpose so that I may consult you and seek help
regarding it.”

They all expressed their loyalty and help to him in unison. They said,
“By Allah, we say to you in all sincerity and we shall try to do our
best. So tell us about it.”

At that time necks were stretched and people looked on with bated
breaths this great leader. He continued, “Muawiyah had died and may he
be degraded. By Allah he has been destroyed and eliminated but left the
door of injustice and sin open. And the pillars of oppression are
shaken. He organized an allegiance and thought that he had performed a
stable action. Alas! He failed in his aim. He took counsel but could not
reach any conclusion. Yazid is a drunkard and well-known  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Rum 30:60  
 **[2]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/298  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/357-358

for transgression and sinful acts. He stood up and claimed the caliphate
of Muslims. And he exercised his command on them without their
permission. He had not an iota of knowledge and has no forbearance as
well. By Allah! To fight Jihad against him in religion is superior to
making war against the polytheists.

This is Husain Ibn Ali (‘a), the grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s),
possessing true nobility and having correct views. A superiority that
cannot be described and a knowledge that is unbounded. He is more
deserving for this matter. Due to his seniority and proximity and his
kindness to the old and the young he has been accorded the position of
Imamate and final authority that we must accept and honor. It should not
be that you close your eyes to truth and move to falsehood. On the day
of Jamal, Sakhar bin Qais was humiliated. So move to the help of the son
of the Prophet and wash away that blemish. One who refrains from this
shall be cursed by Allah by decrease in progeny and humiliation among
relatives. Thus I have worn the dress of war and coat of mail. Those who
do not die fighting shall die in any case and those who try to flee
shall never be able to escape. So give a proper reply, may Allah have
mercy on you.”

This discourse contains many important points. The chief of them are as
follows:

First: It considered the death of Muawiyah as insignificant and that he
left the door of oppression.

Secondly: It has vehemently denounced the allegiance that Muawiyah
organized for Yazid.

Thirdly: The evil traits that were present in Yazid. Like he was always
drunk and devoid of forbearance and knowledge about the truth.

Fourthly: It invited the people to gather in support of His Eminence
Imam Husain (‘a) because he possessed fine qualities of originality of
view, was well-versed in knowledge, having seniority of age, kindness to
young and old and other good manners that qualified His Eminence for the
position of Imamate.

Fifthly: He informed the people that he was himself determined to help,
support and defend the Imam (‘a).

When the great leader concluded his discourse the elders of Bani
Hanzalah began to speak and expressed their full backing for him. They
said: “O Aba Khalid! We are the arrows of your bow (we shall do as
directed). If you take our help, you shall gain victory and you shall
never find us wanting. By Allah you should not have any worry for we
shall always be with you and you won’t have to face any problem. Except
that we shall also face it with you. We shall help you with our swords
and whenever you want, we shall defend you with our bodies.”

This logic of pride expressed their feelings and loyalties towards him.
After that Bani Aamir stood up and spoke of their deep loyalty and said,
“O Aba Khalid! We are sons of your father and your equals. If you become
angry we cannot remain happy. If you move we cannot remain still. It is
upto you. You can count on our support whenever you need…”

However Bani Saad expressed negative opinion and refused any sort of
assistance. They said, “O Aba Khalid, the worst thing in our view is
opposition to you and leaving your view. Sakhar bin Qais humiliated us.
He called us on the Day of Jamal to abandon fighting and our respect
remained intact. Give us some time so that we may seek counsel and then
we shall inform you of our decision…”

He was displeased with their negative reply and he denounced them
saying, “If you do it, by Allah, the sword shall never be lifted from
you and your sword shall be used among you in the same way…”

Yazid bin Masud’s Reply to Imam (‘a)
------------------------------------

Yazid bin Masud wrote a letter to Imam (‘a) which proves his nobility
and high status and that he accepted the invitation of the Holy Imam
(‘a). The text of the letter is as follows:

“So to say: Your letter was received and I was informed about your call
to me to benefit from your obedience and a part of my righteousness
which is due to my devotion to you. The Almighty Allah never leaves the
earth devoid of a person who acts on good and who guides to
righteousness. You are the proof of Allah on the creatures and their
security on earth. You are the branch of the Ahmadi olive and he was its
root and you are the stem. So rise up as success is for you. I have
turned the loyalty of Bani Tamim to you and made them as obedient as
camels that are given water after three days. And by persuading the Bani
Saad for your obedience, I have washed their hearts with rain water. As
if lighting shone on them and they became illuminated…”

This letter is brimming with respect and good manners towards the Holy
Imam (‘a).

Some historians say that the Imam (‘a) received this letter on the
10<sup>th</sup> of Mohurrum after his companions and relatives had been
martyred. And His Eminence was alone and helpless and the rebellious
armies had surrounded him. When His Eminence read the letter he said,
“What would happen to you? May Allah keep you safe from fear and may he
satiate you on the day of the great thirst.”

When Ibn Masud was about to set out for rendering help to Imam (‘a) he
received the terrible news of the Imam’s martyrdom. He was so much
struck with grief and remorse that he passed away in it.**[1]**

Positive Reply of Yazid Basri
-----------------------------

Yazid bin Masud Basri gave a positive reply to the call of truth.
According to the statements of historians he used to visit the residence
of Maria bin Saad or Manqadh as it was the place where Shias used to
gather. The people were informed about the merits of Ahle Bayt (‘a) at
the place and their greatness and virtues used to be publicized from
there. When Imam (‘a) invited the people of Basra to help him, Yazid bin
Nabit gave a positive reply to it and of his ten sons, Abdullah and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 16-19

Ubaidullah joined him but their friends feared that the police appointed
by Ibn Ziyad would arrest them. He said to them, “When the hooves of my
beast fall on smooth desert ground, all those who are with me shall be
safe.**[1]**

Then he mounted his horse and his slave, Aamir, Saif bin Malik and Adham
bin Umayyah departed with him and joined the Imam at Mecca till they
were in the service of Imam (‘a) in Iraq and they were martyred in
Kerbala along with the Imam (‘a).**[2]**

Opposition of Iraq to Umayyads
------------------------------

The majority of Iraqis were displeased with the Umayyad regime and they
did not like their dominance and control. This was due to some reasons
and in our view they were as follows:

1 – During Muawiyah’s time Iraq was governed by an iron hand and the
governor did not follow any sort of system. There was mostly military
rule which did not follow any fixed law. Especially during the period of
Ziyad bin Sumaiyyah who used to hold the innocent as guilty and the
offenders as innocent. He used to kill people on suspicion and
allegations. This caused spread of hatred towards the Umayyads.

2 – Kufa, during the time of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) was the seat of
Islamic government and during the time of Muawiyah Damascus became the
seat of government and capital. Iraq became a province like other
provinces and the Central Treasury was transferred from there. After the
transfer of caliphate and treasury from there, the Kufians began to
regret their ill fortune and the Imam’s name signified for them a sign
of lost prosperity. Their hopes became reposed in the sons of the Holy
Imam (‘a) and they were the brave and capable leaders who would annex
Damascus and gain power again. This was so because the Iraqis did not
like to submit to the Syrians like the Syrians were unwilling to submit
to the people of Iraq. A Syrian poet has mentioned this matter as
follows:

**“I see that Syria does not like the kingdom of Iraq and the people of
Iraq dislike us.**

**They say: Ali is our Imam and we say: we are happy with the son of
Hind.”**

The poet of Iraq had also written about the Iraqi view of rulership in
this way:

**“Ali has come to you with people of Iraq and Hijaz. Then what shall
you do?**

**If your people do not like the rulership of Iraq, before that we are
happy on what you were displeased with.”[3]**

Continuous revolts of the Iraqis did not signify anything except their
dissatisfaction with people of Syria and they were only aimed at gaining
freedom  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/354  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal*, Pg. 144 quoted from *Dhakeeeratud Daarain*,
Pg. 224  
 **[3]** *Al-Akhbar at-Tiwal*, Pg. 161

from the Umayyad rule.

3 – The oppressive policies that Muawiyah employed with Shia leaders,
who were in the forefront of solving their problems of the future and of
all the people of the Islamic community by killing and torturing them
shook the feelings of the Kufians. And their hearts were filled with
hatred to Umayyads. For example the abusing of His Eminence, Imam Ali
(‘a) from the pulpits of Damascus intensified their hatred and the flame
of opposition flared up in their hearts.

4 – The Umayyads looked upon the people of Kufa as opponents of their
governments and source of danger for them who were confronting their
rule. On the basis of this they dealt with them with absolute severity
and mercilessness. This was the reason why the Kufians were always
prepared to oppose the Umayyads.

These were the factors responsible for deep-rooted opposition of Iraqi
people towards the Umayyad regime and their enmity to them.

Announcement of Disobedience in Iraq
------------------------------------

After the death of Muawiyah, the Iraqis had become certain of the
downfall of the Umayyad regime and they saw that the control of rule and
caliphate had been given to Yazid and it was the series of that same
Umayyad rule which tried to suppress and humiliate them.

Gowler Tashir says: “Shias in Kufa became unanimous to attack Yazid and
rise up in opposition to his rule. And they believed that their
confrontation against Yazid was a religious Jihad.”**[1]**

And Kramer believes that the good and righteous of the Shias looked upon
Yazid as the heir of enemies of Islam and successor of Abu Sufyan.

Anyway, the Shias of Kufa did not accept the authority of Yazid and
leaving it aside they became unanimous in agreeing to pledge allegiance
to the Imam and took the following steps:

Public Conference
-----------------

After the death of Muawiyah, the Shias held a public conference in the
house of their greatest leader, Sulaiman Ibn Surd Khuzai. They delivered
speeches highlighting the evils and crimes of the Umayyad regime and in
the same way they exalted the name of Imam Husain (‘a) and called for
his allegiance.

Sulaiman’s Speech
-----------------

Sulaiman took the speaker’s seat and addressed the gathering in his
first speech as follows: Muawiyah is dead. Imam Husain (‘a) had gone out
to Mecca after taking allegiance of the people for himself. You are his
Shias and Shias of his father. If you know that you can help him and
confront his enemies you write to him. If you are fearful of defeat and
sloth, do not deceive this gentleman…”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Aqida was Shariyat dar Islam*, Pg. 69

The voices of people arose in clamor and they were saying, “We shall
give our life in his support…”**[1]**

“We shall battle his foes…”

They expressed their deep devotion and complete support for the Holy
Imam and took the following decisions:

1 – Refraining from Yazid’s allegiance

2- Appointing of a delegation that would meet the Imam and invite him to
join them in Iraq.

3 – Sending letters by people of various classes to Imam (‘a) expressing
their aspirations to have the Imam’s rulership.

Delegation of Kufa
------------------

Kufa sent a delegation to the Imam so that it may invite the Imam to
join them in Iraq. The delegation consisted of many persons; one of them
was Abdullah Jadali.**[2]** When the delegation met the Holy Imam (‘a)
it spoke of the unanimity of people of Kufa to support His Eminence and
their determination in restoring their rights. They also reiterated that
they did not consider anyone as their Imam except His Eminence. They
motivated him to join them in Kufa.

Letters
-------

After their conference, the people of Kufa wrote letters to the Imam
that spoke of their loyalty and sincerity towards him and they motivated
him to come to them and take over the leadership of the community. Some
of those letters mentioned as follows:

1 – From Sulaiman bin Surd, Musayyab bin Najiha, Rafa-a bin Shaddad,
Habib Ibn Mazahir, Shias of His Eminence and Muslims of Kufa.

So to say: Thanks be to Allah that your worst cruel enemy (Muawiyah) has
died, who had usurped power, snatched the control of this community,
plundered their wealth and became their ruler without their agreement.
After that he killed the righteous people of the community and left off
the evil doers. He gave the wealth of God to oppressors and opulent
people. Then he went away like the Thamud were turned back…There is no
Imam on us. Please come to us, perhaps the Almighty may keep us on the
right path through you. Noman bin Bashir resides in the governor’s
palace. Neither we pray behind him on Fridays nor Eids. If we come to
know that you are coming to us we shall expel him so that he may go to
Syria if Allah wills. And peace of Allah be upon you and His mercy and
bounties…”**[3]**

This letter was composed in the final days of Shaban month and it was
sent with Abdullah Hamadani and Abdullah bin Wael. They were instructed
to speed with it  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 2/36  
 **[2]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 99  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/369. *Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 4/2. Tabari,
*Tarikh* 5/352

while at the same time being careful of the enemies. They set out with
speed and did not let their attention be distracted, till the first ten
days of Ramadan were over and they reached Mecca.**[1]** They delivered
the letter to the Holy Imam (‘a) and informed him about the yearnings of
the people to have him with them.

This letter spoke of the defects of the Umayyad regime and considered
Muawiyah to be the worst of oppressors who through force and tyranny had
taken over the rulership of the community and had ruled over the
community without their consent. How he had killed their good persons
and handed over national wealth to selected rich people and nobles while
he deprived others from it.

In the same way this letter explained their estimation of Noman bin
Bashir and his worth in the eyes of the Kufians. After that it promised
the Imam that if he agreed to join them they would expel Noman and drive
him to Syria and pay allegiance the Holy Imam (‘a).

2 – The Second letter was sent by some people of Kufa and its text was
as follows:

To Husain bin Ali from his Shias and from Muslims. “So to say: Come to
us and make haste in it as people are waiting for you and they do not
want anyone else.**[2]** So please hurry up. Hurry up. And peace be on
you.”**[3]**

This letter was couriered by Qais bin Mus-har Saidawi from Bani Asad,
Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Ar-habi and Ammarah bin Abdullah Sulooli. And
around fifty more letters were couriered by one, two, three or four
persons**[4]** to motivate the Imam to move towards them and they
implored him for it, at the same time assuring him of their full
support.

3 – These letters were sent by opportunists who had no faith in God.
They were Shabth bin Rabai Yarbui, Muhammad bin Umar Tamimi, Hijaar bin
Abjar Ajali, Yazid bin Harith Shabani, Azra bin Qais Ahmasi and Amr bin
Hajjaj Zubaidi. The letter was as follows:

“So to say: The atmosphere is favorable, the fruits are ready and
springs have erupted and are full of water. So come and take the
leadership of the army that is ready for you. And peace be upon
you…”**[5]**

This letter shows the high hopes of the people and worldly prosperity
and the consent of the provincial army to accept the Imam’s command. It
also instigated him to confront his enemy. This letter was signed by
those who were appointed in the forefront of the army dispatched by Ibn
Marjana to fight and kill the Holy Imam (‘a). And it is certain that
they had no faith in the rightfulness of Imam (‘a). They were only
pursuing the matter for their personal gain and to obtain worldly  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Futuh* 5/44. Mufeed, *Irshad* 2/37  
 **[2]** It is mentioned in *Tarikh Yaqubi* that: “And they don’t have
any Imam except you.”  
 **[3]** *Irshad*, Pg. 2/38  
 **[4]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/370  
 **[5]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/370. *Matalibus Su-ool fi Manaqib Aaali
Rasool* 2/31-32

wealth and power in dealing with the Umayyads, as Imam (‘a) has
explained this matter clearly to his companions.

4 – Among those letters was the following: “We have dedicated ourselves
for you and we do not participate in the congregation prayer led by the
rulers. Come to us as we are having 100000 men for you and oppression
has become widespread among us. And among us action against the Book of
Allah and Sunnah of the Prophet is being done. We are hopeful that Allah
would keep us on the right path through you. And through you He may keep
injustice away from us as you are more qualified for this position than
Yazid or his father. He has usurped power of the nation, imbibed wine
and cultivated vain pastimes like music and playing with monkeys. And
they have made religion a plaything.”**[1]**

5 – A group of Kufians wrote the following letter and put their
signatures on it. The text of that letter was as follows: “To Husain Ibn
Ali, Amirul Momineen from the followers of his father. So to say: People
are waiting for you. They are not having anyone else in view. O son of
the Messenger of Allah (s), please hurry up. Perhaps the Almighty Allah
may gather us on truth through you and help Islam and Muslims through
you…exceeding and perfect peace on you and the peace of Allah and His
mercy…”**[2]**

6 – Another group wrote this brief letter to His Eminence: “We are with
you and 100000 hands with swords are with us.”**[3]**

7 – The last letter that reached His Eminence was as follows: “O son of
the Messenger of Allah (s), make haste in coming here as 100000 armed
men are ready to support you in Kufa. So do not delay.”**[4]**

Letters reached the Imam continuously. So much so that two saddle bags
were filled with it. Historians say that more that 12000 letters
collected with the Holy Imam (‘a).**[5]** In this way 1,40,000 names
were collected who assured him of full support if he arrived to them in
Kufa.**[6]** On a single day 600 letters were received by His
Eminence.**[7]**

Anyway, a large number of letters were received from Kufians by His
Eminence and they were signed by prominent personalities of Kufa
assuring that they would provide complete support if the Imam joined
them. They implored him to come and save them from the atrocities of the
Umayyad regime. But it was a pity that the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tadkiratul Khawaas*, Pg. 237. Sayyid Mahmud Qadani,
*As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* from facsimile copy at Imam
Amirul Momineen Library and Masudi has narrated it in gist in *Muruj
az-Zahab* 3/54  
 **[2]** *Waseelatul Maal*, Pg. 185. Ibne Sabbagh, *Al-Fusul
al-Muhimma*, 184  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf*, Part I, Vol. 1  
 **[4]** *Biharul Anwar* 44/337  
 **[5]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 15  
 **[6]** *Al-Wafi fil Masaalatush Sharqiya* 1/43  
 **[7]** *Ad-Darul Maslook fi Ahwaalil Anbiya wal Awsiya* 1/107, from
written manuscripts at Imam Hakim Library

page of hope turned upside down. Suddenly Kufa became such that the
people of Kufa were waiting to quench their swords with Imam’s blood and
feed their arrows with the flesh of Imam…They wanted to take up the body
of Imam Husain (‘a) and cut it up into pieces by their swords, pierce it
with their spears and trample him below the hooves of their horses.

Kufa was waiting for Husain like a lion eager to pounce upon him and
sink its claws into his blessed body.

Kufa was waiting for Husain not to defend his family but to make them
their prisoners and instead of giving refuge to his children to harass
and torment them.**[1]**

The condition was such and the command of Allah does not change. That
those people broke the allegiance of the Imam and they became unanimous
to fight His Eminence.

Historians say that after receiving those letters Imam (‘a) decided to
give a positive reply to the requests of Kufians. He decided to first
send his cousin, Muslim Ibn Aqil to them.

Muslim Delegated for Iraq
-------------------------

A flood of letters arrived from Kufa to Imam Husain (‘a) that implored
him to move to the people there and save them from the injustice and
oppression of the Umayyads. Some of those letters said that if the Imam
(‘a) would delay in harkening to their call he shall be responsible
before the Almighty Allah and to the Ummah.

Imam decided to first and foremost select an emissary who would go and
meet them in order to gauge their sincerity and determination. So that
if they were found to be really sincere about their claims and promises
to support the Imam the emissary may take allegiance from them for the
Holy Imam (‘a). After that the Imam would move towards Kufa. With this
view Imam Husain (‘a) selected from among his group a man who possessed
all excellences and one who was most qualified for this important
mission. It was Muslim Ibn Aqil who was presented this proposal and who
accepted it readily. Imam Husain (‘a) immediately wrote a letter to send
along with him. The text of the letter is narrated in various formats as
follows:

Firstly: Abu Hanifah Dinawari has quoted it in the following way: “From
Husain Ibn Ali to all his supporters and Shias in Kufa who receive this
letter. Peace be upon you. So to say: I have received your letters and
was informed about your desire to join you all. I am sending to you my
brother, the son of my uncle and a reliable person of my family – that
is Muslim Ibn Aqil so that he may convey to me your real position. If he
finds that your views agree with his opinions he would write to me about
it. Thus if it is found that your position is the same as you wrote in
your letters and as your delegations to me stated, I shall hasten to
join you, Insha  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ma’al Husain fi Nahza,* Pg. 157

Allah. And peace…”**[1]**

Second: Saifuddin says that after the name of God, the Imam wrote as
follows: “So to say: I received your letters and was informed about what
you intended to convey. I am sending a reliable person, Muslim bin Aqil
to you and very soon I shall also join you, Insha Allah…”**[2]**

This is a rare narration because it does not state the purpose of
Muslim’s appointment as emissary and his mission of taking allegiance
from them.

Third: Tabari has narrated that after the name of Allah it was
mentioned: From Husain bin Ali to all Muslims and believers. “So to say:
Hani and Saeed**[3]** have arrived to me with your letters. They are
your last messengers who have come to me. I have heard what all they
said and reminded as most of that was what you all have conveyed. You
said that you do not have an Imam. ‘So come (to us), perhaps the
Almighty Allah would give us guidance and truth through you.’ I have
sent my brother, the son of my uncle and a reliable member of my Ahle
Bayt to you and instructed him to write to me about your circumstances
and views about me. Thus if he writes that the views of your elders and
the intelligentsia are same as what your messengers have conveyed, and
what I have read in your letters, Insha Allah, I shall set out to meet
you at the earliest. By Allah no one is an Imam except one who acts on
the Book of Allah, who practices justice, who follows the truth and who
has connected his self to the command of God. And peace…”**[4]**

The above letter quoted by Tabari contains the following important
points:

1 – It introduces Muslim as a trustworthy person and his lofty status
due to the trust His Eminence, Husain (‘a) reposed in him.

2 – It specifies the powers allowed to Muslim to find out the present
circumstances and study the political events as also the level of their
sincerity which they had claimed to the Imam. It is natural that the
knowledge of these sensitive matters should be left to a person who is
sufficiently cognizant of the affairs of the society and conditions of
the people.

3 – His Eminence has stated that his coming to them was dependant upon
the feedback of Muslim regarding the unanimity of their claims and the
view of their leaders about allegiance of His Eminence. And it implied
that His Eminence would not set out towards them unless and until his
emissary wrote to him positively about these matters.

4 – His Eminence has clarified about the qualities necessary for an Imam
and leader of the movement of the community. They are as follows:

A – Following the Book of Allah

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Akhbar at-Tiwal*, Pg. 230  
 **[2]** *Waseelatul Maal*, Pg. 186 from written manuscripts at Imam
Hakim Library  
 **[3]** The two were Hani bin Hani Sabi-I and Saeed bin Abdullah
Hanafi  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/353

B – Observing justice and equality

C – Truthfulness

D – Having spiritual connection to the Almighty

Except for His Eminence, these lofty qualities which indicated the views
and qualities of the Prophet, were not to be found in anyone else.

Muslim carried this letter of the Holy Imam (‘a) while the Imam (‘a)
reminded him to observe piety and seek refuge in Allah and repose hope
in Him so that he may help in fulfillment of this mission.**[1]**

Muslim set out from Mecca on the eve of the 15<sup>th</sup>
Ramadan.**[2]** On his way he stopped in Medina, prayed at the Prophet’s
mosque and circumambulated his sarcophagus. After that he bid farewell
to his family and friends.**[3]** It was his last farewell to them. He
then set out for Iraq accompanied by Qais bin Mus-har Saidawi, Ammarah
bin Abdullah Salooli and Abdur Rahman bin Abdullah Azadi. From Medina
they hired two guides from the tribe of Qais to show them the
way.**[4]**

Muslim’s caravan began to move with speed and they did not let
themselves be distracted by anything else. The two guides moved ahead
leading the caravan and making haste in case they may be followed by
someone from the enemy side. But they lost their way and no matter how
much they tried they could not find the road again. Thirst and tiredness
overpowered them.

Historians say: They informed Muslim about the signs and directions of
the route and passed away immediately.**[5]** Muslim set out with his
companions will they found the way and also got water, but the guides
could not be saved and they died of thirst.

Muslim’s Letter to the Holy Imam (‘a)
-------------------------------------

Historians say: Muslim became fearful of his mission and after he fell
into hardships and his two guides expired, he began to consider it a bad
omen. Therefore he wrote a letter to the Imam and implored him to excuse
him from this embassy. The letter was as follows:

“So to say: I set out from Medina with two guides and they missed the
way and got lost. Both were overcome by thirst and soon died. But we
kept going until we came to water. We were only saved at the last moment
of our lives. That water is in a place called al-Madiq in a low valley.
I have taken this as a bad omen for my mission. If you consider it so,
you could relieve me and send another person in my place. And peace…”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/21  
 **[2]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/54  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/354  
 **[4]** *Al-Akhbar at-Tiwal*, Pg. 230. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/21  
 **[5]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 2/39-40

Reply of His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
----------------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) wrote back to Muslim refusing his proposal and said
that it was the result of cowardice. The letter was as follows:

“So to say: I am afraid that your urging me in the letter to relieve you
from the task which I sent you on is only cowardice. Therefore go on
with your task which I gave you. And peace…”**[1]**

Explanation of the Matter
-------------------------

 Most probably the letter and reply quoted above are fabricated and they
lack authenticity for the following reasons:

1 – On the basis of what Hamuyi has written: Mudiq al-Khabt, the place
that Muslim has mentioned in his letter to the Imam is situated between
Mecca and Medina**[2]** while we have seen in the preceding narration
that Muslim hired the two guides from Medina and set out for Iraq and
lost their way and finally the two guides died of thirst and exhaustion.
It is natural that this incident must have occurred between Medina and
Iraq and it did not happen between Mecca and Medina.

2 – If there had been a place by the same name between Medina and Iraq
and Hamuyi has not mentioned it, the journey from this point to Mecca
needed at least 10 days’ travel while according to the historians Muslim
left Mecca on the 15<sup>th</sup> of Ramadan and arrived in Kufa on the
5<sup>th</sup> of Shawwal. That is his journey was completed in 20 days
which is the minimum time required to travel from Mecca to Kufa because
there is a distance of 1600 kilometers between the two places. If during
this period the messenger of Muslim went to Mecca and returned he would
have taken ten days for it. So does it imply that Muslim covered the
distance in only ten days? Which is an impossible task!

3 – Imam (‘a) is supposed to have blamed Muslim for cowardice. This
contradicts the previous statements of the Holy Imam (‘a) when he
remarked that Muslim was the most reliable and superior person of his
Ahle Bayt. Thus how could the Imam now accuse Muslim of cowardice?

4 – Accusation of cowardice on Muslim is in contradiction to his
character because he was the most courageous person and he exhibited
such valor that left people astonished. Because when a group of people
of Kufa attacked him, he confronted them single-handed without caring if
anyone helped him or not. He killed many of the militants such that
their hearts were filled with terror. And when they arrested him and
took him to Ibn Ziyad he did not betray any humility or acceptance of
defeat. Balazari has said regarding him: He was the bravest and the most
valiant person from the family of Aqil.**[3]** Rather he was the most
courageous of the Hashemites after the Imams of Ahle Bayt (‘a), as
history has recognized. These narrations were fabricated to decrease the
status of that great emissary who was the pride of the Arab community
and Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 2/40, *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/114  
 **[2]** *Mojam al-Buldan* 2/343  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/334

In the House of Mukhtar
-----------------------

Muslim traversed the desert and reached Kufa. He stayed in the house of
Mukhtar Thaqafi**[1]** who was the most prominent elder of the Shia
community and the most valiant of them. He was the most loyal devotee
and sincere lover of them with regard to Imam Husain (‘a).

Muslim arrived at Mukhtar’s residence and not at the house of any other
Shia leader because of his trust in Mukhtar’s sincerity to Imam Husain
(‘a) and his readiness to sacrifice himself on the Holy Imam (‘a).
Though there was another factor that was of significance and it was that
Mukhtar’s wife was Ammarah the daughter of Noman bin Bashir the governor
of Kufa. Therefore if Muslim stayed in Mukhtar’s house, Noman would not
try to arrest him. This shows that Muslim was well aware of the social
circumstances prevalent at that time.

Mukhtar welcomed Muslim in his house and accorded him respect and honor.
He invited the Shias to come and visit him. People from all directions
came to meet Muslim and reiterate their loyalty and obedience to him.

Celebrations in Kufa
--------------------

Joy engulfed all the gatherings of Shia in Kufa. Muslim saw their warm
welcome and their excessive support. He read out the letter of Imam
Husain (‘a) to them and they began to weep and they expressed their
longing to have the Imam with them. They stated their loyalty and
willingness to give sacrifices for the Imam so that he may establish
again a rule of justice and equity in their city like his holy father,
Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) had established on the earth. Muslim advised
them to continue to have the fear of Allah and he also warned them to
keep their activities secret till Imam Husain (‘a) arrives.

Taking Allegiance for Imam Husain (‘a)
--------------------------------------

Shias inclined towards Muslim so that they may give him allegiance on
behalf of Imam Husain (‘a). The formula of the allegiance consisted of
oath of invitation by the Book of Allah and Sunnah of His Prophet, Jihad
with oppressors and defense of the deprived people, restoring of the
right of the deprived, equitable distribution of booties among the
Muslims, returning the rights of the rightful, supporting the Ahle Bayt
(‘a), peace with all those who are at peace with them and war with all
those who are at war with them.

Sayyid Muqarram has compared this oath of allegiance to the pledge of
Aws and Khazraj to the Messenger of Allah (s).**[2]** Habib bin Mazahir
Asadi took their oaths of allegiance on behalf of Imam Husain
(‘a).**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 226. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/22 and it is said
that Muslim arrived at the house of Muslim Ibne Ausaja or Hani Ibne
Urwah. This is mentioned in *Al-Isabah* 1/332 and *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib*
2/349  
 **[2]** *Ash-Shahid Muslim bin Aqil,* Pg. 103  
 **[3]** *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/125 from written manuscripts at Imam
Kashiful Ghita Public Library

Speech of Abbas Shakiri
-----------------------

The prominent believer, Abbas bin Shabib Shakiri stood up to speak and
informed Muslim about his personal loyalty and his readiness to lay down
his life in the path of propagation. However he did not accept the
pledge from any person of his town. He said:

“So to say: I do not warn you about the people and I do not inform you
what they have in their hearts and I don’t deceive you by them. By
Allah! Whatever you call out I shall respond and I shall fight your
enemies with you and shall strike my sword in your defense till I rush
to meet God and I don’t desire anything other than what is with Allah…”

Abbas fulfilled his pledge to the Almighty and he did not betray the
trust of his conscience. He sacrificed his life for the beloved grandson
of the Messenger of Allah (s) and was martyred in Kerbala…

Habib bin Mazahir turned to him and said: “May Allah have mercy on you
for expressing your view in brief. By Allah, there is no deity except
Him, I also have the same views as you.”

Saeed Hanafi also spoke up and supported the statements of his two
friends.**[1]** He was the most prominent fighter whom history has
recognized for sincerity and loyalty because they generously gave up
their lives for Imam Husain (‘a) and they attained martyrdom in Kerbala
in the service of His Eminence.

Number of Pledge-makers
-----------------------

Crowds of people of Kufa descended upon Muslim bin Aqil to pledge
allegiance for His Eminence, Husain and competed with each other in
this.

Historians have differed as regards the number of people who pledged
allegiance. Some of the estimations are as follows:

1 – 40000 persons**[2]**

2 – 30000 including Noman bin Bashir, the governor of Kufa**[3]**

3 – 28000 persons**[4]**

4 – 18000 persons. This was on the basis of the letter that Muslim sent
to Imam Husain (‘a) when he said: “18000 people have given oath of
allegiance to me, so make haste in coming here.”**[5]**

5 – 12000 persons**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/355  
 **[2]** Abi Faraas, *Sharh Shaafiya* 1/90 from written manuscripts at
Imam Hakim Library. Ibne Numa, *Matheer al-Ahzaan,* Pg. 26  
 **[3]** Wajidi, *Dairatul Ma’arif* 3/444. *Haqaiq al-Akhbar an Daul
al-Bihar, Rauzatul Ayaan Akhbar Mashaheeruz Zamaan,* Pg. 67. By Muhammad
bin Abi Bakr (d. 730 A.H.) from written manuscripts at Imam Hakim
Library. In *Manaqib Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.),* Pg. 13 it is
mentioned that Noman said: “O people of Kufa, the son of the daughter of
the Messenger of Allah is better for you than the son of the daughter of
Bajdal.”  
 **[4]** Abul Fida, *Tarikh* 1/189  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/375  
 **[6]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 3/54. *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin
Nabi* Pg. 86 from facsimile copy at Imam Hakim Library. *Tahdhib
at-Tahdhib* 2/349. *Al-Isabah* 1/333. *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/117. *Seer
A’laamun Nubla* 3/306

Letter of Muslim to Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------

When Muslim found that a large number of people of Kufa had pledged
allegiance to him and he also saw their devotions and faith in favor of
his call he wrote a letter to Imam (‘a) and urged him to come to Kufa.
He penned this letter twenty and some days before his martyrdom.**[1]**
The letter was as follows:

“So to say: The vanguards of the caravan do not lie to their own people.
18000 people of Kufa have given oath of allegiance to me.**[2]** When
you receive my letter, make haste as all the people are in your support
and they have no positive view and relation with the family of
Muawiyah.”**[3]**

Muslim wrote this letter because he did not encounter or foresee any
opposition to his mission. Rather he found people unanimous and united
on the allegiance to Imam and their eagerness to meet the Holy Imam
(‘a).

The letter was carried by a group of Kufians at the head of which was
the great stalwart, Abbas Shakiri. This delegation reached Mecca and
delivered the letter to the Holy Imam (‘a). They urged His Eminence to
move towards Kufa. They also repeated to him about the unanimity of the
people on allegiance of Imam and their great reverence that Muslim had
witnessed. It was then that the Imam decided to move to Kufa.

Reaction of Noman bin Bashir
----------------------------

Noman bin Bashir’s reaction**[4]** to the revolution was gentle and
soft. The Umayyad party blamed him for laxity and leniency in defending
the interests of the regime and his not giving importance to its safety.
In reply he said: “It is better for me to be lenient on Allah’s
obedience than to be strict in His disobedience. I shall not tear away
the covering that Allah has provided.”**[5]**

This position of Noman imparted power to the Shias and it openly
encouraged  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/378  
 **[2]** And in the narration of Balazari: “All the people of Kufa are
with you.”  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/375  
 **[4]** Muawiyah appointed Noman bin Bashir Ansari Khazraji as the
governor of Kufa after Abdur Rahman bin Hakam. He was a friend of Uthman
and harbored malice towards Ali and spoke ill of him. He fought against
His Eminence in the battle of Jamal and Siffeen and he sincerely
endeavored to strengthen Muawiyah’s regime. He was one to lead ferocious
plunder attacks on various provinces of Iraq. Scholars say: He was
opposed to Yazid and would have liked to see his kingdom destroyed upon
the condition that the caliphate returns to the family of Ali. It is
surprising that when Yazid oppressed the people of Medina and for three
days made it lawful for his mercenaries, this man, that is Noman, did
not help them with his countrymen and community. In *Al-Isabah* 3/559 it
is mentioned: When Yazid died, Noman called people to Ibne Zubair and
later towards himself so that Marwan fought with him and he died in the
year 65 AH. He was an expert poet and his Collected Works have been
published lately.  
 **[5]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/306

them to act against the government. This was probably for two reasons:

1 – Muslim bin Aqil was the guest of Mukhtar and Mukhtar was the
son-in-law, husband of his daughter, Ammarah. So being respectful to
Mukhtar he did not object to the revolutionaries.

2 – Noman was opposed to Yazid. The reason was Yazid’s enmity to the
Ansar. Yazid had persuaded the Christian poet, Akhtal to denounce the
Ansar and Noman stood up for their support. We have indicated this
matter in the previous discussions. Probably this and other factors were
responsible for Noman not taking any step against the revolution.

Noman’s Speech
--------------

Noman allowed the Shias a power for the systematic and organized
revolution and he gave them opportunity to establish a firm base. This
attitude of Noman became a cause for displeasure of the Umayyad party.
They objected against him and urged him to punish and penalize the
Shias.

Noman came out and ascended the pulpit and announced his policy with a
soft approach. After praise and glorification of God, he said:

“So to say: O servants of God! Fear God and do not move towards mischief
and discord as people lose their lives in it and blood is shed and
properties are plundered. I do not make war on those who do not make war
on me. I do not rise up against those who do not rise up against me.
Neither I shall abuse you nor make excuses to you. Neither shall I make
allegations against anyone nor would I be suspicious about anyone.
However, if you stand up to confront me and break my pledge and oppose
your leaders, by the God, except Whom there is no deity, I shall strike
you with my sword as long as I retain power, even though I may not have
any helper. And I hope that those of you who recognize the truth are
more than those who intend to establish falsehood.”**[1]**

No type of fear, severity and harshness is seen in this speech. Rather
it is warning against mischief-making and it advocates the preference to
peaceful means. And it is that he shall not oppose those who do not
oppose the regime and would not falsely accuse or be suspicious about
the people like Ziyad bin Abih had done in Iraq. Anas Zakaria has
presented an opinion regarding Noman’s speech and said:

“Noman’s speech in Kufa is another proof that he was aware of the
present mischief that would surely flare up. He did not attack those who
were instrumental in creating this discord, before they attacked him. On
the basis of this he became responsible for allowing the revolutionaries
the power and opportunity for their mission.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/22  
 **[2]** *Ad-Daulatul Amawiya fish Shaam,* Pg. 41

Anger of Umayyad Party
----------------------

Noman’s policy enraged the officials of the Umayyad regime and Abdullah
bin Muslim Hadhramai, an ardent Umayyads supporter rushed to him and
criticized his program saying, “What you are thinking is not possible
except through oppression. The position you have taken regarding your
enemies and you is fraught with weakness.”**[1]**

Noman defended his stance and said, “I shall not employ any method that
distances us from God and I shall not step towards any path that takes
me away from religion.” In this way it was proved to the Umayyads that
Noman could not effectively deal with the revolutionaries.

Contact of Umayyad Party with Damascus
--------------------------------------

The Umayyad party became worried due to the general support mobilized
for Muslim’s revolution, while the local government was ignoring it.
They blamed the local government for weakness and connivance with the
revolutionaries and they immediately contacted the Damascus government
in this regard imploring it to take immediate action before the
revolution spreads its wings and Iraq develops stability and becomes
independent from Damascus. Among the letters that reached Yazid was
included the letter of Abdullah Hadhrami which said as follows:

“So to say: Muslim bin Aqil has come to Kufa. Shias have pledged
allegiance to him for Husain bin Ali. So if you want to retain Kufa,
send a strong man to it who can impose your command and who deals with
the enemy like you would. Noman bin Bashir is a weak man or that he has
made himself weak.”**[2]**

This letter has petitioned the deposition of Noman bin Bashir and the
appointment of one who is more strict than him so that he may suppress
the revolt because Noman was not capable of suppressing it. Ammarah bin
Walid bin Uqbah and Umar bin Saad wrote to Yazid about this matter.

Yazid’s Worry
-------------

When Yazid received letter after letter from his officials in Kufa
regarding the people’s allegiance to Imam Husain (‘a) he became
perturbed. He could not sleep the whole night only thinking about what
could be done about it because he knew that Iraq was the center of power
in the Islamic world and the people of Iraq hated him and were inimical
to his father because Iraq was wounded by the oppression that was
considered lawful for them. The enmity of Iraqis to Yazid was less than
their animosity to his father. In the same way he was certain that the
majority of people in Islamic world were yearning for Imam Husain’s
rulership because he was the representative of the law of his ancestors,
and people were not prepared to have anyone else taking his position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/297  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/22

Yazid takes Sarjun’s Counsel
----------------------------

Yazid was extremely worried by these developments and he saw a mortal
danger facing his regime. Therefore he summoned Sarjun the Roman, who
was a confidant of his father and his closest associate. Yazid informed
him about the matter saying, “What is your view? Husain is going towards
Kufa and Muslim bin Aqil has taken allegiance for Husain in Kufa. I have
been reported about the weakness and inappropriate behavior of Noman.
Who in your view, should I appoint as the governor of Kufa?”**[1]**

Sarjun pondered on this for sometime and asked, “Do you think you’d have
accepted the opinion of Muawiyah if he were alive?”

“Yes,” replied Yazid.

Sarjun took out the proclamation of Muawiyah appointing Ubaidullah Ibn
Ziyad as the governor of Kufa and said, “This is the view of Muawiyah
who is dead but he proclaimed it through this document.”**[2]**

However the opinion of Sarjun in supporting the candidature of Ibn Ziyad
for governorship of Kufa was based on two factors:

1 – He was aware of the harshness and ruthlessness of Ibn Ziyad and he
knew that no one else was capable of subduing Iraq. And only he was
competent enough to quell the disturbance with an iron hand.

2 – Communal bigotry – It was communal prejudice that motivated him to
nominate Ibn Ziyad because Ibn Ziyad was also a Roman like Sarjun.

Ibn Ziyad’s Rule in Kufa
------------------------

Yazid was extremely displeased with Ibn Ziyad and wanted to dismiss him
from the governorship of Basra**[3]** because he had opposed his
allegiance when his father was taking it. But he accepted the advice of
Sarjun because he saw in it protection of interests of his regime. That
is why he issued a proclamation appointing Ibn Ziyad as governor of
Basra and Kufa. In this way the whole of Iraq came under the
governorship of Ibn Ziyad.

Yazid wrote the following for Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad: “So to say: Our
followers from the people of Kufa have written to us that Ibn Aqil was
gathering people in Kufa to create disunity among the populace. So when
you get this letter, leave for Kufa immediately and summon Ibn Aqil like
you search for a bead, so that you may get him. Then you decide either
to imprison him or put him to death.**[4]**

This letter shows the worry of the ruler in Damascus about Muslim Ibn
Aqil and it emphasizes to Ibn Ziyad that he must make haste in
undertaking the journey to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/356  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/23  
 **[3]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/152  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/357

Kufa. Some sources state: Yazid wrote to Ibn Ziyad that if he has a pair
of wings he must use them to fly to Kufa.**[1]** This indicates the fear
that Yazid had about the revolution of Iraq.

Muslim bin Amr Bahili carried this letter of Yazid along with the
proclamation to Ibn Ziyad.

Historians say that Bahili was a spy of the Umayyads in Kufa and among
one their important officials. He was one of the most evil people of the
Arabs. He was the one who refused a gulp of water to Muslim bin Aqil
when he was brought as a prisoner to Ibn Ziyad.

Ibn Ziyad received the official proclamation through Bahili; he was
greatly pleased at it because while previously he was being threatened
with dismissal from the governorship of Basra now he had become the de
facto ruler of Iraq. The Damascus regime had accorded him complete
authority over Iraq and also gave him a free hand to deal with ferocity
and harshness against all those who showed opposition to the allegiance
of Yazid. Ibn Ziyad was very much elated by these changed circumstances.
This was so because it conformed to his harsh nature and his inclination
to employ such cruelty with the people. Because he experienced immense
pleasure in torturing others and was fond of cruelty and bloodshed.

Ibn Ziyad’s Speech in Basra
---------------------------

Ibn Ziyad readied to leave Basra and move to Kufa. Before departure he
addressed the people in a severe tone in which he said, “Chief of the
believers, Yazid has appointed me as the governor of Kufa. I shall leave
for Kufa tomorrow. By Allah, I shall not refrain from using force and no
evil shall stop me. Whoever becomes inimical to me shall be destroyed by
me. Because I am a poison to everyone who makes war on me. He has done
justice that shot arrows at Qarra.**[2]**

O people of Basra, I appoint Uthman bin Ziyad bin Abu Sufyan as my
representative on you. Never disobey and disregard his commands. By the
One except Whom there is no deity if I am reported about opposition of
anyone towards him I shall eliminate his men and supporters. I consider
the one closest to sin as the farthest one so that you may listen to me.
It should not be that one of you may become my opponent or rival…I am
Ibn Ziyad, I am most resembling the one who walks the desert. And I am
having no resemblance to the paternal or maternal uncle.”**[3]**

How easy is barbarity and ferocity in the view of the governors of Bani
Umayyah. That tyrant spoke with his most evil nature that was immersed
in cruelty. Because  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/299  
 **[2]** It is an Arabian proverb: “He has done justice that shot arrows
at Qarra”. “Qarra” was a well-known Arab tribe. In the battle between
Quraish and Bakr bin Abd Manat bin Kinana, Qarra, a group of archers,
sided with the Quraish. When the battle started a group began to shoot
arrows at them. At that time a man said, “He has done justice that shot
arrows at Qarra”. (*Kitabul Amthal,* Pg. 137, (Tr.)  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/358

he used to punish the innocent instead of the offenders and leave the
offenders unpunished. He used to order killings and murder on the basis
of allegations and suspicion like his father, Ziyad, had done. He made
manslaughter a common phenomenon in Iraq.

The Tyrant goes to Kufa
-----------------------

The vilest and most degraded man of Basra set out for Kufa to wreak
tyranny and commit evils. So much so that he did not leave off a single
crime that he did not commit while 500 Basrans accompanied him. Abdullah
bin Harith bin Naufal and Shareek bin Aawar Harithi,**[1]** who was
actually a sincere follower of the Holy Imam (‘a) joined the entourage
of Ibn Ziyad to keep informed of the developments and plans of Ibn
Ziyad. These people Ibn Ziyad had taken with him in order to spread
terror and fear among the people and that they may help him in quelling
the revolution by using their contacts among the Kufian leaders.

Anyway Ibn Ziyad covered the journey very fast without being distracted
by anything else. He made haste so that he may reach Kufa before the
arrival of Imam Husain (‘a). His men were exhausted and tired and it was
difficult for them to keep moving. Some of them fell own exhausted and
Abdullah bin Harith was one of them. But Ibn Ziyad did not pay any heed
to this. When they reached Qadissiyyah, his slave Mehran fell down. Ibn
Ziyad told him, “If you continue to move in this condition till we reach
the fort, I shall give you 100,000.”

Mehran said, “No, by Allah, I cannot go on.” At that time the tyrant
dismounted and wore a Yemeni dress and a black turban and a veil to
cover his face so that people may think that he is His Eminence, Husain
(‘a). And he moved on alone and entered Kufa from the direction of
Najaf**[2]** while he was fearful and shaking like a wing of a bird. If
he had the least scruples and courage he would not have disguised
himself in order to deceive people into thinking that he was Husain
(‘a)…that coward resorted to this trick in order to keep himself safe.
Some sources say that he avoided speaking out lest people may recognize
him and slay him with their weapons.

At the Governor’s Palace
------------------------

The tyrant hurried to the governor’s palace**[3]** while he was greatly
perturbed and he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/359  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal Husain (a.s.)* Pg. 165  
 **[3]** The Governor’s palace (castle of the ruler): It was the first
building to be constructed in Islam and Saad bin Abi Waqqas has got it
constructed but its signs were completely obliterated like the signs of
all the buildings of Kufa except the Jame Mosque. The department of
archeology in Iraq tried to locate the foundation of this edifice and
they have excavated it. Their research has shown that the palace was
surrounded by an outer boundary and it includes the four walls. Its
length was approximately 170 meters and it was four meters high. Every
portion has six semi-circular towers that guarded it except for the
northern portion which had two towers. The distance between each tower
was 24.60 meters. The height of this boundary with the towers was around
20 meters. The castle was having very solid constructions and it had
been constructed in such a way that it offered absolute security and
defense against external attacks. This matter is mentioned in the book,
*Sketch of Kufa City,* by Dr. Kazim Janabi, Pg. 135-155. I have seen it
many times and studied many of its relics. Some of its original gates
are having canopies for the palace guards, which are now ruined and only
some of its relics have survived. There are some rooms on one side that
at that time served as prison cells and they are constructed in a
strange fashion. On the other side were kitchens that Ustad Janabi has
not indicated. The engineers had made this edifice impregnable so that
it may easily repel attacks and withstand sieges.

was much angered when he saw that people were celebrating the arrival of
Husain (‘a).

When he reached the palace he found the doors closed. Noman, still
thinking that he was Husain (‘a), went up to the balcony and called
down, “I invoke God before you, unless you withdraw (from me), by God, I
will not hand over my office to you but I have no wish to fight you.”

Ibn Marjana sensed weakness and backwardness in the statement of Noman.
Therefore in words full of anger, he cried, “Open! You have not opened
yet and you have already had a long night (in which you have slept
instead of governing).”

A man behind him heard this and withdrew to the people from Kufa who had
followed (Ibn Ziyad) believing him to be Husain (‘a). He said, “O
people, it is Ibn Marjana, by Him other than Whom there is no deity!” It
was astonishing that they could not distinguish between Ibn Marjana and
Imam Husain (‘a) inspite of the fact that many of them had lived with
him in the same town. Probably it was so because Ibn Ziyad had disguised
himself and had donned a black turban.

Anyway when people recognized that he was Ibn Ziyad, they were shocked
and they ran away to their houses in such a condition that they recalled
the oppression of the time of his father. Ubaidullah also sensed that
mischief was brewing…that very night Ibn Ziyad took the treasury and
armory under his control. He spent the night in wakefulness while the
officials of the Umayyad regime were around him discussing about the
uprising. They were introducing him to prominent personalities. Along
with it they were planning to quell the revolt.

Ibn Ziyad’s Speech in Kufa
--------------------------

In the morning the call was given among the people: “As-Salaat jaami’a
(the prayer is a general prayer which all should gather for).” The
people gathered and he went out to them. He praised and glorified God
and said: “The Commander of the faithful (Yazid) has appointed me in
charge of your town, your frontier-station and the distribution of your
booty. He has ordered me to give justice to the oppressed among you, to
be generous to those of you who are deprived, and to treat the obedient
among you with generosity like a good father, but to use the whip and
the sword against those who abandon my commands and oppose my
appointment. Let each man protect himself. True belief should declare
itself on your behalf, not the threat of punishment…”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 100

The speech of Ibn Ziyad had the following highlights:

1 – It announced the governorship of Kufa for Ibn Ziyad and dismissal of
Noman bin Bashir from that post.

2 – It stated that the Damascus regime had accorded him this post and
commanded him to deal nicely with people who obey the government and are
not rebels and also instructed him to deal with the opponents and rebels
with an iron hand.

In his speech Ibn Marjana made no mention of Imam Husain (‘a) and his
emissary, Muslim bin Aqil lest people might raise a clamor as he had not
yet established his position firmly.

Spread of Terror and Fear
-------------------------

Ibn Ziyad began to spread tyranny, fear and terror. A historian says: As
soon as Ibn Ziyad reached Kufa, the very next morning he began to start
his mission of quelling the revolution. He immediately got the rebel
leaders arrested and had them executed.**[1]** He initiated these step
in order to crush the rebellion and kill the uprising.

On the second day he issued a command to gather the people in the Mosque
and he came out dressed in new clothes. He began to address the people
in a severe tone warning them. First he praised and glorified Allah and
then said, “This matter cannot be corrected without using force and
absolute harshness. And it is that I arrest the innocent with the
offenders, the present with those who are absent and the friend with the
friend.”

Thus a Kufian named Asad bin Abdullah Mari spoke up, “O Chief, the
Almighty Allah has said: And a burdened soul cannot bear the burden of
another and if one weighed down by burden should cry for (another to
carry) its burden, nor aught of it shall be carried…Know that! Man is
related to his efforts, the swords and horses are ready. You just say
what you want but do not bring evil before the good…”

This silenced Ibn Ziyad. He came down from the pulpit and went
home.**[2]**

Muslim Shifts to Hani’s House
-----------------------------

Muslim was compelled to change his lodging and to conceal his political
activities with diligence because the arrival of that tyrant in Kufa
posed a serious danger to the revolution. He was aware of the deviation
and misguidance of that filthy tyrant as he had no regard for the
Almighty Allah and had no qualms about committing any sinful act.

Muslim decided to leave Mukhtar’s house because he did not have anyone
capable enough to protect him and he was not connected to any center of
power. Therefore he sought refuge in the house of Hani bin Urwah as he
was the leader of his area and chief of Murad tribe. He was capable
enough to support the revolution and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Fusul al-Muhimma*, 185, *Waseelatul Maal*, Pg. 186  
 **[2]** *Al-Futuh* 5/67

dominate the events because on the basis of what historians say: When he
rode he used to be accompanied by 4000 horsemen in armor and 8000
infantry men. And if their supporters from Kinda and other tribes joined
them, 30000 men would wear armors for him.**[1]** Also he had previous
good connections with his clansmen.

Muslim moved to the house of this great leader who welcomed him and
accepted him with all formalities. Some of the sources**[2]** say: It
was difficult and dangerous for Hani to give refuge to Muslim because
his residence would become the center of rebellion and opposition to the
government because he, due to this, was putting himself as target of
revenge and punishment. However he unwillingly gave a positive reply to
Muslim as it was Arab custom not turn away anyone who came seeking
protection even though it may prove to be difficult and dangerous…

But what we believe is that it was not so. Because if Muslim had sensed
his unwillingness and hesitation he would not have taken refuge in that
place. He would have definitely restrained from entering that house
because Muslim was well-trained in Islamic etiquette. He was an
honorable person and a valiant man and he would have kept away from
every action of his that may be responsible for harming others or
putting them to inconvenience or hardships. Apart from this if Muslim
had not been aware of the perfect faith and absolute submission of Hani
with regard to his mission which had not been an established fact he
would not have taken refuge in the dangerous circumstances he was in.

It is certain that Hani did not support Muslim due to shame and
etiquette. Rather it was as a result of absolute faith and religious
belief. Therefore he agreed to host Muslim.

Anyway, Muslim began to stay in Hani’s house and made it a place for
organizing his revolt while Hani was assisting him and he summoned the
tribes for his call. 18000 persons paid allegiance to Muslim in Hani’s
place.**[3]** Muslim informed Hani about the problems of the uprising
and introduced to him the leaders and prominent persons connected with
it.

Muslim Refrained from Killing Ibn Ziyad
---------------------------------------

Most historians agree that Shareek bin Aawar became seriously ill in
Hani’s house or his own residence.**[4]** The news of his illness
reached Ibn Ziyad. He sent a messenger that he was coming to pay him a
visit. Shareek considered it a good opportunity and he told Muslim, “The
aim of your Shias and you is to kill this oppressor. Allah has given you
an upper hand over him. He is coming to visit me. So get up! And hide in
the closet. When he sits with me relaxed, come out and slay  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Murujuz Zahab* 3/59  
 **[2]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 233  
 **[3]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 233  
 **[4]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/153. It is famous among the
historians that Shareek was in the house of Hani and not in his own
house, because he lived in Basra and he had come to Kufa with Ibne
Ziyad.

him. Then go to his palace of command and occupy the seat. Because no
one would oppose you in this and if Allah restores my health I shall go
to Basra and take control over there on your behalf. The people there
would pay allegiance to you.**[1]**

Hani did not favor the slaying of Ibn Ziyad in his house as Arab custom
did not allow the killing of a guest.**[2]** Therefore he said, “I don’t
like that he should be killed in my house.”

Shareek asked him, “Why? By Allah, his slaying will be a cause of divine
proximity (a good deed)!”

Shareek did not pay attention. He turned to Muslim and urged him to kill
Ibn Ziyad and he said, “Do not fall short in this matter.” As they spoke
they heard clamor at the door of the house because Ibn Ziyad had arrived
with his entourage. Muslim arose and hid in the closet. Ibn Ziyad
entered and inquired about Shareek’s illness. Shareek informed him of
his condition. When Shareek saw that Muslim delayed in coming out he
recited the following lines of poetry:

**“For whom do you await that you don’t welcome Salmi. Welcome him and
whosoever welcomes him, give the goblet of death.”[3]**

At that time his voice arose so that Muslim may hear him. He said:

**“May Allah give your father a good reward. Give him the drink even if
my life is lost in it.”[4]**

Ibn Ziyad did not realize what he intended; he thought that he was
talking in delirium. So he asked Hani, “Is he talking in delirium?”

 “Yes, may Allah do good to the Amir, he is like that since
morning.”**[5]**

Mehran, Ibn Ziyad’s slave was a cunning fellow. He sensed some mischief
and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 234. *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg.
101. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/26. Some historians have opined that one who
invited Muslim to kill Ibne Ziyad was Hani Ibne Urwah as mentioned in
*Al-Imamah was Siyasah* 2/4.  
 **[2]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 101. It is mentioned that Hani did
not like that Ibne Ziyad should be killed in his house.  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 101. *Maqtal Abi Mikhnaf* Pg. 43 it
has come that he recited the following couplets: **“What are you waiting
for that you did not welcome Salmi. Say welcome to him and to all those
who say welcome to him.** **It is not worth drinking that which comes to
me when I am thirsty. And I die and my death is in it.** **If you fear
to cast a glance at Salmi you shall never be able to remain safe from
his intrigue.”** And in *Futuh* 5/72 and *Al-Akhbar at-Tiwal*, Pg. 236
it has come that he recited the following couplet: **“Regarding Salmi in
his opportune time what are you waiting for? Because he is such that his
friendship has weakened and his separation has been decided.**  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 101  
 **[5]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/26 and *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 102

winked to Ibn Ziyad. He got up in haste. Shareek told him, ”O Amir, I
wish to make some bequests to you.” Ibn Ziyad said, “I shall visit you
again.”

Mehran was worried. He addressed Ibn Ziyad and said, ”He wanted to kill
you.”

Ibn Ziyad was shocked. He asked, ”How is it possible? After the respect
I have for him? In the house of Hani, with father’s liking for him?”

When the tyrant went away Muslim emerged from the closest and found that
Shareek was in remorse. He asked, “What prevented you from killing
him?”**[1]**

Muslim replied, “Two things restrained me from this. Firstly: Hani did
not like him killed in his house. Secondly: The saying of the Messenger
of Allah (s) that Islam has prohibited that a believer never kills by
deceit.”

Shareek told him, “By Allah, if you had killed him your mission would
have gained stability and your power would have become
established.”**[2]**

Shareek did not remain alive for more than three days after this. Ibn
Ziyad recited his funeral prayer and had him buried in Thaya. When he
learnt of the plot that Shareek had devised he said, “By Allah I shall
not recite the funeral prayer for any Iraqi. If the grave of Ziyad had
not been in their town I would have dug up Shareek’s grave.”**[3]**

Explanation of this Event
-------------------------

Many people have questioned the attitude of Muslim and they criticize
him and hold him responsible for the events that followed. They say that
if he had killed the tyrant, the Muslims would have been relieved of the
terrible hardships in which they had fallen…”

However, this censure is baseless and in no way is it having any balance
and truth. Because it is not in accordance with Muslim’s character and
his true circumstances. As he was an incomparable example of piety and
religiosity among the people. He was the one who had been brought up in
the house of his uncle, Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) and he had imbibed the
character and views of his exalted uncle. He has considered his
illuminated manner to mould his own behavior and the way of his life. He
had molded his life on absolute truth without any sort of deviation. Ali
(‘a) had also shown a life devoid of everything that could be construed
to be against the religion of Islam. It was only he who had said, “An
intelligent man is aware of deceitful ways but piety prevents him from
them.”

This is the ray of the sun of that character in which Ibn Aqil developed
his views,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/26  
 **[2]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 235 and in *Tarikh* Ibne Athir 4/27
it is mentioned: Hani told Muslim: If you had killed him you would have
killed a transgressor, a sinner and an infidel who betrayed trust. Ibne
Numa says that Hani’s wife implored Muslim in the name of God that he
must not kill Ibne Ziyad in her house. When Hani came to know about it,
he said, “She has killed herself and me and she is standing for that
which has fled her.”  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/363-364. *Al-Aghani* 6/59

which became clear in his actions and it is of the manners of the
Alawites.

Dr. Muhammad Tahir Darush says, “Hashemites have a way of living and
they spend their life in it. Apart from that they do not know of any
other way. That is why such things became their distinguishing
characteristics, like faith, frankness, chastity, nobility, merits,
lofty point of view, exemplary habits, religious nature and prophetic
manners were a part of their character.”**[1]**

Muslim did not act to assassinate his deceitful foe because religion has
prohibited killing anyone through trickery and a believer never resorts
to this type of act. Habtut Deen opines: “This statement is having a
lofty aim and broad vision because Ali’s progeny along with being
absolute followers of truth and rightfulness never resorted to deceit
and trickery even if the circumstances demanded it. And they preferred a
delayed success in a rightful manner to an immediate victory achieved
through trickery. This was a habit seen in their predecessors also and
received by their descendants in inheritance. As if they were created to
establish the rule of justice and virtue in the hearts of the selected
ones or those who have divine recognition. And history has treasured
their status for them in the hearts.”**[2]**

Shaykh Ahmad Fahmi also says, “This is Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad the same
cunning man regarding whom Muslim had an excellent opportunity and he
was within his easy reach. He could have killed him easily. If he had
done so, he would have deprived Yazid from a cruel and powerful ally.
However Muslim took lesson from the guidance of his cousin,**[3]**
avoided this course of action and saved himself from resorting to deceit
and fraud.”

The duty entrusted to Muslim was to take the allegiance of the people
and to keep an eye on the current events. Apart from this he had no
other immediate function. If he had assassinated the tyrant be would
have gone out of the limits of his responsibility…While the government
as the representative of which he had arrived was a religious government
and it was such that before initiating anything it took care to follow
the fundamentals of religion. It strictly followed and established the
practice and laws of Islam while assassination has no place in Islam.

Ahle Bayt (‘a) absolutely avoided following crooked ways and they used
to object against the inappropriate actions of Bani Umayyah with regard
to religious laws. His Eminence, Husain did not go out on his great
mission except that he may reform the conditions of that time and to
show the Islamic way to the people….If Muslim had committed that act
which was unacceptable to religion, how it could have been justified for
the righteous and pious people?

Anyway, Muslim restrained his hands on the basis of religious virtue and
nobility  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Khutabah dar Sadr-e-Islam* 2/13  
 **[2]** *Nahzatul Husain*, Pg. 71-72  
 **[3]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 178

and he did not kill Ibn Ziyad by trick even though he was within his
easy reach. The most useless and absurd remark is that which accuses
Muslim of weakness and sloth. It can never be justified and accepted.
Because he was such a valiant man that he exhibited it when people
betrayed him in Kufa. He displayed such valor that its equal is not
found anywhere in history. When he remained determined in front of a
large number of militants and no kind of weakness and sloth was seen in
him. He beheaded the multitudes and dispersed their ranks. When the
carnage reached a high level the Kufians began to scream in terror. Then
how is it possible to accuse the valiant stalwart, the pride of the
family of Adnan of sloth and weakness?

Horrible Plot
-------------

The oppressive tyrant, Ibn Ziyad devised a horrible plot to gain
political dominance and control of the situation in Kufa even though
before it, Muslim was in absolute control. This charge occurred very
suddenly and he succeeded on turning the tables on Muslim and having him
put to death. The salient feature of Ibn Ziyad’s plan were as follows:

Spying upon Muslim
------------------

The first step that Ibn Ziyad took was that he selected his loyal slave,
Maqil to spy on Muslim and find out his political activities and learn
about his strengths and weaknesses. Maqil was brought up by Ibn Ziyad,
trained in all kinds of trickery and deceit so that he developed into a
vile trickster with a cunning mind who was also dependable and sincere.
Ibn Ziyad gave him 3000 dirhams and instructed him to develop contacts
with Shias and claim that he was a Syrian and a slave of Kala Himyari.
In those days the Syrian slaves were generally in support of Ahle Bayt
(‘a) therefore he was told to pose as a slave so that no one may have
doubt or suspicion about him. And he told him that whenever he met Shia
people he should tell them that he was a devotee of Ahle Bayt (‘a) whom
Allah has bestowed with the love of the household of the Messenger of
Allah (s). He should say that he has learnt that a person has come who
was mobilizing the people towards Imam Husain (‘a), and that Maqil was
having some funds that he wanted to contribute for their fight against
their enemies. Maqil set out to fulfill his duty and entered the Masjid.

He came (to a place where) he sat near Muslim bin Ausaja as-Asadi in the
great mosque. The latter was praying, and he (Maqil) heard some people
saying that this (was one of those who) had pledged allegiance to Imam
Husain (‘a). He went up and sat right next to him until he had finished
praying.

“O servant of God,” he said, “I am a Syrian whom God has blessed with
love for the House and love for those who love them.”

He pretended to weep (in front of) him. Then he continued: “I have three
thousand dirhams with which I want to meet a man from them (the House)
whom I have learnt has come to Kufa to receive pledges of allegiance on
behalf of the son of the

daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s), may God bless him and his
family. I have been wanting to meet him but I have not found anyone who
will direct me to him and I don’t know the place (where he is
staying).While I am sitting (here), I heard a group of the faithful
saying that this is a man (i.e. Muslim bin Ausaja) who is acquainted
with this House. Therefore I have come to you so that you may take this
money from me and introduce me to your leader; for I am one of your
brethren and someone you can trust. If you wish, you may receive my
pledge of allegiance to him before my meeting him.”

“I thank God for you meeting me,” replied (Muslim) bin Ausaja, “and it
gives me great joy to get (you) what you desire, and that God should
help the House of His Prophet, peace be on them, through you. Yet the
people’s knowledge of my (connection) with this affair before it is
finished troubles me, because of (my) fear of this tyrant and his
severity.”

“It would be better (if) you took the pledge of allegiance from me
(now),” Maqil told him. So he took his pledge of allegiance and
testaments heavily supported by oaths that he would be sincere and keep
the matter concealed. He (Maqil) gave him whatever would make him
content in that way.**[1]**

“Come to visit me at my house for (a few) days,” said (Muslim bin
Ausaja), “for I will seek permission for you (to visit) your master.”

He began to visit him frequently with his people (i.e. the other members
of the Shia) and sought permission for him (to visit). Permission was
given and Muslim b. Aqil received (Maqil’s) pledge of allegiance. He
told Abu Thamama as-Saidi to take the money from them and what could be
used to help each other, and he used to buy their arms. He was a
perceptive man and one of the knights of the Arabs and one of the
notables of the Shia.

That man (i.e. Maqil) began to visit them regularly. He was the first to
enter and the last to leave, in order to become acquainted with
(everything of) their affairs which Ibn Ziyad wanted. He used to keep
him informed about that at regular intervals.**[2]**

With the Organs of the Revolution
---------------------------------

First: Maqil was a Syrian inimical to Ahle Bayt (‘a) and loyal to Bani
Umayyah, well known for his sacrifices in their love. What was the worth
of his trustworthiness for Muslim?

Second: When Maqil gave the money to Muslim bin Ausaja, he began to
weep. What was the meaning of his weeping or pretence of weeping? It
should have created doubt in his sincerity?

Third: When he developed contacts. He was the first to enter the
gatherings of Shias and the last to leave. His regularity in attending
their meetings and staying  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/25-26  
 **[2]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 236

for long hours was indeed a cause of suspicion.

It would have better if they had been careful in this matter and found
the reality behind this man. Though it is true that he was an expert spy
and well informed of the details of his mission.

Anyway Ibn Ziyad, on the basis of espionage, gained a lot of
intelligence and he learnt all about the strengths and weakness of the
revolution. This in turn helped him to dominate the circumstances.

Bribing the leaders and elders
------------------------------

Ibn Ziyad became cognizant of the nerve of Kufa and learnt how he could
gain control over the people. Therefore he began to bribe the leaders
and elders and generously bestowed cash gifts on them, thus obtaining
their loyalty and friendship so much so that they began to speak in his
praise and glorification and Ibn Ziyad succeeded in making the powerful
supporters of Muslim abandon him and dispersed the people from around
him.

Ibn Marjana enslaved all those on whom he gifted money and they became
his sincere supporters and loyal men. They broke the oath and pledges
they had made to Muslim. Therefore a man of Kufa informed the Holy Imam
about this when he met him on way to Kufa. He told the Imam, “As for the
elders, their bribes have increased and their lives have prospered,
their supports are obtained and their loyalties are being purchased. As
for the other people, their hearts are with you but tomorrow their
swords would be upon you.”**[1]**

Kufians forgot the letters they had dispatched to Imam (‘a) and the
pledge of allegiance they had made to the emissary of His Eminence
because of the monies bestowed on them by the governor’s regime. A
writer says: A group motivated by criticism of Bani Umayyah, those who
had written letters to His Eminence, Husain emphasizing their sincerity
and shed their most precious tears in the presence of Muslim; these were
the same people whose loyalties were purchased by Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad.
After that Musab bin Umair purchased their loyalties and separated from
Mukhtar leaving him alone to be killed. After that the Umayyah Caliph
Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan purchased them and they became aloof from Musab
who met his end at the hands of Abdul Malik bin Marwan.**[2]**

Refraining from Attacking Hani’s House
--------------------------------------

Ibn Ziyad, the tyrant knew that Hani was a prominent element of the
revolution because his dangerous spy, Maqil had informed him of the
active role Hani played in support and organization of the revolution.
He was also told that Hani’s house was the center of common Shias and
the real place of refuge of Muslim, the ambassador of His Eminence,
Husain… Thus why Ibn Ziyad did not raid Hani’s house or attack it and
lay siege to it with his army in order to quell the revolt?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/233  
 **[2]** *Mukhtar Thaqafi Aaina Asr Amawi,* Pg. 69-70

It was so because Ziyad was militarily weak and he did not possess
enough strength to undertake an armed struggle. Because Hani’s house and
its surroundings were encircled with 4000 armed men who had paid
allegiance to Muslim. Apart from this was the following that Hani had
among the people and his important position in the province. Therefore
Ibn Ziyad did not dare attack him, as he feared dire consequences.

Messengers of Deceit
--------------------

Ibn Ziyad used to remain awake at night and pondered and discussed with
his associates the matter of Hani, because Hani was the most popular man
of the province and the most powerful personality who could support the
revolution and not leave Muslim to be captured by the enemy. Thus if
Hani is eliminated the revolt shall be uprooted. However he refrained
from putting Hani under arrest or laying siege to his house because it
was not possible. They unanimously decided to send a delegation to Hani
and trick him to surrender himself. The delegation was supposed to
convey to him that Ibn Ziyad wished to meet him. Once Hani comes under
their control it would not be difficult to find his followers and all
the problems would be solved. Thus a group of people were selected for
this job. They were as follows:

Hisaan bin Asmaa bin Khatija, leader of Fuzara tribe.

Muhammad bin Ashath, leader of Kindi tribe

Amr bin Hajjaj

Hisaan bin Asmaa was unaware of the trickery with Hani but Muhammad bin
Ashath and Amr bin Hajjaj knew it well. Ibn Ziyad instructed them to
convey to Hani his (Ibn Ziyad’s) eagerness to meet him and that they
must try their best to satisfy Hani of their sincerity and quell all his
doubts and fears.

Hani’s Detention
----------------

The delegation hastened to Hani’s residence in the night and found him
seated there. They saluted him and asked, “What is stopping you from
seeing the governor? For he has mentioned you and said that if he had
been told you were ill, he would have paid you a visit.”

“An illness has stopped me,” he answered.

They rejected the excuse and said, “He has been informed that you sit at
the door of your house every evening. He finds you tardy and tardiness
and churlish behavior he will not tolerate. We adjure you to side with
us.”

They continued to urge him to come to Ibn Ziyad till he unwillingly
assented. He called for his clothes and got dressed. Then he called for
a mule and rode (with them).

When he got near the palace, he began to feel some apprehension and
decided to turn back. He said to Hisaan bin Asmaa, “Nephew, my God, I
fear this man. What do you think?” Hisaan replied, “Uncle, by God, I do
not fear anything for you.

Why do you invent a reason (for blame) against yourself?”

They urged him to move on till they brought him to Ibn Marjana who
welcomed him with anger and said (to himself): “The legs of the swindler
have brought him to you.”

Then he said to Shurayh who was near him:

**“I want his life[1]** **but he wants my death.**

**The one who makes excuses to you is one of your own bosom friends from
the tribe of Murad.”**

He was referring to his earlier kindness and gentleness to him (Hani).

“What is that, governor?” asked Hani.

“Yes, Hani, what are these matters which you have been plotting in your
house against the Commander of the faithful and the general community of
the Muslims?” asked Ibn Ziyad. “You have brought Muslim bin Aqil and
taken him into your house. You have gathered arms and men for him in
houses around you. You thought that was hidden from me.”

“I have not done that and Muslim is not with me,” he replied.

“Oh yes (you have),” was the answer.

After the argument between them had gone on for some time and Hani
persisted in contradicting and denying (the accusations), Ibn Ziyad
summoned that spy, Maqil. He came and stood before him.

“Do you know this man?” (Ibn Ziyad) asked him.

“Yes,” he replied.

At that (moment) Hani realized that he had been a spy against them and
had brought (Ibn Ziyad) all their information. For a moment he was
bewildered, and then his spirit returned to him.

“Listen to me,” he said, “and believe what I say. I swear by God that I
do not lie. By God, I did not summon him to my house. I did not know
anything about his business until he came to me asking to stay with me.
I was too ashamed to refuse him. As a result of that, the duty of giving
(him) protection fell upon me. Therefore I gave him lodging and refuge.
Then his affair developed as you have been informed. If you wish, I will
give you strongly sworn testaments that I will not do you any harm and
danger, and I will come to you and put my hand in your hand.**[2]** If
you wish, I will give you a guarantee which will be in your hand until I
return to you. Then I will go to him and order him to leave my house for
wherever in the land he wants to go. Then he will leave his right of
protection.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** “Hayaa”, it is narrated that it also denotes the stipulated
allowance from the Public Treasury.  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/27-29  
 **[3]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 3/57, *Simtun Nujoomul Waali* 3/61. Dhahabi,
*Tarikh Islam* 4/170 & 304 and 301 has related his statement in another
way also which is different from the version generally quoted by famous
historians.

“You will never leave me unless you bring him,” answered Ibn Ziyad.

“No, by God, I will not bring him to you,” (the other) declared.

After the argument between them had gone on for some time, Muslim bin
Amr al-Bahili rose (to speak). There was no other Syrian or Basran in
Kufa except him.

“May God make you prosper, governor,” he interjected, “(please) leave me
with him (for a time) so that I can speak to him.” He arose and took him
(Hani) aside from Ibn Ziyad. They were (standing) where he could see
them and when they raised their voices, he could hear what they were
saying.

“I adjure you before God, Hani,” said Muslim, “you are killing yourself
and bringing tribulation on your clan. By God, I hold you too precious
to be killed. This man is the cousin of (your) tribe so they will not
fight against him, nor harm him. Therefore give him (i.e. Muslim bin
Aqil) to them (the authorities). There will be no shame and failure for
you by that for you would only be handing him over to the authorities.”

“By God, indeed there would be shame and disgrace for me,” answered
Hani, “were I to hand over one who has come under my protection and is
my guest, while I am still alive and sound. I can hear; I see well; I
have a strong arm and many helpers. By God, if I was the only one
without any helper, I would not hand him over until I had died on his
behalf.”**[1]**

He began to shout at him saying: “By God, I will never hand him over to
him.”

Ibn Ziyad heard that. “Bring him to me,” he said. They brought him.
“Either bring him to me or I will have your head cut off,” demanded Ibn
Ziyad.

“Then there will be much flashing (of swords) around your house,”
replied Hani, thinking that his clan would prevent him (from being
killed).

“Come near me,” demanded (Ibn Ziyad). He came nearer and Ibn Ziyad
struck his face with his cane and went on beating at his nose, forehead
and cheeks so that he broke his nose and the blood flowed from it on to
his face and beard and the flesh of his forehead and cheeks was
sprinkled over his beard. Eventually the cane broke. Hani stretched out
his hand towards the hilt of the sword of one of the armed attendants
but the man pulled it away and prevented him.

“You have been behaving like one of the Haruri (i.e. Kharijites) all day
long!” yelled Ibn Ziyad, “so your blood is permitted to us. Take him
away!”

They took him and threw him into one of the rooms in the building. They
locked the doors on him. He had told them to put guards on him and that
(also) was done.**[2]** However Hissaan bin Asmaa arose and said: “Are
(we) messengers of treachery now? For you told us to bring the man to
you. Yet when we brought him to you,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Futuh* 5/83  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/28-29

you smashed his nose and face, and his blood flowed on his beard. Then
you claimed that you would kill him.”

“You will be for it here (and now),” cried Ubaidullah and he ordered him
to be struck, shaken, and pushed aside.

“We are satisfied with the governor’s attitude on our behalf and against
(those of) us (who are wrong); the governor is only punishing (those who
are wrong),” declared Muhammad bin Ashath.**[1]**

It was nothing serious for Ibn Ashath that what oppression the tyrant
may resort to.

Revolt of Madhij Tribe
----------------------

However when it was reported to Amr bin al-Hajjaj and he learnt that
Hani had been killed, he advanced with Madhij and surrounded the palace.
He had a great crowd with him.

“I am Amr bin al-Hajjaj,” he called out, “and these are the knights of
Madhij, and their leading men. We have not broken away from obedience,
nor have we separated from the community.”

It had been reported to them that their colleague had been killed, and
they regarded that as a great crime. Ubaidullah was told that Madhij
were at the gate. He told Qadi Shurayh: “Go in to their colleague, look
at him and then go out and inform them that he is still alive and has
not been killed.”

Shurayh went in and looked at him. When Hani saw Shurayh, he said, with
blood flowing down his beard: “Oh what a God! Oh what Muslims! Has my
clan been destroyed? Where are the people of religion? Where are the
people of the town? Are they avoiding me because of their
enemies?”**[2]**

When he heard the tumult at the door of the palace he said: “O
Shurayh!**[3]** I think those are the voices of Madhij and my group of
the Muslims. If ten of them got in, they would be able to rescue
me.”**[4]**

After Shurayh had listened to what he had to say, he went out to them
and told them: “When the governor learnt about your attitude and your
statements concerning your colleague, he ordered me to go and see him. I
went and I saw him. Then he ordered me to meet you and inform you that
he is still alive and that the report that he had been killed was
false.”

“Praise be to God since he has not been killed,” answered Amr bin
al-Hajjaj and his colleagues.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh*, Pg. 29  
 **[2]** And in the narration of *Tabari* Vol. 5/267 it is mentioned:
“Are they leaving me to their enemies?”  
 **[3]** Shuraih Qadhi was related to a poet of Kinda. This is mentioned
in *Kamil Mubarad,* Pg. 21.  
 **[4]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/30. In *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 2/351 it is
mentioned: Hani told Shuraih: “O Shuraih, fear for Allah, he would kill
me.”  
 **[5]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/30

At that time they went away fast as if they had been released from a
prison. They went, taking along with themselves humiliation and disgrace
and became examples of betraying of trust.

In my view, the going away of Madhij so soon without being fully assured
about Hani’s safety was as a result of a deep secret relationship that
Ibn Ziyad had developed with their prominent members to eliminate Hani.
If it had not been so, the Madhij tribe would not have allowed Hani’s
execution, in an open manner by hanging him in the market place of
shoe-makers.

Anyway the Madhij earned disgrace and allowed themselves to be
humiliated. An anonymous poet who kept his name concealed for fear of
reprisal from that tribe, composed elegy in the sorrow of Hani in which
he denounced Hani’s clansmen and through this tried to rekindle in them
anger so that they may revenge the killing of their tribe member. He
says:

**“If you do not know what death is, then look at Hani in the
market-place and Ibn Aqil.**

**(Look at) a hero whose face has been covered with wounds and another
who fell dead from a high place.[1]**

**The command of the governor struck them (down) and they became legends
for those who travel on every road.**

**You see a corpse whose color death has changed and a spattering of
blood which has flowed abundantly;**

**A young man who was (even) more bashful than a shy young woman, was
more decisive than the polished blade of two-edged sword.**

**Is Asma riding in safety a mount which moves at walking pace while
Madhij urged him to seek vengeance**

**And Murad wander around him? Are all of them in fear of the questioner
and the questioned?**

**If you do not avenge your two brothers, then be harlots satisfied with
little.”[2]**

Dr. Yusuf Khalif has expressed his opinion regarding the above couplets
and he says: “Here is an effective voice and it goes from urging to
openly instigating till it reaches the position of blatant daring
although the poet was living under the rule of the Umayyads. Because he
was able to conceal his name. So much so that there  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In *Muruj az-Zahab* 2/60 it is mentioned: These couplets are by
an anonymous poet. In *Aghani* 13/35 and in *Jumharatul Ansaab,* Pg. 228
they are considered to be of Akhtal. In *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 110
they are considered to be written by Abdullah bin Zubair Asadi. And in
*Tabari* 5/379-380 by Farazdaq and in *Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 242 by
Abdur Rahman bin Zubair Asadi and in *Lisanul Arab* 4/502 by Sulaym bin
Salam Hanafi.  
 **[2]** Timaar is the name of a room on the top of the royal palace,
and Muslim was killed in that place and from there his body was thrown
down. Thus what Ibne Abil Hadid has written in *Sharh Nahjul Balagha*
5/237 that it was a wall, is incorrect.

was difference of opinion between narrators regarding his identity.
While for other narrators he was completely unknown. In this call
neither has he spoken of Husain nor about politics. Rather he only
wished to kindle the spirit of conscience of Yemenis so that they may
take revenge of the killing of their man. On the basis of this suspicion
he did not intentionally mention the name of Muhammad Ibn Ashath Yemeni.
He only named Asmaa bin Kharija Fuzari, whom he blamed for the murder of
Hani. He did not mention anyone else. Inspite of the fact that both of
them were sent by Ibn Ziyad. However, the poet has as a precaution not
mentioned the name of Ibn Ashath so that there may not be discord or
mischief among the Yemenis. This was so because he wanted the people to
be united in taking revenge. In his elegy the poet has given a graphic
description of the two persons who were put to death and the description
is really terrifying; the poet was sure that the story of two corpses,
one of which had the face crushed and the other which was thrown from
the top of the palace, would definitely spread among the people.”

In this picture the poet has emphatically presented two horrifying
scenes so that he may cause to rise in them sentiments and emotions of
sorrow which would lead them to become angry and take revenge: The scene
of the two corpses whose color death had changed and the blood that was
dripping from them, they bled from every side. After that the
description of Asma who mounted his horse and in absolute comfort and
security was riding to Kufa. He rode on in pride and arrogance. And he
asks, “How long would this man remain safe while the tribesmen around
him would seek revenge?” At that time nothing greater shall be seen
except that nobility would ridicule them. Therefore the poet tells them:
“If you do not take revenge you would be like prostitutes who sell their
honor at a paltry price.”**[1]**

Thus Faal Hauzen writes: Madhij ignored their leadership and they did
not fulfill its right. They captured their leader and delivered him into
the hands of Ibn Marjana, lest he may create disturbance. Although this
tribe was having leadership and dominance in Kufa.

Anyway, the passing of away of Hani induced a great effect in spreading
terror and fear in the hearts of Kufians and it finally became the cause
of people abandoning their support for Muslim and thus finally causing
the failure of the uprising.

Muslim’s Uprising
-----------------

When Muslim learnt of what passed on Hani he hastened the uprising
against Ibn Ziyad because knew that the same fate awaited him, so he
ordered Abdullah bin Hazim to summon the people he had hidden in the
houses. 4000**[2]** or 40000**[3]** people gathered near him while the
Muslims were chanting the slogan of the Battle of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hayatush Sha’ar fil Kufa ilaa Nihayatul Qarnuth Thani lil
Hijrah*, Pg. 463-464  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/30. Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 4/92  
 **[3]** *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 2/351. Dhahabi, *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 1/150
from facsimile copy at Amirul Momineen Library

Badr: “O ones helped by the Ummah,**[1]** O victorious ones, sacrifice
your lives!”

Muslim perfected the arrangement of his forces and entrusted the general
command of the army to those who were known to him for their loyalty and
sincerity to Ahle Bayt (‘a) They were as follows:

Abdullah bin Aziz Kindi was entrusted with Kinda quarter.

Muslim bin Ausaja was given the command of Madhij quarter.

Ibn Thamame Saidi was given the leadership of the tribes of Bani Tamim
and Hamadan.

Baath bin Jude Jadali was made the commander of Medina quarter.

When Muslim moved to the governor’s palace with his army in order to lay
siege to it**[2]** Ibn Ziyad had gone out to speak to the people after
the passing away of Hani. He went to the great mosque and mounted the
pulpit. Then he glanced at his companions and they stood to his right
and left with their maces and swords pulled out to defend him. Seeing
this his worries faded and he addressed the people of Kufa as follows:

“So to say: O people of Kufa! Cling to the obedience of Allah, His
Messenger and that of your leaders. And do not create discord and become
disunited or you shall be destroyed. You shall be defrauded, regretful
and defeated. No one would be able to find a conclusive way. He who
warns is excused.”

The tyrant had hardly concluded his address when a shout was heard and
people began to yell. He asked about it and was told, “Beware it is
Muslim bin Aqil who has come with those who have pledged allegiance to
him.”

Ibn Ziyad was filled with apprehension and his limbs began to shudder in
fright. The coward hastened to his palace in such a terrified condition
that his tongue hung out of his mouth. He went into the palace and
bolted all the doors from inside.**[3]**

The mosque and the market place became full of Muslim’s companions and
the world became narrow for Ibn Ziyad and he became sure that he would
be killed because he did not have any power to defend himself except for
thirty bodyguards and his twenty officials.**[4]** While the soldiers of
Muslim were increasing in number till according to some historians their
numbers reached 18000. They were waving their flags and flashing their
swords and raising slogans denouncing Ibn Ziyad and announcing their
enmity to him. Some historians have written that there was a severe
confrontation between Muslim’s soldiers and Ibn Ziyad’s men.

Ibn Ziyad began to ponder upon the quickest means that could release his
regime from the clutches of the revolution and he concluded that except
for a psychological war no other option was there for him, and he began
to put this into effect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This slogan used to motivate the fighters in battle to fight
with greater fervor and also contains the glad-tidings of victory.  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/30  
 **[3]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/154. *Al-Futuh* 5/85-86  
 **[4]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/30
