Failure of the Uprising
=======================

Many people have questioned the factors that led to the failure of
Muslim’s uprising inspite of the fact that he enjoyed military power
while his opponent had no sort of power to defend himself. Leave alone
getting such strength to attack or make war. Some of them think that the
cause lay in Muslim’s lack of knowledge about political matters and his
weakness in dominating the affairs. They think that he opened the way
for the enemy to prevail over him…Obviously this is a superficial view
and has no sign of research or contemplation for it is not based on a
thorough understanding of the circumstances and events of that time.
Most important thing is to undertake a thorough study of the social
conditions of Kufa of that time and the similarity of its people in
individual and social behavior. Also the political program of Ibn Ziyad
that he used to subdue them. More than that the discretions allowed for
Muslim by the Imam, because complete information about this matter
explains to us the causes of the failure of the uprising which shall be
studied in the coming pages.

Kufian Society
--------------

It is necessary for us to speak in more detail about the nature of
society in Kufa. Because it is the mirror that reflects the terrible
events that have left their imprints on the history of political Islam.
And it is a must for us to describe the local elements in Kufa and the
types of social relationships among them and the economic life that
ruled over them so that this discussion illuminates the causes of the
failure of revolution. It would also clarify the condition of
indifference and deviated thinking regarding the sufferings of that
society which resulted in the most evil disaster in the history of
humanity; that is their stepping forward to slay the beloved grandson of
the Messenger of Allah (s). The following are the main points that we
explain to our readers:

Social Phenomena
----------------

The following social phenomena were present in the Kufian society of
that time, which were exclusive to it among all communities:

Contradictory Behavior
----------------------

A strange phenomenon in Kufa society was that, that society was in
contradiction with its real life. Because they said one thing and did
just the opposite. They believed in one thing and committed the opposite
of it. While it is necessary for the actions of man to conform to his
beliefs. These contradictions were mentioned by Farazdaq when Imam
Husain (‘a) asked him about the conditions of Kufa. He said to the Imam,
“The hearts of the people are with you but their swords are against
you.”

Although it was necessary that their swords should have supported what
they had faith in and confronted in the path that they believed in, and
such a phenomenon is not seen in the history of any community.

Among the strange things about these contradictions was that the Kufa
society in a positive way involved itself in the political field and
they actively participated in those events and raised the slogan of
overthrowing the Umayyad rule. People wrote letters to Imam Husain (‘a)
imploring him to save them from the oppressions and injustice of the
Umayyads. They sent delegations and messengers with thousands of letters
to the Holy Imam (‘a) in order to invite him to their land. And when His
Eminence sent his emissary, Muslim bin Aqil to them they welcomed him
with great enthusiasm and assured him of their full support, so much so
that he wrote to Imam Husain (‘a) to come over there at the soonest.
However when Ibn Marjana arrived in Kufa and unleashed terror and fear
among them, they became aloof from Muslim shutting their doors upon him
and said, “Who are we to interfere in the affairs of rulers?”

Their practical life was not in consonance to their beliefs and in what
they had faith in. Because they gave promises to their leaders that they
would stand beside them and then in a delicate moment they become aloof
from them.

Among examples of their contradictions was that after they had compelled
Imam Hasan (‘a) to make peace with Muawiyah and His Eminence left their
lands they lamented upon their own shortcomings regarding him. And when
they had slain Imam Husain (‘a) and the prisoners of Ahle Bayt (‘a)
arrived in their city, they raised their voices in lamenting for them.
Such that Imam Ali Ibn Husain (‘a) considered this action of theirs
astounding and he said, “They are lamenting for us and wailing, then who
has killed us?”

Absence of balance in the life of that society for the people there
brought calamities and problems and involved them in a great mischief.

Disloyalty and Deceit
---------------------

Another phenomenon present in Kufa society was deceit and betrayal and
they became so famous for this quality that idioms began to be coined
regarding this specialty. So much so that it is said: “More deceitful
than a Kufian.”**[1]**

And also about disloyalty an idiom says: “Al-Koofi Laa Yoofi (A Kufian
cannot be loyal).”**[2]**

Amirul Momineen (‘a) has described them as follows: “Deceitful loins and
crafty foxes…”

And it is said regarding them, “They are people whose bodies are
together but whose views are conflicting. Anyone who has them with him
just derived meager advantage. And they have become such that there
should be no hope in their loyalty and their statements cannot be
verified.”**[3]**

Practical aspects in their life were turnabout, hypocrisy and lack of
co-operation.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Qahir Baghdadi, *Al-Farq Bainal Farq,* Pg. 26  
 **[2]** Zakaria Qazwini, *Aathaarul Bilaad,* Pg. 251  
 **[3]** *Al Imamah was Siyasah* 1/129-130

They deceived that great revolutionary, Zaid bin Ali and told him, “A
hundred thousand men of Kufa are with you, who shall fight on your
side.”**[1]** And 50000 people gave allegiance to help him.**[2]** Later
when he declared his uprising their number went down to 218.**[3]** Such
that Dawood bin Ali advised Zaid that he should not be fooled by the
deception of Kufians and he said,

“Cousin, these people are fooling you. Before you, did they not deceive
one who was more respected among them, that is your grandfather, Ali?
And after him they pledged allegiance to Hasan but later arose against
him and snatched his cloak, plundered his tent and injured him. Did they
not call out your grandfather, Husain and made strongest oaths to him
and later deserted him and did not submit? They did not rest content
with this, they even went so far as to slay him.”**[4]**

They broke allegiance after allegiance.

Aashi Hamdan, who was the poet of uprising of Muhammad bin Ashath
against Hajjaj, has ridiculed the Kufians in the following lines:

**“Allah did not accept but that His light be perfected and that the
light of the transgressors is extinguished and that light was
extinguished.**

**And on Iraq and its people He sent humiliation due to their breaking
of pledge.**

**And they created such inappropriate things that are not eligible to be
taken up to God. (Be of any benefit).**

**That is they broke one pledge after another. Such that if they pledged
an oath one day, they betrayed it the next.”[5]**

They are well-known to all scholars for this quality of theirs.
Falhauzen believes that they were absolutely ignorant of rebellion,
retraction, deception and disobedience. And political and military
loyalty was absolutely unknown to them. The scholar, Waztarshuneen has
also emphasized this matter and he says, “Their most prominent
characteristic was deception, retraction and betraying trust.”**[6]**

This deception in their life was not confined to their commoners, it was
also seen in their thinkers and litterateurs. Because, the famous poet,
Surraqa stood against Mukhtar and fought against him in the battle of
Jabanah as-Sabi. However when Mukhtar came out victorious Surraqa was
brought as a prisoner to him and he threw him into the prison. Surraq
began to present his excuses to Mukhtar and composed poems and
panegyrics in his praise. Therein he recalled the principles of his
uprising. He resorted to hyperbole in his glorification. Among his
compositions are the following couplets:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/166  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/171  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/167-168  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/167-168  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/376  
 **[6]** *As-Siyaadatul Arabiyya,* Pg. 74

**“You emerge victorious on your enemies everyday and with every
battalion mourn the martyrdom of Husain.**

**Like the victory of Muhammad in the battle of Badr and on the day of
the splitting of the mountains which was seen in the battle of Hunain.**

**Thus, now that you are victorious, be kind to forgive though if we
were to be victorious we would have committed oppression and injustice
in the kingdom.**

**Accept my repentance, such that even if you repay me afterwards I
shall be grateful to you.”**

When Mukhtar forgave him, he left Kufa and not much time elapsed that he
again started badmouthing Mukhtar and instigated people against him
saying:

**“Tell Abu Ishaq that we have seen a large and strong number of piebald
horses.**

**I shall show with my eyes those things that are not seen. We know even
that which is hidden.**

**If they say that I have lied to them and if they come out I shall put
on the armors to fight them.”[1]**

He has sung about his uprising against Mukhtar and ridiculed him and his
supporters with the same fervor as he showed in his previous panegyric.
It is natural that such continued contradiction in their life caused
perplexity and lack of equitability in their behavior.

The most surprising aspect of their contradictory behavior was that some
of them exercised utmost precaution in the most ordinary religious
problems but did not flinch from committing the most heinous of deeds.
For example, a Kufian came to Abdullah Ibn Umar and asked whether the
blood of mosquito on his clothes be considered ritually pure or impure.

“To which area do you belong?” asked Ibn Umar.

“I am an Iraqi.” replied the man.

Ibn Umar was surprised. He said, “Look at him, he is asking me about
mosquito blood! While they have killed the son of the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (s)! I have heard His Eminence say about him and his
brother: These two (Hasan and Husain) are for me two flowers in the
world.”**[2]**

Some people have explained the cause of this confusion of theirs to be
the tough political conditions that befell them. Because the Umayyad
regime dealt with them in the harshest and most cruel manner. They
appointed over them the most merciless and ferocious persons as
governors, like Mughairah bin Shoba and Ziyad bin Sumaiyyah, who made
public life suffocating and difficult. These conditions created
contradictory behavior in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 6/401. *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 303  
 **[2]** *Al-Adabul Mufrad*, Pg. 14. *Hilyatul Awliya* 5/71

Rebellion against Governors
---------------------------

A special characteristic prominently seen in Kufa society was its
rebellion against governors and their complains regarding them. There
was no governor whom they did not denounce. For example, Saad bin Abi
Waqqas who was the founder of their city. They criticized him and said:
He does not know the prayer well.**[1]** Umar dismissed him and
appointed in his place, the most respectable companion, Ammar bin Yasir.
Not much time passed but they complained about him also to Umar. Umar
dismissed him also and appointed Abu Musa Ashari in that post. Again not
many days passed in his governorship that they began to raise objections
against him and said, “We have no need of Abu Musa.”**[2]**

Umar was fed up with them and he expressed his displeasure. Thus when
Mughairah asked him what was troubling him, “O Chief of believers! You
are like this only when facing a serious problem. Have you encountered a
problem?”

Umar complained to him about the pain caused by the people of Kufa and
he said, “What trouble is greater than these hundred thousand people who
are neither satisfied with any governor nor any governor is satisfied
with them…?”**[3]**

Umar has said about them as follows: “Among my problems from the people
of Kufa is that if I appoint a strong man upon them, they describe him
as a transgressor and if I appoint a weak one, they consider him
lowly…”**[4]**

They had made rebellion a habit and were not able to sit peacefully
without making any movement.**[5]**

Dimo Mobin believes that Kufians resorted to this habit during the time
when they were ruled by Persians and they always kept on changing the
governors.

Flutton is of the view that the Bedouins inhabiting Kufa possessed
characteristics like enmity, malice, revengefulness, plunder and crying
for blood. Therefore they were always rebellious and disobedient to the
government.**[6]**

Cowardice
---------

Another astounding quality of Kufian society for which it is famous, is
the cowardice of those people and their lack of determination in the
face of difficulties and disasters. Because whenever they were in
hardships they used to retract and flee. For example they initially paid
allegiance to Muslim in large numbers and promised him their support.
But when he declared uprising against Ibn Marjana, they went away from
him. So much so that not even a single person remained to show him the
way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 277  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/165. And it is mentioned therein that he was
a grocer.  
 **[3]** *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 278  
 **[4]** *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 278  
 **[5]** *An-Nazmul Islamiya*, Pg. 26  
 **[6]** *As-Siyaadatul Arabiyya,* Pg. 11

Zaid bin Ali was also the recipient of this same treatment. Because they
deserted him and left him alone to confront the Syrian army, while he
remarked, “Just as they did with Husain.”**[1]**

Also, they pledged allegiance to Abdullah bin Muawiyah and told him,
“Call the people towards you, because Bani Hashim are more deserving of
caliphate than Bani Marwan.” They urged him out of his residence and to
come to the palace where they pledged oath of allegiance to him. However
when he marched forward to fight Abdullah bin Umar, the Umayyad
governor, they began to flee. Abdullah bin Muawiyah looked and saw the
field devoid of his supporters because the commanders of his forces had
betrayed his trust when they aligned with the Umayyad governor. So he
fled from the side of Abdullah bin Muawiyah and the battalions also
followed him.**[2]**

Isa bin Zaid has said regarding them, “I don’t know anyone worthy of
trust, who would fulfill his pledge of allegiance and remain steadfast
fast when facing the enemy.”**[3]**

Bad Manners
-----------

Most Kufians possessed bad morals and manners. Thus Abdullah bin Hasan
says regarding them, “Apparently they seem to be proud but inwardly they
are lazy, in replying they were nasty and in facing the enemy,
impatient. Their tongues are in their forefront but their hearts do not
follow them.”

Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) has described them as follows: “If you are
left alone you are cowardly, if you engage in battle you are lazy. If
people get an Imam you criticize him and if you fall into hardships you
turn on your heels.”**[4]**

Mukhtar has also described them to Ibn Zubair when he inquired from him
about them and said, “Apparently they seem to be loyal to their rulers
but actually they are inimical to them.”

Ibn Zubair added the following to the statement of Mukhtar, “This is the
characteristic of bad slaves. That whenever they are in the presence of
their masters, they serve and obey him. But whenever they (masters) are
away, they abuse them.”

Aashi Hamadan has also denounced them as follows:

**“A fear that Allah has put in their hearts that without being
chastised they do not go near people.**

**Neither is there truthfulness in their statements nor do they have any
patience. But pride, vanity and greed is widespread among them.”[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/183-184  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 7/302-303  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 353  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 7/169  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/376

And Abul Sarya says regarding them:

**“I have traveled to various lands but I haven’t seen people like
you.**

**You are contradictory, foolish, lacking determination, lazy and weak
in hardships and prosperity.**

**The curse that fell on you before and which shall remain on you till
Doomsday is that no one is pleased with you and you are not pleased with
anyone.[1]**

**I have made my home, in discontent, far away from your lands. Thus if
I have become distanced from you, so you taste the enmity.”[2]**

Dr. Yusuf Khalifa has explained these couplets as follows: In these
lines, Abul Sarya has repeated the ancient view regarding the people of
Kufa that were a people having evil, hypocrisy and bad morals. They are
described to be disunited, contradictory, ignorant and having lack of
determination, weakness and helplessness. The poet believes that these
qualities shall remain in them always whether it is war or peace. Among
their qualities was that no leader or guide has ever passed that was
satisfied with them or they were satisfied with him. They were unique
among all the communities with regard to their being affected by these
traits and the poet says that nowhere has he come across people like
them. In the end the poet declares his enmity to them and his decision
to go far away from them. He also warns them of dire consequences and
evil fate that was to befall them.”**[3]**

Abu Bakr Hazali has also described their condition as, “The people of
Kufa broke off relations. They wrote to Husain bin Ali that, ‘We, a
hundred thousand men are with you,’ till he came out to join them. But
when he arrived, they attacked him. They killed the young and old of his
family. After that they came out to take revenge for his blood. Has
anyone ever heard of such a thing?”**[4]**

Greed and Jealousy
------------------

Another prominent defect of Kufian people was their greed for material
wealth. They were so much greedy for worldly things that they did not
refrain from resorting to the most shameless methods to achieve them.
They had no fear of insult or exposure. This was one of the most
important factors that led to the failure of Muslim’s uprising. Because
Ibn Ziyad generously bestowed money to the nobles and leaders of Kufa
and they hastened to him and betrayed Muslim. They broke the oath of
allegiance they had given him and Ibn Ziyad was able to purchase their
loyalties through his wealth and he was able to send them to fight the
beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) while they had pledged to
help and support His Eminence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** He is alluding to Imam Husain's curse on the people of Kufa on
the day of Ashura that: “May your rulers never be satisfied with you.”  
 **[2]** *Maqatilut Talibiyyin*, Pg. 444  
 **[3]** *Hayatush Sha’ar fil Kufa,* Pg. 445  
 **[4]** *Mukhtasar al-Buldan*, Pg. 173

Influenced by Rumors
--------------------

Another major defect of Kufa society was that the people were proved to
believe in rumors very soon without investigating the reality behind it.
Umayyads took advantage of this in the days of Maskan**[1]** and spread
rumor in Iraqi army that Imam Hasan (‘a) has made peace with Muawiyah.
When the soldiers heard this rumor they were shocked and there developed
conflict among them. They rushed upon Imam (‘a) and plundered all his
belongings. They even attacked him and slashed his thigh with a sword.

When Ibn Ziyad’s agents spread rumor among them that the Syrian army was
fast approaching them to take revenge from them, they were absolutely
devastated. Their fighting spirit died down and they began to flee from
the army. They left Muslim Ibn Aqil alone and not a single person
remained with him who could have pointed him the way.

These were some prominent aspects of the Kufian society that tell us
about their decadence and their failures in face of disasters because
neither they possessed a firm determination nor view of social
principles. Due to this they brought misfortune upon themselves and
destroyed their future. They did not respect their own rights and
instead opened up the way for the cruel son of Marjana to rule upon them
and shower upon them the most terrible punishments.

Economic Life
-------------

The economic life in Kufa was in a disbalanced condition. A noble class
existed which was drowned in extreme wealth due to the fact that the
Umayyad regime during the reigns of Uthman and Muawiyah had accorded
special treatment and made generous grants to persons of this special
class, by depriving the poor and destitute they had become wealthy and
some of them are as follows:

1. Ashath bin Qais: During the reign of Uthman he purchased large tracts
of land in Iraq and he became the foremost feudal lord of that time. He
was the one who compelled the Imam to accept arbitration because the
Imam’s government criticized special benefits and privileges given to
him by the previous regimes.

2. Amr bin Hareeth: He was the most affluent man of Kufa**[2]** and he
played an important role in quelling Muslim’s uprising and paralyzing
his movement.

3. Shabth bin Rabi: He was from a prominent noble class of Kufa.**[3]**
He was one of those who restrained people from supporting Muslim. In the
same way he commanded a battalion in battle against His Eminence, Husain
(‘a).

These were some wealthy people of that time who strengthened the hands
of Ibn Marjana and provided him with their support so that the uprising
of Muslim may be suppressed because they possessed wide power in Kufa
and had the capability  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is a locality of Kufa (Tr.)  
 **[2]** It is mentioned in *Tabari:* Amr bin Hareeth was the richest
man of Kufa.  
 **[3]** *Hayatush Sha’ar fil Kufa*, Pg. 168

to announce their opposition to Mukhtar even though the majority of
people on his side included slaves and retainers. They were also those
who overthrew his rule.

However the majority of the people of society in Kufa were having
connections with the government and they obtained their livelihood from
it as it was originally an army cantonment and the regime had guaranteed
its expenses as many people of this area were deprived and in a poor
condition.

Asadi, the poet, has described its unsuitable economic life in his
panegyric that he composed in praise of a leader in order to obtain his
favors and kindness. In that panegyric he says:

**“O the generous Aba Talha! Bestow me something from what is given to
you.**

**Enliven me, may my life be sacrificed on you as I am helpless and
deprived and you’re aware of it.**

**Or give me barley flour as it is a great rewarding deed.**

**You know what Allah has said about feeding the orphans, so do not
ignore me, sir.**

**Except for a cup and leather utensil and a discolored book-like fresh
saplings, I do not possess anything else.**

**And the covering sheet patched with leather that I am selling for a
loaf of bread.**

**And the firm saddle that I have been lent is sufficient for every
respected guest.”[1]**

You can see how poverty and deprivation has impelled him to beg in these
lines. This was the same face of destitution that had squeezed his neck.
Shauqi Zaef has opined about these couplets that: “If it is from here
that the call for money arose in the Umayyad panegyric. It surrounds
their various aspects and it became a basis of life of people. It is
natural that it should also form the basis of their art and poetry. Is
it not from the important pillars of life? Then how it could not be the
important pillar of art? Because in the palm is hidden the sea of life
and in the depth of poetry, because only poetry reflects life.”**[2]**

Economic life has a deep and active impact in the existence of society
and it plays an important role in leading the society on the path of
good or evil. And it is proved that the crimes and evils they committed
was as a result of extreme poverty and deprivation. Or it was due to
their greed in obtaining material things. Most of the soldiers who had
gone out to fight Imam Husain (‘a) had done so only when Ibn Marjana
promised a raise in their stipends.

Anyway, bad economic conditions in Kufa played an active role in failure
of Muslim’s uprising and dispersing people from around him. At that time
Ibn Ziyad generously bestowed riches to leaders and prominent people and
they began to oppose Muslim and finally deserted him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Haajiz, *Al-Haiwan* 5/297  
 **[2]** *Al-Tatur wat Tajaddud fil Sha’arul Amawi,* Pg. 34

Social Factors
--------------

The city of Kufa was a city of many communities and people speaking
various languages inhabited it. They differed from each other in habits
and mannerisms because they included Arabs, Persians, Nabateans who
lived with slaves and other people. It was not considered a pure Arab
town like Mecca and Medina. Rather it was a town of homogeneous
population. As Yaqubi says, these people migrated to this town as it was
considered to be the original Islamic army cantonment. And Muslim
soldiers used to be sent for expeditions from this town. War booties
were sent to this town continuously as Allah has prescribed, so much so
that every participating soldier’s share from the booty of Madayan came
to 12000 units of currency,**[1]** thus that which became a cause to
impel the people to move to Kufa was the desire to obtain wealth. Some
of these communities were as follows:

Arabs
-----

When Kufa was founded at the hands of the conqueror of Iraq, Saad bin
Abi Waqqas, Arabs were attracted to it. They began to compete with each
other to relocate to Kufa. In the very beginning, seventy Badr veterans
and 300 companions of Shajarah arrived to settle here.**[2]** Ibn Saad
in his *Tabaqaat* has mentioned about 150 companions who were settled in
Kufa.**[3]** Saffah says about them that, “It (Kufa) is the best
residence of companions and noble men.”**[4]**

As for the Arab tribes that settled over there, they were as follows:

Yemeni Tribes
-------------

Yemeni tribes competed with each other to settle in Kufa. They numbered
according to the statements of historians to be 12000 people**[5]**
comprised of following clans:

1. Qaza – a,  2. Ghasaan, 3. Bajeela, 4. Khas-a’m, 5. Kinda, 6.
Hadhramaut, 7. Azd, 8. Madhij, 9. Himyar, 10. Hamadan, 11. Nakha.

These were clans that originally belonged to Yemen but who had made Kufa
their home. The settled on the west side of the Masjid. And Falhauzen
believes that famous tribes of Yemen like Madhij, Hamadan and Kinda
became dominant in Kufa and acquired leadership. When Abdul Malik bin
Marwan arrived in Kufa and when people of Madhij and Hamadan approached
him he said to them, “Except for them I do not see anything for anyone.”
(That is they are prominent everywhere).

Adnani Tribes
-------------

Adnani tribes that settled in Kufa comprised of 8000 persons. They
formed two major groups: 1. Tameem, and 2. Bani Asr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 6/4. *Mukhtasar al-Buldan*, Pg. 166  
 **[2]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 6  
 **[3]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 6  
 **[4]** *Mukhtasar al-Buldan*, Pg. 73  
 **[5]** *Mojam Qabail al-Arab* 1/15 etc. *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 276.
*Mojam al-Buldan* 5/492

Bani Bakr Tribes
----------------

A number of Bani Bakr clans arrived and settled in Kufa. They were as
follows: 1. Bani Asad, 2. Ghitfaan, 3. Muharib, 4. Nameer.

Also other Arab tribes had settled in Kufa which were as follows:
Kanariah, Jadeela, Zabee-a’, Abdul Qais, Taghlab, Iyyad, Tai, Thaqeef,
Aamir and Mazeena.**[1]**

Masniyun believes that along with the Quraish tribe there were in Kufa
people who were Bedouins at the heart that lived in tents and were camel
herders from Bani Daram Tamimi and the neighbors of ancient Yemeni, the
Tayy and people of lower middle class from the Rabia and Asad. Also from
west and north-west. There was Bakr from east and south-east. There were
also elements among the city dwellers from the original southern Arab
tribes who had relocated from Hadhramaut. They were of two types: Either
they were semi-urbans from Kinda and Bajila and fully urban people from
other Yemeni cities and villages, that is the Madhij, Himyar and
Hamadan.**[2]**

Arab people who came and settled in Kufa at the time of its
establishment were a mixture of Yemenis, Nizaris and others, however the
Yemenis were more in number. In the same way their influence on social
life of Kufa was much more than that of the others.

Tribal Spirit
-------------

Tribal spirit reigned over the social tribes of Arabs in Kufa who lived
in their particular quarters and people of other tribes had no share in
their quarters. And Masniyun believes that the burial grounds in Kufa
were also having demarcated areas based on tribal divisions.**[3]** In
the same way roads and streets were also named after the tribes that
resided in those areas.**[4]** The city became a perfect image of tribal
life, so much so that tribal feeling and spirit was at the foremost and
tribal bigotry was at the highest. And the tribes resorted to
competition for achieving success among themselves just as was seen in
the battle of Jamal. This led to a situation when ignorance reigned
supreme in the life of Kufa.**[5]**

Ibn Abil Hadid has described to us in the following way the tribal
spirit that was dominant in Kufa. “In the last period of Hazrat Ali (‘a)
the people of Kufa were divided into tribes that whenever a person from
a tribe came out and passed through the area of another tribe he used to
call out the name of his tribe: O Nakha! O Kinda! Thus young men of that
tribe used to gather around him and shout: O Tamimi! O Rabia! And they
used to rush to the one who was shouting and they used to beat him up.
He used to go towards his tribesmen and call them. They pulled out their
swords and fights erupted.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Hayatul Ijtimaiyyah was Iqtisaadiyaa fil Kufa,* Pg. 42  
 **[2]** *Naqshe Hai Kufa*, Pg. 12-13  
 **[3]** *Khatat al-Kufa*, Pg. 18  
 **[4]** *Khatat al-Kufa*, Pg. 18  
 **[5]** *Al-Tatur wat Tajaddud fil Sha’arul Amawi,* Pg. 80-81

Tribal spirit was the most important element of social life of Kufa
which was effectively utilized by Ibn Sumaiyyah to capture Hujr and to
quell his uprising. And he used one group of people to defeat another
group. In the same way his son took advantage of this phenomenon in
order to put down the movement of Muslim, Hani and Abdullah bin Afif
Azdi.**[1]**

Persians
--------

Along with the Arabs, there resided in Kufa, people of Persian race
also, were given the title of al-Humra,**[2]** the red-faced. They
inquired about the most powerful of the Arabian tribes. It was said to
them that they were the Tameem. And so they signed a peace treaty with
them.**[3]** The greatest wave of Persians that came to Kufa and settled
there at the time of its establishment comprised of surviving soldiers
of the Sasanids who joined the Arab army and fought at their side. They
came to be known in history as Humra Dailam. Their number according to
historians was four thousand fighters. Their commander was a person,
Dailam, with whom they had fought under the command of Rustam at
Quddisiya and when the Persians were defeated and Rustam was killed they
made peace with Saad bin Abi Waqqas with the condition that they would
settle down wherever they liked and they would have treaties with anyone
they liked. And that he would appoint a share for them from the Public
Treasury.

They entered into a treaty with Zahra bin Juba Tamimi, a victorious
general. Saad appointed for them a million as their share in Public
Treasury. They became Muslims and participated in the conquest of
Madayan just as they also had share in the conquest of Jeloola. After
that they shifted their residence and settled down in Kufa.**[4]**

These were some of the people who had settled down in Kufa in large
numbers. Falhauzen says they were more than half the total population of
Kufa and their population increased so much so that Arab ratio decreased
and in the time of Mamun they had become a majority. During that period
Persian became the chief language.**[5]**

Jahiz says: “The Persian language has great influence on the language of
Kufa.”**[6]**

Anyway, the Persians played an important role in Kufa and a big group of
migrants came into being there in such a way that people of Kufa said:
“I have come from Humra of Dailam.”**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 13/167-168  
 **[2]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 288 & 293  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*  
 **[4]** *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 279. *Khatat al-Kufa*, Pg. 11  
 **[5]** *Fikrul Arabiyya*, Pg. 83-84  
 **[6]** *Al-Bayan wat-Tibbiyin* 1/26  
 **[7]** *Itiihaajaatush Sha’arul Arabi fil Qarith Thaaniul Hijri,* Pg.
55

Balazari says, “Ziyad sent some of them to Syria and a group of them to
Basra.**[1]** This group took part in numerous Islamic conquests and
they were instrumental in the defeat of the Umayyad regime.

Anbat**[2]**
------------

Anbat was one of the tribes that resided in Kufa. They had influenced
the social and intellectual life. Historians say: “Anbat did not denote
a distinct people. Rather they were Arabs and used the Darami language
in their writings. They were natives of rocky parts in the Arab lands
but from there they relocated to Iraq and started agriculture. They
spoke in their own Darami language.”**[3]**

They had much influence on the life of Kufa. Abu Amr bin Alaa said to
the people of Kufa: “You have the pretensions and cheekiness of the
Anbat and we have the personality of the Persians and their
foresight.”**[4]**

Tabari narrates: “A man from Bani Abas took a man from Nihawand, called
Dinar as a prisoner. He used to frequent Abasi and gave him gifts. In
the rule of Muawiyah he came to Kufa and stood among the people. He told
them: ‘O people of Kufa! You are of the first who superceded us and were
the best of people and took up your responsibility during the time of
Umar and Uthman and after that you changed it and four qualities were
acquired by you: Miserliness, deceit, betrayal of trust and poverty as
none of them existed in you. I became with you and saw that they existed
in your posterity and after that realized from where you have
come.’”**[5]**

De Bond believes that the society and morals of Kufa underwent a great
transformation in the past during the period of Muawiyah bin Abi
Sufyan**[6]** and it is natural that Anbat caused a great part of this
change.

Syrians
-------

The fourth element that took part in the creation of Kufa was the
Syrians. They had spread in Iraq before Islamic conquest and an
exceeding number of them settled at Tigris and some of them at Hira and
Kufa. They developed relations with the Kufaites and were influenced by
their habits and behavior because social life, as the scholars of social
sciences say, is a life of giving and accepting influence. Every human
accepts influence and to those are around him he leaves his effect.

These were some of the elements that contributed to the formation of
society in Kufa. These people were not pure Arabs. Rather they were
mixed races and the majority among them was Arab as they were dominant
majority of the province. The religious customs and social habits were
formed under the Arab influence in the same way the Arabs had the last
word in that province…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 279  
 **[2]** Sami people from north Arabian Peninsula. People who were
originally Darham and Qati. *(Al-Mojam al-Wasit)*.  
 **[3]** *Al-Hizaaratul Islamiyya* Pg. 97  
 **[4]** *Al-Bayan wat-Tibbiyin* 2/106  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 4/135-136  
 **[6]** *Tarikh Falsafa dar Islam*, Pg. 15-18

Religious Groups
----------------

The Kufan society was not made of people following one and the same
religion. Rather people of every religious denomination resided in Kufa
and each followed its particular religious customs. Some of the major
religious groups were as follows:

1. Islam
--------

Islam was the religion of the majority of Arabs who had settled in Kufa
and the cause of the establishment of this town was that it was a
garrison of soldiers who fought for Islam under the control of the
regimes. They were actually expected to fight Jihad for the Islamic
faith but most of them lacked this sincerity and they had joined the
army due to greed and to earn booties from war prescribed by Allah for
religious fighters. Social scientists have emphasized that social
change, alone, developed after generation and generations and the
society in the same way protected their habits and practices that they
had received from their ancestors. Dua to this the Kufian society was
involved in intellectual movements that were opposed to Islam and few
dangerous groups existed among their ranks as we shall explain in the
following pages:

A - Khawarij: The reciters of Quran and those who had blackened their
foreheads in prostrations had acquired this faith. When in Siffeen,
Qurans were raised aloft on the spears they compelled the Imam to accept
arbitration after Muawiyah was defeated and almost routed. Imam accepted
this against his will and warned them of deceit and humiliation. But he
could not influence them and they remained obstinate upon their belief
and when they realized that they have been misguided, they came to the
Imam and said: “We had become disbelievers and have repented. You also
express your regret and confess to your disbelief, so that we may
accompany you!”

Imam refused to do this. They separated from His Eminence and selected
for themselves the slogan of, “There is no command except of Allah’s!”
They fell into falsehood and went astray. The Imam fought against and
killed a large number of them. However some of them survived and they
continued actively to spread their views and played an important role in
fighting against Imam Hasan (‘a) who was finally compelled to sign the
peace treaty with Muawiyah. In the same way most soldiers sent by Ibn
Ziyad for battle against Imam Husain (‘a) were from the Khawarij, who
harbored enmity against Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a). They displayed this
enmity before his pure son in the battle of Kerbala and took revenge
from him.

B – Umayyad Party: These persons were the representatives of the nobles
of Kufa and their leaders. Like Qais bin Ashath, Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaidi,
Yazid bin Harth, Shabt bin Rabi’, Amr bin Hareeth and Umar bin Saad.
They were having loyalty to Bani Umayyah and believed that they were
superior to Ahle Bayt (‘a) in the matter of Caliphate and leadership of
the community. They played an important role in quelling the uprising of
Muslim and they instigated people to participate in war against Imam
Husain (‘a).

C – Shias: They had faith in the loyalty to Ahle Bayt (‘a) and
considered them a religious necessity. Shias of Kufa displayed sincerity
in their love and loyalty to Ahle Bayt (‘a) and the signs of their
devotion were as follows:

1 – They used to deliver sermons to the people regarding the events
related to Ahle Bayt (‘a) in which they praised and described the merits
and greatness of Ahle Bayt (‘a) and they told the people about the
examples of justice and truthfulness that they had witnessed during the
rule of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a).

2 – They wept profusely remembering the calamities and tortures that
they bore during the reign of Muawiyah and the insults they had to
suffer. However they did not show exemplary sacrifice in the path of
their faith. Their friendship was merely a sort of human kindness and it
was not based on firm religious belief. They separated from Muslim and
abandoned him to become a morsel in the hands of the oppressive Ibn
Marjana. Balazari has narrated that in Kerbala when they saw that swords
and spears were hacking at the blessed body of the beloved grandson of
the Messenger of Allah (s) they wept and prayed to God: “O God! Send
Your help to the son of the daughter of Your Messenger!” One of them
glanced at the suppliant and said in ridicule, “Why don’t you rush to
help him instead of just praying?” Imam Husain (‘a) differentiated them
from True Shias and shouted at them: “O Shias of the progeny of Abi
Sufyan!”

The fact is that except for a small group, the majority were not true
Shias. The small group of real Shias joined Imam Husain (‘a) and was
martyred with His Eminence. In the same way a large number of them were
lying in the dark dungeons.

Anyway, the Muslims of Kufa were not following a single faith. They were
having some dangerous groups among them.

2 – Christians
--------------

Among the people that settled down in Kufa were the Christians who had
arrived in Kufa after the downfall of the glory of Hira. They settled
down in Kufa and constructed some churches for themselves. They had a
church at the back of the great mosque of Kufa.**[1]** They were having
two bishops, one following the Nestorian church and the other,
Jacobite.**[2]** There were two major tribes among them:

A – Taghlib Christians: They had settled there since the time Saad laid
the plans of Kufa. This tribe commanded respect and earned glory.**[3]**
People of this tribe refused to pay the Jizya tax and Umar was helpless
and instead allowed them to pay Sadaqah like other Muslim
subjects.**[4]**

B – Christians of Najran: They settled down on the outskirts of Kufa
during the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Futuh al-Buldan* Pg. 284  
 **[2]** *Khatat al-Kufa*, Pg. 35  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh*  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh*

caliphate of Umar and their locality came to be known as
“Najraniyyah”.**[1]**

Christians were employed in many government posts. Such that Abu Musa
Ashari had Christian scribes**[2]** and Walid bin Uqbah, the governor of
Uthman appointed a Christian in charge of the office of caretaker of
mosques near Kufa.**[3]**

Christians mostly followed the occupation of money-changer in Kufa and
they established markets for this purpose.**[4]**

These special banks during difficult times in the province loaned funds
to the local government and the government used to distribute these
funds among people with potential of staging uprisings so that such
rebellions may be avoided. Ibn Ziyad also borrowed from them to pay the
nobles in order to quell the uprising of Muslim.

Anyway, the population of Kufa was a mixture of Muslims and Christians
and relations between the two groups were extremely strong.

3 – Jews
--------

Jews came and settled down in Kufa since the 20<sup>th</sup> year of the
Hijrah**[5]** and the majority of them arrived from Hijaz after they had
been expelled from there by Umar bin Khattab.**[6]** They lived in a
separate area in Kufa which was associated with their name and they also
had a synagogue there. The traveler Binyamin writes: “Seven thousand
Jews lived in Kufa. There was a grave over there that they considered
sacred and circumambulated around it. They had built a synagogue over
this tomb.”**[7]**

They mostly followed occupations like that of goldsmith etc. and other
professions that the Arabs disliked…The Jews harbored deep animosity to
the Holy Prophet (s) because he had destroyed a large number of them and
humiliated and defeated them in every confrontation. According to some
researchers they played a prominent role in the massacre of Kerbala so
that by killing the grandsons and progeny of the Prophet they may
extract their revenge…

Here we conclude our discussion regarding the various religious groups
that dominated the population of Kufa and which played important roles
in movements of Jihad and military actions of that area.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hayatush Sha’ar fil Kufa*, Pg. 144  
 **[2]** *Uyun al-Akhbaar* 1/43  
 **[3]** *Al-Aghani* 4/184  
 **[4]** *Tarikh* *Kufa,* Pg. 148. The money changers and bankers’ begin
from the Masjid Sohail to the Great Mosque as some of the sources have
mentioned.  
 **[5]** Yusuf Rizqullaah Ghaneema, *Nuzhatul Mushtaq fi Tarikh* *Yahood
wal Iraq,* Pg. 103  
 **[6]** *Al-Hayatul Ijtimaiyyah was Iqtisaadiyaa fil Kufa,* Pg. 105  
 **[7]** *Safarnama Binyamin,* Translation of Azar Haddad, Pg. 146

Military Organization
---------------------

The city of Kufa had been initially established as a military cantonment
to house the soldiers of the Islamic army. The army was organized on the
basis of tribal divisions. It was divided into platoons and divisions
according to the clans and tribes they belonged to. The divisions of the
army were as follows:

Seven-division System
---------------------

The army was divided into seven major divisions based on tribal
differences inspite of the fact that all of them were supposed to be
fighting for Islam and Allah. And tribal feeling dominated them to a
great extent and it had not decreased a bit. The organization was as
follows:

First Division: This division consisted of Kinanah and those who had
peace treaties with them from the Abyssinians and the Jadilah who were,
since the days of Saad, obedient to the governors of Quraish and they
acted loyally to the Bani Umayyah and their governors.

Second Division: Qazaa-a, Ghassaan, Bajeelah, Khath-a’m, Kinda,
Hadhramaut and Azd.

Third Division: Madhij, Himyar, Hamadan and their confederates who were
distinguished for their enmity to Bani Umayyah and their support for His
Eminence, Ali (‘a) and his children.

Fourth Division: Tameem and other Arab tribes and their confederates.

Fifth Division: Asad, Ghitfaan, Muharib, Zabi-a’, Taghlib and Nameer.

Sixth Division: Iyyad, A’k, Abdul Qais, Ahle Hijr and Humra.

Seventh Division: Tayy.**[1]**

These seven groups were present in the tribal battalions of the army.
This system was followed so that general soldiers may participate in the
battles that may occur in that period and that they may share in the war
booty that is distributed after returning from the battles. Kufa was
divided in this manner till the year 50 A. H. However Ziyad bin Abih,
the governor of Iraq changed it and converted it into a four-division
army as follows:

1 – People of Medina, Amr bin Hareeth was appointed over them.

2 – Tameem and Hamadan, Khalid bin Arafta was their commander.

3 – Rabi-a, Bakr and Kinda, Qais bin Walid bin Abde Shams controlled
them.

4 – Madhij and Asad,**[2]** Abu Burdah bin Abu Musa was their
commander-in-chief.

The reason why Ziyad took this step was that he wanted to make whole of
Kufa his military regime. Thus he chose only those persons as commanders
who were known for their loyalty to the government. Ibn Ziyad solicited
their assistance in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hayatush Sha’ar fil Kufa*, Pg. 29-30  
 **[2]** *Khatat al-Kufa*, Pg. 15-16

suppressing the uprising of Muslim. In the same way some of them were
appointed as commanders of the battalions that the tyrant had dispatched
to fight Imam Husain (‘a). Thus Amr bin Hareeth and Khalid bin Arafta
were commanders of that army.

Military commanders are chosen from those who hold a social position and
are well known for harshness, courage and experience in war.**[1]** The
commanders of all the four divisions were under the control of the
government and the connection of the government with the people was also
maintained through them, that in view of their great importance in the
province, Imam Husain (‘a) wrote to them and requested them to help and
support him.**[2]**

Experts of Tribal Affairs
-------------------------

The government relied upon the U'rafa.**[3]** They solved the problems
of the tribes and distributed allowances among them, and also helped in
maintaining public registers that recorded the names of men, women and
children. In the same way they recorded births in order to secure from
the government stipends for the newborns. Names of people who died used
to be deleted from those registers by these officers.**[4]**

In the same way they also bore the responsibility of maintaining law and
order and during hostilities they used to mobilize people for joining
the army and used to encourage them in this regard. They used to report
to the government about those who refused to join the armed
forces.**[5]** If the U'rafa fell short in their duties or went beyond
their power they used to be punished very severely by the
government.**[6]**

One of the important causes of the people leaving Muslim was the
activity of these U'rafa because they discouraged the people from
joining the movement and spread fear and rumors among them.**[7]** In
the same way they played an active role in instigating people to join
forces against Imam Husain (‘a).

With this we conclude our discussion on the salient features of social
life in Kufa as their understanding is necessary from the aspect of
their effect on the failure of the uprising.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/268  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf*  
 **[3]** Urfa is the plural of Arifeen. It is that man who recognizes
his friends. It is mentioned in traditions: “Turn back to your Urfa, so
that they may tell us about you.” Arif’s duty was to administer the
affairs of the tribe and its members. Through him the governor used to
know of tribal matters and problems of members.  
 **[4]** *Al-Hayatul Ijtimaiyyah was Iqtisaadiyaa fil Kufa,* Pg. 53  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 7/226  
 **[6]** *Al-Aghani*  
 **[7]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* Pg. 154-155

The Tyrant Ibn Marjana
----------------------

To understand fully the failure of Muslim’s revolt, it is necessary to
know about the tyrant, Ibn Marjana’s coup d’etat and to learn about his
life, characteristics and the plan he resorted to, to quell the
uprising. Therefore we present the following points for our readers:

Birth of Ibn Marjana
--------------------

This tyrant was born in the year, 39 A. H.**[1]** He created disasters
and difficulties on the earth. Thus he was 21 when he put to the sword
the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s). Sources available to
us do not specify the place of his birth.

Parents
-------

His father was Ziyad, the son of Sumaiyyah. He was among the elements of
mischief and corruption on the earth. Such that, he blinded people and
had them crucified on trunks of palm trees, and merely on the basis of
suspicion or allegations he punished innocent people. Thus he put the
area of Iraq into untold misery and sorrow.

Ibn Ziyad’s mother was Marjana, a Magian woman**[2]** well-known for her
wantonness. Ubaidullah Tamimi mentioned her in the presence of Ibn
Marjana and said, “Umar bin Khattab has said: O God! I seek Your refuge
from fornicating women and from children of fornicating women.” Ibn
Ziyad was disturbed by these words and he replied, “Umar said: No child
remains for nine months in its mother’s womb but that it comes out as a
fool.”**[3]**

Ziyad left Marjana and Shiruyah married her.**[4]**

Upbringing of Ibn Marjana
-------------------------

That tyrant was brought up in the house of crime. He spent his early
childhood in the house of his stepfather, Shiruyah, who was not even a
Muslim. When he grew up he was taken up by his father, Ziyad and trained
to cause bloodshed and oppress the people. He was brought up to practice
deceit and employ intrigue. In other words he inherited all the evil
traits of his father, like cruelty and getting pleasure by doing bad to
people. He was not less cruel than his father. That tyrant has himself
mentioned in one of his speeches:

“I am Ibn Ziyad, I am most resembling the one who walks the desert. And
I am having no resemblance to the paternal or maternal uncle.”**[5]**

Like his father he was harsh and firm on committing evil and he very
much distant from truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* Pg. 283  
 **[2]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* Pg. 283  
 **[3]** *Al-Bayan wat-Tibiyyin* 2/242  
 **[4]** *Al-Bayan wat-Tibiyyin* 1/72  
 **[5]** Tabari, *Tarikh*

Characteristics of Ibn Marjana
------------------------------

Of his prominent psychological characteristics were cruelty and
obtaining pleasure through bloodshed. He arrested a Khawarij woman, cut
off her limbs and ordered that she be exhibited in the market
place.**[1]**

Hasan Basri has described him as a senseless young man who shed a lot of
blood.**[2]** Muslim bin Aqil said about him: “He laps the blood of
Muslims and kills the life of those whose killing Allah has forbidden
and he sheds blood on the basis of anger, enmity and suspicion, while he
is busy in vain pastimes, in such a way as if he has not done anything.”

He was arrogant and he did not heed the advice of anyone. For example
Aaez bin Amr Sahabi came to him and said: “My son! I have heard the
Messenger of Allah (s) say: The worst ruler is one who is cruel and who
oppresses the people. So take care that you don’t become such.”

These words hit him sharply and he screamed, “Sit down! You are the
rubbish of the companions of the Messenger of Allah (s).”

Aaez objected against him and said, “Is there rubbish among them?
Rubbish is after them and among those other than them.”**[3]**

During his governorship of Basra he became well known as a deceitful man
and a trickster with regard to the people. Motal bin Yasar advised him
to leave such acts, saying, “I have heard the Messenger of Allah (s)
say: There is none that is appointed as ruler who acts deceitfully with
the people except that Allah deprives him from Paradise.”**[4]**

These were his personal and psychological characteristics. As for his
physical traits, they were as follows:

Bad Accent
----------

The tyrant was brought up in the house of his mother, Marjana, who was
not Arab. He learnt her accent and was not able to understand Arabic.
For example he often used to say: “Open up your swords!” While he meant
to say: “Pull out your swords!” Yazid bin Mufrag in his poem had alluded
to Ibn Ziyad’s faulty Arabic:

**“On the day when you opened your sword from far away, you destroyed
it, as all your actions were destructive.”**

During a conversation with Suwaid, Ibn Ziyad said, “Sit on the buttocks
of the floor!!”

Suwaid ridiculed him saying, “I didn’t know the floor had
buttocks!”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Qisasul Arab* 1/212  
 **[2]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/545  
 **[3]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/285  
 **[4]** Muslim, *Sahih* 1/124, Tr. 142  
 **[5]** *Al-Bayan wat-Tibiyyin* 1/73

He pronounced the ‘h’a’ of Arabic as ‘ha’. Thus asked Hani: “Are you
Haroori today?” While he meant to ask him if he had joined the Khawarij
(H’aroori). He also used to pronounce the Arabic alphabet of ‘A’ain’ as
ordinary ‘a’ and the Arabic ‘q’ as ‘k’. One day he said, “Man kaatalna
kaatalna!” Actually he meant to say: “Man Qaatalna Qaatalna!” which
means that we shall fight those who want to fight us.**[1]**

Gluttony and Debauchery
-----------------------

Historians say: He was a glutton and he had a voracious appetite. He ate
five times a day and his last meal of the day used to be a donkey leg.
His meal was concluded only after eating this. If a full lamb or a kid
was brought to him, he used to finish it off alone.**[2]** In the same
way he was a sex maniac. On the night he entered Kufa he slept with a
woman named, Umme Nafe, the daughter of Ammarah bin Uqbah bin Abi
Muit.**[3]**

These were his salient physical characteristics.

Ibn Ziyad’s Rule in Basra
-------------------------

Muawiyah gave him the governorship of Basra and entrusted him with
authority upon the affairs of Muslims at a time when he was in the prime
of his youth and given to arrogance and pride. He ruled Basra in the
same way as his father had. Because he also killed on the basis of mere
suspicion and allegation. And he considered the innocent as criminals
and the sinners as innocent ones. Muawiyah trusted him and was pleased
with his manners. Therefore he also proclaimed for him the governorship
of Kufa. But Muawiyah died before dispatch of this appointment letter.

Yazid’s Dislike for Ibn Marjana
-------------------------------

Yazid hated Ibn Marjana very much. This was due to some matters, most
important of whom was that his father, Ziyad had objected to his father,
Muawiyah when he wanted to appoint Yazid as the next caliph because
Yazid was a profligate and always involved in evil vices.

Yazid wanted to dismiss Ubaidullah from the governorship of Basra and
take away all his powers but when Imam Husain (‘a) announced his
uprising and he sent Muslim as his emissary to Kufa to take the
allegiance of the people for him, Sarjun suggested to Yazid that he
allow Ibn Ziyad continue as the governor of Basra and at the same time
appoint him as the governor of Kufa also and order him to quell the
uprising. Yazid accepted this suggestion and the whole of Iraq came
under the control of Ibn Ziyad. Ibn Ziyad took over the province in an
iron fist and strived by all his might to suppress the uprising so that
through it he may be able to get into the good books of Yazid and to
gain the affections of the Umayyad clan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/284  
 **[2]** *Nihayatul Arab* 3/343  
 **[3]** *Miraat az-Zamaan*, Pg. 285

Plan for Coup d’etat
--------------------

In spite of his young age Ibn Ziyad was an expert politician and he had
mastered the art of conducting coups and knew well how to turn
unfavorable circumstances to his advantage. He succeeded through deceit
and intrigue to get the control of the garrisons of Kufa and quell the
revolt. The main points of his master plan were as follows:

1 – Spying on Muslim in order to gain intelligence about his matters.

2 – He spread such fear and rumors that it created an atmosphere of
terror in Kufa and the people became concerned with their own selves. In
this way he was able to prevent them from interference in any way, in
the political events of that time.

3 – He bribed the nobles and upper class people so that they would
always be at his beck and call and he could use them in any way whenever
he liked. These people created disunity among the tribes and defeated
Muslim’s forces.

4 – He worked out a cunning plot regarding Hani and had him arrested as
he was a prominent man of the province. Through this he was able to
remove a very important factor of the uprising.

These were some of the dangerous points of the plan of the tyrant, Ibn
Ziyad, by which he was able to dominate the circumstances and to destroy
the revolt and finally to mobilize forces to slay the beloved grandson
of the Messenger of Allah (s).

Muslim bin Aqil
---------------

As for Muslim bin Aqil, he was an emblem of piety in Islam and extremely
precautious and careful and in his behavior he did not deviate in any
way and never resorted to any kind of deceit and fraud even if political
victory depended on it. In this regard he acted on the manner of his
uncle, Amirul Momineen (‘a). Moreover, he was not sent to Kufa as an
absolute ruler that he could have acted in any way he liked. His
responsibility was only to take allegiance on behalf of the Imam and to
find out the true position of the Kufians. So that if he found it
favorable he would ask Imam Husain (‘a) to proceed to Kufa. Apart from
this he did not have any other responsibility as we have already
explained in the previous discussions.

Thus we end our discussion about the failed uprising of Muslim, which
was the beginning of the tragedy of Kerbala and the initial point of the
deep pains. Along with this we conclude the second volume of this book.
