Selection of Migration To Iraq
==============================

Imam Husain (‘a) chose to migrate to Iraq and not to any other place in
the Islamic lands, while he knew what conditions and atmosphere
surrounded the people and what difficulties the Iraqis lived in.
Probably, the selection of Iraq and not any other place was made the
Holy Imam (‘a) due to the following factors:

**First:** Iraq, in those days, was the center of Islamic Kingdom and
the place of wealth and manpower, such that Kufa was established there
as a garrison town and it had a definite role to play in Islamic
victories and had participated in the conquests of Ram Hormuz, Shoosh,
Shustar and Nihanand as Umar bin Khattab had sought help from them in
these campaigns.

Umar wrote to his governor, Saad bin Abi Waqqas: “Send a large
contingent with Noman bin Maqran to Ahwaz. In numerous reports
concerning Islamic conquests it has been recorded that Umar sought the
help of Kufians. Umar has also praised them extensively, “May Allah give
the people of Kufa a goodly reward as they are content with their area
and they also help people of other areas.”

A Syrian has said regarding them, “You are the treasure of Islam. When
the people of Basra seek your help, you help them. And if the Syrians
seek your help, you help them.”**[1]**

Apart from this Iraq was the capital of the government and it had been
in ancient times a land of power and wealth. “It was the centre of the
kingdom and it held a huge treasure in addition to the prosperity that
the Almighty Allah had given to the Kufians: Such as: Manufacture of
colored garments and silk and other things like fruits and dates
etc.”**[2]**

Umayyads considered it as an important source that contributed to the
treasury of Damascus.**[3]** Muawiyah received around 50 million Dirhams
from taxes of Kufa and its surrounding areas.**[4]**

While taxes collected from Batha**[5]** were only in the range of 5
million Dirhams.**[6]**

Iraq was the center of the illuminated world of Islam which surpassed
all the provinces in fields of politics, economics and social spheres,
such that all the revolutionaries were attracted by it and moved towards
it**[7]** so that they may make it the place of launching their
political movement….And Kufa alone was that city in the Islamic lands
that understood the value of the events and aims of political  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *At-Tabaqat al-Kubra,* 6/124  
 **[2]** Hamadani, *Mukhtasar Kitab al-Buldan,* Pg. 52  
 **[3]** *Futuh al-Buldan,* Pg. 293  
 **[4]** Yaqubi, 2/218  
 **[5]** ‘Batah’, a large part of land between Waast and Basra
consisting of villages in close proximity (*Mojam al-Buldan* 1/666)  
 **[6]** Qudamah bin Ja’far, *Al-Khiraj wa Suna’tul Kitabah,* Pg. 169  
 **[7]** *Al-Iraq fee Zillul Hukmul Amawi,* Pg. 9

movements because social awareness was dominant there to a great extent
and Kufians used to impose their desires on rulers and when they did not
fulfill them they used to draw swords against them and stand up to
confront them.

Anyway, Imam (‘a) chose to migrate to Kufa, from the aspect that the
city of Kufa was the center of power in the Islamic world. Abdul
Muta-aal Saeedi says: “Imam Husain (‘a) did not make a wrong choice. He
decided to move to Iraq at that time because Iraq was a suitable place
to lay the foundation of the movement of uniting the aims of Muslims.
And therefore he selected it so that afterwards this Kingdom may be
established for the Iraqis and later on the Abbaside Kingdom developed
there, which ruled on Muslims for 500 years.”**[1]**

**Secondly:** Kufa was the cradle of Shiaism and a native place of the
Alawites which displayed exceptional devotion to Ahle Bayt (‘a) on
numerous occasions. Groups of revolutionaries, under the leadership of
Malik Ashtar Nakhai, a prominent Shia personality, moved to Medina and
laid siege to Uthman and they attacked him and nominated the Imam for
caliphate. This was the seed of Shiaism that was sown in Kufa during the
caliphate of Umar. Because among the governors of Kufa were Ammar bin
Yasir and Abdullah Ibn Masud, who publicized the greatness and merits of
the Imam in gatherings of Kufa; that had been recorded from the Holy
Prophet (s) in his regard. They spoke all this so much that finally the
people became devoted to the Imam and began to have respect and regard
for him. In such a way that Kufians participated on the side of the Holy
Imam (‘a) in the battles of Jamal and Siffeen and they used to say to
His Eminence, “O Amiral Momineen! Take us wherever you like as we are
your soldiers and companions. We are inimical to all those who are
inimical to you and we shall be with anyone who returns to you and obeys
you.”**[2]**

Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) has praised their goodness because he believed
that they were sincere friends towards him and he told them, “O people
of Kufa! You are my brothers, companions and supporter for truth and
those who respond for Jihad against those who make the unlawful as
lawful. By your support I shall defeat all those who confront us and I
am hopeful of your complete obedience.”**[3]**

He also said, “Kufa is the mine of faith, the treasury of Islam and
swords and spears of God that He appoints wherever He likes.”**[4]**

Iraq participated in the more severe battles and the deadliest
confrontations for the sake of Ahle Bayt and they took revenge from the
killers of Ahle Bayt under the leadership of the great revolutionary
Mukhtar Ibn Abi Ubaidah Thaqafi who rose up to take revenge for their
blood. On the basis of this the Imam selected Iraq for migration because
the people of the Iraqi cities had a deep loyalty and devotion to Ahle
Bayt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Journal ‘Ghurra’, Year 9, No. 11-14, Pg. 108  
 **[2]** *Al Imamah was Siyasah* 1/125  
 **[3]** *Al Imamah was Siyasah* 1/124  
 **[4]** Ibne Faqih, *Mukhtasar al-Buldan*, Pg. 163

**Thirdly:** Kufa was the original center of the opposition to Umayyad
Kingdom. Because throughout the Umayyad rule, the Kufians had never
restrained from confronting the Umayyads and they always aspired to
bring about its downfall. According to Falhauzen the cause of Kufian
animosity towards the Umayyads was that the caliphate had been relocated
from Kufa to Damascus and that previously, they themselves had been at
the helm of the government. And that their city was reduced to the
position of only a territory of the new kingdom. And their lands were
taxed and funds dispatched to the lands they themselves had conquered.
Now the position was such that they had to remain content at the
leftovers of the Umayyad rule. Therefore it was nothing strange that
Kufians displayed remarkable fury in confronting the Syrian Kingdom and
they considered their authority as a yoke of slavery upon them and tried
their best to overthrow their domination.

Among the factors that lent severity to the anger of Kufians against the
Umayyads was that Muawiyah had appointed incapable persons like
Mughairah bin Shoba and Ziyad bin Abih as governors of Iraqi provinces.
And these two wreaked injustice and oppression among them and took away
their comfort and peace. They also tried to bring about their economic
deprivation and took steps to make effective the politics of hunger and
deprivation…Kufa became the center of revolt against the Umayyad regime
and the arrests, murders and oppression of the governors did not
restrain them from it.

Thus, the selection of Kufa by the Imam for migration and his decision
to chose it as the center of his mission was that it was the only city
inimical to the Umayyads and that the clamor of opposition to the
Umayyads had reached to its peak after the death of Muawiyah.

**Fourthly:** Imam Husain (‘a) selected Iraq to migrate because of the
continuous flow of letters from the people who wrote to him and begged
him to join them. The majority people sent the Imam letters persuading
him to come for their help. These petitions were dispatched to the Holy
Imam (‘a) even during the lifetime of Muawiyah. Thus Imam (‘a) had to
relent when letter after letter arrived and they encouraged the Imam to
move to Iraq. If the Imam had refrained from giving them a positive
reply he would have been answerable to the Almighty Allah. Especially
after his emissary Muslim Ibn Aqil wrote him informing him about the
unanimity of the people on Imam’s allegiance and their anticipation of
Imam’s arrival. Muslim also urged him to come immediately. Thus His
Eminence had no choice but to accept it.

Dr. Muhammad Halami says: “Imam Husain (‘a) did not set out to Iraq
immediately after receiving representations from Iraqi people so that he
may lead them in revolt against the caliphate of Yazid. But he first
dispatched his emissary, Muslim bin Aqil bin Abi Talib so that he may
test the claims of the people of Kufa and find out if they were really
having true sympathies with the Holy Imam. Muslim succeeded in taking
allegiance of 12000 persons to help in the determined

uprising of Imam Husain (‘a) and managed to keep them away from the
allegiance to Yazid. Muslim reported these developments to Imam Husain
(‘a) and he decided to personally travel to Iraq and lead the uprising.
Therefore Imam Husain (‘a) cannot be said to have resorted to haste in
initiating the uprising because letters addressed to him had arrived.
His Eminence wanted to find the level of their sincerity. And his active
representative was able to gauge this in a short period of time and had
taken allegiance of thousands of people.”**[1]**

**Fifthly:** If Imam Husain (‘a) had moved to any other province,
Umayyad mercenaries would have pursued him and definitely martyred him
against his will. While he would have been criticized why he did not
move to Iraq? While it was a land of his companions and Shias and people
of Iraq had sent him letters in thousands and encouraged him to join
them? In that case what reply His Eminence had given if he had moved to
some other land and the Umayyad army had pursued him?

These were some of the factors that caused the Imam to select Kufa in
order to make it the launch pad of his uprising.

Abandoning Hijaz
----------------

Here a matter remains that why the Imam (‘a) did not remain in Hijaz to
make it the center of his movement? Probably the following factors
caused him to take this step:

(a) The Hijaz province had very few economic sources because Muawiyah
had spread poverty and deprivation there. And it is natural that a
revolution required greater monetary support and with the lack of wealth
and money how could the Imam organize his revolt in Hijaz?

(b) There was lack of political awareness in Hijaz, because the majority
of the people there were aloof from politics while Iraq held the torch
of political know how in the Arab lands.

(c) Hijaz was not suitable to become the center of revolution because it
had been continuously made the target of attacks by the Umayyad forces.
That is why Yazid had sent a huge army to fight Ibn Zubair under the
commandership of his brother, Amr bin Zubair.

(d) Hijaz did not have a garrison town or center so that the Imam may
have taken refuge there to obtain protection and support.

(e) The majority of people in Hijaz was inimical to Ahle Bayt and more
inclined to Umayyads.

Abu Ja’far Iskafi says: “As for the Meccans they were all hostile to Ali
and the whole of Quraish was opposed to him. And the majority of the
people supported Bani Umayyah.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Khilfah wad daulah fil Asr al-Amawi,* Pg. 115-116  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/103

Imam Ali Ibn Husain (‘a) has said, “There were not even 20 individuals
in Mecca and Medina who supported us.”**[1]** Thus despite it being a
known fact that Hijaz was hostile to Ahle Bayt (‘a) how could the Imam
make it the center of his uprising?

Imam (‘a) left Hijaz seen and heard by its populace but none rushed out
to accompany him and except for his Ahle Bayt no one followed him to
help and defend him.

Avoiding Egypt
--------------

Imam (‘a) avoided Egypt and he did not correspond with anyone there
because the people of that area had during the regime of the Umayyad
caliphs, been used to comfort and peace and they remained aloof from
political happenings. Also not a single letter from them was sent to the
Imam, inviting him to join them. Then how could the Imam have migrated
there? In addition to this, the Uthmani view was predominant over there.
And the governor of Egypt was Amr bin al-Aas who propagated enmity
towards Ahle Bayt and cultivated among the people devotion and loyalty
to Umayyads. Thus how it be possible for the Imam to decide on Egypt?

Avoiding Yemen
--------------

Ibn Hanafiyah and others suggested to the Imam to move to Yemen because
Shias of the Imam and his Holy father resided there. But the Imam did
not accept this view. In our opinion the Imam avoided Yemen for the
following reasons:

(1) Garrison area was not present in Yemen that could have helped and
defended the Imam from attack of Bani Umayyads because the Yemenis
neither have weapons nor military provisions or contingents. They had no
military capability at all.

(2) The rabble of Yemen, when Muawiyah’s soldiers attacked them under
the command of Busr Ibn Abi Artat, the oppressor, did not step forward
to defend their land. So much so that oppressors slew a lot of their men
and captured their women and sold them in the markets. The stronger of
them brought a good price due to their physical well-being. But the
Yemeni people did not stand up to defend their territories and property
and they submitted their blood and property to the Umayyad foes. In such
a case how the Imam could had moved to Yemen?

(3) Yemen was involved in poverty and deprivation, the economic life was
paralyzed and people had no power to provide funds and weapons necessary
for revolution and a large number of Yemenis had migrated to Kufa in
search of livelihood and prosperity.

(4) If Imam had gone to Yemen, Yazid would not have left him alone. He
would have sent his mercenaries to fight him and in this way lives would
have been lost and Imam would have been blamed for creating mischief and
discord and thus the justice established by His Eminence on the basis of
the statement of Dr. Ahmad  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid, Pg. 104

Mahmud Sabihi, would have been destroyed.**[1]**

From what we have stated is apparent the weakness of the view of Dr. Ali
Husain Kharbutali who has criticized the Imam ‘Why he did not head to
Yemen after leaving Hijaz because these two places were having his true
friends and sincere Shias of his father. Apart from this the plus point
of Yemen was that it was far from the center of caliphate, his strong
castle and his vast valley.’**[2]** This view is not having an iota of
reality because the Imam did not have any true friends in Hijaz and if
he really had them when he declared his move to Iraq they would have
come forward to accompany him and they would not have left him alone a
prey in the hands of Ibn Marjana. We have also mentioned that Yemen,
from the strategic view point was not suitable that the Imam could have
chosen it for his revolution.

Avoiding Iran
-------------

The Holy Imam (‘a) avoided going to Iran also because he did not have
any support there and the invitation towards Ahle Bayt (‘a) had yet not
crystallized there. It was only after a short time that it became the
center of the Alawite propagation. That is when a great society of
Shias, most of whom had been exiled there, took shape in this land and
they began to spread Shiaism there and the claimants of Bani Abbas bore
the fruits that the Shias had produced in Iran. They designated Iran for
themselves and it was from here that they launched their opposition to
Bani Umayyah and destroyed their kingdom.

Avoiding Basra
--------------

Imam (‘a) avoided Basra also because it had a garrison loyal to Uthman
and many of the people there were followers of Talha and Zubair.

Abu Ja’far Iskafi says, “The people of Basra were generally inimical to
Ali (‘a).”**[3]** And it was because of the Battle of Jamal that most of
the heads of the people of Basra had reaped and made their hearts filled
with animosity towards the Imam and his children. Although there did
reside a group of Shias in Basra to whom the Imam wrote at the time of
his departure towards Kufa.

Anyway, Kufa was the most suitable center for announcing the revolution
against the Umayyads. Because this revolutionary town had led the
opposition to Bani Umayyah and after the death of Muawiyah it had become
absolutely ready to invite the Imam. In such a way that it was
considered the real native town of the Shias of His Eminence. The hearts
of the people of Kufa were rich with love and devotion to His Eminence.

The selection of Kufa as the destination was chosen by the Imam with
exception to all other places because of a deep study of the existing
conditions in all Islamic provinces and their surrounding areas. His
Eminence had encompassing knowledge  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nazaria Imamat Nazd Shia Ithna Ashari,* Pg. 243  
 **[2]** *Tarikh* *Iraq Dar Zer-e-Sulte Umayyan,* Pg. 121. Sooli has
also expressed the same view in his book *Ad-Daulatul Amawiya fish
Shaam,* Pg. 53  
 **[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/103

of the attitude of the people of every place, be it in the political
sphere or in the field of belief which was the standard of their
economic and military power. Because the Holy Imam was aware of all
these matters and knowledge and he could not find any other place having
the strategic advantage of Kufa for support of his revolution and
guarantee of his victory. And he had realized the strengths of his
supporters and opposition to the Umayyad regime. On the basis of this,
movement towards Kufa was the need of the hour as there was no
alternative to it.

Sympathizers and critics
------------------------

When the decision of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and his determination to
leave Hijaz for Kufa became public, a group of members of Ahle Bayt and
his Shias sympathized with him and some of the politically greedy
persons made a show of sympathy like Abdullah Ibn Zubair and feigned
sincerity to him or like Ashdaq, due to trepidation that the Umayyad
regime will be destroyed, became worried and he expressed sympathy for
the uprising of the Imam. They all warned the Holy Imam and frightened
him of the about turn of the people of Kufa and their betrayal of trust
towards him, just as before this they had betrayed trust of his brother.
They all suggested to the Imam that he must not go to this province and
that he must not join them.

In the same way some government agents and their followers, due to the
fear of the downfall of Umayyad regime and their routing criticized the
Imam for organizing the uprising. Some opponents of Ahle Bayt (‘a) in
numerous areas also spoke up against the Imam’s uprising. The views of
these two groups are presented below:

Sympathizers
------------

Sympathizers from the Shias of Imam Husain (‘a) and his Ahle Bayt were
such that their hearts were filled with sorrow, and grief for Imam’s
departure from Hijaz overcame them. They spoke with a kind tongue and
warned the Imam of things he was not fearful of. They suggested to the
Imam that he give up confrontation with the regime and give allegiance
to Yazid so that he remains safe from his mischief and oppression.
However His Eminence saw that the religion of his grandfather had become
a toy in the hands of Abu Sufyan’s grandson and it was necessary for him
to rise up in defense of its honor and to sacrifice everything in its
support and it was that same aim that none was capable of restraining
the Imam from it…these are some of the statements of sympathizers and
those who restrained him:

1. Masoor bin Mukhrama
----------------------

When Masoor bin Mukhrama**[1]** came to know of the decision of the Imam
about leaving Hijaz for Iraq he became extremely perturbed and he wrote
the following letter to His Eminence: “You must not join with the
letters of the people of Iraq  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Masoor bin Mukhrama bin Naufal Qarashi Zuhri was born two years
after the Hijrah and he has narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).
He was a man of religion and excellence. He was with Ibne Zubair and
when the siege of Mecca took place he was injured by a stone thrown by
the catapult and he passed away, *Al-Isabah* 3/400

and to what Ibn Zubair has told you, you must not believe that they
would give you support. You will be deceived. You must not go away from
the Holy Sanctuary as they, that is the Iraqis, if they are needful of
you, they would mount the camels and hasten to join you. In that case
you may go out to them with power and military equipment.”

When the Imam read his letter he thanked him for his sympathy and sent a
message to him: “I shall beseech the Almighty for goodness in this
matter.”**[1]**

2. Abdullah bin Ja’far
----------------------

Abdullah bin Ja’far also became fearful about his cousin when he learnt
about the decision of His Eminence to march towards Iraq. Waves of
depression surrounded him. He sent his sons, Aun and Muhammad to His
Eminence with the following letter: “So to say: I implore you by the
name of God, that the moment you read this letter, you change your
decision because I am afraid regarding you as you are risking your life
for this and your Ahle Bayt shall be uprooted and destroyed if something
happens to you today. The effulgence of the earth shall be extinguished.
You are the standard bearer of guidance and the chief of the believers.
So do not make haste in moving out as I am coming behind my letter. And
peace be upon you.”

While the son of Ja’far had exhausted his strength and he had become
worried and perplexed he hastened to Amr bin Saeed the governor of Mecca
and took from him a letter guaranteeing security to His Eminence, Husain
(‘a) and then went quickly to His Eminence while Yahya bin Saeed bin Aas
was with him. Then he suggested the Imam to stay in Mecca and give up
the intention of going to Iraq but the Imam did not accept his advice.
He began to petition the Imam and implored him to change his decision.

Imam said, “I saw Allah’s Messenger in the dream and he commanded me to
hasten towards him…”

Ja’far’s son asked him about the dream but the Imam refused to speak
about it. He said, “I have not related it to anyone and I shall not
relate it to anyone till I meet Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.”**[2]**

Abdullah Ibn Ja’far was filled with sorrow and grief and he went away
with the certainty that a terrible catastrophe would befall. He ordered
his two sons to remain in the service of their maternal uncle, His
Eminence, Husain (‘a).

3. Abdullah bin Abbas
---------------------

Abdullah bin Abbas hurried to the Imam in a disturbed state of mind and
asked him, “Useless people have spread the rumor that you have decided
to move to Iraq. Have you indeed made such a decision?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/208-209  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/387*, Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/163 & 167,
*Seer A’laamun Nubla* 2/297

“Yes, I have decided to set out to Kufa on one of these two days. I want
to, if Allah wills, join my cousin, Muslim, there.”**[1]**

Ibn Abbas became distressed and he told the Imam, “I beseech the
Almighty’s refuge for you, tell me, are you going towards the community
that has murdered its chief (Amir) and that has taken over its province?
If they have done so, you may go to them. But if they have invited you
while their governor is upon them, ruling over them and his officials
are collecting taxes from them, they have in fact invited you for war
and I am not in peace regarding you because they are deceiving you, they
have lied to you. They shall desert you and betray you and they shall be
the worst of the people against you.”

These perceptive points were not concealed from the Imam, because His
Eminence was perfectly aware of his circumstances, therefore he told Ibn
Abbas, “I shall seek goodness (Istikhara) from the Almighty Allah and
see what happens.”

Ibn Abbas was worried and agitated and he could not rest in peace. Thus
he turned to the Imam and said, “I tried to remain patient but was
unable to do so. I am fearful of your death and destruction because of
this decision of yours…the people of Iraq are disloyal and betrayers of
trust, do not go to them. Stay in this town as you are the leader of the
people of Hijaz. Thus if the people of Iraq are desirous of you as they
are claiming to be, write to them to extern their governor and enemy and
then you may go and join them. Then if you like you may go out and move
to Yemen as there are castles and valleys over there and it is a vast
and huge land. And your father had Shias over there and you shall be far
away from the people. Then you may write to the people and send letters
to them, send your emissaries all over the country and I am hopeful that
you shall able to achieve what you like peacefully…”

Imam informed him about his determination and steadfastness to undertake
the journey. Ibn Abbas told him, “If you have decided to move, do not
take your ladies and children as I am afraid you shall be slain in the
same way as Uthman was killed, while his ladies and children witnessed
the carnage….By setting out from Hijaz you have pleased the son of
Zubair, today while you are present here; no one pays attention to him.

At that time, Ibn Abbas lost control of his emotions and in a bewildered
state, as the historians have described he said, “By the One except Whom
there is no deity, if I had known, I would have held your hair and
forehead, so that people gather over us and you had listened to what I
say and remained here, I shall do it.”

Whatever Ibn Abbas had said was not concealed upon the Holy Imam and His
Eminence was determined on his aim which was the victory of Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Waseelatul Maal fee idda manaqibul Aal,* Pg. 187, from the
facsimile in Amirul Momineen Public Library, and it is also mentioned in
*As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 285, by Sayyid Mahmud
Shaikhani Qadri, from facsimile copy at Imam Amirul Momineen Library*.*

Ibn Abbas, while his feet were moving with difficulty and his heart was
bursting with grief, went to Ibn Zubair and told him, “O Ibn Zubair!
Your eyes have lighted up!” Then he recited the following couplets:

**“O lark! Now you are left alone and your surroundings have become
empty. So lay your egg and chirp aloud.**

**And as much you like peck at the ground**

**For Husain who is going to Iraq and leaving you at Hijaz…”[1]**

If the Imam had been desirous for rulership and kingdom he would have
accepted the suggestion of Ibn Abbas. However, His Eminence wanted
reform and he wanted to turn back Islam to the illuminated reality and
he was certain that this could not be accomplished except through blood
sacrifice. It was the only thing that would enable him to achieve his
aim.

4. Abu Bakr Makhzumi
--------------------

Abu Bakr bin Abdur Rahman Makhzumi**[2]** hastened to the Imam and said
to His Eminence: “My relationship has persuaded me to sympathize with
you and I don’t know how I should advise you? Your father was the
bravest person and people were more hopeful of him, more obedient to him
and were more prepared for him. He marched against Muawiyah while except
for the people of Syria all were supporting him and he was more
respected than Muawiyah. But they deserted him and in greed of material
wealth left him alone. And they made him taste gulps of anger and they
opposed him till he reached where he reached from the honor and
satisfaction of God…after that they did with your brother what they did
and you also witnessed all that and saw it with your own eyes. Now you
are going towards those who had oppressed your father and brother so
that you may fight against the people of Syria and the people of Iraq.
You are going out to fight one who is more prepared and stronger than
you and people are more afraid of him and are more hopeful of him. If
the news of your departure reaches them, they will lure the people
through greed of wealth so that they may become slaves of the world. At
that time, those who have promised you support would be prepared to
fight you. And they shall desert you. You are more liked by those you
help. So remember Allah in your heart…”

Imam (‘a) thanked him for his advice and sympathy and informed him that
he was determined on what he had decided.

Abu Bakr despaired and said, “O Aba Abdillah! I entrust you to the
security of God!”

Then Abu Bakr went to the governor of Mecca saying:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 4/39, *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/374  
 **[2]** Abu Bakr bin Abdur Raman bin Harith Makhzumi Qarashi was one of
the jurists who was born during the caliphate of Umar and due to his
excessive prayers he was called the monk of Quraish. He was blind and an
elder of Quraish and he passed away in 95 A.H. (*Tahdhib at-Tahdhib*
30/12)

“Many of those who are advised do not pay any attention to it, however
if they are blamed secretly they accept the advice.”

“What happened, O Abu Bakr?”

He informed him about his conversation with His Eminence, Husain. He
told him, “By the Lord of the Ka’ba! You have indeed given a sincere
advice to him.”**[1]**

5. Abdullah bin Judah
---------------------

Abdullah bin Judah bin Hubairah was very much concerned about the Imam.
Thus he sent his son, Aun to the Holy Imam with a letter in which he
requested the Imam to turn back and also stated his apprehension
regarding the march of His Eminence to Iraq. However this matter was not
liked by the Imam.**[2]**

6. Jabir bin Abdullah
---------------------

Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari also rushed to the Imam and demanded him not
to leave but the Imam did not agree to it.**[3]**

7. Abdullah bin Muti
--------------------

Imam met Abdullah bin Muti’ on way to Iraq and Abdullah, knowing the
decision of the Imam said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! I remind you
about the sanctity of Allah that it may not be defiled. And the respect
of Quraish and the pledge of Arabs. I beseech you in the name of God. By
Allah! If you seek what is in the hands of Bani Umayyah, they shall kill
you and if they kill you, after you they shall not care for anyone…By
Allah! This is the sanctity of Islam, the sanctity of Quraish and the
sanctity of Arab. So for the sake of Allah! For the sake of Allah! Do
not do this and do not go to Kufa and do not put yourself in opposition
to Bani Umayyah.”**[4]**

8. Amr bin Saeed
----------------

Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq sent a letter to the Imam offering security and
assured that His Eminence will not have to face any difficulty.

It was mentioned therein: “I pray to the Almighty that He may inspire
you to resort to peace. And I want to tell you about what they (enemies)
intend to do with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 3/56, Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/382  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/377  
 **[3]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/8  
 **[4]** *Waseelatul Maal fee idda manaqibul Aal,* Pg. 189. And in
*Tarikh* Ibne Asakir 14/207 it has come that: Abdullah bin Muti’ said to
His Eminence, Husain: May my parents be sacrificed on you, benefit us by
your presence and do not go to Iraq as by Allah, if these people kill
you they would make us slaves and bondsmen. And in *Al Iqdul Farid*
4/376 it is mentioned that he met the Imam and said to His Eminence: O
Aba Abdillah, after you, the Almighty Allah will not give us drinking
water, where are you going? His Eminence (a.s.) said: Muawiyah is dead
and I have received more than a camel load of letters. Abdullah said: Do
not do this, as by Allah, they did not accord security to your father
while he was better than you, thus how will they give you security? By
Allah, if you are killed, after you no sanctity will remain but they
defile it.

I have heard that you have decided to go to Iraq. I pray Allah to give
you refuge from mischief. Thus if you are afraid, come to me as you
shall have security and rewards with me.”

How was it possible for the chief of the nobles to humble himself before
Ashdaq and ask for his protection? Ashdaq wanted to control the Imam so
that he may no more exercise his will. This matter was not unknown to
the Imam. He replied to Ashdaq as follows:

“If your intention by writing to me was really to reward me, the
Almighty Allah shall give you a goodly reward in the world and the
Hereafter…and the one who invites to Allah and performs good deeds and
says that I am a Muslim, he is creating mischief. And the best of the
security is the protection of Almighty Allah and by Allah! One who does
not fear Allah in the world is not having faith in Him. And we beseech
Allah to make us fearful of Him in the world so that we may be eligible
for His protection in the Hereafter.”**[1]**

9. Muhammad bin Hanafiyah
-------------------------

Muhammad bin Hanafiyah was in Medina and when he learnt about the
decision of his brother to march towards Iraq, he set out for
Mecca**[2]** and he reached there a night prior to the scheduled
departure of Imam to Iraq. He met His Eminence immediately and said, “My
brother! The people of Kufa! You are aware of their betrayal of trust
with your father and your brother. I am afraid that you shall also have
to bear the same treatment. Thus if you decided to stay on in the Holy
Sanctuary, you would be the most beloved and secure person in the here.”

Imam (‘a) thanked him for his concern and advice and told him, “I am
afraid that Yazid Ibn Muawiyah would have me killed and at that time I
shall be the one to have defiled the sanctity of this House.”

Muhammad said, “If you are afraid of this, you may go to Yemen or some
desert area as there, you would be in a better position to defend
yourself and no one would be able to overpower you.”

His Eminence, Husain said, “I shall reflect upon what you have
said.”**[3]**

When it was dawn and he was performing ablution (Wuzu), he was informed
that the Imam has set out for Iraq. He began to weep so much that the
sound of his tears falling into the pail was audible.**[4]**

Muhammad rushed to his brother and caught the rein of his camel and said
to His Eminence, “O my brother! Did you not promise me about what I had
requested you?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/209-210  
 **[2]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 9/5  
 **[3]** *Ad-Darul Maslook* 1/109 and close to this conversation there
was agreement between the Imam and his brother when he was in Medina.  
 **[4]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/377 and in *As Sawaiq al-Mohreqa* Pg. 196
it is mentioned that he cried till the pail was filled with his tears.

“Yes, but after you departed, Allah’s Messenger came to me and told me:
O Husain! Set out! As the Almighty Allah wants to see you slaughtered.”

Muhammad was terribly distressed and he began to tremble from the head
to toes and tears began to flow on his cheeks while he was saying, “Then
why are you taking these ladies and children when you are going out in
such circumstances?”

Imam (‘a) replied to him with determination and calmness, “The Almighty
Allah desires to see them as hostages.”**[1]**

10. Her Eminence, Umme Salma
----------------------------

When Umme Salma, the Mother of believers became aware of the Imam’s
determination to move to Iraq, she was extremely disturbed. It was the
time when His Eminence was in Medina and had not yet gone to Mecca. So
she hurried to the Imam and in a voice filled with sorrow and shock, she
said:

“O my son! Do you distress me by going out to Iraq as I heard your
grandfather, Allah’s Messenger say: ‘My son, Husain shall be killed in
Iraq at a place called Kerbala, and I have the soil of your grave in a
bottle that the Prophet had entrusted to me.”

Imam replied to her with firm determination, “O mother! I also know that
I shall be killed unjustly and oppressively and Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime desires to see my family and Ahle Bayt rendered homeless and my
children killed and taken hostages in chains in such a way that they
would be calling out for help but shall not be helped…”

Umme Salma was extremely distressed and she exclaimed loudly, “Wonder!
Then why are you going while you know that you shall be killed?!!”

Imam, while he considered death a joke and life an object of ridicule
replied to her, “O mother! If I do not go today, I will have to go
tomorrow. And if I don’t go tomorrow, I have to go the day after. And
there is no escape from death. And I know the day I shall be killed and
the hour I shall be slain and the ditch I shall be buried in, just as I
recognize you and I am watching it just as I am looking at you.”**[2]**

11. Abdullah bin Zubair
-----------------------

When the Imam decided to leave Mecca, Abdullah Ibn Zubair hastened to
meet him from the Bab-e-Mujamela.

Balazari has stated: By this Ibn Zubair desired that the Imam should not
blame him and that he should be excused from the aspect of
speaking.**[3]** So he expressed sympathy and concern for His Eminence
and said, “Where are you going? To the community that killed your father
and slashed your brother?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ad-Darul Maslook* 1/109  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal* 136 and Khwarizmi has said: This
conversation was between His Eminence, Husain (a.s.) and Ibne Umar in
Mecca, when he invited His Eminence to come with him to Medina.  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/375

Imam (‘a) replied, “If I am killed at such and such place it is
preferable to me than this place; that is Mecca should be defiled
because of me.”**[1]**

Imam remained firm in his resolve and the forbidding of forbidders and
the sympathies of the sympathizers did not make him change his decision.
Because he had become absolutely certain that the affairs of Islam shall
not be successful and the word of Allah cannot be exalted on the earth
except by laying down his life and giving sacrifice.

Ustad Khalid Muhammad Khalid says: The matter that made the valiant one
wave his flag was not a personal one that it be related to his right to
caliphate…or due to his personal rivalry with Yazid. In the same way
that was not an imaginative high flying matter that falls down on its
author. And that it may force him to a bewildered state where there may
be profit or loss. This matter was greater, higher and loftier. It was
the matter of Islam and its future and for Muslims and the future
generations.

When all Muslims were silent against this falsehood while some were
criticizing it and the rest hated it inwardly, the meaning of this was
that Islam has been prevented from training those people.

It implied that Muslims had lost their eligibility of the greatness of
this great religion…and also its meaning is that the future of Islam and
Muslims both had been surrendered to power of invaders. Whoever is
dominant, he mounts it and apart from this no power remained for Islam
and reality…it was this matter in the view of Husain and it was this
logic that persuaded him to rise up in revolt.**[2]**

Sympathizers of His Eminence urged him not to harken to the callers of
Kufa and that he should keep sitting at home and make peace with Yazid.
But the chief of the nobles was thinking of something all those people
were unaware of. His Eminence saw that Islamic life had fallen into
severe weakness and this matter was reaching a situation when it would
be completely destroyed. What it was required that he should infuse it
with his own blood so that the active life of Muslims may return and its
youth may be restored through his blood which was the blood of the Holy
Prophet (s).

Critics
-------

Also a group stood up to criticize the uprising of the Imam and
denounced the declaration of Jihad by the Imam because this was going to
be a cause of the weakening of the Umayyad regime by whom they had
received rewards and largesses. Some of those who followed them have
also issued statements of writer who flayed the Imam’s revolution
against Yazid’s regime while their statements had no value in Islamic
Shariah. They have quoted the following characters:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/203  
 **[2]** *Farzandaane-e-Payambar dar Kerbala,* Pg. 123-124

1. Abdullah Ibn Umar
--------------------

Abdullah Ibn Umar criticized the Imam’s uprising and found fault with
his entering into political confrontation and he said, “Husain succeeded
by his uprising against us and by my life he derived lesson from his
father and brother, he saw how the people left them and did not help
them. And it was not suitable for him to initiate any moment as long as
he was alive and for the sake of the well-being that people have seen it
was necessary for him to realize that this congregation is
better!”**[1]**

2. Saeed bin Musayyab
---------------------

Saeed bin Musayyab denounced the uprising of the Holy Imam (‘a) and
said, “If Husain had not undertaken the uprising, it would have been
better for him.”**[2]**

3. Abu Waqid Laithi
-------------------

Abu Waqid Laithi was a partisan of Bani Umayyads. He came to the Imam
and implored him in the name of Allah that he must not rise up against
Yazid. He did not do this because of his attachment to the Imam. It was
so because he was worried about the Umayyad regime. Imam, on the other
had, paid no attention to him. He just ignored him.**[3]**

4. Abu Salma
------------

Among those who condemned Imam’s revolt against Yazid was Abu Salam bin
Abdur Rahman**[4]** who said, “Husain must have recognized the people of
Iraq and he would not have moved towards them, but Ibn Zubair encouraged
him!”**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahzib al-Kamal,* 6/416. *Tarikhul Islam* 5/8. Ibne Asakir,
*Tarikh* 14/208. It is mentioned in *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 1/155 that
Shobi said: “Ibne Umar had come to Medina when he got the news that
Husain has departed for Mecca. Thus he journeyed for two days to reach
him. He dissuaded him and said: It is their rule and the Almighty Allah
put the choice of the world and the hereafter for His Prophet and the
Prophet chose the hereafter and you are also a part of his body, none of
you will give your hand to him. He has not taken it away from you but
for something better.” Imam refused and that time Ibne Umar embraced him
and said: “And seeing that you shall be surely killed I entrust you to
Allah.” It is mentioned in *Ad-Darul Maslook* of Hurre Amili 1/106:
Abdullah bin Umar suggested to His Eminence that he should pledge
allegiance to the deviated people and he warned him of being killed and
fought. His Eminence, Husain said to him: “O Aba Abdur Rahman! How
valueless it is before Allah that the head of Yahya bin Zakaria was
gifted to a tyrant of Bani Israel? Have you not seen that the Bani
Israel killed seventy prophets from the dawn to sunrise and after that
sat conducting their usual business as if they have not done anything?
The Almighty Allah was not hasty on them, rather gave respite to them
and after that He seized them; a terrible seizing. O Aba Abdur Rahman!
Fear Allah and do not give up my support.”  
 **[2]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/208, Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/8  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/208, Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/162,
*Tarikh Islam* 5/8  
 **[4]** Abu Salma bin Abdur Rahman bin Auf Zuhri Madani is considered
as belonging to the second category of Medinans. He died in 104 A.H.,
*Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 12/116  
 **[5]** Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/162

5. Abu Saeed
------------

Abu Saeed also criticized the Imam’s revolution and said, “Husain
invited me to join the uprising, but I told him, ‘Fear Allah, stay in
your house and do not rise up against your leader!’”**[1]**

6. Ammarah binte Abdur Rahman
-----------------------------

Ammarah binte Abdur Rahman**[2]** was a staunch ally of Bani Umayyad and
she was much concerned about the well-being of Umayyad regime. She wrote
a letter to the Imam pointing out that the Imam’s revolt was a dangerous
matter and she urged him to co-operate and obey the congregation
(majority). She warned him against rising up in revolt because it was
inciting him to his death. She wrote in her letter that she heard Ayesha
narrating the Prophet that His Eminence said, “My son, Husain shall be
killed.”

When Imam (‘a) read the letter and saw the Prophet’s saying about his
martyrdom he said, “In that case there is no solution other than my
being killed.”**[3]**

These were some of the critics of the Imam who condemned his stand and
they did not view the uprising of His Eminence from the Islamic point of
view. They viewed it from a materialistic angle because the Umayyad
regime had given a lot of wealth to them and thus they were worried of
the downfall of the regime.

Modern Critics
--------------

A group of modern writers have also condemned Imam Husain’s uprising
against Yazid and they considered it an uprising against the will of the
community. Below we present some examples:

1. Shaykh Muhammad Hadhari
--------------------------

Shaykh Muhammad Hadhari, Shaykhul Azhar, in his historical discussions
about Islam, has not displayed any regard to Ahle Bayt (‘a), while the
Almighty Allah had commanded love and devotion towards them, and he says
with regard to Imam Husain: “By undertaking the uprising, he committed a
great mistake. This action of his created such discord and mischief in
the community and shook the foundation of communal amity that its
effects last to this day.”**[4]**

Imam definitely did the correct thing and staged his uprising for the
benefit of the community and he is having superiority to every Muslim,
because if his sacrifice hadn’t been there neither would have Islam
survived in name nor in ritual. His Eminence destroyed the plot of the
Umayyads whose aim was to eradicate Islam and annihilate all its
treasures. His Eminence, Husain, by his sacrifice made himself the
sacrifice of the religion of Islam and the belief of Monotheism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/8  
 **[2]** Ammarah the daughter of Abdur Rahman bin Saad Ansari Madani,
was brought up under the care of Ayesha and she has narrated from her.
She was most knowledgeable about the traditions of Ayesha and she passed
away in 103 A.H. (*Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 12/438)  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/209  
 **[4]** *Tarikh Al Imamatul Islamiya* 1/517

2. Muhammad Najjar
------------------

Muhammad Najjar says, “As for the rightfulness of Husain (‘a) in the
position of caliphate, it is a matter regarding which the majority of
the people agree. But what is the value of these opinions if they are
not supported by military power? In such circumstances the uprising was
not necessary because the leadership of the inferior in presence of the
superior is lawful, just as Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) considered himself as
the rightful recipient of caliphate post but he did not organize
uprising against anyone.”**[1]**

Najjar believes that the caliphate of Yazid was legal according to the
Shariah! And it is the weakest type of Imamate that is lawful in their
view…However, it has been proved by many logical arguments that the
Imamate of the weaker in presence of the better one is invalid and Shia
scholastic theologians have proved its absolute invalidity and said that
it is a revolt against logic and an attack on Islamic guidance to say
that Islamic law allows in practical life and general welfare of the
community that the superior could follow the inferior. Because it is a
matter that would destroy merit and it would be a revolt against the
well-being of the community and the Holy Quran has said that it is
improper to consider the two of them equal, as the Almighty Allah says:

**“Are those who know and those who do not know alike?”[2]**

And as the Usulis have said: If we accept this rule, it still does not
justify the caliphate of Yazid because he, according to the consensus of
Muslims, had no merit, rather he was a transmogrified man who committed
evil deeds and was sunk in sinful acts and revolt against him was a
religious duty.

3. Muhammad Ghazzali
--------------------

Shaykh Muhammad Ghazzali has also condemned the revolution of Imam
Husain (‘a) and he considers it extremism devoid of diplomacy!**[3]**
And according to Ghazzali it was necessary for Husain to have paid
allegiance to Yazid and accepted the leadership of this wanton sinner,
who was in no way qualified for the leadership of the community. And it
was something that His Eminence, Husain and his lofty principles could
never accept, because His Eminence was the foremost in having the
responsibility of saving Islam and defending its sanctities and values.

4. Ahmad Shibli
---------------

Ahmed Shibli is another one who has frantically defended Yazid and
criticized the Imam for having organized uprising against the son of
Muawiyah. He says: We come towards Husain and regretfully state that his
steps in some of the aspects of this matter were unacceptable, because
he did not accept the advice of the advisors and especially Ibn Abbas
and he remained adamant in his attitude! Secondly: He forgot the
behavior of the people of Kufa and the way they dealt with his father  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ad Daulatul Amawiyah fil Sharq,* Pg. 102-103  
 **[2]** Surah Zumar 39:9  
 **[3]** *Min Maalimul Haq,* Pg. 131

and brother or that he ignored those things. Thirdly: He took along his
ladies and children as if he were going to a special outing or to visit
relatives and that during the journey he received the news of the
betrayal and disloyalty of people of Kufa but in spite of this he
continued his journey towards them or that he followed the opinion of
Aqil’s family and he took a group of children, women and some men in
order to take the revenge of Muslim’s murder. It is, by Allah, possible
that the incumbency of Yazid was a practical mistake, but was it the
right way to confront a mistake?”**[1]**

Shibli has not studied with insight the reality of Islamic life during
the period of Yazid. He has merely followed his inclination to bigotry
and considered him sentimentally, that is why he has written such
absolutely deviated things.

Islam, during the time of Yazid was in a mortal danger of being wiped
out and the uprising of the Imam was aimed at restoring life to the
arteries of the Islamic community and His Eminence declared that: “…I am
not taking up arms in order to make merry, or be ecstatic over what I
possess. I am not making mischief nor exercising oppression. But I am
ready to fight for the sole goal of seeking reform of the Ummah of my
grandfather the Apostle of Allah. I want to enjoin good and forbid evil
and guide the affairs of the people as my grandfather and father were
doing…” We have explained the aims of the revolution of Imam Husain (‘a)
in the second volume of this book and also clarified the doubts
regarding it.

Here we conclude our discussion about those who criticized the uprising
of the Imam against Yazid’s regime.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *At Tarikhul Islam wal Ikhtisarul Islamiya* 2/201
