Towards Iraq
============

Alas for the world! May this life go away and that the world should be
constricted for someone like the son of Allah’s Messenger (s) and the
waves of sorrows should surround him from all sides, and he could not
decide where to go and where to turn to, because he received reports
that the tyrant Yazid has commanded his assailants to eliminate the Imam
even if they find him clinging to the covering of the Kaaba.

The grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) became sure that Yazid would
never leave him alone and that he would definitely shed his blood and
defile his sanctity, and he mentioned this matter a number of times in
his statements; some of which were as follows:

1. Ja’far bin Sulaiman Zabi’ has narrated that His Eminence (‘a) said,
“They will not leave me till they spill out this blood,” and pointed to
his breast – “even though by their killing me, the Almighty Allah would
impose such a one upon them who would humiliate them to such an extent
that they shall become more degraded than an old slave-maid.”**[1]**

2. Imam (‘a) told his brother, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyah “If I enter the
hole of a reptile, they would bring me out and slay me.”**[2]**

3. Muawiyah bin Qarra has narrated that His Eminence, Husain (‘a) said,
“By Allah! They shall persecute me like the Bani Israel resorted to
injustice on Saturday.”**[3]**

Anxiety descended upon the Holy Imam and waves of sorrow and grief
enveloped His Eminence. The atmosphere around him was concealed by the
dark clouds, terrible calamities and horrifying events; because if the
Imam remained in Mecca he was expecting to be murdered and if he went
towards Iraq he was not trustful of the people of Kufa because they
would be disloyal to him and betray his trust. He has mentioned this to
someone he met on his way to Iraq. Yazid Rashk has narrated regarding
this that someone who happened to meet the Imam said: “I decried tents
fixed in an open area in the desert. I asked: “Whose tents are these?”

“They belong to Husain (‘a),” they replied. So I went towards him and
saw an elderly man reciting the Quran while tears were flowing on his
cheeks and face. I asked him, “May my parents be sacrificed on you, O
son of the daughter of Allah’s Messenger (s)! What has brought you to
this desolate desert land?” He replied, “These are the letters of people
of Kufa to me. I don’t consider them anything except my killers. When
they do this they would not leave any other religious sanctity but that
they defile it. The Almighty Allah would also impose upon them one who
would humiliate them till they become more degraded than an old female  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/169, Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/216  
 **[2]** *Bihar* 44/375  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/216, Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/169

slave.”**[1]**

His Eminence was not happy with the people of Kufa because he was aware
of their deception and disloyalty that they would become his enemies,
and become partisans of his enemies.

Anyway, we shall mention some of the events that occurred with His
Eminence before he set out from Mecca, the causes of his flight to Iraq
and incidents that happened on the way.

Imam’s letter to Bani Hashim
----------------------------

When the Holy Imam (‘a) decided to set out for Iraq he wrote the
following letter to Bani Hashim in which he stated after the name of
Allah: “From Husain bin Ali to his brother, Muhammad and anyone who is
with him from Bani Hashim. So to say: Anyone who joins me shall be
martyred and one who does not join me, shall not obtain success and
peace (be on you all).”**[2]**

Imam (‘a) informed the clan of prophethood that anyone who comes with
him would be guaranteed martyrdom and all those who do not join him
would not be able to achieve success. But what victory did the Imam (‘a)
have in mind?

It is that same victory that except for His Eminence no other leader of
the world and warrior of history had earned. Because his views became
victorious and his value increased and the world became illuminated by
his sacrifice. His name became the symbol of truth and justice. His
personality was not restricted to one community or tribe, rather it
became incomparable in all of humanity in every period of time and in
all the places. Thus what victory could be greater and which success
could be loftier than this success?

Bani Hashim People join the Imam
--------------------------------

When the Imam’s letter reached Bani Hashim in Medina a group of them
hastened to join the Holy Imam in order to obtain victory and martyrdom
in the company of the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah
(s).**[3]** Among them were his cousins and brothers just as Muhammad
bin Hanafiyah also came with them to dissuade the Imam from moving to
Iraq however Imam (‘a) did not accept his suggestion. We have already
related their conversation in the foregone pages.

Why Imam left Mecca?
--------------------

In our view, the following factors compelled the Imam to leave Mecca in
haste:

1. Safety of the Sanctuary
--------------------------

Imam feared that the sanctified House of Allah, where all those who
enter it are granted immunity from harm. This was so because Bani
Umayyad did not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/11, Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/169,
*Tadhib at-Tahdhib* 1/56, Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/216, *Ad Durrun
Nadheem*, Pg. 547  
 **[2]** *Kamil az-Ziyaraat,* Pg. 157, *Dalailul Imamah*, Pg. 177-178,
H. 107  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/211

recognize any of its sanctity and Yazid had ordered Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq
to fight the Holy Imam and if he could not do so, he must have him
assassinated. And Ashdaq had arrived in Mecca with a large number of
mercenaries. When the Imam was informed about this he set out from
there**[1]** and he did not take refuge in the sanctified house so that
he may protect its sanctities.

His Eminence (‘a) said, “Even if I am killed one hand span outside
Mecca, it is more preferable to me.”

His Eminence (‘a) himself said to Ibn Zubair, “If I am killed at such
and such place, it is more preferable to me than that the sanctity of
this place (Mecca) be defiled.”**[2]** The succeeding days showed that
Bani Umayyads had no regard for the holiness of this Great House,
because during their battle against Ibn Zubair they fired burning logs
of wood and stones with the help of catapults on the Kaaba, just as
before that they had defiled the sanctity of Medina…

2. Fear of being Killed
-----------------------

Imam (‘a) resorted to extreme precaution that it should not be that he
is killed in Mecca or that he becomes an easy prey for the Umayyads,
because Yazid had dispatched assailants to eliminate His Eminence.

Abdullah bin Abbas in his letter to Yazid wrote: “And whatever I may
forget I will not forget that you forced Husain bin Ali from the
sanctuary of the Messenger of Allah (s) towards the sanctuary of Allah
and after that sent your agents to assassinate him and he had to leave
the sanctuary of Allah to go to Iraq in a condition of trepidation and
in a precautionary manner. While he was and still is the most liked
person in the land of valleys (Hijaz) and among the people of the two
towns he is the most obeyed if he had stayed there and considered
hostilities in these places lawful.**[3]**

3. Muslim’s Letter
------------------

Another factor that prompted the Imam to set out from Mecca was the
letter of his emissary, Muslim bin Ail, which urged him to move to Iraq
and it had mentioned that all the people of Kufa were with him and the
number of people who have pledged allegiance for him exceeded 18000…

These were some of the factors that impelled the Imam to depart for Iraq
and the weakest view is that which claims that the Imam set out from
Mecca at the behest of Ibn Zubair because Ibn Zubair did not command any
importance that the Imam should leave Mecca because of him, only the
factors that we have indicated were explained. When Mecca became the
target of Umayyad attack such a situation was created that it never
became a center of any political movement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan,* Pg. 167 from facsimile copy at Imam Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) Library.  
 **[2]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/203  
 **[3]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh* 2/249

Imam’s discourse in Mecca
-------------------------

When Imam (‘a) decided to exit from Hijaz and set out for Iraq he issued
orders to gather the people so that he may deliver among them a
historical discourse. A huge crowd of people from Hijaz and residents of
Mecca congregated in the Masjidul Haraam to listen to Imam (‘a) who
stood up amidst the crowd and began his sermon as follows:

“Praise be to Allah! By Allah’s will only! There is no power but with
Allah! And blessings of Allah be upon His Messenger! Verily death is
bound with the sons of Adam as a necklace around the neck of a maiden.
How I desire and long to meet my ancestors similar to (Prophet) Yaqub
(‘a), who was desirous of meeting (Prophet) Yusuf (‘a). Verily I proceed
towards the place of my martyrdom, which has been selected for me. It is
as if I see the wolves of the desert (of Bani Umayyah) separating each
part of my body between Nawawis and Kerbala, and filling their empty
bellies and utricles. There is no escape from that which has been
written down by the pen of destiny, and the pleasure of our Household
(Ahlulbayt) lies in the pleasure of Allah. Verily we will endure His
trials and secure the reward due for the forbearing ones. The cord of
the Prophet and his child cannot be separated from him, but will all be
united together with him near the Right (Allah). Thereby his (the
Prophet’s) eyes will be cooled due to us and thus Allah will fulfill
what He has promised through them. Then whoever desires to lay down his
life for us and strive in the way of Allah should come out with us, for
I shall be leaving tomorrow morning, Allah willing.”**[1]**

I have not seen a sermon more eloquent and more astonishing, which
called the people to truth and which illustrated the worthlessness of
this life in the view of Almighty. The sermon contained the following
points of significance:

1. His Eminence predicated his imminent martyrdom and he has welcomed
death considering it an embellishment for man just as the necklace
adorns the neck of a youthful dame. This simile is extremely touching
and the most beautiful of the comparisons in the speech of Arabs. And it
is natural that the death which man would consider as an adornment for
himself, it must be the death on the path of God and truth.

2. His Eminence has indicated his eagerness to meet his Holy ancestors,
who had been martyred in the way of Allah and the Imam’s eagerness is
compared to the eagerness of Prophet Yaqub (‘a) to see his long lost
son, Prophet Yusuf (‘a) as His Eminence has himself explained.

3. His Eminence declared that the Almighty has selected for him a great
martyrdom and death with honor on the way of defense of religion and
support of Islam.

4. His Eminence introduced that purified land where his blood would be
shed that it is between Nawawis and Kerbala, where he shall be cut up
into piece by swords and spears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/114, *Miftah al-Afkaar,* Pg. 148, *Kashful
Ghumma* 2/29

5. His Eminence has informed that till the dogs of Bani Umayyah and
their followers do not fill their bellies with his flesh and blood they
would not rest. This is an allusion to their rule on Muslims after him
and how they shall plunder the wealth of the nation etc.

6. The Imam has clarified that whatever calamities were to befall him,
have been destined and there was no way to avoid them and when the pen
of destiny has moved there was no way one could change it.

7. Imam (‘a) has announced his supplication to Allah that may He join
the pleasure of Ahle Bayt to His pleasure and their obedience to His
obedience and it really deserved to be so. Because they were the callers
to the religion of God and guides to His satisfaction who bore such
terrible difficulties for this that they defy description.

8. His Eminence has described a quality of Ahle Bayt (‘a) and it was
their patience and forbearance and submission to the command of Allah in
whatever befalls them and may Allah give them unlimited rewards for
their patience.

9. Imam (‘a) has declared that the illuminated reality of Ahle Bayt was
the continuation of the reality of the Prophet (s) because they were his
flesh and blood and the stems of the same tree are not different from
its root and the eyes of the Prophet (s) shall be illuminated for his
progeny in his Holy Grave. They stayed awake on nights and in defense of
his religion bore the greatest Jihad.

These brilliant points show that His Eminence had become hopeless of
this worldly life and was prepared to die and sacrifice himself. If he
had been aiming for kingdom he would not have issued such statements and
he would have had to give sweet promises and bright hopes to his
supporters.

None from the Meccans or Hajj pilgrims harkened to the Imam’s call,
except a few believers. This indicates the paucity of religious
inclination in the people and the decadence of that society and its
deviation from truth.

Conclusion of Umrah
-------------------

When the Imam decided to leave Mecca he put on the Ihram for
Umrah-e-Mufradah, performed circumambulation (Tawaf) of Kaaba, shaved
the head and performed Tawafun Nisa. Then he put on ordinary clothes.
Shaykh Mufeed has written that when Imam Husain (‘a) decided to leave
for Iraq; he went around the Kaaba, did *Sayy* (jogging) between Safa
and Marwa, then he removed his Ihram and considered it Umrah, because he
was not able to conclude his Hajj lest he may be apprehended in Mecca
and taken to Yazid.**[1]** This point is worth consideration. Because
one who has come for Hajj cannot, according to verdict of jurisprudents,
remove Ihram before sacrifice and that it could not be changed into
Umrah. What we have explained is supported by two traditions that Shaykh
Hurre Amili has  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shaykh Mufid, *Al-Irshad*, 2/67 and Shaykh Tabarsi has mentioned
it in *A’laamul Wurdi,* Pg. 227

quoted in *Wasailush Shia,* Book of Hajj, chapter on: “Permissibility of
Umrah Mufradah in the months of Hajj**[1]** and going anywhere one
likes.”

A. Ibrahim bin Umar Yamani has narrated from Imam Sadiq (‘a) that His
Eminence said regarding the person who goes for Umrah in the months of
Hajj and after that he returns to his hometown that there is no problem
in it. Even if that year he performs Hajj Afrad which does not require
sacrifice. Indeed Husain bin Ali (‘a) set out for Iraq on the day of
Tarwiyah after performing Umrah Mufradha.

B. Muawiyah bin Ammar asked Imam Sadiq (‘a): How does Umrah Tamatto
differs from Umrah Mufrada? He said: Umrah Tamatto is related to Hajj
and it is a part of it but Umrah Mufrada when it is done one can go
anywhere one likes. Indeed Imam Husain (‘a) performed Umrah Mufrada in
Zilhajj. After that on the day of Tarwiyah when the people went towards
Mina he set out for Iraq. There is no problem for one who had not
intended to perform Hajj to perform Umrah Mufrada in Zilhajj.”**[2]**
This tradition also supports what we have stated above.**[3]**

Departure before Hajj
---------------------

The question arises why Imam (‘a) left Mecca on 8<sup>th</sup> Zilhajj
while it is the day when pilgrims prepare to leave for Arafat and why he
did not complete his Hajj? According to our view there were some factors
due to which His Eminence hastily left Mecca and they are as follows:

1. The regime had become so strict on him that His Eminence had become
sure that it would open the door of battle with him or it would have him
killed during the performance of Hajj rituals. And in this way trample
upon the sanctity of Hajj and destroy its Holy aims among whom was
freeing the community in a complete way from humiliation and servitude.

2. If the regime had not initiated battle with the Imam during the
rituals of Hajj it would have done so immediately after the conclusion
of Hajj. At that time he would have been in Mecca either in battle or he
would have been killed. In both the cases there would have been
bloodshed in the Holy House in the Holy Month. Therefore His Eminence
left Mecca in order to defend the Islamic sanctities.

3. The departure of His Eminence at that delicate moment was one of the
important ways of propagation against the regime of that time, because
the news of the Imam’s sudden departure spread to all the pilgrims of
the Holy House in a sensational manner and the people who had arrived
from all over the Islamic regions conveyed this information to their
native places that Imam Husain (‘a) has declared an uprising against
Yazid. And that the Imam had been compelled to leave Mecca at such a
crucial moment as he wanted to protect the sanctity of the Holy land at
the hands of the Umayyads…these were some of the factors that led the
Imam to depart from Mecca before Hajj.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The months of Shawwal, Zilqad and Zilhajj are called the months
of Hajj (Tr.)  
 **[2]** *Wasailush Shia* 10/246-247  
 **[3]** Laws related to Hajj and Umrah are very detailed and it is
necessary to refer to the verdicts of great jurists. (Tr.)

With Ibn Zubair
---------------

When Ibn Zubair learnt of the Imam’s departure to Iraq he hurried to him
in order to ask him about a matter that he hadn’t been be able to solve.
He asked the Imam, “O son of Allah’s Messenger, we may never meet each
other again after today. How does a new born child inherits or is
inherited from? And the gifts presented by a king, are they lawful or
not?”

Imam (‘a) replied to him, “As for the newborn, he is eligible only when
it is born into the world and as for the gifts of kings and rulers, they
are allowed only if they have not usurped that property.”**[1]**

Ibn Zubair did not possess juristic knowledge that is why he sought the
replies of these questions from the Imam. Now is it not surprising that
how such a person could aspire to become the caliph of Muslims?

Journey to Iraq
---------------

Before leaving Mecca, His Eminence went to the Masjidul Haraam (the
Great Mosque) and by performing circumambulation and prayer, he
fulfilled its honor and this was the last farewell of His Eminence. Imam
(‘a) performed the noon prayer in the Masjid and after that he bid
farewell to the sanctified Mosque and came out.**[2]** Imam (‘a) bid
farewell to the Holy Ka’ba while he was carrying its soul in his body
and he was holding aloft its torch with both his hands while angels
accompanied him reciting Allaahu Akbar and circumambulating it. As if
they were fearful about it because it was a relic of the heavens on the
earth.**[3]**

Imam departed from Mecca while he was fearful of the grandson of Abu
Sufyan like his grandfather, His Eminence, the Messenger of Allah (s)
had fled Mecca due to the fear of the polytheists under the leadership
of Abu Sufyan. Along with the Imam were eighty-two persons from Ahle
Bayt, their friends and their bondsmen.**[4]** In the same way the
ladies and women of the family also accompanied him. The Imam departed
in such a way that he was carrying with himself the complete
independence of the Islamic community and he wanted to establish the
government of Quran and heavenly justice on the Islamic lands and that
he may remove the deceitful and oppressive people from there.

The Imam’s departure – according to historians – was on the
8<sup>th</sup> of Zilhajj 60 A.H.,**[5]** while all the people of Mecca
were filled with sorrow and none was free from it…**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 167 from facsimile
copy at Imam Amirul Momineen (a.s.) Library.  
 **[2]** *Jawahirul Matalib fee Manaqib Imam Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)*
from facsimile copy at Imam Amirul Momineen (a.s.) Library.  
 **[3]** Abdullah Alaili, *Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 557  
 **[4]** Bustani, *Dairatul Ma’rif* 7/48. It has come in *Waseelatul
Maal fee idda manaqibul Aal,* Pg. 188 that: He departed for Iraq with
his Ahle Bayt and six senior citizens of Kufa. And in Dhahabi, *Tarikh
Islam* 5/9 it says: He departed from Mecca with ninety men from the
family of Abdul Muttalib and women and children went with him.  
 **[5]** Maqrizi, *Khatat* 2/286. Bustani, *Dairatul Ma’rif* 7/48  
 **[6]** *As Sawaiq al-Mohreqa* 196, *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin
Nabi* Pg. 186

The caravan left the limits of Mecca. The Imam did not halt at any of
the stops but that he spoke to his Ahle Bayt about the killing of Yahya
bin Zakaria.**[1]** Thus implying that he would also be martyred in the
same way.

The regime pursues the Holy Imam
--------------------------------

The Imam had not traveled much distance from Mecca when he was pursued
by a group of government soldiers under the command of Yahya bin Saeed.
They wanted to prevent the Imam from going to Iraq. There was an armed
confrontation between the two groups and the soldiers failed to achieve
their objective.**[2]** In our view these steps were nothing but a
formality because the Imam had left Mecca in clear daylight without
voicing any opposition to the regime. Now this battalion was actually
sent to chase the Imam’s entourage far away from Mecca and then attack
them in the desolate desert so that they could be finished off easily.

Dr. Abdul Momim Majid has also stressed this point and said: “It shall
become clear to us that Yazid’s official in Hijaz did not take any
serious steps to prevent the Imam from leaving Mecca for Kufa as many
Shias of His Eminence were in his employ. Rather, it may be that he
thought that it would be easier for them to eliminate the Imam in the
desert, far away from his partisans, as indeed the Bani Hashim, later on
blamed Yazid that he had sent his agents to expel the Imam from
Mecca.”**[3]**

Connection of Damascus with Kufa
--------------------------------

Damascus had always maintained connection with Kufa in such a way that
it was aware of all the movements of the Holy Imam and the failure of
the conspiracy to assassinate the Imam in Mecca. The regime became
terrified when it learnt that the Imam was now himself heading towards
Kufa to take over the charge of the uprising where he had previously
dispatched his emissary, Muslim bin Aqil to gauge the level of his
support.

Yazid wrote numerous letters to his tyrant governor in Kufa, Ibn Ziyad
in which he suggested him of some dangerous plots devised against Shias
so that he may confront the Imam. And he commanded him to be careful of
the events that he may have to encounter. Of those letters were the
following:

1. Yazid wrote this letter after the Imam had departed from Mecca. It
contained the following: “So to say: Beware of Husain bin Ali, he may
not escape you. Hasten towards him before he could reach Iraq.”

This letter purported to command the regime of Kufa to immediately march
into  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nazm Durarus Simtain*, Pg. 215  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/39. *Al-Bidaya wan Nihaya* 8/166. And in
*Simtun Nujoom* 5/57 and *Jawahirul Matalib fee Manaqib Imam Ali Ibne
Abi Talib* 2/264 it is mentioned: When Amr bin Saeed learnt of Husain's
departure from Mecca he told his officers: Mount every camel between the
earth and the sky and follow him and people were shocked at his orders.
They followed him but could not catch up with him.  
 **[3]** *At-Tarikh Siyasi Dawlatul Arab* 2/72-73

the desert to fight Imam Husain (‘a) before he reaches Iraq and in this
matter they must not allow any type of carelessness.

2. It is mentioned in a letter: “So to say: I have received news that
Husain has departed for Kufa. Your day from among all days and your town
from all the other towns is in turmoil due to him and you have become
involved among your officials because of him. That time either you shall
be freed or you shall be enslaved just as a slave is freed.”**[1]**

This letter is a message of hatred and ferocity because therein Yazid is
warning his official that if he commits any sort of shortcoming in his
responsibility of fighting His Eminence, Husain, he shall be expelled
from his relationship of Bani Umayyah and his paternity will be turned
back to Ubaid the Roman, his grandfather, so that he becomes a slaves
like ordinary slaves who are sold and then emancipated…Immediately after
receiving this letter, Ibn Ziyad declared an emergency and martial law.
He sealed all the borders of Iraq and put guards on the roads leading to
Syria and Basra so that no one could enter or leave the desert of
Iraq.**[2]** Also he formed a battalion that would patrol whole of Iraq
and search for Imam Husain (‘a). Among them was a regiment of one
thousand mounted soldiers under the command of Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi
that forced the Imam to halt at Kerbala and prevented them from going to
any other town.

3. Yazid ordered Ibn Ziyad to gift huge sums of money to leaders and
elders in order to obtain their loyalties. The text of this letter was
as follows: “So to say: To the people of Kufa, supporters and those who
obey you, grant more than a hundred units of currency.”**[3]**

Ibn Ziyad doled out huge amounts to the important personalities and
leaders of groups and persuaded them to make war on the son of Allah’s
Messenger.

Attitude of Umayyads
--------------------

The Umayyads were terrified when they learnt of Imam’s movement and the
journey of His Eminence from Hijaz towards Iraq because a group of them
was peace-loving and fearful of the consequences of these circumstances.
They were worried in case Ibn Ziyad may cause some harm to the Holy Imam
and this may become a cause for the downfall of their regime. And a
group was afraid of the downfall of Umayyad regime hence they were of
the opinion that the Imam (‘a) must be dealt with an iron hand or he
should be confronted and destroyed to assure security to their regime.
The former group was represented by Walid bin Utbah and the latter party
was led by Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq. Each of them dispatched a letter to Ibn
Ziyad explaining their respective point of view:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/214. Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/10.
Tibrani, *Al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/123. *Kifayatut Talib,* Pg. 432,
*Jawahirul Matalib Fee Manaqib Imam Ali Ibne Abi Talib* 2/271 it has
come in the Arabic text: ‘Kama yotaqul Abd’ but in the text of Ibne
Asakir it says: ‘Kama Yotabdul Ubaid’ and obviously this is correct, on
the basis of this the translation will be: Just as Ubaid became a slave
(Tr.)  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/371  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/371

1. Letter of Walid bin Utbah
----------------------------

There was none in Bani Umayyah having a realistic and deep view of the
circumstances as Walid bin Utbah. When he learnt that the Imam has
departed from Hijaz to march towards Kufa, he became perturbed because
he was aware of Yazid’s arrogance and Ibn Ziyad’s oppressive nature.
Therefore he penned a letter to Ibn Ziyad and warned him against causing
any harm to the Holy Imam because such a thing was going to cause a
terrible harm to Bani Umayyah. The text of this letter was as follows:

“From Walid bin Utbah to Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad: Husain bin Ali has set
out for Iraq. He is the son of Fatima and Fatima is the daughter of
Allah’s Messenger. So, Ibn Ziyad, beware, that you may not send
messengers to him and inspite of your not wanting you may be condemned
by all the people. Was Salaam.”

Ibn Ziyad did not accord any importance to this letter. He continued in
his deviation and oppression and began to fulfill the responsibility the
Damascus regime had forced upon him.**[1]**

Misunderstanding of Ibn Kathir
------------------------------

Ibn Kathir has erred when he claimed that Marwan wrote a letter to Ibn
Ziyad urging him to avoid extremism with His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and
that he advised him and warned him of the consequences of his actions.
The letter that he sent is similar to the one dispatched by Walid quoted
by us above. It additionally has the following sentences:

“So to say: Husain bin Ali is coming towards you. And Husain is the son
of Fatima and Fatima is the daughter of Allah’s Messenger (s). By Allah!
None has Allah kept alive near us more beloved than Husain. It may not
be that you do something that cannot be stopped; the people may also not
forget it. Keep this in mind forever. Was Salaam.”**[2]**

This letter is definitely not from Marwan because he never had any
regard for the well being of the community and all his life he never
caused any benefit to the Muslims. In addition to it was his enmity
towards the Purified Progeny, especially towards Imam Husain (‘a)
because he was the same person who advised the governor of Medina to
eliminate the Holy Imam and later when he received the news of Imam’s
martyrdom he openly expressed his joy and satisfaction. On the basis of
this how could it be possible that he requested Ibn Ziyad to give
concession to the Imam and to protect him?

2. Ashdaq’s Letter
------------------

Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq wrote a letter to Ibn Ziyad in which he ordered him
to resort to the most severe steps against the Imam. The letter states:
“So to say: Husain is coming towards you in such circumstances that
either you shall be freed or be enslaved so that you are dealt with like
bondsmen.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/121-122  
 **[2]** Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/165  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/212

Confiscating Yazid’s wealth
---------------------------

Imam (‘a) had not traveled very far from Mecca that in Taneem**[1]** he
came across a caravan carrying huge quantities of red garments and
dresses sent by governor of Yemen, Bajeer bin Yasar for the tyrant
Yazid. Imam ordered that the goods of the caravan be confiscated. He
told the camel owners that whomsoever of them may like may go with His
Eminence to Iraq and they would be paid the full fare and whoever wanted
to discontinue, may take his charges till that point and go back. Some
of them joined the Imam and the rest departed from there.**[2]**

In this way the Imam saved the goods from being put to unlawful purposes
and be used for drinking parties and help in oppressing people. Before
this also the Imam had taken the same steps during the time of Muawiyah
about which Ayatullah Sayyid Mahdi Aale Bahrul Uloom thinks that it is a
weak narrational report, because the position of the Imam was too
exalted to resort to such tactics.**[3]** However we are of the opinion
that there was nothing wrong in this. The Imam considered the regimes of
both Muawiyah and Yazid as unlawful and when he saw that the wealth of
Muslims was being used to promote vices and destruction he saved it by
confiscating and distributing it all to the poor and needy people. So
what is the problem in it?

Meeting with Farazdaq
---------------------

When the Imam’s entourage reached a place called Saffah,**[4]** the
famous poet, Farazdaq Haman bin Ghalib met the Imam and saluted him.
Farazdaq invoked blessings upon him and asked His Eminence, “May my
parents be sacrificed on you, what has compelled you to leave the Hajj?”

“If I do not hasten, I would be apprehended.”**[5]**

The Holy Imam asked him, “O Aba Firaas, where are you coming from?”

“From Kufa.”

“Tell me about the people there.”

“You have asked a good (question), the hearts of the people are with you
but their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Taneem is a place in Mecca, outside the sanctuary between Mecca
and Saraf at a distance of two farsakhs from Mecca and it is said that
it is at a distance of four farsakhs that is why it is called Taneem at
the right side of which is a mountain called Naeem and on the left is
another mountain named Naaim (*Mojam al-Buldan* 2/49)  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/385-386. *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/166  
 **[3]** Bahrul Uloom, *Rijal* 4/48  
 **[4]** Safah is a place between Hunain and Ansaab al-Haram on the left
of anyone who enters Mecca from Mashash…Farazdaq has versified his
meeting with the Imam at this place as follows:  
 I met Husain at Safah while cloaks and shields were on His Eminence.
This matter is mentioned in *Mojam al-Buldan* 3/412 and in *Tadhkiratul
Huffaz* of Dhahabi it says that the Imam’s encounter with Farazdaq was
at Zaatul Irq and in *Maqtal* of Khwarizmi it is mentioned that they met
at Ash-Shuqooq and in *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 134 Zubala is mentioned but the
fact is that they met at Safah as Farazdaq has himself stated.  
 **[5]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/167

swords are against you. The decision comes from Heaven and God does what
He wishes.”**[1]**

Imam agreed to what Farazdaq said and he replied: “You have spoken truly
of the affair belonging to God. Every day He (is involved) in (every)
matter. If fate sends down what we like and are pleased with, we praise
God for His blessings. He is the One from Whom help should be sought in
order to give thanks to Him. However, although fate may frustrate (our)
hopes, yet He does not destroy (the soul of) those whose intention is
the truth and whose hearts are pious.”**[2]**

At that moment the Imam recited the following couplets:

**“If the world is considered of any value, the abode of Allah’s reward
is higher and greater.**

**If the bodies are created for death it is best that man is killed by
the sword in the way of Allah.**

**If the sustenance has already been appointed, man should spend the
least effort in obtaining it.**

**If wealth is accumulated only to be left behind, why is man miserly in
spending something that is going to be left behind?”[3]**

Then Farazdaq asked the Imam about matters concerning vows and
pilgrimage rites. The Imam told him about them and then moved his mount
off, saying farewell, and so they parted…

This encounter indicates for us a picture of weakness and decadence of
the people and their lack of motivation for supporting truth because he
was having social and cultural perception, but inspite of knowing that
the Imam shall be killed he did not come forward to help him and he did
not join the caravan of His Eminence in order to defend him. So, if such
was the position of Farazdaq what could be said of the general populace
and laymen?

Anyway, the Imam continued his march with determination and
steadfastness and Farazdaq’s statements regarding the weakness of the
people towards His Eminence and their support to Bani Umayyah was not
able to make the Imam change his decision. If the Imam had been aiming
for kingdom, Farazdaq’s remarks would have dissuaded him from his
journey to Iraq.

Letter of the Imam to people of Kufa
------------------------------------

When Imam Husain (‘a) reached the spot called Hajir in the Zirrama
province, which was a station off from Badia, he wrote a letter to the
Shias of Kufa to inform them of his departure towards Iraq. After the
name of Allah the Imam wrote:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Waseelatul Maal* Pg. 188  
 **[2]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/166. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/386. Ibne
Athir, *Tarikh* 4/40. *As Sawaiq al-Mohreqa* 196  
 **[3]** *Al Futuh* of Ibne Athim 5/125-126

“From Husain bin Ali to his believing brothers and Muslims, peace be on
you. With you all, I praise that Allah except Whom there is no deity. So
to say: The letter of Muslim bin Aqil reached me and informed me about
your favorable attitude and the readiness of the majority of you to help
me and to restore our rights. Thus I beseech the Almighty to give me
success in righteousness and that He makes you eligible for the greatest
reward for this. I have set out from Mecca towards you on Tuesday,
8<sup>th</sup> Zilhajj the day of Tarwiyah. So when my messenger reaches
you, you must conceal your affair and continue your efforts as I would,
if Allah wills, reach you in a few days. And peace be upon you and the
mercy of Allah and His bounties.”**[1]**

Imam (‘a) entrusted this letter to the great warrior, Qais bin Mus-har
Saidawi. He set out with speed without being distracted by anything else
till he reached Quddisiya when he came across a police party that was
patrolling the lands to check anyone from entering or leaving Iraq. The
police arrested him but Qais destroyed the Imam’s letter so fast they
could not find out about its contents. Then they took him in custody and
along with pieces of the letter sent him to Ibn Ziyad, the oppressor.
When he came to Ibn Ziyad he asked:

“Who are you?”

“I am a partisan (Shia) of Amirul Momineen, Husain bin Ali (‘a).”

“Why did you tear up the letter that you were carrying?”

“For the fear that you would have learnt of its contents?”

“Who was the sender of that letter and who was supposed to be its
recipient?”

“It was from Husain to a group of people of Kufa, whose names I do not
know.”

The oppressor became infuriated and became absolutely out of control. He
screamed at Qais: “By Allah! You will not leave me except that you
report to me the names of persons for whom you had brought the letter or
that you go upon the pulpit and curse Husain, his father and his brother
in order to be excused by me or I shall have you cut into pieces.”

Qais told him, “I do not know the recipients of the letter but I shall
perform the function of cursing.”

Ibn Ziyad thought he was another kind of degraded man of Kufa, who the
world has deceived and whom death has terrified. He didn’t know that
Qais was the incomparable reformer of the world who made history of
communities and nations and exalted for them the word of truth and
justice on the earth…

Ibn Marjana ordered the people to gather at the Great Mosque so that he
may display to them through Qais’ cursing of Ahle Bayt, an example of
pledge breaking and persuade them to make it a part of their behavior.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/168 and in *Futuh* 5/143-145 the
letter of His Eminence is quoted in a different detailed manner. *Ansaab
al-Ashraaf* 3/378

That great warrior, while he ridiculed death and made fun of life stood
up from his place in order to fulfill the trust and sincerity towards
the message of God. Then he mounted the pulpit and praised Allah and
glorified Him. He invoked blessings on the Messenger of Allah and prayed
for divine mercy for Ali and his sons.**[1]** After that he cursed
Ubaidullah, his father and all the oppressors of Bani Umayyah and he
raised his call of the rammer which was the call of truth and Islam and
said:

“People, this man, Husain bin Ali, the best of God’s creatures, the son
of Fatima, the daughter of the Apostle, may God bless him and his family
and grant them peace, (is nearby). I am his messenger to you. I left him
at Hajir. So you answer him.”**[2]**

Ibn Ziyad’s men rushed to him and informed him what Qais had done. He
became infuriated and ordered him to be thrown from the top of the
palace alive.

The agents apprehended Qais and threw him to the ground from the palace
top. He was smashed to pieces, his bones were pulverized and he passed
away with the death of a brave warrior in the path of his faith and
belief.

When the news of his killing reached Imam Husain (‘a) he was extremely
devastated and he began to weep and said, “O Allah! Appoint for us and
our Shias a valuable place in Your realm and surround us all with Your
mercy as You are powerful over everything.”**[3]**

With Abu Harra
--------------

When the Imam reached Zaat Irq, Abu Harra came and said to His Eminence:
“O Son of Allah’s Messenger! What has brought you out from the sanctuary
of Allah and the sanctuary of your grandfather, the Messenger of Allah
(s)?”

The Imam was touched and he said, “It is amazing, O Aba Harra! The Bani
Umayyah has plundered my property and I remained patient, they spoke
harshly to me and I was patient. They wanted to kill me, so I fled. I
swear by Allah! These unjust people want to slay me and the Almighty
will heap them with extensive degradation and put swordsmen over their
lives. He would appoint such a person on them as will humiliate them
till they become more degraded than the community of Saba just as a
woman from them became their queen and ruled their lives and properties,
till she humiliated them completely.”**[4]**

The Imam moved out from that place while he was aggrieved of the people
who did not believe in helping the truth. He was sad for the people who
preferred a life of comfort and did not like to participate in Jihad on
the way of Allah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/146-147  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/41  
 **[3]** *Al Futuh* 5/147  
 **[4]** *Ad-Darul Maslook* 1/110. *Al Futuh* 5/123-124

With an Arab Shaykh
-------------------

When the Imam’s caravan reached Batnul Uqbah, an Arab Shaykh who resided
there approached the Holy Imam and said, “I adjure you in the name of
God, go back. You won’t come to anything there except the points of
spears and the edges of swords. If those who sent for you were enough to
support you in battle and had prepared the ground for you, and you came
to them, that would be a wise decision. However, in the light of the
situation as it has been described I don’t think that you ought to do
it.”

Imam (‘a) replied, “What you have stated is not concealed from me, but I
shall be patient and forbearing till the Almighty Allah completes that
which He intends to complete.”**[1]**

Worry of Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a)
----------------------------------

The Imam’s caravan continued its journey till it reached Hazeemiyah, a
station on the route of Hajj. The Imam stayed at this place for a day
and a night to rest from the fatigue of the journey and the hardships of
the way. His sister, the honorable lady of Bani Hashim came to him
dragging her garment on the ground and her heart was brimming with
sorrow and grief. She said in a forlorn voice accompanied with
lamentation that she had heard a caller say:

**“O eye! Be diligent, who will weep upon the martyrs after me?**

**On those whom death follows as they move forward to fulfill the
covenant they have made.”**

The chief of nobles told her, “My sister, whatever is decreed by Allah
shall indeed come to pass?”**[2]**

His Eminence counseled his sister to observe patience and to face the
calamities and problems with determination and resolve so that he may be
able to fulfill his duty.

With Zuhair bin Qain
--------------------

Imam’s caravan reached Zarood and halted there for sometime. Zuhair bin
Qain who held the Uthmani view and that year he had performed the
pilgrimage of the House of God, happened to camp near the Imam’s halting
place. Though Zuhair and his caravan had been traveling parallel to the
Imam’s caravan they always avoided camping too near the Imam, lest the
Imam may send a messenger to him and summon him, which was something
Zuhair was trying to avoid. This day Zuhair and his companions were
having dinner when the Imam’s messenger arrived and delivered Imam’s
message. They were so shocked that they threw what food they held in
their hands on the table as if birds had alighted on their heads.

Zuhair’s wife censured their reaction and remarked, “Glory be to Allah!
Did the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Sabbagh, *Al Fusulul Muhimma*, Pg. 189  
 **[2]** Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 4/195 from the facsimile in Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) Library. *Al Futuh* 5/122

son of the Messenger of Allah send for you? Then aren’t you going to
him? If you went to him, you would hear what he had to say.”

Zuhair went unwillingly to him. It was not long before he returned in a
happy mood and his face was aglow. He ordered his tent (to be struck)
and (called for) his luggage, mounts and equipment. His tent was pulled
down and taken to Husain’s camp. Then he said to his wife, “You are
divorced.”

What secret did the beloved grandson of Allah’s Messenger convey to him
that he was absolutely transformed? Did he promise him wealth and
riches? If he had done thus, Zuhair would not have divorced his wife and
not bid last farewell to his friends…

Imam promised him martyrdom, salvation and Paradise and told him about a
tradition that reminded him of a long day he had passed and which he had
long forgotten…Zuhair repeated the incident to his wife as follows:

“I will narrate a tradition for you: we had gone to Balanjar for Jihad.
The Almighty Allah granted victory to us and bestowed us war booty and
we were elated at this. Salman al-Farsi was accompanying us. He asked
us, “Are you happy with the victory which God has granted you and the
booty you have won?” We said, “Yes.” Then he said, “Therefore when you
meet the Lord of the young men of the family of Muhammad be happier to
fight with them than you are with the booty which you have obtained
today.”**[1]**

Ibrahim bin Saeed who went to the Imam with Zuhair has narrated that His
Eminence told him, “He shall be killed at Kerbala and Zajar bin Qais
will take his blessed severed head to Yazid with the hope of earning
reward but he will not give him anything.”**[2]**

Fortune shone on Zuhair that he joined the caravan of the Purified
Progeny and he became their strongest defender and their most brilliant
companion. He sacrificed his life upon the Holy Imam and was martyred on
the way of his equitable aim.

** **

The Tragic News of Muslim’s Martyrdom
-------------------------------------

Abd Allah bin Sulaiman and al-Mundhir bin Mushamill**[3]** both from
Asad brought the tragic news of the martyrdom of Muslim and they have
reported thus:

When we had finished the pilgrimage, there was no concern more important
to us than to join al-Husain, peace be on him, on the road, so that we
might see what happened in his affair. We went along trotting our two
camels speedily until we joined him at Zarood. As we approached, there
we (saw) a man from Kufa who had changed his route when he had seen
al-Husain, peace be on him. Al-Husain, peace  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shaykh Mufid, *Al-Irshad*, 2/72-73, Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/42.
*Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/378-379. *Ad Durrun Nadheem*, Pg. 547-548  
 **[2]** Muhammad bin Jurair Tabari, *Dalail al-Imamah* 182, H. 97  
 **[3]** It is said that the man who brought the news to the Imam was
Ibne Yazid Tamimi, as mentioned in *As Sawaiq al-Mohreqa* 196. According
to *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/379 it was Bakr bin Motaqid

be on him, had stopped as if he wanted (to speak to) him, but (the man)
ignored him and went on. We went on towards the man. One of us said to
the other: “Come with us to ask this man if he has news of Kufa.”

We came up to him and greeted him. He returned our greeting.

“From which (tribe) do you come, fellow?” we asked.

“(I am) an Asadi,” he answered.

“We also are Asadis,” we said, “Who are you?”

“I am Bakr bin so and so,” he answered and we told him our lineage.

“Tell us of the people (you have left) behind you?” we asked.

“Yes,” he replied, “I only left Kufa after Muslim bin Aqil and Hani bin
Urwah had been killed. I saw them being dragged by their legs into the
market-place.”

We went on to join al-Husain, peace be on him, and we were traveling
close to him until he stopped at al-Thalabiyya in the evening. We caught
up with him (at Thalaba)**[1]** when he stopped and we greeted him. He
returned our greeting.

“May God have mercy on you,” we said, “we have news. If you wish, we
will tell it to you publicly or if you wish, secretly.”

He looked at us and at his followers.

“There is no veil for these men,” he answered.

“Did you see the rider whom you were near, yesterday evening?”

“Yes,” he answered, “I had wanted to question him.”

“We have got the news from him and spared you (the trouble of)
questioning him,” we said, “He was a man from our (tribe), of sound
judgment, honesty and intelligence. He told us that he had only left
Kufa after Muslim and Hani had been killed, and he had seen them being
dragged by their legs into the market-place.”**[2]**

“We belong to God and to Him we shall return; may God have mercy on them
both,” said al-Husain, and he repeated that several times.**[3]**

“We adjure you before God,” we exhorted him, “for your own life and for
your House that you do not go from this place, for you have no one to
support you in Kufa and no Shia. Indeed we fear that such men (will be
the very ones who) will be against you.”

“What is your opinion,” he asked, looking towards the sons of Aqil, “now
that Muslim has been killed?”

“By God,” they declared, “we will not go back until we have taken our
vengeance  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Thalabiyya is a station on way from Mecca to Kufa after Shaqooq
and before Khazimiya. It is at 2/3 distance. *Mojam al-Buldan* 2/78)  
 **[2]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 75  
 **[3]** *Ad-Darul Maslook* 1/111

or have tasted (the death) which he tasted.”

Al-Husain, peace be on him, came near us and said: “There is nothing
good (left) in life for these men.”**[1]**

Then the Holy Imam recited these couplets:

**“I shall go and death cannot degrade a man if he has true intention
and he fights Jihad like a Muslim.**

**Then if I die I shall not be regretful and if I remain alive I shall
not be condemned. For you O man, the only thing to regret is humiliation
and degradation.”[2]**

Imam (‘a) moved forward, his face aglow with exaltation while he had now
become certain that he was heading towards a victory that nothing shall
equal it. He went on till he had fulfilled the divine duty with
sincerity and devotion just as before him, his grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (s) had fulfilled it.”

News of Abdullah’s Martyrdom
----------------------------

When the Imam reached Zubala he received the dreadful news that his
messenger, Abdullah bin Yaqtar has been murdered. His Eminence had sent
him to meet Muslim bin Aqil. But he was apprehended by the policemen at
Quddisiya and sent under custody to Ibn Marjana. When he was taken to
that filthy man, Ibn Ziyad screamed at him, “Go atop the pulpit and
curse that liar son of liar and then come down so that I may take
decision regarding you…”

Ibn Marjana thought that he would do as directed and he was not aware of
the fact that he was a nobleman without a peer and that he shall exalt
the word of God in the world through this.

That great warrior ascended the pulpit and raised his voice of daring
and said: “O people! I am the messenger from Husain, son of Fatima to
you that you help him against Ibn Marjana, the filthy one, son of the
filthy one whom Allah has cursed.”**[3]** Then he began to curse and
denounce Ibn Ziyad; he related the evil deeds of Bani Umayyah and urged
the people to support the beloved grandson of Allah’s Apostle (s). Ibn
Ziyad was absolutely infuriated and ordered that Abdullah be thrown from
the palace roof just as Qais bin Mus-har Saidawi had been.

Ibn Ziyad’s mercenaries took Abdullah to the roof of the palace and
threw him down and his bones were smashed, but there still remained the
last breath of life when the lowly beast, Abdul Malik Lakhmi moved
towards him in order to cut off his head so that it may be presented to
his master, Ibn Ziyad and earn his proximity. When he was told that that
had been a shameful thing to do and he was blamed for it, he said: “I
wanted to relieve him (of his suffering).”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Irshad*, Pg. 74  
 **[2]** *Ad Durrun Nadheem*, Pg. 548-549  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/379

When the news of his martyrdom reached Imam (‘a) it shocked him a great
deal and he became hopeless of this world. At that time he summoned his
companions and all those who had joined him for obtaining booties – and
not for truth. When they were all present he addressed them: “So to say:
Our followers have withdrawn support from us. Those of you who prefer to
leave, may leave freely (without guilt) and my allegiance shall no more
be upon them.”

The people began to disperse from him to right and left until there were
only left with him those followers who had come with him from Medina,
and a small group of those who had joined him. Husain (‘a) had done that
because he realized that the Arabs who had followed him had only
followed him because they thought that he was going to a land where the
inhabitants’ obedience to him had already been established. And he did
not want them to accompany him without being fully aware of what they
were going to.**[1]** If the Imam had been in pursuit of kingdom and
power he would not have talked about his position so openly. His
Eminence told them that whoever accompanied him will not get any wealth
or position but he would be stepping into the fields of Jihad and by
gaining martyrdom he shall become eligible for salvation. If His
Eminence had been in quest of rulership, in those difficult hours when
he was in need of helpers and supporters, he would not have spoken of
such matters.

The Imam, time and again advised the people of his Ahle Bayt to leave
him and this was only to make them fully aware of his position and then
step into fighting and in action also they be the best of men and most
steadfast in the way of defending the truth to follow him, while their
souls are full of faith in Allah and sincerity for Jihad in His way.

Dream of Imam Husain (‘a)
-------------------------

During the noon, Imam (‘a) became drowsy, according to the narrator:

We set out at once with him and he became drowsy while he was on his
horse’s back. He woke up, saying: “We belong to God and to Him we will
return. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds.”

He did that twice or three times, then his son, Ali bin al-Husain
approached him and asked: “Why are you praising God and repeating the
verse of returning to Him?”

“My son,” he answered, “I nodded off and a horseman appeared to me,
riding a horse and he said: ‘Men are traveling and the fates travel
towards them.’ Then I  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/42. *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/379.
*Waseelatul Maal* Pg. 189. Abul Fida, *Tarikh* 1/190. Dhahabi, *Tarikh
Islam* 5/11. And in *Rauzatul Ayaan Akhbar Mashaheeruz Zamaan,* Pg. 67
it is mentioned that when the Imam permitted the people to leave him
they dispersed from him and except for 42 men from his Ahle Bayt none
remained.  
 It is mentioned in *Tarikh* Tabari 5/399: Those who accompanied the
Imam from Medina dispersed from him when he informed them of the killing
of Abdullah bin Yaqtar which in our view is a mistake of Tabari; because
while coming from Mecca the Imam did not pass by Medina but he implied
those who were with him from Medina to Mecca or those who joined him on
the way.

knew it was our own souls announcing our deaths to us.”**[1]**

“Father,” asked (the youth), “does God regard you as evil? Are we not in
the right?”

“Indeed (we are),” he answered, “by Him to Whom all His servants must
return.”

“Father,” said (the youth), “then we need have no concern, if we are
going to die righteously.”

“May God give you the best reward a son can get for (his behavior
towards) his father,” answered al-Husain, peace be on him.**[2]**

Encounter with Hurr
-------------------

He, peace be on him, went on from Batn al Aqaba until he stopped at
Sharaf (for the night). At dawn he ordered his boys to get water and
more (for the journey). Then he continued from there until midday. While
he was journeying, one of his followers exclaimed: “God is greater
(Allaahu Akbar)!”

“God is greater (Allaahu Akbar)!” responded al-Husain, peace be on him.
Then he asked: “Why did you say Allaahu Akbar?”

“I saw palm-trees,” answered the man.

“This is a place in which we never see a palm-tree,” a group of his
followers asserted.

“What do you think it is then?” asked al-Husain, peace be on him.

“We think it is the ears of horses,” they answered.

“By God, I think so too,” he declared. Then he said: “(So that) we can
face them in one direction (i.e. so that we are not surrounded), we
should put at our rear whatever place of refuge (we can find).”

“Yes,” he said to him, “there is Dhu Husam**[3]** over on your left. If
you reach it before them, it will be (in) just (the position) you want.”
So he veered left towards it and we went in that direction with him.
Even before we had had time to change direction the vanguard of the
cavalry appeared in front of us and we could see them clearly. We left
the road and when they saw that we had moved off the road, they (also)
moved off the road towards us. Their spears looked like palm branches
stripped of their leaves and their standards were like birds’ wings.
Al-Husain ordered his tents (to be put up) and they were erected. The
people came up; (there were) about one thousand horsemen under the
command of al-Hurr b. Yazid al-Tamimi. (It was) during the heat of
midday (that) he and his cavalry stood (thus) facing al-Husain, peace be
on him. Al-Husain, peace be on him, and his followers were all wearing
their turbans and their swords (ready to fight).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/13  
 **[2]** *Maqatilut Talibeen,* Pg. 112. *Ad-Darul Maslook* 1/109. *Al
Futuh* 5/123  
 **[3]** Dhu Husam is a mountain in that area.

“Provide people with water and let them quench their thirst and give
their horses water to drink little by little,” al-Husain ordered his
boys. They did that and they began filling their bowls and cups and took
them to the horses. When a horse had drunk three or four or five
draughts, the water was taken away and given to another horse-until they
had all been watered.**[1]**

The Imam was fully prepared in his journey because he was able to
suffice in giving water to 1000 riders and their beasts and this was in
addition to other rations and provisions they were carrying.

Anyway, the Imam observed generosity with Hurr’s battalion that had
arrived to fight the Holy Imam and he saved them from death of thirst.
Historians say: Ali bin Taan Muharibi was a member of that battalion who
has reported about the kindness and lofty morals of the Imam and his
action of helping them as follows:

I was with al-Hurr on that day, I was among the last of his followers to
arrive. When al-Husain, peace be on him, saw how thirsty both I and my
horse were, he said: “Make your beast (rawiya) kneel.” I thought rawiya
meant water-skin so he said: “Cousin, make your camel (jamal) kneel.” I
did so. Then he said: “Drink.” I did so, but when I drank, water flowed
from my water-skin.

“Bend your water-skin,” said al-Husain. I did not know how to do that.
He came up (to me) and bent it (into the proper position for drinking).
Then I drank and gave my horse to drink.

This exalted nature and greatness of soul did not move those fighters
and they were not a bit impressed by these lofty morals. But Hurr, who
was having a sensitive conscience, was highly touched by this behavior
which was instrumental in making him join the Imam and being martyred in
his service finally.

Imam’s sermon
-------------

Imam (‘a) welcomed the units of that battalion and delivered to them a
sermon in which he clarified his position that he had not come to fight.
Rather messengers and letters had been sent to him that urged him join
their senders and the Imam has responded positively to these requests.
After praise and glorification of the Almighty, His Eminence said:

People, I did not come to you until your letters came to me, and they
were brought by your messengers (saying), ‘Come to us for we have no
Imam. Through you may God unite us under guidance and truth.’ Since this
was your view, I have come to you. Therefore give me what you guaranteed
in your covenants and (sworn) testimonies. If you will not and (if you)
are (now) averse to my coming, I will leave you (and go back) to the
place from which I came.

The audience was unable to reply anything because many of them had
written to the Imam inviting him to Kufa, and they had pledged
allegiance to the Imam through his emissary, Muslim bin Aqil…the time of
prayer arrived. His Eminence  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/400-401, Maqrizi, *Khatat* 2/286

directed his Muezzin, Hajjaj bin Masruq to recite Azan and Iqamah for
the Zuhr (noon) prayer. After this had been done the Imam asked Hurr,
“Do you want to lead your followers in prayer?”

“No,” he replied, “but you pray and we will pray (following the lead of)
your prayer.”

Al-Husain, peace be on him, prayed before them. Then he returned (to his
tent) and his followers gathered around him. Al-Hurr went back to the
place where he had positioned (his men) and entered a tent which had
been put up for him. A group of his followers gathered around him while
the rest returned to their ranks, which they had been in and which now
they went back to. Each of them held the reins of his mount and sat in
the shade (of its body).

At the time for the afternoon (Asr) prayer, al-Husain, peace be on him,
ordered his followers to prepare for departure. Then he ordered the call
to be made, and the call for the Asr prayer was made, and the Iqamah.
Al-Husain, peace be on him, came forward, stood and prayed.

Imam’s Discourse
----------------

After the Imam concluded the Asr prayer he stood up with determination
among the soldiers of that battalion and a delivered a proper sermon.
After praise and glorification of the Almighty, he said:

“People, if you fear God and recognize the rights of those who have
rights, God will be more satisfied with you. We are the House of
Muhammad and as such are more entitled to the authority (Wilayah) of
this affair (i.e. the rule of the community) over you than these
pretenders who claim what does not belong to them. They have brought
tyranny and aggression among you. If you refuse (us) because you dislike
(us) or do not know our rights, and your view has now changed from what
came to us in your letters and what your messengers brought, then I will
leave you.”

By this sermon, the Imam called them towards the obedience of God and
following of the callers to truth, the Imams of guidance, Ahle Bayt
(‘a), because they were more worthy of it than Bani Umayyah who had
spread injustice and oppression among them. In the same way he proposed
to them that if they wanted to change their decision and break their
allegiance the Imam was prepared to go back.

Hurr, who was completely ignorant of the political situation in Kufa as
he was away at that time said:

“By God,” declared al-Hurr, “I know nothing of these letters and
messengers which you mention.”

“Uqbah bin Siman,” al-Husain, peace be on him, called to one of his
followers, “bring out the two saddle-bags in which the letters to me are
kept.”

He brought out two saddle-bags which were full of documents, and they
were put before him.

“We are not among those who wrote these letters to you,” said al- Hurr.

Argument between His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and Hurr
---------------------------------------------------

A heated argument occurred between the Imam and Hurr because Hurr said
to the Imam:

“We have been ordered that when we meet you we should not leave you
until we have brought you to Kufa to Ubaidullah.”

“Death will come to you before that (happens),” al-Husain, peace be on
him, told him.

The chief of the nobles had refused to give allegiance to Yazid, then
how could he pay the oath to Ibn Marjana, the dirty son of the dirty
father? How could he become his prisoner? In that case it would be
better for him to be killed at the hands of Hurr…

He ordered his followers, “Get up and get mounted.”

They got mounted and (then) waited until their women had been mounted.

“Depart,” he ordered his followers.

When they set out to leave, the men (with al-Hurr) got in between them
and the direction they were going in.

“May God deprive your mother of you,” said al-Husain, peace be on him,
to al-Hurr, “What do you want?”

“If any of the Arabs other than you were to say that to me,” retorted
al-Hurr, “even though he were in the same situation as you, I would not
leave him without mentioning his mother being deprived (of him), whoever
he might be. But by God there is no way for me to mention your mother
except by (saying) the best things possible.”

“What do you want?” al-Husain, peace be on him, demanded.

“I want to go with you to the governor, Ubaidullah,” he replied.

“Then by God I will not follow you.”

“Then by God I will not let you (go anywhere else).”

These statements were repeated three times, and when their conversation
was getting more (heated) al-Hurr said: “I have not been ordered to
fight you. I have only been ordered not to leave you until I come with
you to Kufa. If you refuse (to do that), then take any road which will
not bring you into Kufa nor take you back to Medina, and let that be a
compromise between us while I write to the governor, Ubaidullah. Perhaps
God will cause something to happen which will relieve me from having to
do anything against you. Therefore take this (road) here and bear to the
left of the road (to) al Udhayb and al-Quddisiya.”

Al-Husain, peace be on him, departed and al-Hurr with his followers
(also) set out traveling close by him.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Kamil* 4/46-48. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/401-403

A Fabricated report
-------------------

Among the fabricated reports that lack a proper source is what Bustani
has narrated. The text of his report is as follows: “When Husain
approached Kufa he came across Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi who had been
dispatched by Ibn Ziyad with 1000 horsemen. He said, “Ubaidullah has
sent me to keep watch over your activities. And I have been told that if
I find you I must not let you out of my sight or take you to him. I do
not like to be involved in such a matter regarding you, so you take up
another route and go wherever you like. I will tell Ibn Ziyad that your
route was different from mine and I adjure you by the name of Allah for
your sake and the sake of those who accompany you.”

Husain (‘a) altered his route and along with his entourage returned to
Hijaz. He set out that night. When it was morning he met Hurr and Husain
asked him, “What has brought you here?” He replied, “Someone complained
about me to Ibn Ziyad that after apprehending you I allowed you to go
free. He wrote to me that I must find you and not let you go out of
sight till you come with the soldiers…”**[1]**

The above narration is fabricated because the encounter of the Imam with
Hurr did not take place near Kufa. It was en route at the place named
“Sharaaf.” In addition to this Hurr did not suggest to the Imam that he
could go wherever he liked. Rather he had received strict orders from
Ibn Ziyad to apprehend the Imam and as we have said, and take him to
Kufa. This matter is agreed upon by all historians and writers of
accounts of Imam’s martyrdom.

Error of Ibn Anba
-----------------

Among the concocted things is the account of Ibn Anba Nisaba who has
stated as follows: “Hurr wanted to take the Imam to Kufa forcibly but
the Imam did not agree. He changed his route to go to Yazid bin Muawiyah
in Shaam. And when he reached Kerbala they stopped him and three
thousand mercenaries under the command of Umar Ibn Saad tried to take
the Imam to Kufa, so that he may obey Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad. But the Imam
refused to do so. He again set out towards Yazid and they obstructed his
way, and then began to fight with him.”**[2]**

None of the historians has acknowledged the veracity of this report and
they all are unanimous that the Imam stuck to his decision to refuse
allegiance of Yazid. And if it had been to the contrary he would not
have taken up arms against Yazid.

Discourse of the Holy Imam (‘a)
-------------------------------

When the Imam’s caravan reached Baiza, His Eminence delivered a
discourse to Hurr and his men describing his views about his uprising
against Yazid. He invited those people to help and support him. After
praise and glorification of God he said:

“O people! The Prophet has said, that when you see an oppressive ruler
legitimizing that which has been prohibited by Allah and breaking His
covenant,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bustani, *Dairatul Ma’rif* 7/48  
 **[2]** *Umdatut Talib*, Pg. 192

and opposing the customs of the Prophet, and he behaves unjustly and
oppressively with Allah’s servants, then if a person does not oppose him
through his word or deed, it is incumbent upon Allah to place that
person on the status of that oppressor. Beware that these statesmen (of
Bani Umayyah) have adhered to the commands of Satan and disobeyed the
orders of Allah, and have made corruption the custom of the day. They
have gathered the rights at one place and have reserved the treasury of
Muslims (Baitul Mal) for themselves, and permitted the prohibitions of
Allah and forbade that which is allowed by Him. I am more worthy among
all the men to stop and oppose them. You sent your letters to me, and
your messengers too, saying that you have taken the oath of fealty to me
and promised that you would not hand me over to my enemies nor forsake
me. Then if you (still) persist on your allegiance, then you are on the
right. I am Husain, the son of Ali and Fatima the daughter of the
Prophet of Allah (s). My life is associated with you and my family with
yours, and you should be sympathetic towards me. And if you do not do so
and have committed breach of trust, while having taken off the pledge of
allegiance from your necks, then I swear by my life, that this is
nothing new from you. You have done the same with my father, brother and
cousin Muslim (bin Aqil); the one who falls prey to your deception turns
helpless. You have let go your share from your hands and have toppled up
your fortunes. The one who committed breach of trust shall himself face
deceit, and very soon Allah will make me independent of you. Peace be
upon you and Allah’s Mercy and Abundance.”

This brilliant discourse had numerous important points. Some of them are
as follows:

**First:** His Eminence had taken up arms against Yazid in order to
fulfill the religious duty he had been entrusted with. Because Islam did
not accept a tyrant ruler and it has made it incumbent to confront him
and whosoever does not undertake Jihad is a partner in his oppressive
and unjust actions.

**Second:** His Eminence has condemned the Umayyads and severely
criticized their policies which were based on obedience of Satan and
disobedience of the Beneficent God, committing transgression and
non-fulfillment of divine commands, usurping public wealth for
themselves, considering lawful as unlawful and unlawful as lawful.

**Thirdly:** His Eminence, more than others, was more eligible to act in
order to change the present situation which was a mortal danger for
Islam because His Eminence (‘a) was the one having the greatest
responsibility in accepting this important duty.

**Fourthly:** His Eminence (‘a) proposed to them that were he to obtain
control he would consider himself as one of them and consider their
family members as his own family members without there being any
difference in their status.

**Fifthly:** If they broke their allegiance and disregarded the pledges
they had given, it was nothing surprising, because previously they had
broken the pledges they

offered to his father, brother and cousin and by this they lost an
important benefit and deprived themselves from success.

By this discourse the Imam clarified the matters and spread rays of
light for them. He invited them to reform themselves to stay in its
shade so that they may remain in it in peace. When Hurr heard the
discourse of His Eminence he glanced at him and said:

“I remind you (before) God to (think of) your life; for I testify that
you will be killed if you fight.”

“Do you think that you can frighten me with death?” said al- Husain,
peace be on him, “Could a worse disaster happen to you than killing me?
I can only speak (to you) as the brother of al-Aws said to his cousin
when he wanted to help the Apostle of God, may God bless him and grant
him and his family peace. His cousin feared for him and said: ‘Where are
you going, for you will be killed?’ but he replied:

**“I will depart for there is no shame in death for a young man,
whenever he intends (to do what is) right and he strives like a
Muslim,**

**(Who) has soothed righteous men through (the sacrifice of) his life,
who has scattered the cursed and opposed the criminal.**

**If I live, I will not regret (what I have done) and if I die, I will
not suffer. Let it be enough for you to live in humiliation and be
reviled.”[1]**

When Hurr heard that he drew away from him and he realized that the Imam
was determined to lay down his life and sacrifice anything for the sake
of his aim of universal reform.

Some people of Kufa join Imam (‘a)
----------------------------------

When the Imam arrived at Udhayb Hijanaat, four people joined the Imam’s
party. They were astride their camels and had a horse belonging to Nafe
bin Hilal. Except for them none from the people of Kufa came forward to
welcome His Eminence, Husain (‘a); they were as follows:

1. Nafe bin Hilal Muradi

2. Amr bin Khalid Saidawi

3. Saad, slave of Amr bin Khalid

4. Majma bin Abdullah Abadi, from Madhij

Hurr tried to stop them from joining His Eminence, Husain but the Imam
scolded him, “In that case I shall defend them just as I would defend
myself. They are my helpers and supporters. You promised me that you
will not take any action against me before you receive Ibn Ziyad’s
letter.”

Hurr left them alone and they joined the Holy Imam. His Eminence
accorded them  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/49, and *Tabari* 5/403-404

a warm welcome and asked them about the people of Kufa. They said, “As
for the nobles, their bribes have become inflated and their coffers are
filled up so that their loyalties may be obtained and their support may
be acquired. They have united in their enmity towards you. They have not
written to you except that they make profit from you; as for other
people, their hearts are with you but their swords shall be drawn
against you.”**[1]**

These sentences are having many important points as follows:

1. The regime has purchased the consciences of nobles and upper class
people of Kufa through cash bribes and lured them with posts and power.
They in turn have become united to confront the Imam. The Umayyads were
experts in such type of deception and they lured the noble men of Kufa
towards themselves in every way possible. As for the commoners, they
beat them with lashes on their backs and burnt them in the fire of their
oppression.

2. The nobles of Kufa had written to His Eminence, Husain (‘a) urging
him to join them in Kufa not because they regarded his aim to be just
and they considered the beliefs of Umayyads wrong. They invited Imam
Husain (‘a) so that they may make profits through him and get into good
books of Bani Umayyads and obtain wealth from them. They had threatened
the Bani Umayyads that: If you don’t share your wealth with us, we shall
join the party of Husain (‘a). Their letters to Imam (‘a) were a means
to obtain monetary wealth.

3. The commoners were such that they were inwardly in support of His
Eminence, Husain (‘a) but practically following their leaders without
there being any kind of determination or intention of their own to
follow the dictates of their conscience. They served as mercenaries of
the regime and as their rammers.

These were some important points present in the saying of those people
and it shows their deep insight about the problems of their society.

With Tirmah
-----------

Tirmah joined the Imam en route and traveled with for a period. Imam
(‘a) glanced at his companions and asked, “Is there anyone among you who
is knowledgeable about the route?”

Tirmah bin Adi Tai turned to His Eminence and said, “I know the way.”

“Lead us.”

Tirmah began to move ahead of the caravan of the Purified Progeny while
he was in deep grief. In a sorrowful voice he began recite the song of
the camel riders (Haddi):**[2]**

**“O, my she-camel! Do not be distressed about my browbeating and convey
me to my destination before dawn break.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/381-382  
 **[2]** ‘Haddi’ is a song that Arab camel drivers sing to spur their
mounts. (Tr.)

**Along with the best youths and passengers from the family of the
Prophet, worthy of pride.**

**Bright faced leaders, faces like flowers hit by darkened spears.**

**They slash with wielding swords to reach those who are having the best
family and roots.**

**Having honorable ancestors and wide chests as the Almighty has brought
them for the best assignment.**

**May the Almighty keep them safe forever as He is the One Who gives
both profit and harm.**

**Bestow to my master, Husain, victory over the oppressors of the
remaining infidels.**

**On those two accursed ones from the progeny of Abu Sufyan; Yazid who
is always drunk.**

**And busy in obscene and wanton acts and Ibn Ziyad, that impure son of
a dirty father.”[1]**

The camels began to move faster under the influence of this sorrowful
dirge while the eyes of the companions of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and
his Ahle Bayt were filled with tears. They said Amen to the supplication
of Tirmah for help and support of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).

Dr. Yusuf Khalif has explained the above poetic piece in the following
way: “The Rajaz is perhaps the first Kufic piece of poetry where it
openly speaks about Husain (‘a). It shows the simplicity of the poet’s
belief and reliance. And that which is more than that, to speak well of
it and the welcome for that dear guest who has arrived at their place
and they have come out to welcome them. The reciter of Rajaz urges his
camels to move forward fast so that they may reach that dear guest. And
that he may complete their duty of sincere hosting and fulfill their
praises for them. And that seriousness and merits that people know about
him, they may be related to these qualities. Because he, near him has
true awe and respect. He is honorable, noble and generous…as these
guests are not ordinary men. He is the grandson of the Messenger of
Allah (s) and the one who is the channel of receiving divine bounties;
thus it is the best action. The poem concludes with extolling of their
praise and also invocates the Almighty in a natural manner as the poet
is having devotion and sincerity towards them. Finally he prays that God
Almighty may take care of them forever.”**[2]**

At that time Tirmah remarked to the Holy Imam, “I see that no one is
with you. If except for those who are with you no one else fights you
there would still be problems for you. Then how was it possible that one
day before I left Kufa, I saw that the streets of Kufa were full of
people. I asked about them. I was told that they  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/382-383. *Al Futuh* 5/140-141  
 **[2]** *Hayatush Sha’ar fil Kufa*, Pg. 373

were going to be sent for Husain. I adjure you by the name of God, do
not at all move towards them.”**[1]**

But where could the Imam return? And where could be go? While all the
lands were under the control of Umayyads. His Eminence has no choice but
to continue his journey to Iraq. Tirmah suggested to His Eminence to go
with him to Koh Bani Tai and assured the Holy Imam that 20000 persons
from the Tai tribe would fight for him. But the Imam refused the offer
which could not be guaranteed. Tirmah sought the permission of the Holy
to go to his family, get provisions and return to help His Eminence.
Imam (‘a) permitted him and he headed to his family, stayed there for
some days and was returning when at Adheeb Hajaanat he received the news
of the martyrdom of Imam. He began to cry in remorse as he had lost the
opportunity to achieve martyrdom in the company of the beloved grandson
of Allah’s Messenger (s)**[2]**

With Ubaidullah bin Hurr
------------------------

The Imam’s caravan now passed by Bani Maqatil.**[3]** Imam (‘a) arrived
over there. Near the place they had halted was a tent outside which, in
the front, spears had been fixed in the ground indicating the valor and
courage of the owner of the tent. Horses could also be seen before it.
Imam (‘a) inquired who the owner of the tent was. He was told that it
belonged to Ubaidullah bin Hurr. His Eminence sent Hajjaj bin Masruq
Jofi to meet him. He went out at once and Ubaidullah bin Hurr told him,
“What has brought you here?”

“The Almighty Allah has sent you an honor as a gift?”

“What is that?”

“This is Husain Ibn Ali (‘a) who has summoned you to help him. Thus if
you fight for him you will receive reward and if you die you shall
achieve martyrdom.”

“I did not leave Kufa but for the fear that Husain (‘a) would arrive
while I were staying there and do not help him. Because, there he
neither has Shias nor helpers as all of them have fallen to materialism
except those whom the Almighty Allah has guarded.”

Hajjaj returned and conveyed the message to Imam (‘a). It was upon him
to complete the argument on Ubaidullah and make him aware of the
position he was in. So the Imam, accompanied by some persons from Ahle
Bayt (‘a) went over to him personally.

Ubaidullah rose up to welcome Imam Husain (‘a) in the most respectful
way while he was absolutely awed by the presence of the Holy Imam. He
used to later remark about his encounter in the following way:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/373  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/206-207  
 **[3]** Khwarizmi in his *Maqtal* Vol. 1, Pgs. 228-229 says: The
encounter of the Imam with Ubaidullah bin Hurr was between Thalaba and
Zarood.

“I had not seen anyone more elegant and attractive than Husain and
indeed I have not pitied anyone more than him when I saw him going
surrounded by his young children. I looked at his beard and found it as
black as the crow’s wing, I asked him, ‘Is it naturally black or you
have dyed it?’ He replied, ‘O son of Hurr, Old age has come upon me all
of a sudden.’ Then I understood that he had dyed it.”**[1]**

Imam (‘a) discussed with him the present circumstances and political
matters. After that he requested him to enlist his support, “O son of
Hurr, your townspeople wrote to me that they were ready to help me and
they invited me to join them, so I have come. But I find that the view
they claimed to hold is not there anymore. Because they have cooperated
in the murder of my cousin, Muslim and his followers and they have
unified in obedience to Ibn Marjana, Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad… O son of
Hurr, know that the Almighty Allah shall punish you for the sinful acts
you have committed in the past. I call you towards repentance that would
wash your sins…I call you to provide assistance to us, Ahle
Bayt.”**[2]**

Ibn Hurr began to offer excuses and justifications and deprived himself
from success, salvation and helping the grandson of the Prophet, saying,
“By Allah, I know that whosoever accompanies you shall be fortunate in
the Hereafter. But what help can I render you when I see that you don’t
have any supporter in Kufa? I adjure in the name of God, please do not
force me in this matter because my heart does not allow me to die.
However, you may take this horse of mine, named Mulhaqa.**[3]** By Allah
no one has rode it but achieved whatever he wanted. By Allah I never
mounted it for something but that I obtained it. Till now whenever I
have remained mounted and if someone wanted to catch me, I always used
to outrace him.”**[4]**

What was the value of that horse in the Imam’s eyes? Therefore the Imam
told him, “I did not come here to ask you for your horse and sword. I
came to ask for your help and assistance. Thus if you are miserly over
your life for me, I have no need of what you own. I am not the one to
take the help of misguided persons.**[5]** And I advise you that if you
can avoid hearing my call for help and my tragedy, avoid it, as by
Allah, Allah shall cast into Hellfire anyone who hears my call for help
and does not respond positively.”**[6]**

Ibn Hurr was ashamed and he said in a low voice: “It would never happen
if Allah wills.**[7]** Although it never happens that after so many sins
a person should get the divine opportunity to become Imam’s helper and
get martyred in his company.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/384. *Khazaanatul Adab*, 2/158  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/129-131  
 **[3]** And it is mentioned in a report that “This horse of mine A’naan
is saddled and ready”.  
 **[4]** *Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 251. *Ad Durrun Nadheem*, Pg. 549  
 **[5]** *Al Futuh* 5/132  
 **[6]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 189-190  
 **[7]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/51

Thus finally, Ibn Hurr was absolutely sorry and regretful of having
suffered such a loss due to his refusal to help the son of the Messenger
of Allah (s). He was very much disturbed and he has described his
condition in his couplets that we have quoted in our discussion about
those who regretted not helping Imam Husain (‘a).

With Amr bin Qais
-----------------

Imam (‘a) met Amr bin Qais at Qasr Bani Maqatil who was accompanied by
his cousin. They saluted the Imam and asked him, “O Aba Abdillah, have
you dyed your hair?” His Eminence replied, “It is dyed, we Bani Hashim
encounter graying of hair very soon.”

Then the Imam glanced at them and asked, “Are you willing to help me?”

“No, Sir! We are having large families and we are carrying people’s
goods. We don’t know what would happen and we would not like to lose the
trusts we hold.”

The Imam advised them and said, “Go away from here so that you don’t
hear my call and see our multitude. Because for anyone who hears my cry
for help and sees our multitudes but does not responds or helps us, it
is the right upon Allah to throw him headlong into the fire (of
Hell).”**[1]**

The Holy Imam (‘a) set out from the fort of Bani Maqatil and his caravan
traveled in the burning sands. And along with it they were traveling in
hardships and difficulties and bearing the cutting winds that caused
them untold discomfort.** **

Ibn Ziyad’s Letter to Hurr
--------------------------

Imam’s caravan continued its journey in the desert, sometimes turning to
the right and sometimes to the left in such a way that the mercenaries
of Hurr took them away from the wilderness towards Kufa and the caravan
resisted them.**[2]** Suddenly a horse rider appeared racing towards
them passing upon the sand. They waited for him and noticed that he was
the messenger of Ibn Ziyad sent to Hurr.

That filthy man saluted Hurr but did not have the decency to greet His
Eminence, Husain (‘a). He gave to Hurr, Ibn Ziyad’s letter in which it
was mentioned: “So to say: When this letter reaches you and my messenger
comes to you, make Husain come to a halt. But only let him stop in an
open place without vegetation. I have ordered my messenger to stay with
you and not to leave you until he brings me (news of) your carrying out
my instructions. Greetings.”**[3]**

Ibn Marjana in his order to Hurr cancelled his previous mission of
apprehending the Imam and getting him to Kufa under security. Perhaps he
feared that the circumstances might change and the events may return to
be against him again. Therefore he decided to besiege the Imam in the
wilderness away from habitations so that people may not come out for his
help and thus he may be eliminated easily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kishi, *Rijal* Pg. 113, No. 181  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/51  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/385. Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 4/96

Hurr read out the letter to Imam Husain and the Imam wanted to move on
to a village or a place where water is available. However Hurr stopped
him and said, “I cannot allow you to do that because this man has been
sent to keep an eye on me. If I do anything against the order it would
be reported to Ibn Ziyad.”

“Son of the Apostle of God,” said Zuhair bin al-Qain, “I can only think
that after what you have seen, the situation will only get worse.
Fighting these people now will be easier for us than fighting those who
will come against us after them. For by my life, after them will come
against us such (a number) as we will not have the power (to fight)
against.”

“I will not begin to fight against them,” answered Husain.

Zuhair continued, “Let us go up to these villages because it is a secure
place and it is situated on the banks of Euphrates. Thus if they prevent
us we shall fight with them as our fighting them shall be easier than
against those who shall come after them.”

Imam asked about the place’s name. He was told that it was called Aqar.
Imam considered it inauspicious and moved on from there. And he said, “O
Allah, please grant me Your refuge from Aqar.”**[1]**

Hurr insisted upon the Imam to halt at that place and not to move from
there. Imam had no choice but to halt there. So he looked at the place,
then turned to his companions and asked. “What place is this?”

“Kerbala”

“The Imam’s eyes were filled with tears and he said, “O Allah, I seek
Your refuge from pain and sorrow (Karb and Bala).”**[2]**

At that time he began to address his companions as he was now sure of
facing a mortal danger because he said, “This is the place of sorrow and
calamities. Here our mounts shall kneel down. This is the place where
our litters shall arrive and the place where our blood shall be shed...”

The Imam recalled the past calamities and remembered especially the day
when his father, Amirul Momineen, on his way to Siffeen had halted there
and remarked, “This is the place where their litters shall arrive and
here it is that their blood shall  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/52. *Mojam al-Buldan* 4/445  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/149. In *Tadkiratul Khawaas* Pg. 250 it is stated:
When Husain (a.s.) was told that the place was Kerbala he picked up a
handful of sand and smelt it. Then he said: “By Allah it is the same
land about which Jibraeel informed the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
that I would be killed upon it.”  
 In *Hayatul Haiwan* of Damiri 1/87 it is mentioned: His Eminence asked
the name of that place; he was told that it was called Kerbala. Then he
said: “It is having ‘Karb’ (sorrow) and ‘Bala’ (calamity). My father
passed this place on way to Siffeen and I was with him. He stood at this
place and asked about it and its name was told to him. He said: Here
they shall put down their loads, here their blood will be shed. They
asked him about it. He replied: A group of Aale Muhammad will arrive at
this place. Then His Eminence, Husain ordered that they unload their
belongings there.  
 In *Mukhtasar Safwatul Safwa,* Pg. 262 it is mentioned in the same way.

be shed...” When the people asked His Eminence about this he replied,
“Some members of the Progeny of Muhammad shall arrive here...”

The world had become worthless in the view of the Holy Imam. He had lost
all hopes of worldly life and had become certain that his limbs shall be
strewn on the sands of this land. Yet he continued to observe patience
and surrendered himself willingly to whatever the Almighty had decreed
for him.

With strength and determination, His Eminence, along with his companions
and Ahle Bayt, began to fix the tents for the ladies of the house of
prophethood in such a way that the tents of the companions and the tents
of Ahle Bayt were surrounding them from the right and the left.

At that time the youths of Bani Hashim stepped forward to help the
ladies alight from their mounts. They escorted them to their tents while
those respected ladies were in a state of shock and anxiety as they
began to feel that something terrible was to befall them in that place.

Location of Tents
-----------------

The tents of Ahle Bayt (‘a) were fixed on the pure land, that is, to
this day, its signs are still present there.**[1]** Sayyid Habtuddin
Shahristani says, “Imam camped at a place far away from water where
continuous battalions of amateur soldiers had surrounded them from all
sides. They began from north-east to Bab-e-Sidra in north. In the same
way they stretched from Bab-e-Zainabi towards the west and then to the
direction of Qibla from the south. They resembled the shape of a
semicircle that had besieged the beloved grandson of the Prophet
(s).**[2]**

My friend, Ustad Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Kaliddar does not accept that the
well-known site of Imam’s camp was that same place where Imam had
halted. Rather the camp was further away near to the Husaini Hospital.
And this matter also supports the military maneuvers and events of that
time. Because it is necessary that the two parties should be separated
by a distance of at least two miles as it is required for military
actions. For example the space required for running of horses and other
distances were also required. In spite of there being tents, the camp
must be located far away from where arrows are fired. He has in the same
way proved his theory with the help of some historical
testimonies.**[3]**

Most probably the Imam’s camp was located at the present site or a
little distance from it, because the large number of Umayyad armies that
had come to confront the Imam made it seem a single cantonment that
there could not have been much distance between them. There was no
obvious demarcation between them, that there could be a distance of two
miles between them.

The Umayyad army surrounded the Imam’s entourage. So much so that when
Ibn Saad shot the first arrow and announced the commencement of battle
and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Baghiyatun Nubla fee Tarikh Kerbala* 2/6 written by Sayyid
Abdul Husain in the library of the Defense Secretary, Sayyid Adil
Kaliddar  
 **[2]** *Nahzatul Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 90  
 **[3]** *Madinatul Husain* 2/24

following his cue, his archers shot arrows, there was none in the party
of the Imam that was not hurt by an arrow. Some arrows also hit the
tents of ladies. Hence if there had been a great distance the ladies of
Ahle Bayt would not have become targets of arrows.

That which proves this matter is that when Imam Husain (‘a) delivered a
discourse for the army of Umayyads, the ladies present in the Imam’s
camp were able to hear it and they began to lament because of it. If
there had been considerable distance they would not have been able to
hear the Imam’s discourse. There are other signs also that go on to
prove that the Imam’s camp was situated at the place where it is
generally believed to be.
