In Kerbala
==========

The caravan of the Purified Progeny halted and camped at Kerbala on
Thursday, 2<sup>nd</sup> of Mohurrum 61 A.H.,**[1]** while a condition
of distress and anxiety reigned upon them as they were now sure that a
terrible disaster was to befall them. Imam knew the hardships of his
mission and the terrible disasters that were to befall him had become
clear to him.

Historians say: His Eminence gathered his Ahle Bayt and companions. Then
he glanced at them with kindness and compassion knowing that very soon
their bodies shall be cut up into pieces. He began to weep profusely and
raised up his hands to pray to the Lord. He spoke in a confidential
manner and complained about the great calamities that had surrounded
him, and he said:

“O my Lord, we are the Progeny of Your Messenger, Muhammad (s) whom the
Bani Umayyah forced out of the sanctuary of our grandfather. They
banished us, persecuted and oppressed us. O Allah, take up our rights
for us and make us victorious over the unjust people.”

Then he glanced at those stalwarts and said, “People are the slaves of
the world and religion is like leftover food that clings to their tongue
that as long as their life passes in comfort they follow it. But when
they fall into hard times, very few remain religious.”**[2]**

What a brilliant statement it is, that describes the reality of the
people in all the stages of history. Because they are slaves of material
world in all times and in all the places but no kind of religious view
was found in the depths of their consciences.

And whenever a storm of calamities falls on them they become disgusted
of religion and they desert it...

Yes, religion is present in the very nature only for Imam Husain, the
selected ones of Ahle Bayt and the companions of His Eminence that their
sentiments were fused with it and their emotions were merged with it.
Therefore they rushed forward to the fields of death so that their
position may be exalted and that they may impart lessons in astonishing
loyalty with regard to religion.

After praise and glorification of the Almighty the Imam addressed his
companions, “So to say: No doubt you are aware of the gravity of the
situation which you are witnessing yourselves here and now. Life has
certainly changed disguises and its good has gone forever. This has
continued till the remaining good in it amounts to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/385. The new moon of Muharram that year
was on Wednesday. This is mentioned in *Al Ifada min Tarikhul Aimmatus
Saadah*  
 **[2]** Abu Hilal Hasan bin Abdullah Askari in his book, *As Sana’teen*
has quoted the statement of the Imam in this way: “People have become
slaves of the world and religion is a meaningless thing on their
tongues, till their life passes in comfort they follow it and when
hardships befall them, very few remain religious.

the thin sediment at the bottom of a drinking vessel. Life is a mean
food, like a pasture covered with bad grass. Do you not see that the
truth is not followed and falsehood not discouraged? The faithful must
certainly desire to meet his Lord righteously. I do not deem death other
than martyrdom and life among the unjust other than degradation.”**[1]**

In these sentences the Imam has again spoken of the hardships and
difficulties that fell upon His Eminence and he informed them that as
much hardships increase His Eminence shall not hesitate in his
determination and resolve for the establishment of truth for which he
had stepped forward.

Imam (‘a) did not sermonize his companions to arouse their emotions or
to attract their support. Because what could they have done for him
while the armies had filled the desert and surrounded His Eminence. He
spoke thus in order to make them aware of their responsibilities of
establishing truth and to make them determined for an everlasting
success and make them willing partners in this mission. While His
Eminence had made the desire of death a part of his life, that nothing
else could equal it.

When His Eminence concluded his discourse all his companions arose and
expressed astonishing examples of loyalty and sacrifice for the sake of
justice and truth...

The first one to speak up from his companions was Zuhair Ibn Qain. He
was that valiant fighter who had no equal in the world. He said, “O son
of Allah’s Messenger, we heard your discourse. If the world had remained
for us and we had become immortals in it we would have given preference
to fight for you rather than stay in it.”

These statements show the nobility of man in his march on the path of
righteousness. Zuhair’s words imparted a great joy and satisfaction to
the companions of the Holy Imam and he motivated them to loyalty and
sacrifice.

Now another valiant companion of the Imam, Burair stood up, who had
dedicated his life to the path of God. He addressed the Imam as follows,
“O son of Allah’s Messenger, the Almighty Allah has bestowed a favor
upon us through you that we should fight in your service and in your way
our body is cut up into pieces. And in that case, on the Day of Judgment
your grandfather should intercede for us.”

Burair was certain that his companionship to the Imam was a divine favor
for him so that he may obtain the intercession of the Messenger of Allah
(s).

After that Nafe also in the same way addressed his fortunate brothers.
He said, “You know that your grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s) was
not able to imbue their hearts with his love nor were they able to
become attached to what he (the Prophet) liked. Some of them were
hypocrites who used to promise help to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tibrani, *Mojam* 3/122, *Biography of Imam Husain,* Pg. 214.
Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/217-218. Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/112.
*Hilyatul Awliya* 2/39

him but secretly they betrayed his trust. In front of the Prophet they
were sweeter than honey but on his back they were more bitter than
Hanzal.**[1]** Till the time the Almighty Allah took him to Himself.

Your father’s circumstances were also somewhat like this. That some
people helped him and on his side fought the Nakiseen, Qasiteen and
Mariqeen. Till finally he met his end and joined the mercy of the
Lord...

You also are in that condition with us. Anyone who breaks his pledge and
leaves off allegiance has caused harm to himself and the Almighty Allah
is needles of it. Thus lead us with determination and steadfastness, to
the east or to the west. By Allah, we shall not step back from the
destiny written by God for us. Nor are we frightened of meeting Allah.
And we, on the basis of our aims and perception like what you like and
hate what you hate.”**[2]**

Most companions of the Imam spoke in this way and the Imam thanked them
for their sincerity and loyalty.

A man from Bani Asad waits for Imam (‘a)
----------------------------------------

As soon as the Imam halted at Kerbala, he was joined by a man from Bani
Asad. But historians have not recorded the name of this person. His
story is narrated by Uryan bin Haitham who says, “My father used to
reside near the place where the incident of Taff occurred. Whenever we
used to pass by that place we used to see a man of Bani Asad present
there. My father asked him, “I see that you are always present here?”

He replied to my father, “I have heard that Imam Husain (‘a) shall be
martyred at this place. I come here so that perhaps I may encounter him
and along with him achieve martyrdom.”

When Husain was martyred, my father said, “Let us go and see if that
Asadi man has also been killed.”

We came to the battlefield and searched among the corpses and found that
Asadi man among those killed.**[3]**

He had achieved the grade of martyrdom in the service of the beloved
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s). He obtained the loftiest status
near the great prophets, martyrs and righteous ones. And what nice
companions they are.

The Imam’s letter to Ibn Hanafiyah
----------------------------------

Imam (‘a) wrote a letter to his brother, Muhammad bin Hanafiyah and
other persons of Bani Hashim from Kerbala. Therein he spoke of his death
and the end which was very near. The text of that letter was as follows:
“So to say: As if the world has not remained and the Hereafter remains
as it was.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A bitter fruit  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 193-194  
 **[3]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/216-217  
 **[4]** *Kamil az-Ziyaraat,* Pg. 157, Chap. 23, H. 21

This is the briefest letter that especially speaks about those hardships
that defeat patience.

With Harthima bin Salmi
-----------------------

Harthima bin Salmi joined the forces of Ibn Ziyad. When they reached
Kerbala he remembered something he had forgotten. He was traveling with
Amirul Momineen (‘a) in a journey of war when His Eminence passed
through Kerbala and stopped at a tree under the shade of which he stood
up to pray. After concluding the prayer he took a handful of sand, smelt
it and said, “Alas for you, O dust! A group of people shall be killed
upon you and shall enter Paradise without undergoing accounting.”

Harthima hurried to His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and related to him what he
had heard from his father.

Imam asked him, “Are with us or against us?”

“Neither with you nor against you. I have left my family behind.”

Imam advised him and ordered him to go away from Kerbala so that he may
not have to witness the tragedy of Ahle Bayt and he told him, “Go away
from here. By the One in Whose hand is the life of Husain, anyone who
witnesses (without rendering any help) our killing today, shall enter
Hell.”

Harithma fled from Kerbala and heard reports about the martyrdom of Imam
(‘a)**[1]** while he himself had been deprived of martyrdom in the
company of the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s).

Anas bin Harith Joins Imam (‘a)
-------------------------------

A prominent and senior companion of the Prophet, Anas bin Harith joined
the Imam and narrated to the Imam what he had heard from the Messenger
of Allah (s) regarding him, that His Eminence had said, “This son of
mine (that is His Eminence, Husain) shall be killed on a land called
Kerbala. Thus whosoever of you sees him should help him.”

After that Anas remained in the service of Imam till he achieved
martyrdom in his company.**[2]**

Ibn Ziyad’s letter to His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------

When Ibn Ziyad was informed that Hurr has surrounded His Eminence,
Husain (‘a) at Kerbala, he sent a letter to His Eminence that displayed
his oppressive and arrogant nature. The text of that was as follows: “So
to say: O Husain! I have been informed about your arrival at Kerbala.
Amirul Momineen, Yazid has written to me that I must not sleep on a bed
nor have my drinks till I have not conveyed you to the Kind and Informed
Lord, or that you agreed to obey my orders and the command of Yazid!...”

O Ibn Marjana! You and your master, Yazid deserve not to be served with
drinks  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/222-223. *Waseelatul Maal fee idda
manaqibul Aal,* Pg. 179  
 **[2]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/223-224

and you must come to your senses as you have committed every type of
infamy in Islam.

When the Imam read Ibn Marjana’s letter, considering that transmogrified
man to be worthless and weak, he threw down the letter and said, “Those
who purchase the pleasure of men through the wrath of God, are never
successful.”

Ibn Ziyad’s messenger asked the Imam to give a reply that he may convey
to Ibn Ziyad. Imam (‘a) said, “I have no reply with me because, he is in
fact, eligible for divine punishment.”

Ibn Ziyad’s messenger returned and told Ibn Marjana what the Imam had
said. Ibn Ziyad was terribly infuriated and he prepared all the forces
to fight the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s).

Deployment of the Kufan Army
----------------------------

When the news of deployment of army of Ibn Ziyad against Imam Husain
(‘a) spread and it became common knowledge that His Eminence has been
surrounded at Kerbala, a pall of gloom and dread descended on all
gatherings of Kufa. Ibn Ziyad had spread such terror among the
multitudes that they were horrified of their future because death was
decreed merely on the basis of suspicion or allegation. Hence the people
had no will of their own.

When Ibn Marjana apprehended the son of the conqueror of Mecca and the
breaker of idols of Quraish, he realized his dreams and aspirations. So
that by killing him he could gain proximity to the grandson of Abu
Sufyan, that same leader of the group opposed to Islam. And that he may
strengthen his relationship to Bani Umayyah that was based on the
testimony of Abu Maryam, the wine-seller.**[1]**

Ibn Marjana spent all his time preparing for war and he resorted to
various ways in arranging for dominance in the coming confrontation
while the nobility had sold its conscience and they were surrounding Ibn
Ziyad ready to offer their help to complete the program of hostilities.

Ibn Saad selected as Commander-in-chief
---------------------------------------

Ibn Marjana selected Ibn Saad to be the Commander-in-Chief of the armed
forces that had been prepared to fight against the beloved grandson of
the Messenger of Allah (s). Before we explain the causes of his
appointment let us study some important matters:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** One day Muawiyah…told Abu Maryam Salooli in front of the people:
With what do you testify? He replied: I testify that Abu Sufyan came to
me and asked me for a prostitute. I told him: I don’t have anyone other
than Sumaiyyah. He said: Bring her even if she is dirty and filthy. I
brought that woman…! At that time Muawiyah made Ziyad as his brother and
the son of his father, Abu Sufyan. (*An-Nasaaih al-Kafiya leman
Yatawalla Muawiyah* Pg. 81)

Prophecy of Allah’s Messenger regarding Ibn Saad’s end
------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Saad happened to pass by the Messenger of Allah (s). When His
Eminence saw him, he became disgusted with him and prophesied about his
bad end: “He shall be with those who eat up the world with their tongues
like the cow licks the ground.”**[1]**

Amirul Momineen (‘a) had also predicted similarly about Ibn Saad.
Narrators say that His Eminence glanced at him and spoke to him. He
found him to be the arrogant, one who considered truth worthless and who
had the daring to resort to illegal acts. He said, “Woe by on you, O,
Ibn Saad, how shall you be when you are in a situation when you have to
choose between Paradise and Hell and you decide to choose Hell?”**[2]**

Saad’s hatred for his son Umar
------------------------------

When Saad heard the statement of the Messenger of Allah (s) regarding
his son, he scolded him. Narrators say: “He instructed the executors of
his will not to give anything to his son, Umar Ibn Saad.”**[3]**

Harun Rashid Curses Umar Saad
-----------------------------

Harun Rashid cursed Umar Saad and decreed that he be considered an
apostate and an outcast from religion. It is an interesting anecdote
that deserves to be mentioned here:

Narrators say: Ishaq bin Ibrahim was brought as a captive to Harun
Rashid. Ishaq was accused to have apostated from religion.

Ishaq told him: “O Amiral Momineen! I believe in Allah and all His
messengers and prophets. I am not an apostate. My fault lies elsewhere.”

Rashid was surprised and he asked, “What is that?”

“Loyalty and devotion to you, Ahle Bayt. Can one who believes in love
for you and considers it to be obligatory, be considered an apostate?”

Rashid smiled and ordered that the special execution mat and the sword
be taken out for him.

Ishaq began to speak and he asked Harun:

“O Amiral Momineen! What is your view about Umar bin Saad, the killer of
Husain? Who said: **They say: The Almighty Allah created a Paradise and
fire and punishment and arrests.”**

Rashid bowed his head and thought about it for a long time, then he
said, “May Allah curse Umar bin Saad as he had no faith in the Almighty
Allah, in resurrection or in prophethood...O Ishaq, do you know from
where this is taken?”

“Yes, O Amiral Momineen! It is taken from the poetry of Yazid bin
Muawiyah...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Qutaybah, *Mukhtasar al-Buldan*, Pg. 271  
 **[2]** *Ayanush Shia* 4/437  
 **[3]** Balawi, *Alif Baa*

“What did Yazid say?”

“He said:

**O Alayya give me the goblet and speak up your thoughts as I do not
like whispering secretly.**

**The statement of Abu Sufyan that was used in Uhad till these dirges
began to be recited.**

**And by that word Amr wanted to get Ali but he escaped. But the old man
Muawiyah managed to get.**

**Thus O young mother in red! If I died, you get married and do not wait
for reunion after death.**

**Because whatever is said about resurrection is all useless talk that
puts the heart to doubt.**

**And if people were not useless I would have seen Muhammad, with the
pure wine that quenches the bones.**

**There is no difference in people that Muhammad has chosen a grave in
Medina.**

**Often it is that the pasture stinks on the ground while its branches
show the existence of the roots.**

**We shall be destroyed and no sign shall remain on the earth but the
malice of the heart shall remain.”**

Rashid was terrified and he said, “May Allah curse Yazid, who had no
faith in Allah, the Day of Resurrection and prophethood. O Ishaq, do you
know from where he has inherited these beliefs?”

“Yes, O Amiral Momineen! He has taken them from the poetry of his
father, Muawiyah.”

“What did Muawiyah say?”

“He said:

**Ask me about the monastery of Busra which is of old. Do not condemn me
as there is no use of it.**

**Get up so that in the darkness we may establish a bright sun. Where
there are goblets and cups and the luminosity of the stars.**

**Perhaps separation may call us and we have to go in such a condition
that our souls are quenched with it.**

**What is present here, get hold of it and let go what is being
promised. It is the way intelligent people act and delay will cause
problems.**

**Before the nights return all borrowed things because all the dresses
of the world are on hire.”**

Rashid cursed Muawiyah and said the same things he had mentioned about
Yazid.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shaykh Mufid, *Ath-Thaqib fil Manaqib*, from the written
manuscripts at the Imam Amirul Momineen (a.s.) Library

Ajali considers Ibn Saad a reliable narrator
--------------------------------------------

Ajali has considered Umar Ibn Saad to be a reliable narrator and he says
about him, “He has related traditions from his father and other people
have narrated from him. He was a reliable Tabii (companion of a
companion). He is the same person who killed Husain.”**[1]**

I don’t know how Ibn Saad was reliable when he had killed the beloved
grandson of the Prophet and one who destroyed the Purified Progeny
inspite of the fact that the Almighty Allah has made it incumbent on all
Muslims to love them...?

Ajali has deviated from the path of truth due to his considering
reliable, narrators who bore enmity to Ahle Bayt. In the same way he
considered those who were loyal to Ahle Bayt (‘a) to be absolutely
unreliable.

Righteous people and those who acted with piety in their religion used
to condemn anyone who narrated from Ibn Saad. Once Aaizaar bin Hareeth
related a tradition from Umar bin Saad. A person objected to him and
said, “Do you not fear Allah? Are you narrating from Umar bin Saad?”
Aaizaar wept and said, “I shall never do it.”**[2]** It is strange that
Ibn Hajar has given the biography of Ibn Saad in his *Tahdhib
at-Tahdhib* while he claimed that he was including only those narrators
whom he considered reliable!

Habits and Nature of Ibn Saad
-----------------------------

Ibn Saad did not have in himself any sort of noble trait or habit
because he was by nature hard-hearted. There was not an iota of humanity
or goodness in him. Some of his personal qualities were as follows:

A. Surrender to Governor’s Rule
-------------------------------

Absolute dedication to the governor’s system was a prominent part of Ibn
Saad. According to unanimous verdict of historians, he used to mix up
with the ruling class and completely lose his balance for greed of
obtaining position and rulership.

He subjected himself to hardships and sorrows in order to earn the
confidence of Ibn Marjana. After having killed His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
he had told Ibn Marjana, “By God, the sincerity I performed towards you
with regard to the killing of Husain was such that if I had performed
such sincerity for my father, I would have fulfilled his rights.”**[3]**

Ibn Saad did not have a stable personality or a noble intention. He was
always inclined to follow the ruling class and he was always striving to
earn their confidence and gain material benefits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 7/451. *Mizanul Etedal* 3/198  
 **[2]** *Mizanul Etedal* Pg. 198  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/467

B. Severe Greed for Rulership
-----------------------------

Another important trait of his personality was his extreme greed for
obtaining power and position of rulership. Historians say: He used to
urge his father to enter politics as it was possible the people may
become disinclined to Ali and Muawiyah and select him for caliphate. But
his father refused to act in this way and he remained content with
whatever he had.**[1]** When Ibn Ziyad appointed Ibn Saad as the
governor of Rayy but upon the condition that he must go out to fight
Husain (‘a) his family members heard him recite:

**“Should I abandon the governorship of Rayy while it is my heart-felt
desire or should I return with the sin of killing Husain?”**

He believed that if he gets governorship of Rayy he would be able to
spend his life in prosperity and comfort. That is why he committed such
a terrible oppression in Islamic history.

C. Decadence
------------

Decadence was another trait of Ibn Saad’s personality, because all the
signs of nobility and respect had been destroyed. When Muslim bin Aqil
stood as a prisoner before Ibn Ziyad, he asked Ibn Saad to hear his
bequest but he refused in order to remain in the good books of Ibn
Ziyad, till he was instructed by his masters to listen to Muslim’s will.
Thus when Muslim made bequest to him in confidence, he at once turned to
Ibn Ziyad and told him what Muslim had willed. Ibn Ziyad also objected
to him about it and said, “The faithful would not betray you, but the
traitor was confided in.”

Of his decadence was the fact that when His Eminence, Husain (‘a) had
been martyred, he rushed forward to plunder his coat of mail, which he
put upon himself at once. If he had the least nobility and honor he
would not have plundered the corpse of the beloved grandson of the
Messenger of Allah (s). Because, this action of his was a signal to his
soldiers that they could freely plunder even the ladies of the household
of prophethood and they did not even spare their veils and bed sheets.

D. Cowardice and Fearfulness
----------------------------

Ibn Saad had no sign of courage and bravery. He was cowardly, weak
willed and lacked determination. When he was confronted by the problem
of the Penitents, he was terrified completely. He never again slept in
his house. He used to sleep in the governor’s palace so that he may be
guarded by the palace guards. He used to be agitated all the time and
spent sleepless nights. And when officers of Mukhtar attacked him he got
up from his bed in a disturbed state. Due to the shock, instead of
picking up his weapons he fell down and the soldiers killed him in his
bed. And in this way was fulfilled the prayer of Husain (‘a) that: “May
Allah have him beheaded in his bed.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 7/282

What is surprising is that Khairuddin Zarkali used to consider him a
brave commander.**[1]** If he was really as brave as Zarkali has said he
would not have abandoned his family to seek refuge in the governor’s
palace to dispel his fear and terror.

E. Doubt in Resurrection
------------------------

Ibn Saad had no faith in resurrection; he was in doubt about it. As he
has mentioned in his couplets he recited when he was selected to fight
Imam Husain (‘a). He said:

**“They say: The Almighty Allah has created a Paradise and a Fire,
punishments and arrests.”**

On the basis of this he neither had faith on accounting, nor on Paradise
or Hell as Harun Rashid has said...

These were some traits of Ibn Saad that show him to be a transmogrified
man sunk in evils and crimes.

Reasons for selection of Ibn Saad
---------------------------------

Ibn Marjana selected him to lead the army against Imam Husain (‘a) in
order to deceive the common people and gullible populace so that they
may also take part in this venture because Ibn Saad was the son of the
conqueror of Iraq and one of the six members of the Shura Committee
instituted by Umar bin Khattab for the position of Islamic Caliphate.
Also Ibn Saad belonged to Quraish and was somewhat related to the Imam.
In addition to this, Ibn Ziyad was aware of his deviated views and
weaknesses and he knew that except for him none could dare to commit
this outrage.

Anxiety of Ibn Saad
-------------------

Ibn Ziyad had appointed Ibn Saad for the governorship of Rayy**[2]** and
areas of Dastabi and Dailam.**[3]**

After that he told him to proceed and fight against Imam Husain (‘a) but
he wanted to be excused from it. But Ibn Ziyad threatened him that the
governorship of Rayy shall be taken away from him. Ibn Saad asked for a
night’s respite to make up his mind, which was granted.

Ibn Saad went home and spent a sleepless night thinking whether he
should undertake war against the beloved grandson of the Prophet and
earn everlasting degradation or he should excuse himself from this
matter. In that case he would have to forgo the governorship of Rayy,
while it was an ambition of his life, which  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Zarkali, *Al-Alaam* 5/205  
 **[2]** Rayy is a famous and one of the large cities due to its beauty
and excessive fruits and it is situated in Iran. Istakhri has said:
After Baghdad no city is as populous as Rayy. And Asmai has said: It is
the bride of the world and people traveled to it for business. This is
mentioned in *Mojam al-Buldan* 3/117-186.  
 **[3]** *Al-Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 253

would have guaranteed him a life of comfort and prosperity. His family
heard him recite the following poem:

**“Shall I give up the governorship of Rayy while it is my desire, or
shall I soil my hands with the blood of Husain?**

**In killing him, nothing could stop me from being sent to Hell, while
on the other hand the rulership of Rayy is something I desire
most.”[1]**

Those who tried to stop Ibn Saad
--------------------------------

Historians say: Some well-wishers of Ibn Saad went to him and restrained
him from going out to fight Husain (‘a). One of those who made such a
suggestion was his nephew, Hamzah bin Mughairah bin Shoba, who told him,
“O Uncle! If you march against Husain, you shall be a sinner in the view
of Allah and you would have cut off relations with him. By Allah, if you
give up your world and wealth it would be better for you than that you
face the Almighty with responsibility of Husain’s murder.”**[2]**

Some other people also advised him and told him, “Fear Allah, do not do
this.”**[3]** He tried to avoid the battle but he did not have the
determination to forgo the governorship of Rayy, because he had become
greedy for it and there was nothing which could make him forget it. When
morning came he decided to lead the forces against the beloved grandson
of the Prophet. He went to Ibn Marjana to inform him about his
acceptance of the appointment. Ibn Ziyad also became pleased at his
assent. This was so because the presence of Ibn Saad would assure that
Ibn Ziyad would not be alone condemned for the elimination of Imam
Husain (‘a) and if anyone other than Ibn Saad had assented, Ibn Ziyad
would not have been as much elated.

Ibn Saad marched forward at the head of a 4000 strong army absolutely
aware that he was going out to confront the Progeny of Allah’s Messenger
(s), who were the best of people.

Ibn Saad reached Kerbala and joined the battalion under the command of
Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi.

March Past
----------

Ibn Marjana stood up to watch the armed units that had been raised to
fight against His Eminence, Husain (‘a), in order to gauge their
strength and the level of their preparation in taking part in battle.

Tirmah says: “A day before I departed from Kufa I saw such a large
number of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraatul Jinaan* 1/132. Yafai says: If it were said:  
 “Should I let go of the governorship of Rayy though I want it badly
even though by killing Husain I return as a sinner.” This lamentation
informs about the aim in a better way.  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/385-386  
 **[3]** *Al Futuh* 5/152

people gathered at the outskirts as I have never before seen a greater
crowd. I inquired about it and was told that they have been gathered
there so that they may be inspected then dispatched to fight
Husain.”**[1]**

Ibn Ziyad had employed all the powers of his regime in this matter
because he was absolutely terrified of changed circumstances in the
future.

Speech of Ibn Marjana
---------------------

The tyrant, Ibn Ziyad, ordered people to gather in the courtyard of the
Great Mosque. Like frightened sheep, the people obeyed these orders and
filled up the entire premises. Ibn Ziyad stood up before them and
addressed them as follows:

“O people! You have tested the family of Abu Sufyan and found them as
you had preferred. This is Amirul Momineen, Yazid, whom you have found
to be of good nature and fine mannered. He is good to the subjects and
he rewards according to rightfulness. In his time, the roads are safe as
it was during the time of his father, Muawiyah. His son, Yazid has
respect for the people and he has made them needless through wealth. He
has increased your incomes by a hundred percent. He has ordered me to
obtain that income for you. And send you to fight his enemy, Husain.
Thus you must listen to him and obey him.”**[2]**

Ibn Ziyad spoke in such a convincing way that they became submissive to
him because he promised them wealth and persuaded them to take part in
the most terrible crime of the history of humanity.

He ordered Haseen bin Numair Tamimi, Hijaar bin Abjar and Shimr bin Zil
Jaushan that they march forward to fight the Imam. After that he
appointed at the command those who had outstanding capabilities. They
set out of Kerbala to support Ibn Saad.

Samrah encouraged people to fight the Imam
------------------------------------------

Samrah bin Jundab was that liar companion who played a very important
role in motivating people to join in the battle against the son of
Allah’s Messenger (s), because he was the Police Commissioner of
Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad. So he was at the forefront in recruiting people
for the battle of Kerbala.**[3]**

Shabth bin Rabi feigned Illness
-------------------------------

Shabth bin Rabi, the hypocrite did not like to march out against Imam
Husain (‘a) so he feigned illness. But this did not remain concealed
from Ibn Ziyad. He sent message to Shabth that: My messenger has
informed me about your illness. I fear you might not be of those that
when they are with the believers they say: We have accepted faith and
when they are alone with their satans they say: we are with you and they
make fun of the Muslims. Thus if you obey us you must come immediately.
Shabth came to him in the darkness of the night so that he may not
discern the absence of illness. Then he responded positively to the
proposal of Ibn Ziyad to lead a battalion against Imam Husain (‘a).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/406  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/157  
 **[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/88-89

Public Mobilization
-------------------

Ibn Ziyad issued general orders to mobilize people or force them to take
part in battle against the Imam. Before they could report in the first
cantonment he issued the decree: “No one should remain even from the
nobles, elders, traders and residents but that they must all join us in
the cantonment. Whoever is found lacking in this would not have any
guarantee of security and help.”**[1]**

He ordered that this order be publicized and instructed Kathir Ibn
Shahab Harithi, Muhammad bin Ashath, Qaqa bin Suwaid bin Abdur Rahman
Munqari and Asmaa bin Kharja Fuzari to go out among the people and urge
them to obedience and threaten them with dire consequences. They set out
in Kufa and began to fulfill their duty.**[2]** After that they joined
the cantonment. But Kathir bin Shahab remained in Kufa to restrain the
people from helping the Imam and to threaten those who were not willing
to go out to fight the Imam. The police arrested a man from Hamadan
tribe who had come to Kufa in connection with his inheritance. He was
brought to Ibn Ziyad and he condemned him to death. When people saw
this, they all rushed out to join the army and not a single grown-up man
remained in Kufa.**[3]**

This was the policy of Ibn Ziyad to persuade the people to join the
forces against Imam Husain (‘a). And it was the condition through which
he could dominate the circumstances perfectly and did not leave anyone
free.

Strict Surveillance on Kufa
---------------------------

Ibn Ziyad applied very strict surveillance on Kufa so that no one is
able to go out to help the Imam. He appointed spies and guards and
designed very strict surveillance machinery. Whosoever was accused for
any act against the administration was immediately apprehended and cast
into prison or executed mercilessly. Abdullah bin Yasar used to urge
people to support the Imam and he restrained people from helping the
members of the Umayyad clan. Ibn Ziyad was informed of this and
immediately wanted him to be arrested. But he went into hiding and
agents went out to search for him till he was finally apprehended by
Ubaidullah bin Hurr. He was taken to Sabakha and executed there.**[4]**
He was other than Ubaidullah bin Hurr Johfi.

Ibn Ziyad appointed guards and installed armories around Kufa and kept
them in charge of Zajar bin Qais. Also between them and the army of Ibn
Saad were kept ready mounted messengers to convey news of whatever may
occur.**[5]**

Flight of Soldiers
------------------

The majority of soldiers of Ibn Ziyad, who were of exceptional
capabilities, deserted the army and a large number of them avoided
taking part in hostilities against the grandson of the Prophet (s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[4]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[5]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387

Balazari says: “A battalion of 1000 soldiers used to depart for Kerbala
but when it reached there, it had only three hundred, four hundred or
even less men, because the rest had deserted the army as they did not
see the expedition to be having any legality.**[1]**

They were without any doubt convinced that it was the battle of deviated
people. They were fighting their God and His Prophet, fighting someone
whose obedience and devotion was incumbent upon them.

The Tyrant Ibn Ziyad in Nukhaila
--------------------------------

He went to Nukhaila**[2]** and encamped over there while a large number
of contingents accompanied him. He appointed Amr bin Hareeth as his
representative in Kufa. He had been informed that people in singles, in
twos and threes were running over by the Euphrates route to join the
army of the Imam. Therefore he issued commands to secure to bridge and
keep it under strict surveillance so that none may escape from
there.**[3]**

Plan to kill Ibn Ziyad
----------------------

The great stalwart, Ammar bin Salama Dalabi tried to kill Ibn Ziyad at
Nukhaila but he could not succeed due to the elaborate security
arrangements. When he failed in this attempt he decided to join His
Eminence, Husain (‘a) and in the end he was able to achieve martyrdom
with His Eminence.**[4]**

Number of Umayyad Soldiers
--------------------------

Historians have different opinions as regards the number of soldiers
that set out to fight Imam (‘a). Here we have stated the opinions of
some of them:

1.  80000 riders**[5]**

2.  50000 riders**[6]**

3.  35000 riders**[7]**

4.  30000 riders**[8]**

5.  22000 riders**[9]**

6.  20000 riders**[10]**

7.  16000 riders**[11]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[2]** Nukhaila was an area close to Zul Kifl which is today known as
Abbasiyat. This is mentioned by Muqarram in *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg.
199.  
 **[3]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayan* (Manuscript)  
 **[4]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/377  
 **[5]** *Baghiyatun Nubla,* Part 2, quoted from *Maqtal* of Abu
Mikhnaf, Pg. 80  
 **[6]** Ibne Zuraas, *Sharh Shaafiya* 1/93 from written manuscripts at
Imam Hakim Library  
 **[7]** *Manaqib*, Ibne Shahr Aashob 4/98  
 **[8]** *Matalib al-So-ool* 2/136 (Has quoted 22000). *Umdatut Talib*,
Pg. 192  
 **[9]** *Miraatul Jinaan* 1/132. *Shazaratus Zahab* 1/67. *Matalib
al-So-ool* 2/36  
 **[10]** *As Sawaiq al-Mohreqa* Pg. 197. Ibne Sabbagh, *Al-Fusul
al-Muhimma,* Pg. 191. *Lohoof*, 145  
 **[11]** *Ad Durrun Nadheem Fee Manaqibul Aaimma*, Pg. 551

8.  12000 riders**[1]**

9.  8000 riders**[2]**

10.  6000 riders**[3]**

11.  4000 riders**[4]**

These are some figures that historians have mentioned. Apart from this
whatever reports are recorded, are not free from exaggeration.

Research on this topic
----------------------

Here it is necessary for research regarding the different theories
connected with the number of soldiers that participated in the battle
against the Imam so that we may analyze and evaluate the different
arguments...

Before everything let us see the number of soldiers that were present in
the cantonment in Kufa at that time. The number of soldiers in the
middle of the first century were 40000 from whom 10000 used to
participate in fighting every year.**[5]**

This number saw increase during the time the Imam had selected Kufa as
his capital because migrants converged on Kufa and 1000 of them
accompanied the Imam in the battle of Siffeen along with 8000 slaves of
theirs.**[6]**

Some expressions of views also exist that some people have given that
prove the number of soldiers at that time and prove that at that time
the roll of soldiers had reached upto a hundred thousand. Because
Sulaiman bin Surd Khuzai objected to the treaty of Imam Hasan (‘a) and
said to His Eminence: “I am astonished how you decided to make peace
with Muawiyah when you are having a hundred thousand men of Iraq at your
command.”

Some letters from the people of Iraq to Imam Husain (‘a) also mentioned,
“We, a hundred thousand men are with you.” And in my view this figure is
not without exaggeration and their number was much less...but as for the
residents of Kufa, we have not been able to get their list but it is
likely that they were so numerous because among them were many workers,
traders and artisans and who were not a part of military service...and
after this brief research about the number of soldiers and citizens of
Kufa we stop here and evaluate the different theories:

**First:** Acceptance and inspection of everything that is mentioned
about the increase of soldiers. Because Ibn Ziyad had declared general
mobilization of forces in Kufa and there did not remain any grown up
person but that he was sent out to fight His Eminence, Husain (‘a). And
anyone who opposed this order was doomed to execution or thrown into
prison. So much so, all modes of transport were used to transfer people
from Kufa to the battlefield against the Holy Imam. In this way the
figure of 100000 or more is not an exaggeration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ad Durrun Nadheem Fee Manaqibul Aaimma*, Pg. 551  
 **[2]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 92  
 **[3]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 87  
 **[4]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/169  
 **[5]** *Sulh al-Hasan,* Pg. 114  
 **[6]** *Al Imamah was Siyasah* 1/93 has mentioned the figure of
190000.

**Secondly:** There is doubt regarding that large number because most of
the fighters considered fighting against the Imam a serious crime and
they deserted the army and fled into wilderness. Apart from this a large
number of soldiers were with Ibn Ziyad in Nukhaila cantonment. On the
basis of this, the number of men who went to Kerbala to fight the Imam
was not as high as some historians believe.

The most likely scenario is as mentioned in the tradition of Imam Sadiq
(‘a) that 30000 men came forward to fight Imam Husain (‘a). This is the
nearest saying about the number of soldiers because this figure or a
little more took part in battle against the beloved grandson of the
Messenger of Allah (s).

Military Commanders
-------------------

Historians have recorded for us the names of some military commanders
who participated in the Kerbala tragedy. They are as follows:

1. Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi – He commanded a 1000 strong force that
besieged His Eminence, Husain (‘a) at Kerbala.

2. Umar bin Saad – He was appointed commander in chief by Ibn Ziyad. He
led a battalion of 4000.

3. Shabth bin Rabi commanded a 1000 strong battalion.**[1]**

4. Madhair bin Raheena Mazini – He controlled a 3000 men group.**[2]**

5. Nasr bin Harsha – commanded a 2000 men battalion.**[3]**

6. Kaab bin Talha with 3000 soldiers.**[4]**

7. Hijaar bin Abjar – with 1000 men.**[5]**

8. Haseen bin Numair 4000 strong force.**[6]**

9. Shimr bin Zil Jaushan – 4000 strong platoon.**[7]**

10. Yazid bin Rakaab – At the head of 2000 strong regiment.**[8]**

11. Yazid bin Harth bin Ruwiyam – with 1000 fighters.**[9]**

These were some military commanders who jointly controlled a force of
around 25000 soldiers.**[10]**

Ibn Jauzi says: Abdullah bin Zohra bin Sulaym Azadi was the commander of
Kufa  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[2]** *Manaqib* 4/98  
 **[3]** *Manaqib* 4/98  
 **[4]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 200  
 **[5]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[6]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[7]** *Manaqib,* Ibne Shahr Aashob 4/98  
 **[8]** *Manaqib,* Ibne Shahr Aashob 4/98  
 **[9]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/387  
 **[10]** Calculating the numbers mentioned 96000 is correct figure
(Tr.)

division. Qais bin Ashath was heading the Rabia and Kinda division.
Abdullah bin Sabra Jofi controlled the Madhij and Bani Asad division and
Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi was the chief of Rabia and Hamadan
division.**[1]**

Arming the soldiers
-------------------

The army of Ibn Ziyad was armed with all the weapons in use at that
time, such that his preparations for battle against the Imam could be
described to be terrible whose importance the historians have mentioned
to us and said: Blacksmiths and weapon makers of Kufa worked day and
night pointing the arrows and sharpening the swords and this continued
for more than 10 days…Ibn Ziyad prepared such a well-armed force to
fight against His Eminence, Husain (‘a) that it had the power to conquer
a territory if it wanted.

1. Archers
----------

Archers were those who shot arrows and darts. They had a very important
role in the battle and they were the first to initiate battle against
the Imam when they shot their arrows to the Imam’s camp. So much so that
none from the companions of the Imam remained but that was shot by an
arrow. Even some ladies were injured and they were terrified by this.
Some children of the family of Prophethood also were cruelly killed by
these arrows like Abdullah bin Muslim, Abdullah bin Hasan, Abdullah (or
Ali Asghar), the infant son of His Eminence and others.

2. Foot soldiers
----------------

They were battalions of soldiers who threw stones and their weapon was
sling.

3. Armored soldiers
-------------------

They were of those who covered the fighters with materials that would be
secure in the battle. In the same way they used to put such things on
their horses also so that they may be protected against arrows and
darts.

Number of Companions of His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
-------------------------------------------------

The companions of Imam Husain (‘a) were less in number but historians
have differed as regards their exact figure as follows:

1. Masudi believes that they comprised of 500 riders and 100 foot
soldiers. Only Masudi has mentioned this figure and no one else
has.**[2]**

2. Ammar Dahni has narrated from Imam Baqir (‘a) that they were 45
horsemen and 100 foot soldiers.**[3]**

3. Ibn Shahr Aashob has mentioned that they were 82 persons of whom 32
were mounted.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan,* Pg. 92  
 **[2]** *Muruj az-Zahab* 3/61  
 **[3]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/197. *Tahdhib al-Kamal* 6/427.
*Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/119. *As-Siraatus Sawi*, Pg. 86  
 **[4]** *Manaqib* 4/98

4. Saad bin Abduh says: I have seen that they were around 100 persons. 5
or 7 from the descendants of Ali, 10 from Bani Hashim one from Kinana
and another from Sulaym.**[1]**

5. Ibn Kathir Wafa Khori has written that they were 32 riders and 40
footmen.**[2]**

According to our belief, including the persons of family of prophethood
there were 80 persons. This is proved from the fact that the number of
heads that were severed and sent to Ibn Marjana and Yazid numbered 79
and not more.

Anyway, these valiant fighters in spite of being less in number
effectively confronted that army and caused them terrible losses and by
their courageous attitude, displayed nobility of their beliefs and
loftiness of their faith.

Ibn Saad’s Messenger meets Imam (‘a)
------------------------------------

Ibn Saad was not in favor of fighting against the Imam and he wanted to
shun this in any way possible. Therefore he summoned Azra bin Qais to go
and meet the Imam and inquire about the reason for the arrival of His
Eminence, but Azra refused as he was one of those who had written to the
Imam inviting him to Kufa.

Ibn Saad appointed Kathir bin Abdullah Shobi to meet the Holy Imam. He
was an audacious and reckless man. He said: “I am ready for it and if
you want I can attack him suddenly and finish the matter.”

Ibn Saad did not agree to this. He told him to approach the Imam and ask
him what has brought him there.

Kathir set out to meet the Imam and when Abu Thamama Saidi saw him, he
became suspicious about him and told him to remove his sword before he
could meet the Imam. But he did not agree to it and thus he was not able
to get the permission to meet the Imam. He returned to Ibn Saad and
reported the matter to him.**[3]** Ibn Saad told Qarra bin Qais Hanzali
to go and meet the Imam. He agreed to it. When he came the Imam asked
his companions, “Do you know him?”

Habib bin Mazahir replied, “Yes, he is from Bani Tamim. I used to know
him as a man of sound judgment. I would not have thought that he would
be present at this scene.”

He came and greeted al-Husain, peace be on him. Then he informed him of
Umar bin Saad’s message.

“The people of this town of yours wrote to me that I should come,”
answered Husain, peace be on him. “However, if now you have come to
dislike me, I will leave you.”

Habib glanced at him and chided him, “O Qarra, I considered you to be a
supporter  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tadhib at-Tahdhib* 1/156  
 **[2]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/187. Fakhura, *Tohfatul Anaam fii
Mukhtasar Tarikhul Islam,* Pg. 77  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/410

of Ahle Bayt. What has changed your attitude? Thus you remain with us
and help this gentleman.”

Qarra said: “You are right. But first I shall return to my associates
and convey the message to them and after that I shall think upon this
matter.”

Qarra returned to Ibn Saad and conveyed to him what the Imam had
said.**[1]**

Ibn Saad was pleased. He thought that there was some peaceful
alternative that would free him from this dreadful responsibility.

Ibn Saad Meets the Imam
-----------------------

Ibn Saad wanted to be reassured about this so he expressed the desire to
meet the Imam. The Imam agreed to meet him and when he came to His
Eminence, he asked, “What has brought you here?”

“People of Kufa.”

“But you don’t know what they have done to you?”

“We the people of God are such that if someone considers it lawful to
deceive us, we also for the sake of Allah bear that deception.”

“Now what do you think about escaping from this problem?”

“I shall return and stay in Mecca or Medina or in some other place.

Ibn Saad was pleased at this attitude of the Holy Imam and he saw in it
possibility of peace and less chance of hostilities.**[2]**

Ibn Saad’s letter to Ibn Ziyad
------------------------------

Ibn Saad immediately penned a letter to his governor, Ibn Marjana which
said: “So to say: God has put out the fire of hatred, united the people
in one opinion, and set right the affairs of the community. This man,
al-Husain, has given me a promise that he will return to the place which
he came from, or he will go to one of the border outposts - he will
become like any other of the Muslims, with the same rights and duties as
them; or he will go to Yazid, the Commander of the faithful, and offer
him his hand and see if the difference between them can be reconciled.
In this offer you have the consent to what you have demanded and the
community gains benefit.”

Ibn Saad’s Slander
------------------

Doubtlessly, in this letter Ibn Saad has attributed things to His
Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) that he never said: Aqba bin Sulaiman was
with the Imam from Medina to Mecca and then to Iraq and at the time of
the martyrdom of His Eminence he was in his service, he has said
regarding the fabricated points of this letter as follows:

“I accompanied Husain from Medina to Mecca and then to Iraq and at the
time of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/386, *Al Futuh* 5/155-156  
 **[2]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 87

his martyrdom I did not leave him and I heard whatever he said. And I
never heard him say that he was ready to give allegiance to Yazid, as
people allege. And neither did he say that he would go to any other
place. He did not mention this either in Medina or Mecca or Iraq or in
his army, till finally he was martyred. Yes, I heard him say: Leave me,
so that I may go to the wide earth till I see what the people
do.”**[1]**

Shaykh Muhammad Khazari has also stated that this letter mentions false
things. He says: “It is not correct that he proposed to them that he
would give allegiance to Yazid; rather he suggested them to leave him so
that he may return from where he had come.”**[2]**

Ibn Saad composed this letter to escape the battle and to keep himself
safe from the crime of killing the beloved grandson of the Messenger of
Allah (s). If the Imam had said such a thing, the army of Ibn Ziyad
would have dispersed and all the problems would have come to an end…Imam
(‘a), since the beginning of his mission, refused to bow down before the
unjust group and he was determined before the storms of opposition. And
he always displayed loftiness of his aims, steadfastness of his resolve
and respect of his self.

Shimr Defeats Efforts of Peace
------------------------------

When Ibn Saad’s letter came to Ibn Ziyad, he liked the view of Ibn Saad
and he considered it a solution of the problem and a channel for uniting
the Muslims. It restrained him from fighting the battle. Thus with
surprise he uttered, “This is the letter about a sincere man who is
anxious for his people.”

Shimr bin Zil Jaushan was standing besides him and he became annoyed at
this, because he was well known for his hatred to people of noble class
due to his own lowly birth. Hence he was jealous of Ibn Saad because he
was given the command of the army due to his parentage, so he wanted to
inflame the fire of battle.

“Are you going to accept this from him,” demanded Shimr bin Zil Jaushan,
jumping up, “When he has encamped on your land nearby? By God if he was
a man from your land and he would not put his hand in yours, whether he
was in a position of power and strength (or) whether he was in a
position of weakness and impotence you would not give this concession,
for it would be (a mark) of weakness.”

These words made the circumstances explosive and dashed all hopes
regarding peace and agreement, because Ibn Ziyad realized something he
had not thought of earlier. That is if the Imam escapes from him and
does not give allegiance to Yazid and goes away to another area the
reality of the situation will become obvious for all. And the people
shall stand up in support of the Imam against that sinful group. Hence
the tyrant shall emerge to be weaker while His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
shall come out stronger and more influential due to his position as the
son of Allah’s  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 20  
 **[2]** *Tarikhul Imamatul Islamiya* 1/515

Messenger (s). These delicate points had never entered the mind of Ibn
Marjana; so when Shimr reminded him, he began to think of him as a
sincere advisor.

When Shimr understood that he had the situation under his control and
that he has succeeded in weakening the position of Ibn Saad near Ibn
Ziyad, he tried to have him removed from his post and occupy it himself.
So he said, “By God, I have been informed that Husain and Ibn Saad sat
down between the two armies and carried out discussions for the most
part of the night.”**[1]**

This meant that Shimr had kept Ibn Saad under secret surveillance so
that he may come to know if Ibn Saad committed any shortcoming in
discharging his duties. If he did so, the information could be passed on
to the government so that he demotes Ibn Saad from his post and Shimr
may be able to obtain that place for himself.

Ibn Ziyad Rejected Peaceful Negotiation
---------------------------------------

Ibn Marjana rejected all the proposals Ibn Saad had written to him with
regard to a peaceful solution of this problem. He wrote to Ibn Saad as
follows:

“I did not send you to al-Husain for you to restrain yourself from
fighting him, nor to idle the time away with him, nor to promise him
peace and preservation of his life, nor to make excuses for him, nor to
be an intercessor on his behalf with me. Therefore see that if Husain
and his followers submit to my authority and surrender, you send them to
me in peace. If they refuse, then march against them to fight them and
to punish them; for they deserve that. If Husain is killed, make the
horses trample on his body, both front and back; for he is a disobedient
rebel, and I do not consider that this will be in any way wrong after
death. But it is my view that you should do this to him if you kill him.
If you carry out your command concerning him, we will give you the
reward due to one who is attentive and obedient. If you refuse, we
withdraw the command of our province and army from you and leave the
army to Shimr bin Zil Jaushan. We have given him our authority.
Greetings.”**[2]**

This extremely acerbic and cruel letter contains the following points:

1. It limited the discretionary power of Ibn Saad with regard to war and
fighting and no sort of choice was given to him for making peace or
holding discussions with the Imam.

2. There is indication in this letter that if the Imam accepted peace he
must submit to the authority of Ibn Marjana so that he may decide what
to do; forgive him or put him to death. He wanted the Imam to come to
him as a prisoner or a criminal and plead for mercy.

3. If the Imam refuses to surrender to the command of Ibn Ziyad, Ibn
Saad was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/175  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/55, Somewhat similar thing is mentioned
in *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/390-391. In *Tahdhib al-Kamal* 6/428 it is
mentioned: Ibne Ziyad wrote to Ibne Saad: “No, and no honor will be
there for him till he gives his hand into mine.” Then Husain said: “It
shall never be so.”

supposed to immediately put him to death and cut him into pieces.

4. Ibn Ziyad threatened Umar Ibn Saad that he would be stripped of his
post if he failed he carry out these commands. After that Shimr bin Zil
Jaushan would have the command of all forces and he would carry out the
above orders of Ibn Marjana.

Historians say: Ibn Ziyad began his dialogue like this: “Now when our
claws cling to him, he hopes for escape but he will be prevented from
getting any refuge.”

Shimr set out joyfully and pleased at once. He rode non-stop towards Ibn
Saad hoping that he may decline to accept the command of Ibn Ziyad and
Shimr would get the chance of being the commander-in-chief. He reached
Kerbala to find Ibn Saad bathing in the Euphrates. A man went to him and
said, “He sent Juwaira bin Badr Tamimi to you and ordered him to murder
you if you refrain from fighting the battle.”

Ibn Saad went to get his clothes and put them on.**[1]** He glanced at
Shimr bin Zil Jaushan and understood that it was his doing. He told him:

“Shame upon you, what is this to you? May God never show favor to your
house. May God make abominable what you have brought to me! By God, I
did not think that you would cause him to refuse what I had written to
him, and ruin for us a matter which we had hoped to set right. Husain
will not surrender, for there is a spirit like (his) father’s in his
body.”

“Tell me what you are going to do,” demanded Shimr. “Are you going to
carry out the governor’s command and fight his enemy or are you going to
leave the command of the army to me?”

Ibn Saad fell a prey to his desire and greed and he agreed to carry out
the commands of the governor. He said, “No, there is going to be no
advantage to you. I will carry that out instead of you.”**[2]**

Shimr kept Ibn Saad under surveillance just in case he may happen to
fall short in carrying out the orders of Ibn Marjana and he (Shimr) may
get the command of the army. Ibn Saad conveyed the reply of Ibn Ziyad to
the Holy Imam and His Eminence said, “By Allah, I shall never surrender
to Ibn Marjana.”**[3]**

The Imam Meets Ibn Saad
-----------------------

Imam (‘a) expressed the desire that Ibn Saad comes to meet him. He
accepted it unwillingly and met His Eminence at night in a secret
meeting attended by none except His Eminence, Abbas and His Eminence,
Ali Akbar. Ibn Saad also did not have anyone on his side except Hafs and
slave of Ibn Saad. Imam asked him, “O Ibn Saad, would you fight against
us? Do you not fear Allah while your return is to Him alone? I am the
son of the one you know well. Will you not remain on our side and give
up their support, as it would be more liked by Allah?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dhahabi, *Tarikh Islam* 5/14  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/391  
 **[3]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 87

Ibn Saad presented a very lame excuse saying, “I am afraid that my house
shall be destroyed.”

“I shall make it again for you.”

“I fear they shall confiscate my orchard.”

“I shall give you a better one in Hijaz.”

“I have a family in Kufa, I am afraid Ibn Ziyad would kill my family.”

Imam did not get any positive reply from him. Rather he found him
adamant on injustice and oppression. Thus he cursed him and said, “What
will happen to you? Almighty Allah will soon have you decapitated in
your bed and He shall not forgive you on the Day of Judgment. By Allah,
I hope you will not be able to consume but a little from the wheat of
Iraq.”

Ibn Saad went away from there ridiculing the Imam: “Barley is sufficient
for me.”**[1]**

Shimr offers Security to Brothers of His Eminence, Abbas
--------------------------------------------------------

The degraded leper, Shimr bin Zil Jaushan thought that he could drive a
wedge between His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and his brothers and thus
deprive the Imam from their support. Thus he secured a letter of
guarantee for them from Ibn Ziyad and came forward quickly. He stood up
before them and called out, “Where are the sons of our sister, Abbas and
his brothers?”

Those youths rushed out towards him like brave lions and asked him,
“What do you want, O son of Zil Jaushan?”

“I am having a guarantee of security for you.”

They shouted angrily at him, “God curse you and curse the security which
you offer without offering it to the son of the Apostle of God.”**[2]**

That criminal returned a failure while he had expected that the Imam’s
brothers are his transmogrified friends. He did not know that they were
among those incomparable personalities who shaped the nobility of
humanity and created the basis for pride for man.

Embargo on Imam’s Entourage
---------------------------

Ibn Saad surrounded Imam Husain (‘a) from all sides so that he may not
receive any outside help and this was carried out with such efficiency
that it was impossible for anyone to join the Imam’s camp or convey any
sort of help to him.

Access to Euphrates cut off
---------------------------

The most dangerous deed committed by Ibn Saad was cutting off access to
tributary of Euphrates because he had received express orders from Ibn
Marjana to deprive Imam Husain (‘a), his Ahle Bayt and companions from
water, like it was done in the case of Uthman bin Affan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/175  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/391

He prepared a force consisting of 500 horsemen and according to another
report consisting of 4000 horsemen under the command of Amr Ibn Hajjaj.
They secured all the tributaries, streams and water holes of Euphrates
and thus cut off all access of Imam Husain (‘a) and his companions to
get any water. I feel that this cruel step was taken to achieve the
following aims:

**First:** They cause harm to the Imam’s camp so that there remains no
strength in them to fight the battle and the forces of Umar Saad do not
face any problem.

**Second:** In this way they also closed the river route for anyone who
may try to join the Imam’s group.

**Third:** It was apparently to avenge the treatment accorded to Uthman.
But the fact was that when Uthman was besieged, it was Imam Husain (‘a)
who had brought water and food for him; but what a pity that Bani
Umayyah had even disregarded that favor of His Eminence.

**Fourth:** Ibn Saad through these steps, hoped that the Imam would be
compelled to surrender and accept their orders.

These were some of the factors that motivated Ibn Marjana to issue the
command to cut off access to Euphrates and prevent His Eminence, Husain
and his companions from getting any water.

Historians have said: “Access to water was cut off for His Eminence,
Husain since three days prior to his martyrdom.**[1]** The most terrible
hardship that the Imam experienced was the thirst of young children and
ladies and their clamor of “Water! Water!”

Children were not able to bear thirst. Whenever they looked at the
Euphrates that was full of water they used to increase their clamor. The
Imam’s heart was shocked at this scene and he felt emotional about their
pathetic condition. Lips of the children were shriveled and their bodies
had weakened. The breast milk of the mothers had dried up while those
oppressors were having unlimited access to water.

Noor Jundi says,

**“Evil wolves had full access to water while the family of the Prophet
were deprived of it.**

**What injustice it is in the history of man that the heart of the lion
had to bear thirst, while he is capable of doing much.**

**Husain’s children lamented in the desert. O my Lord, render help. What
has happened to divine justice?”**

All the laws and religions of the world are unanimous that water must
not be denied to children and ladies especially the Islamic law is
particular that everyone has equal right to pasture lands and water
resources. Permission is accorded to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 89, *Ansaab
al-Ashraaf* 3/389

drink even from streams owned privately even though the owners may not
have accorded their permission. Also, it is considered very detestable
to slaughter a thirsty animal. However, the Umayyad army did not care
about this matter and they considered all the things decreed unlawful by
Shariah to be lawful.

Those cruel people did not even consider the favor the Imam had done to
the vanguard under Hurr’s command. It was the group that consisted of
1000 horsemen with Hurr at its leader and it was marching in the desert
to find and apprehend the Imam but it ran out of water and was nearly
dying of thirst. His Eminence would have let them die of thirst but his
magnanimity and nobility could not permit such cruelty. So he ordered
his men to provide them all with water, even their beasts; inspite of
the fact that His Eminence was in the middle of an arid land and himself
in need of water. But those wicked people did not even requite this
favor of the Imam. They kept him deprived of water along with the ladies
of the house of prophethood and the grandchildren of the Prophet with
him.

Decadent Nature
---------------

Those transmogrified people who had the control of water under them
ridiculed the Imam while they had cut off his access to water. They
goaded over this and boasted in a shameless manner; some examples of
which are as follows:

1. Muhajir bin Aws
------------------

Muhajir bin Aws Tamimi glanced at the Imam and called out loudly, “O
Husain, can you see the water sparkling like a snake’s belly? By God,
you shall not be able to drink it till you die.”

Imam responded and said, “I hope that Allah may enable me to reach it
and prevent you from it.”**[1]**

2. Amr bin Hajjaj
-----------------

Amr bin Hajjaj came forward while he was of those who had written to His
Eminence, inviting him to Kufa. He came near the Imam’s camp and called
out aloud, “This is Euphrates, that dogs dip their snouts in it and
donkeys and pigs drink from it. By Allah you will not get a drop of it
till you get boiling water of Hell.”**[2]**

3. Abdullah bin Haseen
----------------------

Abdullah bin Haseen Azadi came running like a dog to the Imam and asked,
“O Husain, do you not see the water that is like the center of sky. By
God, you wouldn’t be able to get a single drop till you die of thirst.”

The Holy Imam raised both his hands and prayed, “O Allah, let him die in
thirst and do not forgive him.”**[3]**

Those lowly beasts who had power over water supply were goading over
their  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/390  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/390  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/389. *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin
Nabi* Pg. 86

position so that they may get into the good books of their master, Ibn
Marjana and please him in order to gain rewards and allowances from him.

Objection to Ibn Saad
---------------------

Some companions of Imam Husain (‘a) and other people also condemned Ibn
Saad for denying water access to the beloved grandson of Prophet (s)
because it was the most degraded type of revenge while the children of
His Eminence, Husain (‘a), before their very eyes were dying of thirst.
And it happened when there did not exist any cause of revenge except
that the Umayyads were contaminated with malice and degradation. Among
those who raised objection against Ibn Saad were the following:

1. Yazid bin Haseen
-------------------

Yazid bin Haseen came out and told Ibn Saad, “This is Euphrates and dogs
are drinking from it while Husain, the son of Allah’s Messenger (s) and
his Ahle Bayt remain thirsty, while you claim to have recognition of
Allah and His Prophet (s)?”

Ibn Saad turned his dirty face down and did not provide any
reply.**[1]**

2. Burair bin Khudhair
----------------------

Burair bin Khudhair Hamadani went to Ibn Saad and called out aloud, “O
Umar, would you leave the family of prophethood to die of thirst, while
you have denied them access of Euphrates? While you claim to know Allah
and His Messenger!”

Ibn Saad replied, “O Burair, by Allah! Indeed the killer of this group
would go to Hell. But if you think that I would leave the governorship
of Rayy for someone else, you are wrong, because I can never agree to
it.”**[2]**

3. Hurr
-------

When Hurr joined the Imam’s camp and repented for his past attitude to
His Eminence, he set out towards Ibn Saad’s army and in a loud voice
said, “O people of Kufa! May your mothers grieve for you. That you have
invited and besieged and surrounded him from all sides that he may not
go away anywhere else in the wide earth and obtain security for himself
and his Ahle Bayt. He is like a hostage in your hands having no choice
of his own. He, his ladies, his children and his companions are deprived
of Euphrates water by you while Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians drink
from it and the dogs and pigs of this area swim in it. They are in a
serious condition due to thirst. What type of ill behavior have you
resorted to with the progeny of Muhammad after his passing away? May
Allah not quench you on the day of thirst.”**[3]**

This objection had no effect on Ibn Saad and he continued to be adamant
on his cruelty and oppression. He continued the embargo on water till
the Prophet’s progeny was dying of thirst.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qirmani, *Akhbarud Daul,* Pg. 108. *Waseelatul Maal fee idda
manaqibul Aal,* Pg. 290. *Matalib al-So-ool* 2/36-37  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/171-172  
 **[3]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/65

Access to a Spring
------------------

Thirst tormented the Ahle Bayt and children and ladies began to clamor
for water. Imam (‘a) arose and picked up the pick axe and dug around the
tents of ladies. A spring of fresh water erupted and they drank from it.
However only a little water came out of it and it dried after sometime.
Spies conveyed this information to Ibn Ziyad and he became infuriated.
He wrote to Ibn Saad as follows:

“I have been told that Husain is digging wells, obtaining water and he
and his companions are drinking from it. Thus take care! As soon as my
communication reaches you, as far as possible restrain him from digging
wells and be strict with him…”

Ibn Saad deployed men to prevent digging of wells and stationed a large
number of sentries and mercenaries along the branch of Euphrates so that
none may be able to reach it and drink water from it.**[1]**

Battle over water supply
------------------------

When Imam saw his children and Ahle Bayt tormented and wailing for the
killing thirst he was deeply disturbed and aggrieved. So he directed his
brother, His Eminence, Abul Fazl al-Abbas to bring water. That great
stalwart, set out with 30 horsemen and 20 foot soldiers along with 20
water skins. They all moved to the Euphrates while Nafe bin Hilal Muraid
was ahead of them.

Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaidi who was in charge of guarding the Euphrates came
forward and asked,

“What do you want?”

“We have come to drink from the water that you had deprived us from.”

“Have it.”

“Shall I drink it while Husain and his companions are thirsty?”

“There is no way they could get water. We have been stationed here to
keep them away from water.”

Imam’s men paid no heed. They stepped towards the river to fill up the
water skins. But Amr bin Hajjaj rushed to them with his soldiers. His
Eminence, Abbad and Nafe bin Hilal confronted with them but none of them
were killed. After that the Imam’s group filled up the skins with water
and turned back to the camp. It is said that they returned with only a
little quantity of water.**[2]** His Eminence, Abbas quenched the thirst
of those who were thirsty among the Ahle Bayt and saved them from
thirst. From that day he became known as “water carrier”, which is the
most famous titles of His Eminence and the one liked by him most.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 1/244. *Al Futuh* 5/162, *Baghiyatun
Nubla*  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/389

Habib seeks help from his clan
------------------------------

The famous companion of His Eminence, Husain (‘a), Habib bin Mazahir was
his most loyal and sincere ally. When he saw the loneliness of the Imam
and the unity of oppressive powers to wage a war against His Eminence he
sought the Imam’s permission to seek help from his tribe of Bani Asad so
that they may fight Jihad on the side of His Eminence. He said, “A group
of Bani Asad people reside in this area as nomads. They are located at
Nahreen, a short distance from our camp. Do you permit me to go and call
them for help, Perhaps through them the Almighty God would give you some
benefit or remove your affliction?”

Imam (‘a) accorded him permission. He went towards them as soon as
possible and addressed them, “I invite you towards nobility of the
hereafter, its virtues and great reward. I call you towards the help of
the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s) as he is right now
in a difficult situation. People of Kufa invited him offering their
support. But when he arrived to them they withdrew support and have come
to slay him.”

Seventy persons**[1]** accepted his invitation. Abdullah bin Bushr Asadi
was one of them. He said, “I am the first to accept this call.” Then he
recited the following war poem:

**“When people take a decision they know. And when the riders halt or
fall into a hardship.**

**I am a brave warrior and a valiant one. As if a roaring lion in the
den.”[2]**

They marched forward to join the Imam but a spy of Ibn Saad was present
in that meeting who rushed back to inform about these developments. He
dispatched a troop under the command of Jabla bin Umar and it prevented
the Bani Asad volunteers to join the Imam. Habib returned aggrieved and
informed the Imam about what had happened. His Eminence said, “Exceeding
thanks to the Almighty Allah.”**[3]**

Imam (‘a) along with his companions passed through extremely difficult
circumstances due to the forced detention awaiting that terrible event
that was to befall them in the desert of Kerbala.

With the two Encampments
------------------------

On the pure desert of the land of Kerbala, the powers of betrayal
confronted the soldiers of God and the seeds of monotheism. They fought
those whose hearts the Almighty Allah had opened up for faith while they
were absolutely convinced of their rightfulness...on the other hand
their enemies were involved in bewilderment and confusion. They fought
with complete awareness of their deviation and misguidance. Here we are
compelled to pause for a moment and discuss in some more detail about
these two groups.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** And in a report, ninety persons  
 **[2]** Part two of *Baghiyatun Nubla*  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/388

Husain’s Camp
-------------

The Imam’s camp displayed humanistic nobility and expressed lofty values
and great thinking, such that every righteous person obtains a gem from
their high values. And it is sufficient for them that they have become
immortal in the pages of history. Because of all the families of martyrs
of the world none could equal in nobility, loyalty and sacrifice in the
path of justice, the martyrs of Kerbala. Here we shall point out some
signs of their aims and their personal traits.

Noble Aims
----------

Those noble aims they had taken as their chief slogan and that valor and
faith for which they were taking part in this confrontation were as
follows:

1. Defense of Islam
-------------------

The companions of the Imam stood up with sincerity and faith to defend
Islam and protect its principles which had been ignored by the Umayyad
regime. And in this regard they acted in the best way and with most
outstanding sincerity and there are numerous instances deserving of
pride. For example, His Eminence, Abbas (‘a), who was the nearest
relative of the Imam, he did not act on the basis of his brotherly
affection and ties of relationship. Whatever sacrifices he offered, they
were on the basis of his firm faith in defense of Islam and the support
of an Imam of Muslims whose love and obedience was made incumbent upon
all people by Allah. He expressed this in the battlefield when the
enemies had cut off his right hand. He said:

**“By Allah, even though they have cut off my right hand I would
continue to defend my religion.**

**And go on defending the Imam, whom I really believe to be the rightful
Imam and the son of the pure trustworthy Prophet.”**

The war poem of Abbas clearly shows that His Eminence had not performed
Jihad due to his brotherly relationship with Imam Husain (‘a). It was
due to his concern for the defense of religion and support of the
rightful Imam which he truly believed in. People other than His
Eminence, Abbas have also announced this reality.

His Eminence, Aba Abdillah (‘a) had nourished them with his spirit and
guidance and dressed them up with his morals and manners in such a way
that their souls had distanced from the material world and their bodies
had separated from worldly matters. Their hearts and emotions had become
free of the activities of life...because what teacher is like Husain?
Which school is as inspiring as his school of thought? Can the
generations of the world create such faith in Almighty Allah and such
sincerity for truth?

2. In defense of Imam Husain (‘a)
---------------------------------

Another special aim of the companions of the Imam was their concern for
the defense of His Eminence from those beasts who had come together to
slay the Holy Imam. The Imam’s companions sacrificed their lives for
their loyalty and sincerity to His Eminence and through this they set
outstanding examples of loyalty. For example when Muslim bin Ausaja, the
famous companion of the Imam set out to the battlefield, while his body
had been wounded by swords and spears and he fell down fighting, the
Imam went to him accompanied by Habib bin Mazahir at a time when Muslim
was in his last moments in pain of death. Habib told him to make his
bequest about that which was important for him. He said in a soft
grievous voice, “I will you to defend him”, pointing towards the Imam,
“and sacrifice your life upon him.”**[1]**

What loyalty is so capable to be a cause of pride and esteem? He
imparted important lessons in loyalty with regard to truth, to the
coming generations, because when he was in the last moments of his life
and the hiccups of death were upon his chest, at that time also he
displayed no concern save the defense of the Imam and he had abandoned
every other thing connected with this life.

This great warrior is Suwaid bin Abi Muta, who is the most outstanding
martyr and the most sincere of them in loyalty. When he fell down
wounded in the battlefield, the enemies left him thinking that he was
dead. They did not attack him anymore. When he heard shouts that the
Imam has been killed, he could not keep still and save his life; he
stood up immediately and wanted his sword but he found that it had been
plundered. So he tried to get hold of something with which he could
fight Jihad with them. He got hold of a knife. He picked it up and used
it to stab the enemies. They were terrified of him, thinking that the
dead were becoming alive again to restart Jihad. And when they realized
that it wasn’t so, they turned to him and slew him. This loyalty of the
companions of the Imam indeed continued to the final moments of their
life.

Such a loyalty was not restricted to men. Ladies who were present in the
field of fighting also possessed this condition, for example a woman
used to come to her son and implore him to be martyred in the service of
Imam. Wives also rushed to their husbands to ask them to defend Imam,
while they did not care for their afflictions, like the death of their
sons or that they would have wear the dress of mourning.

It is extremely surprising that even the children of the family of
prophethood used to come forward and kiss the hands and feet of the Holy
Imam seeking his permission to achieve martyrdom. Among them was
Abdullah Ibn Hasan, who was only twelve. When he saw that enemies had
gathered to slay his uncle, he could not rest still. He came running but
his aunt Zainab came forward to stop him. However, he ran away from her
till he reached his uncle when Abjar bin Kaab had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/435-436

raised his sword to hit the Imam. The boy screamed at him, “O degraded
man, would you slay my uncle?” That dirty beast rushed to the little boy
and aimed his sword at his outstretched hands almost severing them from
his body.**[1]** The boy fell into the lap of his uncle. Harmala shot a
cruel arrow upon him and killed him in the bosom of his uncle. The lad
tasted death in the way of His Eminence...

Examples greater than those of the companions of His Eminence and his
Ahle Bayt are not found in pages of history.

3. Saving the community from oppression
---------------------------------------

Among the aims of the camp of Imam Husain (‘a) was the emancipation of
Muslim community from oppression of Umayyads and their injustice,
because they had spread injustice and filled up the world of Islam with
mischief. Companions of the Imam arose to destroy that system and to
restore the Islamic government. We have already stated this matter in a
separate topic during our discussion on the causes of Imam’s revolution.

4. Incomparable natures
-----------------------

Companions of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) were imbued with a noble nature
and they were more distinguished from other people in the following
aspects:

A. Nobility and Self-respect
----------------------------

Among the personal qualities of those noble men was nobility and
self-respect, because they had accepted death in the way of their
nobility. The chief of the nobles, His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) says,
“I do not see death except as a success. And I do not consider living
with oppressors as nothing but deception.” And his righteous son, His
Eminence, Ali Akbar has recited in his war poem of the day of Ashura:

**“I am Ali bin Husain bin Ali. By the Lord of the Kaaba, we are more
deserving of the Prophet. By Allah, this son of the evil man cannot rule
over us.”**

Imam Husain had cast the ray of his soul on his companions and Ahle Bayt
and they welcomed death with honor, respect and nobility.

B. Valor and Steadfastness
--------------------------

Another quality prominent in the Imam’s camp was courage, because they
were incomparable warriors of the world. Inspite of their few numbers
they displayed untold determination against their numerous foes and
caused them terrible harms and serious hardships.

The English historian, Percy Skies says: “Imam Husain and his group of
few companions were determined by their firm resolve to face death. And
they fought with such valor and courage that to this day no other
fighters have earned our astonishment and praise so much.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/450-451  
 **[2]** Percy Skies, *History of Iran*

Imam dressed them with spirituality and revolutionary zeal and it is
natural that the personality of the leader is an important effect on
imparting spirituality to the soldiers. Because the mechanism of
leadership is instrumental in taking forward the warriors in the
battlefield.**[1]** And the companions of the Imam with a firm
determination, without any fear of hardships and hurdles fell upon the
Umayyad forces till the earth became constricted for that army and a
majority of them resorted to flight. A mercenary of Ibn Ziyad condemned
the man who had persuaded him to join this campaign and said:

“It was the most difficult thing in the world that if you had seen what
we saw, you would also have done what we did. A group pounced upon us
while their hands were upon their swords. Like ferocious lions who were
killing mounted fighters on their right and left. They were throwing
themselves upon death, not prepared to accept security and not having
any desire for wealth. There was nothing between them and death, not
even the lure of rulership. Thus if they had got hold of us they would
have eliminated all the soldiers of our army. Then what we could have
done, may your mother die?”**[2]**

Kaab bin Jabir Azadi was among the soldiers of Ibn Ziyad who killed the
great Qari (reciter of Quran) of Kufa, Burair bin Khudhair and who also
had a hand in the Imam’s killing. In a poetical composition of his, he
has glorified the valor of the companions of the Holy Imam (‘a) as
follows:

**“Make inquiries, so that you may be informed about me, and of that
time when you were condemned. That day when Husain was present there and
the spears were drawn out.**

**But I did not do at all what you didn’t want and that which I did on
that day, it has not affected me in anyway.**

**With me was a spear that could not break. And the sword drawn out that
I had sharpened at both the edges.**

**Against the group whose religion was not the same as mine, I caught
them as I had faith in Muawiyah.**

**I fought with swords in the battle such that whoever may defend with
obligatory actions will be successful.**

**They would have been steadfast before the swords and spears and
continued to fight if that action had been beneficial.**

**So tell Abdullah that whenever you see him that I am the obedient one
of the caliph.**

**I killed Burair and after that I attacked Abu Munqadh when he came to
confront me.”**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nizami, *Ilmun Nafs* 1/36  
 **[2]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 3/263

Kaab has revealed his extreme surprise at the bravery of the companions
of the Imam; because neither he nor anyone else had ever witnessed such
a kind of steadfastness and valor. Those who were patient in front of
the strikes of swords, wounds of spears and death. And of their
incomparable courage, according to what historians have said was that
none of them resorted to flight and all of them were killed while
confronting and none in retreat. They displayed the highest limit of
possibility in valor, bravery, steadfastness, rightfulness of intention
and strength of determination for the support of the Imam and defense of
His Eminence; in such a way that Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaidi advised against
fighting them and told the people of Kufa:

“Do you know against whom you are fighting? You are fighting against the
knights of this land and the owners of perceptions. Against the people
who are in pursuit of death and none of you would attack them but that
in spite of their meager numbers you shall be killed.”**[1]**

His statement has mentioned qualities that were apparent in them; of
them were the following:

- They were knights of the people of Kufa, or rather of the complete
Arab region.

- They were having living consciences and wakeful souls that they
stepped forward to help the Imam with full awareness, and not in greed
of wealth or position.

- They were fighting the battle to achieve martyrdom and had no hope
from worldly life. Through this they were most capable to make their
enemies retreat; however they (the enemies) had been deceived and
defrauded by greed.

Regarding their unsurpassed bravery, Aqqad says: “Accompanying Husain
were the best knights of Arabs and each of them were famous for their
valor, daring, sharp shooting and sword fighting. But it was certain
that they would not be earning any fame or praise in accompanying the
Imam, because at that time conditions were such that they were only
expected to face death boldly.”**[2]**

It is clear that none of the companions of the Holy Imam (‘a) had greed
for any worldly benefit and none desired anything except the rewards of
Allah and success of the Hereafter...

Elements constituting the Imam’s Army
-------------------------------------

The Imam’s army consisted of two main elements which were as follows:

A. Bondsmen
-----------

Bondsmen were having a firm relationship to Imam Husain (‘a) due to the
equitable manner with which His Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) had
dealt with them. And if conditions had been favorable a large number of
them would have joined the Imam. The Imam’s army had the following
persons from the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/432-435  
 **[2]** *Abu Shohda*, Pg. 215

slave class:

1. Sulaiman, slave of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).

2. Qaarib Daili, slave of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).

3. Harith bin Nab-haan, slave of Hamzah bin Abdul Muttalib.

4. Sahah, slave of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).**[1]**

5. Aamir bin Muslim, slave of Saalim.

6. Jabir bin Hajjaj, slave of Aamir bin Nahshal.

7. Saad, slave of Umar bin Khalid Saidawi.

8. Raafe, slave of Ahle Shanwa.

9. Shauzab, slave of Shakir bin Abdullah Hamadani Shakiri**[2]**

10. Aslam Turki, slave of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).**[3]**

11. Jaun, slave of Abu Zar Ghiffari.**[4]**

12. Zaahir, slave of Amr bin Khuzai.**[5]**

These were bondsmen who had precedence over freemen as far as their
nobility and their decision to support the truth was concerned, because
they succeeded in helping the Chief of the youths of Paradise and earned
martyrdom in the service of His Eminence.

B. Arabs
--------

The rest of the companions of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) were of Arab
linage and most of them were residents of Kufa, and from Basra, except
for a few, none were martyred with His Eminence. In the same way from
Hijaz, the great companion, Anas bin Harith Kahili joined His Eminence.

Here we conclude our discussion about the qualities and composition of
the Imam’s army.

Umayyad Troops
--------------

As for the Umayyad troops, they consisted of trust betrayers and
conscience-sellers, such that not a single noble inclination was found
among them. In the same way, without any doubt, they were certain that
they were in misguidance and deviated from the rightful path…some of
their qualities were as follows:

1. Aimlessness
--------------

The most prominent sign of these mercenaries was that they were
absolutely devoid of any kind of aim and determination. Because most of
them – according to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hisan bin Bakr Hanzali killed him.  
 **[2]** *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/121-122  
 **[3]** *Ayanush Shia* 1/126  
 **[4]** *Biharul Anwar* 45/22  
 **[5]** *Manaqib,* Ibne Shahr Aashob, 4/113

historians – were such that their hearts were with the Imam and their
swords were against His Eminence! They had come to fight one in whose
rightfulness they believed and they knew that it was only he who could
realize their aims and aspirations. If they had an iota of understanding
and perception they would have sacrificed their hearts and souls upon
him. And that was after they had pledged oath of fealty to the Almighty
that they would support and defend him; in spite of this they betrayed
the trust.

2. Confusion and Anxiety
------------------------

Confusion and self betrayal had most of the soldiers of the Umayyad army
in its clutches; because they knew that they had fallen into the abyss
of falsehood and that His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and his companions were
on the path of rightfulness. As described by Shabth bin Rabi, one of
their senior officers and leaders, that:

“I fought on the side of Ali bin Abi Talib and his son, Hasan and after
that for five years I served in the army of Abu Sufyan’s family. Then we
wreaked oppression on his (Ali’s) son, who is the best of men on the
earth. We fought against him on the side of family of Muawiyah and son
of Sumaiyyah, the fornicatress. It is deviation and what a deviation? By
God! The Almighty Allah will never bestow goodness on the people of this
land and He shall never give them success.”

These words describe the level of internal anxiety that had taken over
Shabth bin Rabi and without any doubt there were hundreds of people like
him who inwardly condemned themselves for having fought against the
beloved grandson of Allah’s Messenger (s). In the same way many of them
avoided taking part in martial activities. Just as Amr bin Hajjaj
Zubaidi noticed these matters regarding them and addressed them as
follows: “Do not fall into doubt in fighting against one, who has left
the religion.”

Among the signs of their bewilderment was that none of them have been
quoted to say anything about their aims and objectives in this war in
their war poems**[1]** because their mouths were shut and their tongues
had become dumb. On the other hand the war poems recited by the
companions of Imam Husain (‘a) and his Ahle Bayt were such that they
state the aims and principles for which they were martyred…Singing war
poems was a practice of those days and the warriors used to recite them
during the battle boasting about their own valor and strength and
threatening to eliminate their enemies or force them to retreat.

Reciting of war poems, in this way, was a weapon of war upon which
relied the warriors of that time in the same way as they relied on the
tools of warfare like the sword, arrows and spears. During the battle of
Jamal, Ayesha’s supporters sang about their aim in taking part in the
battle to be in defense of their mother and the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Habib says: Arabs recited Rajaz in battles to drive camels,
to boast of their valor and achievements and for other things. This
matter is mentioned in *Aghani* 18/164.

companions of the Imam, in their recitations spoke of their defense of
His Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) and described it to be a
religious duty, like it was in the battle of Siffeen.

However in the battle of Kerbala, it is noteworthy that not a single
line of a war poem has been quoted from any of the men of the Umayyad
army or that they mentioned it by way of testimony or example. This is a
proof of their confusion and their self-condemnation because all of them
were aware with awareness devoid of any misunderstanding or denial that
what an infamy they have committed. How they had sunk in falsehood and
were submerged in misguidance.

3. Recklessness
---------------

A large group of the army men of the Umayyad forces were famous for
sinfulness and crime, because they were those who constantly imbibed
wine. Historians say: “All those who carried the severed heads of the
martyrs to Damascus, drank wine all the way.” In the previous
discussions we have explained about their well-known qualities in lying
and impiety in religion.

Here we conclude our discussion about some qualities of that army.

Elements of the Army
--------------------

The Umayyad troops were composed of the following elements:

1. Opportunists
---------------

They were those who for greed or fear of the regime joined the army and
who were in constant pursuit of their personal gains. In their behavior
and actions they gave no preference to rightfulness and were only after
their own benefits. Such persons comprised a large group in Ibn Ziyad’s
camp and they were entrusted with important posts in the army. They were
of the likes of Ibn Saad, Hijar bin Abjar, Shabth bin Rabi, Shimr bin
Zil Jaushan, Qais bin Ashath, Yazid bin Harith and others, who had
permanently divorced righteousness and not a single act of goodness was
seen throughout their lives. They were only known to afflict harm upon
others.

2. Mercenaries
--------------

A major part of the Umayyad troops consisted of men who had been lured
to join the battle by greed of war booty. As soon as the Imam was
martyred they rushed forward to plunder his belongings and such was the
level of their decadence that they did not even spare the ornaments of
the noble ladies of the family of prophethood. They pillaged all the
clothes and weapons of the martyred people. Historians say: “They looted
all the garments of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and left him absolutely
unclothed. We shall explain this in more detail in the discussion about
the actual martyrdom of the Holy Imam (‘a).

3. The Transmogrified
---------------------

Among the elements that constituted the Umayyad camp were the
transmogrified persons. They were such that their breasts were full of
malice and enmity towards

one and all, and their most important tendency was to shed blood
unjustly and rushing towards crimes in response to the call of evil
which had been deeply rooted in their souls.

Those oppressors from the transmogrified ones were in constant pursuit
of criminal deeds and they competed with each other in putting to death
young children and tormenting the ladies of Ahle Bayt. And they also
gloated about their misdeeds and shameful acts. Of such decadent beasts
were Shimr bin Zil Jaushan, Harmala bin Kahil, Hakeem bin Tufail Tai,
Sinan bin Anas, Amr bin Hajjaj and other rejected dogs like them.
Historians have researched the names of some of them who displayed such
cruelty in Kerbala that even beasts and dogs would wish to be aloof from
them.

4. The Compelled Ones
---------------------

Another group in the army consisted of those who were compelled to join
the battle against the Imam. They were forced into this by the regime of
the governor, while their loyalties and feelings were in favor of the
Holy Imam, except that their fearfulness and weakness has prevented them
from joining the Imam’s camp. These people did not take part in the
actual fighting. They instead prayed to the Almighty that may He send
his help to the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah. One of
such characters was even condemned for his attitude and was told,
‘Instead of praying, why don’t you go ahead and help and defend
him?’**[1]** Without any doubt, they had committed a great sin and are
deemed to have a share in the criminal acts of mercenaries, because they
did not do anything to save the Imam and defend him against the
oppressors.

5. Khawarij
-----------

One of the elements of the army that came out to fight against the Holy
Imam was the Khawarij. They were the most inimical persons towards the
family of the Prophet (s), because Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) had fought
against them in the battle of Nahrawan and thus they competed with each
other in the battle of Kerbala to seek their revenge by eliminating the
Purified Progeny.

These were some elements that constituted the troops of Ibn Ziyad. In
one of the Ziarats of His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) they are described
as follows: “And they united on him – on fighting the Imam – those whom
the world had deceived and who sold their benefit in the least price and
lost their hereafter in exchange of a lowly price and they fell into
destruction in their selfish desires.”**[2]**

We conclude here our discussion regarding the camps of Imam Husain (‘a)
and Ibn Ziyad so that we may fully understand the main features of that
immortal tragedy in the world of sorrows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 1/1  
 **[2]** *Mafatihul Jinan*, Pg. 468 Ziarat Arbaeen
