Introductions
=============

First Introduction
------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) is the greatest personality who has made all historical
events of humanity everlasting. He is among those great personages who
gave shape to social civilization and principles that form the basis of
a life of culture.

The Imam and the leader of nobles, he is the most prominent individual
to have shown miracles in the field of life and led the caravan of
humanity to destination and gave movement to their aspirations. He
guided them towards a moderate society. A society where equality is
given an important position so that all the people, low and high, may
benefit from it.

The Imam struggled more than any other reformer. He bestowed and offered
sacrifice because he took along with himself the people of his family
and his companions so that he may sacrifice himself and them also so
that in every place in the east, the command of Quran and heavenly
justice is established. Because he had no other aim except the removal
of oppression, destruction of injustice and establishment of a just
government. A government in which man could bring out peace, greatness
and prosperity according to the justice that the Almighty Allah wants in
the earth…and after that the life of the Holy Imam became an ideal
exemplar for all ages and all generations and an example of human
Values.

The life history of most of the reformers, who laid down their lives for
communities and in generations, remained illuminated and their fruits
and results served as signs for the people. But it was only for a
particular period and limited duration. Then not after a long time its
effect wears off just as light disperses in the atmosphere.

However the life of Imam Husain (‘a) has split the horizon of history in
such a way that he had light of guidance for all the people just as the
signs of death and destruction for the destroyers and oppressors given
as a souvenir to all generations.

The life of Imam Husain (‘a) merged with the souls of the people and
became united with their feelings and emotions, because he was such a
fresh one that fragrance of honor and greatness issued from him. He was
the one to take the society to the field of contest so that their aims
may be realized and that their fate may be appointed.

The life of His Eminence is a great school that bestows goodness and
blessings to individuals and to the society as a whole. Because it
inculcates in them loyalty and patience and takes them to faith in God
and the best of destination accompanied with honor and righteousness.
Just as it endeavors to impart good manners to consciences and increase
in knowledge. Thus he is more deserving to have an everlasting life than
all the living creatures living on this earth for he is such a structure
to mould human values.

The life of the beloved one of the Prophet and his example shall endure
forever

because the designer of all fates has kept in view all the generations,
as the Imam’s revolution had no political ambitions or material aims.
Rather his aim was the reformation of society and he had the thought for
all the people that he may provide political and social justice to all
of them. His Eminence, peace of Allah be upon him, declared his lofty
aims in his own words as follows:

“I did not come out to spread mischief, aimless things or oppression.
Indeed I have come out to reform the nation of my grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (s). I wish to enjoin good and forbid evil…”

It was due to these lofty principles that the tale of Husain became
immortal and it entered all the languages of the world. And people in
the remembrance of his sacrifice initiated the rituals of mourning
(Azadari) so that through it they may obtain faith in God and gain such
lessons from it as may serve them in all aspects of their life. There is
no doubt that this would continue till the end of the world. While it
issues the call of justice, truth and greatness and illuminate the paths
for every reformer who aims to reform the humanity.

In the history of Islam, there was no one more than Imam Husain (‘a) who
has benefited Islam and bestowed it kindness and merits, because His
Eminence is the Savior and revivalist of this great religion whom the
Umayyad politics attacked and injured and on the other hand put
obstacles in his path. Their internal and external discords were of such
a level that there was no one who could save the people from
destruction. They were absolutely helpless and nothing remained in their
society to oppose or resist or protest against the oppressions of the
tyrannical rulers. In other words the ruler has clearly announced to his
subjects that there was no religion, no Islam, no revelation and no
scripture (Quran):

Yazid bin Muawiyah said:

“The Hashimites played a in the reign; neither any news arrived nor any
revelation descended from the heavens.”

Walid bin Yazid says:

“A Hashemite played with the post of caliphate without any revelation or
book having revealed on him.”****[1]****

Whatever has reached us, if we study it clearly we find nothing but
disbelief and apostasy and very few people remained having faith in
Allah and the Last Day or considered Islam to have any value.

Without any doubt, not a single portion of the light of Islam had
entered their heart. Rather their souls were already full of bigotry and
ignorance and not a single quality of disbelief was removed by the force
of Islam. They harbored malice and animosity towards the Holy Prophet
(s) and they denied everything that the Messenger had brought as a mercy
for all the worlds.

The Holy Imam realized how the attacks of disbelief had rendered Islam
an easy  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

****[1]**** *Muruj az-Zahab* 3/ 216

prey and all the forces of infidelity were targeting the beliefs and
principles of the religion of God. Hence he considered it as his duty to
warn the people about it. He had seen that the Umayyad powers were
trying by all means to uproot and destroy the foundations of Islam while
the common people were living a life of fear and terror that had
scattered among them that the Umayyads had infused into them. Thus they
had become absolutely inert due to it. Neither talks of reformation
reached their ears nor were the drums of war heard by them. They did not
impose any sort of obstacle in the working of the oppressive rule nor
did they raise any protest against it that was ruling the common Muslims
with oppression.

The Holy Imam saw that he was the only one responsible in the view of
Allah and it was solely his responsibility to bring about a revolution.
And if he did not take any steps against the wrong being continued by
the ruling tyrants who else could? Hence he expressed his aims that he
wanted to remove oppressions and mischief and revive the enjoining of
good and restraining from evil. So that he could lead the people to
truth and justice. All these aims of the Holy Imam were mentioned in his
illuminated sermons that he issued to the enemy forces comprised of
Hurr, and soldiers of Ibn Ziyad.

“O people! The Messenger of Allah (s) has said: One who sees a tyrant
ruler making the unlawful of Allah as lawful and ignoring the commands
of Allah and opposing the practice of the Messenger of Allah (s),
committing before the very eyes of the people, sins and transgressions;
and he does not object against him by words or actions, it becomes
incumbent on Allah to make him enter the same place that he (the tyrant)
shall go (in Hell). All of them have obeyed the Shaitan and they have
become distant from the obedience of the Beneficent. They have made
corruption open and general, trespassed the limits and took over public
property in their sole control and made the unlawful things lawful and
the lawful things unlawful…”****[1]****

These are the dangerous causes that motivated the Imam (‘a) to rise up
against the tyrannical rulership of the Umayyads and a system, which
considered every act, opposed to the Book of Allah and the practice of
His Prophet as lawful.

The Umayyad rulers concentrated all their efforts to oppress and weaken
the people and misappropriated public wealth to fulfill their lustful
desires and finance their vices. They used to control their fates and
forced them to a life of penury and spent public wealth in evil vices.
This was the reason that the Holy Imam arose against them to save the
nation and manifest their greatness and honor.

It was the most important period of the political history of Islam in
which the Imam (‘a) lived. It was a time when terrible events took place
due to which the Islamic life was shaken up and the Muslims were
subjected to severe trials and tribulations. Calamities after calamities
descended upon them weakening them badly. They were in terrible
circumstances.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

****[1]**** Tabari, *Tarikh,* 5/403

The most terrible event of that period was the carnage of Kerbala in the
history of humanity that awoke the consciousness of the people and shook
them from their slumber.

This great event was not a sudden and chance happening. Rather it was a
certain consequence for those terrible events that had silenced the
Islamic awareness and killed the feeling of responsibility and made the
people completely numb to all types of emotions and feelings. The
effects of the spirit of Islam and its guidance no longer remained on
them. The most significant proof upon this is that the beloved grandson
of the Prophet was mercilessly martyred openly before their very eyes
and his severed head aloft spear points was taken around the cities and
town accompanied with the women and children of the family of the Holy
Prophet (s) as prisoners. Their veils were snatched away and they were
forced to reveal their faces that were visible from near and far. But
this atrocity did not rouse the manliness of the people so that they may
attack the rule of Yazid and seek vengeance for killing the son of the
daughter of their Prophet. Dibil (May Allah have mercy on him) says
regarding such circumstances:

**“The head of the son of Muhammad’s daughter and his Successor and O
people, it is being raised aloft the spears.**

**And the people are witnessing it with their eyes and ears. No one is
being angered by it and none is distraught.**[1]****

The tragedy of Kerbala did not occur but for the fact that the Muslim
community was stupefied and their paths had deviated. Many diseases of
the manners and calamities had rendered their lives to become absolutely
debased. They had seen such terrible events such as the Saqifah, the
Shura and the battle of Siffeen.

In any case, the historical events surrounding Imam Husain (‘a) are
worth scholarly research and deep study, without having any bias and
completely refraining from the well-established practice that
necessitates the concealment of truth. There were many circumstances
that compelled them to make the general deviated views in many aspects
of life to be made opinionated. This should be made a subject of
research because the history of Islam by way of its subject and
comprehensiveness has not been properly researched. Rather most of the
researches have followed the well-established practice that is not
beneficial to the society. It is of no use. And also the way those
events and historical facts should have been studied and explained has
also been stopped from being shown in the light of reality.

That in which there is no doubt, there are some hidden aspects in the
history of these events that historians have purposely concealed. It
therefore becomes necessary for those researchers to mix the facts with
doubtful reports and half-truths, so that in this way they may help the
Kingdoms that were powerful at that time. Now it is incumbent for a
researcher to find out the facts and reach to the truth.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

****[1]**** Dibil Ibne Ali Khuzai, *Diwan,* Pg. 225

We are compelled to present those events and describe the actual matters
because they are the means to fully realize the truth behind the life
and martyrdom of Imam Husain (‘a). These things are such that by their
study we would be able to clearly present the prevailing conditions and
social thinking of that period in a new method of research.

We believe that it is not possible for us to perfectly explain and
understand the story of Imam Husain (‘a) and the horrifying events he
had to undergo without conducting sufficient research into the social,
political and economic life of his period, because these things served
as a preface to that tragic event.

The history of Islam is needful that it should be released from its
sanctity and like other topics are researched, objected and doubted in
such a way that the matter is fully surrounded to the vigorous tests of
the scholars so that this imparts firmness to the history, and it blooms
and bears useful fruits.

The political rulers of that time had compelled the historians of that
time to record history according to their favor and they were not
supposed to pen anything against the ruling powers. Therefore the
histories of those times became full of those things that their writers
had fabricated and presented as historical truths. Due to this, its
factuality was destroyed and many topics became distant from reality.

The pens taken up to write Islamic history first of all were not
completely free of bias and vested interests, because religious bigotry
and proximity of the dominance of the ruler was weighing heavy upon it.
Therefore it is necessary that history should be subjected to close
research and critical examination.

I don’t think there is anything more beneficial for the people of
community than the propagation of the virtues of the Imams of Ahle Bayt
(‘a) their biographies and their greatness because this would present
goodness and guidance to all the people. And they contain practical
lessons and effective moral advices that create steadfastness and
balance in their behavior. It is of the most valuable powers alive that
the Muslims possess so that they may benefit from the valuable things
and their personal merits that are the source of this religion.

The life of Imam Husain (‘a) is the most-prominent example among the
Purified Imams (‘a), because it is beyond the limits of time and space
and it manifested the highest human values that inculcate in every human
heart a sign of greatness and illuminates their path of action. In fact
the biography and martyrdom of His Eminence contains such astonishing
topics in whole history of Islam that came into being and the Muslims
and other communities have not seen anything else presenting human
values in such a clear way as the Holy Imam (‘a) had done on the plains
of Kerbala. On the basis of which faith in God, contentment and
submission to His command have never been explained such beautifully
anywhere else. And this unbounded faith is the special quality of the
Ahle Bayt and their followers through which they obtained precedence
over all the martyrs of the world. They were absolutely sincere in their
defense and in the confrontation for

the sake of truth. And none of them had any material motive. For
example, His Eminence, Abbas (‘a) who was the closest person to Imam
Husain (‘a) and the one who was very closely related to him. In this
incomparable loyalty he did not have any motive due to brotherhood and
relationship to the Imam. Rather he took steps for the sake of faith and
defense of Islam. And His Eminence, peace of Allah be upon him, has
introduced these aims in epical poetry well known for its eloquence in
the following way:

**“By Allah! Even if you cut off my right hand I would continue to
defend my religion and my faith is in the truthful Imam, scion of the
pure and trustworthy Prophet.”**

The meaning is clear that his sacrifice is not having any motive
connected with his relationship or friendship of the Imam, which would
have nullified the sincerity of this act. It was solely for the defense
for the sake of Allah and the Imam of the Muslims, whose obedience is
made incumbent on all the Muslims.

Examples like this abound from Imam Husain (‘a) his Ahle Bayt and his
companions in the history of humanity which are the most valuable
lessons regarding faith, loyalty and sacrifice on the path of God. And
every step from the steps of the day of Kerbala imparts honor to truth
and justice in the world.

Imam Husain (‘a) spread and waved the standard of Islam and freed the
aspirations of the Arabs and Islamic community because before the
incident of Kerbala they were slothful, silent, stagnant and ignorant.
The bonds of the Umayyad rulership imprisoned them and they had laid
obstacles in their path of freedom and progress. The Holy Imam (‘a)
through his revolution broke those chains and released the community
from the heavy yokes that had kept them down. He destroyed the fear and
awe of the rulers from their captivated minds.

The revolution of the Imam endeavored to create a social feeling and
shaped the social structure so that the people also in the same way
become valiant and powerful. That also after release from stupefaction
they demanded their rights from the oppressive rulers and seriously took
steps to dethrone the tyrannical government of the Umayyads that had
tried its best to humiliate them and take them towards slavery.
Sacrifices continued to be offered one after the other till the
tyrannical rule was destroyed and their oppressions and rebellions
dissipated.

The revolution of the Father of the noble ones (‘a) is the greatest of
revolutionaries of the nobles of the world that spread the light of
knowledge and awakening in the world and accorded a respectful status to
Islam and humanity. He provided such glorious lessons for the belief
that is not weakened and a faith that is never defeated. It is a
continuous source of respect and dignity of the Muslims, which shall
remain forever in their generations.

Allah knows best that our heart’s desire was to conduct such a research
into the life history of the chief of the Martyrs (‘a) that it should be
considered a masterpiece among researches on the same subject. My
respected friend and mentor, Haj

Muhammad Rishad Ajine encouraged me in this aim and time and again
assured me that I could be successful in my endeavor. He is such a
righteous personality and so keen to serve the cause of Allah and Ahle
Bayt that he volunteered to bear the total cost of the research and
publication of this work and also our book on the life of Imam Musa
Kazim (‘a). May the Almighty Allah bestow him with exceeding rewards and
may He accord success to each of his great virtues.

He wanted that the expenses of printing this book be paid from the
charitable trust in the name of his respected father, Haj Muhammad
Jawwad Ajina (q.s.). I pray to Allah that He may reward him for this
venture. And it is also necessary for me to acknowledge the
encouragement of His Eminence, Hujjatul Islam Mujahid Sayyid Muhammad
Kalantari (q.s.) that enabled me to take this project to completion. I
am especially thankful to him and also my respected brother, His
Eminence, Hujjatul Islam Shaykh Hadi Qarashi for providing access to
many sources in course of this research.

In the conclusion of his preface we announce with absolute faith and
conviction that I do not find anything more worthy of gaining divine
satisfaction and His forgiveness except through the Chief of the Martyrs
(‘a). Therefore, I have entrusted myself to that Ark of Salvation that
can accommodate many deficient people like us, and we hold fast to the
support of Wilayat (Guardianship) and repose hope in them on the day
when I face my Creator.

O my God! Do not make my efforts go in vain and fulfill my desires. Do
not let our hopes be dashed as you are the guardian for it and you are
the most powerful.

***Najaf Ashraf  
 3<sup>rd</sup> Rajab/1394 Hijri  
 21<sup>st</sup> July/1974 A.H.( 30<sup>th</sup> Tir 1353 Solar year)***

Second Introduction
===================

The terrible events in Islam that were contemporary to the time of Imam
Husain (a.s.), had a deep impact on the changing of manners of
intellectual and social life and also had an important imprint in the
political life throughout history. The most prominent consequences of
those events were confrontations against the ruling despot, rivalry with
the tyrant ruler and struggle for obtaining the produce of the lands.

It was natural that political conflict occurred with the most difficult
condition and most terrible way and battles began to take place with all
intensity and ferocity. Because the eyes of many companions and
companions of companions had been enchanted with the sight of different
types of luxuries and a comfortable life without any hassles. The
opulent kingdom of Iran and the land of Byzantine that had fallen into
their hands, completely mesmerized them and the victories that the
Islamic armies had achieved and whatever the Almighty Allah had given
them and those slaves they obtained from the conquered lands; the wealth
they hadn’t even dreamt about astonished them. Now their sole
preoccupation was fighting battles and the struggle for life and death
and they had completely forsaken religion.

The great Prophet through the unseen had known what dominions his
community would obtain and what lands they would conquer through their
glory and greatness and had in view along with it the holy movement of
Islam and he informed the Muslims of this matter. Whatever they were
doing was due to their personal beliefs. Just as the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) had through the knowledge of unseen known about the mischiefs
and turmoils that his community shall fall into. Therefore he observed
extreme precaution in this matter and he arranged for a treasure for his
community that has cure for every pain and which removes every conflict.
And it was that he entrusted the Imamate of his Purified Progeny to the
community. Who were such that the Almighty Allah had protected them from
every abomination and filth and kept them pure? These steps were not the
consequences of his personal affection and attachment because the
position of prophethood was higher than that it should be affected by
factors of love and other material grounds.

Sayings of the Prophet reached to the limits of Tawatur (widely related
so that there is no doubt about their authenticity) and none from the
Muslims had any doubt or misunderstanding about them because His
Eminence had made the Ahle Bayt (a.s.) equal to the Holy Quran, which is
such that falsehood can neither come to it from the front nor from
behind and he described them as the Ark of Salvation and the security
for the people, especially the chief of the Progeny, His Eminence,
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) on the basis of the emphatic sayings of the
Prophet – his brother, the self of His Eminence, gate of the city of
knowledge and the most equitable of the people of the community and Ali
(a.s.) was in relation to the

Prophet like Harun was to Musa. And he said:

*“Of whomsoever I am the master; this Ali is also his master…”*

However those people did not like to see prophethood and caliphate
together in the same family and these people explained away the texts
and kept away the caliphate from the family of prophethood, the mines of
wisdom and the place of descent of revelations and they deprived the
community from benefit of the shade of their kingdom whose aim was to
spread divine justice on the earth.

This separation became the cause of confrontation for taking over the
rulership which spread in the prominent families in Islam and after that
the community became involved in the most terrible difficulties, such
that life in those days became hellish and was unbearable and the reign
of Nata’**[1]** And the sword became established among the people.

Political conflict developed in the most severe manner during the period
of caliphate of Imam Amirul Momineen (a.s.) because the powers greedy
for rulership began to move; they initiated an armed attack for this
purpose and began to try to dislodge the government, which stood for the
benefit of Muslims, was based on the foundation of human rights and
trying to establish the principles of truth and justice and to destroy
the castles of oppression and demolish the forts of falsehood and kindle
the torch of human greatness and to eradicate all the factors of
backwardness and corruption that has been left as heritage by the
previous regimes.

Imam brought into existence a revolution with a strong foundation and a
social transformation in the political, intellectual and economic fields
from which was expected equitable distribution and removal of
disparities that the government of Uthman and the families of Bani
Umayyah and Abi Muit had created. It also confiscated the monetary
sources that had been usurped unlawfully and dismissed the governors and
other government officials who had made rulership a medium for obtaining
wealth and domination over the people wrongly.

These social changes that were brought about by the Imam’s government
increased the psychological crisis in the hearts of Quraishites and
others who were opposed to social reforms and were certain that the
Imam’s government shall put an end to all their economic and
non-economic advantages. Therefore they joined hands to announce their
opposition and it is a matter of great regret that some of the senior
companions like Talha and Zubair were also among them. And that Ayesha,
the Prophet’s widow was a prominent part of them. It is also noteworthy
that the opponents had no sort of social or reformative aim. Rather they
had become prepared for this due to their greed and selfish desires as
they have expressed on some occasions. The foremost of these was the
Umayyad party which came out in opposition to the Imam and they put at
the disposal of the Imam’s opponents the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nata’: It is like a leather carpet upon which is put the person
who is to be beheaded/executed so that the blood does not spill out.

wealth they had obtained during Uthman’s tenure and they in turn
purchased weapons and paid the mercenaries whatever they demanded as
remuneration. And the fire of war erupted which the historians have
named as the Battle of Camel. The Imam rushed to them and put out the
fire and eradicated its signs. However that battle caused untold loss to
the Muslims because it opened the doors of war on the Muslims and
prepared the ground for Muawiyah to announce his rebellion against the
Imam so that he may confront the Imam in the most severe and terrible
battles.

One after another, horrible events took place and in such a way that
each was the result of another till it culminated in the martyrdom of
Imam Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the absence of the obedience of his son,
Hasan (a.s.) and the victory of the powers inimical to Islam. We shall
discuss them topic-wise in a detailed way and with an unbiased manner.

In a deceitful manner and a diplomatic way the Umayyads succeeded in
coming to power and the Umayyad rule was established under the
leadership of Muawiyah bin Abu Sufyan who was the first one to follow
all the war tactics against Islam that was in the illuminated period of
revolution and against the teacher and leader of humanity. Muawiyah
stood up to announce opposition of progress of society and against
establishment of the society on the foundation of justice and equality.

The Islamic community became involved in this trap of Umayyads due to
their own greed and they submitted to their rulership in awe and terror;
that had malice and enmity against social values and their intellectual
and social foundations; it raised up its head and they began to destroy
that which Islam had established in the economic, political and
intellectual fields.

Umayyad policy initiated a terrible pogrom to destroy the fundamental
bases of the community and to root out the spiritual and intellectual
treasures through their terrible and merciless policies that are
described as follows:

A – Considering worthless the value of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) whose view was
the social pivot in Islam and who were the most sensitive nerve in the
body of the community and the spirit of progress in the Ummah. The ruler
employed all political machinery, economic and their other capabilities
to distance the hearts of the Muslims from Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and made
them inimical to Islamic life. So that this enmity of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)
may become an inseparable part of Islam. And in this path the machinery
of education and training, the machinery of speeches, counseling and
other mediums were employed and the cursing of the Prophet’s Progeny
from atop the pulpits was made an obligatory duty, such that its
omission was threatened with the worst consequences. Whoever refrained
from this was interrogated severely and subjected to a terrible
punishment.

B – Destroying the elements of enlightened thinking in Islam that they
had received in training by guidance and reality and to send the senior
ones of Islam to jaws of death as done to Hujr bin Adi, Mitham Tammar,
Rushaid Hujri and Amr

bin Hamaq Khuzai and others like them who had the power of social
enlightenment and the capacity to protect the community from deviation
and moving in undesirable ways.

The system of the rulers made excuse that these people had given up
obedience and separated from the congregation while there was not an
iota of truth in this. They created a political front clothed in the
dress of religion to take benefit of the community for themselves. Since
the selection of the ruler was supposed to be with justice and equality
between the people and its duty was to endeavor for balance in their
affairs, taking excuse of this system they declared that it was lawful
to shed their blood.

C – Changing of the illuminated reality of Islam and turning upside down
of all Islamic teachings and destroying its foundation with
superstitions and doubts so that their powers are nullified. And their
movements on the path of life and their release with man for getting
guidance by their capabilities and abilities, made them helpless in all
this. Thus they hindered the people from means of progress in their
life.

The regime formed false committees and bestowed them a lot of wealth so
that they may fabricate traditions of the Prophet. And that they should
be made out as tenets of law and Sunnah, which is itself a source of
Islamic law.

Fabricators began to concoct false sayings and associated their lies to
the Prophet but most of what they fabricated was opposed to logic,
reason and the law of nature. It is a matter of great regret that all
their lies were compiled into books of traditions. So such so that some
shameful scholars were compelled to write some books and introduce some
of these fabrications. In our view it was a very dangerous and terrible
plot that Muslims became involved in it. Because involvement in that
matter was not restricted to a particular period. Rather it accompanied
the flow of history and they continued to affect the life of majority of
Muslims. They began to consider those fabrications as a part of their
religion while many obstacles were put so that the capability of
progress and the freedom of their thoughts may be ended and like a
boulder of obstacle it remained in the path that Islam had appointed for
its followers.

The Muslim man during the tenure of Muawiyah, experienced unpleasant and
painful examples of hardships and calamities because Muawiyah’s regime
tried to spread oppression and injustice in all the areas and entrusted
the affairs of Muslims to killers and robbers like Ziyad bin Abih, Busr
bin Abi Artat, Samra bin Jundab, Mughairah bin Shoba and other filthy
characters like them. And they wrought continuous horrors and painful
tortures on the people, such that humanity had never seen such terrible
things in any of the stages of history.

Imam Husain (a.s.) witnessed the social injustice during the tenure of
Muawiyah, so much so that he was very much affected by it and he used to
be very aggrieved at it. Because His Eminence, on the basis of his
spiritual leadership that he had

inherited from his grandfather, used to feel it more and their pains
made him sad and he lived with this pain which was that the tyrant and
cruel governors of Muawiyah were in pursuit of the Shias of Ahle Bayt
(a.s.) and they did not refrain from any step in killing them, burning
their homes and confiscating their wealth and property and they tried
all means to oppress them. So that the Imam himself had to condemn those
unjust policies and send caustic and critical letters to the tyrant of
Damascus. In these communications he wrote about the steps those cruel
officials took for destroying his followers and those who were aware of
his merits. In some of those letters His Eminence negated the fact that
Muawiyah belonged to the community. Rather he was considered an
outsider, an alien who bore enmity towards this community. And this was
the real scenario because his political stances proved that he was the
worst enemy of the community and for them he used to prepare the most
terrible plots and in the light of the days and the darkness of the
night he was always planning various methods to oppress and exploit
them. The most terrible step according to historians that Muawiyah had
taken in this regard was to appoint his profligate son, whose favorite
pastime was playing with monkeys and dogs, as the caliph of the Muslim
community. So that he may destroy their religion and the world and make
them involved in the worst calamities.

During the period of Muawiyah and his profligate son, Yazid, Muslims
lost all their basic principles and no better community remained so that
it may serve as an example for the future generations as the Almighty
Allah had willed. Because Muawiyah had wrought severe destruction among
them and subjugated them in such a way that except for materialism they
had no time for anything else. Also he made them habitual of degradation
and slavery and he had snatched away their shame and kept them away from
good morals and that was the reason that the community did not try to
find the aim and actions which are necessary for giving them a
respectable life. They gave no importance to it. They used to submit
themselves to the Umayyad regime and were degraded and humiliated and
passed their lives under their cruel yoke which shed their blood and
destroyed their property and spread injustice and corruption among them.
Therefore a form of terrible event remained in them such that they
became a stagnant body which neither had the power to move nor the
ability to think. Nor it stood up for defense of its honor and merits.
And neither they stepped forward for merits and sacrifice. So that they
may oppose the oppression and injustice being done to them.

Imam Husain (a.s.), the grandson of the Prophet and the illuminated hope
of His Eminence having all the strengths of His Eminence was seeing this
pitiful condition of the Muslims that how they were involved in
humiliation and degradation and also it was no more that great nation
that could lay the foundation of the message of Islam and present the
torch of guidance for all nations.

A life threatening pain of feelings and sentiments enveloped the Imam
(a.s.) and His Eminence became involved in a deep and prolonged
contemplation. He used to remain awake in the nights to find a way to
save the religion of his revered

grandfather and how he could save the Muslims from reverting to
ignorance.

The Imam sometimes held meetings in Mecca and sometimes in Medina and he
used to present the contemporary conditions of the Muslims to the
companions and their sons and told them about the evil deeds and
unlawful activities of Muawiyah. And at last he concluded that this
method was in no way effective to bring about a social reformation and
it was not capable to regain their lost spirituality. He also noticed
that his position was between two matters and a third option was not
imaginable.

1 – The first option was that he makes a truce with the Umayyads and
gives allegiance to Yazid and ignores all their unjust actions and close
his eyes to the destruction of faith and society in which the community
was involved. In that case, it was possible with no certainty that he
may have secured his life. However it was a thing that the Almighty
Allah would never accept for His Eminence and also his living
conscience, full of piety for his Lord, did not like such a thing.
Because with regard to his relation to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), he was responsible for the defense of the community and to
support their aims and values. And in front of his grandfather, His
Eminence, the Prophet (s.a.w.s.), he was responsible for social
reformation and protecting Islam from destructive and transgressive
plots of the transgressors. His Eminence, peace be upon him, announced
this great responsibility and that which was obligatory on him in his
address to Hurr and his companions from the mercenaries of Ibne Ziyad:

“O people, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said, ‘One who sees a
tyrant ruler making unlawful things lawful and who breaks His covenant
and opposes the practice of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and acts
with sins and transgression among the people and does not oppose him by
action and words as Allah desires, it is upon the Almighty Allah to send
him to a place where He would send him…’”

2 – The second option was to announce a revolution and sacrifice
himself, his family members and his Shias while he was certain that his
revolution shall not succeed. Therefore His Eminence subjected to close
scrutiny the social conditions and he knew that religion was only a word
on the lips of those people. However, His Eminence was certain that his
sacrifice would be in the interest of the Muslims because their
intentions shall be free and they would rush to the fields of Jihad and
they shall be waving the flags of freedom and they would topple the
regimes of tyrant Umayyads and take them to their destruction.

His Eminence chose this illuminated path with all types of hardships and
calamities that no one could bear.

The Imam saw and perfectly understood the atmosphere of sorrow and
troubles and he made a program that provided very distinct consequences.
It was the matter of making Islam successful and to return life to
nerves of religion due to the causes that had spread slow poison by the
Umayyads and made them stagnant.

Imam declared his aim and explained the sorrowful tragedy that was to
endure

forever. He explained and mentioned it on many occasions.

1 – When His Eminence was in Mecca, he announced his uprising against
the Bani Umayyah. He spoke about his martyrdom, because it is mentioned
in that address that: “The martyrdom that I reach, I have selected it.
As if I can see the parts of my body that the hyenas of the wild between
Nawawis and Kerbala are tearing them up…”

Does this statement not prove the loftiness of his determination and
intention for sacrifice? Does it not inform us about the confirmed
prophecy about his great sacrifice which shall take place at Kerbala?
And this is Kerbala in whose lap his blessed body would be.

Similarly, before this, his grandfather and father had also prophesied
this matter.

2 – The great Imam spoke of the terrible calamities and dreadful events
that shall befall his family members from the time he is martyred. It
was at the time when Ibne Abbas suggested to His Eminence that he may
not take with him to Iraq, the veiled ladies of the family of
prophethood and daughters of the sanctuary of revelation, and that he
should leave them in Medina till the time conditions are favorable.

In reply Imam told him, “The Almighty Allah wishes to see them as
hostages.”

The Imam took his family members with him though he knew what
afflictions and captivity would afflict them because the completion of
his message was possible only in this way. Also their activities shall
bring to an end the Umayyad regime in this way and return the Islamic
life to its illuminated pristine glory.

3 – Imam (a.s.) also spoke on the way to Iraq that his blessed head
shall be raised aloft the point of spear and it shall be taken around in
cities and provinces and presented as gifts to the rulers just as the
head of his brother, Yahya bin Zakaria was dealt with given as a gift to
a tyrant king of Bani Israel.

Imam (a.s.) bore all types of hardships in the path of truth and to
exalt the word of God.

The Imam (a.s.) performed his great revolution so that the Almighty
Allah through it may make the Book clear and it may become a lesson for
the people of reason. A revolution that with all its programs was a part
of the message of Islam and an illuminated continuation of the great
revolution of the Prophet that took it forward and gave it a living form
for the aims and hopes of His Eminence such that if that revolution had
not been there the efforts of the Prophet would have been in vain and
his aspirations would not have been realized and no sign of Islam would
have remained.

Imam Husain (a.s.) became successful and the Almighty Allah blessed him
with a brilliant victory because the sky of Islam became illuminated
with his ever-living revolution and his sacrifice joined the feelings
and sentiments of the people and united with their hearts and it came in
the form of a great school of faith in Allah

through which the spirit of faith and sacrifice is spread in the path of
truth and justice and it taught the people lofty morals and superior
values and tried to take them to goodness, guidance and the true path.

The people witnessed with seriousness the afflictions of the chief of
the nobles and carefully pondered upon each of its parts and obtained
lessons of morality and sacrifice from it. They also learnt from it
incomparable valor and the honor that is never dominated by any
oppression or injustice.

Humanity bowed its head in submission before that great Imam who waved
the flag of truth in the heights of time because he spoke of the rights
of the oppressed and defended the interests of the persecuted…

Humanity remembers his greatness more than any other social reformer on
the face of the earth. And the great Imam, in this regard obtained such
a great success that no other social reformer except him in the world
has received such success.

The first success that the Imam received was the destruction of the
Umayyad regime because his everlasting revolution placed the bombs of
destruction in the Umayyad palaces and laid mines in their paths and not
much time passed but that they burst and toppled the Umayyad heads to
the ground and ended their intoxication of victory. That after their
honor and power they took the form of a historical relic. In this book
we shall present in a different manner a research on the illuminated
revolution of Husain in the intellectual and social fields of the
Islamic world.

The history of Islam is not capable of imparting any benefit to life if
one is bound in tethers and heavy chains are on him and he does not
study the events of Islamic history with research and knowledgeable
contemplation. He should ponder deeply, without bias the conditions that
were in the history of other communities which have been subjected to
thorough study and research. Because the study of history in their view
has the most important position in cultural and intellectual study.

If we desire that the history of Islam bears fruit and moves with the
intellectual development and scientific progress it is necessary that it
should be studied with full knowledge and in an intellectual manner and
far from religious and practical attachments. One must subject to
thorough study those great events in which the Muslims of the first
period were involved. Events that in our view, were the source of great
mischief and created everlasting difficulties for the Muslims that they
had to bear those hardships and mischiefs throughout history.

The study of Islamic history should be accompanied with understanding of
the conditions and situations of that time. If not, it would be a
dogmatic study for the people of this age and it would not benefit them
in any way.

We have already narrated and studied many events of early history of
Islam and the political and economic system that the caliphs had
established in their times so that we may make many of their events
subjects of our study with precaution and free of bias. Since it is
necessary for every researcher to try his or her best to reach

to the reality, I believe that of the causes of falling into sin is
intentional ignorance and if we conceal the political or social aspects
it would be a kind of misguidance of the people and lying to the
readers.

It is not proper that the study of history should be such that we change
it or distort the meanings, or that we move away from its intellectual
criterion. Rather this matter is connected to reality and it is a need
of life of our illuminated modern age.

Anyway, this study is related to the personal conditions of the life of
His Eminence, Imam Husain (a.s.) because His Eminence lived in an
eventful period. We have studied those events with great efforts and
learnt their aims that those events without any doubt in a practical
form and many circumstances that Muslims had become fearful of them were
effective and one of them was the tragedy of Kerbala as it was the
direct result of the destruction that the community at the hands of
Umayyad regime, which was trying to paralyze their intellectual and
social life and made comfort-seeking common among Muslims.

I hope that this study shall reach to the truth without being influenced
by sentimental manners, away from the love of customs and established
traditions. And in whatever I have written, truth is given precedence so
that there should not be any other way from this path except narrating
Islamic history in its reality. And before I conclude this preface, I
consider it my duty with all sincerity and awareness of the value, to
mention Haaj Muhammad Rishad Ajine. That righteous and great man who has
served continuously to spread knowledge about Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and
encourage the publication of their history. It is the best service that
is given to the community. The respected sir agreed to bear the cost of
publication of this book and he was desirous that it should be a
dedicated to his late father, Haaj Muhammad Jawad Ajine (died 1391 AH)
according to his will. May the Almighty Allah increase his rewards and
make all his valuable efforts fruitful.

***Najaf al-Ashraf  
 Baqir Sharif Qarashi***

Third Introduction
==================

On the day of Taff,**[1]** Imam Husain (a.s.) constructed the majesty of
humanity by which everyone prides and it is alone sufficient for it that
it presented its sacrifice on a path which is accepted by all for
spreading truth and justice.

Examples of sacrifices that the Imam presented to establish a life of
honor in Islam are really astonishing and outstanding because the
intellects of the people of the world were shaken by it and it left a
deep imprint on their hearts. So much so, that even those who were
slightly perceptive were also affected by it.

The most important matter that makes the Imam unique in this is
incomparable steadfastness that he displayed in front of terrible events
because the Imam was armed with unlimited patience, in such a way that
historians say: The crushing powers that were continuously moving
towards the Imam were welcomed by him with absolute submission to God’s
will, in such a way that no kind of weakness or cowardice was seen in it
and whenever tragedies testing patience descended upon him his lips used
to open and with deep faith which was the most prominent quality of his
personality, he used to say:

“Being in the sight of Almighty Allah has made it easy for us to bear
what is befalling us.”

This faith was that very secret of miracle and eternality in the mission
of Husain; with his lofty example that leaves a school for generations
to show them a way and increase its bestowals, in the same way as the
generous ones, it may release a spring of reformation so that the
Almighty Allah may let those on the earth inherit it.

On the day Ashura, truth was exalted in the field of values that created
discrimination about loyalty, sincerity and selflessness and this day
was not restricted to Muslims or a particular group. It is related to
all the communities of the world and all those who reside on the earth;
that through inspiration and perception brings them out of slavery.

Husain's message became victorious and along with his companions he
became the first standard bearer of truth and justice among the people,
such that more astounding success is not found anywhere else.

The day of Ashura had not yet reached its tragic end when people became
attentive to its events and factors. This incident bestowed such honor
to Islam that even writers having opposing views had to acknowledge its
importance. The chief factor was that it became the most well-known
event of human history.

Past scholars have considered it a separate subject of study and written
extensively  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Taff – Lit. on the banks of the river. It is one of the names of
Kerbala. It is named thus as it is situated on the banks of River
Euphrates. *Majma al-Bahrayn*

on its various facets and among these scholars is the great historian,
Abu Makhnaf, Saut bin Yahya bin Mikhnaf Azadi**[1]** who has written the
book, *Maqtal al-Husain.* Tabari has relied on Abu Mikhnaf for the
account of Kerbala tragedy even though the wordings are different. It is
very likely that this book is related to some other person and it was
later attributed to Tabari.

Of those who have written about the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.) is
Nasr Ibne Mazahim bin Siyar at-Tamimi al-Kufi**[2]** but his book is not
found in any of the libraries we have searched. Waqidi Muhammad bin
Zakaria and Jabir bin Yazid and other personalities of that time have
written around 60 treatises on this subject. But even though we made
great efforts to obtain their books or refer to them in libraries, we
did not succeed in this regard. It is possible that foreign libraries
that maintain Arabic manuscripts may be in possession of some of these
books.

In this volume our discussion on the life of Imam Husain (a.s.) comes to
an end; in such a way that we had to try very hard to refer to Arabic
manuscripts and microfilms that are present in large quantities in Imam
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) library, Imam Hakim and Imam Kashif al-Ghita
Library. Please see the list of books in bibliography. In spite of this
we cannot claim that we have written an exhaustive account of Imam
Husain (a.s.). We believe we have just cast some light on it and have
not been able to fully present the encompassing personality of Imam
Husain (a.s.). This is so because he was a great personality all of
whose aspects cannot be recognized except by studying all the Arabic
manuscripts written on the subject.

Anyway, this book is merely a collection of some pages on the life of
Imam Husain (a.s.) and some examples of his pure life that the common
people pride on. Except for this it is nothing else.

Before we conclude this introduction we would like to thank profusely
our mentor,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The narrator Abu Mikhnaf was well-versed in traditions and
narration reports. He was a Shia and a resident of Kufa. He is the
source of most of the events that occurred in that period. Orientalists
have a very good opinion about him. Maussin says: “If Abu Mikhnaf hadn’t
written anything, History would have been in a great loss.” Falhauzen
says: Tabari has taken large parts of narrations from Abu Mikhnaf and
preserved them for us and in this way preserved the earliest and the
best writings of an Arab for us.” Paul, the orientalist, says in
*Encyclopedia of Islam* 1/399: Abu Mikhnaf had written 32 glosses on
History of various events of the first century of the Hijrah of whom
Tabari has preserved a major portion for us.” The biography of Abu
Mikhnaf is present in *Mojam al-Udaba* 17/41, *Taj al-Uroos* 6/104 (old
edition), *Fawaat al-Wafayaat* 3/225, no. 405, *An-Najjashi,* Pg. 320,
no. 875, *Fehrist Tusi,* Pg. 204, no. 584, Ad-Dharia 1/348.  
  
 **[2]** Nasr bin Muzahim is an early Shia historian who has written
books like, *Jamal, Akhbar al-Mukhtar ath-Thaqafi, Waqiyatus Siffeen,
An-Nahrawan* etc. Some writers have alleged in his biography that he was
an extremist Shia and they say: He was a person deviated from truth.
Khatib Baghdadi has mentioned this in his *Tarikh* 13/282-283 while Ibne
Abil Hadid says about him: He was a positive person who narrated
accurately without any bias. His biography is present in *Mizanul
Etedal* 4/253 no. 9046, *Lisanul Mizan* 6/157, no. 551, *Ad-Dharia*
1/147, Zarkali, *Al-A’laam* 8/350 and *Rauzaat al-Jannaat*

the righteous Hajj Rishad Ajine who sponsored the printing of this book
through the estate of his departed father, Muhammad Jawad Ajine. And we
pray to the Almighty that He may bestow great rewards to him. Also it is
my duty to mention the favor of Hazrat Hujjatul Islam, Shaykh Hadi
Qarashi, my scholar brother who helped me to find reference to numerous
sources and also assisted me with many suggestions and improvements. The
Almighty would Himself reward him for this as He is the One to give
Tawfeeq.

***Najaf Ashraf  
 16/Safar/1396 A.H.  
 Baqir Sharif Qarashi***
