Martyrdom of the Companions
===========================

Mercenaries of falsehood and misguidance, armed to the teeth with rows
like a flood fell upon those chosen noble men who had dedicated their
lives to Allah and nothing could make them unmindful of supporting the
truth and destroying falsehood while those great personalities assumed
patience and sincerity and remained steadfast before those wild beasts.
And they were not cowed down by their huge numbers, their weapons and
their capabilities. They displayed admirable valor and manliness…

We shall discuss about the events of the battle and incidents related to
the martyrdom of those righteous souls.

General Attack
--------------

Forces of Ibn Saad launched a mammoth attack on the companions of the
Holy Imam and a furious battle erupted between the two parties. This was
the first attack in which the Imam’s men participated. It was an attack
in which all the divisions of the army of Kufa took part and the
companions derived strength from their faith in the correctness of their
belief in the defense of Islam and sacrifice with all sincerity. And
their martial spirit was awakened to such an extent that they continued
to repulse the huge army and rent asunder their ranks and dispersed the
rows of soldiers who had been tough as a stone. As a result of which the
small band of Holy warriors was able to put to flight the army of
Saad.**[1]** But in this course half of them were martyred.**[2]**

Number of Imam’s Men who were martyred
--------------------------------------

The number of martyrs from the Imam’s companions in the first attack, on
the basis of what Ibn Shahr Aashob has mentioned were as follows: Naeem
bin Ajlaan, Imran bin Kaab bin Harith Ashjai, Hanzalah bin Amr Shaibani,
Qasit bin Zuhair, Kanana bin Atiq, Amr bin Mashiya, Zarghama bin Malik,
Aamir bin Muslim, Saif bin Malik Numairi, Abdur Rahman Darji, Majma
Aaezi, Habbab bin Harith, Amr Jundai, Halaas bin Amr Rasibi, Sawaar bin
Abi Umair Fahmi, Ammar bin Abi Salamah Daalaani, Noman bin Amr Raasibi,
Zahir bin Amr, slave of Ibn Hamaq, Jabla bin Ali, Masud bin Hajjaj,
Abdullah bin Urwah Ghiffari, Zuhair bin Salim, Abdullah and Ubaidullah,
two sons of Zaid Basri and ten persons from the slaves of His Eminence,
Husain and slaves of His Eminence, Imam Ali (‘a).**[3]**

Single Combat
-------------

After the first attack, single combats started between the two armies,
because Yasar, the slave of Ziyad and Saalim, the slave of Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad came to the battlefield and challenged the Imam’s companions
for duels with them. So  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ma’-al Husain Fee Nahzatih,* Pg. 220  
 **[2]** It is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* that the number of Imam’s
companions martyred in the first attack was fifty.  
 **[3]** Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 4/113

Habib bin Mazahir and Burair stood up to move towards them, but the Imam
did not allow them to proceed. Thus, the great warrior, Abdullah bin
Umair Kalbi went towards them.**[1]** He was a daring and courageous
man. Imam Husain (‘a) said, “I consider him a fighter against
outstanding warriors.”

When he arrived and faced the two challengers they asked about his name
and lineage. He told them about it but they considered it of not much
importance and said, “We don’t know who you are. Let Zuhair bin Qain or
Habib bin Mazahir or Burair come out against us.” The brave warrior
hastened to the two men and screamed at Yasar, “Son of a prostitute, you
wanted to do single combat with one of the people. None shall come
against you but that he is better than you…”

How meaningful was his statement that: “None shall come but that he
shall be better than you.” Each one of the companions of the Imam was
better than him and the soldiers of that army because they were fighting
with conviction and faith that they were confronting with certainty
people of misguidance and deviation in the path of religion.

Kalbi attacked Yasar and felled him to the ground smeared in his own
blood. At that moment Saalim attacked him while he was not attentive to
him. With his left arm he warded off Saalim’s blow but the fingers of
his hand were cut off. Then he turned on Saalim and struck him with the
other hand killing him.

The mercenaries of Ibn Saad were terrified of this incomparable warrior.
While he was fighting, his respected wife, Umme Wahab**[2]** took up a
tent pole and hastened to him and cheered him to fight on, “May my
parents be sacrificed on you, fight for the defense of the Purified
Progeny of Muhammad (s).”

Companions of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) were concentrating all their
efforts in defense of the Holy Imam and in this matter there was no
difference between men or women and young or old.

They displayed daring in battle with fiery emotions and they had become
impassioned in their love and devotion to the Holy Imam.

When Kalbi saw his wife behind him he ordered her to go back to the
ladies’ tents, but she did not agree. The Imam noticed this and he
hastened to her and said, “The Almighty Allah shall bestow a good reward
to your family. Go back! May Allah have mercy on you as ladies are not
obliged to fight in Jihad…”

Umme Wahab returned to ladies’ tent and Kalbi began to recite the
following poem of war:

**“If you do not know me, I am Ibn al-Kalbi: I am a man of bitterness
and anger, I am not a weakling in the face of disaster.”**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It is said that Abdullah bin Umair was martyred in the first
attack.  
 **[2]** The lady Umme Wahab was the daughter of Abdullah from Namr bin
Qasit and she was killed after the martyrdom of her husband.

By this poem he introduced himself that he was from Bani Kalb, a tribe
of Qaza-a.**[1]** In the same way he spoke about his daring,
superiority, outstanding valor, intelligence and eloquence and
reiterated that he shall not be found wanting in conditions of
hardships. Rather in such circumstances he shall be one with foresight
and perception. And in this way he described his noble personality which
was a lofty quality of the noble souls.

Inconclusive Attack
-------------------

Ibn Saad’s forces had surrounded the Imam’s camp from all the sides, but
inspite of their few numbers the Imam’s companions had stood up to
defend themselves, dug their heels in determination and wielded their
spears in such a threatening way that the mounted attackers did not dare
to approach them. They were compelled to retreat. The Imam’s men
showered the foes with arrows, killed some of them and wounded
others**[2]** and the forces of Ibn Saad had to suffer huge losses and
were not able to get any sort of success.

Burair’s Imprecation contest with Yazid
---------------------------------------

Yazid bin Moqal, an ally of Abdul Qais moved towards the camp of the
Holy Imam (‘a) and reaching near, he called out in a loud voice to
Burair bin Khudhair Hamadani, “O Burair, how do you find what Allah has
destined for you?”

Burair replied to him with calmness and perfect faith, “By Allah He sent
good with regard to me and evil for you…”

Indeed, the Allah Almighty conveyed goodness to Burair because He guided
him with truth and made him among the companions of the beloved grandson
of the Messenger of Allah (s). On the other hand He abandoned his
oppressive and degraded opponent in the maze of misguidance and allowed
him to be one of the killers of the sons of the Prophet.

That corrupt man retorted to Burair, “You lie! You were not a liar
before this day. I testify that you are of the deviated ones.”

This wicked man has confessed in the truthfulness of Burair before that
day. That is of the time he supported the truth and on that day he
alleged that he had become a liar. Burair challenged him to an
imprecation contest with him? ‘So that the Almighty Allah may curse the
liar among us and destroy the one who is on falsehood?’

Yazid agreed and the two of them came before the two camps to take part
in the imprecation contest and after that both of them came to attack
each other. Yazid lashed at Burair but the strike had no effect on him.
Burair turned to him and delivered such a terrible blow that his helmet
split and the sword reached upto his brain. That filthy corrupt man was
smeared in his blood while the sword had sunk into his head. He fell
down and died a few moments later.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qaza-a: It is a Yemenite tribe that had migrated to Kufa.  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/65, *Al-Irshad*, 2/101  
 **[3]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/66

Burair was elated that his heartfelt prayers had been fulfilled. He
launched an attack on the camp of Ibn Saad, while all the units of that
army looked at this incomparable warrior. Burair began to intone the
following martial poem:

**“I am Burair and my father is Khudhair.**

**I am not scared of the roar of a lion.**

**Righteous people recognize goodness by us.**

**I shall slay them and won’t have to suffer any loss.**

**And that good deed shall be performed by Burair.”[1]**

He introduced himself to the troops of Ibn Saad and he informed them of
his unequalled valor and that he was a lion that was not afraid of
roaring. Rather he announced his daring and also that at the time when
he would rain severe blows upon them, in this action, he did not see any
doubt or sin.

Burair’s Martyrdom
------------------

Burair stepped forward to fight like a warrior eager for martyrdom while
his being was full of faith, aim and determination to defend the beloved
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s). He called out aloud to the
troops of Ibn Saad, “O killers of believing persons! Come near me! O
murderers of the son of the daughter of the Messenger of the Lord of the
worlds! Come here!”**[2]**

Razi bin Munqidh Abadi, the corrupt one attacked him and the two of them
fought for sometime. However Burair subdued him and sat upon his chest
about to behead him. While he was engrossed in his, the decadent corrupt
man, Kaab bin Jabir Azadi attacked him from behind because he didn’t
dare to attack him from the front. Thus he delivered a blow with a spear
on the back of Burair and when he felt the blow he threw himself on
Abadi and bit a part of his nose. But Kaab rushed upon him and martyred
him.**[3]** In this way, the life of this exalted believer, who was a
prominent Qari of Kufa, came to an end while his killer was condemned
and people regarded him as a degraded person. So much so that even his
wife began to hate him and she vowed never to speak to him again. She
told him, “You have supported the opposition of the son of Fatima and
killed Burair, a reciter of Quran. By Allah, I shall never speak to you
again.”**[4]**

His cousin, Ubaidullah bin Jabir was also angry with him. He told him,
“Woe be on you. Have you killed Burair? How you’ll face the Almighty?”
That wicked man was himself deeply ashamed and he composed some couplets
that described his grief and regret for having committed such a deadly
oppression, that we have quoted in our previous discussions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/186  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/187  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/399  
 **[4]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/66-67

Martyrdom of Amr Ansari
-----------------------

Amr bin Qardha Ansari, a famous nobleman from Ansar stepped towards the
field of Jihad and honor and with great courage initiated the war of
loyalty and faith. He chopped off the heads of wicked people and rained
death and destruction on the heads of the enemies, while reciting the
following poem of war:

**“The Ansars understood that I shall support the center of pledge and
honor.**

**I shall sacrifice my life and house in defense of Husain with blows of
youth that do not accept humiliation.”**

By this war poem he announced that he was the supporter of pledges and
honor. All the companions of the Imam possessed this quality because
they were the chosen ones from Muslims for honoring pledges and
respecting their promises. In the same way he announced that he would
rain terrible blows upon the enemies and fight them with daring and
courage in order to defend his chief and master, His Eminence, Husain
(‘a) and in this way he was prepared to sacrifice his life and
existence.

He fought the battle with a true intention and firm determination till
he achieved martyrdom and his soul joined the exalted ranks. He had a
brother among the misguided companions of Ibn Saad so when he saw his
brother being killed he came towards the Imam’s camp and screamed, “O
Husain, O liar, son of liar! You misguided my brother till you got him
killed!”

Imam (‘a) replied to him, “The Almighty Allah did not deviate your
brother. Rather He has guided him and made you deviated.”**[1]**

The Almighty Allah guided Amr and filled his heart with faith. He
performed the Jihad till he reached martyrdom in defending the most
sanctified matter of Islam. However, his brother was left deviated by
the Almighty and his heart was made crooked. Thus he became a partner in
the deadliest sin those wicked people had committed.

Umayyad Army refuses one to one fight
-------------------------------------

The Umayyad troops were tired of one to one fights because the Imam’s
companions displayed such astonishing examples of valor that the
Umayyads had to suffer huge losses. They raised a clamor in such a way
that Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaidi, an important official of Ibn Saad’s army
noticed that if one to one fights continued they shall all be eliminated
as a result of the valor of Imam’s companions and the power of their
certainty and that they had no fear of death at all. So he yelled at his
troops and restrained them from person to person duels:

“O you fools! Don’t you know whom you are fighting? You are fighting the
most outstanding mounted warriors from the people of this land and a
group that is perfect and seeking martyrdom. So none of you can go to
confront them without being killed. By God! If you all attack them
together you could kill them with stones.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/399  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/400

These statements point out the prominent qualities of the companions of
the Holy Imam and their attitude. Some of them were as follows:

**A.** They were the knights of that country because they possessed
remarkable valor and strength of determination that was not present in
the troops of Ibn Saad.

**B.** They were folks having perception and knowledge who had realized
the truth and understood the lofty values that the Imam has chosen as
his slogans and was fighting to defend these same. Therefore they were
fighting with full knowledge and obvious proof regarding their position.
They were not like their enemies who were in misguidance and confusion
and immersed in falsehood and deviation.

**C.** They were seeking martyrdom in defense of the Imam and had no
hope in their life. They possessed all human virtues that were
considered preferable by intellect so that they may achieve lofty valor,
exalted honor and deep faith.

Historians say: Ibn Saad accepted the view of Ibn Hajjaj and ordered all
his forces to stop fighting the companions of the Imam in single
combat.**[1]**

Attack of Amr bin Hajjaj
------------------------

Amr bin Hajjaj launched a huge attack on Imam’s entourage and indulged
in severe fight of death with them. A most terrible and severe type of
battle ensued. Both sides had to bear more losses of lives.

Martyrdom of Muslim bin Ausaja
------------------------------

One of the most prominent and incomparable companions of the Imam,
Muslim bin Ausaja fell down fighting in the battlefield. Imam (‘a)
rushed to him and reached him when he was in the throes of death. Imam
moved near him and said, “O Muslim, may the Almighty have mercy on you,
**so of them is he who accomplished his vow, and of them is he who yet
waits, and they have not changed in the least…”*[2]***

At that moment his friend and a partner in his Jihad, Habib bin Mazahir
approached him and said, “Muslim, your death is hard for me to bear but
I bring you good news of Heaven (where you are going).”

“May God bring you good news too,” replied Muslim in a weak voice.

Habib said, “Even though I know that I would follow you soon, I would
still like you to appoint me to carry out everything which concerns
you.”

Muslim made a bequest to him regarding that which was most precious to
him. He pointed towards the Imam and said, “I will you regarding him,
that you sacrifice your life to defend him.”

These were his last words.**[3]** Indeed, this is the greatness that
indicates the height of nobility that the Imam’s companions possessed,
because each of them was the representative of human nobility in all the
times and places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/400  
 **[2]** Surah Ahzab 33:23  
 **[3]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/182, Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/435-436

This is that same loyalty that is caused by unlimited faith. In those
moments of their life they were neither worried about their families nor
about any other worldly matter. Rather their concern was solely about
Imam Husain (‘a) because they were sincere in their love for His
Eminence to the last moments of their lives.

Ibn Saad’s troops sighed with relief when this great warrior was finally
eliminated. They congratulated each other and exclaimed in delight,
“Muslim has been killed!”

This matter was hard upon Shabth bin Rabi because he knew Muslim and
acknowledged his merits to be great. Thus being affected by it he
addressed those around him, “May your mothers mourn for you! You are
killing yourselves and humiliating yourselves before others. Are you
elated on killing Muslim? By the one for whom I accepted Islam, I was a
witness of his contribution to the Muslims. I saw him, on the day of
conquest of Azerbaijan that he slew six infidels before that the horses
of Muslims may sleep (they may rest). Are your pleased at the killing of
someone like him?”**[1]**

Those mutated people who had killed this great warrior; it was as if
they had killed themselves, because he was killed in defense of their
benefits and rights that the Umayyad regime considered of no importance.

Historians say: Muslim succeeded in putting to death some stalwarts of
Ibn Saad’s troops. Of them were Ibn Abdullah Zubabi and Abdur Rahman Ibn
Abi Khashkara Bajali.**[2]**

Shimr’s Attack
--------------

The leprous wicked man, Shimr bin Zil Jaushan attacked with a battalion
of his the left wing of the Imam’s army that consisted of only 32
mounted fighters. But they stood firm against him and forced him away
(with their spears). Imam Husain and his followers were attacked on
every side but they fought fiercely. Then their cavalry began to attack
and even though they were only thirty-two horsemen, they did not attack
any side of the Kufan cavalry without putting it to flight.**[3]**

Martyrdom of Abdullah Kalbi
---------------------------

Abdullah bin Umar Kalbi fought Jihad like the valiant ones and slashed
with his sword on the left and right. According to historians he killed
19 horsemen and 12 foot soldiers,**[4]** while he had received multiple
injuries and was severely wounded. Hani bin Thabeet Hadhrami and Bukair
bin Hayy Tamimi pounced upon him and martyred him.**[5]** In this manner
ended the life of this warrior who sacrificed himself for the love and
devotion towards the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s). His
wife, the lady Umme Wahab came out looking for him and searched him  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/67-68, Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/436  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/68  
 **[3]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/68  
 **[4]** Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 4/101  
 **[5]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/68

among the corpses. When she found it she sat down besides him and
congratulated him for his martyrdom with faith and sincerity. She said,

“Congratulations for having achieved Paradise. I pray the Almighty to
join me with you in Paradise.”

She continued to invocate the Almighty in this way when suddenly Shimr
bin Zil Jaushan the most wicked person on the earth saw her. He ordered
his slave, Rustom to eliminate her. The slave hit her on the head from
behind with an iron mace. She was martyred in the battlefield.
Historians say: She was the first female companion of Imam Husain (‘a)
to be killed.**[1]** This denotes that there were other ladies also who
were martyred from the side of the Holy Imam (‘a) in the battlefield.
And in this way the system of the period of Ignorance returned and the
law promulgated by Islam against harming ladies and children was
trespassed.

Urwah Asks for Help
-------------------

Urwah bin Qais was a prominent commander in Ibn Saad’s troops and an
expert of warfare. On seeing the bravery of Imam’s followers and the
unprecedented losses that their troops had suffered he became very much
worried. So he asked Ibn Saad to send more archers and foot soldiers to
support them.

He said, “Don’t you see what my cavalry is receiving today from this
small number of men? Send the foot soldiers and archers against them.”

Ibn Saad ordered Shabth bin Rabi to go for his help but he did not
accept it. He said, “Glory be to God, could you not find anyone else for
this job?”

Shabth bin Rabi was not fully satisfied in participating in this battle
and he has often spoken of this matter. For example he used to say, “The
Almighty Allah would never bless the people of this land and may He not
guide them. Don’t you see that we have killed the best of men? We fought
them on the side of the family of Muawiyah and the son of Sumaiyyah, the
fornicator. This is evil and a strange evil it is!”

When Ibn Saad heard this he summoned Haseen bin Numair and with him
dispatched five hundred well-armed and equipped archers with the order
that they must shoot at the companions of the Imam. They showered the
followers of Husain (‘a) with arrows. They continued shooting at them
until they had lamed most of their horses and wounded some of their men.
Then they moved against them and a fierce battle was fought between them
for some time. Most of the Imam’s followers were now on foot but despite
this there was not the slightest decline in their fervor and courage.
And they remained steadfast like lofty mountains and did not move a step
backwards while Hurr Ibn Yazid also afoot, followed alongside them.
Battle raged more furiously and historians have considered it to be the
fiercest of all battles. It continued till midday.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/438  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/68-69. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/436-438

Opening of Another front
------------------------

Ibn Saad noticed that since only a single front was open in the battle,
it would prolong the hostilities and his troops were bound to suffer
huge losses. Therefore it was decided to open upon another front that
would expedite the elimination of the remaining men of Imam Husain (‘a).
So he issued orders that the tents and camps of the Imam’s followers
that were on the left and right of the tents of the Imam should be
attacked and uprooted so that the Imam’s entourage would be busy in
defending their tents and hence their front shall be weakened.

Soldiers of Ibn Saad launched the attack and began to uproot the tents.
However some companions of the Imam were lying in ambush and they began
to kill them and maim their horses. As a result of it their plan was
changed into a terrible defeat and they could not gain any sort of
advantage. Ibn Saad again commanded them to put the tents afire so that
riders may attack them. Imam’s followers tried to prevent them but the
Imam restrained them from it and said, “Let them burn the tents. If they
do so they would not be able to cross over to reach you.” It happened as
His Eminence had foretold. The burning tents became a barrier between
the enemy and the Imam’s companions and only one battlefront remained as
before.**[1]**

Shimr tries to burn to death the Ladies of Revelation
-----------------------------------------------------

The filthy wicked Shimr bin Zil Jaushan attacked the tents housing the
ladies of the house of revelation and the noble maids of Prophet’s
family, screaming, “Get me fire so that I may burn down the occupants of
these tents.”

This transmogrified monster had gone much ahead in wickedness and
decadence and it is certain that there was none among the martial
oppressors and deviated ones of the land like this criminal in
wickedness and decadence of nature and lowliness of temperament.

Fear loomed over the daughters of the Messenger of Allah (s) and they
began to tremble. They came out of the tents in anxiety and their wails
arose, while the children and infants were crying behind them. This
tragic scene was absolutely shocking and Imam Husain (‘a) was deeply
hurt by it. He screamed at that filthy wicked man, “Would you burn down
my house with my family? May the Almighty burn you with (Hell)
fire.”**[2]**

That wicked one did not change his decision and was ordering his
soldiers in the same way to hand over to him a flame so that he may burn
down the tents of Ahle Bayt.

Objection of Hamid bin Muslim
-----------------------------

Hamid bin Muslim objected to Shimr and after he witnessed the terror and
fear that had surrounded the daughters of Allah’s Messenger (s) he
hastened to Shimr and said, “You won’t gain anything from this. Do you
want to earn two sins because of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/69  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/69

it, that is killing of ladies and killing of children? By Allah, your
chief will be satisfied by the killings of men alone.”

“Who are you?” asked Shimr in fury.

Hamid bin Muslim feared that if he introduced himself he may complain
about him to Ibn Ziyad. So he said, “I shall not tell you who I
am.”**[1]**

That decadent wicked oppressor remained adamant in his injustice so that
he may increase his sins through them.

Condemnation of Shabth bin Rabi
-------------------------------

Shabth bin Rabi hurried to Shimr and condemned him in a furious tone and
restrained him from that serious crime. He had to give up against his
wish and was about to go away from there when Zuhair bin Qain attacked
him with ten soldiers and chased him away. They fought with the
mercenaries and Abu Arza Zubabi a relative of Shimr was killed. At this
moment the soldiers attacked the Imam’s followers. The number of killed
and wounded was apparent among the followers of Imam Husain (‘a) because
of the fewness of their number while it was not so apparent among the
followers of Ibn Saad because of their great number.**[2]**

Noon prayer time arrives
------------------------

Midday arrived and it was the time of Zuhr prayers. The believing
fighter of Jihad, Abu Thamama Saidi stood up and looked towards the sky
as if he was in anticipation of the thing most beloved to him, which was
prayer. When he saw that the sun has crossed the zenith he glanced at
Imam (‘a) and said, “May I be sacrificed on you. I see that they have
come close to us. By Allah you shall not be harmed till I lay down my
life in your defense and I wish to meet my Lord after having performed
the prayer whose time has arrived…”

Death was only a few steps from him but he was neither forgetful of the
remembrance of his Lord nor about fulfillment of his religious duty. All
the followers of the Imam had such faith in God and in this way they
were loyal in fulfillment of their duty.

Imam raised his head towards the sky and calculated the time and saw
that the time to perform the religious duty had arrived. So he told Abu
Thamama, “You have remembered the Prayer, may Allah include you among
the praying ones. Yes, it is the earliest hour for noon prayer…”

Imam asked his companions to request the army of Ibn Ziyad to pause in
the battle so that they may perform their devotions to the Almighty
Lord. The plea was conveyed to the attacking army but the wicked dirty
man, Haseen bin Numair said, “This prayer shall not be valid!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/183  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/69-70

Habib bin Mazahir asked in a taunting tone, “You claim that the prayer
of the family of the Messenger of Allah (s) will not be accepted but
that it will be accepted from you, O donkey?”

Haseen attacked him but Zuhair laid a swift blow to his horse’s mouth
and it bolted dislodging its rider to the ground. His colleagues rushed
forward and saved him.**[1]**

The battle continued and before the Imam could complete his prayer some
of his companions reached martyrdom while defending him and after that
the duty was performed as we shall explain in detail.

Martyrdom of Habib
------------------

Habib Ibn Mazahir was the most prominent companion of the Imam and one
who made the most efforts in defending His Eminence. He was the right
hand of the Imam and one who had purified his soul and nourished it with
wisdom and truth. He was a companion of Imam Amirul Momineen and from
his special officers,**[2]** having a deep perception and stable faith.

Historians say: He was the one most elated and overjoyed person on the
day of Ashura in anticipation of martyrdom in service of the grandson of
the Messenger of Allah (s). He moved towards the battlefield eager for
martyrdom reciting the following lines of Rajaz song:

**“I am Habib and my father is Mazahir, a knight on the battle day among
the flames of war.**

**By my life, you are more in number but we are more loyal and patient
than you.**

**Our argument is more dominant and clear regarding the truth and more
lasting and valid than yours.”[3]**

He informed them about his esteemed personality and the lofty qualities
that he possessed because he was of the outstanding warriors and famous
knights who did not allow fear and trepidation to reach their hearts.
And he announced that in spite of the large numbers of Ibn Saad’s troops
and the paucity of the supporters of Imam Husain (‘a), the Imam’s
followers were having more loyalty and patience and they exceeded their
enemies as far as their convictions and proving their rightfulness was
concerned. Thus by having these qualities, they were more deserving of
immortality and more suitable for permanence.

Habib fought a furious battle and despite his advanced age succeeded in
putting to death 62 fellows from the enemy side. The impure wicked man,
Budail bin Sareem attacked him and slashed him with a sword and other
degraded fellows of Tamim tribe jabbed him with their spears. He fell
down and tried to continue fighting, but Haseen bin Numair rushed to him
and delivered a sword strike upon his blessed head. He fell down again
and that Tamimi dismounted his horse and decapitated  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/70  
 **[2]** Imam Khui, *Mojamur Rijall Hadith* 4/227  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/402

him and that pure spirit, well-satisfied and pleased rose up towards the
Lord. Habib’s slaying deeply aggrieved His Eminence, Husain (‘a). He
stood besides that honorable corpse sighing in sorrow and immersed in
grief and remarked, “Allah shall be pleased with me and those friends of
mine who render help.”**[1]**

Hurr’s Martyrdom
----------------

At that moment, the great warrior, Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi, who had
responded positively to the call of truth, and preferred the Hereafter
over this world, came to the battlefield and went to welcome death
smiling in joy of having helped the beloved grandson of Allah’s
Messenger (s). He performed a severe fight all the time intoning the
following lines:

**“I am Hurr and the refuge-giver to the guests who shall attack you
with the sword.**

**In defense of the one who is the best to come to land of Khaif. I
shall rain blows on you and not be regretful of it.”[2]**

In this poem he spoke of his nobility and generosity and that his home
was a shelter for guests and the center of messengers. He also announced
that he shall strike off their necks with his sword in defense of the
Holy Imam who the most honorable personality to be present in the land
of Khaif. And in this matter he had neither any doubt nor any regret in
fighting them.

Hurr fought while Zuhair bin Qain accompanied him. When one of them was
caught up in crowd of fighters the other used to rush for his help and
had him freed. This continued for quite some time.**[3]**

Hurr’s horse got multiple wounds yet he did not dismount it but
continued to remain astride it and fight them reciting the lines of
Antara:

**“In this way I strike below their necks and chests till they are
bathed in blood.”**

There was a deep rooted and bitter enmity between Hurr and Yazid bin
Sufyan. Haseen bin Numair took this into consideration and said to
Yazid, “This is Hurr, whom you desire to kill.” Yazid attacked. Hurr
swooped upon him and killed him.**[4]** Ayyub bin Mashruh aimed an arrow
at Hurr’s horse and maimed it. The horse stampeded but Hurr jumped from
it like a lion without incurring any harm. He began to fight on foot
with courage till he put to the sword according to historians, 42 men
from the enemy side.**[5]** Finally the foot soldiers attacked him with
swords and spears and he fell down bathed in his pure blood. Companions
of the Holy Imam hastened towards him and carried him to the Imam’s tent
in front of which they fought, and placed him on the ground. Imam stood
besides him and looked  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/70. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/439-440  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/185  
 **[3]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/183-184  
 **[4]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/434  
 **[5]** *Al Manaqib,* Ibne Shahr Aashob 4/100

with a sight full of divine effulgence at his manly face. Imam’s
followers also stood in a respectful manner. Imam (‘a) stepped forward
and cleaned the blood from Hurr’s face and lamented for him with the
following lines:

**“You are ‘free’ (Hurr) like your mother named you. And you are free in
the world and the Hereafter.”**

Verily! Hurr was free (noble) and his conscience dominated his selfish
desire and he chose martyrdom in defense of the Chief of the youths of
Paradise over the life of this world and with his honorable death he
trod on the path of Allah. One of the Imam’s followers recited the
following dirge in his honor:

**“The best of free men is Hurr bin Riyahi that even during continuous
strikes of spears.**

**He became the best freeman when he sacrificed himself on Husain and
gave up his life in the morning.”[1]**

Fulfilling the Duty of Prayer
-----------------------------

Inspite of that which had aggrieved the Imam, that is the calamities by
whose fear mountains would have pulverized, His Eminence’s prime concern
was to fulfill the duty of obligatory prayer, which is the most
important worship act in Islam. He requested his enemies to give respite
so that they may stand up in the worship of God. They agreed to give
respite and His Eminence focused his attention on the Almighty and faced
his Lord. Along with the surviving companions he performed the prayer of
fear.**[2]** The prayer of His Eminence, in those moments of danger, was
the most obvious sign of his devotion and obedience of Allah.

Saeed bin Abdullah Hanafi stood in front of Imam Husain (‘a) so that he
may defend His Eminence from the arrows and spears thrown from the enemy
camp. Because they broke the pledge to give respite for prayer and
taking this as an opportunity they began to shoot arrows towards the
Imam and his companions.

Saeed Hanafi, according to historians rushed in the direction of coming
arrows and stopped them with his chest and neck. He stood like a
mountain and the arrows aimed at him failed to dislodge him from his
position. The Imam had hardly concluded his prayer that he was seriously
wounded by that time and he fell down bathed in his own blood and in a
soft voice he was saying,

“O Allah! Curse them with the curse of Aad and Thamud and convey our
salutation to Your Prophet and convey to him the pain I suffered from
injuries as by this act I desire Your reward and to render help to the
Progeny of Your Prophet.”

Then he glanced at the Imam to see if he has fulfilled his right and
honored the pledge he had made to His Eminence. He asked, “O son of
Allah’s Messenger (s), have I fulfilled it?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/186  
 **[2]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *Husain (a.s.)* 2/17

Imam (‘a) replied to him thankfully, “Yes, you shall be in Paradise with
me.”

When he heard the Imam’s reply, his being became filled with
satisfaction and happiness. At that moment his pure soul flew to his
Lord while his physical body was shred into pieces by arrows and spears,
because in addition to sword and spear blows thirteen arrows had hit
him. Indeed this is indescribable and indefinable loyalty.

Zuhair’s Martyrdom
------------------

Among the companions of Imam Husain (‘a), whose beings were fused with
faith in Allah, was Zuhair bin Qain. He was in great haste to go towards
Paradise and shake hands with His Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s). Happy
and elated by loyalty in the path of the Imam he went to His Eminence
and kept his hand on the shoulder of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and
addressed the Imam with the following Rajaz (war poem):

**“Come, as you are the guide and the guided one. Today I shall meet
your Holy grandfather.**

**And Hasan and Murtuza Ali and Ja’far with a pair of wings, the daring
man.**

**And the Lion of God, that living martyr.”[1]**

This recitation indicates his rightful faith devoid of every doubt and
with certainty that he shall succeed in meeting the Prophet of Allah
(s), his vicegerent, Amirul Momineen, His Eminence Hasan, His Eminence,
Ja’far and His Eminence, Hamzah and it was the best thing that he was
thinking.

Imam replied to him, “I shall also meet him after you.”**[2]**

That valiant fighter attacked the troops of Ibn Saad reciting the
following lines of Rajaz poetry:

**“I am Zuhair and son of Qain who would chase you away from Husain with
swords.”**

He informed them about himself and announced to them that he shall
battle with them to defend his leader, His Eminence, Husain (‘a). He
began to fight a fierce battle and according to historians he killed 120
men**[3]** and performed such a battle that it cannot be described.

Muhajir bin Aws and Kathir bin Abdullah Shobi attacked him and conveyed
him to martyrdom. His Eminence, Husain (‘a) went to the place of his
martyrdom extremely sorrowful and aggrieved. Then he cast a farewell
glace and remarked in a forlorn tone, “O Zuhair, may the Almighty not
make you distant, and may He curse your murderers. Such a curse that
they be transmogrified into monkeys and pigs…”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Maqtal* *Imam Husain,* Khwarizmi 2/20  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/441  
 **[3]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 247  
 **[4]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *Husain (a.s.)* 2/20

Martyrdom of Nafe bin Hilal
---------------------------

Among those who had dedicated their lives to the Almighty Allah was Nafe
bin Hilal Jamli. He hastened towards the battlefield with faith and
sincerity and with poisoned arrows began to confront the enemies of God.
He had inscribed those arrows with his name. As he fought he went on
reciting:

**“I am shooting arrows at them while they are bigger and poisoned too
and they cut off their flight.**

**Till by throwing them the field becomes full and greed is not in any
way beneficial to the soul.”**

In this manner he shot them with his arrows till he reached his last
one. Then he drew his sword and attacked them reciting the following
Rajaz song:

**“I am a Tamimi Bajali youth and my religion is same as the religion of
Husain bin Ali.**

**If I am killed today and my action is this and that belief of mine, I
shall face my deeds.”**

He has introduced himself and also stated that his religious beliefs
were based on the religion of His Eminence, Husain (‘a), the beloved
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s). Also that he shall fight in
defense of his faith.

He fought with a firm determination devoid of any shakiness when he saw
the loneliness and isolation of his chief, Husain (‘a).

In such a way 12 persons were killed by him, in addition to those he had
seriously wounded.**[1]** At that moment, the enemies of God surrounded
him from all sides and began to shoot arrows at him and pelt him with
stones. At last both his arms were broken and he could no more be able
to wield his sword. They rushed upon him and took him as a prisoner to
Ibn Saad.

“What has made you do this to yourself? asked Ibn Saad.

Like one having faith in Almighty he replied, “My Lord knows what I
desire.”

A fellow of Ibn Saad glanced at him while his face bled and blood
dripped from his beard, and said to him, “Don’t you know what came over
you?”

In a taunting manner to infuriate them he replied, “By Allah, I have
killed twelve of your men and this is apart from those I wounded. I
shall not condemn myself for the deed I have performed and if my arms
had remained healthy you wouldn’t have taken me as a hostage.”

The wicked leper, Shimr bin Zil Jaushan arose, took a sword and slew
him.

Nafe was shouting at him, “O Shimr, by Allah, if you had been a Muslim
it would have been very hard on you to meet the Lord with our blood on
your hands. But thanks be to Allah that He appointed our death at the
hands of His creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 2/21

Yes, by Allah, if something had been less important than religion for
Shimr he would not have committed that crime, because only one commits
it that has no relationship with God.

That degraded one moved to Nafe and striked off his neck**[1]** and in
this way came to an end the life of that great warrior having sincerity
about his religion, earnest in defending the son of the Messenger of
Allah (s) and the greatest man in Islam in steadfastness for truth and
true intention for its defense.

Abis and Shauzab
----------------

When the divinely inspired warrior, Abis bin Shabeeb Shakiri saw the
loneliness of the Imam and the coming together of the people of Kufa for
slaying His Eminence to went to his colleague in Jihad, Shauzab, the
slave of Shakir**[2]** and asked him, “O Shauzab, have you decided what
to do?”

Shauzab stood up to speak about his loyalty and spirit of sacrifice
present in his decision. Thus he said, “I shall fight unto death.”

Abis thanked and praised him and said, “Go ahead for the service of Aba
Abdillah so that he may take you into account like he has taken into
account others than you, because today is the day when we can demand
whatever reward we want.”

What faith could be like this faith? He strived with all his
capabilities to obtain whatever he could that would make him more
proximate to Almighty Allah.

Shauzab went forward and invoked blessings on the Imam. Then he attacked
the troops of Ibn Saad and fought like a valiant fighter till he
achieved martyrdom in the service of Abu Abdillah.**[3]**

Martyrdom of Abis Shakiri
-------------------------

Abis Shakiri belonged to a noble family having great respect and honor.
That family was famous for its bravery and sincerity about truth, and
His Eminence, Imam Ali (‘a) has said regarding it, “If their number
reaches upto a thousand, Almighty Allah shall be worshipped as befits
Him.”

They had received the title of “the morning stalwarts.” Abis was the
elder of the family and the most famous of them. He was of those who
carried His Eminence, Muslim’s letter to His Eminence, Husain (‘a), in
which the Imam was requested to come to Iraq immediately. He remained in
the service of the Holy Imam from Mecca to Kerbala and he was the
foremost of his companion in his love and devotion to His Eminence. He
came forward to obtain the permission of His Eminence to fight. He spoke
to the Imam and spoke of his deep love that he cultivated for His
Eminence and he said,

“There is no one, near or far on the face of the earth as precious for
me as your  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Kathir, *Tarikh* 8/184, *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/404  
 **[2]** It has come in Ziarat Rajabia: Suwaid, the slave of Shakir,
*Biharul Anwar* 101/341  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/443-444

goodself. If I were able to remove your hardship I would have done so
even if it necessitated sacrificing something more precious to me than
my life. Peace be on you! I testify that I am on the path of your
guidance and the guidance of your Holy father.”**[1]**

After that he launched an attack on Ibn Saad’s camp and challenged them
to confront him. However no one accepted his challenge because all of
them were afraid to face him as they knew him to be the most valiant of
men. They called to each other while their hearts were full of terror
and fear had caused their complexions to pale. They said, “This is the
most ferocious lion, this is the son of Abu Shabeeb, none of you must go
out to accept his challenge…”

Ibn Saad screamed at his troops, “Stone him!”

They picked up stones and began to pelt him from all sides. When that
warrior saw their terror and refusal to accept his challenge, he threw
away his coat of mail and helmet and pounced upon them like a lion and
drove away more than a hundred mounted soldiers from before himself.
They began to attack him from all sides, threw him down and beheaded
him. But they began to argue among themselves. Each of them claimed to
have killed him so that he may be entitled for the reward. However, Ibn
Saad did not accept that one of them be his killer. Rather a group of
them shared in his killing**[2]** and in this manner came to a close the
life of that mighty stalwart who strived to his best in defense of Islam
and performed a Jihad like the Jihad of the Prophets.

Zahhak flees
------------

Zahhak bin Abdullah Musharrafi was one of the Imam’s followers but when
he witnessed so many companions being killed he decided to flee from
there. He came to His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and said, “I have
accompanied you so that whenever you face a battle I may die with you.
So allow me to go way, because I am incapable of defending you or
myself.”

Imam (‘a) permitted him to leave and he fled from there. Some men of Ibn
Saad blocked his way but later left him off. He thus escaped from there
and could not obtain martyrdom in the service of the beloved grandson of
the Messenger of Allah.”**[3]**

Jaun’s Martyrdom
----------------

Jaun is an outstanding personality of Islam.**[4]** He was the slave of
Abu Zar Ghiffari and much advanced in age. But his being was brimming
with piety and faith. His black skin and unremarkable lineage did not
prevent him from achieving that lofty status and he became a prominent
Muslim. And he was able to earn such honor and respectability that no
warrior in history has been able to gain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/444  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/444  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/404-405. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/444-445  
 **[4]** It is said that his name was Huwi. Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/420

Historians say: He approached the Holy Imam (‘a) and begged him for
permission to sacrifice his life in service of His Eminence.

Imam told him, “O Jaun, you accompanied us in need of life, you are
authorized by me (to go away).”

Jaun threw himself at the feet of the Holy Imam and kissed them. Tears
were flowing upon his face and he was saying, “In prosperity I lick your
vessels but in hardships should I abandon you? My smell is not pleasing,
my origin and lineage is unremarkable and my skin is black. Bestow
Paradise to me so that my body becomes fragrant, my origin and lineage
gain honor and my skin turns fair. No by Allah, I shall not leave you
till this black blood fuses with your bloods…”**[1]**

These brilliant statements, what greatness they speak of? And what an
honor that soul had obtained...? His black skin was the most illuminated
and elegant from the complexions of those slaves. He was a freeman with
that loftiness of courage and personal nobility that he possessed. His
smell was more pleasing than theirs and his origin and lineage was
illuminated. The people of Kufa themselves were rendered of unknown
identities, because they were not aware of their humanity and they
brought disgrace and dishonor for all humanity.

Jaun’s statement was full of the logic of a noble man, because it is
against humanity that he should remain under the protection of the Imam
during times of peace and prosperity but in hard times, desert the Holy
Imam. This was so because loyalty was one of the dominating qualities of
each of the companions of Imam Abu Abdillah which distinguished them
from all the other martyrs of the world.

Imam accorded permission to him and he set out for the battlefield full
of self-respect reciting the following:

**“O sinner how will you see the black strikes from the wielded and
original sword?**

**We defend the children of Muhammad (s) with the sword. We shall defend
them by the tongue and by hand.**

**Through this I am hopeful of being saved on the day of gathering by
the One and Only Lord.**

**Because there is no intercessor like Ahmad near Him.”[2]**

By this Rajaz poetry he has described his daring and courage and that he
was defending the children of the Prophet (s) and shall continue to help
them by his words and deeds and by doing thus he was hopeful of
salvation and intercession of the Prophet (s).

Jaun fought like a courageous fighter and according to historians, he
eliminated 25 fellows from the enemies. At last the enemies of God fell
upon him and martyred  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Numa, *Matheer al-Ahzaan*, Pg. 63  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/198

him. Imam (‘a) hurried to his side and glanced at his blood smeared
body. He prayed for him, “O Allah, make his face fair and his body
fragrant and raise him up with Muhammad and bestow him with the
recognition of Aale Muhammad.”

The Almighty Allah accepted the Imam’s supplication because whoever
passed through that battlefield perceived from him a fragrance more
pleasing than that of musk.**[1]**

Martyrdom of Hanzalah Shabami
-----------------------------

Hanzalah Shabami was the gentleman who had constructed his life with
faith in God and he lived with faith and piety till he obtained the path
to the loftiest of human values. He went to the Imam with eagerness and
inclination in order to obtain for himself the status of martyrdom with
the companions of the Imam. He pleaded for permission from His Eminence
and the Imam granted it to him. He set out for the battle front and
began to exhort those people towards rightfulness and reminded them of
the abode of the Hereafter. He said:

“O people I fear for you a day like the day of confederates, like the
community of Nuh, Aad, Thamud and those who succeeded them. The Almighty
Allah will not be unjust to the people. O people! I am fearful regarding
you for the day of entreaties, the day you shall be turned back and not
have any refuge from the Almighty Allah. One who is led astray by Allah
is not guided…O people! Do not slay Husain lest the Almighty involves
you in chastisement. Whosoever resorts to slander, fails…”

Those decadent people could not understand his statements. They
continued in their disobedience and misguidance as the Lord Almighty had
sealed their hearts and ears and they could not see.

Imam (‘a) thanked him for his discourse and said, “May Allah have mercy
on you. They have become eligible for divine chastisement. They have
requited you with the matters you told them inviting them to truth and
they stood to confront you to destroy you and your colleagues. Then how
can it be that they have killed your rightful brothers?”

“You are right, son of Allah’s Messenger! Are we not heading for the
Hereafter?”**[2]**

The Holy Imam gave him permission and he moved to the field of battle
with eagerness till he achieved martyrdom. He fought like a courageous
soldier till he was martyred fulfilling his pledge to the Almighty that
he would support the truth and sacrifice himself on the path of Islam.

Martyrdom of Hajjaj
-------------------

Among the illuminated pages of loyalty that were embellished with the
greatness of humanity was Hajjaj bin Masruq Jofi. He rushed speedily to
the battle front and performed a ferocious fight till he was bathed in
his chaste blood. He became extremely elated and joyful for having
beautifully fulfilled his loyalty to Imam  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 252  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/443

Husain (‘a). He returned to His Eminence and addressed the Imam with
this poem:

**“I shall meet your grandfather, the Prophet today and after that your
father, Ali, the generous one, whom I recognize to be the vicegerent of
the Prophet.”**

He came to the blessed grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) with his
head held high due to having displayed remarkable loyalty and sacrifice.

Imam replied to him, “I shall meet them after you.”

Then he returned to the battle ground and resumed fighting with courage
and steadfastness till he was martyred in defense of truth.**[1]** May
he be rewarded with the best and everlasting divine rewards.

Martyrdom of Amr bin Junada
---------------------------

The fruitful youth, Amr bin Junada Ansari, the most youthful soldier in
the army of Husain (‘a) came to the field. In intellect and religion he
was superior to every fellow of Ibn Saad’s camp. Historians say, “He was
eleven years old and his father had been martyred in the battle. When he
approached the Imam to permit him to fight, His Eminence refused it
saying, “This boy’s father was martyred in the very first attack and
perhaps his mother would not like him to go out and fight.”

The youth persisted with the Imam and said, “My mother has ordered me to
go.”

The Imam then gave him permission. That young man sped to the ground in
eagerness. Not much time passed but that he was martyred and the lowly
creatures of Kufa severed his head from his body and tossed it towards
the camp of Imam Husain (‘a). His respected mother came towards it, took
it in her arms and kissed it profusely. Then cleaned up the blood and
tossed the head to a man nearest to her and threw it down. She ran back
to the tents and picking up a tent pole attacked the enemies of God
reciting the following lines of poetry:

**“I am an old woman from the weak ladies; absolutely hollow and empty
from inside...**

**I shall give terrible blows to you in defense of the son of the
honorable Fatima.”**

She wounded two persons but the Imam sped to her and made her return to
the camps.**[2]** The isolation of the Holy Imam had deeply affected the
emotions of this great lady and after sending her beloved child to the
battlefield she herself rushed to the field so that she may lay down her
life for her master. These are really the favors of faith and devotion.

Martyrdom of Anas Kahili
------------------------

Anas bin Harith Kahili was a companion of the Holy Prophet (s) and with
His Eminence he participated in the battles of Badr and Hunain. He had
heard His Eminence state, “This son of mine (that is His Eminence,
Husain) shall be killed in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 253-254  
 **[2]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 2/21-22

the land of Kerbala. So whosoever of you is present there must support
him.”**[1]**

He was a gentleman much advanced in age but he remained in the service
of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and accompanied him from Mecca. He sought
permission of His Eminence to perform Jihad in his service. His Eminence
granted the permission. He tied his waist with turban because his body
was stooping. In the same way his drooping eyebrows were tied to his
forehead.

When the Holy Imam (‘a) looked at him, he began to weep and said, “The
Almighty Allah conveys thanks to you, O Shaykh!” Despite his old age he
fought like a brave warrior and reports state that he killed 18 persons
and after that he was martyred**[2]** and his pure soul joined with the
prophets, the truthful ones and the martyrs in the high realm. And how
pleasing is their company.

Martyrdom of Abul Shasa
-----------------------

Abul Shasa Yazid bin Ziyad Muhajir Kandi was a brave stalwart and an
outstanding knight of the Arabs. He was among those who had come out
with Ibn Saad to confront the Holy Imam. When the Imam put forth his
proposals and Ibn Saad did not accept them, he came over to the Imam’s
side**[3]** and shot the soldiers of Ibn Saad with his arrows.
Historians say that he shot one hundred arrows upon them of which only
one missed its target. Whenever he shot an arrow the Imam said, “O
Allah, make his arrow find its target and make Paradise his reward.”

When the stock of his arrows was exhausted, he drew out his sword and
attacked them intoning the following Rajaz poem:

**“I am Yazid and my father is Muhajir, braver than a lion that rests in
a grove.[4]**

**Lord, I am in support of Husain and am away and aloof from Ibn
Saad.”**

He fought valiantly till he received the position of martyrdom**[5]**
and in this way came to a close the life of this great man in defense of
the religion of God and in support of the blessed grandson of Allah’s
Messenger (s).

Martyrdom of Two Jabiris
------------------------

Among the most outstanding colleagues of the Holy Imam (‘a) were two
Jabiris, namely Saif bin Harith bin Saree Jabiri and Malik bin Abd bin
Saree Jabiri. They were brothers from their mother’s side and cousins of
each other. They approached the Imam while tears were flowing from their
eyes. The Imam asked them, “What has caused you to weep. I am hopeful
that at a later hour your eyes shall be illuminated.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Usud al-Ghaba* 1/349. *Al-Isabah* 1/68. *Kanzul Ummal* 12/126,
H. 34314  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 252-253  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/405. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/73 and it is
mentioned there that he was the first martyr from the companions of the
Imam.  
 **[4]** In *Al Futuh* 5/199 it has come with some variation.  
 **[5]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/405

The two of them quickly replied, “May Allah make us your ransom! We are
not weeping at ourselves. We are crying for you. We see that you have
been surrounded but there is no way we can be of any use to you.”

The hearts of the companions of the Imam were rich with remarkable
devotion and deep sincerity regarding His Eminence. They were only
worried about him and they were only affected with his grief and sorrow.

Those two Jabiris fought with zeal and when the swords and spears had
cut up their bodies they reached martyrdom near the Holy Imam
(‘a).**[1]**

Martyrdom of Two Ghiffaris
--------------------------

Two brothers, Abdullah and Abdur Rahman, sons of Urwah Ghiffari arrived
in the grounds of Jihad and fought with exemplary fervor till they were
martyred in the service of Imam Husain (‘a).

Martyrdom of Two Ansaris
------------------------

When Imam (‘a) called out for help and sought helpers and supporters to
defend the ladies of the family of prophethood and noble women of the
abode of revelation this matter deeply affected these two Ansaris. They
were Saad bin Harith and his brother Abul Hatoof and they were in the
party of Ibn Saad. They attacked the troops of Ibn Saad with wielded
swords and fought till they achieved martyrdom.**[2]**

Martyrdom of Anees
------------------

Anees bin Mauqal Asbahi entered the plains of Jihad for the sake of Aba
Abdillah while chanting the following poem of war:

**“I am Anees and I am the son of Mauqal. In my right hand is a broad
and a polished sword.**

**I strike with it in the battle so that it becomes clear and with it I
hack at the heads of soldiers amidst the dust of the battlefield.**

**In defense of Husain with elegance, son of the Messenger of God, the
best of the Prophets.”**

This Rajaz poem is expressive of religious sentiments dominating him;
because he introduced himself and announced that they were fighting in
defense of the son of Allah’s Messenger (s) and in this matter he had no
desire except to earn the pleasure of Allah…this stalwart fought a
furious battle till he reached martyrdom.**[3]**

Martyrdom of Qurra Ghiffari
---------------------------

Among the companions of the Imam martyred on the way of truth was Qurra
bin Abi Qurra Ghiffari who departed for the battlefield humming the
following Rajaz:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/442-443, Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 3/392  
 **[2]** *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/122  
 **[3]** *Al Futuh* 5/198-199

**“Indeed the Bani Ghiffar knew and Khandaf after the Bani Nizar.**

**That I am a lion in the dust of the battle to slash at the
transgressing people.**

**With every original cutting sword I hack in defense of the family of
the Chosen Prophet.**

**The family of the Prophet, those chiefs of the righteous ones.”[1]**

This Rajaz is brimming with life and feelings for the defense of the
family of the Prophet (s) that indicates his valor so that the Bani
Ghiffar, Khandaf and Bani Nizar, all the tribes can vouch for his
bravery. He fought for defending the chief of the righteous, the sons of
Allah’s Messenger (s) in a remarkable Jihad...the stalwart of Ghiffari
clan put up a severe fight till he fell down wounded by the blows of
swords and spears and his lofty soul joined the highest realm.

Martyrdom of Yahya Mazini
-------------------------

Yahya bin Muslim Mazini departed for the fighting grounds reciting the
following poetic composition:

**“I shall attack these people with sword blows that would cut them
apart. Terrible blows that would soon rain upon the enemies.**

**Neither shall I be weak in it nor would I show any sloth. Nor do I
fear the approaching death today.**

**But I am like a lion defending its cubs.”**

Through these lines he declared his bravery and that he would rain
terrible strikes on his enemies and fight them with valor and manly
determination. Such that he shall neither display any sort of weakness
nor any laziness. He also is not fearful of death. Rather he shall
attack them like a lion in order to defend the Progeny of the Messenger
of Allah. He attacked them like a fighter and fought a severe battle
till he reached martyrdom in the service of His Eminence, Abu Abdillah
(‘a).**[2]**

The Imam (‘a) and his companions
--------------------------------

Imam (‘a) blew into the hearts of his companions the spirit of
determination and fortitude and trained them to be patient before
hardships. He told them:

“O sons of great men! Be patient, for death is nothing but a bridge that
would take you from hardships and difficulties towards vast gardens and
everlasting bounties. Which of you would not like to be transferred from
a prison to a palace? My father has narrated from Allah’s Messenger (s)
that he said, ‘The world is a prison for a believer and a paradise for
an infidel and death is the bridge that conveys the former to gardens
and the latter to Hell.’ Neither have I lied nor been lied to.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/195  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/194  
 **[3]** Abdullah bin Nurullah, *Maqtal al-Husain Awalim Imam Husain*
17/351

These words enflamed their passions and they rushed to the whirlpools of
death like a raging storm so that they may reach their positions in the
garden of perpetuity.

Martyrdom of Abdullah Yazani
----------------------------

Abdullah Yazani hurried to the fields of battle and fought with
exemplary courage while he was reciting the following:

**“I am the son of Abdullah from the Progeny of Yazan. My religion is
same as that of Husain and Hasan.**

**I shall rain blows upon you like the blows of the stalwart from Yemen
as I am seeking through it salvation near my Lord.”**

He introduced his lineage and native country and informed them that he
was following the faith of his master, Husain. Also that he shall
sacrifice himself in his path. It was so that he may gain salvation near
the Almighty...Like his martyr brothers, he put up a furious fight and
continued to battle with daring and a firm determination till he reached
martyrdom.**[1] **

The Imam (‘a) Besides the martyrs
---------------------------------

The Holy Imam (‘a) stood besides his great martyred companions and
glanced at them with his glowing countenance. He saw them bathed in the
blood of martyrdom and fragrant with the breeze of divine mercy. And
regarding them to be great he lamented in their sorrow:

“Corpses like the corpses of prophets and of the families of the
prophets.”**[2]**

Martyrdom of Suwaid
-------------------

The last one to achieve martyrdom from the companions of the Holy Imam
was the brave warrior, Suwaid bin Amr bin Abi Mata Khathami who fell
down wounded in the battlefield. They thought that he was dead so they
did not continue to attack him. He fainted due to the pain of his
injuries and loss of blood but when he heard those people screaming:
“Husain is killed”, he stood up like a wounded lion and without paying
any heed to the pain of his injuries he began to search for his sword
but he could not find it. However he found a knife and with it he
attacked the foes injuring them. They ran away from him bewildered and
thinking that the dead companions of Husain were coming back to life to
again perform Jihad. But when they realized their mistaken notion they
came towards him and conveyed him to martyrdom. Urwah bin Butan Thalabi
slew him.

The history of humanity does not remember more devoted and sincere
loyalty than this that indeed it is the splendor of the Imam’s camp that
till the last moment of their life they remained steadfast in their
loyalty to their Imam.

These were some companions of the Imam who put in such great efforts in
battle that description and definition fails to describe them because
they performed a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/194  
 **[2]** Abdullah, *Maqtal al-Husain Awalim* 17/346

Jihad whose like is not found anywhere else in the world. They
confronted that huge army and rendered serious losses and hardships to
it in spite of their own few numbers and despite suffering from a severe
thirst.

That group of warriors of faith fought the battle with hardships and
arrived to that terrible whirlpool of that battle and resisted like a
man and led the movement of faith. The determination of none of them
fell slothful and the spear of none of them softened. All of them were
bathed in their blood while they were feeling delighted and proud, and
by great loyalties displayed the greatness of Islam as it had bestowed
them with revolutionary spirit which enabled them to resist those wild
beasts with patience and fortitude whose greed had impelled them to
commit the most dreadful carnage of the history of mankind.

Their pure souls ascended to the exalted friend (God) in the best way
possible and they sacrificed themselves in the path of Allah. And they
followed the way that was most equitable according to the unanimity of
all...And the most beautiful praise for them is found in the words of
Imam Sadiq (‘a) who said: “May my parents be sacrificed on you. You are
pure and pure is the dust where you were buried. By Allah! You have
reached the best of stations!”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Biharul Anwar* 101/201
