Martyrdom of the Purified Progeny (‘a)
======================================

When the chosen honorable companions of the Imam were martyred the sons
of the family of prophethood from the youth and children stood up for
loyalty and sacrifice. And inspite of their young age they resembled
lions who did not fear death; and calamities didn’t scare them. They
hastened to the fields of Jihad with earnest zeal though the Imam didn’t
want some of them to go to die. However they stood pleading His Eminence
and kissed his hands and feet so that he may permit them to fight in his
defense.

A terrible scene that scorches the hearts and shocks every living being
is that these youths were saying farewell to each other for the last
time. Each of them kissed his brother or cousin again and again while
they were immersed in tears of sorrow and grief for the beloved grandson
of the Messenger of Allah (s). Because they saw His Eminence in solitude
and isolation while the enemy troops had surrounded him. Also they saw
the ladies of the family of revelation and prophethood raising up their
wails and lamentations...,the Almighty Allah helped the Imam to bear
these tragedies that break backbones and bewilder intellects and no man
could bear them, except those whose hearts Allah has tested for faith...
Among the descendants of the Messenger of Allah (s) who were martyred in
Kerbala were the following:

Ali Akbar (‘a)
--------------

Historians are unanimous that Ali Akbar, son of Husain (‘a) resembled
his grandfather, His Eminence, the Messenger of Allah (s) in appearance
and manners. He possessed the same qualities that elevated him among all
the prophets. And what a great wealth it was that the son of Hashim had.
He possessed all the human capabilities and lofty values that the great
reformers gain prominence from.

Among the outstanding examples of the manners of His Eminence were,
magnanimity, great courage, self-respect, powerful and continuous steps
in the fields of human perfection; because he considered death
preferable and regarded life worthless in the way of nobility and he did
not submit to the orders of that spurious one, son of the spurious one.
When Ibn Saad dispatched one of his men to call to him, “You are having
kinship to Chief of believers, Yazid. And we want to respect this
relationship. Thus if you like we shall guarantee your safety!!”

Ali bin al-Husain ridiculed him and shouted at him, “Relationship with
the Messenger of Allah (s) is more deserving of respect.”**[1]**

He was among the most righteous sons of the Holy Imam and the foremost
of them in his loyalty and defense of His Eminence. He was the first
Hashemite to depart for the battle with exceeding eagerness. At that
time his age – according to historians – was 18 years.**[2]** When the
Imam saw him he continued to look at him  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nasab-e-Quraish, Pg. 57*  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/207 it is mentioned that his age was 23 as
mentioned in *Umdatut Talib*, Pg. 192. And it is said that his age was
27 on the basis of what Muqarram has written in *Maqtalul Husain*, Pg.
255

for a long time while his heart was melting with sorrow and he was
almost on the verge of death; because he beheld a son, the like of whom
there was none, moving towards death. Thus he raised his face to the
heavens and in a sad forlorn voice prayed:

“O Allah! Be a witness on these people that a youth has gone towards
them to fight who in appearance, manners and speech most closely
resembles their Prophet, Muhammad (s). Whenever we used to be eager to
see Your Prophet we used to glance at him...O Allah! Prevent the
bounties of the earth from them and make them dispersed and distressed
and make them a divided people. And never let their rulers be pleased
with them as they had invited me and offered to help me, but later on
they oppressed us and confronted us in battle.”

In these grief-filled statements could be seen the level of the sorrow
of His Eminence for his son whom he loved with all his being and with a
burning heart he begged to Allah to punish those sinful people in the
world with His most terrible chastisement. The Imam’s heart was burning
for his son in emotions and he screamed at the sinful criminal, Umar bin
Saad:

“What has happened to you, may Allah cut off His mercy from you, not
bless any of your deeds and impose such a one upon you that shall kill
you in your bed like you have cut off my relations and not honored our
kinship with the Messenger of Allah (s).”

Then he recited the following verses of the Holy Quran:

**“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of Imran above the nations. Offspring, one of the other;
and Allah is Hearing, Knowing...”[1]**

Tearful and immersed in sorrow the Holy Imam escorted his son, while the
ladies of Ahle Bayt were behind His Eminence and their lamentations and
wails for the image of the Messenger of Allah (s) arose that he was
going to be cut up into pieces by swords and spears.

That young man moved towards the battlefield with dignity, having
absolutely no fear or worry. He had the awe of the Holy Prophet (s),
valor of Amirul Momineen (‘a), daring of Hamzah and magnanimity of
Husain. He positioned himself amidst the swords and spears of the
enemies reciting the following:

**“I am Ali bin al-Husain bin Ali. By the Lord of Kaaba, we are those
rightly endowed with the Prophet.**

**By God, the spurious one, son of the spurious one will not rule upon
us.”[2]**

Yes, by Allah, you and your father, O pride of Bani Hashim were most
deserving  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Aale Imran 3/32-34  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/74. *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/361-362

to have the Prophet and you were most eligible for that position because
you are the nearest person and one most closely related to them. But the
political greed that dominated these people removed you from your
position and these oppressive people gained power over you. They cut
your physical organs into pieces and destroyed you completely so that
they may have the field open for themselves and that they may unjustly
rule over the Muslims.

In his war poem, Ali bin al-Husain (‘a) announced the greatness of his
courage and the intensity of his magnanimity and that he preferred death
to submission to the orders of that wicked tyrant son of the wicked
tyrant...At that moment he became involved in confrontation with the
enemies of Allah while their hearts were full of fear and terror. He
displayed such valor that it is impossible to describe it faithfully;
because he reminded them of the valor of his grandfather, Amirul
Momineen (‘a). According to some historians he slew 120 mounted soldiers
and they were in addition to those he wounded. After that he returned to
his father to complain to His Eminence about the thirst that was killing
him and to say farewell to him for the last time. His father welcomed
him warmly and Ali Akbar said to His Eminence:

“Thirst is killing me and the weight of the armor is painful. Is there
any possibility of getting water from somewhere so that I can gain power
over the enemy?”

The father was very much pained and affected by this. Then in a soft
voice and with tearful eyes he said, “It is not possible to get water
right now, but soon you shall meet your grandfather and he would quench
your thirst by his own cup after which you shall never be thirsty
again.”

Then he made him suck his tongue to show him his own thirst that its
severity had dried up his lips. He then kept his finger ring in Ali
Akbar’s mouth.**[1]**

This terrible scene was the most grievous of the calamities in which
Imam Husain (‘a) was involved; because he was looking at his beloved son
in the prime of his youth and on the threshold of manhood terribly
wounded and injured and that he was nearly dying of thirst while he was
helpless to provide him with a glass of water or quench his thirst.

Hujjatul Islam Shaykh Abdul Husain Sadiq in his famous poem says:

**“He complained of thirst to the best of fathers, but he did not
complain of his internal thirst except to the one who was more
thirsty.**

**Thus he would have preferred him over himself with the moisture of his
lips if the remaining moisture of his mouth hadn’t dried.”**

Ali bin al-Husain returned to the battle ground paying no attention to
the injuries that had weakened him physically and the thirst that was
scorching his internal organs. He was only concerned about the isolation
of his father and the coming together of the enemies of Allah to
eliminate His Eminence. Then he recited the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *Husain (a.s.)* 2/30-31

following couplets:

**“For the battle that would uncover the truths and the meanings that
shall be known after that.**

**By the Lord of the Throne! I shall not return my sword to the scabbard
till I have driven away your huge army.”[1]**

Through these lines he announced the pride of Bani Hashim that in battle
shall reveal the realities and the great aims of Ahle Bayt that were
behind it shall be known to all. And they shall fight in this way for
realization of their aims before the swords are sheathed.

Ali Akbar (‘a) performed a severe and ferocious battle till the number
killed by him reached 200.**[2]** The foes bore the brunt of his attack
and suffered huge losses. They began to scream in terror. Then the
decadent wicked man, Marrah bin Munqidh Abadi**[3]** said: “May the
felonies of the Arabs come on me, if he gets past me doing the same as
he has been doing, (and) if I do not deprive his mother of him.”**[4]**
Then that wicked one moved to the image of the Messenger of Allah (s)
and struck him with a spear on his back like a coward who attacks from
behind. And he slashed at his head splitting it open and Ali Akbar
embraced the horse’s neck aiming to reach his father’s camp to see him
once again. But his horse carried him into the rows of enemies who
attacked him from all sides. They did not even rest content at killing
him but continued to hack him into bits and pieces with their swords to
revenge the terrible losses they had suffered at his hands. Ali Akbar
called out in a loud voice:

“O Aba Abdillah! My salutation to you! Here is my great grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah quenching my thirst by his cup so that I shall never
be thirsty again. He is saying that a cup is also ready for you.”

The breeze carried these words to the grief-stricken father splitting up
his heart and insides and despite being terribly wounded and exhausted
he hastened towards Ali Akbar. He threw himself upon his dying son
putting his cheek on Ali Akbar’s cheek while he had become a lifeless
body that had been shredded into pieces by the savage swords. The Imam
wept for him and in a soft voice that was bursting his heart said: “May
God kill the people who killed you, my son. How foolhardy they are
against the Merciful and in violating the sanctity of the family of the
Apostle,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/209  
 **[2]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 2/31  
 **[3]** Munqidh the father of Marrah was a commander of Imam’s forces
in the battle of Jamal and he was martyred in it and his son, Marrah
took the standard after him and participated in the battle and he fought
on the side of the Holy Imam the battles of Siffeen and Nahrawan. After
that he became an apostate and deviated from Islam and joined the army
of Ibne Saad and in this battle he committed the worst sorts of evil
deeds one of which was the killing the image of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.), Ali Akbar (a.s.).  
 **[4]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain* Pg. 259. *Maqatilut Talibeen,* Pg.
115

may God bless him and his family.”**[1]**

Youths from his uncles and cousins rushed towards him and threw
themselves upon him kissing his body that was almost shredded by wounds
and pledged that they shall also tread the path he had traversed. Imam
(‘a) ordered them to carry him to the camp.

The pure granddaughter of the Prophet (s), Her Eminence, Zainab,
hastened to the corpse of her nephew while only a few moments ago she
had looked at his splendor. This tragic scene shocked the Imam and
affected him deeply and His Eminence began to condole while repeating
the words, “There will only be dust on the world after you.”

Ali bin al-Husain was the vanguard and the leader of every brave noble
who opposed humiliation and injustice and lived in the world with
courage and self-respect.

Farewell, O warrior of Islam!

Farewell, O pride of Bani Hashim!

Farewell, O morning of every night!

Along with your father we also bid you farewell in the sorrowful words:
“There is no world after your passing away.”

Martyrdom of Aqil’s family
--------------------------

The daring youths of Aqil’s family raced towards Jihad while they
considered death as nothing. Imam (‘a) noticed their courage and
eagerness to render support to His Eminence and he said, “O Allah! Kill
the murderers of the progeny of Aqil…O family of Aqil! Be patient as you
are promised Paradise.”**[2]**

His Eminence, Ali bin al-Husain, Zainul Abideen (‘a) used to be very
fond of the family of Aqil and accorded them preference over the family
of Ja’far. When he was asked about this matter he explained, “I remember
their day with Abu Abdillah and my heart burns for them.”**[3]**

From them nine persons were killed in defense of the beloved son of the
Messenger of Allah (s) as the poet has said regarding them:

**“O eyes, weep and lament and be mournful if you sit in mourning for
the family of the Prophet.**

**Seven in all from the progeny of Ali and nine from the progeny of Aqil
were martyred.”[4]**

They pounced upon that army with intent and a firm determination and
rendered them the severe-most losses. Among the martyrs of Aqil’s family
were:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *Husain (a.s.)* 2/31. *Al Lohoof,* Pg. 167.
Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/74. *Nasab-e-Quraish,* Pg. 57  
 **[2]** *Batal al-Qama* 1/277  
 **[3]** *Bihar* 46/110  
 **[4]** *Al Ma’arif,* Pg. 204

Abdullah bin Muslim
-------------------

The youth of Bani Hashim, Abdullah bin Muslim**[1]** hastened to the
field of Jihad and arrived with eagerness into the whirlpools of
hardships of the battle while he was bewildering the audience with his
elegant appearance and valor and was reading the Rajaz war poem quoted
below:

**“Today I shall meet my father, Muslim and the daring, the valiant ones
who have passed away on the faith of the Prophet.**

**They are not those who are recognized for lying, rather they are
righteous and of noble lineage.**

**From Bani Hashim, the original Sadat.”[2]**

He introduced himself that he was the son of the immortal martyr, Muslim
bin Aqil and on that same day he would meet his father and the brave
ones from his cousins who had been martyred in the way of Islam and
passed away on the religion of the Holy Prophet (s). They were not like
the people of Kufa well-known for deception, betrayal of trust and
lying. Rather they were from the progeny of Hashim, the leaders of Arabs
in whose personality had accumulated every merit and honor in Islam.

That young man fought a severe battle and in three attacks killed a
number of people so the oppressive decadent one, Yazid bin Raqqad**[3]**
shot a terrible arrow towards him. Though this youth had placed his hand
before himself the arrow pinned it to his forehead and he was not able
to remove it and a terrible pain pierced through his body. He cursed
those criminals and said: “O Allah, they have considered us lowly and
degraded. So kill them like they have killed us.”

Other wretched persons pounced upon him and struck a spear on his chest
and thus was martyred that youth in defense of the most Holy sanctity in
Islam.**[4]**

Ja’far bin Aqil
---------------

Ja’far bin Aqil**[5]** rushed to the fields of Jihad and arrived in the
middle of the battleground, reciting the following poem of battles:

**“I am a youth of Abtah and a Talibi from the group of Bani Hashim and
Bani Ghalib.**

**Indeed we are the chiefs of the tribes, this is Husain the leader of
the pure ones.”[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mother of Abdullah bin Muslim was Ruqaiyya, daughter of His
Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s.). This is mentioned in
*Nasab-e-Quraish,* Pg. 45  
 **[2]** *Al Futuh* 5/202-203  
 **[3]** It is mentioned in *Tarikh* Ibne Athir 4/74: Amr bin Sabih
Sadaiee shot arrow at him.  
 **[4]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *Husain* Pg. 362  
 **[5]** The mother of Ja’far bin Aqil was Umme Thughar, daughter of
Aamir Aamiri from Bani Kilab (*Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 97)  
 **[6]** *Al Futuh* 5/203

He introduced himself to them that he was from the family of
Prophethood, which is the most noble family of Arabs and the most
magnificent of them. Also that he was fighting in defense of his leader,
Husain who is the head of the pure ones and the pride of this world.

That youth fought a ferocious fight till Urwah bin Abdullah Khathami
shot an arrow at him and martyred him.**[1]**

Abdur Rahman bin Aqil
---------------------

Abdur Rahman bin Aqil**[2]** headed for the war front and began to
attack in a furious manner calling out this poem of Rajaz:

**“My father is Aqil, so you recognize his status too from Bani Hashim
and they are our brothers.**

**Truthful men who were the leaders of the confrontation, this is Husain
with his exalted position.”[3]**

He spoke of his remarkable lineage that he was the son of Aqil, the
cousin of the Prophet of Allah (s) and that he was of the chiefs of the
nobility who were most prominent examples of loyalty, greatness and
respectability on the earth; in the same way he remembered Imam Husain
(‘a) with respect that His Eminence had a very lofty position due to his
exalted values and his superior qualities and his relationship with the
Holy Prophet (s)…He fought the battle like a valiant soldier till the
time Uthman bin Khalid Jehni and Bashir bin Haus Qaidh pounced upon him
and sent him to his martyrdom.**[4]**

Muhammad bin Aqil
-----------------

Muhammad bin Aqil was a religious jurisprudent who arrived into the
battlefield in defense of the beloved grandson of Allah’s Messenger (s)
and achieved martyrdom in the service of His Eminence.**[5]**

Abdullah Akbar
--------------

Abdullah Akbar**[6]** came to the field and began to fight till the time
Uthman bin Khalid bin Aseer Jehni and a man from the Hamadan tribe
attacked him and sent him towards martyrdom.**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 97  
 **[2]** Mother of Abdur Rahman bin Aqil was a slave mother (*Maqatilut
Talibeen* Pg. 96)  
 **[3]** *Al Futuh* 5/203  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 96  
 **[5]** Mother of Muhammad bin Abi Saeed al-Hawl bin Aqil was a slave
mother (*Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 98)  
 **[6]** Mother of Abdullah Akbar was a slave mother (*Maqatilut
Talibeen* Pg. 97)  
 **[7]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 97

Muhammad bin Abi Saeed bin Aqil
-------------------------------

Muhammad bin Abi Saeed bin Aqil was a witty speaker and he also
presented himself in Jihad field and achieved martyrdom in the service
of Imam (‘a).**[1]**

Muhammad bin Muslim
-------------------

Muhammad bin Muslim**[2]** came to the field of the battle and was
attacked by Abu Murham Azadi and Luqait bin Ayas Jehni and martyred by
them.**[3]**

Ali bin Aqil
------------

Ali bin Aqil came to the battlefield and fought a hard battle and
reached martyrdom in the service of Abu Abdillah (‘a).**[4]**

The youths from the family of Aqil displayed incomparable and admirable
valor and courage and competed with each other for martyrdom in the
service of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and sacrificed their lives for him.

Sons of His Eminence, Hasan (‘a)
--------------------------------

Daring youths from the sons of His Eminence, Hasan (‘a), who were in the
prime of their youth and the threshold of adulthood came forward and
competed with each other to reach martyrdom so that they may sacrifice
their lives for their uncle. They were as follows:

Abdullah bin Hasan
------------------

His agnonymn was Abu Bakr and his mother was Umme Walad named Ramla. He
rushed towards the battlefield, swords and spears lacerated his body and
he fell down bathed in his own blood.**[5]**

Qasim bin Hasan (‘a)
--------------------

Qasim was the foremost among sons of Imam Hasan (‘a). According to the
description provided by historians he was in elegance and handsomeness
like a moon and in freshness and beauty he was like a beautiful flower
who the Almighty Allah had bestowed with great intelligence and faith
despite his tender age and his uncle had nurtured him with his good
habits and qualities and threw upon him the ray of his soul till he
became an exemplar of perfection and strong faith.

Qasim used to be inclined towards his uncle and think about his
hardships and wanted to keep him safe from the harm of enemies through
his blood and he used to say, “Till the time sword is in my hand, my
uncle shall not be killed.”**[6]**

When he saw the isolation of his uncle he was surrounded by painful
sorrows and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 98  
 **[2]** His mother was a slave wife  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 97  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 98  
 **[5]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/470  
 **[6]** Imaduddin Isfahani, *Al Bustanul Jame Li Jamiul Tawarikhul
Zaman,* Pg. 25, from photocopy at Imam Hakim Library

he came to His Eminence to gain permission to perform Jihad for him.

With tearful eyes, the Imam embraced him and after he insisted greatly,
accorded permission to him. That astonishing daring youth, who didn’t
know what fear was and considered life nothing, set out without armor or
helmet, only carrying a sword. He confronted the enemies, striked off
their necks and slashed their heads as if death was under his control.
He killed whomsoever he wanted. But during his fighting the strap of one
of his sandals broke. That child of prophethood didn’t like to fight
with a bare foot so he halted to retie the strap without any concern for
the surrounding foes. The decadent man, Amr bin Saad saw this as an
opportunate moment and he said, “By God, I shall attack him now!”

Hamid bin Muslim criticized him, “Glory be to Allah! What do you intend
to achieve by this? While even if one of the family of Husain remains,
that will be enough to take vengeance from you for his death.”

Amr paid no attention to him. He attacked Qasim and striked his blessed
head with his sword. He fell down like a falling star and called out in
a loud voice, “My Uncle!”

The Imam’s heart burst with pain and he rushed towards his nephew,
attacked his killer and cut off his hand from the elbow. His colleagues
rushed to his help but that sinner was trampled by hooves of the horses.

Imam (‘a) came to his nephew, kissed him while the youth was thrashing
his limbs. Imam spoke to him with the sorrow of his heart, “May the
people who have caused your death perish. For the one who will oppose
them on the Day of Resurrection on your behalf will be your
grandfather…By God, it is hard on your uncle that you called him and he
did not answer you, or rather he answered but your cry was too late to
help you. For by God, those who kill his relatives are many but those
who help him are few.”**[1]**

Then he carried that youth in his arms, while he was thrashing his legs
like a bird with its head cut.**[2]** He took him and put him with his
son, Ali Akbar and the other members of the household who had been
slain. He continued to look at those luminous stars of his Ahle Bayt for
a long time and invoked curse on their terrible killers. At that time he
consoled the few surviving members of Ahle Bayt and said:

“O Allah! Take their account and do not leave anyone of them and do not
forgive them at all. Be patient, O my cousins, be patient! O my Ahle
Bayt! After this day you shall never be humiliated…”**[3]**

May Allah be your helper, O Aba Abdillah! You faced with determination
such tragedies that even mountains shake in their terror and which
destroy the forbearance of every man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Irshad*, 2/107-108. *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/186. *Ad
Durrun Nadheem fee Manaqibul Aaimma*, Pg. 556  
 **[2]** *Al-Bustanul Jame,* Pg. 25  
 **[3]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 2/28

Hasan, Son of Imam Hasan (‘a)
-----------------------------

Hasan, son of Imam Hasan fought like a valiant stalwart and fell down
wounded on the ground. When those wicked men of Kufa came to cut off the
heads of the martyrs, he was on the verge of death. His maternal uncle,
Asmaa bin Kharja Fuzari interceded for him and his intercession was
accepted. He took him to Kufa with himself, nursed his injuries and
restored his health after which he was sent to Medina.**[1]**

Abdullah bin Hasan (‘a)
-----------------------

He was a lad of eleven years who saw his uncle surrounded by the enemies
and rushed out to help him. His uncle asked Zainab to take care of him
and restrain him but he refused to go back and came running to his
uncle. Abjar bin Kaab rushed towards Husain and attacked him with his
sword. The young lad said to him, “Woe upon you, you son of an impure
woman, are you trying to kill my uncle?”

Abjar struck at him with his sword. The boy tried to fend off (the blow)
with his arm. The sword cut through his arm to the skin on the other
side. There was the arm hanging by the skin. The boy cried out, “O my
mother!” Imam Husain (‘a) took hold of him and embraced him. He said to
him, “My nephew, try to bear what has come to you and be comforted with
the news that God will unite you with your righteous ancestors.”

Then His Eminence, Husain (‘a) raised his hands and said, “O God, even
as You have made life pleasant for them for a time, divide them into
factions and make them follow the ways of factions and let their rulers
never be pleased with them. They summoned us so that they might support
us and then they become hostile to us and fought us.”**[2]**

When he was in the arms of his uncle, the wicked decadent man, Hurmula
bin Kahil aimed and shot an arrow at him, killing him.**[3]** Imam (‘a)
picked him up and laid him among the corpses of his Ahle Bayt.

Those transmogrified men were devoid of every human quality. They
considered the slaying of innocent children permissible, which was even
illegal during the pre-Islamic period.

Sons of Abdullah bin Ja’far
---------------------------

The sons of Abdullah bin Ja’far competed for Jihad in service of the
beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s). They were as follows:

** **

1. Aun bin Abdullah
-------------------

The mother of Aun is Her Eminence, Zainab, the daughter of His Eminence,
Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a). He hastened to the field of Jihad and fought
in the most valiant manner reciting the following couplets of Rajaz:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)* 2/471-72  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/450-451  
 **[3]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 173

**“If you don’t know me, I am the son of Ja’far, that martyr of truth
who shines in Paradise.**

**There, with a pair of green wings he flies, and this excellence is
enough for pride of a group.”[1]**

He introduced himself that he was a descendent of Ja’far, the immortal
martyr in Islam, whose hands were cut off in the way of Islam and
according to the Holy Prophet (s) the Almighty Allah bestowed him with a
pair of wings by which he glides in Paradise. Thus, being the descendent
of such a great man was sufficient for ones respectability.

He continued to fight till Abdullah bin Qutbah attacked and martyred
him.**[2]**

Sulaiman bin Qatah has versified this as follows:

**“Observe mourning if you weep, for your brother Aun who did not fall
short in rendering his help.**

**By my life! You have versified the grief of the relatives of the
Prophet, so weep for these prolonged calamities.”[3]**

2. Muhammad bin Abdullah
------------------------

Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far’s mother was Hausa from the Bani Bakr
bin Bani Wael tribe.**[4]** He landed in the battlefield humming the
following lines:

**“I shall complain to Allah about your injustice. The battle in which
they have become blind in killing.**

**They have changed the signs of the Quran and the explanation of
unambiguous and clear verses.**

**And they have exposed their disbelief and disobedience.”[5]**

With this Rajaz he complained to Allah about the pain and grief of Ahle
Bayt (‘a) against that oppressive people who had gone beyond all bounds
in injustice and wickedness and had become completely blind. Who have
destroyed themselves in misguidance and distorted the laws of Quran and
exposed infidelity and sinfulness.

That young man fought a hard battle till he was attacked by Aamir bin
Nahshal Tamimi**[6]** and wounded by his sword. He fell down on the
burning sands of Kerbala smeared with his blood. Then he passed away
after a few moments as described by Sulaiman bin Qatah in his poetry:

**“The one named like the Prophet passed away from them wounded by the
strikes of sharpened swords.**

**So O, my eyes! If you weep, weep profusely with tears like a flowing
flood.”[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/204  
 **[2]** *Al-Irshad*, 1/107  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 95  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 95  
 **[5]** *Al Futuh* 5/204  
 **[6]** *Al-Irshad*, 2/107  
 **[7]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 95-96

3. Ubaidullah bin Ja’far
------------------------

Ubaidullah bin Ja’far’s mother was Khausa, the daughter of Hafasa. He
set out for Jihad and reached martyrdom.**[1]**

Brothers of His Eminence, Husain (‘a)
-------------------------------------

After that the chosen pure ones of Ahle Bayt reached martyrdom, none
remained with Husain (‘a) except his brothers from his father’s side.
They also hastened towards Jihad and entrusted themselves to death till
they sacrificed their lives and existence upon the beloved son of
Allah’s Messenger (s).

His Eminence, Abbas and his Brothers
------------------------------------

When the stalwarts of Bani Hashim and pride of the clan of Adnan, His
Eminence, Abbas, son of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) saw so many dead from
his Ahle Bayt he glanced at his full brothers and said, “Go ahead, sons
of my mother, that I may see you loyal for Allah and His Prophet and
sacrifice yourselves because you are issueless (and as yet
unmarried).”**[2]**

These statements show the depth of the faith of His Eminence, because he
wanted his brothers to lay down their lives loyally for God and His
Prophet. And in this matter he had no other factor in mind, like
relationships and lineage…His Eminence, Abul Fazl addressed Abdullah the
eldest one among the rest of his brothers, “My brother! Go ahead so that
I see you killed and ask Allah about your recompense.”**[3]**

Worthless statement
-------------------

Among the most worthless and absurd things is that which Ibn Athir has
reported. He says, “His Eminence, Abbas (‘a) told his brothers, “Go
Ahead, so that I may inherit you; because you are all issueless.”**[4]**
They have attributed such a statement to him in order to belittle the
importance and greatness of this brave stalwart who presented such an
exemplary sacrifice in the forefront of Islamic forces. Is it possible
that in that hour when death was only a few steps away from His
Eminence, that His Eminence, Abbas should be concerned about material
things and worldly matters in spite of the terrible calamities that had
surrounded them? He was seeing that like stars his nephews were lying on
the sands and he could hear the wails of the ladies of the family of
prophethood and was aware of the screams of children complaining of
thirst. He saw his brother surrounded by the enemies and he wanted
helpers but no one was coming to his help. Such terrible calamities that
astound the minds surrounded him from all sides and he was not thinking
of anything else except that he should pass away from this world as soon
as possible. Apart from this, his mother, Ummul Baneen was yet alive and
in the table of inheritance she held a higher position. And perhaps that
which has been  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 96  
 **[2]** *Al-Irshad*, 2/109  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 86  
 **[4]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/76

recorded is: “So that I may take revenge for you.” And the words have
been distorted.

Martyrdom of Abdullah son of Amirul Momineen
--------------------------------------------

Abdullah bin Amirul Momineen (‘a), whose mother was Ummul Baneen,
marched towards the plains of Holy war and busied himself in engaging
the enemies in battle. At the same time he recited the following poetic
composition:

**“My master is Ali, owner of great honor, from Bani Hashim, having
great value and generosity.**

**This is Husain, son of the Messenger Prophet whom I defend with a
sharpened sword.**

**May my life be sacrificed on him. What a brother! O my Lord! Grant me
reward of position.”[1]**

Through these lines he has boasted about his father, Imam Amirul
Momineen (‘a) the gate of the city of knowledge of the Prophet (s), the
vicegerent of His Eminence. In the same way he has expressed pride about
his brother, Imam Husain (‘a), the beloved grandson of the Messenger of
Allah (s) and that he was not defending him on the basis of his
relationship. Rather, through this he desired to obtain the pleasure of
Almighty and the abode of the Hereafter.

That daring youth fought in this ferocious manner till the sinful
oppressor, Hani bin Shabth Hadhrami attacked him and made him reach
martyrdom.**[2]**

Martyrdom of Ja’far
-------------------

Ja’far bin Amirul Momineen (‘a), whose mother was Ummul Baneen, was only
19 years old. He set out for the field and conducted the battle of a
courageous warrior till he was attacked by Hani bin Shabth and sent to
his martyrdom.**[3]**

Martyrdom of Uthman
-------------------

Uthman bin Amirul Momineen (‘a), also son of Lady Ummul Baneen, was 21.
He too left for the battle front of Jihad and Khawli shot him with an
arrow and incapacitated him. A man from Bani Daram attacked and martyred
him. Then he picked up his head**[4]** to take it to his master, Ibn
Marjana and get reward for it.

Martyrdom of His Eminence, Abbas (‘a)
-------------------------------------

In the history of humanity, neither ancient nor modern, there exists
brotherly relationship more truthful, prominent and loyal than the
brotherhood of Abul Fazl for his brother, His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a)
because this brotherhood contains all the human values and lofty
exemplars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al Futuh* 5/205  
 **[2]** *Al-Irshad*, 2/109. And in *Al Futuh* 5/205 it is mentioned
that his killer was Zajar bin Badr Nakahai.  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 88  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 89

Among the most prominent signs of that incomparable brotherhood were
sacrifice, equality and loyalty; because His Eminence, Abul Fazl
sacrificed his life for his brother and equally shared all the hardships
and calamities. Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) has praised this incomparable
quality of his uncle and said:

“May Allah have mercy on my uncle, Abbas. He displayed loyalty and
service and sacrificed himself on his brother; so much so that both his
arms were severed. Allah Almighty, the Mighty and Sublime granted him a
pair of wings by the help of which he floats in Paradise, just as they
were bestowed for Ja’far bin Abu Talib...there is such a position for
Abbas near the Almighty that on the Day of Resurrection, all the martyrs
shall vie for it.”**[1]**

This true brotherhood is a cause for respect and astonishment near all
the people and it serves as an example for all generations and periods
of time, such that the grandson of His Eminence, Fazl bin
Muhammad**[2]** has prided over it and said:

**“Among men, one who is most deserving to be mourned is that daring man
who made His Eminence, Husain weep in Kerbala.**

**His brother and son of his father, Ali, Abul Fazl, bathed in blood.**

**Who showed loyalty to him and nothing prevented him, in spite of his
thirst, he accepted water only for him.”[3]**

And Kumayt says:

**“And Abul Fazl whose goodly remembrance is medicine for pains of the
hearts.**

**He killed the wicked ones when they slew.**

**He was the most honorable of those who drink rain water.”[4]**

His Eminence, Abul Fazl (‘a) had extensive strength of piety and
religion, the effulgence of his face was clear; so much so that he was
called the Moon of the Hashemites; in the same way he was the most
outstanding warrior in Islam. Even though he rode a very tall horse the
legs of His Eminence used to trail on the ground.**[5]** He had
inherited the qualities of valor and fighting from his father.

On the day of Ashura, the Holy Imam (‘a) entrusted the command of the
army to him and handed his standard to him, so he raised it aloft and
waved it and performed a ferocious battle. When he saw the isolation of
his brother and the killing of his companions and Ahle Bayt – those who
had sold their lives to Allah – he came to His Eminence and asked him
for permission so that he may meet his bright future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Bihar* 44/298, H. 4  
 **[2]** Fadl bin Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ubaidullah bin Abbas, this is
mentioned in *Uyun al-Akhbaar wa Fununul Aathaar* Pg. 101  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 89  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 90  
 **[5]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 90

Imam (‘a) did not permit him and told him in a low and sad voice, “You
are my standard bearer.”

As long as His Eminence, Abul Fazl (‘a) was alive, the Imam felt strong
and powerful, because he was like a battalion besides him that would
defend and support him. His Eminence, Abul Fazl urged His Eminence too
much and said, “These hypocrites have constricted my chest and I wish to
take my revenge from them.”

His Eminence’s heart had become restricted and he was fed up with life
in such a way that like luminous stars, he saw his brothers, nephews and
uncles lying beheaded on the sands of Kerbala. He became nostalgic and
restless to join them and to take their revenge.

Imam (‘a) requested him to try to get water for children which would
quench their thirst. That daring man rushed towards those transmogrified
people and began to exhort them goodness, warned them of Divine
Chastisement and revenge and addressing Ibn Saad said, “O Ibn Saad! This
is Husain, the son of the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s) whose
companions and Ahle Bayt are slain. These are his thirsty ladies and
children; provide drinking water for them as the thirst is scorching
their beings. Also he has proposed to you: Leave me, I shall go home or
to India and leave Iraq and Hijaz to you.”

The earth shook below their feet and they wished it had swallowed them
up. Some of them began to weep and a terrible silence reigned over them.
The dirty decadent beast, Shimr bin Zil Jaushan replied to him and said,
“O son of Abu Turab! If all the face of the earth was water and had been
under our control we wouldn’t have given you a drop from it till you
pledged allegiance to Yazid.”

Abul Fazl returned to his brother and informed him about their
oppression and sinfulness. That courageous daring man heard the wails of
the children shouting for help and screaming: O thirst! O thirst! Water!
Water!

When Abul Fazl al-Abbas looked at them – what a terrible sight it was –
he saw that their lips had dried up completely, their vision was
confused due to thirst and they were on the verge of death. Abbas was
deeply pained by this and extremely shocked. Daringly he hastened to
help them; taking a water skin he mounted a horse and attacked the banks
of Euphrates. By his courageous power he succeeded in breaking up the
cordon that guarded the waterfront. Mercenaries fled from him because
they were reminded of the valor of his father, the conqueror of Khaiber
and the destroyer of the polytheists.

His Eminence reached the water while his heart was bursting of thirst.
He picked up some water to drink but was reminded of the thirst of his
brother and the ladies and children accompanying him. So he threw down
the water and refrained from quenching the thirst that was killing him.
Then he recited the following:

**“O self! After Husain you are nothing and after him there is
nothing.**

**This is Husain who is going towards death while you would drink cool
water?**

**By Allah! This is not an action sanctioned by my religion.”[1]**

With all respect and honor humanity pays tribute to this great attitude
and mentality that has created excellence and exalted Islam in the
world; an attitude that imparts the most prominent lessons of human
nobility and lofty values.

This sacrifice which had gone beyond the limitations of time and place;
it was from the most outstanding qualities in the manners of Abul Fazl;
because emotions full of loyalty and devotion with regards to his
brother did not give him the possibility to drink water before him. Thus
what sacrifice could be better and truer than this? He had merged his
heart with the heart of his brother and his soul had become one with
that of his brother and between the two there was no plurality of being.

After the pride of the Hashemites had filled the water skin he set out
for the camp carrying the water which was for him more precious and
important than his life. On the way he became involved in a ferocious
confrontation with the foes; because they had surrounded him from all
sides to prevent him from supplying water to quench the thirst of Ahle
Bayt. That stalwart killed a large number of them, beheaded many and
felled their fighters, reciting the following poem:

**“I do not fear dying if I am confronted with death till I may even be
felled to the ground by swords drawn out.**

**May my life be a ransom for the life of the grandson of Mustafa, the
pure one. I am Abbas carrying the water skin.**

**And on the day of battle I have no fear of death.”[2]**

He announced to them his incomparable courage and great valor and said
that he wasn’t afraid of death, rather he was welcoming it on the way of
defense of his brother, the just leader of society on the earth...He
prided upon the fact that he was carrying a skin full of water to quench
the thirst of Ahle Bayt.

Soldiers of falsehood fled from him in terror and trepidation; because
His Eminence Abul Fazl displayed a courage that was beyond description;
they became certain that they would not be able to confront him. Except
for the cowardly decadent one, Zaid bin Raqqad Jehni who concealed
himself behind a date palm waiting in ambush and did not come out face
to face. He slashed at the right hand of Abbas severing it
completely...he cut off the hand that was generous and good doing to the
people and which defended the rights of the persecuted and oppressed.

Abul Fazl did not pay much heed to his right hand and began to recite:

**“By Allah! If they cut off my right arm, I shall continue to defend my
faith as before.**

**And defend the rightful Imam in certainty, the son of the pure and
Truthful Prophet.”[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 267-268  
 **[2]** Ibne Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 4/108  
 **[3]** *Al Manaqib* 4/108

In this Rajaz recitation he has indicated his great aims in fighting
against them because he was confronting in defense of religion and
defense of the Imam of Muslims.

His Eminence had not proceeded much when the most wicked of men, Hakim
bin Tufail Tai stood in ambush behind a date tree and hacked the left
arm of His Eminence and severed it. Some accounts of Kerbala tragedy
have mentioned that His Eminence held the water skin in his teeth and
began to gallop fast to convey the water to the thirsty people of Ahle
Bayt while he paid scant regard to that which was causing pain to him,
loss of blood and severity of wounds etc. This was the pinnacle of
loyalty, mercy and kindness that humanity in all its stages had
achieved.

While he was speeding fast a wicked arrow pierced the water skin and
water flowed on the desert sand and that brave stalwart fell into gloom
and sorrow because the loss of water was harder for him than strikes of
sword and hits of spears. During this moment a decadent man from those
people attacked him and bludgeoned his blessed head with an iron mace.
This caused the top of his head to split and he fell to the ground
calling out his farewell and last salutations to his brother and saying,
“My salutation for you, O Aba Abdillah!”**[1]**

The movement of breeze carried his words to his brother bursting his
heart and shredding his insides. In spite of feeling extremely exhausted
and shattered, His Eminence mounted a horse and rushed to the enemy
troops and reached to the side of that blessed body which was in the
throes of death. He threw himself upon him, kissed him and shed tears on
him and with the corners of his heart that the tragedies had burst, he
said:

“Alas, my back has broken and my strength is gone!”

The Holy Imam (‘a) looked at the body of his brother for a long time and
the true brother, rare loyalty and the brave one who had no equal…his
dreams were shattered. The only thing that made it a little easier for
him bear these tragedies was that he was also going to join him in the
near future and that he wouldn’t be alive after him except for a little
while. But for him those moments were like years and he would have liked
that death came to him before his brother passed away.

The Imam was immersed in sorrow and grief while his strength had sapped
and he didn’t even have the capacity to lift his feet. The signs of
exhaustion and sadness were apparent upon him. He stood up and went
towards the camps wiping his tears. Sakina came forward to receive him
and she asked, “Where is my uncle?”

His Eminence, deep in sorrow and tears informed her about his martyrdom.
When the granddaughter of the Prophet (s), Her Eminence, Zainab, learnt
of the martyrdom of her brother, she became distressed and anxiety
enveloped her. She kept her hand on her broken heart and lamented, “O my
brother! O my Abbas!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 269

After you I shall be lost!”

Imam (‘a) accompanied his sister in mourning for his righteous brother
and that patient man raised his voice and called out, “Abul Fazl, after
you woe be upon our helplessness.”**[1]**

After the loss of his brother, the Holy Imam (‘a) felt lost and
isolated, a brother who did not leave a single kind of good deed and
sacrifice but that he performed it for his brother.

Peace be upon your custom and remembrance, O Abal Fazl! That you went
towards your great destiny while you were of the greatest of martyrs in
prominence and sacrifice.

Farewell, O moon of the Hashemites!

Farewell, O valiant one of Kerbala!

Peace be on you! The day you were born, the day you were martyred and
the day you shall be raised again.

Muhammad Asghar
---------------

Among the brothers of Imam Husain (‘a) martyred from his father’s side
was Muhammad Asghar. His mother was Umme Walad.**[2]** He fought
fiercely. A man from Tamim tribe attacked him and sent him to his
martyrdom.**[3]**

Abu Bakr
--------

Abu Bakr was the Imam’s brother from the father’s side and his mother
was Laila binte Masud.**[4]** His name is not generally recorded but
according to Khwarizmi he was named Abdullah.**[5]** He went to the
battlefield and a person from the Hamadan tribe caused him to be
martyred. It is said that his killer is not known exactly.**[6]** Tabari
believes that it is doubtful that he was killed at all.

Abbas Asghar
------------

Abbas Asghar was also a brother of the Holy Imam from paternal side. His
mother was Lubaba, daughter of Ubaidullah Ibn Abbas. He was martyred on
the day of Ashura.**[7]** Qasim bin Asbagh Mujashayee says: When the
severed heads were brought in Kufa, I saw a rider from the shank of
whose horse hung the severed head of a lad who yet didn’t have facial
hair. His face was as handsome as a full moon. Whenever the horse
brought its head down the lad’s severed head used to reach to the
ground. I asked about that rider. They said, “He is Hurmula bin  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 269-270  
 **[2]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 90. And in *Tarikh Khulafa* of
Khaiyaat 1/34 it is mentioned that his mother was Lubaba daughter of
Ubaidullah bin Abbas.  
 **[3]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 91  
 **[4]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 91  
 **[5]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *al-Husain* 2/28  
 **[6]** *Maqatilut Talibeen* Pg. 91  
 **[7]** *Tarikh Khulafa* of Khaiyaat 1/234

Kahil.” I asked about that severed head. I was told that it was the head
of Abbas bin Ali.**[1]** And this report confirms the existence of Abbas
Asghar, because Abbas, the elder was 32 years old on the day of his
martyrdom and he wasn’t a lad yet to get facial hair.

Here comes to a close our discussion regarding the martyrs of Ahle Bayt
(‘a) by whose slaying was defiled the sanctity of the Prophet (s) and
the Umayyad troops did not pay any regard to their relationship to
Allah’s Messenger (s), though they were more than anything else,
deserving of regard and kindness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhuz Zamaan,* Pg. 95. *Hadaiq
al-Wardiya* 1/127-128. *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 92
