Prisoners From Ahle Bayt (‘a) in Kufa
=====================================

Kufa welcomed the prisoners from Ahle Bayt (‘a) with anxiety and
distress and humiliation and helplessness was covering them. Because the
mouths were shut and the tongues had become dumb. No one was able to
describe the severe grief that they harbored in their hearts due to the
fear of the tyrannical regime that considered the life and honor of
people worthless.

The bugles of the army began to blow and their flags began to wave while
they were holding the severed heads of the Purified Progeny on their
spear points and they had along with them prisoners, that is, the ladies
of prophethood and noble sanctified women of revelation tied to their
horses.

Muslim Jassas**[1]** has described that heart rending scene when he
says: Ibn Ziyad summoned me to Kufa to renovate the Governor’s Palace.
When I was working on the plaster of doorways, suddenly the lamentations
of all the people of Kufa arose. I glanced at one of the laborers and
asked, “Why is Kufa lamenting like women?”

“They have brought the heads of Khawarij who rebelled against Yazid!”

“Who is that Khariji?”

“Husain bin Ali!”

Muslim says: I permitted the laborer to leave. Then I began to strike at
my face till I feared I would lose my eyesight. I washed the plaster off
my hand and left the palace and walked till I reached the locality of
Kanaas. I stood there and people were waiting for the arrival of the
hostages and severed heads. Forty camels came forward carrying ladies
and children. Suddenly I decried Ali bin al-Husain (‘a) on a saddle-less
camel, his neck bleeding and he was wailing and reciting the following:

**“O evil nation! Rain shall not fall on your land. O people who did not
have regard for our grandfather with respect to us.**

**If the Messenger of Allah gathers us on the Day of Resurrection, what
justification would you offer?**

**You carry us on saddle-less camels, as if we did not bring any
religion among you.”[2]**

Jazlam bin Bashir says: I reached Kufa in 61 A.H. at the time of the
arrival of Ali bin al-Husain from Kerbala accompanied with the ladies;
and soldiers were surrounding them and people had come out to watch the
spectacle. They were astride camels without seats. Women of Kufa were
wailing and lamenting. I saw Ali bin al-Husain (‘a) that illness had
made him emaciated. There was an iron collar and chain around his neck
and his hands were tied to his neck. He was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jassas = Mason  
 **[2]** Abdullah bin Nurullah, *Awalim* 17/372-373

crying in a feeble voice: “They are wailing and lamenting for us, then
who has killed us?”**[1]**

A Kufan lady stepped forward and asked the hostages: “What prisoners are
you?”

“We are prisoners from Ahle Bayt (‘a).”

When the lady heard this, she screamed and women also began to cry with
her. Their wails echoed in Kufa. One of the women collected whatever
head scarves and coverings that she could find in her house and
presented them to the Alawite ladies that they may cover themselves in
presence of males.**[2]**

Another lady brought food and date fruits and gave it all to the young
children who were suffering from extreme hunger.

Her Eminence, Umme Kulthum called out from the rear of the caravan:
“Sadaqah (alms) is not lawful for us, Ahle Bayt.”

When the children heard the call of that lady each of them threw away
whatever he or she held in the hand or in the mouth and told their
neighbor, “Our aunt says: Sadaqah is unlawful for us, Ahle Bayt.”

Sermon of Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a)
-----------------------------------

When Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a), granddaughter of His Eminence, the Holy
Prophet (s) and sister of the Holy Imam saw the huge crowd that had
filled up the roads and lanes of Kufa she began to address them in order
to inform them about the reality behind their circumstances and tell
them about the great tragedy that had befallen on Ahle Bayt, and to put
the responsibility of this evil deed on the Kufians who had broken the
pledge, disregarded the covenant and killed the beloved grandson of the
Messenger of Allah (s). Now that after the martyrdom of His Eminence
they were lamenting and wailing as if they had not committed this
heinous deed. The text of Her Eminence’s sermon is as follows:

“Praise be to Allah and divine blessings be on my father Muhammad and
his good and exemplary descendants. O people of Kufa, O you who are
deceitful and treacherous:**[3]** Do you shed tears? May your tears
never dry up and your loud lamentations never cease.**[4]** You are like
the woman that unravels to bits the thread which she has firmly spun.
Your faith is nothing but deceit and betrayal. Are there any among you
but the immodest, disgraced, proud, spiteful, adulator, enemy and
reviler? There are among you those who are as guileful as a beautiful
plant growing in filth, or the silver on a grave. Certainly evil is that
which your souls have sent before for you. Allah is displeased with you
and in punishment shall you abide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdullah bin Nurullah, *Awalim* 17/371  
 **[2]** Abdullah bin Nurullah, *Awalim* 17/377, H. 2  
 **[3]** In a version it says: “Breaking of Pledge”  
 **[4]** In a version it says: “Your tears will not cease and your
lamentations will not fall quiet.”

Are you crying and wailing? Indeed, by Allah. Do cry endlessly and laugh
but little, for your deed was so horrendously disgraceful that you will
never be able to atone for it. How can you wash away the crime of
murdering the scion of the Seal of the Prophets, the essence of the
message, the lord of the youth of Paradise, the refuge of your nobles,
the refuge for whom you resorted during affliction, the bright divine
proof of yours, your master who defended the Prophet’s tradition.

What an awful sin you did commit! Away with you, there will be no
forgiveness for you. Certainly your efforts failed, your hands suffered
loss and your bargain is brought to naught. You have made yourselves
deserving of the wrath of Allah. Abasement and humiliation have been
brought down upon you.

Woe to you! Do you know how you tore the liver of the Apostle of Allah?
Whom of his womenfolk you exposed? What blood of his you shed? What
honor of his you defamed?

Your deed is most certainly so dangerously ugly and foul, that it filled
the earth and sky with its putridness. Are you surprised that it rained
blood? Certainly the punishment of the Hereafter is infinitely more
abasing, and you shall not be helped. Don’t make light of the delay of
punishment in that it is not hastened by the fear of missing the taking
of revenge. Most surely Allah is watching.”**[1]**

The brave lady of Kerbala, by the logic of truth and the call of
rightfulness thrashed them and guided the filthy souls. She was not
deceived by their false tears and their frauds and lies were not
concealed from her. She reminded them of their most terrible crime that
it was the worst thing ever committed on the earth.

She described them to be having the worst qualities and compared them to
the most degraded people; because she described their deception and
breaking of pledge as these two things are the source of decadence and
evil of man.

Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a) opined about their lamentations and said: They
deserve to weep much and laugh less, due to the great sin that they have
committed; because they killed the Chief of the youths of Paradise, son
of the seal of prophethood and their savior and freedom fighter. They
murdered the beloved one of the Messenger of Allah (s), destroyed his
sanctity and took his women and children as hostages, thus which crime
is worse and more tragic than this?

Reaction to the Sermon of Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a)
---------------------------------------------------

People were shocked by the sermon of the daughter of prophethood and
they became certain that they have destroyed themselves. Kharima Asadi
has described the level of effect created by the sermon of that lady and
says: By Allah, I have not seen any lady more eloquent than her, she
spoke like Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a). After her sermon people fell into
bewilderment. They held their hands to their mouths. I saw an old man
approach her, weeping so profusely that his beard was wet with his
tears. He said: May my parents be sacrificed on you! Your elders are  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 310-312

the best of elders and your youths are the best of youths and your
progeny shall never be humiliated and degraded.**[1]** But Imam Zainul
Abideen (‘a) interrupted the discourse of his aunt saying: “Aunt dear,
please be silent. By the grace of Allah, you are a natural intellectual
and untaught scholar…”**[2]**

So, the brave lady of Kerbala stopped her speech leaving the gathering
immersed in sorrow and grief.

Speech of Her Eminence, Fatima, daughter of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------------------------------

Fatima, daughter of Imam Husain (‘a), who was yet a young girl, began to
speak and deliver an outstanding and appealing speech. People were
stunned by her eloquence and clarity. She astounded the minds and left
the people perplexed and grief overtook them in a powerful way. She
said:

“Praise for Allah as many times as there are grains of sand and as
weighty as the weight of all that is from earth and sky. I praise Him
and I believe in Him and I trust Him and I give witness that there is
none worthy of worship except Him and that Muhammad is His Servant and
Messenger and that his progeny was slaughtered by the bank of river
Euphrates though they were neither vindictive nor did they claim or
demand any land.

O Allah! I seek Your refuge from the sin of saying any untruth about You
and anything other than what You have said regarding the last will
(legation) of Ali bin Abi Talib; that they have snatched his right and
have killed him without any fault in such a manner that his son was
martyred yesterday and the martyrdom of Ali was enacted in one of the
Houses (Mosques) of Allah in the presence of a number of Muslims (only
in name). May their heads be destroyed, those who did not drive away
oppression from him all through his life and death until You took him up
to You. He who is the possessor of a praiseworthy character and whose
talent is famous and whose guidance was well known. O Lord! No reproach
of any taunter ever deterred him from his goal or the blame of any
ridiculer. My Lord! You guided him in his childhood to Islam, You
praised his character when he grew up. He was a constant well-wisher and
sympathizer of Your religion and of Your Messenger (s) until you took
his soul, the soul of the one who was a devout abstinent in the world,
who paid no heed to the world but was always inclined towards the
Hereafter and was a struggler in Your path. He was Ali from whom You
loved and selected and guided to the right path.

Now, O Kufians! O the deceivers and disloyal and proud folk! Indeed we
are the members of Ahle Bayt. God involved us in you and you in us and
fixed our test well. He granted us His knowledge and wisdom. Hence we
are the containers of His knowledge and wisdom and metaphysics and are
His Hujjat (argument) on earth for His servants. He has honored us with
His generosity and He has granted grace to His Messenger, Muhammad (s)
over many of His slaves in a manifest manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ad Durrun Nadheem*, Pg. 560  
 **[2]** Tabarsi*, Al-Ihtijaaj* 2/109-114

Then you rose up to deny and refute us and considered it correct to
fight us, thought it was all right to destroy our property as if we were
children of Turks or Afghans. Yesterday you killed my grandfather. The
blood of the youth of Ahle Bayt is dripping from your daggers. All this
is due to your age-old rancor, because, after committing all these
felonious crimes your eyes have brightened and your hearts are
overjoyed. Strange indeed is your slander against Allah and the
conspired planning, which you planned, and Allah is the best of
planners.

Lest you rejoice your deeds of shedding our blood and plundering our
property because whatever calamities have fallen on us were in the Book
(destiny) even before we confronted them. This is easy for Allah so that
you may grieve over what you lost and become joyous on account of what
you gained, and Allah does not like the proud and the boasters.

Be you destroyed. Await curse and chastisement, which is to visit you.
Calamities will rain continuously from the sky and Allah’s wrath will
surround you. Some of you shall be treated harshly by some others and
you will remain in a permanent chastisement as a result of the
atrocities inflicted on us by you. Beware that the curse of Allah is on
the oppressors.

Woe unto you: Do you know how your hands pierced spears into our bodies
or how your hearts inclined to fight against us or with which legs you
rushed on us seeking war with us? By Allah, your hearts had become stony
and your livers hard and your soul, ears and eyes were sealed. Satan
made these crimes beautiful for you and threw dark curtain on your eyes.
So you will never be guarded rightly.

Be destroyed O Kufians! Which inheritance of the Holy Prophet (s) was
before you or on the basis of which vengeance did you exhibit so much
enmity towards his brother Ali bin Abi Talib (‘a), my grandfather and
his two sons (Hasan and Husain) the noble progeny of the Prophet (‘a)
that the boaster from you said so proudly:

‘We killed Ali and his sons with Indian swords and with spear and we
imprisoned their women like the Turkish prisoners. What a war we fought
with them!’

O speaker! Dust in your mouth. By killing the group which has been
purified by Allah and from whom impurity has been removed. How do you
take pride in this? Take care of yourself and sit on your droppings like
a dog, as was your father. Verily for everyone is whatever he has earned
and sent ahead.

Woe unto you! Do you envy what Allah has granted us?

What is our fault if the ocean of our grace is roaring while your
rivulet has no waves!

This is the excellence, which is granted to whomsoever He wishes, and
Allah is the Lord of the greatest grace. The one whom Allah does not
grant light, for him there will be no light.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Tawus, *Lohoof,* Pg. 194-197. Ibne Numa, *Matheer
al-Ahzaan*, Pg. 87. Abdullah, *Maqtal al-Husain Awalim* 17/379-380

The offspring of prophethood and Imamate spoke about numerous important
matters in her great sermon which were as follows:

1. She mentioned the suffering of her grandfather, Imam Amirul Momineen
(‘a), the leader of truth and justice on the earth; sufferings and
hardships that he bore till he was martyred in one of the houses of God,
while the society of Kufa did not defend him and did not stand up in his
support. Rather they left him isolated to confront hardships till the
Almighty Allah called him towards Himself. He possessed such uncountable
merits, good qualities and a righteous nature that the Almighty chose
him and bestowed him with exclusive virtues and gifts.

2. Similarly she spoke of the hardships of Ahle Bayt in that society.
Because being the spiritual leaders of community they (peace be on them)
were responsible for its defense but the community opposed the truth,
shed their blood and defiled their sanctities and how great is their
difficulty and how severe their tribulations.

3. She condemned the open persecutions upon Ahle Bayt and she described
the persecutors to be having the most evil qualities and pleaded to the
Almighty to take revenge from them and punish them in the most painful
way.

Reaction to the speech of Her Eminence, Fatima (‘a)
---------------------------------------------------

This sermon had a deep effect on the hearts of the people present in the
gathering, because they became very much distressed by it and they began
to weep and say: “O daughter of the pure ones, enough! Because you have
scorched our hearts, burnt our necks and scalded our consciences.**[1]**

She discontinued her discourse leaving that huge gathering suffering and
remorseful. They began to sigh and regret and lamented for their
worthless destiny that what a great sin they had committed.

Sermon of Her Eminence, Umme Kulthum
------------------------------------

Another daughter of the Prophet (s) Her Eminence, Umme Kulthum began to
speak and firstly motioned the people to keep quiet. When silence fell,
she began with praise and glorification of the Almighty and continued as
follows:

“O Kufians! Woe unto your condition. What happened to you due to which
you washed your hands off helping Husain (‘a) and killed him and
destroyed and snatched his properties and imprisoned his women and
heaped calamities on them? Be you destroyed.

Woe unto you. How many atrocities you carried out, how much sin you took
on your shoulders, how much blood you shed, how many respected women you
insulted (arrested), how many apparels did you plunder and how much
property did you destroy? You killed the best of people after the Holy
Prophet (s). Kindness has left your hearts. Yet, the party of Allah is
victorious and the party of Satan is in loss.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 313-315

The whole conglomeration was astounded by her speech. Women with hair
askew striked their faces and such lamentation ensued as never had been
witnessed before.**[1]**

Sermon of Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a)
----------------------------------

Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) initiated his speech and after due praise and
glorification of the Almighty said: “O people! The one who knew me has
known. As for the one who did not recognize me I am introducing myself
to them. I am Ali, son of Husain, son of Ali, son of Abi Talib (‘a). I
am the son of the one who has been slaughtered by river Euphrates though
he never asked for blood or inheritance from the killers. I am the son
of those honorable ladies of the harem who have been disrespected, whose
wealth and bounty has been plundered, and whose children have been
arrested. I am the son of the one who was caught and killed and this is
enough for me to be proud of.

O people! I administer you oath of Allah. Do you know that you wrote a
letter to my father and then tricked him? You gave your word to him and
extended allegiance to him. Then you left him and prepared yourselves to
kill him! Be you destroyed because of what you sent forth. Woe unto your
mentality. With which eyes will you look at the Messenger of Allah when
he says: You killed my household and you insulted my harem? You are not
in my community.”

The narrator says: Voices rose from all sides while they were telling
one another: You got destroyed yet did not know?

The Imam said: May Allah have mercy on him who accepts my admonitions
and remembers my advice regarding the command of Allah and His Prophet
and his household as he is the good pattern for us.

All responded: O son of the Holy Prophet! All of us have listened to you
and obeyed you and we are guardians of your responsibility (we are
prepared to carry out your commands). We will not turn our face from
you. Please order us. May Allah’s mercy be on you. We are at war with
your enemy and we are with you in whatever you plan. We will arrest
Yazid and we declare our disconnection from your enemy and our enemy.

The Imam said: Alas, alas. O disloyal conspirers! Is there any excuse,
which is not between you and your passions? Do you want to do to me what
you did to my father earlier? No, by Allah, no, because these wounds
have not yet healed. It was only yesterday when my father, along with
his household (‘a), was martyred. I am unable to forget the calamity of
missing the Holy Prophet (s) and the calamity of losing my father and
his children. His pain is in my mouth and its bitterness is choking me.
His wrath is tightening my chest.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Tawus, *Lohoof,* Pg. 198, Sayyid Muqarram Pg. 316. Others
believe that Her Eminence, Umme Kulthum was none but same as Her
Eminence, Zainab (s.a.).  
 **[2]** Ibne Numa, *Matheer al-Ahzaan*, Pg. 89, *Al-Lohoof*, Pg.
199-200

At that moment, the Imam halted in his discourse and turned away from
those pledge breaking transgressors who had blackened the face of
history by their hypocritical actions, because they killed the Imam and
now they were weeping upon him.

In the Assembly of Ibn Ziyad
----------------------------

They brought the daughters of the Messenger of Allah (s) as hostages in
a humiliating manner to Ibn Marjana, that son of decadence and betrayal
in the governor’s palace, while that palace was full of sinful
blood-sucking mercenaries so that they may report to Ibn Ziyad their
victory and tell him about their supposed bravery on the day of Ashura.
He (Ibn Ziyad) was shaking his legs in joyful mood while the decapitated
head of the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) was placed in
front of him. That tyrant considered it a plaything and tapped it with a
small cane in his hand, shamelessly remarking, “I have never seen such a
face!”

He had yet not completed his sentence when Anas bin Malik, companion of
the Prophet (s) shot back in a very logical way saying: “He was a
look-alike of the Prophet.”**[1]**

That tyrant became speechless.

In that assembly was present a man from Bakr bin Wail, named Jabir. He
stood up saying, “By Allah, if I could find ten Muslim men, I would
revolt against you and along with them rebel against you.”**[2]**

The Tyrant Ibn Ziyad with the Respected Lady of revelation
----------------------------------------------------------

When Ibn Ziyad was satiated by taking out spite with the severed head of
Imam, he glanced towards the ladies and children of His Eminence, Husain
(‘a). He noticed a lady standing in a corner wearing an extremely
worn-out dress, while she seemed to be commanding an awe and respected
position. Ibn Ziyad wanted to know who she was, so he asked, “Who is
that woman who has gone to the side and has sat in a corner with her
women?”

Zainab did not answer. Ibn Ziyad repeated the question about her a
second time but she considered him worthless and lowly and accorded him
no reply. “This is Zainab, daughter of Fatima, the daughter of the
Apostle of God, may God bless him and grant him peace,” one of her women
told him.

That tyrant and decadent man irked by her insult expressed his malice
and said: “Praise be to God, Who has disgraced you, killed you and
revealed the false nature of your claims,” as he came towards her.

“Praise be to God Who has favored us with His Prophet, Muhammad, may God
bless him and his family,” answered Zainab, “And He has purified us
completely from sin. He only disgraces the great sinners and reveals the
false nature of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/417  
 **[2]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayan*, Pg. 98

profligate. Such men are not among us, O Ibn Marjana!”**[1]**

She spoke such severe words though she was among the ladies held as
hostages and the powers of victors was threatening them and their swords
were wielded over them…She brought down the tyrant from his throne and
tossed him into the grave and destroyed his vanity. She exposed and
insulted him in the presence of his employees. Ibn Marjana vented his
ire saying, “How do you consider God has treated your House?”

The honorable lady of Bani Hashim replied to him with courage and
steadfast with words of victory and success for herself and her family,
“I have not seen but good, God decreed death for them and they went
forward (bravely) to their resting-places. God will gather you and us
together. You will plead your excuses to Him and we will be your
adversaries before Him. May your mother mourn for you O Ibn Marjana!”

Ibn Ziyad became enraged and burnt with anger. He could not control
himself and decided to punish Zainab.

“Governor”, intervened Amr bin Hareeth, “She is only a woman and women
are not responsible for anything they say. Do not blame her mistakes.”

“God has healed my soul from your tyranny and the rebellion of your
House,” Ibn Ziyad said to her.

Zainab, peace be on her, became weak and wept.

“By my life, she cried out to him, “you have killed the mature ones (of
my family); you have pierced my family; you have cut down my young
branches; and you have pulled out my root. If this heals you, then you
have been healed.”

“By my life,” declared Ibn Ziyad, “this is a woman who makes poetry.
Your father was a poet.”

“What has a woman to do with poetry?” she answered. “Indeed I have
(things) to distract me from poetry but my heart causes me say what I am
saying.”**[2]**

How painful and worthless this life is that the daughter of revelation
is brought as a hostage to Ibn Marjana, who is trying to insult and
ridicule her. O time! If you have more hardships for these great people
you bring that also, but you don’t have anything more with which they
can be troubled.** **

The Tyrant’s Encounter with Zainul Abideen (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------

The tyrant, Ibn Ziyad looked over other members of Ahle Bayt (‘a) and
saw Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) emaciated and weakened by his illness.

“Who are you?” he asked.

“I am Ali bin al-Husain” he answered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/457  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/457. *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 200-201

“Didn’t God kill Ali bin al-Husain?”

“I have a brother who is also called Ali,” answered Ali, peace be on
him, “the people killed him.”**[1]**

“Rather God killed him,” affirmed Ibn Ziyad.

**“God receives the souls at the time of their death.”[2]**

“How dare you answer me like that!” shouted Ibn Ziyad angrily, “and that
will be the last of you because of (your) answer to me. Take him away
and cut his head off!”

Zainab, his aunt, clung on to him, pleading: “O Ibn Ziyad, haven’t you
had enough of our blood?”

Then she clung on to him and said: “By God, I will not leave him. If you
kill him, kill me with him.”

Ibn Ziyad looked at her and at him, and said, “How wonderful is family
relationship! I think she wants me to kill her with him. Leave him, for
I see him (now) for what he is.”**[3]**

If Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a) had not taken that step, the only surviving
son of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) and the source of goodness and
excellence on the earth would have perished.

Jahiz has narrated that Ibn Marjana had said to his followers regarding
Ali bin al-Husain (‘a): “Leave him to me, I shall kill him, because he
is the only surviving male of this progeny so that I may uproot that
family, destroy this disease and cut off that source.”**[4]**

However they did not share his view as they were sure that the serious
illness he was involved in would definitely end his life soon. But the
Almighty Allah saved him from their clutches in an amazing manner!

Ibn Afif Revolts
----------------

The majority of the people of Kufa were living under terrible pressure
and awe of the tyrannical regime. So much so, that the general
conditions were absolutely turned upside down. In the same way, Kufa was
not like before a field of political happenings and centre of opposition
group; because they had chosen for themselves the robe of humiliation
and epidemic of fear was having them in its clutches.

Who could dare to say anything in such an atmosphere of trepidation?
While the leader of the community’s severed head was hoisted on points
of spears and the noble ladies of the family of Prophet were held as
prisoners in this land. No one  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Hadaiq al-Wardiya* 1/124  
 **[2]** Surah Zumar 39:42  
 **[3]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/82  
 **[4]** Jahiz, *Rasail*

else had the daring to utter a single word because their mouths had been
sealed, their tongues had become dumb. The prisons were full of great
and famous personalities and all had submitted to the rule of Ibn
Marjana. When that arrogant tyrant came into the public gathering,
attended by, in addition to the general public, by the armed forces and
men of any importance he went up to the pulpit and expressed his extreme
joy at his false victory and how terrible was his statement when he
said:

“Praise be to God Who has revealed the truth and the followers of the
truth, and has given victory to the Commander of the faithful, Yazid,
and his party, and has killed the liar who is the son of a liar and his
Shia.”

He uttered such a statement in a society that knew about the justice and
truthfulness of Ali and was aware of the manners and morals of his son,
Imam Hasan and had found him to be having regard for truth and
rightfulness. If he had said such a thing in Syria or some other country
he might have received an audience but they were spoken in Kufa, the
seat of the government of Ahle Bayt. That tyrant had yet not completed
his sentence that the revolutionary stalwart, Abdullah bin Afif Azadi
Ghamidi stood up. He had become visually handicapped as one of his eyes
was lost in the battle of Jamal and another in the battle of Siffeen
fighting on the side of Amirul Momineen (‘a) and he was always busy in
worship in the mosque. He shouted at Ibn Ziyad,

“O son of Marjana! You are the liar and your father too. O Ibn Marjana,
you kill the sons of Prophets and take the place of men of truth on the
pulpit?”**[1]**

The tyrant was absolutely shocked and infuriated because these words
fell upon him like a thunderbolt. So he called out like a wounded dog,
“Who is speaking like this?”

“O enemy of Allah! I am addressing you. Are you killing the Purified
Progeny of the Holy Prophet and thinking that you are following the
religion of Islam? Where are the helpers? Where are the sons of
Emigrants and Helpers?**[2]** Come up and take revenge from this cursed
son of the cursed father who have been described like this by the
Prophet.” The pride of that oppressor was shattered. Shouts arose from
all sides and people came forward from all the sides of the Mosque to
look at the one who had spoken in such a daring way expressing the true
feelings of all of them; because it was the first publicly announced
opposition to the killers of the beloved grandson of the Messenger of
Allah (s).

Ibn Ziyad was extremely enraged and he screamed, “Bring him to me.”

The executioners and guards rushed from all sides to capture him, but
Ibn Afif gave the battle cry of Azadi tribe, “Ya Mabroor!”

Seven hundred men from his clan were present in their gathering. They
came

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/413  
 **[2]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 204. *Biharul Anwar* 45/119

forward and took him away from the soldiers and escorted him to his
house.**[1]** Abdur Rahman bin Mikhnaf Azadi chastised him saying, “Woe
be on others than you. You have destroyed yourself and your
clan!”**[2]**

Ibn Ziyad was extremely angry and full of anxiety because Abdullah had
opened the door of opposition against his regime and destroyed his
glory. In a state of fury he came down from the pulpit and entered the
palace. His officers and retainers competed with each other to be
present in his service. He said, “Did you see what he has done?”

“Yes.”

At that time he ordered the people of Yemen and their confederates to
apprehend Ibn Afif. Amr bin Hajjaj suggested to him that every Azadi in
the mosque be put into prison as they have all cooperated in the escape
of Ibn Afif. As a result of this a severe fight broke out between the
Yemenis and Azd tribe. Ibn Ziyad told one of his officers, “Go and see
what passes between them.” He hastened to do as directed and saw that
fighting was going on among them; told him, “Tell the governor that he
has not sent us to people of unremarkable linage like the Algerians or
the shoemakers of Mosul. He rather sent us to the Azadis; that is he
sent us to the den of the lions. They are not eggs that can be broken or
little rue seeds that can be trampled upon...”

Among the Azadis were killed Abdullah bin Hawzah Walbi and Muhammad bin
Habib and in addition to this there were numerous casualties on both the
sides. However the Yemenis got the upper hand and after defeating their
adversaries went to a fort behind the house of Ibn Afif. They broke upon
the door and attacked him when he was alone except for his daughter. She
handed his sword to him (because he was blind) and he began to defend
himself**[3]** reciting the following Rajaz couplets:

**“I am the son of the one having the purified virtuous excellence, the
great Afif and my mother is Umme Aamir.**

**How many of the armored and non-armored fighters have I
defeated!”[4]**

His daughter too said continuously: Alas, had I been a man to fight with
you against this destructive community who killed the honorable members
of the Holy family!

The enemy surrounded Abdullah from every side and he continued to defend
himself single-handed. Nobody was able to dominate him. The daughter was
telling her blind father from which side he was being attacked, until
finally he was encircled closely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/413-414  
 **[2]** *Riyadh al-Ahzaan,* Pg. 57  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/414  
 **[4]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 205. *Biharul Anwar* 45/120

His daughter said: May Allah avoid disgrace. My father has been
surrounded and there is none to help him.

Wielding his sword Abdullah said: By Allah, had I been able to see, even
my arrival and departure would have exhausted you.

The narrator says: The surrounded Abdullah was, at last, arrested and
taken to Ibn Ziyad.

Seeing him Ibn Ziyad said: Praise be to Allah Who disgraced you.

Abdullah bin Afif: O enemy of Allah! How did He disgrace me? Had I been
able to see with my eyes, I would have undoubtedly put you to trouble.

Ibn Ziyad: What is your opinion about Uthman bin Affan?

Abdullah: O slave of Bani Allaj! O son of Marjana! You uttered an
improper thing. What have you to do with Uthman? He did either good or
bad, did improvement or spread corruption. Allah is the guard over His
servants. He will decide justly between people and Uthman. But He will
question you and your father and Yazid and his father.

Ibn Ziyad: No, by Allah. I will not ask you anything till you taste
death little by little.

Abdullah bin Afif: All praise to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. Even
before your mother delivered you I had asked for martyrdom from Allah
and requested Him that my martyrdom be carried out by the hand of the
worst and the most evil fellow among His creation. After becoming blind,
I had lost my hope for martyrdom. But now, praise be to Allah, after
disappointment I have achieved this good luck and my prayer has been
answered.**[1]**

Ibn Ziyad, the dirty fellow said: Decapitate him and hang him publicly
in Kufa.**[2]**

He was hanged at Sabakha.

In this manner came to an end the life of that great warrior who devoted
his life to the Almighty, confronted falsehood, fought injustice and
spoke truth in the darkest and hardest circumstances.

Amnesty for Ibn Mauqal
----------------------

Ibn Mauqal was one of those who had participated in the uprising of Ibn
Afif. He was apprehended and brought in the custody of Ibn Ziyad. Ibn
Ziyad gave him amnesty saying: “I am condoning you for the sake of your
cousin, Sufyan bin Auf, who is better than you.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 205-206. Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 2/53-55  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/414  
 **[3]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/414

Arrest of Jundab
----------------

Ibn Ziyad issued orders for the arrest of Jundab bin Abdullah Azadi. He
was from the clan of Abdullah bin Afif, a righteous Shia man and a
companion of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a). Police officers arrested him and
brought him in custody to the governor. When he arrived Ibn Ziyad
screamed at him, “Did you not accompany Abu Turab in the battle of
Siffeen?”

The brave warrior did not flinch at his awe and retorted at once, “Yes,
I love him and I pride upon him and I hate you and your father.
Especially when you have killed the beloved grandson of the Messenger of
Allah (s), his companions and his family members and you do not have
fear of the revenge and power of Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime...”

Ibn Marjana was infuriated and he said, “You are more shameless than
that blind one (Ibn Afif) and I can’t think of anything except to gain
divine proximity by having you executed.”

“In that case the Almighty shall not grant you proximity.”

The tyrant was afraid of his clan, so he released him saying, “He is an
old man who has lost his wits.”**[1]**

Ibn Ziyad with Qais
-------------------

Qais bin Ibad was present in the assembly of the tyrant Ibn Ziyad when
he asked him in front of his employees, “What is your opinion about
Husain and me?”

“Please excuse me from this…”

“You have to reply.”

“On the Day of Resurrection his father shall come and intercede for him
and your father will come and intercede for you.”

Ibn Ziyad became angry at this and screamed, “I know your fraud and
infamy! If you go away from me for a day, I shall bury your head in the
ground.”**[2]**

Then he put him under surveillance and banned him from leaving Kufa.

Hacking up the Blessed head of Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------

That offspring of betrayal and pledge-breaking, Ibn Marjana ordered that
the head of Imam (‘a) be cut up from all sides but no one volunteered to
commit such an atrocity except Tariq bin Malik**[3]** who took the
blessed head and hacked it causing some portions to become detached. Amr
bin Hareeth arose and said to Ibn Ziyad,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Matheer al-Ahzaan*, Pg. 94. Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* 2/55. Muqarram,
*Maqtal,* Pg. 329  
 **[2]** Ibne Qutaybah, *Uyun al-Akhbar* 2/215. And in *Wafayatul Ayan*
6/353 it says: Ubaidullah Ibne Ziyad said to Haartha bin Badr Adawani:
What do you think will happen on the Day of Resurrection as a result of
that which occurred between Husain and me? He replied: His father and
grandfather will intercede for him and your father and grandfather will
also intercede for you. So you can guess what would happen.  
 **[3]** Tariq bin Malik was the grandfather of Abu Ali, secretary to
Abdullah bin Khaqan, minister of Mutawakkil.

“You got what you wanted from this head, so give me what has detached
from it.”

“What will you do with it?”

“I shall bury it.”

Ibn Ziyad allowed him to do that. He gathered up the detached portions
and wrapped them in a cloth, brought it to his house, known as the house
of Amr bin Hareeth and buried them there.**[1]**

Imam Husain’s Head taken around the Town
----------------------------------------

Ibn Marjana ordered that the Imam’s head be taken through all the main
roads and lanes of Kufa**[2]** while an announcer shouted, “The liar,
son of liar is killed!”**[3]**

By this procedure he intended to announce his victory and humiliate the
Shias but he could not achieve his aim; it paved the way for spreading
the call of the Imam and the completion of his message, because the
Imam’s head inspired the people that the word of truth must be exalted
no matter what and the message of Islam must be defended no matter what
it requires or entails.

Anyway, the head of the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s)
was taken around under the view of those who claimed to profess Islam
but they did not rise up to take revenge for his martyrdom.

Dibil Khuzai, the famous poet versifies this as follows:

**“They hold aloft the spear points the head of the son of the daughter
of the Prophet and his legatee.**

**While Muslims see and hear. Neither anyone is infuriated by it nor
aggrieved.”[4]**

The Muslims were stupefied in a frightening way; because they had been
deprived of their human nature and become devoid of all awareness and
feelings.

Imprisonment of the Ladies of Revelation
----------------------------------------

The tyrant Ibn Marjana ordered that the great ladies of the Prophet’s
family be lodged in the jail. When they were being taken to the prison,
the main roads were crowded with men and women in a way described by
Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) that: Women thrashed their own faces and wept
in frenzy.

Daughters of the Messenger of Allah (s) were taken to the prison and
dealt with untold cruelty. The granddaughter of the Prophet (s) was not
permitted to be visited by any free woman and she says: “Except for
slave maids or slave girls none was allowed to meet us; because they
were also prisoners like us. A stone was hurled at the daughters of the
Messenger of Allah (s) with a letter attached to it. It said: “Regarding
you a messenger has departed for Yazid. So whenever you hear the call of
‘God is Great’ you must become certain that you’d be killed. And  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 97. *Miraatul
Jinaan* 1/135  
 **[2]** *Ad Durrun Nadheem*, Pg. 561. Abdullah, *Maqtal al-Husain*
17/386  
 **[3]** *At-Tarikh Siyasi Dawlatul Arabia* 2/76  
 **[4]** Dibil, *Diwan,* Pg. 225

if you do not hear that call it shall denote your safety.” They fixed a
time for receiving the reply. The ladies were extremely anxious and
worried. Two days before the arrival of the courier another stone was
thrown to them with a letter that said: “Compose your wills and make
your last wishes as the time of the courier’s arrival is near.”

Thus after a time, Yazid’s orders came for transfer of the prisoners to
Damascus.**[1]** Some sources have mentioned that Yazid intended to
fully eradicate all the descendants of Amirul Momineen (‘a) but
afterwards changed his mind and gave them amnesty.**[2]**

Abduction of His Eminence, Ali bin al-Husain (‘a)
-------------------------------------------------

A Kufian abducted Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) and concealed him in his
house. Then he busied in serving him and granting him much respect and
reverence. Whenever he came to the Holy Imam he wept excessively and
Imam began to have a good opinion about him. But not much time passed
that a proclaimer of Ibn Ziyad announced that whosoever finds and brings
Ali bin al-Husain will be rewarded 300 Dirhams. When the Kufian heard
this announcement he hastened towards the Holy Imam and threw a rope
around the neck of His Eminence and tied up his hands and feet. He
carried the Imam to rulers and collected the prize money.**[3]** This
shocking behavior is a picture of the self-forgetfulness of that society
in the way of materialism and sacrificing themselves for obtaining
material wealth in every possible way.

Ibn Saad’s Regret
-----------------

The filthy wicked man, Umar bin Saad became extremely regretful of his
role in that terrible iniquity, because one of his close associates
inquired about his condition upon his return from Kerbala and he
replied: “No man has returned home with a thing worse than what I have
returned with. I accepted the order of the transgressor and oppressor,
Ibn Ziyad and disobeyed Allah, the Just Ruler; then cut off the noble
relationship and committed a heinous deed.”**[4]**

But what use was that regret after he had shed the blood of the Purified
Progeny and cut off the ties of relationship with the one whose love
Allah has made incumbent.

Ibn Ziyad asks Ibn Saad for the Letter
--------------------------------------

Ibn Ziyad faced waves of condemnation in all the gatherings hence he
decided to throw the blame of that deed on Ibn Saad so that he may be
held responsible for this crime. So he summoned him and said: “Give me
the letter.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/84  
 **[2]** *Al Wafi* 3/298  
 **[3]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 98. *Al Muntazim,*
5/345  
 **[4]** *Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 260. *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/303.
*Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/414-415

“I had gone to carry out your orders and the letter is lost.”

“You must get it for me.”

“I have sent it to be read out to the old woman of Quraish so that I may
apologize to her. By Allah! Regarding Husain, I have acted with you in
such a sincere manner that if I had done thus with my father I would
have fulfilled his rights.”

Uthman bin Ziyad was present in that meeting and he said to his brother,
Ibn Ziyad: “He is right. By Allah! I would have liked that no son of Ibn
Ziyad had been except that in his nose was a rein till the Day of
Resurrection but Husain shouldn’t have been killed.”

The tyrant fell silent and did not say anything in reply.**[1]**

A letter that Ibn Saad had sent to Medina was to prevent from himself
the shower of curses and that the blame may be laid against his
governor, Ibn Marjana. The letter was as follows:

“From Ubaidullah bin Ziyad to Umar bin Saad. So to say:

I did not send you to al-Husain for you to restrain yourself from
fighting him, nor to idle the time away with him, nor to promise him
peace and preservation of his life, nor to make excuses for him, nor to
be an intercessor on his behalf with me. Therefore see that if al-Husain
and his followers submit to my authority and surrender, you send them to
me in peace. If they refuse, then march against them to fight them and
to punish them; for they deserve that. If al-Husain is killed, make the
horses trample on his body, both front and back; for he is a disobedient
rebel, and I do not consider that this will be in any way wrong after
death. But it is my view that you should do this to him if you kill him.
If you carry out your command concerning him, we will give you the
reward due to one who is attentive and obedient. If you refuse, then we
withdraw the command of our province and army from you and leave the
army to Shimr bin Zil Jaushan. We have given him our authority.
Greetings.”**[2]**

Ibn Ziyad condemned
-------------------

Near and distant relatives and friends condemned Ibn Ziyad for the
killing of the beloved son of the Messenger of Allah (s). Some of them
were as follows:

1. Marjana
----------

Marjana was very much angry at his sinful oppressive son, for having
committed such a sin and she told him: “O degraded one! You killed the
son of the Messenger of Allah! By Allah you shall never see
Paradise.”**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/467  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/415  
 **[3]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan,* Pg. 98. *Tadhib
at-Tahdhib* 1/156. *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 2/357

2. Uthman bin Ziyad
-------------------

Uthman bin Ziyad, the brother of that wicked man, denounced him and
said, “By Allah! I would have liked that no son of Ibn Ziyad had been
except that in his nose was a rein till the Day of Resurrection; but
Husain shouldn’t have been killed.”**[1]**

3. Mauqil bin Yasar
-------------------

Of those who had condemned Ibn Marjana, was Mauqil bin Yasar. He
criticized him sharply, denounced him and dissociated himself from him.

The Imam’s martyrdom was such a gigantic crime that the world of Islam
was trembling due to its horror. They considered this tragedy great
because the sanctity of the Messenger of Allah (s) – which is more than
anything else deserving of regard – was defiled in this incident.

Objection on Ibn Saad
---------------------

People objected to Ibn Saad due to this evil misdeed and considered him
an enemy. He was isolated in such a way that people cursed him near
whichever group he passed and whenever he entered the Masjid, he was
evicted from there.**[2]**

Widespread Discontent
---------------------

Imam’s martyrdom created widespread discontent in all the congregations.
Haseen bin Abdur Rahman Salmi says: “When the news of the killing of
Husain (‘a) reached us, for three days we remained as if our faces were
smeared with dust.”**[3]**

Hubaira bin Khuzaima says: “I informed Rabi bin Khatheem about the
killing of Husain. He became bewildered and recited the words of
Almighty Allah,

**“Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the
seen…”[4]**

After that he said: “They killed a brave young man from whom whenever
the Messenger of Allah (s) saw them he used to display his love for
them, and feed them with his own hands seating them on his
knees.”**[5]**

Hasan Basri was conveyed the news of Imam Husain’s killing. He began to
weep till both his sides shook. “What an insult it is for the Ummah that
the son of its wicked one (that is Ibn Marjana) has killed the son of
its Prophet.**[6]** By Allah, his grandfather and father will take his
revenge from Ibn Marjana.”

Amr bin Ba’ja has also said, “The first degradation that befell the
Arabs was the killing of Husain and the laying of claim by
Ziyad.”**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/467  
 **[2]** *Miraat az-Zamaan* Pg. 68  
 **[3]** *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 2/382  
 **[4]** Ibne Saad, *Tabaqat* 6/190  
 **[5]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 94  
 **[6]** *Taisar al-Matalib fee Amali Abi Talib,* Pg. 89  
 **[7]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/196. *Al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/132

Muslims fell into a terrible grief and pain due to the martyrdom of the
beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) and wept excessively.

Imam Shafei is said to have wept intensely and recited the following
couplets:

**“My grief has returned and heart is sorrowful. The eyes are sleepless
and sleep became odd for me.**

**From that, which has snatched away my sleep and greyed my hair, are
the accidents of time having hardships.**

**The world is trembling for the Progeny of Muhammad; it was almost as
if the solid mountains would turn to water.**

**Who will convey my message to Husain, even though the soul and the
heart may not like it.**

**That sinless martyr! As if they have dyed his dress in purple dye. You
invoke blessings on the chosen Prophet from the family of Bani Hashim
but you have distanced his son, it is a strange matter!**

**If my sin is loving the Progeny of Muhammad, it is a sin that I shall
never repent for.**

**They shall be my intercessors on the Day of Resurrection and my
helpers; and the crime of Shafei would be that he loved them.”[1]**

The poet, Ibn Habaria passed through Kerbala and began to weep for
Husain and his family members. He also composed the following couplets
regarding them:

**“O Husain, by you grandfather who was sent for guidance, the Almighty
Allah shall interrogate me regarding this covenant.**

**If I had been present on the day of Kerbala I would have tried much to
reduce your sorrow.**

**I would have quenched the lips of the sword with the blood of your
enemies and also the points of the spears.**

**Except for my misfortune of delay in reaching you. But my griefs shall
be between Lovi and Babel.**

**I take that I have been deprived of fighting with your enemies but is
my grief a lesser grief while my tears are flowing?”**

Historians say: He went to sleep where he was and saw the Messenger of
Allah (s) in the dream telling him: “May Allah give you a good reward on
my behalf. Good news to you that the Almighty Allah has included you
among those who performed Jihad in the service of Husain.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 94  
 **[2]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi* Pg. 94

Regret of People of Kufa
------------------------

The people of Kufa were deeply regretful for the terrible crime they had
committed; because they had been such that by sending delegations and
letters to the Holy Imam they urged him to join them and when he did
arrive to join them they abandoned him and then later killed him. Some
of those who expressed their deep remorse were as follows:

1. Baraa bin Azib
-----------------

Baraa bin Azib regretted that he had retracted his support from the Imam
because Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) had told him: “Would Husain be killed
while you are alive and you wouldn’t help him?”

“O Amiral Momineen, it shall never be so.”

When Imam was martyred Baraa recalled the words of the Imam while he was
extremely remorseful and he said: “What a great regret that I was not
present with him and did not die in his defense.”**[1]**

2. Musayyab bin Najba
---------------------

Musayyab bin Najba was the most remorseful person for not having
achieved martyrdom in the service of the beloved grandson of the
Messenger of Allah (s). He announced his regret in his sermons that he
delivered among the penitents; as he used to say in those speeches:

“We had been deceived by our purity, Almighty Allah found us false in
all our promises to the son of His Prophet (s). Previously he sent
letters and messengers to us and offered excuses to us and sought our
help in the beginning and in the end and clearly, but we were miserly to
our selves regarding him till he was killed in front of us. Neither we
helped him with our hands, nor defended him by our tongues, or
strengthened him with our wealth or called our confederates’ help for
him. Thus what is our excuse before our Lord and at the time we meet our
Prophet? Except that we put to death those who killed him and those who
acted against him or that we may be killed in this endeavor. Perhaps in
that case our Lord will be pleased with us. After meeting him I shall
not be secure from His reprisal.”**[2]**

These words show the level of his internal remorse for having lost the
opportunity of sacrificing his life in the company of the Holy
Imam.** **

3. Sulaiman bin Surd
--------------------

One of those who were left in deep sorrow for not having helped the Imam
was Sulaiman bin Surd. He spoke in the company of his penitent
companions about the pain that haunted his soul and inter alia said, “We
stretched our neck for the arrival of the Ahle Bayt of our Prophet,
Muhammad (s), promised them our support and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 10/14-15  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/159

urged them to join us. But when they arrived we fell weak, became
feeble, flattering and continued to wait till the son of our Prophet,
his offspring and descendant and a part of his flesh and blood was
killed right before us. At that time he called for help and wanted
justice but he did not get it, the transgressors made him a target for
their arrows and a victim of their spears till they killed him, rushed
upon him and plundered his belongings.”**[1]**

4. Ubaidullah bin Hurr
----------------------

One of the most regretful persons and the most grief-stricken and sorrow
ones was Ubaidullah bin Hurr Jofi whom the Imam had approached and asked
for help but he was not generous with his self and he declined the
request. His conscience was badly shaken due to his rejection of the
Imam’s plea for support and he fell into a deep gloom, composing the
following lines of poetry:

**“O remorse till the time I live! As long as I am breathing.**

**The day he said to me in the palace: Will you abandon me and intend to
go away?**

**Husain asked me for help against the enemies and creators of
dissension.**

**If the grief of the heart could get a free hand, today my heart will
decide to burst.**

**And if one day I had sacrificed my life for him I would have achieved
the honor of the day of meeting God.**

**He said farewell to the son of Muhammad – may my life be sacrificed
for him – and moved out fast.**

**Those who helped Husain were successful and others who were
hypocrites, failed.”[2]**

In his couplets the son of Hurr has sketched the picture of the intense
pain that had afflicted his soul; because as long as he lived he shall
regret having lost the honor of martyrdom in the service of the son of
the Prophet of Allah (s) and he was extremely sad at this, for if he had
rendered his help he would have obtained Paradise.

He envies the companions of Husain who sacrificed their lives on the
Holy Imam (‘a); because they had earned excessive reward and a
respectable position near the Almighty Allah.

These were some of those who regretted not providing assistance to Imam
(‘a) and lost the chance of achieving salvation through martyrdom in the
service of His Eminence who when they got an opportunity they joined the
penitents in Kufa and rose up in revolt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/160  
 **[2]** Khwarizmi, *Maqtal* *al-Husain* 1/228
