Towards Medina
==============

Ahle Bayt (‘a) did not stay in Damascus for a long time because Yazid
feared the appearing of mischief, confusion of public opinion and
unfavorable circumstances as the discourses of Her Eminence, Zainab
Kubra and Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) had created an intellectual
revolution in all gatherings. It was such that those brilliant speeches
had illuminated the minds and awakened the feelings and they became the
topic of discussion in all gatherings and assemblies of that time. In
the same way they encouraged opposition to the tyrannical regime and the
public unrest indicated that they would overthrow Yazid’s regime as the
people of Syria had become aware of Yazid’s decadence and wickedness and
thus inciting public opinion against him. He was condemned even in his
own gatherings, his position declined in public opinion and he became
unpopular.

Yazid’s Apology to Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a)
-------------------------------------------

Yazid, the tyrant summoned Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) and sought his
pardon; and throwing the responsibility of that crime on Ibn Marjana
said:

“May Allah curse Ibn Marjana! By Allah! If I had been with him, I would
have given him everything he asked for and in every possible way saved
him from death even if I had to sacrifice the life of some of my
children in this. But Allah decreed what you saw. My son! Write to me if
you need anything.**[1]** There shall develop an issue among your
people, thus you must not join any of them.”**[2]**

Imam (‘a) turned his face away from him and said nothing in reply;
because he knew the aim behind this apology was to escape disgrace and
condemnation.

Ahle Bayt (‘a) Presented Compensations
--------------------------------------

The tyrant Yazid ordered that sheets of silk be spread over the floor in
his court and upon them be placed excessive expensive things so that
they could be presented to Ahle Bayt as compensation for the slain
members of their family and the plunder of their belongings in Kerbala.
Then he said, “Accept these things in lieu of what you had to suffer.”

Reply of Her Eminence, Umme Kulthum
-----------------------------------

Sister of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) Her Eminence, Umme Kulthum (‘a) was
shocked and infuriated and she screamed at him, “How shameless you are!
And how audacious! You killed my brother and Ahle Bayt and now you want
to give compensation for it?”**[3]**

Her Eminence, Sakina said: “By Allah! I have not seen anyone as wicked
as Yazid and a polytheist and a disbeliever worse than him or an
oppressor more tyrannical than him.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/87-88  
 **[2]** *Tadhib at-Tahdhib* 1/157  
 **[3]** Abdullah bin Nurullah, *Awalim Imam Husain* 17/422-423  
 **[4]** Abdullah bin Nurullah, *Awalim Imam Husain* 17/396

Yazid was helpless; because he had thought that material wealth would
deceive the Ahle Bayt and he did not realize that they were the hands of
the Almighty from whom Allah had kept away all impurities and purified
them thoroughly.

Request of Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a)
-----------------------------------

The worst of the oppressors asked Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) to tell him
what he needed. His Eminence (‘a) said: “I want you to show me the face
of my father and return whatever has been looted from our ladies;
because heirlooms of our ancestors were among those things. And if you
want you can kill me. Then send someone to escort my family to Medina.”

Most probably the Imam’s request to see the head of his father was so
that Yazid would give it to him and thus he could respectfully assign it
to dust. However that oppressor declined this request, it was so because
he had ordered to take the severed head around the country to instill
awe and fear in people and make it a lesson for anyone contemplating an
uprising. But he accepted the demand that looted belongings of the
womenfolk be returned to them. This demand of His Eminence did not imply
that he was asking for the jewellery, ornaments and other belongings
that were plundered in Kerbala. Rather the aim of His Eminence was to
get back the exquisite heirlooms they had inherited from their
great-grandfather, His Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s); like the turban,
coat of mail and sword of His Eminence and other things that were more
valuable than wealth.

That tyrant bowed his head and became worried about the request of the
Holy Imam (‘a), then he raised his head and said to His Eminence: “You
will not see the face of your father but whatever has been taken from
you will be restored. As for the ladies, they shall not be returned (to
Medina) except with you, as I have decided to spare your life.”**[1]**

Journey to Medina
-----------------

Yazid, the tyrant ordered Noman bin Bashir to escort the survivors of
the Prophet of God (s).**[2]** In the same way, fearing mischief and
unfavorable developments he instructed him to depart with them from
Damascus at night time.**[3]**

News of Ahle Bayt’s Return to Medina Arrives
--------------------------------------------

The news of the great tragedy reached Medina before the arrival of the
hostages. This information was conveyed to Medina by Abdul Malik bin
Harith Salmi under the orders of Ibn Ziyad. He hastened on his journey
till he reached Medina exhausted and tired. He went to Ashdaq, the
governor of Medina. A man saw him and was afraid of his worrisome
condition, so he asked, “What is the news?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdullah, *Maqtal al-Husain Awalim* 17/444-445  
 **[2]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/87  
 **[3]** *Jauharatul Kalaam Fi Madhis Saadaatil A’laam,* Pg. 128

“The news is with the governor.”

That person realized the seriousness of the matter and remarked, “We
belong to Allah and to Him we shall return! By Allah, Husain has been
killed. Umme Salma was right when she informed about it!”**[1]**

Ibn Ziyad’s messenger conveyed the news of the killing of His Eminence,
Husain (‘a) to the governor who was absolutely delighted by it and he
exclaimed, “A calamity in reprisal of the tragedy of Uthman!”**[2]**

Ashdaq ordered that the news be publicized. People were shocked and they
began to weep and rushed to the Prophet’s mosque to learn the details of
this terrible report.

Ashdaq’s Speech
---------------

The oppressor, Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq mounted the pulpit pleased at the
killing of Imam (‘a) and rocking his legs in joy. Then he expressed his
hatred and malice, saying: “O people! This is an encounter in response
to a strike, how numerous are the sermons in front of one discourse:

**“Consummate wisdom – but warnings do not avail.”*[3]*** He spoke ill
of us and we praised him. He distanced from us and we reached him. Just
like our habit and his habit. But what we could have done for the one
who pulled out his sword against us and wanted to kill us except that we
drive him away from us!”

Abdullah bin Saeb interrupted his talk in which he was expressing his
ridicule at the killing of the blessed grandson of the Messenger of
Allah (s), and he said: “If Her Eminence, Fatima were alive and had seen
the decapitated head of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) she would wept for
him.”

The objection was the beginning of a condemnation that the governor of
Medina faced when he was delivering his speech. This matter distressed
him greatly, so he shouted back at him: “We are more deserving than you
to Fatima. Her father was our uncle, her husband was our brother and her
mother was our daughter. If Fatima had been alive her eyes would have
wept but she would not have denounced his killers!”**[4]**

In this statement, Ashdaq has deviated from all social customs; because
he claimed that if Fatima were alive she would not have condemned the
killer of her son. Rather he was certain that Her Eminence would have
congratulated the sinful killer; because that action of his was in
support of the regime of Bani Umayyah spreading of their power which
followed all the attitudes of the period of Ignorance.

If Her Eminence, Fatima had been alive, and had seen her beloved son in
the desert  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdul Aziz Sayyidul Ahl, *Zainab binte Ali,* Pg. 152  
 **[2]** Abdullah, *Maqtal al-Husain Awalim* 17/389. Muqarram, *Maqtal,*
Pg. 335  
 **[3]** Surah Qamar 54:5  
 **[4]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 335

of Kerbala bearing such calamities and tragedies that if they had
befallen on any man he would have been devastated, Her Eminence’s heart
would have melted with sorrow and grief; because it is reported from His
Eminence, the Allah’s Messenger (s) that he said:

“On the Day of Resurrection, my daughter Fatima shall be raised in such
a way that she would be carrying clothes smeared in blood and she would
be clinging to one of the pillars of the throne (Arsh) and saying: O
Allah, dispenser of Justice! Judge between me and the killer of my son.
Thus I swear by the Lord of Paradise, Allah will judge in favor of my
daughter.”**[1]**

Hashemites Devastated
---------------------

The news of the martyrdom of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) fell like a
thunderbolt upon the Hashemites. Wails and laments came out from their
houses and the noble lady, Zainab, daughter of Aqil**[2]** came out with
her hair disheveled, screaming: Oh Muhammad! Oh Husaina! Oh my brothers!
O my relatives!”**[3]**

Then she began to recite couplets in which she addressed the Muslims as
follows:

**“What will you reply if the Prophet asks you what you have done, while
you were supposed to be the best of nations?**

**With my progeny and the companions of my descendants that some of them
were made hostages and some killed and bathed in their blood.**

**This is not the recompense for my favors on you when you have behaved
so badly with my relatives after me.”[4]**

Abdul Aswad, while being immersed in sorrow and lamentation replied to
her: We shall say: “O our Lord! We have done injustice to ourselves, and
if You don’t forgive us and not have mercy on us we shall be of the
losers.”

At that moment he became intensely agitated and said:

**“I say: While my hatred and fury has increased, may Allah destroy the
regime of the progeny of Ziyad.**

**And drive them away so that they are driven away and terrorized like
the Aad and Thamud were driven.**

**And their camels may not return to them on the day You shall be
responding to pleas.”**

Weeping and wailing spread everywhere and lamentations and mourning
continued in all the localities of Medina. And such mourning had never
been observed before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *As-Siraatus Sawi min Manaqib Aalin Nabi,* Pg. 93  
 **[2]** Zainab, daughter of Aqil married Ali bin Rukana from the family
of Abdul Muttalib and bore him a son and of his daughters is Abda, the
mother of Abil Bakhtari known as Qadi. This is mentioned in *Ansaab
al-Ashraaf* 3/420  
 **[3]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan*  
 **[4]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/199, Tibrani, *Al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/126-127

Mourning of Abdullah bin Ja’far
-------------------------------

Abdullah bin Ja’far organized a mourning assembly for his cousin, Husain
(‘a). People came and met him and paid him condolences at such a great
calamity. Historians say: Abdullah had a slave named Abdul Salasil, who
said to him, “This is what we have received from Husain!”

That foolish man thought that by saying these words he would earn favors
of Abdullah because if His Eminence, Husain (‘a) hadn’t been there, the
two sons of Abdullah bin Ja’far would not have been martyred. When the
son of Ja’far heard this, he lost his temper and thrashing the slave
with his sandals, said:

“O son of stinking slave girl! Do you say this about Husain? By Allah!
If I had been accompanying him I would not have liked to leave his
company till I had been killed with him. By Allah! That which pacifies
me regarding the death of my sons and eases my sorrow about them is that
those two sons of mine were killed in the company of my cousin, while
they were supporting him and observing patience along with him.”

Then he turned towards the people present in the gathering and said:
“Thanks be to Allah! Sorrow of the martyrdom of Husain would have been
hard for me, if I did not sacrifice my life upon him, I had (at least)
sent two sons of mine with him.”**[1]**

Ibn Abbas observes Mourning
---------------------------

Ibn Abbas fell into mourning due to the excessive pain and sorrow when
he heard the news of Imam’s martyrdom. He was in the Masjidul Haraam
when a man secretly conveyed this news to him and informed him about
that horrible tragedy. He became absolutely distressed and was
completely devastated.

Muhammad bin Abdullah said to him: “O Aba Abbas! What is the matter?”

“A great calamity that has been accepted by the Almighty Allah.”

After that he began to weep and went to his house in a grievous mood. At
home he held a mourning program and people came to condole him on this
great sorrow and shared in his sadness and grief.**[2]**

Masoor and Ibn Zubair
---------------------

When the news of the martyrdom of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) reached
Mecca, Masoor met Ibn Zubair and said, “The news of the killing of
Husain bin Ali, which you desired, has arrived.”

Ibn Zubair resorted to pretence and said, “O Aba Abdur Rahman! You are
telling me this? By Allah! Alas, if not a stone remained in Jama.**[3]**
By Allah! I never wished thus.”

Masoor told him, “You suggested to him to go to some other province.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/466  
 **[2]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/238  
 **[3]** Jama is an elevated spot near Medina.

“Yes, I suggested to him but I did not know that he shall be killed, his
death was not in my hands. I went to Ibn Abbas and pacified him and I
knew that this action of mine would be hard upon him and if I did not go
to pay condolence, he would say: “Are people like us ignored and should
the sorrow of Husain be not condoled? So what could I do? My maternal
uncles, they have become displeased with us and I don’t know why it is
so?”

Masoor counseled him and said, “What was the need for remembering past
things? And behave nicely with your maternal uncles as your father was
more praiseworthy in their view.”**[1]**

Head of Imam Husain (‘a) in Medina
----------------------------------

Most historians believe that Yazid the oppressive one, sent the head of
the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) to Medina in order to
spread awe and terror and suppress every uprising against himself. They
took the blessed head to Amr bin Saeed Ashdaq. He criticized this act
and said, “By Allah, I wished the chief of the believers had not sent
his head to me.”

In his gathering was present the lizard, offspring of lizard, that is
Marwan bin Hakam who screamed at him, “You have uttered nonsense! Bring
it here.”

Then he took up the head, swayed in delight and said in a mocking way:

**“What type of friendship is it? That your hands are cold and cheeks
colored red.”**

They brought the respectable head and placed it in the mosque of the
Prophet (s). Ladies of the family of Abu Talib lamented and they rushed
to the grave of the Prophet, weeping and wailing. Marwan said:

“Women of Ahle Bayt cry like the crying of the women of Quraish in
mourning those killed in the battle of Badr.”

When Marwan heard the lamentation of the Hashemite ladies he expressed
his delight and said: “By God! As if I am seeing the days Uthman was
murdered.”**[2]**

Looking towards the grave of the Holy Prophet (s) he said, “O Muhammad!
A day in reprisal of the day of the battle of Badr.”**[3]**

The hatred of Bani Umayyah became obvious and it became known that they
had no faith in Islam. They still remained on their previous ignorance
and they took revenge from His Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s) by
destroying his Progeny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Tarikh* 14/239  
 **[2]** *Miraat az-Zamaan fee Tawarikhul Ayaan*  
 **[3]** *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 4/72 and of those who have mentioned the
arrival of the head in Medina are Balazari in *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/417
and Qadi Noman Misri in *Al Manaqib wal Mathalib.*

Return of the Hostages to Kerbala
---------------------------------

Some sources have mentioned that hostages from Ahle Bayt requested the
escorts appointed for their protection to take them to Kerbala that they
may renew their pledge at the grave of the Chief of the Martyrs (‘a).
They accepted the request and the caravan changed its direction to
Kerbala. When they reached there, ladies of the Alawite family rushed to
the grave of Aba Abdillah (‘a) wailing and lamenting. They wept upon
that purified grave and remained there for three days. And they were the
most difficult and painful days for Ahle Bayt. Their lamentations did
not cease for a moment till their wails arose and hearts were scorched
by their grief.

Some books have mentioned that the famous companion of the Prophet,
Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari also arrived there to obtain the honor of
visiting the tomb of Abu Abdillah (‘a). He also met Imam Zainul Abideen
(‘a) who spoke with him and told him about the various hardships and
pains that had befallen them. After that they left Kerbala and departed
for Medina.**[1]**

To Medina
---------

The caravan of the hostages from Ahle Bayt (‘a) set out for Medina,
moving at full speed without being delayed by any distraction, while
pain and sorrow was hovering on them. The eyes of the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (s) were filled with tears and they were lamenting
the loss of their family members even though more than that, they were
constantly remembering their captivity and humiliation of what they had
to pass through.

Medina dressed up in raiment of mourning before the arrival of the
hostages; because mother of believers, the lady, Umme Salma had passed
away one month after the martyrdom of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) in
sorrow and grief of His Eminence.**[2]** She had herself informed the
people about the killing of His Eminence.

Bashir conveys the news of the Martyrdom of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------------------------------

When Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) reached the outskirts of Medina he halted
and got his tent fixed and his aunts and sisters were also made to
alight from their vehicles. Then he addressed Bashir Jazlam and said:

O Bashir! Your father (may Allah have mercy on him) was a poet. Are you
also able to recite poetry?

I said: Yes, O son of the Holy Prophet! I am a poet.

The Imam: Go to Medina and announce the martyrdom of Abu Abdillah (‘a).

Bashir says: I rode a horse, and rushed to enter Medina. When I reached
the Mosque of the Holy Prophet I raised my weeping voice and recited:

**“O people of Medina! Now Medina is no more your place (worth
living).**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Taisar al-Matalib fee Amali Abi Talib,* Pg. 93. *Hadaiq
al-Wardiya* 1/129. Ahmad Fahmi, *Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.),* Pg. 59.
Abdullah, *Awalim al-Husain* 17/446. Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg.
361  
 **[2]** *Miraat az-Zamaan,* Pg. 103

**Husain has been killed making me weep all the time.**

**His bleeding body was left in Kerbala**

**And his Holy head was moved from place to place on a spear.”**

Thereafter I said: Here is Ali bin Husain (‘a) who has come to you in
Medina with his aunts and sisters and I am his messenger informing you
of their whereabouts.

The narrator says: There was not a single respected lady and a veiled
woman who did not come out with unveiled face and bare head and they
scratched their faces and slapped their cheeks and wept loudly in
mourning. Ever since the day of the departure of the Holy Prophet (s) I
had not seen so much weeping and mourning of men and women in the Muslim
society.**[1]** People came to Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) and gave
condolences to His Eminence for that painful tragedy and they shared his
grief and sorrow.

Discourse of Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a)
-------------------------------------

Imam (‘a) decided to speak to the people about the great calamities and
hardships that befell them and the pain they suffered as a result of the
humiliating and disrespectful way they were taken captives. His Eminence
did not possess enough physical strength to stand up to deliver his
speech because he was afflicted with illness and the discomforts had
weakened him. Thus a chair was procured for His Eminence from which he
spoke as follows:

“All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the worlds, the Most Merciful and
Most Beneficent. Allah is the Master of the Day of Judgment. He is the
Creator of all creatures, the One Who is so far that his height
surpasses the highest skies and He is also so near that even the noise
of humming bee is not inaudible to Him. We praise Him over great affairs
and over tragedies of time and over bitterness of scoldings and over
crushing difficulties and hardships.

O people! Praise is for Allah Who testes us through heavy hardships and
great calamities in Islam. They have martyred Abu Abdillah (‘a), his
household and companions and imprisoned their wives and daughters. They
have carried his Holy head on a spear from place to place and so this is
a calamity unparalleled.

O People! Now who among you is such that will ever be joyful after this
or who is able to stop tears rolling from the eye and who will be stingy
in weeping?

Truly the seven heavens wept over his martyrdom, the oceans through the
noise of their waves and sky with its pillars and the earth with its
tracts and the trees with their branches and the fish in the depths of
seas and all the angels near Allah and all in the heavens became
tearful.

O people! Which heart is so hard that has not split by his martyrdom and
which soul has not inclined towards him and which ear has not deafened
after hearing this blow on Islam?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Lohoof,* Pg. 226-227

O People! We got up in the morning in such a condition that we were
expelled and scattered and driven off away from cities and villages, as
if we were Turks or Kabulis. And all this without any fault or mistake
or any harm to Islam on our part. We have not heard such a thing in our
predecessors. Such allegations are nothing but lies.

By Allah, if the Holy Prophet gives, instead of recommendation, an order
for war, it would not result in more oppression than what we have
undergone. **Indeed we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return** over
such a terrible calamity, so troublesome, so cruel…We complain only to
Allah. Verily He is Mighty and able to take revenge.”

Imam spoke in his discourse of the dark calamities that befell the
family of prophethood and the terrible persecution that was done on
them….Sa’sa addressed His Eminence and sought his pardon since his
illness had prevented him from joining the entourage of Imam Husain
(‘a). The Imam accepted his apology, pardoned him and invoked divine
mercy for his father. After that the Imam, accompanied by his aunts and
sisters set out for Medina while multitudes of people surrounded His
Eminence and their wails and lamentations rose up in the atmosphere.
When they reached the Prophet’s Mosque, the senior lady of Abu Talib’s
family held the two sides of the mosque door and addressed her
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s) saying: “O my grandfather! I bring to
you the news of the martyrdom of my brother, Husain.”**[1]**

Daughters of the Messenger of Allah (s) sat in mourning and held
assemblies of lamenting the sorrows of the Chief of the martyrs. They
put on black garments of mourning and began to wail and weep with deep
sorrow and grief.

Rewarding the Escorts
---------------------

Ladies of the Alawite family thanked the chief of guards; because they
had brought them from Damascus to Medina safely and rendered valuable
services to them, hence it was necessary to reward them for it. Fatima,
daughter of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) said to her sister, Zainab: “This
man has done good to us, do you think we should offer him a reward for
it?”

“By Allah! We don’t have anything that we could have given him, except
for our ornaments.”

“Yes, you are right.”

At that time they brought their two bracelets and bangles and sent them
to him and politely apologized also.

That man was deeply moved by this gesture. He knew in what straitened
circumstances they were. So he returned their gift and respectfully
said: “If what we have done was for this world we would have been
pleased with these, but by Allah! We have done it only for Allah and for
the sake of your relationship with the Messenger of Allah (s).”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 374-377  
 **[2]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/462-463. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/88

Grief of Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a)
---------------------------------

Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) continued to weep upon his father day and
night. Imam Sadiq (‘a) says: “My grandfather, Ali bin al-Husain (‘a)
cried on his father for twenty years. No eatable was presented to him
but that he used to start weeping.”**[1]**

One of his slaves restrained His Eminence and said, “I fear that you
would die of weeping.”

Imam replied to him with utmost kindness: “O man, I complain to the
Almighty about my sorrow and grief. I know about a thing from Allah that
you don’t. Yaqub was a prophet. Almighty Allah separated one of his sons
from him. He was having twelve sons. He knew that he (Yusuf) was alive
but yet wept upon him (so much) that his pupils turned white due to
grief. I have seen my father, brothers, uncles and companions killed
before my eyes. Then how could my grief end? Whenever I recall the
killing of the sons of Her Eminence, Fatima, anger bursts my neck and
whenever I look at my aunts and sisters I am reminded of their fleeing
from one tent to another.”**[2]**

Imam’s sorrow increased and his pain intensified whenever he looked at
the houses of his family and found them empty and terrifying as they
reminded him of the killing of their inmates; because those stars had
separated from him, those who illuminated the intellectual and social
life of the people. Regarding them the poet says:

**“I passed by the houses of the family of Muhammad, but I did not see
them moving about in them. May Allah not separate the folks from their
houses even though they may have been vacated from it forcibly.”**

And Dibil Khuzai says:

**“The Madressas have become empty of recitation of the verses of Quran
and the abode of revelation has become devoid of its occupants.”**

Hashemites Observe Mourning
---------------------------

Hashemites were terribly aggrieved for the Chief of the martyrs (‘a) and
they observed mourning for him. They continued to lament on His Eminence
for three years. Masoor bin Mukhrama, Abu Huraira and senior companions
of the Messenger of Allah (s) used to come secretly, listen to their
lamentations and weep bitterly.**[3]**

Grief of Her Eminence, Zainab (‘a)
----------------------------------

The Lady from Abu Talib’s clan continued to lament the extinction of her
family,**[4]** her tears never dried and she never stopped crying.
Whenever she saw her nephew, His Eminence, Zainul Abideen (‘a) her
sorrow and grief intensified**[5]** while  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmad Fahmi, *Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.),* Pg. 31  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal,* Pg. 376-377. And somewhat similarly
mentioned in *Hilyatul Awliya* 3/138  
 **[3]** *Daimul Islam* 1/230  
 **[4]** *Al-Wafi fil Masaalatush Sharqiya* 1/43  
 **[5]** Abdullah, *Maqtal al-Husain Awalim* 17/424

tragedies had burst her heart and her body had become frail. So much so
that after that tragedy she did not live for more than two years and her
soul ascended to the heaven.

Mourning of Rabab
-----------------

Rabab, the wife of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) deeply mourned her husband
and was immersed in intense grief. She was so loyal that her like is not
seen; because when the nobles of Quraish proposed to her, she refused to
oblige them saying, “After the Messenger of Allah (s), I will not have
anyone as my father-in-law. She remained alive for only a year after the
martyrdom of Imam Husain (‘a). She never sat in shade till she passed
away.**[1]** Historians say that she mourned for His Eminence and
composed a very touching dirge which is as follows:

**“That Husain who was such a brilliance that people obtained light from
him. He is lying slain in Kerbala, unburied and unshrouded.**

**O Prophet’s grandson, may God give you a good recompense and keep you
safe from the loss of the balance.[2]**

**You are for me such a lofty mountain, which had given me strength and
refuge, and you lived with us with mercy and piety.**

**Now after you, who can fulfill the needs of orphans and beggars?**

**And who should the poor and the deprived people approach?**

**By Allah! In place of your relationship, I would not look for another
relationship, till I am hidden in the grave.”[3]**

Some historians say: She stayed for a year at the grave of His Eminence
and then went away from there reciting: “For a year and after that peace
be upon you! As one who completes a year in weeping is excused.”

This report is very improbable; because after the day of Ashura the
family of Imam Husain (‘a) departed from Kerbala together and as per the
unanimity of historians none of them remained behind.

And the loyalty of the wives of His Eminence was such that Lady Atika
Binte Zaid bin Amr bin Nafil, a wife of His Eminence lamented on him and
recited the following lines of grief:

**“Oh, O, Husain! I have not forgotten Husain, that the spears of the
enemies striked him.**

**They left him lying on the ground at Kerbala, after him it doesn’t
rain at Kerbala.”[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/88. *Jawahirul Matalib* 2/295  
 **[2]** On the Day of Judgment  
 **[3]** *Al-Aghani* 16/142  
 **[4]** *Mojam al-Buldan* 4/445. *Al-Aghani* 18/62

Sorrows of Ummul Baneen
-----------------------

Ummul Baneen mourned and lamented for her righteous sons, who had
reached martyrdom in the company of their brother, His Eminence, Husain
(‘a); because grief had shattered her heart she wept upon them from the
depths of her heart.

Some historians say: She used to go out to the Baqi cemetery and mourn
and lament in their grief. People used to gather around her, listen to
her plaintive poems for her sons and weep along with her. Among those
who came to watch this was Marwan bin Hakam, who despite his
hardheartedness and intensity of malice towards Ahle Bayt (‘a)**[1]**
was moved by it.

Allamah Late Sayyid Abdur Razzaq Muqarram has rejected that Ummul Baneen
was alive after the tragedy of Kerbala and he has written that she had
passed away before it,**[2]** while Abul Faraj and all those who have
studied this matter have concluded that she was alive.

Fate of the blessed head of Imam Husain (‘a)
--------------------------------------------

Throughout the ages, generations of people in the same eager way have
posed the question: Where was the head of His Eminence, Husain buried?
After the fact that his Holy body has become the place of visitation in
Kerbala.

And all the people, partisans and non-partisans circumambulate around
it. There are many different views of historians regarding the place
which got this honor. Some of them are mentioned below:

1. In Kerbala
-------------

Among Imamite Shias it is generally believed that, that head was
respectfully brought back to Kerbala and buried with the purified torso.
Sayyid Raziuddin Ali bin Tawus has said Shias act in this manner.**[3]**
Among those who have stated this matter with textual proof is
Majlisi**[4]** and Ibn Numa.**[5]** In the same way it is famous among a
large group of Sunni scholars. Some of them are: Shubrawi,**[6]** Ibn
Jauzi,**[7]** Biruni,**[8]** Qazwini**[9]** and others. Doubtlessly Shia
Imamiyah scholars have preceded other in discussing this topic and have
accorded it more significance. Hence they are more likely to have
reached to the reality of the matter and have been more successful than
all other researchers.

As for the manner in which the severed heads were brought to Kerbala and
buried with the purified torsos, in our view it is based on one of the
two possibilities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Maqatilut Talibeen,* Pg. 56  
 **[2]** Muqarram, *Maqtal al-Husain,* Pg. 336  
 **[3]** *Al-Lohoof*, Pg. 225  
 **[4]** *Bihar* 45/144. *A’laamul Wara*, Pg. 250  
 **[5]** *Matheer al-Ahzaan*, Pg. 107  
 **[6]** *Al-Ittiaf be Hubbil Ashraaf,* Pg. 70  
 **[7]** *Tadkiratul Khawaas* Pg. 265  
 **[8]** *Al-Aathaar al-Baqiya* (Persian), Pg. 528  
 **[9]** *Ajaaebul Makhlooqaat,* Pg. 120 on the margins of *Hayatul
Haiwan*, Vol. 1

**First:** Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) requested Yazid to allow him to do
this and he accepted this request, because Yazid wanted to satisfy the
Imam. On the basis of this, the report that: “When Imam (‘a) asked Yazid
to show his father’s face to him, he rejected the request,” is discarded
and it is possible that after initial non-acceptance, Yazid later
acceded to the request.

**Second:** When the heads reached Medina, Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a)
asked the governor for them so that they may be buried with the torsos.
He granted his permission. His Eminence took them and returned to
Kerbala. There he buried them with their respective purified bodies.

2. In Baqi
----------

Some historians believe that the governor of Medina buried that
respectable head next to the grave of His Eminence’s mother.**[1]**

3. In Najaf
-----------

Some traditions related from Imam Sadiq (‘a) prove that the blessed head
was buried in Ghurra. They are as follows:

1. It is narrated from Amr bin Talha:

Imam Sadiq (‘a) asked me when he was in Hira: Don’t you want what we
promised you? I said: Yes – that is going to the tomb of Amirul Momineen
(‘a) – thus His Eminence mounted (his horse) and Ismail also mounted. I
mounted with them and rode till we passed by Thuya and arrived between
Hira and Najaf and halted at the white fire holder. Ismail also arrived
and we dismounted along with him. After that he prayed and Ismail also
prayed and I too prayed. He said to Ismail: “Get up and salute your
grandfather, Husain (‘a).” I asked, “May I be sacrificed on you! Is
Husain not buried at Kerbala? He replied, “Yes, but the head of His
Eminence was taken away, a slave of ours took it and buried it besides
Amirul Momineen (‘a)”**[2]**

2. Aban bin Taghlib reported: I was with Imam Sadiq (‘a) when he passed
by Kufa and recited two units (rakats) of prayer. Then he went ahead a
little bit and performed two units of prayer. Again he moved on for some
distance and prayed two units again. Then he said: “This is the location
of the grave of Amirul Momineen (‘a).” I asked what were those two
locations where you previously prayed?” he replied, “The location of His
Eminence, Husain’s head and house of His Eminence, Qaim.”**[3]**

3. Ali bin Asbat has narrated through chain of narrators that: Imam
Sadiq (‘a) said, “When you go to Ghari you will see two graves, a big
one and a small one. The longer one would be that of Amirul Momineen
(‘a) and the smaller one is the head  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Shazaratus Zahab* 1/67. *Miraatul Jinaan* 1/126-136. *Al
Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/204. *Waseelatul Maal,* Pg. 194. *Al Muntazim*
5/344. *Tabaqat* 5/238  
 **[2]** *Wasailush Shia* 1/310  
 **[3]** *Furu al-Kafi* 4/572

of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).”**[1]**

These were some narrational reports that prove that the blessed head is
buried at Ghari, however the term ‘location of the head’ does not prove
that it is buried there.”

4. In Damascus
--------------

A large number of historians are of the opinion that the blessed head is
buried at Damascus. But there is difference of views as regards the
location of its burial. Some of the opinions are as follows:

A. In the wall of Damascus.

B. In the Governor’s Palace

C. In the graveyard**[2]**

D. Inside the door of Fardis popularly called “Mosque of the
Head.”**[3]**

E. In the Damascus Mosque.**[4]**

F. Other places.

5. In Iran
----------

Ahmad Atiyya**[5]** has mentioned this view which is against the
established principle and none of the historians has mentioned it.

6. In Egypt
-----------

Some historians are of the view that the blessed head is buried in Cairo
but there are two theories how it was transported there:

1. Sherani has mentioned that Her Eminence, Zainab (s.a) transported it
to Egypt and got it buried there.**[6]** However this statement is
against established method and is not reliable.

2. Maqrizi has narrated that it was transported from Ascalon to Egypt on
10<sup>th</sup> Jamadiul Aakhir, 548 A.H. it was carried by
Saif-al-Mamlika and Qadi Motamin bin Miskeen. It was accorded a warm
welcome.**[7]**

These were some theories that are put forth concerning the burial of
that honorable head. On most of those possible locations, shrines have
been constructed where Muslims come for Ziarat (visitation) and all the
towns and cities having these sites consider it an honor for themselves.

Anyway, His Eminence, Husain (‘a) has a place of respect in the hearts
of people  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Wasailush Shia* 10/311  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 3/419  
 **[3]** *Al Bidayah wan Nihayah* 8/204  
 **[4]** Ibne Hayyan Ahmad Tamimi, *Tarikhus Sahaba,* Pg. 67  
 **[5]** *Dairatul Ma’arif al-Haditha,* Pg. 152  
 **[6]** *Tabaqat al-Kubra,* 1/27  
 **[7]** *Nurul Absar,* Pg. 271

such that the grave and the remembrance of His Eminence is in the depths
of the hearts, because it is the holiest picture that people in all ages
and times considered it sanctified.

Abu Bakr Aalusi was asked about the head of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).
He replied in the following couplets:

**“Do not search for the head of Husain in the East and the west.**

**Leave everything and come to me as its burial place is in my
heart.”[1]**

And Haaj Mahdi Falaudi has said:

**“The presence of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) has not been emphasized at
any place neither should you search for it in any cave.**

**But the sincerity of your love will guide you that it is buried inside
my heart.”[2]**

His Eminence, Husain (‘a) has dominated the emotions of the people and
occupied a place in their hearts; they are enamored by his love and
purity and the great hardships and calamities that befell His Eminence
have aggrieved them. In the same way the hardships of His Eminence have
shattered the hearts and the souls are aggrieved due to their intensity.

People hasten to all the locations that are considered as possible sites
of the burial of his head. The great tomb in Cairo is always teeming
with people who seek blessings from it and consider performing its
visitation to be the best form of obeying God and seeking His proximity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Babilyat* 3/128  
 **[2]** *Shoara al-Hilla* 5/371
