Effects of Imam Husain’s Revolution
===================================

No revolution exists in the history of the world like the revolution of
Imam Husain (‘a), which shook the world, bestowed glory for truth and
created dignity for human beings, as all its parts are effulgence and
all its horizons, nobility and honor. Replete with immortal lessons
regarding belief that shall never be overpowered and faith that shall
never be defeated and loftiness that shall never be humiliated; a
revolution that began a modern age for the nations of the world and the
communities of the earth, spirit of revolution and opposition to
oppression and injustice, confrontation with unreasonable demands and
fighting corruption are its signs.

The revolution of the chief of nobles was the first revolution in human
history from the aspect that on it were built intellectual, social and
political foundations. Of them are the following:

Victory of Islam
----------------

By his martyrdom, the great Imam achieved a victory that no
revolutionary on the earth had ever obtained; because the principal aims
for which he undertook the confrontation succeeded and the most
important of them was the success of movement in his open war against
the Umayyad regime, which had made the future of Islam dark and tried to
uproot it so that no effect of it remains in the sphere of life. Imam
Husain (‘a) took upon himself to ensure the well being of Islam’s
future. And he martyred himself for its sake; he restored its freshness
to it and destroyed the perils that surrounded it.

Morbin, the German philosopher says, “When a sensible person ponders
upon the situation of that period, and how the Bani Umayyah was
succeeding in its aims and their domination on all the strata of people
and the decadence of Muslims…no doubt remains for him that Husain (‘a)
through his martyrdom revived the religion of his grandfather and the
laws of Islam; because if that event had not occurred and those true
feelings had not been created among the Muslims...and if the martyrdom
of Husain (‘a) hadn’t taken place, Islam definitely would not have been
as it is, rather it was possible that its heritage and laws had been
destroyed; because in that period, Islam was in its initial stages.”

It is sufficient for the success of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) that
through his martyrdom he bestowed a new life to Islam and sacrificed his
blood for it. When Imam Zainul Abideen (‘a) was asked by Talha bin
Abdullah who had won, he mentioned this point and said:

“Whenever it is prayer time, you recite the call for prayer (Azan) and
shorter call for prayer (Iqamah); this tells you who the victor
is.”**[1]**

His Eminence, Husain (‘a) himself became successful and victorious;
because he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shaykh Tusi, *Amali* Pg. 677, H. 1432

restored life and youth to Islam. On the basis of this he was a
reformer; perhaps it was about this aspect that the Holy Prophet (s)
said: “Husain is from me and I am from Husain.”

Because if the sacrifice of His Eminence, Husain (‘a) had not been there
all the efforts of His Eminence, the Prophet (s) and that well-being,
blessings and mercy that he brought for the people would have been
destroyed as Bani Umayyah was bent on eradicating all the principles
that this religion brought and they proclaimed infidelity and apostasy,
and ruled the people with a policy in which no sign of Quranic command
was visible.

Defeat of the Umayyads
----------------------

The first clear victory that the Imam earned was to defeat the Umayyads;
because the sacrifice of His Eminence destroyed all the pillars and
foundations raised by Muawiyah for strengthening the regime of Abu
Sufyan’s family.

One of the writers says: “Whatever Muawiyah had built up for his son
Yazid in years was destroyed by Husain in a few days. People began to
look at the caliph with disgrace and heedless way. Muslims were
disillusioned by his policies and eyed with malice the blemishes that
had stained him with bad qualities like fraud, deception, injustice and
oppression. All this was under the shade of the leadership of His
Eminence, Husain and the popularity of His Eminence, a result of wise
policy in observing steadfastness in front of their persecution and a
well-designed program for removing disobedience and oppression which was
instrumental in this. The foresight of the Imam and his sincerity in his
actions made all this possible.”**[1]**

By his auspicious movement, the Imam crushed the heads that were full of
pride, weighed down with arrogance and blinded by self-conceit.

Sayyid Amir Ali says: “The carnage of Kerbala shook up the world of
Islam; a factor that assisted in the destruction of the foundation of
the Umayyad regime.”**[2]**

As for the signs of Umayyad defeat after the martyrdom of Imam Husain
(‘a); they were as follows:

A. Their separation from Religious Authority
--------------------------------------------

The terrible carnage of Kerbala took out the Umayyads from the pale of
Islam and it proved that they still followed the barbarity and ignorance
of the pre-Islamic age. Because all the acts they committed with the
Progeny of the Prophet (s) proved that the Umayyads had left the
religion of Islam and the faith of Muslims. For example, first of all
they put embargo on water supply with the help of armed forces. Then
after killing His Eminence, they cut up his Holy body into bits and
pieces. After that they took as hostages the noble ladies of the
Prophet’s family and took them around towns and cities in such a way
that to see them makes one hair stand on end. This was done to announce
the defeat of the Prophet’s family and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Raihaanatur Rasool*, Pg. 176  
 **[2]** *Mukhtasar Tarikhul Arab*

publicize that revenge has been taken from them. Similarly the couplets
that Yazid recited clearly said that it was to revenge the death of his
disbelieving ancestors who had been eliminated in the battle of Badr.
Thus all these facts clearly proved that the Umayyads were not Muslims.

B. Their widespread Condemnation
--------------------------------

Among the signs of Umayyad defeat was that their condemnation became
general and people in all gatherings and assemblies openly criticized
their policies and evils; so, frenzied waves of condemnation began to
descend upon Yazid – so much so that even his womenfolk and clansmen
took up this activity, such that he was absolutely harried and he began
to regret the deed he had committed. Hence his relationship with Ibn
Marjana, according to historians, fell into gloom.

C. Transfer of Caliphate from Umayyads
--------------------------------------

The Imam’s revolution involved the Umayyad regime in defeat and
destroyed all its traces and made it the target of one uprising after
another which were initiated by Shias and others till finally the dark
regime was destroyed by the establishment of Abbasid rule as we shall
discuss this matter now.

Bringing out the True Status of Ahle Bayt
-----------------------------------------

The revolution of the Chief of the martyrs brought out the illuminated
reality of Ahle Bayt and proved to the world of Islam, their powers in
being steadfast on truth, their firmness in face of calamities and their
sincere concerns for the future of the Islamic community. As a result of
it, the majority of Muslims began to love and regard them with respect
and awe.

The tragedy of Kerbala clearly showed that the Ahle Bayt were lofty
examples of spiritual and practical leadership of this community and the
vanguards of truth and justice on the earth.

Centralizing the Shiite Faith
-----------------------------

Among the consequences of the Husainite revolution was that it bestowed
a centralization to them in the limits of their beliefs. Such that it
assumed a form of a well-defined school of thought in the life of Shia
people.

Phillip Hitti says: “Shia was born on the day of 10<sup>th</sup>
Mohurrum. From that day Imamate in the progeny of Ali became a principle
of the faith of Shias, just as prophethood of Muhammad (s) was a
principle of Islamic faith.”**[1]**

An orientalist says: “If Husain had not been killed, Shias would not
have come into being in Islam.”**[2]**

Also Satarthman has said: “The blood of Husain which was shed by the
swords of the armed forces of the regime became the nucleus around which
grew the Shia belief more than the blood of Ali which was shed by the
Khawarij conspiracy.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikhul Arab* 1/237  
 **[2]** Umar Abu Nasr, *Husain bin Ali*, Pg. 10

Shaykh Shustari says: “If His Eminence, Husain had not borne those
hardships, religion would not have become clear for Shia people; because
when Bani Umayyah became the dominant power in the land. They indulged
in corruption and tried to conceal the truth till the matter became
doubtful for people and they made the cursing of Ali a part of daily
prayers and filled the minds of the people with the notion that Bani
Umayyah are Imams of Islam. And this matter was taught to the people
from childhood because teachers were ordered to impart such training to
all the children under their care that they were Imams of religion. And
opposition to them is deviation…and when His Eminence, Husain was killed
in that fashion and his womenfolk were taken as prisoners of war, people
came to their senses, that if they (Umayyads) were guides of truth they
would never have committed such acts. This action of theirs had no
relation to religion, faith or justice. It was not even in conformity to
the oppression of oppressors.”**[1]**

Those purified bloods cleaned up the spirit of sacrifice and devotion
towards Ahle Bayt in the view of the majority of Muslims. And since that
time those who were neutral to join battles for getting the power now
they came under their flag.**[2]** Those terrible tragedies that befell
the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s) were such that
shocked and devastated all those who lived at that time.

Uniting the Shia People
-----------------------

The tragedy of Kerbala bestowed unity to Shias and created a spirit of
cooperation among them. Before that due to lack of motivation and
loyalty in defense of their belief based on religious right of special
caliphate of Ahle Bayt, they had borne grief. Those perceptions changed
and they gathered the strongest practical force with which they rushed
out to destroy the Umayyad regime and stood up together to take revenge
for Husain chanting the slogan of “Yaa thaaratal Husain.”

A writer says: “This terrible and unpleasant tragedy to the furthest
limit, brought clarity to Shiaism and was a factor of Shiite unity and
their motivation for supporting their religion and became a cause of
frenzied uprisings to take revenge from the killers of Husain
(‘a).**[3]**

Brockleman has also mentioned this point in his statement: “Those bloods
that quenched the grounds of Kerbala brought clarity to the spirit of
Shiaism in the hearts of the Shias. And it made them realize that they
must unite their ranks.

The carnage of Kerbala roused in the hearts of Shias, feelings and
sorrows and it brought them to the belief that before everything they
must think of the need of unity to take revenge for the martyrdom of the
great Imam who had stood up for the sake of justice and for restoring
the rights of the persecuted and oppressed people.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Khasais al-Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 89  
 **[2]** *Ittajahaatush Sher al-Arabi,* Pg. 30  
 **[3]** *Adab as-Siyasa fil Asr al-Amawi,* Pg. 40

Creating Social Awareness
-------------------------

Imam’s movement was effective in creating social awareness and bringing
out the revolutionary spirit in people, because the community had
completely changed and after remaining silent and submissive it became
armed with faith and power of determination and decisiveness and it
became free of all the negative notions that it had been involved in.
They set out to demand their rights and endeavor to destroy the Umayyad
regime. They initiated uprisings after uprisings that indicated their
infuriated mood with Bani Umayyah and they generously stepped forward to
sacrifice their lives for the victory of these uprisings. No other
effect of fear or distress remained with them till they destroyed the
expressions of Umayyad arrogance and eradicated their persecution and
deviation.

The revolution of Imam Husain (‘a) changed the meaning of fear and
surrender that was supreme on the community and according to the
principles of revolution turned it into confronting and seeking freedom
from the bonds of humiliation and slavery; because the Imam gave them a
rousing power and bestowed them a revolutionary spirit to stand up and
fight injustice and oppression.

Blooming of Talents
-------------------

Among the factors of success of the Husainite revolution was that it
stimulated the blooming of talents and capabilities and it created an
outstanding genre of literature in the literary world which is
exquisite, outstanding and beautiful.

Literature of Husainite revolution is rich with most outstanding subject
matter in the political literature of Islam; because it contains a rich
mine most beneficial and artistic of the intellectual sources. Its
salient features are as follows:

**First:** It extolled social justice and human values for whom the
great Imam struggled.

**Second:** It condemned oppression and fought falsehood and confronted
arrogance and obstinacy.

**Third:** It motivated the society towards honor and lofty purpose by
following Imam Husain (‘a) the leader with lofty aspirations and the
vanguard of human perfections.

**Fourth:** It presented the intellectual and religious attitude of the
honorable Imam.

**Fifth:** It glorified the Imam in a way that no martyr from the social
reformers had ever been exalted; because the principles of His Eminence
were merged with the emotions of Shia poets and the wave of human
movement had seized that immortal revolution and they praised and
glorified His Eminence in the most outstanding fashion.

**Sixth:** Publicizing the decadence of Umayyads and describing their
crimes in their enmity towards Islam.

**Seventh:** Explanation of the hardships and tragedies that befell the
Holy Ahle Bayt.

Sayyid Muhammad Sayyid Gilani says: “Shia literature showed a true
picture of the persecutions meted out to the Alawites.” He says: “The
carnage of Kerbala in which Husain was martyred, and whatever befell the
Alawites afterwards, was a powerful stimulation for the poets and in
their numerous elegies they openly recited, they were able to create
such grief that scorched the hearts and shattered the lives. It is most
surprising that this led to widespread uprisings to take revenge for the
blood that was shed and the bodies that were cut up into pieces and
abandoned unburied in the desert that they may become morsels of
scavengers…

Poems lamenting for the Ahle Bayt multiplied in an astounding manner,
all of them arising from the depths of the hearts and the depths of
souls and in this way they became a priceless treasure of Arabic
literature.”**[1]**

**Eight:** Outstanding beauty in the literature of Husainite revolution
and the warmth of passion.

A writer states: “The poetry lamenting Husain is warm and fiery; because
it is derived from powerful emotions and it is composed by burning and
revolutionary souls. They were angry and furious because the Bani
Umayyah had snatched their rights and usurped their position. Therefore
they expressed their anger in poetry.”**[2]**

Husainite poetry is a true expression of the enflamed passions and its
composers were neither reserved in expressing feelings nor did they
borrow their ideas from others. They were themselves impassioned by the
tragedy and thus they described the Imam in the most realistic way.

These pieces of living literature are the richest examples of the
literature of the world and the most outstanding cultural values in
Islam.

What is necessary to mention is that the Husainite literature did not
attain as much prominence and popularity in the literature of Islam,
except after a very long period of time. But it was as explained by
Abdul Faraj; due to the fact that in those early days the poets
restrained from composing mourning poetry on Husain due to the fear of
Umayyads.

Pulpits of Exhortation and Guidance
-----------------------------------

Among the most prominent consequences of the revolution of the chief of
the nobles was that it gave rise to platforms of propagating the message
of Imam Husain (‘a) which to this day have played an important role in
imparting lessons of righteousness and piety to the people and their
important service was to preach the significance of sacrifice in the
path of truth.

Martin, the German writer considers these pulpits to be of the important
factors of the progress of Muslims if they are utilized in a proper and
organized way.

The tragedy of Abu Abdillah (‘a) is a part not separate from the message
of Islam and it shows his efforts and struggle against the transgressors
and his support of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Athar Tashayyo Dar Adabiyat Arab,* Pg. 23  
 **[2]** *Adab as-Siyasa,* Pg. 189

the persecuted and oppressed people.

John Ashra says, “The tragedy of Husain contains the loftiest meaning of
martyrdom on the path of social justice.”**[1]**

The Husainite pulpits are the most important contribution and the most
outstanding achievements of the revolution of the Chief of the martyrs
and it sowed the natures of well-wishing in the hearts and removed the
souls from the factors of corruption and deviation and guided them on
the path of virtue; steadfastness and good manners, are among its
distinctive qualities. In the same way they became like mobile schools
for spreading faith in Allah and teaching Islamic values to the people.

Continuation of Revolution
--------------------------

The tragedy of Kerbala created a terrible wave of disconcertation and
deep effects on the life of Muslims and it stimulated them to undertake
political action and social groupism for bringing the downfall of the
Umayyad regime and to take revenge from the man killers.

The country, since the martyrdom Husain had burnt with the fire of
war,**[2]** because the Islamic communities arose as powerful
oppositions and announced their anger and fury against the Umayyad
regime and endeavored to bring their downfall. Some of the uprisings
were as follows:

1. Uprising of Abdullah bin Afif
--------------------------------

The uprising of Abdullah bin Afif was the first uprising in Kufa that
appeared immediately after the martyrdom of the Imam and the great
stalwart, Abdullah bin Afif Azadi started it. He was the first of those
who lighted the spark of revolution and changed into defeat the fake
victory that Ibn Marjana had achieved as we have already explained in
detail in the foregone pages.

2. Uprising of Medina
---------------------

The fact is that the uprising of Medina was nothing but the continuation
of the revolution of the Chief of the martyrs; because people were
boiling with rage and hatred towards Yazid as he had defiled the
sanctity of the Messenger of Allah (s) by killing the Progeny of His
Eminence and by taking his children as captives.

When hostages from Ahle Bayt (‘a) returned to Medina and told the people
about the great tragedies and terrible hardships that they had to suffer
and explained to them the calamities and captivity the ladies of the
abode of prophethood and noble women of the family of revelation had to
bear, people became deeply aggrieved and sorrowful for the beloved
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s).

Sister of Husain and granddaughter of the Prophet (s), Her Eminence,
Zainab enflamed passions for taking revenge for the killing of her
brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Rehla Ilal Iraq*  
 **[2]** Maqrizi, *Az-Zahab al-Maslook,* Pg. 27

People of Medina began to believe that it was a religious duty to rebel
against Yazid. So they officially broke their pledge of allegiance to
him and announced an uprising against his regime.

Yazid ordered the sinner, Musraf bin Uqbah Mari to ransack Medina and
gave him an army composed of at least 12000 Syrian mercenaries. For
three days he made it lawful for them to do whatever they liked to the
people of Medina and plunder whatever they desired from there!

Masruf set out for Medina and allowed his mercenaries three days of
complete discretion to plunder the city. They began to kill and plunder
and committed every deed that Allah had prohibited. Then they took
allegiance of the people with their confession that they were slaves of
Yazid. Anyone who refused to pledge such allegiance was immediately
beheaded. In that incident such terrible hardships occurred that the
heart burns due to their horror. Historians have described those
horrible and grievous conditions that passed on the people of Medina.
This tragedy was also like the tragedy of Kerbala and it created
political groupism in the Islamic community to act against the Umayyad
regime and to make efforts to bring down their power.

3. Uprising of the Penitents (Tawabbeen)
----------------------------------------

People of Kufa were deeply regretful that they had committed a great sin
in deserting the Holy Imam (‘a). They chastised each other for the
terrible iniquity they had done. They unanimously decided that they must
confess to their sin of deserting His Eminence and it was necessary for
them to take revenge of His Eminence as expiation of their sins. One of
them addressed his daughter and said: “My daughter! Your father cries to
his Lord due to his sin.”**[1]**

They held a conference at the house of Sulaiman bin Surd Khuzai an elder
of the Shia community and a companion of Allah’s Messenger. He had
precedence and seniority in Islam. They held discussions among
themselves and concluded that this disgrace and sin cannot be washed
clear without eliminating those who had martyred His Eminence, Husain
(‘a).**[2]**

In that meeting some fiery speeches were made that called for taking
revenge for the blood of the great Imam and they stressed the need for
unity and cooperation in this regard. According to historians this
conference was held in the year 61 A.H, that is the year of the
martyrdom of His Eminence, Husain (‘a).

Resolutions of the Conference
-----------------------------

The conference took some unanimous resolutions, some of which were a
follows:

1. Sulaiman bin Surd was chosen as the leader of the revolt so that he
may chalk out the political program and make military preparations.

2. Letters were dispatched to Shia localities in Iraq and outside Iraq
informing the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/552  
 **[2]** *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 6/363-365

people about their decisions regarding revenging the Imam’s blood and
inviting them to join them in this mission.

3. The uprising was to take place after a gap of four years so that
during this time volunteers could be enrolled and preparations made for
war.

4. Nukhaila shall be the center of revolt and the uprising shall be
announced from there.

5. The matter of uprising should be kept secret.

Organs of the uprising, who according to historians, numbered one
hundred, spread in the lands to start working for mobilizing help for
purchase of weapons. They invited the people to cooperate with them and
to join them.

Announcing of Revolt
--------------------

In the year 65 A.H, the penitents declared their impassioned revolt
against the Umayyad regime. They numbered, according to historians, 4000
men. Leader of the uprising, Sulaiman bin Surd sent Hakeem bin Munqidh
Kandi and Walid bin Aseer Kanani to Kufa and instructed them to raise
the slogan of “Yaa Thaaratal Husain!” (Rise up to take revenge of
Husain!”).

When the two of them reached Kufa they raised that slogan and for the
first time this effective call arose in the atmosphere of Kufa and it
fell like a thunderbolt on the sinful killers but was a medicine for the
hearts of believers and Muslims. A large number of people rushed to
Nukhaila, where Sulaiman bin Surd delivered an effective speech among
them. He explained to them that he was not in pursuit of power or booty
of war. He only desired the satisfaction of God and had only the abode
of Hereafter in view. He also expressed hope that the Almighty Allah
would forgive him and his brothers the sin of having deserted the
beloved grandson of Allah’s Messenger (s).

In Kerbala
----------

The penitents decided to travel to Kerbala for the Ziarat of the tomb of
the Chief of martyrs (‘a) so that besides his grave they may announce
their repentance in the court of the Lord of the worlds.

Groups of penitents set out for Kerbala and when they reached there they
lamented in one voice: “Yaa Husain!” They wept and lamented and humbled
themselves before the Almighty that He may accept their sincere
repentance and forgive them. They said besides the grave of the Holy
Imam: “O Allah! Have mercy on Husain, the martyr and son of martyr, the
guided one, son of guided one, the truthful one, son of truthful one.

O Allah! We take You as our witness that we are upon his faith and path.
We are the enemies of his killers and friends of his followers.

O Allah! We deserted the son of the daughter of our Prophet. Thus
forgive our past and accept our repentance and have mercy on Husain and
his companions – the truthful martyrs. We take You as our witness that
we follow their religion and that

for which they laid down their lives. If You do not forgive us and not
have mercy on us, we shall be of the losers.”**[1]**

At that time they crowded on the Holy grave with a crowding that
exceeded that of the Hajar al-Aswad (the black stone) while they were
weeping and humbling before Allah that He may forgive their sins and
accept their repentance. After that they departed toward the Anbar
province.

At Ainul Wurda
--------------

Groups of penitents marched on till they reached Ainul Wurda. They
camped at that place. Soldiers of the Syrian army began to attack them
and furious battles occurred between them. Both the sides suffered heavy
losses. Leaders of the penitents, like Sulaiman bin Surd, Musayyab bin
Najba and Abdullah bin Saad and others were martyred.

When the penitents saw that they were not getting help in confronting
the Syrians they left the battlefield in the darkness of the night and
returned to Kufa. Syrian army also did not pursue them. Both parties
returned to their towns and in this way ended the war of penitents,
while the Umayyads became distressed and heavy losses had inflicted
them.

4. Uprising of Mukhtar
----------------------

Mukhtar is the most famous personality that the history of Islam knows
and he played an important role in the political events of that time. He
was also the most outstanding politician having uncanny ability for
organization and planning, and he was an expert in turning the
circumstances to his advantage. He strengthened his achievements with
his capabilities as a person of deep perception.

Regarding him a writer states: “He was very knowledgeable in psychology
and well-versed in method of propagation and communication and he spoke
to the people according to their intellectual level and he did not
suffice only with the modes of propagation like speeches and poetry. He
employed other methods also like exhibitions, displays and propaganda.

He also employed that which we call coup d’etat through which he took
Kufa from the control of Ibn Zubair.”**[2]**

He was a senior personality of the Shias and a sword of the family of
the Messenger of Allah (s). He was intensely aggrieved and agitated in
sorrow of the Purified Progeny who were eliminated by swords of
falsehood. He endeavored to obtain rulership not because he was inclined
to it but that he may avenge Ahle Bayt and take revenge from their
killers.

Serious allegations are heaped on this great warrior like that he was
claimant of Prophethood and other false implications from which he is
blameless. And for which he is absolved; because he arose to take
revenge for the great Imam, he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 5/589. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/178  
 **[2]** *Al-Mukhtar,* Pg. 43

shook up the existence of Umayyad rule and destroyed the glory of their
regime. He practiced equity between Arabs and non-Arabs, he did not
accord preference to anyone over others. During his rule he tried to
follow the footsteps of Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) and followed the
economic and social policies of His Eminence.

He was extremely pious and religious. Historians say: During his brief
rule, in order to thank the Almighty he fasted excessively so that the
Almighty Lord may enable him to take revenge for the Purified Progeny
and to eliminate the sinful and transgressive killers.

They have made baseless allegations against this great warrior in order
to decrease his status and reduce his importance. After having carefully
studied his activities we have found him to be an incomparable
personality of history and a famous man of the Islamic nation. With many
excellences like virtues and piety, original thinking, deep perception
and good intentions, such that few people of that time had possessed
such qualities…,we would have liked to say more on the personality of
this outstanding man and explain in detail how he organized his uprising
and obtained power. But this would require a whole separate book which
if Allah wills we may succeed in compiling. Before we conclude our
discussions about him we shall discuss in brief some matters related to
the subject as follows:

Anguish of the Killers
----------------------

Fear and terror seized the sinful murderers and killers of the beloved
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s); because they became certain that
the uprising of Mukhtar has been organized to take revenge from them.
Therefore some of them fled to the wilderness and others disappeared in
such a way that no information came about them. A few of them fled to
Abdul Malik to take refuge from the attack and fury of Mukhtar as one of
them addressed him as follows:

**“I come to you so that you have mercy on me and remove my hardships.
But I see that you drive me away; then where can I go?”[1]**

Abdul Malik bin Hajjaj Taghibeen also sought his refuge saying; “I fled
from Iraq to you.”

Abdul Malik bin Marwan screamed at him: “You have not fled to join me.
You have fled from the reprisal of killing Husain and fearing for your
life you seek to take refuge with me.”**[2]**

In the same way some of them fled to Ibn Zubair and joined his army and
fought on his side. It was not because they followed his faith, but it
was due to the fear of Mukhtar as he had ruined their houses and
confiscated all their property. Mukhtar demolished the house of Muhammad
bin Ashath, took away the materials and renovated the house of the
martyr, Hujr bin Adi that had been destroyed by Ziyad bin Abih.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Qutaybah, *Uyun al-Akhbar* 1/179-180  
 **[2]** Ibne Qutaybah, *Uyun al-Akhbar* 1/179-180  
 **[3]** Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/244

As for that filthy one, Umar bin Saad, he hid in his house, anxious and
frightened; and he sent important persons to mediate for him with
Mukhtar and wrote to him letters seeking pardon and safety. Mukhtar gave
him security on the condition that he would not take any step. However
Ibn Saad in this matter spoke in a roundabout and ambiguous manner that
he wasn’t allowed even to go to answer the call of nature.

Mukhtar anguished the hearts of criminals and killers of Imam in such a
way that the earth shook beneath their feet and frenzied waves of shock
and terror covered them in such a way that none of them could live in
peace; because the ghost of death hovered over them.

Widespread Destruction
----------------------

Mukhtar hastened to issue decree of death to anyone who had participated
in the killing of the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (s);
because he endeavored to take revenge from them and purify the earth
from those filthy creatures. As such, as Tabari says – on one day he
condemned twenty of them to death and none of their commanders and
leaders could escape. He killed the filthy sinner, Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad,
Umar bin Saad and his son Hafas. He executed Shimr bin Zil Jaushan and
threw his corpse to dogs. In the same way he got killed Qais bin Ashath,
Haseen bin Numair, Shabth bin Rabi and others.**[1]**

The Almighty Allah fulfilled the prayers of the great Imam regarding the
sinful murderers and killed them in the way they had killed, made them
drink the bitter cup of death and took revenge from them in the most
severe manner. Almighty Allah has truly said when He states: **And such
is the punishment of your Lord when He punishes the towns while they are
unjust; surely His punishment is painful, severe.*[2]***

Zuhri says: “From the killers of Husain (‘a) none remained but that he
were punished in the world, either by killing, getting blinded,
blackening of face or downfall of power in a short time.”**[3]**

They were punished in this world and they lie forever in the fire of
Hell in such a way that neither the punishment shall be reduced for them
nor would they get any respite.

Here ends the discussion regarding the uprising of Mukhtar which was the
most prominent and original uprising in Islam; because its aim was
taking revenge for the Purified Progeny, who according to the statement
of the Prophet (s) were equals of the Glorious Quran. Also its aim was
to spread equality and social justice among the people.

Blessing and pleasure of Allah be on Mukhtar, on the day he came in
pursuit, the day he was martyred and the day he shall be raised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/51. Ibne Athir, *Tarikh* 4/244-245. *Tarikh
Ahkbaar at-Tiwaal*, Pg. 301-302  
 **[2]** Surah Hud 11:102  
 **[3]** *Jawahirul Matalib* 2/278

The Revolution Continues
------------------------

Mukhtar’s killing at the behest of Ibn Zubair did not weaken the
revolutionary spirit of the Shias; because other uprisings appeared
which were led by the grandsons of the Imam Husain (‘a) and the
grandsons of his brother, Imam Hasan (‘a). Like the great revolution of
Zaid bin Ali who arose to confront injustice and oppression and after
him, his son Yahya enflamed the fire of his revolt. He took as their
slogan the principles of Imam Husain (‘a) and wanted to revenge his
killing.

In this way uprisings continued till black flags appeared in the
vanguards of Muslim army under the command of Abu Muslim Khorasani and
destroyed the crown and throne of the Umayyads and crushed their
oppression and arrogance.

Here comes to conclusion our discussion about the consequences of the
Imam’s revolution related to the social and intellectual fields. In the
same way we come to the last pages of this book and in the end, once
more state the points we have mentioned before. That these pages are
just some glimpses of the life of the great Imam that have conquered the
feelings of the people and their sentiments and achieved a place in
their hearts and minds. I am sure that whatever has been written on His
Eminence so far and whatever that shall be written in future would still
fall short in covering all the aspects of the personality of His
Eminence and would not be able to present the reality of his life in
full, a life that was continuation of the life of his grandfather, the
Holy Prophet (s) and guidance that had the benefit of humanity in view.

*True loyalty demands that we must mention about the love and
recognition of the righteous man, Haaj Muhammad Rishad Ajine who helped
in the publication of books about Ahle Bayt (‘a) and spreading awareness
about their excellences. We believe that he has rendered the most
valuable service to community and which is the most necessary and most
lasting contribution. He has generously donated a sum from the estate of
his late father, Muhammad Jawad Ajine who had made bequest for it. I
pray to Allah to accept this generosity of his and may he be recomposed
by the Almighty and forgiven in return. In the same way I pray to Allah
for myself and my brother Hadi, who helped me in checking many
references for this book. May Allah reward him on my behalf with the
best reward that a brother can give to his brother.*
