Offspring of Prophethood "part 1"
=================================

Greetings for the newborn who initiated light and knowledge in the dark
age in such a way that he illuminated the intellectual life and society
of the people and guided them to the right path.

Mother
------

That purified offspring is from the Chief of the Ladies of the world,
Fatima Zahra (‘a) whom the Almighty Allah had purified by His grace and
appointed her to guide people from deviation and bring them out from
discord and disunity towards unity and integration. It was Fatima Zahra
who has the spark from the soul of her father and benefited from his
light and the flames of his guidance. She is the center of his attention
and a halo of greatness and power had surrounded her, and he made her
love incumbent upon Muslims so that it becomes a part of their faith and
religion in such a way that her merits and greatness become well known
in Islam and she may be regarded as the model of womanhood.

The Holy Prophet (s) has narrated her merits and special qualities in
general and private gatherings so that Muslims may retain his sayings
regarding her and narrations upon which the traditionists are unanimous
say:

1. “Allah is angry when you are angry and He is pleased at your
pleasure…”**[1]**

2. “Fatima is a part of me. One who hurts her has hurt me and one who
causes pain to her has caused pain to me…”**[2]**

3. “Fatima is the leader of the women of the world…”**[3]**

Other statements of the Holy Prophet (s) also say that among the signs
of the personality of Her Eminence, Zahra (‘a) is that she was the
exemplar of Islam and a great example for the women of this community as
she illuminates the way for them. In good manners, chastity and the
bringing of a cultured progeny...and how great are her blessings and how
beneficial for Islam and for her exalted honor it is sufficient to say
that the great Fatimid Dynasty is named after her and also the
University of Al-Azhar is named thus in her honor.****[4]**** For the
greatness of the Fatimid Kingdom it is sufficient to say that it gained
prominence due to the name of Fatima Zahra (‘a).  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Mustadrakul Sahihain* 3/154. *Tahdhibut Tahdhib* 12/441,
*Kanzul Ummal* 13/674 and 12/111, *Usud al-Ghaba* 5/522, *Mizanul
Etedal* 1/535. *Zakhairul Uqbah,* Pg. 39  
 **[2]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/656. Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad* 4/571. And
in *Sahih Tirmidhi* it is mentioned that His Eminence (s.a.w.s.) said:
As for my daughter, that is Fatima. She is a part of me, one who
aggrieves her, aggrieves me and one who hurts me has hurt her. And in
*Kanzul Ummal* 12/111 he is reported to have said: As for Fatima, she is
a branch of mine, one who makes her happy makes me happy and one who
angers her, angers me.  
 **[3]** *Usud al-Ghaba* 5/522. And in *Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal* 6/112
he said: Fatima is the chief of the ladies of this community or the
ladies of the world. And in *Sahih Bukhari* in the origin of creation it
is mentioned. Are you not pleased that you are the Chief of the ladies
of Paradise or the ladies of the world?  
 **[4]** *Nisa Lahunna fi Tarikhul Islami Nasib,* Pg. 48

Anyway, the Prophet received news from the unseen that it is only this
purified part (Fatima) through whom would be born the purified Imams of
Ahle Bayt (‘a), successors of the Prophet and callers to truth on the
earth. They shall bear important responsibilities of the Prophet’s
mission and make all efforts to reform the society; and in doing so bear
all sorrows and pains, that is why the Holy Prophet (s) paid utmost
attention to her upbringing and took utmost care of her.

Father
------

He is the beloved son of Ali, the rightful and just leader on the earth,
the brother of the Messenger of Allah (s) and the gate of knowledge of
His Eminence. He is the one who was having the same position with the
Holy Prophet (s) as Harun (‘a) had with Musa (‘a). He was the first to
have brought faith in Allah and testify for the Prophet. He was the
first to take up the responsibility of fighting Jihad at the dawn of
Islam and he went to the most perilous places and subdued powers of
polytheism and apostasy in deadly combat and astonishing duels, till the
time this religion became strong with the help and support and his Jihad
bestowed strength to the religion of Allah. The Almighty Allah bestowed
him with all the honors and gave him also virtues and he is the Father
of the Purified Imams (‘a). He is the one who spread effulgence from the
source of his wisdom.

The first new-born
------------------

The fruits of the tree of Prophethood and the plant of Imamate are
successors of the Holy Prophet (s) who shall continue his mission. The
first child of this family was Abu Muhammad Zaki, seeing whom the soul
of the Prophet overflowed with joy. Thus began his attention to him and
he inculcated in him his own noble virtues; virtues whose effulgence
covered the whole world.**[1]**

Only a few days, according to some historians 52 days**[2]** elapsed
when the chief of the ladies conceived again. Such that the Messenger of
Allah (s) and other Muslims were impatiently awaiting that the Almighty
Allah will unite that star to another star so that the sky of the
Islamic community may be illuminated and bestow a great part towards the
life of freedom.

Dream of Ummul Fadl
-------------------

Lady Ummul Fadl, the daughter of Harith**[3]** had a strange dream and
she did not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Detailed chapter on the holy birth Abu Muhammad (a.s.) is given
in our book life of Imam Hasan (a.s.) 1/49-56  
 **[2]** Ibne Qutaybah, *al-Ma’rif,* Pg. 158  
 **[3]** Ummul Fadl Lubaba, the elder was the wife of Abbas bin Abdul
Muttalib. She was the first lady after Her Eminence, Khadija binte
Khuwailid to accept Islam in Mecca. She had such an honorable position
near the Prophet (a.s.) that His Eminence used to visit her to see her
and take rest and afternoon nap in her house. She has narrated many
traditions from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). She was the mother of
Abbas’s six children, namely, Fadl, Abdullah, Ubaidullah, Qatham, Abdur
Rahman and Umme Habiba. Abdullah Ibne Yazid has said about her: No lady
in the mountains or plains we know of to have given birth to such six
issues. Like the six children born from the womb of Ummul, Fadl.
Consider them worthy of honor and also her husband. Who is the uncle of
the Prophet Mustafa, who possessed merits and is the seal of Prophets
and the best of the Messengers. Her biography is present in all books
like *Tabaqat-e-Kubra* 7/278, *Al-Isabah* 4/464 and *al-Istiab.*

have any idea about its interpretation. Thus she came to the Messenger
of Allah (s) and asked His Eminence: “I had a very strange dream: that a
piece of your flesh fell into my lap.”

The Messenger of Allah (s) dispelled her fears and gave her good news
saying:

“You have seen something good! Allah willing, Fatima will give birth to
a boy that shall be given in your arms.”

Days passed swiftly and Fatima, the chief of the ladies, gave birth to
Imam Husain (‘a) and the newborn child was given in the lap of Ummul
Fadl just as the Messenger of Allah (s) had informed.**[1]**

The Holy Prophet (s) remained waiting for the rise of the newborn star
as the life of his beloved child was being illuminated by it. He was his
favorite grandchild and the most beloved of those whom he left behind.

The Blessed Birth
-----------------

The Chief of the ladies of the world gave birth to such a great child
that no daughter of Eve had ever done either before the time of
Prophethood nor after him. He was the one who reached such heights of
greatness that no one bestowed greater blessings or grace on humanity
more than him. Thus there was none purer, cleaner and more prominent
than him.

The world became illuminated with him and the humanity, along with its
whole progeny, became blessed. Muslims were proud of him and considered
his remembrance worthy and every year they express pride in him.

The Ministry of Endowments in Egypt holds celebrations in the Husaini
Mosque to commemorate the birth of the Holy Imam and considers this a
great and a very significant occasion just as most of Islamic areas hold
celebrations in this regard.

This joyful news spread over the horizon of Medina. Mothers of the
believers (wives of the Prophet) and other Muslim ladies hastened to the
residence of the chief of the ladies and congratulated her about the
newborn child and participated in her joy.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Mustadrak Sahihain* 3/176 and in *Musnad Firdausi* Ummul Fadl
says: I saw as a limb of the Prophet was in my house. Thus I became
worried about it and I went to His Eminence and related the matter to
him. His Eminence said: Yes, it is like that only. Thus Fatima gave
birth to Husain, then I gave milk to him till the milk was over. And in
*Tarikh Khamis* 1/418 it has come that this dream had occurred before
the birth of Imam Hasan (a.s.)

Grief and weeping of the Holy Prophet (s)
-----------------------------------------

When the news of his grandson’s birth was conveyed to him, His Eminence,
immediately hastened to his dearest Fatima (‘a) in such a condition that
his steps were heavy and grief and sorrow had enveloped him. Then in a
choked voice he called out: “O Asma! Get me my child!”

Asma handed over the child to him. The Holy Prophet took him in his arms
and kissed him again and again while all the time he was weeping. Asma
became worried and asked: “May my parents be sacrificed on you, why are
you lamenting?”

The Holy Prophet (s) replied with his eyes filled with tears: “I am
weeping for this son of mine.”

She was astonished to hear this and she could not understand the motive
behind this. She asked: “He has just stepped into the world!”

The Messenger of Allah (s) replied to her in an aggrieved tone: “An
unjust group shall slay him after me, may the Almighty Allah deprive
them of my intercession.”

After that he stood up in a sad mood and told Asma secretly: “Do not
convey this to Fatima as she has just come out of labor…”**[1]**

The Holy Prophet (s) emerged from the house in a sorrowful mood because
he had received the information from the unseen about the calamities
that were to befall the child in the future; such calamities as could
shake the complete life of every living person.

Year of Imam Husain’s (‘a) birth
--------------------------------

The grandson of the Prophet (s) was born in the 4<sup>th</sup> year of
the Hijri calendar**[2]** and elsewhere the year is also mentioned to be
the 3<sup>rd</sup> year of the Hijri calendar.**[3]** Narrators also
differ as to the month of his birth and most of them consider it to be
the month of Shaban and on the 5<sup>th</sup> day of the
month.****[4]**** Some of them have not specified the day of his birth
and said he was born after a few nights of Shaban had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Musnad Imam Zaid,* Pg. 468 and in *Amali* of Saduq, Pg. 199 it
is mentioned that the Holy Prophet took Husain in his arms after he was
born while he wept. Then he handed over the child to Safiya binte Abdul
Muttalib saying: May Allah curse the people who shall be your slayers.
And he repeated this thrice. Safiya asked: May my parents be sacrificed
on you! Who would slay him? He replied, “A group of Bani Umayyad
oppressors.”  
 **[2]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 38.
*Tahdhib al-Asma* 1/163. *Maqatilut Talibeen,* Pg. 84. Maqrizi,
*Khattat* 2/285. Bustani, *Dairatul Ma’rif* 7/48. *Jauharatul Kalaam Fi
Madhis Saadaatil A’laam,* Pg. 116. *Al-Ifaadah Fil Tarikhul Aimmatil
Saadah* by Yahya bin al-Husain (died 424 A.H.) from photocopy at Imam
Hakim Library. *Ad-Dhariyatut Taahira* from written manuscript at Amirul
Momineen Public Library, *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/194. *Usud al-Ghaba* 2/18.
*Al-Irshad,* Pg. 198  
 **[3]** *Usul al-Kafi* 1/463. Maqrizi, *Khattat* 2/285. *Al-Istiab*
(Printed on the margins of *al-Isabah*) 1/392  
 **[4]** Tibrani, *al-Mojam al-Kabir* from manuscripts of Amirul
Momineen Library. *Tohfatul Azhar Zilaalul Anhaar* from manuscripts at
Imam Kashiful Ghita Public Library. Maqrizi, *Khattat* 2/285

passed.**[1]** While some historians have ignored this and just state
that he was born in Shaban and they are all unanimous in this.**[2]**

Some elders also say that His Eminence was born at the end of the Rabi
I, but this view is against the established one, so we must not pay any
attention to it.**[3]**

Birth ceremonies of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (s) personally performed the religious ceremonies
of the blessed newborn child and carried out the following rituals:

First: Azan and Iqamah
----------------------

The Messenger of Allah (s) took the blessed child in his arms and in his
right ear recited the Azan and in his left ear recited the
Iqamah.****[4]**** And it is mentioned in narrations that: “This ritual
protects the newborn child from the accursed Shaitan.”**[5]**

The first voice to reach the ears of Husain (‘a) was that of his
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s) who was the first to have turned
towards God and called the people towards Him and his slogan was: “Allah
is the Greatest. There is no god except Allah…”

The Holy Prophet (s) inculcated these words into the soul of his
grandson; words, which were the essence of faith and reality of Islam
and he imbibed these things into the newborn child and taught him about
them. They became a part of his elements and basics of his existence. He
became absolutely devoted to these concepts in every aspect of his life.
Thus he hastened towards the field of Jihad and sacrificed everything so
that this formula of faith may be exalted on the earth and powers of
righteousness and goodness may become dominant and signs of apostasy of
ignorance that were trying to put out the divine light may be subjugated
and destroyed.

** **

Second: Naming
--------------

The Holy Prophet (s) named the child ‘Husain’ just as he had named his
brother, ‘Hasan’.**[6]** Historians state that Arabs were not aware of
these names during the period of ignorance till the Prophet named his
grandsons thus. Rather the Holy  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Imtaul Asma*, Pg. 187. *Usud al-Ghaba* 2/18. *Ad-Dhariyatut
Taahira*, Pg. 101  
 **[2]** *Fathul Bari* in the chapter of Virtues of al-Hasan and
al-Husain (a.s.) 7/75  
 **[3]** *Al-Muqna*, Pg. 467, *At Tahdhib* 6/41, *Ad Durus* 2/8  
 **[4]** *Kashful Ghumma* 2/3, *Tohfatul Azhar wa Zilaalul Anhaar*  
 **[5]** Ali (a.s.) has narrated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said,
“For the newborn child you must recite the Azan in his right ear and the
Iqamah in his left because it is a protection against the accursed
Satan.” And he told Ali (a.s.) to perform this ritual for Hasan and
Husain, that is to recite the Azan, the Iqamah, Surah Fatiha, Ayatul
Kursi, last verses of Surah Hashr, Surah Ikhlas and Surahs Falaq and
Naas. This is mentioned in *Daimul Islam* 1/148  
 **[6]** *ar-Riyazun Nazarah*

Prophet (s) gave them these names on the basis of divine
revelation.**[1]**

Later this honorable name became synonymous for one who spread knowledge
and faith on the earth and his remembrance enveloped all languages of
the world and people became devoted to him. So much so that in their
view it become a holy slogan for all the high examples and a slogan for
every sacrifice that was based on truth and justice.

Statements opposed to facts
---------------------------

Some historical and traditional sources have, in different ways,
reported this matter but they are not free of doubtful authenticity.
They are as follows:

1 – It is that Hani bin Hani narrated from Ali (‘a) that he said: “When
Hasan was born the Messenger of Allah (s) arrived and asked: ‘What have
you named my child as?’ I said: ‘I have named him Harb.’ He said:
‘Rather he is Hasan.’ And when Husain was born the Prophet asked: ‘What
have you named my son as?’ I said: ‘I have named him Harb.’ He said:
‘Rather he is Husain.’ And when the third child was born the Holy
Prophet (s) came and asked: ‘What have you named my son as?’ I told him:
‘Harb.’ He said: ‘Rather he is Mohsin.’”**[2]**

In our view this report is not correct, because:

**A –** Since the Ahle Bayt (‘a) were deeply rooted in Islamic culture
and absolutely observant of every law that is related to it, they could
not name child with a name associated with the Age of Ignorance and was
from the signs of backwardness and decadence. More than this, this name
Harb was well known as the name of the Progenitor of the Umayyad clan
who were the representatives of animosity and oppression against the
religion of Islam. Thus how can the Imam name his son as such?

**B –** The objection of the Holy Prophet (s) from naming his eldest
grandson by that name should have restrained the Imam from again giving
the same name to his other sons.

**C –** Mohsin, according to the unanimity of the historians, was not
born during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (s). Rather he was
miscarried a few days after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah
(s).

The above reasons prove that this narration is nothing more than a false
claim and it has no authenticity.

2 – Ahmad bin Hanbal from his chains have narrated from Imam Ali (‘a)
that he said: “When Hasan was born to me I named him after my uncle
Hamzah and when Husain was born I named him after my brother Ja’far.
However the Messenger of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Usud al-Ghaba* 2/9, And in *Tarikhul Khulafa*, Pg. 188, Imran
bin Sulaiman has narrated that: Hasan and Husain are two names from the
people of Paradise that the Arabs were oblivious off during the Age of
Ignorance  
 **[2]** *Nihayatul Arab* 18/213, *Al-Istiab* 1/384, *Tahdhib
at-Tahdhib* 2/296. Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad* 1/158

Allah (s) summoned me and told me: ‘The Almighty Allah has commanded me
change the names of these two and to name them as Hasan and
Husain.’”**[1]**

This narration is also weak like the previous one because the naming of
these two grandsons took place only a short while after their birth
according to the widely known historical records and no one has seconded
the claim of Ahmad bin Hanbal.

3 – Tibrani has narrated through his chains of narrators from Ali (‘a)
that he said: “When Husain was born, I named him after my brother,
Ja’far. But the Messenger of Allah (s) called me and told me to name him
as ‘Husain’.”**[2]**

This report is also weak like the previous two narration reports because
His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (‘a) did not take precedence in naming the
grandson and beloved one of the Prophet over the Prophet himself. It was
the Prophet (s) himself who, as is well known, named him as such. The
traditions of Ahle Bayt (‘a) are unanimous upon it.

Third: Aqiqa Ceremony
---------------------

Seven days, after the birth of the grandson of the Prophet (s), His
Eminence issued instructions that a sheep be sacrificed in Aqiqa for him
and its meat be distributed to the poor people and also ordered that a
leg of mutton be given to the midwife**[3]** and this ritual became a
recommended act of Islamic faith.

Fourth: Shaving of the head of Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------

In the same way, the Holy Prophet (s) ordered to shave the head of his
newborn grandson and in proportion of the hair shaved equivalent weight
of silver be distributed among the poor.****[4]**** The weight of it
came to be one and a half dirham,**[5]** on the basis of what has come
down in traditional reports. Then his head was anointed with perfume of
saffron and other materials. The Prophet (s) prohibited the ritual of
applying the blood of the slaughtered animal to the head of the newborn
child.**[6]**

Fifth: Circumcision
-------------------

The Holy Prophet (s) instructed his Ahle Bayt to have the newborn child
circumcised on the seventh day of its birth. The Prophet (s) has
recommended  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad*, 1/257  
 **[2]** Tibrani, *Al-Mojamul Kabir*, 3/10  
 **[3]** *Musnad* Imam Zaid, Pg.468, *Tohfatul Azhaar wa Zilaalul
Anhaar*. And in the book *Dhariatut Tahira*, pg. 122. It is narrated
from Ayesha that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) sacrificed a sheep each in
Aqiqa ceremony of both Hasan and Husain on the seventh day of their
birth and ordered that it be sacrificed in their names and the following
be recited at that time: In the name of Allah. O Allah it is for you and
towards you this Aqiqa of so and so. This tradition is quoted by Hakim
in his *Mustadrak* (4/237) and said that its narrators are in large
number and it is weak since it is well-known among the jurisprudents
that it is recommended to slaughter only one sheep for each child.  
 **[4]** *Ar-Riyadh Nazarah*, Tirmidhi, *Sahih*, *Nurul Absar*, Pg.
253  
 **[5]** *Daimul Islam* 2/187  
 **[6]** *Bihar* 43/239

circumcision in this young age because it is purest and cleanest for
him.**[1]**

Attention of the Prophet (s) towards Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s) personally took up the rearing of Imam Husain and
gave him a lot of attention and mingled his feelings, emotions and
aspirations with that of his own. On the basis of what historians state,
he used to place his thumb in the mouth of the child. His Eminence took
him in his arms and placed his tongue in his mouth so that the exudation
of prophethood may be fed to him in the condition that he used to tell
him: “Behold O Husain! Behold O Husain! The Almighty Allah has not
accepted for you except what He intended, that is Imamate that shall be
for you and your descendants.”**[2]**

Regarding this Sayyid Tabatabai says:

**“They kept him away from water, thirsty. The one whom his grandfather
Mustafa gave him his fingers to suck.**

**Sometimes he gave him his thumb to suck and sometimes his tongue so
that his nature may be inculcated into him.**

**The child whom the Prophet himself reared and after his basic goodness
there sprouted out from him branches of righteousness (other Imams).”**

The Prophet (s) imbibed in the personality of the newborn his personal
virtues and excellence so that he may be an exemplar of greatness and
this may continue even after he has passed away, and that he may become
his successor in spreading his aims and in defending his principles.

Amulet**[3]** of the Holy Prophet (s) for Imams Hasan and Husain (‘a)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Among the compassions of the Prophet (s) towards his grandsons was his
extreme love of the two and his seeking their protection from every evil
and calamity by seeking Allah’s refuge for them, and he used to often do
this for them.

Ibn Abbas has narrated that: “The Holy Prophet (s) sought protection of
Hasan and Husain as follows: ‘I seek by the perfect words of Allah from
all devils and poisonous creatures and from all the envious eyes.’ And
he used to say: ‘Ibrahim (‘a) used to invoke protection in this way for
his sons, Ismail and Ishaq.’”****[4]****

Abdur Rahman bin Auf has reported that: “The Messenger of Allah (s) told
me: ‘O Abdur Rahman! Do you not want me to teach you the amulet through
which  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jawahirul Ahkam, 31/260 It is mentioned therein that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: Circumcise your male children on the
7<sup>th</sup> day as it is the purest and cleanest and best for the
growth of flesh it is most appropriate and that the earth remains impure
by the urine of one who has not been circumcised.  
 **[2]** *Al-Manaqib* 4/50  
 **[3]** Amulet (Taweez) literally means to seek refuge or to give in
refuge of, to protect someone. It is also used in the meaning of a
supplication that is written on a piece of paper and fastened to be neck
or the arm for dispelling of evil eye and warding off calamities.
*(Farhang Ameed)*  
 **[4]** *Zakhairul Uqba,* Pg. 134, *Mushkilul Athar* 4/72

Prophet Ibrahim sought protection of his two sons, Ismail and Ishaq and
I do for my two sons, Hasan and Husain…?**[1]**

Sufficient is Allah as a protector for one who supplicates and there is
no place for any archer to shoot an arrow after the command of Allah…’”

This proves the intense love that the Holy Prophet (s) has towards the
two Imams and that he feared that evil eyes may strike them; thus he
sought their protection through these supplications and amulets.

Appearance of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------

The signs of his grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s) became apparent in
the face of Imam Husain (‘a), because in his characteristics he
resembled His Eminence and he also had the same morals due to which the
Holy Prophet (s) had precedence over the other Prophets.

Muhammad bin Zahhak has described him saying: “The body of Husain
resembled that of the Messenger of Allah (s).”**[2]**

And it is said: “The lower half of his body resembled that of the Holy
Prophet’s (s).”**[3]**

His Eminence, Imam Ali (‘a) said: “One who likes to see the person most
closely resembling the Messenger of Allah (s) from neck to the face
should look at Hasan. And one who desires to see the person most closely
resembling the Messenger of Allah (s) from the neck to the feet, in
shape and complexion, should look at Husain bin Ali…”****[4]****

Signs of Imamate became apparent on the blessed face of His Eminence,
and his face was most luminous of the people and it was such that Abu
Kabir Hazali says: “When you look at the face it seems to be a flash of
lightning.”

Some writers have described the physical appearance of His Eminence as
follows:

“He had a fair complexioned face and in whichever dark place he used to
sit it was illuminated by the brilliance and elegance.”**[5]**

Others have said: “He had great elegance and a luminous forehead, his
cheeks glowed in the darkness of the night and he was the one most
closely resembling the Prophet (s).”**[6]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Zakhairul Uqba,* Pg. 134  
 **[2]** Tibrani, *Al-Mojamul Kabir* 3/123 from the photocopy of the
book in Hazrat Amirul Momineen (a.s.) Public library  
 **[3]** *Al-Munmaq Fi Akhtar-e-Quraish,* pg. 424, *Maqrizi*, *Khatat*
2/285 *Al-Ifada min Tarikhul Aaimmatus Saada*, from the facsimile at
Imam Hakim Public Library  
 **[4]** Tibrani, *Al-Mojamul Kabir* 3/98  
 **[5]** *Al-Ifadah Fil Tarikhul Aimmatus Sadah*  
 **[6]** Ali Durai Hanafi, *Muhaziratul Awail wal Awakhir*, Pg.71, and
in *Masabihus Sunnah* 4/187-188 quoted from the Anas that he said: None
resembled the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) as Husain bin Ali and regarding
Husain he said: He was the most closely resembling one to the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). In *Ansabul Ashraf* 3/5 it is mentioned that: Husain was the
image of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

One of his companions, who was also martyred along with him on the day
of Ashura, has said as follows describing His Eminence:

“He had the brilliance of the midday sun and the glow of his forehead
was like the luminous moon.”

Awe of Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------

His Eminence had the qualities of the Prophets. In his awe he resembled
his grandfather that people used to humble before him. A mercenary of
Ibn Ziyad has said regarding the great awe of the Holy Imam (‘a): “The
brilliance and luminosity of his face compelled me to have second
thoughts about killing him.”

On the day of Ashura, the strikes of the swords and the wounds of the
spears did not conceal the luminosity of his face. He was like a full
moon in his elegance and handsomeness. Regarding this Kabi says:

**“The wounded one whose elegance the spears could not dissipate and
they could not make his freshness fade.**

**He was a full moon that it changed into a sun at its zenith.**

**From the time when blood smeared hands put coverings over it.”**

When the blessed head of His Eminence came to Ibn Ziyad he remarked, “I
have not seen anyone more handsome.”

Anas bin Malik objected to him saying, “But, is it not that he is the
one most closely resembling the Holy Prophet (s)?”**[1]**

When the blessed head was presented to Yazid bin Muawiyah, he was
astonished and perplexed by his awe and elegance and he said, “I have
indeed never seen such a beautiful face.”

One of those present said, “He was the image of the Messenger of Allah
(s).”**[2]**

Traditional reporters are unanimous that he was just like his
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s), in physical appearance and gestures
and in resemblance and qualities he was the image of the Prophet. Such
that when Ubaidullah bin Hurr Jofi got the honor of his audience his
being was filled with his greatness and awe and remarked, “I have never
seen anyone as elegant and attractive as Husain…”

Gestures of the Prophets and signs of the pious became obvious on his
face and therefore, the eyes of the audience were filled with his vision
and they used to become subservient before him.

Titles of Imam Husain (‘a)
--------------------------

The titles of His Eminence and the lofty qualities that he possessed are
as follows:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Balazari, *Ansabul Ashraf* 3/5, Manuscript at the Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) Public Library  
 **[2]** Balazari, *Ansabul Ashraf* 3/5

1. Martyr (Shaheed), 2. Pure (Tayyib), 3. Chief of the youths of
Paradise, 4. Grandson**[1]**

According to a saying of the Holy Prophet (s): “Husain is my grandson
from among the grandsons.”**[2]**

5. The Rightly guided one (Rashid), 6. Wafi (Loyal), 7. Blessed
(Mubarak), 8. Follower of Allah’s will (At Taabe le marzillah)**[3]**,
9. (Ad-Daleel Alaa Zaatullah) Proof for the True entity, 10. Most
Purified (Mutahhar), 11. Birr (Righteous), 12. Ahadul Kazmain (one of
those who swallowed the Anger)****[4]****

Patronymic of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------

The patronymic of His Eminence was Abu Abdillah**[5]** and numerous
historians have stated that he had no other patronymic.**[6]** And it is
said that his patronymic was Abu Ali**[7]** and after his martyrdom
people gave him the patronymic of Abu Shuhada**[8]** and Abul
Ahrar**[9]**.

Inscription on the Ring stone of Imam Husain (‘a)
-------------------------------------------------

His Eminence wore two finger rings. One of them was set with cornelian
having the inscription: “Surely Allah attains His purpose.”**[10]** And
the other ring was the same that was looted from him on the day he was
martyred. Upon it was inscribed: “There is no God except Allah, prepare
to meet Allah.” And it is related that: “Anyone who wears such a ring
would be safe from Satan.”**[11]**

Use of Perfume
--------------

His Eminence liked perfumes very much and in journey or at home, musk
was never distant from him and his assemblies were made fragrant by
incense of aloe-wood.**[12]**

Residence
---------

The first house where he resided with his parents was next to Ayesha’s
quarters and a door of the Masjid opened into the house of
Fatima.**[13]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tohfatul Azhar wa Zilalul Anhar*  
 **[2]** Bustani, *Dariatul Ma’rif* 7/47  
 **[3]** *Nurul Absar*, Pg. 256, *Jauhratul Kalam Fi Saadaatul A’laam,*
Pg. 116  
 **[4]** *Dalailul Aimmah*, Pg. 73  
 **[5]** *Al-Irshad,* P. 198  
 **[6]** *Al Fusulul Muhimma*, Pg. 170, *Nurul Absar*, Pg. 253  
 **[7]** Al *Manaqib* 4/78, *Ansabul Ashraf*, Vol.1  
 **[8]** Father of the Martyrs  
 **[9]** Father of Freemen  
 **[10]** In *Nurul Absar*, Pg. 253 it is mentioned that the inscription
on his ring was: For every Term there is an appointment. (Surah Ra’ad
13:38)  
 **[11]** *Dalailul Aimmah*, Pg. 73  
 **[12]** *Raihana-i-Rasool,* Pg. 38  
 **[13]** *Wafa al-Wafa*

Upbringing and Training
-----------------------

As the grandson and the beloved of the Prophet (s), Imam Husain had in
him all the elements of a good upbringing that no one else was bestowed
with such things and he gained from its essence and quiddity. These
elements of His Eminence prepared him for the leadership of the
community and responsibilities of prophethood of Islam in every aspect
and manner and it bestowed him with unlimited spiritual powers from a
deep faith in Allah and steadfastness in patience in difficulties and
calamities, such that no living man possessed the ability to bear them.

Factors that contributed to the lofty training of His Eminence and that
greatly influenced the greatest riches of thoughts and reformation were
as follows:

Heritage
--------

Heritage is explained to be an expression from the similarity of the
branch with the root and it is not limited to apparent similarities.
Rather it also includes personal qualities and natural make up in such a
way that scholars of inheritance have explained clearly saying: “The
fact is clear in every living entity, because the seed of cotton yields
cotton and the seed of flower gives a flower and another thing is that
the branch resembles the roots and is similar in the qualities to the
roots.

Mandel says: “Most characteristics are transferred from one or both
progenitors to the offspring without any change.”

Hurley explains this phenomenon in the following words: “No quality is
there for any human part of the body but that it reflects environment or
heredity, because the system of heredity appoints the limits of
possibility and this proves that all the possibilities from them will
really come to pass. From this aspect of heredity, the make up of man is
nothing except that it is related to environment.”

This means that all physical and personal characteristics present in a
human being are mostly based on his heredity and environment that serves
to bring out the qualities present in him. On the basis of this,
according to experimental research, experts of heredity have proved that
environment is only a helper in what one has received in heredity.

In any case, experts of heredity, without any doubt, have emphasized
that sons and nephews inherit most of their physical and psychological
characteristics from their ancestors and these things are transferred to
them without any voluntary effort or choice. Dr. Alexis Carrel has
explained this in his writings thus:

“The time moves forward in the same way as in branches it goes ahead as
far as the limits of his body and the limits of time are not deeper or
steadfast than the limits of its spread because it is related to the
past and future. In spite of this his essence does not go beyond the
present and the individuality as we know, comes into being when the
sperm enters the ovule. However the factors of the being (the
personality) have been created before it and they are spread right up to
our parents and ancestors and are found in their bodies because we are
born from the cellule of our

parents, that without division, stops in the past age and we are
carrying little parts of innumerable bodies of our ancestors and
qualities and defects and whatever we have are the same that were more
or less with our ancestors.”**[1]**

Islam, before others has exposed this reality when it emphasized
thorough investigation and proper inquiry before establishment of
marital ties because all psychological, physical and spiritual elements
of the offspring depend upon both the parents. It is also mentioned in
traditions that: “Select the best repository of your sperm as it is
going to be the source of your descendants.”

The Holy Quran has informed about the most important characteristics
that are transferred through heredity as follows:

**“My Lord! Leave not upon the land any dweller from among the
unbelievers: For surely if thou leave them they will lead astray thy
servants and will not beget any but immoral, ungrateful
(children).”***[2]*****

This verse clearly proves the transference of disbelief and apostasy
through heredity. Books of traditions are replete with reports of
narrations of the Imams of Ahle Bayt (‘a) regarding the factuality of
heredity and its principles and their great significance on the behavior
of man and his natural make-up.

In the light of the fact that personal qualities are never based on
anything but heredity we can say for sure that the grandson of the
Prophet (s) had received as heredity, the moral and psychological
qualities and spiritual make up from his grandfather, His Eminence, the
Holy Prophet (s). The same qualities that had accorded him precedence
over all the other divine prophets. Numerous traditions state that the
Imams, Hasan and Husain inherited physical characteristics from their
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s). It is also narrated from His
Eminence, Ali (‘a) that he said: “Anyone who likes to see the person
most closely resembling the Messenger of Allah (s) between the neck and
hair should glance at Hasan and anyone who prefers to view the person
most closely resembling the Messenger of Allah (s) between the neck and
feet, in make up and complexion, should look at Husain.”**[3]**

It has also come in traditions that Imam Husain (‘a) resembled the
Prophet from his navel to the feet.****[4]**** Just as he had inherited
the outward appearance from the grandfather in the same way he had also
inherited from him other qualities and special characteristics.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nizam Tarbiyati Dar Islam,* pg.61-62  
 **[2]** Surah Nuh 71:26-27  
 **[3]** Tibrani, *Al-Mojam al Kabir* 3/97, from written manuscript of
Allamah Sayyid Aziz Tabatabai.  
 **[4]** *Al-Munmaq Fi Akhbar-i-Quraish,* Pg.424

Family
------

The Family**[1]** is an important factor in formation of society and the
shaper of the child’s personality and it inculcates in him habits that
remain with him for the rest of his life because the family is the first
seed for the formation of individual progress and social behavior. The
factor of training is most influential in formation of balance in
interpersonal behavior. The child learns the language from them and
acquires values and social practices.

At that time the children of a family based on good social behavior
obtain the best values and balanced life, while in their house, things
like comfort, love, mental peace, no anger and dislike are dominant. But
if the family does not care for these things, the children are afflicted
with serious mental and spiritual maladies that create more difficulties
and worries for them. It is proved by the view of psychology that the
most serious problems of personal dilemmas are rooted in early
childhood, specially the child’s relationship with his or her
parents.**[2]**

In the same way, one of the most important duties of the family is to
pay attention towards the training of children, because it itself is
responsible for acceptance of social behavior so that the child gains
information about the culture and its principles in such a way that he
actively takes part in relation to other organs of society in his life.

According to scholars of training the most important functions of the
family are as follows:

**A –** To prepare the children in a decent atmosphere so that they may
have their biological and psychological needs fulfilled.

**B –** To prepare them for participation in social life and recognizing
its values and habits.

**C –** To provide them with comfort, security and support.

**D –** To provide means for making possible their existence and entry
into society.**[3]**

**E –** Their moral, spiritual and religious training.****[4]****

In the light of modern researches connected with the science of family
and ethics we can say with certainty that Imam Husain (‘a) had been the
recipient of the very best family training and the highest values of a
good family life because the family in which he was brought up was the
best family under the dome of the sky. Therefore, Imam Husain (‘a) was
brought up under the shade of this family and he obtained his nature and
manners through them. Now we shall briefly delineate the major points of
incomparable training that Imam Husain (‘a) received from the family of
prophethood.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** According to scholars of social science, family is a social
relationship that is brought into existence through the husband-wife and
their children and it includes the grandparents and grandsons. (*Ilmul
Ijtima,* Pg.92)  
 **[2]** *Bimari hai Rawani wa Aqli,* Pg. b  
 **[3]** *Nizam-e-Tarbiyati Dar Islam,* Pg. 81  
 **[4]** *Nizam Khanwadeh Dar Islam,* Pg.25

The Prophet’s Training
----------------------

The Holy Prophet (s) personally took up the responsibility of training
his grandson and beloved child. He presented to him his personal merits
and virtues and brought him up with his values and principles so that he
may become like His Eminence.

Narrators have stated that: “His Eminence used to be very attentive and
caring towards Imam Husain (‘a) and most of the time he used to keep him
with himself and imbibe him with his own good qualities and lofty
manners. He used to demonstrate before him his exemplary behavior. In
his early childhood he taught him the Surah Tawheed.”**[1]**

Once some dates of Sadaqah were presented to the Holy Prophet (s) and
Imam Husain (‘a) took up a piece and placed it in his mouth. However,
the Messenger of Allah (s) took it out from his mouth and asked:
“Sadaqah is not lawful for us.”**[2]**

In this manner, His Eminence inculcated the habit of restraining in his
childhood and taught him that he must never partake of anything that is
unlawful for him and it is natural, according to new medical researches,
that what a child eats affects his memory, understanding and behavior as
it halts his behavioral development and in him develop negative
qualities like hard-heartedness, rebellion and impatience with others.
Islam has paid deep attention to this aspect and therefore considered it
necessary to keep the child away from unlawful food.**[3]**

Therefore it was but natural for the Holy Prophet of Islam to keep away
Imam Husain (‘a) from eatables unlawful for the Ahle Bayt (‘a) since it
was the most import part of his training and a significant factor of his
physical and spiritual development. We shall present more traditions on
this subject at appropriate occasions.

Imam Amirul Momineen’s (‘a) Training
------------------------------------

However, His Eminence Imam Ali (‘a) is himself is the foremost trainer
of good moral behavior and ethics and he brought up his Imam Husain (‘a)
with the best training and upbringing. He inculcated in him wisdom and
imbibed him with chastity and purity and demonstrated practically to
him, good manners and morals and ingested into him enthusiastic
spirituality and made him inclined towards those virtues so that he may
create a good and correct path for himself.

His Eminence, Imam Ali (‘a) in his bequest to his sons spoke of
invaluable points on the subject of morality; such that his statements
stand out prominently as the final word in acquiring good morals and
eternal success. It contains all the rules of social behavior and
everything that man is in need of. It is the masterpiece of Islamic
teachings, as it becomes cause of moderation and manners.

His Eminence said, “O my son! I advise you to fear Allah, the Mighty and
the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh*, 2/246  
 **[2]** Imam Ahmad, *Musnad*, 1/201  
 **[3]** *Nizam Tarbyati Dar Islam,* Pg. 99

Sublime in concealed and open matters and I make bequest to you to
observe truth in happiness**[1]**, thrift in wealth and poverty, justice
with friend and enemy, work in happiness and sadness and satisfaction
from the Almighty Allah in hard times and prosperity.

O son, no hardship is bad after which there is Paradise and no goodness
is good after which there is Fire (of Hell) and every bounty is less
than Paradise and nothing and every calamity is lesser than the Fire of
Hell; it is salvation.

Know that, O my son. One who is aware of his own faults, he does not
find fault of others. And one who is satisfied with the fate of
Almighty, he is not distraught with what he loses. And one who exposes
others, his own defects shall be exposed. And one who ignores his own
sins, he regards the sins of others great. And one who puts himself into
hardship of useless actions stumbles (suffers). And one that throws
himself into the sea, drowns. One who follows his own opinion becomes
deviated. And one who considers himself needless of his own intellect,
commits mistakes. And one who is arrogant to the people is degraded. One
who behaves with them in foolish manner is abused. And one who sits in a
bad place is put to blame. And one who cultivates the company of
scholars gains honor. And one who jokes too much is not considered
serious. And one who keeps aloof remains safe. One who leaves off the
sensual desires gains independence. And one who leaves jealousy, gains
the love of people.

O my son! The respect of the believer is in his needlessness of the
people. And contentment is unending wealth. One who remembers death too
much remains content with little of the world and one who comes to know
that his word is considered as his action, he becomes a man of few
words, except where it is beneficial for him. Surprising that one who
fears the punishment and is hopeful of rewards but he does not act.
Remembrance is effulgence and forgetfulness (carelessness) is darkness
and ignorance is misguidance and fortunate is one who takes lesson from
others. Manners are the best inheritance and good behavior is the best
companion.

O my son. There is no bounty and progress for the one who cuts off
relations and he shall not remain needless of sinfulness…

O my son! Salvation is made of ten parts. Nine parts of it are in
silence but except that one remembers God and one of it is leaving off
company of fools. One who decorates his gatherings with disobedience of
God, receives humiliation and one who seeks knowledge becomes
intelligent.

O my son! The beginning of knowledge is moderation and its calamity is
concealing it. And from the treasure of faith is patience in calamities.
Chastity is the embellishment of poverty and thankfulness is the
embellishment of wealth. One who does a thing too much is recognized by
it. One who speaks too much, makes too many mistakes and one who makes
too many mistakes reduces his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In another version it is mentioned: ‘in pleasure and anger.’

shame and one in whom shame is reduced his abstemiousness reduces and
one in whom abstemiousness reduces his heart becomes dead and whosever’s
heart dies he shall enter the Fire.

O my son! Do not make any sinner hopeless because many a times it had
been such that someone continued to sin but his ultimate end was good.
And many a times it had been that people performed many good deeds but
in their last days they destroyed them and went to Fire (of Hell). One
who gets the end of the matter, it becomes easy for him.

O my son! Too much of meeting gives rise to boredom and dislike.
(Familiarity breeds contempt).

O my son! Satisfaction before knowledge is opposed to farsightedness.
Self worship is the proof of weakness of ones intellect.

O my son! How often it had been that a glance creates regret and many a
times a word becomes cause of a bounty. No status is higher than Islam,
no gift is higher than piety, and no refuge is more satisfactory than
abstemiousness and no intercessor is better than repentance. No dress is
more beautiful than salvation and no wealth is more effective in
removing poverty than satisfaction while possessing power. One who makes
efforts to get only as much as he needs, he has made haste in gaining
his comfort and he has tried to maintain his reputation. Greed is the
key of sorrow, vehicle of hardship and cause of falling into sins. Evil
deeds bring bad traits and defects. And for training of self it is
sufficient that one pays attention to that which one does not like for
others and it is for your brother just as it is for your own self. And
one who without any thought and consideration makes himself subject to
hardships; he has really put himself into sudden difficulties.

Thoughtfulness and consideration before initiating anything will keep
you safe from regret. And one who carefully analyses the actions and
studies them fully recognizes the points of mistakes. Patience is a
shield against poverty. Opposition of the self creates perfection in
oneself. Hours eat up the age (reduce it). Your Lord is the best of the
rulers for the oppressors and He is cognizant of the hidden and keeps an
eye on the inside (hidden). The worst provision for the Day of Judgment
is oppression on people, his throat will burst at every gulp of water
and every morsel of food shall get stuck in his throat. No bounty shall
he receive except after separating from another bounty. How near is
comfort with exhaustion, and poverty with bounty, and death with life,
thus blessed is the one who has made special for Allah, the knowledge
and action, love and hatred, taking and leaving, speaking and keeping
quiet. And congratulations to the scholar who is aware and refrains from
sins and acts and makes efforts, and is fearful of destruction and loss.
Thus he is prepared and ready. If he is asked, he replies clearly and if
he is released he remains silent. His speech should be correct and his
silence should be due to the inability to reply. Woe, and all woe on the
one who is disappointed, degraded and sinful. And what he does not like
for others he considers it good for himself. One who has softness in his
speech his love becomes incumbent. One who does not

have shame and generosity; his death is better than his life. Generosity
of a person is not perfected till it is not important for him that which
of his two dresses he should wear and which of his two eatables he
should eat.”**[1]**

This will is full of moral teachings and points of character building.
It teaches all the good ethics and invites towards piety as these are
the fundamentals of self building and keeping the self safe from sins
and it shows the true path which is indicated by guidance and
rightfulness.

Her Eminence, Fatima’s (‘a) Training to Imam Husain (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------------

The chief of the ladies decided to train her son and she molded him into
her love and kindness so that he may develop a stable character and
understanding. In the same way she inculcated in him Islamic manners so
that he may develop a habit of steadfastness and the right path.

Alaili says: “Among the reports about Imam Husain (‘a) that have reached
us, it is mentioned that his mother made elaborate arrangements for his
training so that examples of Islamic thoughts may become firm in his
personality. It would not be wrong to assure that the Holy Prophet (s)
also provided the same training in childhood, which is the time when a
child perceives a feeling of stability.”

Her Eminence Fatima (‘a) perfected in him correct thinking and general
love and accorded him with lofty virtues and morals so that it may
become a part of him and the center of his attention may be Allah as
everything is included in this.

In this way a child puts into practice his limited circle of childhood
and only keeps in his view its mother and he does not see anyone besides
her. His mother demonstrated to him an unlimited circle where the divine
thought was made the center of attention and made it the standard of
morals and behavior. Thus his self became wide so that he may include
the world into his good behavior and he may present a lofty example to
lead people towards the path of goodness…**[2]**

Imam Husain (‘a) was bred out brought up in the atmosphere of that great
family whose equal the history of humanity cannot trace in faith and
guidance. Thus His Eminence was brought up under the shade and among
this family and became to be an incomparable example for human thoughts
and became the most prominent Muslim leader.

Environment
-----------

Experts of training and psychology are unanimous that environment is one
of the most important factors that shape the child’s personality and it
forms inclinations and habits in the child and they all depend on the
environment. And responsibility in every way for decadence and
backwardness in the training values returns to it, in the same way the
effect of environment and lack of family problems have a profound effect
on our behavior and that of our children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Ijaaz wal Ijaaz* Pg. 33  
 **[2]** *Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 289

UNICCO, the international organization for children has surveyed the
unnatural effects on the child’s nature and the research conducted by a
number of experts in this regard presented the following results:

“Without any doubt, environment is proved to have a profound effect on
the child and then the family that has come into being, if it is based
on love and affection it would be the first step that shapes the good
nature of the child. The child would, in the future, base his social
relationships on his family upbringing and in case if the child’s
personality is a prey to unfavorable attitude of the parents, he would
not be able to have social acceptance…”**[1]**

A stable environment and absence of family problems are the basis for
formation of a good personality of the child and the development of a
good life for him and it would be able to remove worries from him.
Psychologists believe that instability of environment and its
difficulties cause the child to feel that he is spending a life in a
defective world filled with deceit, misappropriation and greed, and that
he is a powerless creature, not any match to this powerful world…**[2]**

Islam has been attentive to the problems of environment in a positive
manner and has spent all means and capabilities for its reformation and
more than anything else it has kept this matter in view so that the
highest values of truth, justice and equity be dominant and factors of
obedience and backwardness like injustice oppression and deceit are
destroyed and the environment may become a safe place and away from
problems and difficulties so that it could present the best and most
useful people to the community; such humans that compete in performance
of righteous deeds, charitable acts and reformation.

The Islamic Environment has nurtured great, famous, incomparable
personalities from the reformers who were the best of the people that
humanity has itself witnessed them in all its stages of history. Like
our Master, His Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a), Ammar bin Yasir,
Abu Zar and others like them who strengthened social justice in Islam.

Imam Husain (‘a) was brought up in the illuminated Islamic environment
that the rays of its light affected it and he established the
civilization and made the communities of the world and guided them on
this path; and powers that cause decadence and backwardness be
destroyed. The great environment which has come into being from the
sources of justice and he benefited from it and also benefited the needy
generations by it.

While yet in his childhood, Imam Husain (‘a) had understood how the
Islamic environment was capable of founding a society based on justice
and love and how it aims to make itself strong and stable by spreading
its principles and its aims of creating love and righteousness among the
people.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Effect of family and society on children below 13 years. Unesco,
Pg. 35  
 **[2]** *Shakl Geeri Shakhsiyat,* Pg. 22

These were some of the means of training provided for Imam Husain (‘a).
The means that bestowed His Eminence preparedness so that he may become
a lofty example of his grandfather, His Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s)
and in the call towards truth and dignity he should be equal to him.

In the Shade of Quran and Sunnah
--------------------------------

Islam has paid special attention to Imam Husain (‘a) in Quran and Sunnah
(sayings of the Prophet) and has endowed special kindness and made
elaborate arrangements with regard to him. This is so because His
Eminence is one of the highest centers of leadership. That if anyone
looks upon this world of existence he would see him shining brilliantly
before it; he has accorded success to the affairs of human beings and
has led them on the path of righteousness and the correct way.

Islam has spoken of Imam Husain (‘a) with absolute respect and honor and
along with him also paid attention to his parents and brother and
exalted their remembrance and emphasized their emulation and advised
following them and took the oath of the community that it must not
deviate from their path. In all aspects it must never try to get
precedence over them. Here we shall present in brief whatever is
mentioned about him in Quran and traditions.

Under the shade of Quran
------------------------

Quran is the great of book of Allah; such that falsehood can neither
approach it from before nor from behind it. It has declared the merits
of Imam Husain (‘a) under the reference of Ahle Bayt (‘a). His Eminence,
in presence of Quran, is not needy of the praise of praisers and acclaim
of the acclaimers. The following are some verses of Holy Quran that
mention about Imam Husain (‘a):

Verse of Purification
---------------------

The Almighty Allah says:

**Allah only desires to keep away impurities from you O People of the
House and purify you with a thorough purification.[1]**

We feel compelled to dwell more at this juncture and have a detailed
discussion on this verse:

A – Who are the “Ahle Bayt” (People of the House)?
--------------------------------------------------

Commentators of Quran and reliable tradition scholars**[2]** are
unanimous that the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Ahzab 33:33  
 **[2]** Fakhruddin Razi, *Tafsir Kabir* 25/209. Nishapuri in the
exegesis of Surah Ahzab. Muslim, *Sahih* 4/1883. On what is revealed
from the Quran on Ahle Bayt, Pg. 71. From photo copied manuscripts at
Imam Hakim Library in the Mustansiriya Collection, Year 666 A.H.,
written by Husain bin Hakim Hibri. *Al-Khasais al-Kubra* 2/ 464.
*Ar-Riyadh an-Nazarah. Khasais an-Nasai* 2/ 152. Nasai, Pg. 34 & 35.
Ibne Jurair, *Tafsir* 22/5. Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad* 4/107. Baihaqi,
*Sunan* 2149 & 152. Nasai, *Sunan*, 2/150. *Mushkilul Athar* 1/334
Jalaluddin Suyuti in *Durre Manthur* 5/199 has narrated more than 20
narrations from different channels that indicate that this verse was
only about Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and Ibne Jurair in his *Tafsir* has
presented 50 reports from different chains saying that this verse is
only with regard to Ahle Bayt (a.s.).

Ahle Bayt (‘a) are these only five persons of the Blanket (Kisa) that
include: The Leader of the Universe, His Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s)
and the brother of His Eminence, who is the self of His Eminence; that
is Master of the Believers (‘a), and the pure part of his body, an image
of Maryam daughter of Imran, leader of women, Her Eminence, Fatima Zahra
(‘a), who was such that her pleasure was like pleasure of Allah and her
anger equivalent to Allah’s anger. After that were the two beloved ones
of His Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s), the two grandsons of His
Eminence, that is Hasan and Husain, chiefs of the youths of Paradise and
no companion or any other person is included in this verse with them.
The following traditions prove this distinction:

**Firstly:** Umme Salma says: “This verse was revealed in my house while
Fatima, Ali, Hasan, and Husain (‘a) were present. The Holy Prophet (s)
spread his cloak on them and said: ‘These are the members of my family.
(O Allah!) Remove uncleanness from them and make them pure’, and he
repeated this statement. Umme Salma heard and saw this and then said,
‘Am I with you?’ She held the blanket that she may enter therein. The
Prophet pulled away the sheet from her and said: ‘You are on the good.’
This tradition is related in Sihah books on a large scale
(Tawatur).**[1]** This narration of Umme Salma clearly proves the
special status of Ahle Bayt (‘a) in this verse and their precedence over
all other people in this matter. It shows that only these five persons
are meant in this verse. This verse denotes only these five personages.

**Secondly:** The Holy Prophet (s) took every opportunity to declare the
sole precedence of Ahle Bayt (‘a) as beneficiaries of this verse. Ibn
Abbas has narrated that: ‘I noticed for seven months that the Holy
Prophet (s) went to the door of Ali’s house everyday when it was time
for prayers and used to say: ‘Peace and blessings be upon you! O People
of the Prophet’s House! Allah intends but to remove all sorts of
uncleanness and blemish from you and to purify you with a thorough
purification.’ And he repeated this act five times a day.’**[2]**

Anas bin Malik narrates that for a period of six months the Holy Prophet
(s) used to pass by the door of Fatima (‘a) when he came out for morning
prayers and say: ‘O People of the House, it is time for prayers’, and
then added: ‘O People of the Prophet’s House! Allah intends but to
remove all sorts of uncleanness and blemish from you and to purify you
with a thorough purification.’**[3]**

Abu Barza has narrated that: ‘I performed my prayers with the Holy
Prophet (s) for seven months.

As and when he left his house, he went to the house of Fatima (‘a) and
used to say:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 2/416, *Usud al-Ghaba* 5/ 521  
 **[2]** *Ad-Durre Manthur* 5/199  
 **[3]** *Majma-az-Zawaid* 9/169, *Ansaab al-Ashraaf* 2/104, *Zakhair
al-Uqbah* pg. 24

‘Peace be upon you! O People of the Prophet’s House! Allah intends but
to remove all sorts of uncleanness and blemish from you and to purify
you with a thorough purification.’**[1]**

The Holy Prophet (s) emphasized that the connotation of this verse is
restricted to his Ahle Bayt (‘a) and considered them different from
others so that they may guide the community and made it compulsory for
them to accept their leadership.

**Thirdly:** The Holy Progeny has used the specialization of this verse
for themselves as their argument for their superiority as mentioned in a
sermon of Imam Hasan Mujtaba (‘a): “I belong to the family upon whom
Jibraeel used to descend and from there ascend to heavens. I belong to
the family from whom Allah has removed all impurities and made them
pure.”**[2]**

Numerous traditions (widely narrated) from the channels of Progeny of
Muhammad (s) have specified the restricted implication of this verse to
only these five personages and they also announce the exclusion of all
other family members of the Holy Prophet (s).

B – Exclusion of the Prophet’s wives in the verse of Purification
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The wives of the Prophet (s) have no share in this verse, because they
have been excluded from it by subjectively as well as legally according
to scholars of the Principles of Jurisprudence. By way of proof we
present below some points of discussion:

1 – “Ahl” (Family), according to dictionary denotes the family of man
and his relatives**[3]** and it does not include the wife. This meaning
has been emphasized by Zaid bin Arqam when he was asked regarding the
family of the Prophet that whether the wives of the Prophet are included
in it. He rejected this view and said: “No, by Allah! The wife stays
with the husband for a limited period, after that he divorces her and
she returns to her father and her clan…His Ahle Bayt are his original
relatives, such that after him Sadaqah (alms) has become unlawful for
them.”

2 – If we accept that “Family” includes the wife and it refers to
her****[4]**** we would be compelled to consider it restricted to them
on the basis of the previously quoted traditions because it has reached
up to the limits of Tawatur in wordings and by meanings.

C – False Claims of Akrama and Maqatil
--------------------------------------

A group supporting the Bani Umayyads and claimants of exclusion has
tried to take away the verse away from the Holy Progeny and apply it to
the wives of the Prophet and in this matter they have used the preceding
verses. Among these are persons like Akrama and Maqatil bin Sulaiman.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Zakhair al-Uqbah* Pg.24  
 **[2]** Hakim, *Mustadrak*, 3/172  
 **[3]** *Qamus Muhit* 1/331, *Aqrabul Mawarid*  
 **[4]** Ibne Kathir, *Tafsir*, 2/302, Muslim, *Sahih* 4/1873

Akrama was the most inimical person towards the folks of the Blanket and
he openly declared it in the market place.**[1]** His audacity reached
such a stage that he claimed: “I can participate in imprecation contest
with anyone who does not accept that this verse was revealed for the
wives of the Prophet.”**[2]**

It is obvious that this open challenge of his is a clear proof of his
animosity towards the Holy Progeny, which has the same position as that
of Quran itself. Here it is necessary to study some matters related to
Akrama and Maqatil so that their view regarding their claim becomes
clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wahidi, *Asbab an-Nuzul*, Pg. 240  
 **[2]** *Ad-Durre Manthur*, 5/198
