Offspring of Prophethood "part 2"
=================================

Akrama in Mizanul Etedal
------------------------

Akrama, the Berber, is Abu Abdillah Madani who was originally a Berber
and was initially the slave of Haseen bin Abil Hurr Anbari. Then he
presented him to Ibn Abbas, when he became the governor of Basra under
the orders of His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (‘a). He remained under his
service till the passing away of Abdullah bin Abbas. After that Ali bin
Abdullah sold him and then later bought him back.**[1]** He had changed
his beliefs and had a doubtful character because his biographers have
written about him as follows:

1 – He was from the Khawarij (renegades).**[2]** He stood at the gate of
the Masjid and said there were none except disbelievers inside it**[3]**
because the Khawarij believed all Muslims to have become apostates. As
for his position with regard to His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (‘a) he is
well-known for his malice and animosity towards Ahle Bayt (‘a).

2 – He was famous for lying and he had no qualms about lying and he is
well-known for this because it is narrated from Ibn Musayyib that he
told his slave, Burd: “Do not attribute falsehood to me like Akrama did
to Ibn Abbas.”**[4]**

It is narrated from Uthman bin Marrah that he said to Qasim: “Akrama had
told Ibn Abbas such a thing about us.” So Qasim said: “O my nephew!
Akrama is a liar. He says a thing in the morning and opposes it in the
evening.”**[5]**

Due to his being convicted of lying, none of the reports narrated by him
is reliable because lying is an important factor that makes the narrator
unreliable.

3 – He was a sinner and he used to listen to music, he played dice, he
was careless about prayer and was of deflective intellect.**[6]**

4 – The Muslims abandoned him and became aloof from him. One day he and
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhib at Tahdhib,* 7/263  
 **[2]** *Mizanul Etedal*, 3/95, *Tabaqat* *al-Quraa*, 1/15, Ibne Sa’ad,
*Tabaqat* 5/216  
 **[3]** *Mizanul Etedal*, 3/95  
 **[4]** *Mizanul Etedal* 3/96  
 **[5]** *Mojamul Udba*  
 **[6]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib* 7/263

Kathir Uzza died. People attended the funeral of Kathir but none took
part in the funeral of Akrama.**[1]**

In presence of such testimonies against him how could one rely on the
narrations of Akrama? Bukhari has relied on him though Muslim avoided
him.**[2]** Bukhari says: “There is none among our companions (tradition
scholars) but that he or she is needful of Akrama.”**[3]** It is
surprising Bukhari relies on Akrama as well as those who like him, whose
faith he doubts but he abstains from traditions of the Holy Progeny who
are equals to the Holy Quran.

Maqatil bin Sulaiman
--------------------

Maqatil bin Sulaiman bin Bashir Azadi Khorasani like his friend Akrama
was having a weak faith and biographers have mentioned this about him
thus:

1 – He was a false reporter. Nasai says: “Maqatil reported false
statements”****[4]**** and Waki has also said: “And Ishaq Ibrahim
Hanzali says: ‘Khorasan has produced three characters unequalled in
lying and innovation. They are Jaham, Maqatil and Umar bin Sabah.’”

And Kharijah bin Musab said: “In our view Jaham and Maqatil are two
sinners and transgressors.”**[5]** Thus due to his proven falsehood it
is not correct to trust his reports and his tradition is of no value in
proving anything.

2 – He was having doubts in faith and had belief of Tashbih.**[6]** Ibn
Hayyan says: “Maqatil obtained the knowledge of Quran through Jews and
Christians according to what their books taught. He used to compare the
Almighty Allah to created things and creatures and he resorted to
falsehood in narrating traditions.”**[7]**

Some pious people considered shedding his blood lawful.

Kharijah says: “I do not consider lawful shedding blood of Jews and
Zimmis**[8]** but if I gain dominance over Maqatil bin Sulaiman and none
sees us, I would kill him.”**[9]**

3 – Maqatil was well known for his animosity and hatred towards Amirul
Momineen (‘a) and he always associated the merits of Imam (‘a) to other
characters. It is related from Imam (‘a) that he said: “Ask me before
you are deprived of me.” Maqatil also tried to be like this and he
claimed that he could provide information of all that is between the sky
and the depths of the earth. So a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib* 7/271  
 **[2]** *Mizanul Etedal* 3/93  
 **[3]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib* 7/271  
 **[4]** *Mizanul Etedal* 4/173  
 **[5]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib* 10/281  
 **[6]** Comparison of Allah with other things  
 **[7]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib* Pg.284, *Mizanul Etedal* 4/175  
 **[8]** Non-Muslim protected people  
 **[9]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib*, Pg.281

person stood up and asked him to inform about the dwelling of the ant.
But he failed to reply to this query.”**[1]**

Again at another time he claimed: “Ask me whatever you want regarding
whatever is between the sky and the depths of the earth.” A person stood
up and asked: “Who shaved Adam’s head when he performed Hajj?” Maqatil
was dumb founded and he could not offer any reply.**[2]**

The above reports indicate his false notions and that is none of his
traditions are worthy of being trusted.

Weak arguments of Akrama and Maqatil
------------------------------------

Akrama and Maqatil have argued from the preceding words of the verse
that it is revealed about the wives of the Prophet (s) and the Ahle Bayt
(‘a) are not included in it.

Imam Sharafuddin has refuted these notions in a topic-by-topic manner.
He says: “We have some reasons to refute this view:

**Firstly:** It is a personal opinion against clear texts and widely
related traditions.

**Secondly:** If this verse had been restricted to the wives as they
claim, the address would have been to females and the Almighty Allah
would have used feminine pronouns and said: Ankunna and Yutahara-rakunna
(instead of Ankum and Yutaharakum), as seen in other verses. The use of
masculine pronouns in this verse proves their argument wrong.

**Thirdly:** An eloquence discourse includes interjections and
objections and it denotes that a sentence of some other topic is
included in the systematic order as the statement of the Almighty Allah
in the incident of Aziz to his wife, when he tells her:

**“…Surely it is a guile of you women; surely your guile is great: O
Yusuf! Turn aside from this; and (o my wife)! Ask forgiveness for your
fault…”***[3]*****

In the above statements the words: “**O Yusuf! Turn aside from
this…”**is an interjection, as we see.

And in the same way is the remark of Almighty Allah:

** “Surely the Kings, when they enter a town, ruin it and make the
noblest of its people to be low, and thus they (always) do; And surely I
am going to send a present to them, and shall wait to see what (answers)
do the messengers bring back.”***[4]*****

In this verse the words: “**and thus they (always) do**” is an
interjection from the Almighty in between the statement of Bilquis.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhibut Tahdhib*, Pg.283  
 **[2]** *Wafayatul Ayan*  
 **[3]** Surah Yusuf 10:28.29  
 **[4]** Surah Naml 27:34-35

In the same way is the statement of the Mighty Lord:

**“But nay! I swear by the falling of stars; and most surely it is a
very great oath if you only knew; most surely it is an honored
Quran…”***[1]*****

In the above discourse the words Allah intends actually to say: **“But
nay! I swear by the falling of stars; most surely it is an honored
Quran.”**

But what is between the above two verses is by way of digression and
inter alia to the statement. This technique is found in many instances
in the Quran in traditions, in the discourses of Arabs and others from
the preachers.

The verse of purification is also of this same category. It is a
digression contained within a discourse mainly about the wives of the
Holy Prophet (s). Through this it has become restricted Allah is not
issuing any commands, prohibitions and advices to them but it is due to
the regard the Almighty Allah has for the Holy Five. It may not be that
(even though it be through the wives of the Prophet) any sort of evil
may reach them or that hypocrites may gain some way (even if it be
through the wives of the Prophet), and if in this way there had been no
generality, that valuable point would not have been achieved. That is
the eloquence of the Wise Lord had reached to its depths and it has made
it clear and perfect in such a way that it should not remain
concealed.**[2]**

The view of Imam Sharafuddin is a stable and strong view that has
rejected the wrong interpretations and destroyed the claims of the
opponents and through it he completed the argument over them.

The Proof of the Verse of Purification on Infallibility
-------------------------------------------------------

This verse clearly proves the infallibility of the Five Personages
because the Almighty Allah has removed all impurities from them (that is
sins) and purified them in a way it befits and this is, in fact, the
meaning of infallibility.

The verse contains the word “Innama” (only) in its heart to emphasize
this fact of restriction and the letter L (Laam) is added to it, as also
the repetition of the word “purification”. All this is according to the
construction of the sentence. It conveys limitation of the meaning. In
this matter the intention of Almighty God is a Takweeni**[3]**
intention; that it is not possible to go back on this: **“His command,
when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be, so it
is.”***[4]*****

Imam Sharafuddin says: “This verse proves the necessity of Imamate for
Amirul Momineen (‘a) because His Eminence claimed the Caliphate for
himself and Imams Hasan and Husain and Fatima also claimed it for him
and they were not given to making false statements, because lying is a
sin which the Almighty Allah  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Waqiah 56:75–77  
 **[2]** *Al-Kalimatul Ghurra Fi Tafzeeluz Zahra,* Pg. 196-197  
 **[3]** Fixed destiny  
 **[4]** Surah Yasin 36:82

has kept away from them and purified them with a perfect
purification.”**[1]**

The Verse of Love
-----------------

The Almighty Allah has made the love of Ahle Bayt (‘a) compulsory on the
Muslims. Allah says: **“I do not ask of you any reward for it but love
for my near relatives; and whoever earns good, we give him more of good
therein; surely Allah is forgiving, grateful.”***[2]*****

The majority of the Muslims are of the opinion that the word ‘qurba’
(relatives) refers to these same personages: Ali, Fatima and their two
sons, Hasan and Husain and the ‘earning of good’ implies the earning of
divine rewards for their love and regard. Some of the traditions related
on this subject are as follows:

1 – Ibn Abbas has narrated: “When this verse was revealed they asked: ‘O
Messenger of Allah! Who are your near kindred whose love is made
incumbent on us?’ His Eminence (s) replied: ‘Ali, Fatima and their two
sons.’”**[3]**

2 – Jabir bin Abdullah has narrated: “A Bedouin came to the Messenger of
Allah (s) and said: ‘O Muhammad! Please explain Islam to me.’ His
Eminence (s) said: ‘Testify that there is no god except the One God and
He has no partner and that Muhammad is His servant and Prophet.’

The Bedouin asked: ‘Would you seek recompense from me regarding that?’

His Eminence (s) replied: ‘No, except love for the near relatives?’

Bedouin: ‘My relatives or yours?’

The Prophet (s): ‘My relatives.’

Bedouin: ‘Come, so that I can pledge allegiance to you that curse be on
the one who does not love you.’

The Prophet (s) said: ‘Amen.’”****[4]****

3 – Ibn Abbas has narrated: “When the ‘saying of God’ (verse of Quran)
was revealed: **‘Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for
my near relatives…’[5]** some people opined: ‘He does not intend but to
make us inclined to his relatives after he has passed away.’ So Jibraeel
informed the Messenger of Allah (s) that they had accused His Eminence.
Then the following verse was revealed: ‘Or do they say: He has forged a
lie against Allah?’**[6]** Then those people said: ‘O Messenger of
Allah! You have said the truth.’ At that time was revealed:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Kalimatul Ghurra Fi Tafzeeluz Zahra,* Pg.201  
 **[2]** Surah Shura 42:23  
 **[3]** *Majma az-Zawaid,* 7/103, *Zakhair al-Uqbah*, Pg. 25, *Nurul
Absar*, Pg. 227, *Ad-Durr al-Manthur*  
 **[4]** *Hilyatul Awliya*, 2/201  
 **[5]** Surah Shura 42:23  
 **[6]** Surah Shura 42:23

**‘And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants…’”[1]**

4 – The Holy Progeny has argued that the captioned verse was revealed in
their honor as the elder grandson, His Eminence, Imam Hasan (‘a) said
inter alia his sermon: “And I am from the Ahle Bayt whose love the
Almighty Allah has made incumbent on all Muslims and said: ‘Say: I do
not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives; and
whoever earns good, We give him more of good therein…’and that earning
good is through loving the Ahle Bayt (‘a).”**[2]**

Also the Chief of those who prostrate and the leader of the worshippers,
His Eminence, Imam Ali bin al-Husain (‘a) argued with this verse. When
he was taken as a prisoner to the tyrant Yazid and stopped at the steps
of Damascus, a Syrian addressed him: “Thanks be to Allah Who killed and
destroyed you and finished off the dual horns of mischief.”

Imam glanced at him and found him to be a misguided soul due to false
propaganda, which had taken him away from the truth. So he asked him:
“Have you read the Holy Quran?”

“Yes.”

“Have you recited Aal-e-Haa Mim?”

“I have read the Quran, so have I not recited Aal-e-Haa Mim?”

“Have you recited: **‘Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but
love for my near relatives…?’**

That man was astonished and he began to tremble. He asked in haste: “Are
you those?”

“Yes!”**[3]**

And His Eminence, Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) said: “The verse of Aale Ha
Mim is regarding us. None shall keep the sign of our love but a
believer.” Then he recited the verse: **“Say: I do not ask of you any
reward for it but love for my near relatives…?”**[4]****

Razi’s Opinion
--------------

Fakhruddin Razi has established his view and considering the family of
the Prophet (s) to be highly exalted saying: If it is proved that the
verse is special for Ahle Bayt it becomes incumbent that they shall
become eligible for more respect. He says that the following points
prove this theory:

**First:** The words of the Almighty Allah are: **“Except the love of
the near relatives”** are the aim of something that has already been
stated before. And it is a thing that has already been mentioned before.
That the Progeny of Muhammad are  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *As-Sawaiq al-Mohreqa,* Pg. 202  
 **[2]** *Life of Imam Hasan (a.s.)*  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tafsir,* 25/16  
 **[4]** Surah Shura 42:23, *Kanzul Ummal* 1/218, *Sawaiqul Mohreqa,*
Pg. 170

the same whose matter returns to His Eminence. Thus they are those whose
matter is more closely associated with the Holy Prophet (s) and they
shall be that “Progeny”. And there is no doubt that Fatima, Ali, Hasan
and Husain have the strongest relationship with the Messenger of Allah
(s) and this matter is that is learnt from widely related tests. Thus it
is necessary that they be “ Progeny”.

**Secondly:** There is no doubt that the Prophet (‘a) loved Fatima (‘a)
greatly. His Eminence said, “Fatima is a part of me. One who hurts her,
hurts me.” Also, widely related reports and sayings of Prophet Muhammad
(s) show that he loved Ali, Hasan and Husain (‘a) and if this matter is
proved this also would become incumbent on all the Muslims due to the
saying of the Almighty Allah: “**and follow him so that you may walk in
the right way.”***[1]*****

And for the sake of the words of the Almighty: **“therefore let those
beware who go against his order…”***[2]*****

And for the statement of the Almighty Lord: **“Say: If you love Allah,
then follow me, Allah will love you…”[3]**

And for the command of the Almighty Allah when He says: **“Certainly you
have in the Apostle of Allah an excellent exemplar…”***[4]*****

**Thirdly:** Praying for the Progeny is a great status and therefore
this prayer became the ending of the Tashahud in ritual prayers. And it
is: O Allah, bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad and have mercy
on Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad…which became obligatory.**[5]**

Loving the Ahle Bayt (‘a) is the most important of the obligatory
Islamic duties and the most sanctified of religious obligations. Imam
Muhammad bin Idris Shafei says:

**“O Ahle Bayt (‘a) of the Prophet. Loving you is an obligatory duty
from Almighty Allah revealed in the Holy Quran.**

**It is sufficient for your lofty station that anyone who does not pray
for you in his or her ritual prayers, it (ritual prayer) would be
invalid.”[6]**

Ibn Arabi has said:

**“I consider loving the Family of the Prophet as a religious duty that
in spite of remoteness it bestows proximity to me.**

**Because the Holy Prophet (s) did not seek any recompense for the
labors of his propagation except the love of his relatives.”**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Araaf 7:158  
 **[2]** Surah Nur 24:63  
 **[3]** Surah Aale Imran 3:31  
 **[4]** Surah Ahzab 33:21  
 **[5]** Razi, *Tafsir,* Under the exegesis of the verse of love in
Surah Shura  
 **[6]** *Sawaiqul Mohreqa,* Pg. 148

Kumayt, the poet of Islam says:

**“There is a sign for you in the verse of Aal-e-Haa Mim. That among us
are some people who resort to dissimulation and those who say it openly,
it is these that are implied.”**

In the love of Ahle Bayt (‘a) there is recompense of the labor of
prophethood, goodness to the Holy Prophet (s) and thankfulness to His
Eminence due to the labor and great difficulty that he bore on the path
of the liberation of Muslims from polytheism and releasing their
intellects from wrong notions and the Almighty Allah has stipulated the
right of the Prophet on this nation that they must love his Progeny and
cultivate their affection and regard in their hearts.

Verse of Malediction
--------------------

Among the verses of the Holy Quran that announce the merits of Ahle Bayt
(‘a) is the verse of malediction (Mubahila). The Almighty Allah says:
**“But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then
let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars.”***[1]*****

Commentators of Quran and traditionists are unanimous that this verse
was revealed in the honor of Ahle Bayt (‘a),**[2]** and that “our sons”
implies Hasan and Husain, “our women” refers to Fatima and “our near
people” to Ali.

This verse was revealed on the occasion of a very important event in the
history of Islam between the powers of Islam and the Christians of
Najran. The context in which this verse was revealed was that a
Christian delegation from Najran arrived in Medina to have a debate on
the religion of Islam. Thus a stage reached when both parties agreed to
enter into a malediction contest and pray to God’s curse on the liars.
The time and place for the proposed contest were also fixed.

The Christian delegation returned to participate in the said malediction
so that the affair of the Almighty becomes apparent and falsehood is
destroyed. Their hearts became filled with unrest and fear and they had
no idea whom the Messenger of Allah (s) would bring for the Malediction
contest with him.

The appointed day arrived and the Prophet (s) came out in such a
condition that he had selected the greatest of the people in the view of
Allah for the contest. In other words the gate of knowledge and the
father of his two grandsons, that is Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) and his
beloved daughter, Fatima Zahra, chief of the ladies of Paradise and
Hasan and Husain, the two chief of the youths of Paradise.

The Prophet (s) came carrying Husain in one hand and holding Hasan with
the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Aale Imran 3:61  
 **[2]** Razi, *Tafsir,* 8/85; Baidhawi, *Tafsir,* 2/47; *Tafsir Kashaf*
1/368; *Tafsir Ruhul Bayan,* 2/44; *Tafsirul Jalalayn,* 1/35; Tirmidhi,
*Sahih* 5/225; Baihaqi, *Sunan*, 7/63, Muslim, *Sahih*, 4/1871, Book of
Merits of Companions; Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad*, 1/185, Baghawi,
*Misbah as-Sunnah* 4/183 *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/286

other. Behind him moved Her Eminence Zahra covered with divine light and
after her walked Imam Amirul Momineen (‘a) in majestic grace.

On the other side, the Sayyid and Aaqib came out with their sons while
they were all decked in the best of raiments and wore expensive
ornaments. They were accompanied by the Christians of Najran and the
cavalry of Bani Harth in a magnificent display.

A large number of people had also arrived and they stretched their necks
to witness the contest. A silence had spread like a blanket over the
crowds and only whispers were exchanged among the people.

When Christians glanced at the majesty of the Holy Prophet (s) and his
Ahle Bayt (‘a) they were dumb struck and their heads bowed down in
humility towards them. Their hearts were filled with awe at the
magnificent spectacle.

The Messenger of Allah (s) was sitting on the ground for malediction.
Sayyid and Aaqib approached the Messenger of Allah (s) with trepidation
and asked: “O Abal Qasim! With whom have you come for malediction
contest with us?”

The Holy Prophet (s) replied in words that expressed the greatness of
faith and humility for God: “With the best people on earth and the most
honorable in the view of God.” Then he pointed towards Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husain.

The two men asked in surprise: “Why have you not been accompanied with
the nobles of your community and the most prominent of your followers?”

The Prophet (s) informed them emphatically that his Ahle Bayt (‘a) were
the greatest creatures near God. His Eminence said, “Anyhow I would
contest with you along with these people, who are the best of the people
of the earth and the best of the creatures.”

They were filled with trepidation as they understood that the Prophet
(s) was on the right. So they returned to Isqaf, their leader in order
to seek his advice in the matter. He told them: “O Aba Haritha! What is
your opinion about this?”

“I have seen such faces that if someone invoked God with them to pick up
a mountain he would be able to do so.”

He did not rest content with this, rather he proved his assertion with
proof and argument. He said, “Don’t you see Muhammad raising up his
hands and waiting for what you two say to him? By Holy Jesus, if a word
comes on his lips neither shall we return to our families nor to our
properties.”

He was stopping them from the contest and was pleading among them and
saying, “Don’t you see the sun whose color has changed and the dark
clouds of the sky have surrounded it? And while the black and red winds
are blowing and these mountains from whom smoke is rising up with the
breeze. It is a divine chastisement on our heads. You see that birds are
leaving their nests and trees are shedding their leaves and see how this
earth is trembling beneath our feet.”

They had kept concealed those great faces and to see them openly is so
meritorious in the view of God.

The Christians immediately looked for a solution. They hastened to the
Messenger of Allah (s) and said, “O Abal Qasim! Forgive us! God will
forgive you!”

They accepted the conditions proposed by the Holy Prophet (s). After
that the Messenger of Allah (s) announced to them that if they had
participated in the contest, they would have been destroyed. His
Eminence said, “By the One in Whose hands is my life, the Chastisement
had come upon the heads of the people of Najran. If they had
participated in the contest, they would have been transformed into
monkeys and pigs and a valley filled with fire would have been turned
towards them. Najran and their people would have been destroyed; even
the birds on the tree. The people of Najran would not have survived the
end of the year.”

The important event shows the level of Holy Ahle Bayt (‘a), such that
none was equal to them in the whole world. For if anyone had been equal
or more worthy than them, the Holy Prophet (s) would have chosen them
for the contest. If anyone else had more piety and righteousness, the
Messenger of Allah (s) would have chosen him or her to accompany him for
the imprecation duel. Rather even if anyone had been equal to their
status that they would be given preference over Ahle Bayt (‘a), he would
have refrained from it, because preferring the inferior in presence of
the superior is against reason and logic as the scholars of logic have
stated.

In the same way, His Eminence did not bring anyone from his family for
the Mubahila contest. Neither did he bring his uncle, Abbas Ibn Abdul
Muttalib nor anyone else from the Bani Hashim with his two grandsons.
And he also did not invite any of the mothers of believers (his wives)
even though they were present at their residences. He also did not take
his paternal aunt, Safiya so that she may accompany her beloved nephew
and be with the chiefs of the ladies of the world. He did not take any
respectable lady of the family. Neither any lady from the ‘Amr the high’
(Hashim) and ‘Shaibatul Hamd’ (Abdul Muttalib) nor did he take any of
the wives of the three caliphs, nor of the other Emigrants and Helpers
while all the families were before him. Thus the aim of this action was
that a proof should be created for the lofty status of Ahle Bayt (‘a)
and that it may show how great their position was in the view of the
Almighty: **“that is the grace of Allah: He gives it to whom He pleases,
and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace.”***[1]*****

Imam Sharafuddin says, “And you do know that the contest of His
Eminence, and his request from them that they should say Amen to his
pleas, itself is alone a great merit and their selection by His Eminence
for this position over other people and preferring them to other
personalities. They had this merit in the past and in future also; no
one could be equal to them. And the verse of Quran about the matter of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Hadid 57:21

Mubahila is a third virtue for them, which shows more the merits of
Mubahila and it adds another honor to their lofty status and effulgence
to their effulgence.”**[1]**

In the same way the verse also clearly shows that His Eminence, Amirul
Momineen Ali (‘a) himself is the self of the Messenger of Allah (s) and
the Holy Prophet (s) is higher to all the creatures of Allah and Ali
also due to his equality is having the same position. And Fakhruddin
Razi has mentioned this point in his *Tafsir Kabir* saying, “In Rayy
there was a person named Mahmud bin Hasan Hamasi. He was an Ithna Ashari
teacher. He used to claim that Ali (‘a) was higher in position to all
prophets except Muhammad, and he used to quote the verse of Quran to
prove his assertion: **“And our selves and your selves.”** Because
**“And our selves”** does not denote the self of Muhammad as one never
calls himself, it is for others. And there is consensus that the other
‘self’ is Ali Ibn Abi Talib. Thus the verse proves that the self of Ali
is same as the self of Muhammad and it is not possible that this self
should be the same self. Its aim is that the self is just like that
(similar) to that self and this only denotes equality of every point
among them. It implies that the two were having equality in all aspects.
But we have accepted their equality in only position and status and not
in terms of the divine post of prophethood. Because regarding this we
have consensus that Muhammad was superior to Ali and except for this
they were equal in every other aspect.

It is also proved that Muhammad is superior to all other prophets. Thus
it necessarily implies that even Ali (‘a) is superior to all the
prophets.**[2]**

Verse of the Righteous
----------------------

One of the verses of Quran that informs about the lofty grade of the
Purified Progeny of the Messenger of Allah (s) is the verse of the
Righteous. The Almighty Allah says: **“Surely the righteous shall drink
of a cup the admixture of which is camphor. A fountain from which the
servants of Allah shall drink; they make it to flow a (goodly) flowing
forth. They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be
spreading far and wide.”[3]**

Majority of commentators and traditionists have related that this verse
was revealed in honor of Ahle Bayt (‘a)****[4]**** and its reason was
that Hasan and Husain were indisposed, so their grandfather, His
Eminence, the Holy Prophet (s) went to visit them with a group of his
companions. He asked Ali to make a vow to keep a fast if the two of them
get well. Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) made the vow that he would keep three
fasts. Lady Fatima Zahra (‘a) decided to accompany him in the
fulfillment of the vow and her maidservant, Fizza, also followed them in
this matter. When Hasan and Husain (‘a) recovered, all of them kept a
fast. At that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Kalimatul Ghurra*, Pg. 184  
 **[2]** Razi. *Tafsir,* 8/86  
 **[3]** Surah Dahr 76:5-7  
 **[4]** Fakhruddin Razi, *Tafsir* 30/140. Wahidi, *Asbabun Nuzul*, Pg.
296. Nishaburi in the exegesis of Surah Hal Ata, *Ruhul Bayan* 10/268,
*Durre Manthur*, *Yanabiul Mawaddah* 1/279. *Ar-Riyadh an-Nazara* 2/180
& 208. Maqrizi, *Imatul Asma,* Pg. 502

time, the Imam had nothing to eat which he could offer them to break the
fast. His Eminence brought a portion of barley on loan. On the first
day, Lady Fatima grinded a portion of this grain and prepared bread from
it. When the time of breaking the fast approached a poor man knocked on
the door and asked for food. All of them gave their portions to this
poor man and continued their fast and except for water they did not
partake anything else.

On the second day, the Prophet’s daughter again prepared bread from the
same grain, and at sunset an orphan arrived who was on the verge of
death due to hunger. He beseeched them to help him and all of them gave
their shares to him while themselves they had nothing except water.

On the third day, the chief of the ladies (Fatima) kneaded the flour and
prepared bread and presented them with the food at the time of the
breaking of the fast, but not much time passed when a hungry captive
came to their door and asked for something to eat, and they restrained
their hands from food and gave it all to the hungry man.

Glory be to Allah! What righteousness could be better than this? What
sacrifice is greater than this? That was the sacrifice they had for the
proximity of God.

On the fourth day the Messenger of Allah (s) came to visit them and saw
their conditions. How terrible was what he saw! His Eminence, saw that
they were trembling due to hunger and their strength had waned due to
starvation. Thus his expression changed and he said, “O Allah! Help! The
Ahle Bayt of Muhammad shall starve to death.”

The Prophet’s statement had not even come to an end when the
‘trustworthy one of the revelation’ descended to His Eminence and
brought the recompense and certification for Ahle Bayt (‘a). That reward
which cannot be described and it is not possible for anyone to estimate
its value, and forgiveness, salvation and divine pleasure that is from
the Almighty Allah.

**“And reward them, because they were patient, with garden and silk.
Reclining therein on raised couches, they shall find therein neither
(the severe heat of) the sun nor intense cold. And close down upon them
(shall be) its shadows, and its fruits shall be made near (to them),
being easy to reach. And there shall be made to go round about them
vessels of silver and goblets which are of glass, (Transparent as)
glass, made of silver; they have measured them according to a measure,
and they shall be made to drink therein a cup the admixture of which
shall be ginger…”[1]**

In the same way are those rewards that the Almighty has given to them in
the Hereafter and more forgiveness and happiness is given to them.

Here we conclude our discussion on some verses of Quran revealed in
honor of Ahle Bayt (‘a) and without any doubt, His Eminence, Imam Husain
(‘a) from all  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Dahr 76:12-17

the people in question, is also included in these verses; verses, which
have come about the lofty status of His Eminence in the view of Allah.

In the Shade of Sunnah
----------------------

A large number of traditions have been recorded from the Messenger of
Allah (s) that bring out the meritorious position and lofty status of
Imam Husain (‘a). These traditions clearly show that the position of
Imam Husain (‘a) with respect to all the other people of the world in a
sense that it distinguishes him in loftiness of station among the
Muslims…

On this matter exist a large number of proofs that can be divided into
different groups. One group is that which speaks of all the Ahle Bayt
(‘a) and Imam Husain (‘a) is also included in it. Some are about Imams
Hasan and Husain (‘a) together. So these also apply to Imam Husain (‘a)
individually. The third class is of traditions specifically about Imam
Husain (‘a).

These are as follows:

First Group
-----------

As for the statements of the Holy Prophet (s) about the merits of the
Progeny and the incumbency of love towards them, they constitute a large
portion of Prophetic sayings. We present some of them as follows:

1 – Abu Bakr has narrated that he saw that the Messenger of Allah (s)
has fixed a tent and was leaning on an Arabic bow while Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husain were in the text. Then he said, “O Muslims! I am at
peace with those who are at peace with the folks of this tent and I am
at war with those who are at war with them. None except those who had
righteous ancestors love them and none have enmity towards them except
those who have unfortunate ancestors and are born of illegitimate
birth.**[1]**

2 – Zaid bin Arqam has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) told
Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (‘a): “I am at war with one with whom you
are at war and I am at peace with one with whom you are at
peace.”**[2]**

3 – Ahmad bin Hanbal with his chains has narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (s) took the hands of Hasan and Husain and said, “One who loves me
and these two and their parents, shall be with us in the same grade on
the Day of Judgment.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Ar-Riyadh an-Nazara* 2/154  
 **[2]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/699. And Ibne Majah in his *Sunan* 1/52 has
narrated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said, “I am at peace with one
is at peace with them and I am at war with one who is at war with them.”
In the same way Hakim has mentioned similarly in his *Mustadrak* 3/149.
Ibne Athir in *Usud al-Ghaba* 5/523. Ahmad has narrated it in his
*Musnad* 2/442 through his chains from Abu Huraira and also Khatib
Baghdadi in his *History* 7/36.  
 **[3]** Ahmad, *Musnad* 1/77. Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/641. And *Tahdhib
at-Tahdhib* 10/430 it is mentioned that Nasr bin Ali has narrated this
tradition. Thus Mutawakkil ordered that he should lashed 1000 times.
Then Ja’far bin Abdul Wahid has spoke about him and he said that he is
from the Ahle Sunnat he himself was till he released him.

4 – Jabir has narrated that on a day in Arafat while Ali was before him,
the Holy Prophet (s) said, “O Ali! Come near me. You and I are created
from the same tree. I am the root and you are its trunk and Hasan and
Husain are its branches. Thus one who remains attached to those
branches, the Almighty Allah shall admit him to Paradise.”**[1]**

5 – Ibn Abbas has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Stars
are security for the people of the earth from drowning and my Ahle Bayt
(‘a) for my nation are security from differences. Thus if a tribe of
Arabs opposes them, it shall become a group of Satan.”**[2]**

6 – Zaid bin Arqam has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said, “I
leave among you two heavy things. If you remain attached to them you
shall never go astray after me. One of them is greater that the other.
The Book of Allah, which is a rope stretching from the earth to the sky,
and my Progeny, my Ahle Bayt (‘a); the two shall not separate from each
other till they arrive at the Pool to me. Thus see, that after me how
you act with them…”**[3]**

The tradition of the two heavy things (Hadith Thaqlayn) is of the most
prominent traditions of the Prophet and it is the most well known and
famous tradition among the Muslims and this tradition has been repeated
by the Messenger of Allah (s) on a number of occasions. Some of them are
as follows:

A – Messenger of Allah (s) announced this tradition during Hajj on the
Day of Arafah because Jabir bin Abdullah has narrated: I saw the
Messenger of Allah (s) when he was in his Hajj on the Day of Arafat he
was riding his she-camel, Qaswa and saying: “O people! I leave among you
a thing, such that if you act upon it, you shall never go astray. The
Book of Allah and my Progeny, my Ahle Bayt (‘a)…”****[4]****

B – His Eminence (s) mentioned it on the Day of Ghadeer because Zaid bin
Arqam has narrated: “The Messenger of Allah (s) halted at Johfa. Then he
addressed the people and praised and glorified the Almighty. Then he
said, ‘I am not made a prophet except for half the age of the past
prophets. And it is near that I shall be summoned and I have to accept
the summons. Then what do you say about it?’

They said, ‘You have made us sad and aggrieved.’

His Eminence said, ‘Do you testify that there is no deity except God and
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger? And that there is Paradise and
Hell?’

They replied, ‘Yes! We testify to this.’  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmad, *Musnad* 1/77  
 **[2]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/149. And in *Kanzul Ummal* 12/102 and
*Sawaiqul Mohreqa,* Pg. 187 it has come that His Eminence (s.a.w.s.)
said, “Stars are the security for the folks of the earth and my Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) are the security for my Ummah.” Manawi has mentioned it in
*Faiz al-Qadeer* 6/297 and Haithami in his *Majma* 9/174.  
 **[3]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/663. *Usud al-Ghaba* 2/12  
 **[4]** *Kanzul Ummal* 1/172, Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/662

Then the Messenger of Allah (s) kept his hand on his breast and said,
‘And I testify along with you.’ And he turned to them and asked, ‘Do you
hear?’

‘Yes,’ they replied.

His Eminence said, ‘I shall reach at the edge of the Pool before you and
you shall come to me at the edge of the Pool, whose length shall be from
Sanaa to Basra and silver goblets equal to number of stars shall be in
it. Then you must take care how you behave with the two weighty things
after me.’

A person asked the Messenger of Allah (s), ‘O the Messenger of Allah
(s)! What are the two weighty things?’

The Messenger of Allah (s) replied, ‘The Book of Allah; its one side is
in the hand of Allah and the other is in your hands. So hold it firmly;
and the other are my relatives.**[1]** The Most Informed and the Kind
Lord has informed me that the two shall not separate till they reach me
at the edge of the Pool and for this I beseeched to my Lord. Thus do not
try to precede them as you shall be destroyed and do not remain behind
them as you shall be destroyed and do not try to teach them as they are
more learned than you.’

Then he took the hand of Ali and said, ‘Of whomsoever I am the master,
this Ali is also his master. O Allah! Love those who love Ali and be
inimical to those who hate him…’”**[2]**

C – The Holy Prophet (s) announced this matter at the time of his
passing away when he faced the people and said, “O people! Very soon I
shall pass away and I am to be taken away. And I have told you this
before also so that none has any excuse about it. Except that I leave
among you the Book of my Lord and my Progeny, and Ahle Bayt (‘a). Then
he held the hand of Ali (‘a), raised it and said, “This Ali is with the
Quran and the Quran is with Ali. The two of them shall not separate till
they reach me at the side of the Cistern and I shall ask them that what
happened to them after me?”**[3]**

The Hadith Thaqlayn is the most reliable and authentic tradition of the
Holy Prophet (s) and Samhoodi has narrated from Manawi that he said,
“And in that room were present more than 20 companions****[4]**** and
all of them have reported this tradition.”

And Ibn Hajar says, “This tradition has been transmitted through many
channels from more than twenty companions.”**[5]**

His tradition clearly proved the limitation of Imamate in Ahle Bayt (‘a)
and also proves their infallibility from all sins and sensualities
because the Messenger of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** In *Kanzul Ummal* 1/188 the words “is my Progeny” are
mentioned.  
 **[2]** Haithami, *Majma* 9/163  
 **[3]** *Sawaiq*, Pg. 126  
 **[4]** *Faiz al-Qadeer* 3/15  
 **[5]** *Sawaiq*, Pg. 228

Allah (s) has made them companions of the Book of God, which is such
that falsehood cannot approach it either from front or behind, and it is
natural that every type of their deviation from religion shall be
considered a separation from the Book of the Almighty while the
Messenger of Allah (s) has clearly stated that they shall never separate
from each other till they reach His Eminence at the Pool. Thus the proof
of their infallibility is a clear matter and there is no doubt in it,
and also the Messenger of Allah (s) has emphasized in this tradition to
the people of his nation that they must not precede them and they must
entrust the leadership to them so that they are not destroyed in this
life.

A separate book shall be needed to be written about the conclusions of
this tradition. Many scholars have conducted researches on this subject
and dealt with this particular topic.**[1]**

7 – Abu Saeed Khudri has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said,
“The simile of my Ahle Bayt (‘a) is the simile of the Ark of Nuh. One
who boards it shall be saved and one who abandons it shall be drowned
and destroyed. And the simile of my Ahle Bayt (‘a) among you is like the
simile of the Baab-e-Hitta in Bani Israel, that all those who enter it
are forgiven.”**[2]**

In this tradition there is constructive invitation that makes incumbent
the obedience and attachment of the Purified Progeny that it is
guarantee for salvation of the nation and its security just as being
away from the Progeny causes deviation and destruction. Imam Sharafuddin
says with regard to this tradition:

“You know that likening them with the ark of Noah implies that whoever
resorts to them in matters related to the creed, deriving the branches
and basics of religion from their virtuous Imams, will certainly be
saved from the fire of hell, and whoever lags behind them is like one
who seeks shelter during the flood with a mountain so that it may save
him from divine fate, but he will eventually drown while the first will
be hurled in the inferno, may Allah protect us from it. The reason why
they, peace be upon them, are compared to the Gate of Salvation is that
Allah has made that gate a symbol of humility before His Greatness and
submission to His Judgment; therefore, it becomes a reason for
forgiveness. This is the reason for the similitude.”

Ibn Hajar, in the exegesis of Chapter 7 of the Holy Quran, in Chapter
11, page 91, of his *Al-Sawaiq al-Mohreqa,* has accepted it while
saying, after quoting these and other similar traditions,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For this topic refer to *al-Murajat,* Pg. 71-78 *Al-Usul
al-Aamma Lil Fiqh al-Maqarin,* Pg. 164-187  
 **[2]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/168 and Hakim has narrated it in his
*Mustadrak* 2/43, from Hansh from Abu Zar. Khatib Baghdadi in his
*History* 2/19 has narrated from his chains from Anas bin Malik. Abu
Naeem in *Hilya* 4/306 has narrated from his chains from Saeed bin
Jubair from Ibne Abbas. Al-Muttaqi in *Kanzul Ummal* has narrated from
his chains from Ibne Zubair and Ibne Abbas. Mohib Tabari has narrated in
*Zakhair al-Uqba* Pg. 20 from his chains from Ali. Tibrani has narrated
in his book, *Kitabul Asghar wal Awsat* from Abu Saeed Khudri.

“The reason for their similitude to the ark is that whoever loves and
highly respects them as means of thanking the One Who gave them honors,
following the guidance of their learned men, will be saved from the
darkness of dissension, and whoever lags behind it is drowned in the sea
of ingratitude and will perish in the paths of tyranny.” Then he adds
the following: “As to the Gate of Salvation (meaning thereby their
similitude thereto), Allah has made entering that gate, which probably
was the gate of Shittim or of Jerusalem, in humility, seeking
forgiveness, a reason for salvation, and He (likewise) has made loving
Ahle Bayt a reason for this nation’s salvation.**[1]**

Shia Scholastic Theologians have relied on this tradition to limit the
Imamate in Ahle Bayt (‘a) because the Messenger of Allah (s) has
compared them to the Ark of Nuh on the basis of their superiority to
others. Thus attachment to them is cause of salvation and distancing
from them is cause of deviation and destruction.

8 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Cognizance of the Progeny of
Muhammad is safety from Hell fire and friendship of Progeny of Muhammad
is a channel of passing over the Sirat Bridge; and the guardianship
(Wilayat) of Progeny of Muhammad is safety from divine
chastisement.”**[2]**

9 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Whoever dies on the love of
Muhammad’s progeny, dies a martyr. Whoever dies on the love of
Muhammad’s progeny dies as a believer of a perfect faith. Whoever dies
on the love of Muhammad’s progeny will be given glad tiding of Paradise
by the angel of death, then by Munkir and Nakir. Whoever dies on the
love of Muhammad’s progeny will be taken to Paradise like a bride taken
to her groom’s house. Whoever dies on the love of Muhammad’s progeny
will have two doors in his grave overlooking Paradise. Allah will make
the grave of whoever dies for loving Muhammad’s children a visiting
place for the angels of mercy. Whoever dies for loving Muhammad’s
progeny, dies adhering to the Sunnah and consensus. Whoever dies hating
Muhammad’s progeny will come on the Day of Judgment with this inscribed
between his eyes: ‘In despair of Allah’s mercy,’”**[3]**

10 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Consider my Ahle Bayt among you
as you consider the head of the body, and the eyes in the head, for the
head is guided by the eyes.”****[4]****

11 – The Holy Prophet (s) said, “The foot of any servant of Allah shall
not move forward on the Day of Judgment unless he or she is asked about
four things: How he spent his life, what he wore his body out for, how
he made and spent his wealth, and about loving us, Ahle Bayt.”**[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Murajat,* Pg. 77  
 **[2]** *Al-Murajat,* Pg. 82  
 **[3]** *Al-Murajat,* Pg. 83, Quoted from *Tafsir Thalabi*  
 **[4]** *Al-Murajat,* Pg. 81 quoted from *Sharaful Mobad,* Pg. 58  
 **[5]** *Al-Murajat,* Pg. 82, Quoted from Suyuti

12 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “One who likes to live like me and
die like me and wants to stay forever in the Garden that my Lord has
planted should love Ali after me and should love those who love him, and
after me should take the refuge of my Ahle Bayt (‘a) who are my Progeny;
they are created from my clay and my understanding and knowledge is
bestowed to them. Then woe be to those people of my community who deny
their excellence and who dissociate them from me. May the Almighty not
make them destined to my intercession.**[1]**

13 – Ali (‘a) said, “The Messenger of Allah (s) informed me that the
first of those to enter Paradise shall be, I, Fatima, Hasan and Husain.
I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (s)! And what about our friends?’ He
replied, ‘They are behind you.’”**[2]**

14 – Abu Saeed Khudri has narrated that the Holy Prophet (s) came to Her
Eminence, Fatima (‘a) and said, “I, you and these two (Hasan and Husain)
shall be in one place on the Day of Judgment.”**[3]**

These were some of the traditions recorded from the Messenger of Allah
(s) regarding the excellence of his Progeny and anyone who may ponder
upon them shall understand that the Prophet intended to convey that the
Islamic leadership should be left to the Imams of Ahle Bayt (‘a) for
they were such who gave preference to the obedience of God to everything
else so that the nation is not distanced from guidance and salvation in
its path and may not deviate from the divine commands so that justice
and truth may be established among them and the ways of the oppressors
are closed so that they may not jump on the pulpits of Islamic rulership
and caliphate.

Second Group
------------

Sources of Prophetic biography and traditions are full of reports of the
Messenger of Allah (s) in favor of his two grandsons and the importance
and lofty position they had near His Eminence. Some of these reports are
as follows:

1 – Abu Ayyub has narrated that he came to the Messenger of Allah (s)
while Hasan and Husain (‘a) were playing near the Prophet (or in their
room). So he said, “O Messenger of Allah (s)! Do you love them?” He
replied, “How can I not love them, while they are my blossoms from the
world that I smell?”****[4]****

The Holy Prophet (s) has referred to Hasan and Husain (‘a) as ‘two
flowers’ on many occasions. Some of these occasions are as follows:

A – Saeed bin Rashid has narrated: “Hasan and Husain (‘a) rushed towards
the Messenger of Allah (s) so the Prophet lifted one of them and took
the other under his arm. Then another one came and the Messenger of
Allah (s) took him under his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Kanzul Ummal* Vol. 12/102  
 **[2]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/151  
 **[3]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/137  
 **[4]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/181. And Zahabi has narrated it with slight
diffrence in *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/282, *Mukhtasar Sifwatus Safwa,*
Pg. 62. Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.)* from *History of
Damascus,* Pg. 61

other arm. Then he said, ‘They are my flowers in the world, one who
loves me must also love them.’”**[1]**

B – Saad bin Malik says, “I came to the Messenger of Allah (s) while
Hasan and Husain were playing on his back. So I said, “O Messenger of
Allah (s)! Do you love them?” He replied, “Why shouldn’t I love them,
when they are two flowers of mine in the world?”**[2]**

C – Anas bin Malik has narrated that he came to the Messenger of Allah
(s) while Hasan and Husain (‘a) were rolling on his stomach. The
Messenger of Allah (s) said, “These two are my two flowers from this
nation.”**[3]**

D – Abu Bakr has narrated that Hasan and Husain (‘a) stood on the back
of the Messenger of Allah (s) while the Prophet prayed. So he held them
in his arms in order to straighten his waist and he kept them on the
ground. When he finished the prayer he took them in his lap and said,
“These two sons of mine are my two flowers from the world.”****[4]****

E – Jabir has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) told Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (‘a), “Peace be on you, O father of my two flowers. I advice
righteousness to you regarding my two flowers from the world as very
soon two of your supports would go away and the Almighty would be my
guardian for you. So when the Messenger of Allah (s) passed away Ali
(‘a) said, “This was one of the two supports that the Messenger of Allah
(s) had mentioned.” And when Lady Fatima (‘a) departed from the world,
His Eminence, Ali (‘a) said, “This is the second support that the
Messenger of Allah (s) mentioned.”**[5]**

F – Bukhari from his chains of narrators from Abu Naeem narrates that he
was a witness on Ibn Umar when a person asked him about the blood of a
mosquito. So he asked, “Who are you?” He replied, “I am an Iraqi.” He
said, “You are asking me about the blood of the mosquito while they
killed the son of the Messenger of Allah (s) and I heard the Messenger
of Allah (s) say, “They are my two flowers from the world.”**[6]**

2 – Anas bin Malik has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) was
asked, “Who is the most beloved to you in Ahle Bayt (‘a)?” He replied,
“Hasan and Husain.” And His Eminence told Fatima, “Call my two sons.”
Then he kissed and hugged them.**[7]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Zakhair al-Uqba,* Pg. 124  
 **[2]** *Kanzul Ummal* 13/671  
 **[3]** Nasai, *Khasais,* Pg. 125. And in *Musnad* of Imam Zaid, Pg.
469 it is mentioned that, “A son is a flower and Hasan and Husain are my
two flowers.”  
 **[4]** *Kanzul Ummal* 13/667  
 **[5]** *Hilyatul Awliya* 3/201  
 **[6]** Bkhari, *Sahih* 8/8 and 5/33. *Fazailul Khamsa min Sihah
as-Sitta* 3/183  
 **[7]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/657, *Faiz al-Qadeer* 1/148

3 – Ibn Abbas has narrated that one day when he was in the company of
the Messenger of Allah (s), Fatima came weeping. The Messenger of Allah
(s) asked, “Your father be sacrificed on you, what has aggrieved you?”
She replied, “Hasan and Husain went out and I don’t know where they
passed the night.” The Messenger of Allah (s) told her, “Do not lament,
as their Creator is more merciful on them than you and me.” Then he
raised his hands and said, “O Allah! Take care of them and keep them
safe.”

Then Jibraeel arrived and said, “O Muhammad! Do not be aggrieved for the
two of them are sleeping in the Bani Najjar locality and an angel has
been appointed to protect them.” The Messenger of Allah (s) arose and,
accompanied by his companions, headed for that area. When he reached
there he saw that Hasan and Husain were sleeping in each others’ embrace
and the angel who had been appointed to take care of them had kept one
of his wings below them and was shading them with the other. The
Messenger of Allah (s) bent down and kissed them till they awoke. Then
he took Hasan on his right shoulder and Husain on his left. Abu Bakr
said, “O the Messenger of Allah (s)! Let me carry one of them for you.”
The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “The best mount is their mount and they
are the best of riders and their father is better than them,” as he
walked to the mosque. Then the Messenger of Allah (s) stood while the
two of them were on his shoulders. Then he said, “O Muslims! Do you want
me to show you the best people with regard to their grandparents?”

They replied, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s)!”

His Eminence said, “They are Hasan and Husain. As their grandfather is
the Messenger of Allah (s) the last of the Prophets and their
grandmother is Khadija binte Khuwailid, the leader of the ladies of
Paradise.”

Then His Eminence said, “Do you want me to show the best persons with
regard to their uncle and aunt?”

They replied, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s)!”

He said, “It is Hasan and Husain. Their uncle is Ja’far Ibn Abi Talib
and their aunt is Umme Hani, the daughter of Abu Talib.”

Then he asked, “Do you want me to show you the best persons with regard
to their maternal uncle and maternal aunt?”

“Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s)!” they replied.

He said, “It is Hasan and Husain. Their maternal uncle is Qasim, the son
of the Messenger of Allah (s) and their maternal aunt is Zainab, the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s).”

After that the Messenger of Allah (s) said, “O Allah! You know that
Hasan and Husain and their uncle shall be in Paradise. And one who loves
them shall be in

Paradise and one who hates them shall be in Hell.”**[1]**

This tradition indicates the love and regard of the Messenger of Allah
(s) for his grandsons and that the two of them were his favorites among
Ahle Bayt (‘a). In the same way that the two were best with regard to
their family background and also that one who loves them shall be with
them in Paradise.

4 – Umar has narrated that he saw Hasan and Husain upon the shoulders of
the Messenger of Allah (s). So he said, “What a great mount!” The
Messenger of Allah (s) said, “What great riders!”**[2]**

In the same way Jabir has narrated that he came to the Messenger of
Allah (s) while Hasan and Husain were riding the Prophet’s back and the
Messenger of Allah (s) was saying, “The best camel is your camel and you
are the best riders.”**[3]**

Sayyid Himyari has versified this in his following composition:

**“One day the Messenger of Allah (s) saw Hasan and Husain playing.**

**So he took them in his arms and said, “May I be sacrificed on you.”**

**And he mounted them on his back and said that he was a great mount and
they were the best riders.”**

5 – Abu Saeed Khudri narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said,
“Hasan and Husain are the two leaders of youths of Paradise…”****[4]****

6 – Salman Farsi narrated that he heard the Messenger of Allah (s) say,
“Hasan and Husain are my two sons; one who loves them, loves me and
Allah loves one who loves me, and one whom Allah loves, He admits him to
Paradise. And one who hates them has hated me and one who has hated me,
has hated Allah and Allah shall put into Hell one who hates
Him...”**[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Zakhair al-Uqba,* Pg. 130  
 **[2]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/182, *Kanzul Ummal* 13/658  
 **[3]** *Kanzul Ummal* 13/663, *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/182  
 **[4]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/656. *Mukhtasar Sifwatus Safwa,* Pg. 62.
Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad* 3/62, *Hilyatul Awliya* 5/71. *Tarikh*
*Baghdad* 9/231 and Hakim has narrated it from his chains from Ibne Umar
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said, “Hasan and Husain are the two
chiefs of Paradise and their father is better than them.” And it is
mentioned with these words in *Musnad* Imam Zaid. And in *Isabah* 1/266
Jaham has narrated: I heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) says,
“Hasan and Husain are the two chiefs of the people of Paradise.” And it
has come in *Kanzul Ummal* 6/221 that, “Hasan and Husain are two chiefs
of the people of Paradise. One who loves them loves me and one who hates
them hates me.” And in *Jame al-Kabir* of Suyuti from Ibne Asakir from
his chains it is narrated from Huzaifah that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said, “Angels came to me and saluted me. And they gave me the
good news that Hasan and Husain are two chiefs of the people of Paradise
and that Fatima is the chief of the ladies of Paradise…”  
 **[5]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/166. And with a slight difference Haithami
has mentioned it in his *Majma* 9/111. And Muttaqi has also narrated it
in *Kanzul Ummal* 12/120 and in *Sunan* Ibne Majah 1/51 it is mentioned
that he said that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said, “One who loves
Hasan and Husain loves me and one who hated them has hated me.” And in
*Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* in the biography of Nasr bin Ali Azdi, Ali bin
Sawaf has narrted from Abdullah bin Ahmad that Nasr has narrated the
tradition that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) took the hands of Hasan
and Husain and said, “One who loves me and loves their father shall
remain with us in Qiyamat in our station.” When Mutawakkil heard him he
ordered that he be lashed 1000 times. Then Abdul Wahid spoke to
Mutawakkil about Nasr and said, “He is from Ahle Sunnat,” and he
remained with him till he was released.

7 – While the Messenger of Allah (s) was delivering a sermon, Hasan and
Husain arrived, wearing red shirts and as they approached they stumbled
in their dress. The Messenger of Allah (s) came down from the pulpit and
picked them up and said: “Indeed your wealth and your children are a
test. I saw the two of them stumbling and I could not wait to finish my
address. I broke my speech and picked them up…”**[1]**

8 – Ya’la bin Marrah narrates that when Hasan and Husain were racing to
reach the Messenger of Allah (s) and they came to him the Messenger of
Allah (s) took them in his arms and said, “Indeed children are cause of
miserliness and fear…”**[2]**

9 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Hasan and Husain are two
grandsons**[3]** from the grandsons.”****[4]****

10 – Anas has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said, “My
favorites from Ahle Bayt (‘a) are Hasan and Husain…”**[5]**

11– Anas has narrated that he asked the Messenger of Allah (s), “Who is
the most beloved to you from Ahle Bayt (‘a)?”**[6]**

He replied, “Hasan and Husain”. And His Eminence told Fatima, “Call my
sons for me.” Then he kissed them and took them in his arms.

12 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “Hasan and Husain are two Imams,
whether they be standing or sitting.”**[7]**

The Messenger of Allah (s) dressed his two flowers (beloveds) in the
dress of Imamate and he appointed them as Imams that whether they stand
up to take the caliphate or do not take it.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih* 5/658. Nasai, *Sahih* 3/108. Hakim,
*Mustadrak* 1/287. Abi Dawood, *Sahih* 1/290. Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad*
5/354. Baihaqi, *Sunan* 3/218. *Usud al-Ghaba* 2/12. *Kanzul Ummal*
12/114. Nasai, *Sunan* 3/108 and *Sawaiq al-Mohreqa,* Pg. 191  
 **[2]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/168. Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad* 4/172. And
the meaning of this tradition is that people tend to become miserly as
they fear that they would not be able to provide sufficiently for their
children.  
 **[3]** ‘Sibtan’ is the dual of ‘sibt’ and in *Lisanul Arab* 9/181 it
has come that ‘sibt’ is a nation from the nations in goodness.  
 **[4]** *Kanzul Ummal* 12/119. *Sawaiq al-Mohreqa,* Pg. 192. *Al-Adab
al-Mufrad* in *Subhul Aashi* 1/430 it has come that Hasan and Husain
were the first in Islam to be given the title of ‘Sibt’.  
 **[5]** Tirmidhi, *Sahih*, *Kanzul Ummal* 12/116  
 **[6]** Ibnud Daibagh, *Taisir al-Wusul* 3/320  
 **[7]** *Biharul Anwar* 10/78 and in *Nuzhatul Majalis* 2/476 it has
come that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) told Hasan and Husain, “You
are two Imams and intercession for us is in you.” And this tradition is
mentioned on Pg. 129 of *al-Ittiaf le Hubbil Ashraaf.*

Deep Love
---------

Tradition scholars have shown that the Messenger of Allah (s) had a deep
love and affection for his two grandsons. The following are some of the
reports on this matter:

1 – Whenever Hasan and Husain went away from the Messenger of Allah (s)
he used to be very much desirous for them and used to order that they be
brought back to him. Then he used to take them in his arms, kiss them
and embrace them.

2 – Abdullah bin Ja’far says, “Whenever the Messenger of Allah (s)
returned from a journey he used to meet me or Hasan or Husain.”**[1]**

3 – The affection of the Messenger of Allah (s) for his grandsons
reached such a level that he made a pledge of allegiance to them from
his Ahle Bayt (‘a) while they were with Abdullah Ibn Ja’far, their
cousin. And except for them, the Messenger of Allah (s) never pledged
allegiance to any other child.**[2]**

4 – His Eminence used to make them ride on himself. Thus one of them he
took before him and the other he made to ride on his back.**[3]**

5 – Love and affection of His Eminence (s) for his grandsons reached
such a level that when he was reciting his night (Isha) Prayer they
climbed upon his back when he went into prostration. When he raised his
head he used to hold them carefully and put them down on the floor.
Again when he went into prostration they mounted his back. This
continued till he completed his prayer. After that he used to seat them
on his thigh.****[4]****

The Messenger of Allah (s) used to openly display his love and affection
for his grandsons so that Muslims understand their importance and high
status in view of the Prophet and they also may express their love for
them and entrust their spiritual and secular leadership to them so that
the nation may achieve a position of respect in which man finds all his
aspirations.

Third Group
-----------

Traditions of the Messenger of Allah (s) recorded in praise of his
beloved, Imam Husain (‘a) show his personality in the true light. It is
narrated often in a great part of the arrangement of the Messenger of
Allah (s) for Imam Husain (‘a). We present some of these traditions as
follows:

1 – Jabir bin Abdullah has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s)
said, “One who desires to see the chief of the youths of Paradise,
should look at Husain bin Ali…”**[5]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Darami, *Sunan* 2/285  
 **[2]** *Al-Iqdul Farid* 2/243  
 **[3]** Muslim, *Sahih* 4/1883  
 **[4]** Ahmad, *Musnad*  
 **[5]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 83 from the
handwritten manuscript at Amirul Momineen Library, *Seer A’laamun Nubla*
3/282

2 – Abu Huraira has narrated that he saw the Messenger of Allah (s) was
carrying Husain bin Ali and saying, “O Allah! I love him, so You (also)
love him.”**[1]**

3 – Ya’la bin Marrah has narrated that once he was accompanying the
Messenger of Allah (s) to a dinner where they were invited. Suddenly he
saw Husain playing in the street. So the Messenger of Allah (s) came
forward and stretched his hands. That child ran this way and that. The
Messenger of Allah (s) was laughing with him, till he caught hold of him
and kept one hand below his chin and another on his head.**[2]** Then he
kissed him and said, “Husain is from me and I am from Husain. O Allah,
love those who love Husain. Husain is a grandson of the
grandsons…”**[3]**

By this blessed tradition the Messenger of Allah (s) has shown his deep
love and affection for his sons and most probably His Eminence by this
statement, “Husain is from me” is not about his relationship with him,
rather it is about another matter which is more fine and deep in the
view of His Eminence, because he was the one who was to take over the
position and mission of the Prophet; guidance and giving direction of
His Eminence. He had in his view the factors of reformation of man and
his elevation and development on the basis of the faith in Allah so that
all the meanings of good and reformation are achieved in this world.

4 – In the same way, His Eminence, by his statement, “And I am from
Husain” had this interpretation in mind, that the great sacrifice that
the grandson was to offer in the path of religion. And the great feat he
performed to reform the prophethood of Islam and to keep it alive for
the future generations by putting his own life as the price of achieving
it. Due to this action the Messenger of Allah (s) is from Husain.
Because it was Husain who had infused new life into the religion brought
by the Messenger of Allah (s) and he had saved it from the mischief of
that group of tyrant rulers who tried to destroy Islam in order to cause
the coming back of the period of Ignorance and other evils. While the
Imam, by his mission, destroyed the Umayyad wolves and made freshness
and life return to Islam and elevated its standard and hoisted it for
all the generations.

In the same way the Messenger of Allah (s) for the greatness of his
grandson has proved what the word ‘Sibt’ said about him and the aim of
His Eminence was that he is a nation from the nations which stands on
its own being and stable on its own self, so its a community from
communities for goodness and is honored among all the communities for
all times.

5 – The great companion, Salman Farsi has narrated that he came to the
Messenger  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/177. And in *Nurul Absar*, Pg. 254 the
words of the tradition are as follows, “I love them and I love all those
who love them.”  
 **[2]** And in a tradition, “Then he put his one hand below his waist
and he put the other hand below his chin and placed his mouth on his
mouth while saying, “Husain is from me…”  
 **[3]** Ibne Majah, *Sunan* 1/51. Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Musnad* 4/172.
*Usud al-Ghaba* 2/19. *Tahzib al-Kamal,* 6/401. *Taisar al-Wusul* 3/320.
Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/177. *Ansaab al-Ashraaf*, Vol. 3/142.

of Allah (s) and saw that Husain bin Ali was on the thigh of His
Eminence while he kissed at his mouth and said, “You are a chief, son of
a chief, you are an Imam, son of an Imam, brother of an Imam and father
of Imams and you are the Proof and son of Proof and the father of nine
Proofs from your progeny and the ninth of them is their Qaim (one who
rises).**[1]**

6 – The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “This one (that is Husain) is an
Imam, son of an Imam, brother of an Imam and progenitor of nine
Imams…”**[2]**

7 – Abul Abbas has narrated that he was with the Messenger of Allah (s)
while his son, Ibrahim was on his left thigh and Husain bin Ali was on
his right thigh and the Messenger of Allah (s) kissed them in turns.
Suddenly Jibraeel descended to the Messenger of Allah (s) from the Lord
of the worlds and when he went away from His Eminence, he said,
“Jibraeel came to me from my Lord and told me, ‘O Muhammad, Allah sends
you ‘Salaam’ and says to you: I shall not leave both of them for you. So
sacrifice one of them on the other.’”

So the Messenger of Allah (s) looked at Ibrahim and wept, “If Ibrahim
died, none shall be aggrieved as much as me. While Husain’s mother,
Fatima and father, Ali, my cousin, is such that they are my flesh and
blood and if he dies, my daughter shall be aggrieved and my cousin would
sit in sorrow and I shall be sad for them and I prefer my own grief to
the grief of these two. O Jibraeel, Ibrahim may be taken. I sacrifice
Ibrahim for Husain.” Thus after three days Ibrahim passed away and
whenever the Messenger of Allah (s) saw Husain coming towards him, he
used to kiss and embrace him and kiss his lips and say, “May I be
sacrificed on the one for whom I sacrificed my son, Ibrahim.”**[3]**

8 – Ibn Abbas has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) had made
Husain mount on his shoulder. A man told him, “O son, you are on the
best of mounts.”

The Messenger of Allah (s) retorted, “He is the best of the
riders.”****[4]****

9 – Yazid bin Ibn Yazid has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s)
came out of Ayesha’s house and went to Fatima’s House and heard that
Husain was crying. Thus His Eminence was very disturbed by this and he
told Fatima, “Do you not know that his crying pains me…?”**[5]**

10 – Abdullah bin Shaddad has narrated from his father that the
Messenger of Allah (s) performed a long prostration till we thought that
something has happened or that revelation was descending on him. So we
asked him about it and he said, “None of these happened, rather my son
had made me a mount and I did not like  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Murajat,* Pg. 287  
 **[2]** *Minhaj as-Sunnah* 4/210  
 **[3]** *History of Baghdad* 2/204  
 **[4]** *At-Taj al-Jame al-Usul* 3/218, *Kanzul Ummal* 13/650,
*al-Bidaya wan-Nihaya* 8/36  
 **[5]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/201. *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/284, Tibrani,
*al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/124. *Zakhair al-Uqba,* Pg. 143

that I should make him dismount quickly, till he may achieve what he
desires…”**[1]**

These are some traditions that have come about his beloved one, that are
the signs of the lofty status that is bestowed on him and it is an
expression of His Eminence that its image and its realities would be
apparent in this child and it shall be an incomparable example for high
humanity and be of the great secrets of His Eminence.

The Messenger of Allah (s) Prophesied the martyrdom of Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (s) informed his companions about the martyrdom
of his beloved grandson and he announced this matter among the Muslims
in such a way that this became an imminent matter for them and none of
them had any doubt in it.

Ibn Abbas says that, “We had no doubt and Ahle Bayt often said that
Husain bin Ali shall be killed at Taff.”**[2]**

The Messenger of Allah (s) had on many occasions been informed of those
calamities that were to befall his beloved Husain. Here we shall mention
some of them:

1 – Umme Fadl, the daughter of Harith, has narrated that Husain was in
my lap when I came to the Messenger of Allah (s). So I transferred him
into the Prophet’s lap. Then I noticed that the eyes of the Messenger of
Allah (s) were filled with tears. I asked His Eminence, “O the Messenger
of Allah (s), may my parents be sacrificed on you, what has happened to
you?”

His Eminence replied, “Jibraeel came to me and informed me that my
people shall kill this son of mine.”

Umme Fadl became worried and asked, “This one shall be killed?” pointing
towards Husain.

His Eminence said, “Yes, and Jibraeel brought to me red soil from the
place of his burial.”**[3]**

Umme Fadl began to weep and sorrow and grief descended upon her.

2 – Lady Umme Salma has narrated that one night the Messenger of Allah
(s) went to his bed to sleep. Then he awoke in a disturbed condition and
again he went back to sleep. Again he awoke in a disturbed condition but
it was less than his previous condition. Then again he went to sleep and
again awoke while a red soil was in his hand and His Eminence was
kissing it. I asked him, “O Muhammad, what soil is it?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahdhib at-Tahdhib* 2/346 *Taisar al-Wasul al-Jame al-Usul*
3/321, Nasai, *Sunan* 2/229  
 **[2]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/179  
 **[3]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 3/176. And in the tradition of Ibne Asakir
13/162 it is mentioned from Ummul Fadl that she said, “One day the
Prophet came to me while Husain was with me. So he took and played with
him for a long time. Then his eyes were filled with tears. I asked him,
“What has made you aggrieved?” He replied, “This is Jibraeel who has
informed me that my people shall kill this son of mine.”

His Eminence, “Jibraeel, informed me that this one (Husain) shall be
martyred in Iraq. So I asked Jibraeel, ‘Show me the soil of the land
where he shall be slain,’ and this is the same soil.”**[1]**

3 – Umme Salma has narrated that one day the Messenger of Allah (s) was
sitting in our house. Then he said, “None shall come to me.” I waited.
Then Husain entered and I heard the Messenger of Allah (s) weeping and
saw that Husain was in his lap (or beside him) and the Messenger of
Allah (s) was stroking him and weeping. I asked him, “By Allah, I did
not notice him entering.”

His Eminence replied to me, “Jibraeel was with us in the house and he
said, ‘Do you love him?’ ‘Yes’, I replied. He said, ‘Your people shall
slay him in the land of Kerbala.” Then Jibraeel took some soil of that
place and showed it to the Prophet.**[2]**

4 – Ayesha has narrated that Husain bin Ali came to the Messenger of
Allah (s) while revelation was descending on His Eminence. Then he ran
towards the Holy Prophet (s) while the Prophet was bent on the floor.
Jibraeel asked, “O Muhammad, do you love him?” He replied, “Why should I
not love my child?” He said, “Your people shall slay him after you have
passed away.” Then Jibraeel stretched his hand and brought a white soil
for His Eminence and said, “It is on this land that this son of yours
shall be slain and the name of that place is Taff. When Jibraeel went
away from the Messenger of Allah (s) the soil was in the hand of the
Prophet and he was weeping and saying, “O Ayesha, Jibraeel informed me
that my son Husain shall be slain in the land of Taff and that my nation
shall be involved in mischief after me.”

Then he came out to his companions while Abu Bakr, Umar, Huzaifah, Ammar
and Abu Zar were among them. The Messenger of Allah (s) was weeping.
They rushed towards His Eminence and asked, “O the Messenger of Allah
(s), what has made you weep?”

His Eminence replied, Jibraeel has informed me that my child, Husain
shall be slain in Taff after me and he brought this soil for me and
informed me that his grave shall be on that land.”**[3]**

5 – Zainab binte Jahash, the wife of the Messenger of Allah (s) has
narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) was sleeping near me while
Husain was crawling in the house on his four limbs. Then I became
unmindful of him till he went to the Messenger of Allah (s) and climbed
on his belly. Then the Messenger of Allah (s) arose to pray and carried
him in his arms. And when he bowed or prostrated he placed him on the
floor and when he stood up he used to pick him in his arms. When he sat
down and began to supplicate and raised his hands and said…Then  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Hakim, *Mustadrak* 4/398. *Kanzul Ummal* 12/126. *Seer A’laamun
Nubla* 3/289, *Zakhair al-Uqba,* Pg. 148  
 **[2]** *Kanzul Ummal* 12/126. Tibrani, *al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/116  
 **[3]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/187. And in *Tahzib al-Kamal,* 6/409 it is
mentioned that the Prophet took the dust that Jibraeel had brought to
him and began to kiss it and said, “Woe be to Karb-o-bala.”

when he concluded the prayers, I told him, O the Messenger of Allah (s),
today I saw something that I never saw you doing before.”**[1]**

His Eminence said, “Jibraeel came to me and informed me that my son
shall be slain.”

I said, “Then, in this case show me.” And he brought a red soil for me.”

6 – Ibn Abbas has narrated that Husain was in the lap of the Messenger
of Allah (s). Then Jibraeel said, “Do you love him?” He replied, “How
can I not love him while he is the fruit of my heart?” He said, ‘Your
people shall kill him. Do you want me to show you the location of his
grave?’ Then he closed his fist and suddenly there was red soil (in
it).”**[2]**

7 – Abu Amama has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) told his
wives: “Do not make this child (Husain) weep.” And he said: And that day
was turn of Umme Salma. Then Jibraeel descended and the Messenger of
Allah (s) went inside the house and told to Umme Salma, “See that no one
comes to me.” Then Husain came and saw that the Prophet was in the
house. He tried to go in but Umme Salma took him in her arms and sung a
lullaby to him. When his crying increased she released him. Then he went
inside and sat on the Prophet’s lap. Jibraeel told the Prophet, “Your
people shall slay this son of yours.”

His Eminence asked, “Would they kill while they had faith in me?”

Jibraeel replied, “Yes, they shall slay him,” and Jibraeel took a
handful of soil and told His Eminence, “He shall be slain at such and
such place.” Then the Messenger of Allah (s) came out holding Husain in
his arms and he was sad and aggrieved. Umme Salma though that His
Eminence was aggrieved due to the coming of this child. She said, “O
Messenger of Allah (s), may I be sacrificed on you. You told me to take
care of this child and commanded me not to allow anyone to come to you
but I released him.” The Prophet did not give any reply to her and he
came out towards his companions in a sad and sorrowful condition. Then
he told them, “My community shall slay him (and he indicated towards
Husain).”

Abu Bakr and Umar looked towards His Eminence and asked, “O Messenger of
Allah (s), would they do it while they are Muslims?”

He replied, “Yes, and this is the soil of that place…”**[3]**

8 – Anas bin Harith has narrated from the Prophet that he said, “This
son of mine (and he indicated towards Husain) shall be slain on a land
called Kerbala. Then anyone who is present at that time should assist
him.”

When His Eminence, Husain departed for Kerbala, Anas accompanied him and
was martyred in his service.****[4]****  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/189  
 **[2]** *Majma az-Zawaid,* Pg. 191  
 **[3]** *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/189  
 **[4]** Ibnul Wardi, *Tarikh* 1/233

9 – Umme Salma has narrated that, “Hasan and Husain were playing in my
house in the presence of the Prophet. Then Jibraeel arrived and said, “O
Muhammad, your community would slay this son of yours after you have
passed away (and he pointed towards Husain).”

The Messenger of Allah (s) wept and embraced him (Husain) while a soil
was in his hand. Then he kissed it and said, “Woe be to Kerb-o-bala.”
And he gave it to Umme Salma and told her, “When this soil turns to
blood you should know that my son has been slain.”

Umme Salma kept it in a bottle and everyday she used to look at it and
say, “The day you turn to blood shall be a day of a great
tragedy.”**[1]**

10 – The Messenger of Allah (s) dreamt that a black and white dog was
licking at his blood. He interpreted it in a way that a person shall
slay his (grand)son, Husain. Thus Shimr bin Zil Jaushan was a leper who
slew Imam Husain (‘a).**[2]**

11 – Umme Salma has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) said,
“Husain bin Ali shall be slain 60 years after my Hijrat.”**[3]**

12 – Maaz bin Jabal has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (s) came
out to us and said, “I am Muhammad and the first and the last word has
been given to me. So obey me till I am among you. And after I leave the
world you must consider the lawful of the Book of Allah as lawful and
its unlawful as unlawful. Death shall come to you…mischief shall
approach you like the darkness of the night. No matter how many Prophets
go away, the same number will come back. Prophethood shall be
transmogrified and assume the form of rulership. May Allah have mercy on
one who takes his right in the way it has come for him and goes out from
there. O Maaz, protect it and count it.”

Maaz said, “I counted till five (of the caliphs). Then the Prophet said,
“Yazid, may Allah not bless Yazid…”

Then the eyes of His Eminence became tearful. Then His Eminence said, “I
have been informed about the slaying of Husain and his grave soil has
been brought to me and I have been told who his killer shall be. He
shall be killed among a people that shall not defend him but that their
hearts shall become divided and impose evil rulers on them and scatter
them…”

Then His Eminence said, “Ah upon the sons of the Progeny of Muhammad.
Those whom people consider as caliph shall slay my successor whom I have
reared with care and also slay the successor of my successor. O Maaz,
Remember this.”

When he came to the tenth, that the ten who shall take over the kingdom
after him, he said, “Walid,****[4]**** it is the name of Firon, who
destroys the Islamic Shariah is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tibrani, *al-Mojam al-Kabir* (In the biography of Imam Husain)
3/114  
 **[2]** *Tarikh* *al-Khamis* 2/299  
 **[3]** Tibrani, *al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/110  
 **[4]** Walid bin Yazid bin Abdul Malik bin Marwan, he was such a
wanton king that he committed every transgression. He went for Hajj and
drank wine atop the Holy Ka’ba. He was more terrible to this nation than
Firon was on his people. It is narrated that he kept a copy of Quran for
target practice and Muslims were furious with him for his open
expression of apostasy and innovations in religion and raised their
voices against him and had him killed. This matter is mentioned on Pgs.
250-252 in *Tarikhul Khulafa*.

a person from their family; his hands shall reach up to his blood and
the Almighty Allah shall take out His sword which shall not return to
its case and the people shall differ among themselves and shall become
such.” Then he closed his fist.

The he said, “After 120 years a swift death and slaughter shall become
common and their death shall be on them and a descendant of Abbas shall
be ruling over them.”**[1]**

The Prophet exposed the secrets of the unseen that were to come on his
community after him due to which terrible calamities shall befall them
due to the battles on the Muslims. So much so that they shall be ruled
by tyrant rulers and they shall kill and dishonor Muslims. As the
Prophet has informed about what was to come to pass with his son Husain
at the hands of Yazid and then the dominance of the Abbasids who would
overthrow the Umayyads. All this came to be exactly as the truthful
Prophet has prophesied.

13 – Ibn Abbas has narrated that, “When two years had passed after the
birth of His Eminence, Husain, the Prophet went on a journey. When he
was on his way, he halted and recited, “To Allah we belong and to Him we
shall return,” and his eyes were filled with tears. So he was asked
regarding it. He said, “This is Jibraeel, who informs me of a place
called Kerbala at the banks of Euphrates where my son, Husain bin
Fatima, shall be slain.”

A group of companions turned to His Eminence and asked, “O Messenger of
Allah (s), who would slay him?”

His Eminence replied to them in broken and sorrowful words, “A man named
Yazid. May Allah not bless him. As if I am seeing the place of his
slaying and that his severed head is being presented to Yazid. By Allah,
anyone who sees the severed head of my son, Husain and becomes pleased
at it, the Almighty Allah shall put hypocrisy in his heart.”

When the Prophet returned from the journey, he was very sorrowful. He
went to the pulpit and warned the people and said, “O Allah, I am
Muhammad, Your slave and Your Messenger and these two are the best from
my Progeny and the most righteous of the descendants and my Progeny and
the ones I am leaving in my community. O Allah, Jibraeel has informed me
that this son of mine (pointing towards Husain) shall be slain and he
shall be deserted. O Allah, may You give blessings in his slaying. May
Allah make him the Chief of the Martyrs. As You are powerful over
everything. O Allah! Do not bless those who slay and desert him.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tibrani, *al-Mojam al-Kabir* 3/129 (In the biography of Imam
Husain) *Majma az-Zawaid* 9/190

Hearing these words a group of people in the courtyard of the Mosque
began to wail and moan. The Messenger of Allah (s) said, “You are
crying! Would you not help him? O Allah, You be his guardian and
helper.”

Ibn Abbas says, “The Messenger of Allah (s) was such that his color had
waned and his face was worried. Then he ascended the pulpit for the
second time and delivered a short and nice sermon to the people while
tears flowed from his eyes. Then he said, “I leave among you after me
two heavy things, the Book of Allah and the Progeny. The two shall not
separate from each other till they arrive to me at the Pool. Indeed I
shall not request you about them except what my Lord has commanded,
affection for my near kindred. Then be careful that tomorrow you may not
come to me at the Pool in such a condition that you have made my progeny
unhappy.

Know that! On the Day of Judgment three flags shall approach me. A black
flag, seeing which the angels shall be terrified. They shall stand
besides us. I would ask them, “Who are you?” They would remind me that
they are Arabs, the followers of monotheism. Then I would tell them. I
am Ahmad, the Prophet of Arabs and non-Arabs. They would say, “We are
from your followers, O Ahmad.” We shall tell them, “How did you behave
with my Progeny and the Book of my Lord after me?” They shall reply, “We
wasted the Book and tore it to pieces. As for your Progeny we followed
them till they departed from the world. Then I would turn my face away
from them (in disgust) and they shall return thirsty and black faced.

Then another flag, darker than the previous one, would approach me. I
would ask them, “Who are you?” Like the former group they shall reply,
“We are monotheist folks and we are from your followers. I shall ask
them, “How did you behave with the bigger and lesser heavy thing after
me? That is the Book of God and my Progeny.” They shall reply, “We
opposed the greater heavy thing and we abandoned the lesser heavy thing.
And in all conditions considered them useless.” I shall tell them, “Get
away from me.” They shall go away thirsty and dark-faced.

After that another flag shall come to me such that effulgence is
emanating from it. I shall ask them, “Who are you?” They shall reply,
“We are followers of monotheism. We are the followers of Muhammad and we
are the survivors among the people of truth. We have followed the Book
of our Lord and considered its lawful as lawful and considered its
unlawful as unlawful. And we loved the Progeny of our Prophet, Muhammad
and we helped them like we helped ourselves. We accompanied them in
battles and confronted their opponents. Thus, I shall say to them,
“Congratulations to you! As I am Muhammad, your Prophet. You were in the
guesthouse of the world just as you have described. After that I shall
provide drinks from the Pool myself and they shall depart satiated.
Indeed Jibraeel has informed me that my community shall slay my son,
Husain on the land of Kerbala. Curse of Allah be on his killer and those
who abandon him till Qiyamat…”

After that His Eminence descended from the pulpit and there was none
from the Emigrants and the Helpers who had any doubt about the slaying
of Husain.**[1]**

The above were some traditional reports from the Messenger of Allah (s)
regarding the slaying of his blessed grandson and from them we can gauge
the intensity of the sorrow and grief of His Eminence.

From these traditional reports, the Muslims became certain of the
slaying of the Imam. And they had no doubt about it whatsoever. In the
same way, Imam Husain (‘a) also had perfect certainty in it and he has
mentioned this matter many a times that we shall discuss in this book.

Respect Accorded by Companions to Imam Husain (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------

The companions used to highly respect Imam Husain (‘a) and accorded him
great honor when they came in his presence and they considered him in
place of his honorable grandfather, because they found in him all that
they expected from him with regard to knowledge, piety and religion.

Historians say: “His Eminence was very kind towards them and used to
help the weak ones from them and he used to share their problems and
difficulties. He used to keep away from their evil ones and he used to
solve all their problems like his eminent grandfather had acted with
them.”

The famous and prominent companions used to compete with each other in
the service of His Eminence and his pure brother, Aba Muhammad Hasan
(‘a) and had the belief that whatever service is offered to them was a
sign of greatness and honor for the one who provides it. For example,
Abdullah Ibn Abbas, who is the scholar of the community, in spite of his
status and greatness among the Muslims, whenever His Eminences Hasan and
Husain wanted to mount their beasts, he used to rush forward and hold
the stirrups and he used to adjust their clothes and considered it a
matter of pride. Till Mudrik Ibn Ziyad or Ibn Ammara criticized him for
this but Ibn Abbas scolded them and said, “O foolish man, do you know
who these people are? They are the two sons of the Messenger of Allah
(s). Is it not from the divine bounties on us that we hold their
stirrups and adjust their garments?”**[2]**

Their respect and honor from the Muslims was to such an extent that when
the two of them used to go for visiting the House of Allah, all the
caravans they passed used to also come on foot due to their respect till
it became very difficult for some of the pilgrims. So a senior companion
requested them to either ride like others or to leave the common route.
They presented these options to them. They replied, “Neither would we
ride nor leave the route.” So the people took up another route.

Whenever they circled the Ka’ba people thronged around them to salute
them and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Futuh* 4/216-219  
 **[2]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 210, Ibne
Shahr Aashob, *Manaqib* 3/400

sought blessings from them in such a crowd that it was feared that they
might be killed in that melee.**[1]**

An example of this lofty personality is that once Imam Husain (‘a)
passed by a group of people in the Prophet’s mosque while Abdullah, son
of Amr Aas was among them. Then he saluted them and they replied to his
salutation. Abdullah replied to his salutation in a louder voice and
with full attention towards him and asked the people, “Do you want me to
introduce the most honorable one of the earth in the view of the folks
of the heavens?”

“Yes,” they replied.

He said, “It is the one who is going,” and he pointed towards His
Eminence, Husain. He has not spoken to me a word from a night of Siffeen
till date. If he becomes satisfied with me, I would prefer it to red
haired camels.”

Abu Saeed Khudri turned to him and asked, “Would you not seek
forgiveness from him?” He agreed to do so and they hastened towards the
Imam’s quarters and sought permission to enter. Imam accorded them
permission and when all of them were seated Imam glanced at Abdullah and
said, “Do you know that I am the most beloved of the inhabitants of the
earth in the view of the folks of heavens?” Abdullah replied at once,
“Yes, by the Lord of the Ka’ba.”

His Eminence said, “What compelled you to fight against me and my
father? By Allah, my father was better than me.”

Abdullah told him about his excuses and said, “Yes, but (my father) Amr
complained about me to the Messenger of Allah (s) and told His Eminence,
‘Abdullah prays the whole night and fasts all the days.’ The Messenger
of Allah (s) said, ‘Pray, and sleep too. Fast, and break it too and obey
Amr.’ Thus when the battle of Siffeen took place he put me under oath
and I came out, but by Allah, neither I took out the sword nor used the
spear or shot an arrow.” He them implored the Imam in such a way that
finally the Imam became satisfied with him.**[2]**

Although his excuse of obeying his father in fighting against His
Eminence Amirul Momineen Ali (‘a) has no legal sanction because on the
basis of what has come in the Quran, obedience of parents in
disobedience of Allah has no legality.

Anyway, His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) was the recipient of respect and
honor of the Muslims. Historians have said that, “His Eminence was
present in a funeral when Abu Huraira rushed forward and cleaned the
dust from the Imam’s feet with the garment he was wearing. And Miqdad
bin Aswad, the companion of the Prophet and one of the most senior and
of the first ones in Islam made a bequest that after his death 36000
(units of currency) be paid to His Eminence, Husain.**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Bidaya wan-Nihaya* 8/37  
 **[2]** *Usud al-Ghaba* 3/234-235. *Kanzul Ummal* 11/343. *Majma
az-Zawaid* 9/186  
 **[3]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla* 3/187. And *Kifayatut Talib,* Pg. 425 it
is narrated from Abi Mahram that he said, “I was attending a funeral of
a lady and Abu Huraira was with us. Then they brought a dead body of a
man and he kept it between the corpse of that lady and recited prayer on
it. When we returned His Eminence, Husain became tired and sat down on
the way. Then Abu Huraira cleaned the dust off the feet of His Eminence
with the corner of his garment. His Eminence, Husain said to him, “Why
do you do this?” Abu Huraira said, “Let me do it. By Allah, if people
knew what I know about you they would have carried you on their
shoulders.”

The companions had considered Imam Husain (‘a) as the remnant of Allah
on the earth. He was a lofty example of his grandfather. And due to this
relationship they used to love and respect him greatly and they used to
consider it a matter of honor to serve and visit him. They used to
compete with each other in this.

Examples of the Merits of Imam Husain (‘a)
------------------------------------------

In the personality of the chief of the nobles, were present all human
values and lofty merits; and elements of prophethood and Imamate were
merged in the person of His Eminence. And they with regard to his merits
and manners are incomparable and prominent examples that are clear
examples of Islamic prophethood and, in fact, which is counted as
ever-living path of Islam with all its powers and its principles.

Indeed, all the characteristics of the father of the martyrs and every
quality of his from the good qualities that has bestowed him with the
greatest status in the world without any exaggeration has compelled us
to confess that it is an incomparable example in the whole history of
humanity except for his grandfather and father. We shall discuss about
some of his personal qualities and virtues.

Imamate of Imam Husain (‘a)
---------------------------

Imam Husain (‘a) is one of the brilliant stars of the Imams of Ahle Bayt
(‘a). The qualities of humanity are perfected in him and those qualities
have reached to their zenith in him. He has established the torch of
this religion and spread the slogan of truth and justice on the earth
and established the constructive matters in Islam. In this path he had
borne all sorts of difficulties and calamities. He bore all sorts of
problems and oppressions from the oppressors of his time in this path;
those oppressors, who considered the property of God as their personal
wealth and those who considered the slaves of the Almighty as their own
servants.

When revelation used to descend on the Messenger of Allah (s) on most of
the days, he used to look at the purified Imams of his Ahle Bayt (‘a)
one after the other. And he introduced them with their names and
characteristics and through general and special proofs. That they are
his successors and they are the Ark of Salvation and the security for
the people and made them to be with the Great Book of Allah that neither
falsehood shall approach it from back or from front. In the past
discussion we have presented many such proofs of this and there is no
need to repeat them here. Just as we have discussed about Imamate and
its necessity as a topic and also discussed about the duties and
characteristics of the Imam in the book of “Life of Imam Hasan (‘a)”
here we shall refrain from repeating them as there is no need to do so.
