Characteristics of the Personality of Imam Husain (‘a)
======================================================

Those incomparable qualities that were present in the personality of the
leader of the noble men and the elements and basic matters were present
in the being of His Eminence in incalculable quantity as follows:

1 – Firm Determination
----------------------

Of the personal qualities of the father of the martyrs is a firm
determination and a strong will that this valuable condition he had
inherited from his respected grandfather. A Prophet who had changed the
course of history and had transformed the meanings of life and alone he
stood against the great powers who stood in his way of spreading the
word of God. And he did not care for them and told his uncle, Abu Talib,
the believer of Quraish:

“By Allah, if the sun is placed in my right hand and the moon in the
left and I am asked to refrain from this (prophethood of Islam) I shall
not do so till I die, or that the Almighty Allah may make them
successful.”

By this powerful determination he confronted the powers of polytheism
and was able to dominate the direction of the events. In the same way
the eminent grandson of His Eminence arose against the Umayyad kingdom
and without any doubt and announced his denial to pay oath of allegiance
to Yazid, and in spite of the scarcity of his helpers he left for the
battlefield of the holy war, so that he may bestow loftiness to the word
of truth and destroy falsehood, while the large number of Umayyad
fighters were mobilized to confront him. However, His Eminence did not
worry about it and he announced his intention and aim in his immortal
words, saying,

“I don’t see death but as success; and life with the oppressors as
nothing but a deviation.”

He moved towards the field of honor and respect with his family members
of Ahle Bayt (‘a) and his companions so that he may hoist the flag of
Islam and obtain a great success and victory for the nation of Islam
till he finally reached martyrdom. Peace of God be on him as he was the
strongest person with regard to determination and foremost with regard
to will and intention. He did not mind bearing all those circumstances
that make the intellects and minds bewildered.

2 – Refusal to accept Injustice
-------------------------------

Among the characteristics of Imam Husain (‘a) was the illuminated
quality of: Refusal to accept oppression. So much so that he earned the
title of ‘Abi Dhayyem’ (One who refuses to be oppressed). This is one of
the most well known titles of the Holy Imam, because His Eminence was a
lofty example of this quality. It was he who raised the slogan of human
greatness and constructed the path of honor and respect. Thus he did not
bend before the monkeys of Bani Umayyah. He preferred death in the shade
of spears.

dishonor. Aba Abdillah Husain bin Ali Ibn Abi Talib (‘a) was such that
he preferred safety for himself and his companions but he did not accept
humiliation on the basis of his aim so that it may not be that Ibn Ziyad
does not kill them and dishonors them is some way; he preferred death to
it and I have heard from Naqeeb Abu Zaid Yahya bin Zaid Alawi that he
said: You can say that the couplet of Abu Tamam about Muhammad in Hamid
Tai actually fits Imam Husain (‘a):**[1]**

**“It was easy to escape death, but a loyal defense and a manly quality,
he turned it towards them.**

**And one who does not accept oppression, it is as if on the day of the
battle he would be like a refusal or higher than that.**

**Thus he made his steps steadfast by joining them to death and he said
to it: Qiyamat or the day of gathering is under your control.**

**He donned the red apparel of death and the night did not pass but it
turned into the green brocade.”**[2]****

The leader of the nobles restrained his self from increasing oppression
and taught sacrifice to the people. Musab bin Zubair says, “He gave
preference to death with honor to a life of degradation.”**[3]** After
that the following lines came on his tongue:

**“O one who was in Taff from the Hashemite clan. He considered others
as equal and taught the elders equality.”**

The words of His Eminence are the most prominent compositions that
became established in Arab literature whenever there is mention of
honor, sanctity and pride is explained he says, “Indeed, these ignoble
sons have put me between two choices. Either I kill myself with the
sword or accept dishonor. Far be it, that we accept degradation, because
the Almighty Allah, the Prophet and the believers would not accept it
for us. Those who are pure, incomparable, self-respected and souls of
the oppressed ones do not consider it lawful that we prefer the debased
ones to a death of honor…”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 1/302  
 **[2]** Meaning the garments of Paradise  
 **[3]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/273

On the day of Taff, he stood like a strong mountain against the Umayyad
soldiers of apostasy and taught future generations the lesson of
nobility, self-respect, greatness and destroying injustice:

“By Allah, I shall never give you the hand of humility and I would not
accept slavery. I seek refuge from my Lord and yours that you may stone
me…”

These brilliant words show to what extent the great Imam was rich with
nobility and unlimited virtues; whose best example is the everlasting
valor that shall remain forever that the History of Islam has kept
recorded in it.

The poets of Ahle Bayt (‘a) in order to portray this best scene have
competed with each other and their compositions regarding this are the
best examples of Arabic literature and eloquence. Sayyid Himyari Jalli
in his immortal poems has versified the merits of his glorious ancestor,
His Eminence, Husain (‘a). He says:

**“Those people desired (were greedy) that he may accept oppression, but
the Almighty Allah and sword fighters did not accept it.**

**How can the neck that has not bowed for anyone except for Allah,
accept degradation?**

**For him was a heart, stronger than a coat of mail, which it spread in
front of the thirsty spears.**

**And loyalty and determination used to turn about in those breasts that
the land may become narrow it goes into it.**

**Thus he did not accept life but that it may be preferable or did not
stop fighting at the time of the battle till he was rolling in the
dust.”[1]**

In self-restraint and nobility they had so prominently drawn a picture
that has never been done before. That is why Sayyid Haider has shown the
forcible tactics of the Umayyad rulers and the firm determination of
Imam Husain (‘a) not to accept any kind of dishonor. While it is not
acceptable to Almighty Allah, and that a lofty soul that had got the
honor of prophethood in inheritance, how can he accept injustice, so he
turns his head away, because His Eminence (‘a) had not bowed his head
(submitted) ever to anyone else except Almighty Allah. Then how can he
do so before the debased ones of Bani Umayyah? And how can their power
stop him from his iron will? That was like a coat of iron that stops the
thirsty spears. How beautifully it is said:

**“Are there deeper and reachable words than these that turn the quality
of destroying injustice that is Imam Husain (‘a) and could there be a
better description than this? That all the powers of confrontations that
turn the loyalty to the breast of Imam (‘a) that the whole world is
deficient to carry that determination which in spite of its vastness
fitted in this breast.”**

And it is the fact that in the quality of self-restraint that has
reached its peak that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Haider, *Diwan,* Pg. 87

even the beautiful words in this matter promote it. While in this
couplet there is no word, which is strange, and no letter is rare that
is unheard of.

The following are some of the couplets and a part of great poetical
compositions that we must consider. In this also, the great valor of
Imam Husain (‘a) in described.

**“He died but his death was Hashemite death as he was recognized below
the spears.**

**The nobility that you saw was such that he could not accept
degradation. Thus it would be the smell of the aimed spear that shall
reach him.**

**And he said, “O my beloved, halt, standing on the pool of death is not
the standing of the one who is undecided.**

**He has seen the back of the mount of degradation less preferable than
death while death was waiting for him.”[1]**

Thus he gave preference that he should step in the burning fields, but
he did not give a hand in degradation to anyone.

I may not be able to obtain deeper and sweeter couplet than the above,
which has presented a real scene, the forbearance in the nature of Imam
and that, which shows his personal loftiness. That he preferred the
shade of the spears to a life of comfort but surrender to the tyrants.
The same thing is expressed in the poems regarding the other martyrs of
the Imam’s side. They also competed with each other in the field of
contest. They rushed to the field with zeal and were eager to lay down
their lives in loyalty so that they be bestowed with honor and respect.

In the same way Sayyid Haider has drawn a picture of the defeating of
oppression by the martyred Imam and he has described the Imam saying
that he even restrained from smelling degradation and oppression but he
smelled intentionally the swords and spears because in it was the taste
of magnanimity, honor and respect. By the description of these prominent
qualities of the Imam, Sayyid Haider moves forward. Then he delineates
the magnanimity of the Holy Imam that was rooted in wisdom and had a
specific aim; such that his aim dominated the aims of the opponents and
he did not in the least give way to any laxity in this regard. He has
not described and non-factual matter. Rather he has presented the facts
with a real description without any sort of reservation.

Sayyid Haider, in another beautiful panegyric has presented the Imam’s
confrontation with injustice and oppression and the courage of the Imam
in this matter. It may be the most beautiful poem lamenting the tragedy
of the Holy Imam:

**“He was forced to accept one of the two options while the battle was
shaking his teeth.**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Haider, *Diwan,* Pg. 87

**That he should either submit to them or be killed. But he did not
accept surrender.**

**So he said to them: Maintain your forbearance, as the soul of man is
lofty that imparts it with beauty.**

**If there is no dress except that of degradation don the raiment of
death and be freed.**

**He considered being killed with patience as the slogan of his elders
and the pride that beautified his status.**

**Thus he upturned his sleeves for the battle, in a battle in which
death was approaching swiftly.”[1]**

Elegies of Sayyid Haider about the Imam are illuminated emblems for the
Arab nation because he has used his imagination in a beautiful way and
systematically arranged the points in a proper order. According to his
contemporaries, he composes one elegy about the Imam every year and
spends the whole year in polishing it. He used to carefully select each
word of the elegy and consider and weigh it properly. In this way his
final composition emerged.

3 – Valor
---------

No personality braver, determined and more valiant than Imam Husain (‘a)
is seen throughout all the stages of the history of humanity. Because
His Eminence on the day of Kerbala was in such a position that the
intellects are perplexed and minds are bewildered at it. The generations
venerate his memory and regard his bravery with absolute astonishment,
and people have considered his valor higher to that of the well-known
valor of his father.

His cowardly enemies were shocked by the strength of his determination
and aim because the Imam did not step back due to the continuous
horrible strikes that befell him one after the other; and the more the
difficulties increased and the calamities intensified the more steadfast
he became and the more his face shone. And when all his followers and
his Ahle Bayt were martyred, all the armies consisting of thirty
thousand mercenaries according to some reports, surrounded the Imam from
all sides. The Imam. though the lone survivor attacked the hordes with
ferocity of a wolf attacking a herd of goats and the enemies dispersed
in fear and trepidation. They were fleeing in front of him in all
directions and he was like a firm mountain. And he faced the swords from
all sides in such a manner that there was no sort of laxity on his part.
He did not care for death with all his bravery, Sayyid Haider says:

**“When he alone faced a particular group all groups were terrified
before him.**

**His spear was on his fingertips as if they had made their swords for
that same purpose.**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sayyid Haider, *Diwan*

**The sword was married to the self and its dower was death and its
henna the dust and soil of the battlefield.”**

In another beautiful elegy he says:

**“He was firm and steadfast while the ground under the hooves of his
horse was shaking such that it was rocking its pillars.**

**He was firm on the ground while fear enveloped the fighters.**

**His face became more and more illuminated while terror was changing
the color of the enemies’ faces.”**

When the one who did not accept injustice fell to the ground while the
loss of blood had weakened him, the enemies were so much terrified that
when they glanced at him that none of them could summon the courage to
deliver the last fatal strike.

Sayyid Haider says:

**“They were filled with fear due to his awe. No one has presented such
a battle that even after he is grounded the foes are awe-struck by
him.”**

The Ahle Bayt and his followers had also obtained this bravery and valor
from him and therefore they moved towards with great fervor and spirit.
No kind of fear or awe they ever found in their hearts, while even their
enemies have confessed to their valor and steadfastness. Because a
person who had accompanied Umar Ibn Saad in Kerbala was told: “Have you
massacred the progeny of the Messenger of Allah (s)?” And he replied:

“Keep quiet! Even if you had seen what we witnessed and did what we
performed. A group attacked us such that they were holding their swords
in the hands and falling upon us like hungry lions from all sides and
were killing us. They were putting their lives on the mouth. Neither
they pleaded for peace nor had any inclination towards any material
wealth. There was nothing that served as obstacle between them and the
pool of death and the spiritual kingdom. Even if we had refrained a bit
from confronting them they would have terminated the life of all the
army. Hence what we could have done under those circumstances? May your
mother die!”**[1]**

One of the poets has described this incomparable bravery in the
following words:

**“Even if mountains had come to confront them, they would have been
sheltered in the battlefield and got pulverized.**

**They were either standing and receiving arrows on their fronts or the
attackers used to spear their chests.”**

And what a magnificent poetry Sayyid Haider has composed:

**“They pulverized their stony rocks and when they were shattered they
said: We**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Abil Hadid, *Sharh Nahjul Balagha* 3/263

**are instead the solid rocks in their place.”**

The father of the martyrs whose valor is unequalled, has challenged the
nature of humanity for a contest. Thus he has made fun of death and
humiliated life. He told in his address to his companions when the
enemies were showering them with arrows:

“Arise, may the Almighty God have mercy on you, rush towards death as
there is no other venue. These arrows shot by these people are their
messengers for you…”

His Eminence, motivated his companions to embrace the throes of death as
if he were inviting them to a banquet of delicious victuals; and in
fact, it was acceptable to them because His Eminence was battling with
falsehood and the Proof of the Almighty Lord, which was the first step,
had been chalked out before him.**[1]**

4 – Frankness
-------------

Among the special characteristics of the father of the martyrs is
frankness in speech and his outspoken nature. All his life he never
resorted to uncouth behavior and he never used deception and fraud and
did not take up any deviated path. Rather he chose the straight path
which was compatible with his living conscience avoided every kind of
wavering that religion and good manners do not accept. Among the
prominent examples of his excellent manners is that when Walid, the
governor of Medina, summoned him in the dark of the night and informed
him about the death of Muawiyah and asked him to pledge allegiance to
Yazid the Holy Imam (‘a) refused it and spoke up clearly explaining his
stance:

“O Amir! We are the Ahle Bayt of Prophethood and repositories of
messengership. The Almighty Allah has initiated (creation) and will
terminate (it) with us. Yazid is a transgression and a sinner, who
imbibes alcohol and a man who sheds blood God has made sacred. He openly
resorts to sinful activities. None like me would never pledge allegiance
to Yazid.”

These words show the frankness and outspoken nature of His Eminence and
demonstrate his strength and determination in the path of truth.

Among the aspects of his frankness was that it had become a part of his
personality; such that when he was leaving for Iraq, he received the
news of assassination of his emissary, Muslim Ibn Aqil and his being
betrayed by the Kufaites, he told the people who were accompanying him
for material gains only: “Our supporters have betrayed us. Thus anyone
among you who desires to go back may do so, no fealty shall remain on
his neck…”

The greedy people left him and only the selected few among his
companions remained.****[2]****

At a time when the Imam was badly in need of numbers and numerous
helpers would have helped in his campaign, yet he refrained from any
kind of deception  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abdullah Alaili, *Al-Imam al-Husain,* Pg. 101  
 **[2]** *Ansabul Ashraf*, 3/169

and frankly stated the true position to the multitudes who had been
accompanying him. This was so because those who have firm belief in God
and His justice never has such defects.

Among the examples of his forthrightness is that on the 10<sup>th</sup>
eve of Mohurrum he gathered all his companions and informed them with
absolute frankness that all those who shall remain with him would be
martyred the next day. The Holy Imam explained to them in unequivocal
terms that they may have a clear idea about what they were doing and he
suggested them to go away in the darkness of the night, but the great
clan did not agree to leave him and rather expressed their determination
to be martyred in his company.

Kingdoms are established and governments destroyed but these lofty words
that are the basis of eternity to every living being remain, because the
lofty values are made prominent by it, such that man does not obtain any
exaltation without it.

5 – Firmness on the Path of Truth
---------------------------------

Steadfastness on the path of truth was one of the most prominent
qualities of the father of the martyrs, Imam Husain (‘a), because for
the establishment of truth and for the destruction of the facts of
falsehood and centers of oppression he exhibited unequalled
perseverance.

The Holy Imam (‘a) had in his view, truth with all its vastness and
meanings and he set out for the field of contest so that truth may be
established in all Islamic lands and that people may be released from
atrocities meted out to them by tyrannical rulers of the time and dispel
forces that had besieged him and the events that had subjected people to
deep pits of ignorance where they were thrashing their limbs for
survival.

Imam (‘a) saw that the community was sinking in falsehood and deviations
and people were not having any values in their life. Therefore he
proceeded towards the field of confrontation so that he may sacrifice
everything for the sake of hoisting the flag of truth. The Imam (‘a) has
mentioned this same illuminated aim in his address to his companions:

“Do you not see that truth is not being practiced and falsehood is not
being avoided so that a believer may be eager to meet the Lord…?”

Truth was one of the most prominent qualities of the personality of
father of the martyrs, Imam Husain (‘a); that he had inherited those
qualities from his grandfather and that is the reason why he used to,
time and again, kiss that same face and the same mouth that spoke up the
words of Allah and issued the springs of justice and truth on the earth.

6 – Patience and Forbearance
----------------------------

Among the unequalled qualities in which the chief of the martyrs had no
peer was that of patience on the calamities of the world and the
difficulties of the time. His Eminence, had tasted the bitterness of
patience during his childhood when had sat

in grief of his grandfather’s and mother’s demise and witnessed the
horrifying events that were encountered by his respected father. He saw
the atrocities and problems borne by His Eminence and during the tenure
of his brother also he experienced the bitterness of patience in the
condition that he saw how his soldiers betrayed him and how they cheated
him, till finally Muawiyah had him assassinated through poisoning. And
how when he wanted to bury his brother next to his grandfather, but the
Bani Umayyah disallowed it and this was extremely painful for Imam
Husain (‘a).

And the greatest calamity in front of which His Eminence exhibited
patience was that right before his very eyes the lofty principles of the
Islamic religion were been trampled upon and inappropriate sayings were
fabricated and falsely attributed to his grandfather, which were
changing and distorting the Law of God. The most painful thing was that
his venerable father was being denounced and imprecated from the pulpits
and how the tyrant Yazid was busy in extermination his Shias and
followers. He assumed patience and forbearance in all these atrocious
circumstances.

On the 10<sup>th</sup> of Mohurrum such calamities descended upon him
one after the other that patience used to rock in front of them, while
the grief had not ended for him and all the difficulties and sorrows had
besieged him. He saw the bright stars of his Ahle Bayt how the swords
were cutting them into pieces. He witnessed this with utmost patience
and urged them:

“O my Ahle Bayt! Be patient! O my cousins! Be forbearing! That after
this day you will not have to face any humiliation and oppression.”

His Eminence, used to see his dear sister, the lady of Bani Hashim, how
the severities of the tragedy had disconcerted her and sorrow had
shattered her heart. He hastened towards her and counseled her that she
must maintain patience and content with what Allah had decreed for them.

The most terrible tragedy that Imam bore with patience was the sight of
his children and women suffering from killing thirst and they were
seeking his help while he could only advice patience and steadfast to
them and informed them about the everlasting rewards they would finally
achieve after all these difficulties.

He was absolutely at ease in face of the hordes of enemies that
surrounded him and their multitudes that had filled up the lands; in
such a condition that he was alone bearing the strikes from all sides
while extreme thirst was killing him, however he did not pay any heed to
these circumstances.

The patience and forbearance of His Eminence and his unflinching
attitude on the day of Ashura is the rarest of examples through which
humanity was recognized. Arbili says: “The valor of Husain became a
parable and his patience in the battle has rendered the past and future
people powerless.”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Kashful Ghumma* 2/20

Each difficulty of His Eminence was alone sufficient to render a person
powerless and defeated, even if he had possessed patience and
steadfastness, but His Eminence, for the sake of his noble aims, on
which exaltation of ones soul depends, in spite of difficulties and
calamities, bore all these atrocities.

Historians say that no type of tragedy weakened the resolve of His
Eminence. One day a son of the Holy Imam (‘a) expired but no sign of
tragedy was apparent in his face. He was inquired about it and he said
in reply: “We are Ahle Bayt and whatever we ask Allah, He gives to us
and we are pleased with whatever He desires for us.”**[1]**

His Eminence became satisfied with divine decree and submitted to God’s
command and this is the essence of Islam and perfection of faith.

7 – Forbearance
---------------

Forbearance was one of the highest quality of the father of the Martyrs
and the most prominent characteristic of His Eminence. According to
narrators he did not have any kind of unfavorable habits and he never
misbehaved with any badly- behaved person. Rather he dealt with utmost
goodness and pleasing manners. In this matter he used to tread the
footsteps of his honorable grandfather His Eminence, the Messenger of
Allah (s) whose lofty morals and virtues had won the hearts of all. His
Eminence was distinguished by this quality and his fame spread wide to
such an extent that even some of his slaves took undue advantage of
these qualities, and they intentionally misbehaved with him so that they
may be recompensed with goodness and favor!

Historians say: A slave of His Eminence, once committed a grave mistake
which made him liable to punishment and His Eminence (‘a) ordered that
he be punished. The slave pleaded with him saying: My Lord! The Almighty
Allah says: **“Those who swallow their anger.”**

The Holy Imam (‘a) turned to him smiling and said, “Release him! I have
swallowed my anger.”

The slave said at once, **“And the forgivers of men.”**

His Eminence said, “I have forgiven him.”

At that time the slave pleaded for more favor and said, **“And Allah
likes those who do good.”**

His Eminence said, “You are freed for the sake of Allah.”

Then His Eminence ordered that a valuable gift be given to him so that
he no longer remains dependant on others.****[2]****

These lofty manners were of the principles of the life of His Eminence,
which did not separate from him throughout his life.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Isabah* 2/222  
 **[2]** *Al Husain (a.s.)* 1/137

8 – Humility
------------

Imam Husain (‘a) was bestowed with utmost humility and his nature was
absolutely bereft of any kind of pride and arrogance. He had inherited
this quality also from his grandfather who established principles of
good manners and lofty morals on the earth. Narrators have quoted many
examples of his lofty manners, some of which we quote in the following
paragraphs:

1 – One day His Eminence passed by a group of destitute having meals on
the “poor platform” (suffa) in front of the Prophet’s mosque. This day
these same people invited the Holy Imam (‘a) to join them in their
meals.

His Eminence alighted from his mount partook some food with them. Then
he said, “I accepted your invitation. Now you also accept my invite.”

They accept the Imam’s invitation and hastened with him to his house.

His Eminence, told his wife, Rabab, “Take out what you used to save.”
She took out all the money she had saved and His Eminence gave the full
amount to those people.**[1]**

2 – His Eminence passed by some beggars who were eating a piece of bread
from the Sadaqah offerings. So the Imam saluted them and they invited
the Holy Imam (‘a) to join them. His Eminence sat down with them and
said, “If it had not been Sadaqah I would have indeed joined you in
partaking it.” Then he invited them to his house, served them food and
gifted them clothes. Then he ordered that they also be given some
cash.****[2]****

In this manner, the Holy Imam (‘a) trod the footsteps of his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s) because according to historians,
His Eminence used to mingle with the poor and benefited them through his
favors so that poverty may not cause discomfort to the poor and
affluence may not make the rich thankless.

3 – There was some sort of trouble between His Eminence, Imam Husain
(‘a) and his brother Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah. Thus Muhammad returned to
his house and wrote a letter to His Eminence as follows: “So to say: You
are having an excellence which is not given to me and a merit which I
haven’t got. Our father is Ali and none of us are superior to the other
regarding this matter. But my mother is a lady of Bani Hanifah while
your mother is Fatima, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (s). And
even if the earth is filled with women like my mother they cannot become
equal to yours. Thus when you read this letter of mine, put on your
slippers and don your robe and come to me and make me happy and I could
never take precedence to you in which you are more deserving…”

When Imam Husain (‘a) read his brother’s letter, he hastened towards him
and made up with him, making him happy.**[3]** Such were his lofty
manners and great personality.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam al-Husain,* Pg. 218  
 **[2]** *Ayanush Shia,* 1/580  
 **[3]** *Nihayatul Arab* 3/260, Ali Baa 1/467

9 – Kindness and Affection
--------------------------

Among the qualities of the father of the martyrs was that he had great
affection for the people and offered his help to those in need. He used
to reach for the assistance of all those who needed it and for anyone
who sought his refuge, he used to accord it to him.

Marwan, after defeat in the episode of Jamal sought refuge from himself
and his brother, though he (Marwan) was one of the staunchest opponents
and he requested him to intercede on his behalf with his venerable
father. The brothers went to their father and petitioned him regarding
and Marwan said: “O Amirul Momineen! He would pledge allegiance to you.”

His Eminence said: “Did not pay allegiance to me before the killing of
Uthman? I have no need of his allegiance, as it is the hand of a Jew. If
he gives allegiance to me with his hand he would be betraying the trust
with his fingers. While he would obtain a kingdom, like a dog licks at
its nose and he is the father of four rams and the nation would see the
light of the day from his sons.”

They pleaded so much with their father that at last he gave him amnesty,
but Marwan never acknowledge this favor of Imams Hasan and Husain (‘a)
and he did all he could to trouble the two grandsons of the Messenger of
Allah (s). He was the one who prevented Imam Hasan (‘a) from being
buried next to his grandfather and it was he who told Walid that if Imam
Hasan refuses to give allegiance for Yazid he must be killed. Also he
celebrated in joy when he heard about the martyrdom of Imam Husain (‘a).
For Marwan, it is sufficient that he is a tree, which puts forth nothing
except evil and harms to one and all.

Among the obvious examples of the Imam’s kindness is the episode
concerning Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi who was accompanied with 1000 soldiers
and they had been sent to confront the Imam (‘a), but when they came
face to face with the Holy Imam (‘a) they had already run out of
drinking water and were all on the verge of death due to extreme thirst.
When the Holy Imam (‘a) saw their serious condition he was having
sufficient quantities of water with him and he supplied all of them with
water and even provided it to their mounts. Among the forces of Hurr was
an old man, Ali bin Taan Maharabi who was so shaking so violently that
he could not hold the mouth of the water bag steady to drink the water
so the Imam held the water bag for him and made him steady with his own
hands. These actions were the most prominent examples in the culture of
humanity that are recorded in the pages of history.

10 – Charity
------------

Charity was one of the greatest qualities of the father of humanity,
Imam Hasan (‘a), because His Eminence was the refuge of the poor and
destitute and the support of everyone who was going through hard times
and His Eminence, used to satisfy and please all those approached him
for help.

Kamaluddin bin Talha says that it had become famous that His Eminence
used to

welcome guests with great respect and gave to anyone who asked him
anything. He used to be kind to his relatives, help those who appealed
him for it, provided clothes to the needy, fed the hungry, forgive his
debtors, helped the weak, be concerned for orphans and make needy ones
needless. Whenever he received any funds he used to distribute them to
the needy. These good qualities of kindness, charity and benevolence are
such that only those having the perfect morals possess it…**[1]**

Historians state: “His Eminence, carried sacks full of bread and
victuals and some money in the darkness of the night on his shoulders to
homes of widows, orphans and destitute till it left scars on his
shoulders.”

A huge quantity of wealth came to His Eminence and he did not leave his
place before distributing all of it to the needy around him. Muawiyah
came to know about this and he sent a huge quantity of gifts and
souvenirs for him and also sent some personalities of Medina so that
they may see what he does with those things. They reported about the
Imam (‘a) as follows:

“But Husain began with orphans of those killed in Siffeen on the side of
his father. Thus if something remained he used to feed the milk of the
load bearing camels to the people…”

He sent an informant to see what the people do and they did as Muawiyah
had expected. Then Muawiyah said: “I am the son of Hind, I know better
about the Quraish.”****[2]****

Anyhow, historians have reported countless episodes highlighting the
charitable nature of the Imam (‘a). Some of these are quoted below for
the sake of our readers:

**1 – To Usamah bin Zaid:** Usamah bin Zaid became terminally ill and
the Holy Imam (‘a) visited him. When the Imam sat on his side, Usamah
sighed, “O my sorrow!”

“What are you sorrowful for?”

“A debt of sixty thousand.”

“It is my responsibility.”

“I am afraid that I would die before it is repaid.”

“You will not die before I repay it on your behalf.”

Thus Imam (‘a) hastened to repay the debt on his behalf before he
breathes his last,**[3]** while he had forgiven Usamah because Usamah
was one who had not paid allegiance to his father but the Imam did not
behave in the similar manner; rather he dealt with him with utmost
kindness and benevolence.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Matalibus So-ool,* Pg.28  
 **[2]** *Uyunul Akhbar*, 3/47  
 **[3]** *Ayanush Shia* 1/570

**2 – To one of his maids:** Anas has narrated that he was with the Holy
Imam (‘a) when a slave girl came to him with a container of perfume and
presented it to the Imam (‘a). His Eminence told her, “You are free for
the sake of Allah.”

Anas was astonished and he asked, “A slave maid gets you a container of
perfume and you have emancipated her?”

His Eminence said, “The Almighty Allah has taught us in this manner. The
Almighty Allah says: Whenever someone wishes you, you must reply in a
better way or return that same greeting, and better than that was
emancipating her.”**[1]**

By these lofty manners and great benevolence he captured the hearts of
Muslims and they become devoted to his love and guardianship.

**3 – To a borrower:** One day, after the martyrdom of his brother, Imam
Husain (‘a) was sitting in a corner in the mosque of the Messenger of
Allah (s). Abdullah bin Zubair and Utbah bin Abi Sufyan were also
sitting in a corner of the mosque. A Bedouin arrived on a camel. He
tethered his camel and entered the mosque. Then he approached Utbah bin
Abi Sufyan and saluted him. He returned the greeting and the Bedouin
said:

“I have killed the son of my uncle (cousin) and blood money is being
demanded from me. Would you give me something?

Utbah raised his head and ordered his servants to pay him a hundred
Dirhams.

The Bedouin said: I do not want anything less than the full amount of
the blood money.

Utbah did not pay any attention to him and the Bedouin went away from
before him, dejected, and came to Ibn Zubair and told him his problem
and he ordered that two hundred Dirhams be given to him but the Bedouin
refused and went towards His Eminence, Imam Husain (‘a) and informed the
Holy Imam (‘a) about his requirements.

His Eminence ordered that they pay ten thousand Dirhams to the man and
told him, “This amount is for you to pay off your debts.” And ordered
that another ten thousand Dirhams be given to him and he said, “This is
for you to make arrangements for your upkeep and to improve your living
conditions and spend the amount on your family.”

The Bedouin was extremely overjoyed at this and he recited the following
couplets:

**“Neither any fragrance reached me nor was I involved in a love
relationship, yet I became enchanted.**

**But for that Progeny of the Messenger, I came and recited pleasing
couplets.**

**They are the noble and exalted beings that the stars of the heavens
twinkle for them.**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibne Sabbagh, *Al-Fusul al-Muhimma*

**You are the greatest among all the men, you are such a bestower that
none could equal your generosity.**

**Your father obtained such pleasure from greatness that those who
wanted to precede him fell behind.**

**Through him the Almighty God opened the door of guidance and through
you He closed the door of mischief.”[1]**

**4 – To a Bedouin:** A Bedouin came to His Eminence and saluted him and
told him about his needs and said: “I have heard from your grandfather
that he used to say: ‘Whenever you have any need, ask it from (one of
the) four persons: From a noble Arab, or the benevolent who gives
happily or the people of Quran or one having an elegant face.’ However
the Arab has received nobility only through your grandfather and as for
benevolence, it is your custom and as for the Quran, it was revealed in
your house and as for an elegant face, I heard the Messenger of Allah
(s) say: ‘When you desire to see me, just look at (the faces of) Hasan
and Husain.’”

His Eminence asked him, “What do you want?”

The Bedouin wrote his requirement on the sand. His Eminence, Imam Husain
(‘a) said: “I heard my father say that goodness is proportionate to
divine recognition. So I want to ask you three questions, if you reply
to one of them, I shall give you one third of what I have, if you reply
two question two thirds of what I possess shall be yours, if you reply
to all three questions, all I have shall be yours, while a purse has
just arrived from Iraq.”

The Bedouin said, “Go on and ask the questions, there is no power and
strength except from Allah.”

Imam Husain (‘a): What is the best deed?

Belief in God.

What is the way of salvation for man?

Reliance (trust) on God.

What is it that bestows beauty to man?

Knowledge accompanied with forbearance.

What if he does not have?

Then he should have wealth accompanied with generosity.

What if he does not have it?

Then he should have penury accompanied with patience.

What if he does not have that also?

A bolt of lightening should strike him from the sky and burn him up.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bahrani, *Iqdul Aal Fi Manaqibul Aal*

The Holy Imam (‘a) smiled and handed him the purse.**[1]**

**5 – To a petitioner:** A petitioner came to the Imam, knocked at his
door and recited the following couplets:

**“Anyone this day having hope in you is not disappointed and anyone who
knocks at your door.**

**You are having benevolence and you are the source of generosity, while
your father was the exterminators of transgressors.”**

The Holy Imam (‘a) was standing up in Prayer. Thus he shortened his
prayer and went to the Bedouin and saw signs of poverty in him. He
turned back and called out for Qambar. When Qambar arrived, His Eminence
asked him, “How much money do we have with us?”

He replied, “Two hundred Dirhams that you commanded me to distribute
among your Ahle Bayt.”

He said, “Bring it here, because someone more deserving has arrived.
Thus he took the money and paid it to the Bedouin, sought his
forgiveness and recited the following couplets:

**“Take these and I request you to excuse me and know that I am
sorrowful for you.**

**If I had more possibility my sky (of favor) would have rained more on
you.**

**However, the times are hard and we are having less provisions.”**

Then the Bedouin took the money being highly obliged and praying for the
well-being of His Eminence. He began to extol the praises of His
Eminence and said as follows:

**“They are purified and have a good lineage and whenever they are
remembered, divine blessings are invoked for them.**

**You are the one, you are the one having an exalted status. You are the
expert of the Quran and the meanings of its chapters.**

**One who does not have an exalted status by way of his lineage none has
any precedence among the people.”**[2]****

These were some examples of generosity and charity of His Eminence, that
informs about his kindness and concern for the poor and he intended
nothing but pleasure of Allah and rewards of the Hereafter.

Here concludes our discussion about some circumstances and qualities of
His Eminence and how he scaled the heights of perfection in winning the
hearts of Muslims in such a way that they became devotees of his love
and friendship.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Fazailul Khamsah Min as Sihah-e-Sittah* 3/332  
 **[2]** *Ayanush Shia*, 1/579
