Worship and Piety of Imam Husain (‘a)
=====================================

Imam Husain (‘a) was sincerely and heartedly devoted to the Almighty
Allah and the love of God and His fear had blended with every part of
his being. Historians say: “His Eminence did everything that obtained
the proximity of Allah, so he prayed excessively and observed fasts,
went for the Hajj, gave Sadaqah (charity) and performed good
deeds.”**[1]** Here we shall quote some narrational reports about the
worship of His Eminence and his attention towards the Almighty God.

A – Imam Husain (‘a) and his fear of God
----------------------------------------

Imam (‘a) was the vanguard among those having divine cognition. He
feared God very much to oppose Him. He was severely fearful of God. Such
that some of his companions asked him: “How great is your fear of
Allah?”

His Eminence replied, “On the day of Qiyamat none shall be secure except
those who feared Allah in the world…”**[2]**

Thus was the practice of the pious ones that bestowed light to the path
and opened horizons of divine recognition and guided towards the creator
of the universe and giver of life.

B – Excessive Prayer and fasting of Imam Husain (‘a)
----------------------------------------------------

His Eminence (‘a) was mostly engrossed in prayers and fasting.**[3]**
Every twenty hours he used to recite a thousand units of prayer as
narrated by his son, Zainul Abideen.**[4]** In the month of Ramadan he
used to complete the recitation of Quran.**[5]**

Ibn Zubair has mentioned about the Imam’s worship saying: “By Allah they
killed him! The one who used to stand up in prayers at night and fasted
during the days too much.”**[6]**

C – Hajj of Imam Husain (‘a)
----------------------------

The Holy Imam (‘a) had performed many Hajj pilgrimages. He traveled to
Hajj 25 times on the foot**[7]** even though his mount was present
alongside him.**[8]** He held the black stone and pleaded to the
Almighty God in the following words: “O my Lord! You Bestowed favor on
me and did not find me thankful. And You tested me and did not find me
patient. Yet neither You took away the bounties due to thanklessness nor
You continued to send difficulties due to my lack of patience. O  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tahzibul Asma,* 1/163  
 **[2]** *Ayanush Shia*, 4/104, *Raihana Rasool,* Pg. 58  
 **[3]** *Tahzibul Asma* 1/163, Maqrizi, *Khatat*  2/285  
 **[4]** Yaqubi, *Tarikh*, 2/219, Ibnul Wardi, *Tarikh* 1/233  
 **[5]** *Seer A’laamun Nubla,* 3/291  
 **[6]** Tabari, *Tarikh* 6/273  
 **[7]** Ibne Asakir, *Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 215, *Seer
A’laamun Nubla,* 3/287. *Majmauz Zawaid* 9/201. *Tahzibul Asma* 1/163.
Ibne Maghazali, *Manaqib*, Tradition no 64. *Mukhtasar Safwatul Safwa*
1/763, Tibrani, *Tarikh* 3/123  
 **[8]** *Sifwatul Safwa* 1/763. Sherani, *Tabaqat* 1/26. Ibne Asakir,
*Biography of Imam Husain (a.s.),* Pg. 217

my Lord! Nothing but kindness comes from the kind one…”**[1]**

His Eminence left for performing the lesser pilgrimage (Umrah) to the
House of Allah and became indisposed. His father, Amirul Momineen (‘a)
received the news that he was in Yathrib (Medina), so he went after him
and reached him at Saqiyah when he (Husain) was ill. Ali (‘a) asked, “My
son! What is troubling you?”

“My head is aching.”

Amirul Momineen told them to bring a camel. Then he sacrificed it and
after that he shaved the head of Imam Husain (‘a) and took him back to
Medina. When his illness was cured he returned towards Mecca and
performed the lesser pilgrimage of Umrah.**[2]**

These were some incidents regarding the worship and obedience of His
Eminence that are recorded in history and biography.

D – Charitable nature of Imam Husain (‘a)
-----------------------------------------

The Imam was very much charitable and he gave away a lot in charity and
alms. His Eminence had inherited some land and other things. So before
they could come in his possession he gave them away in charity.**[3]**
He used to distribute food to the destitute of Medina during the
darkness of the night**[4]** and except for divine rewards and God’s
proximity he had no other aim. We have presented above many examples of
his charitable deeds of the Holy Imam (‘a).  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Al-Kawaakibut Durriya* 1/58  
 **[2]** *Daimul Islam* 1/344  
 **[3]** *Daimul Islam* 2/339  
 **[4]** *Tadkiratul Khawaas* Pg. 264
