Sermons of Imam Husain (‘a)
===========================

A greater part of the sermons of Imam Husain (‘a) used to be about the
stability of truth and determination and firm will for Jihad in the way
of Allah. These were the highlights of his sermons:

The Imam (‘a) delivered those sermons at a time when the sky was dark
with clouds of political turmoil. In these sermons the Imam targeted the
politics of Bani Umayyads and called the people to rise up against them.
We shall quote important sermons of the Imam on their particular
occasions but here we mention one of his discourses below:

His Eminence (‘a) ascended the pulpit and praised and glorified the
Almighty, then invoked blessings on the Prophet (s). Then he heard
someone says, “Who is this delivering a sermon?” the Imam (‘a) replied:
“We are the successful group of God and the nearest progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (s) and his purified Ahle Bayt and one of the two
weighty things that the Messenger of Allah (s) has made us second to
next to the Book of Allah which contains all the details and falsehood
cannot come to it from the front and from the back and we are depended
upon for its commentary and its interpretation does not make us tired.
Rather we follow its truths. Thus obey us, as our obedience is
obligatory because the obedience of Allah is joined with the obedience
of the Prophet. Almighty Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says: **“O you
who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from
among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it to Allah and the
Apostle, if you believe in Allah and the last day; this is better and
very good in the end.”*[1]***

And he said: “And if they had referred to the Prophet and the Ulil Amr,
those who used to recognize them they used to be attentive towards them,
and if the mercy and blessings of God had not been upon you, except for
some they all would have followed the Shaitan. And I warn you to heed
the pleadings of Shaitan because he is your open enemy. You become his
friends in such a way that he says: **“No one can overcome you this day,
and surely I am your protector: but when the two parties came in sight
of each other he turned upon his heels, and said: Surely I am clear of
you…”(*[2]*)([3])**

The sermon is rich with invitation to attachment to the Progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (s) and it makes it incumbent to obey and follow
them. It warns people about the machinations and intrigues of Umayyads
and the systematic destruction unleashed by them because they used to
call the people to distance themselves from Ahle Bayt (‘a) who were the
source of knowledge and light of guidance on the earth.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah Nisa 4:59  
 **[2]** Surah Anfal 8:48  
 **[3]** *Bihar*, 43/359 and 44/205
