An Account of Dhu’l-Qarnayn
===========================

Al-Qutb al-Rawandi mentions that his name was Ayaash, and that after Nuh
he was the first ruler whose kingdom included (all) the countries of the
east and west. It must be clarified that there is a difference of
opinion among the historians and commentators whether Dhu’l-Qarnayn was
same as Alexander of Rome. According to authentic traditions it wasn’t
so.

Whether he was a Prophet or not is another point of difference. Actually
he was not a Prophet, he was an honorable personality who was guided by
the Almighty.  
 Why he is referred to as Dhu’l-Qarnayn is another topic of contention.
There are many opinions in this regard. The first explanation is that he
is named Dhu’l-Qarnayn (one having two ‘qarns’) is because at first the
people hit him on his right side (qarn) of the head and killed him but
the Almighty raised him, and again they hit him on his left side (qarn)
and killed. Again Allah gave him life.  
 Second: He lived for two epochs.  
 Third: He had a pair of horns on his head, or two projections from his
head resembling a pair of horns.  
 Fourth: His crown had two projecting branches.  
 Fifth: Both the sides of his head were extra strong.  
 Sixth: He had conquered the earth fully and his dominion stretched to
the two limits.  
 Seventh: He had locks of hair hanging from both the sides of his
head.  
 Eighth: Allah had given him power over light and darkness.  
 Ninth: He had a dream that he has gone to the heavens and was clinging
to both the sides of the Sun.  
 Tenth: ‘Qarn’ stands for strength. Hence Dhu’l-Qarnayn had two
‘Qarns’ - strength and power, and the possessor of great influence on
his kingdom.

***“And they ask you about Dhu’l-Qarnayn. Say: I will recite to you an
account of him. Surely We established him in the land and granted him
means of access to everything. So he followed a*** ***course. Until when
he reached the place where the sun set, he found it going down into a
Black Sea, and found by it a people. We said, O Dhu’l-Qarnayn! Either
give them a chastisement or do them a benefit. He said, As to him who is
unjust, we will chastise him, then shall he be returned to his Lord, and
He will chastise him with an exemplary chastisement: And as for him who
believes and does good, he shall have goodly reward, and We will speak
to him an easy word of Our command. Then he followed (another) course.
Until when he reached the land of the rising of the sun, he found it
rising on a people to whom We had given no shelter from It; Even so! And
We had a full knowledge of what he had. Then he followed (another)
course. Until when he reached (a place) between the two mountains, he
found on that side of them a people who could hardly understand a word.
They said, O Dhu’l-Qarnayn! surely Gog and Magog make mischief in the
land. Shall we then pay you a tribute on condition that you should raise
a barrier between us and them He said, That in which my Lord has
established me is better, therefore you only help me with workers, I
will make a fortified barrier between you and them; Bring me blocks of
iron; until when he had filled up the space between the two mountain
sides, he said, Blow, until when he had made it fire, he said, Bring me
molten brass which I may pour over it. So they were not able to scale it
nor could they make a hole in it. He said, This is a mercy from my Lord,
but when the promise of my Lord comes to pass He will make it level with
the ground, and the promise of my Lord is ever true.” (18:83-98)***

According to an authentic report the people didn’t have the knowledge of
how to construct houses. Some historians say that they lived in the
nude, as shall be explained later.  
 As regards the location of the mountains mentioned in the above ayats,
some scholars opine that they are the mountains of Armenia and
Azerbaijan. The northern part of these mountains falls in Turkistan.
Details concerning Gog and Magog state that the two giants were
man-eaters.  
 The translation of the above ayats is in consonance of the view held by
commentators.

Shaykh Muhammad bin Masud al-Ayyashi has reported in his tafsir that
Asbagh bin Nubatah quotes from Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali when people asked
him about Dhu’l-Qarnayn that,  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn was an exalted servant of Allah. His name was Ayaash. The
Almighty selected him after the Deluge of Nuh and gave him suzerainty
over the surrounding areas of Northwest Africa in the two centuries. The
people hit him on the right and he was martyred by it. Then after a
hundred years the Almighty raised him to life in the areas of East. This
time the people hit him on the left side of his head and he was
martyred. The Almighty raised him again after a hundred years and the
lieu of the strokes he had suffered granted him a pair of outgrowths
with a space between them. And gave him Kingship, Prophethood and
miracle.

Then summoned him to the first heaven. When the curtains were removed
from his sight he beheld all that was in the earth, like the mountains,
deserts and passes. Dhu’l-Qarnayn saw everything and the Almighty
bestowed him complete knowledge and he could discriminate between right
and wrong. Allah strengthened his horns with a part of a heavenly cloud
that contained darkness, thunder and lightening. Then he was sent back
to the earth and commanded through revelation,

“Roam in the east and the west, We made easy for you the travel between
cities. And We made the people subservient to your commands and
instilled your fear in their hearts.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn departed for the West end of the earth. As he traversed
the lands he raised a loud scream like the roar of a lion. His horns
emitted darkness, thunder and lightening and all those who were inimical
to him and tried to oppose were instantly killed. In a single day he
reached to the end of the earth before the Sun could reach the West.
(Before Sunset). All the people of the East and the West became
subservient to his command as mentioned by Allah:

***“Surely We established him in the land and granted him means of
access to everything.” (18:84)***

When the sun reached west he saw that it was setting in a hot spring and
70000 angels are tugging at the Sun with fiery chains on the surface of
the sea towards the lands of East, in the same manner as a boat is
towed. He went to the rising place of the sun and it began to shine on
the people of the East as described by the Almighty.

Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali says that he came across a people who were burnt
by the Sun. Their bodies and skins were scorched by sunlight. From here
he (Dhu’l-Qarnayn) proceeded towards darkness and desolation until he
reached a place between two great walls as mentioned by the Holy Qur’an.
The inhabitants of that area complained to Dhu’l-Qarnayn that Gog and
Magog lived between the two mountains and had wreaked havoc in the land.
When the crops and orchards are ready for cultivation they crossed the
barriers and devoured everything.

The people offered Dhu’l-Qarnayn annual tithes if he could construct a
barrier to prevent the mischief of the two giants. Dhu’l-Qarnayn said
that he was in no need of their tithe, but they should provide him labor
for constructing the barrier.

“Collect ingots of iron,” commanded Dhu’l-Qarnayn. The people mixed iron
ingots from a mountain and with these iron bricks constructed a wall
across the chasm. Dhu’l-Qarnayn was the first person to construct a
wall. Then he spread firewood on the ingots and ignited fire and left it
for some time. Then he began to blow at it and when the iron melted,
Dhu’l-Qarnayn called for molten brass. The people brought copper from
the mountains and spread it on iron. The copper melted and mixed with
iron and the wall was ready. Neither Yajooj (Gog) nor Majooj (Magog)
could scale it. They could not even make a hole in this wall.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn was a righteous servant of Allah who commanded a high
position and status. He loved the Almighty and worshipped Him with
sincerity. The Almighty assisted him and provided for him means in the
cities and settled him there. He was able to extend his kingdom to the
countries of east and the west.

An Angel by the name of Raqail had befriended Dhu’l-Qarnayn and used to
visit him frequently. He used to converse with Dhu’l-Qarnayn and the two
shared their secrets.

One day Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked him about the worship of the inhabitants of
the heavens and in what way was it comparable to the worship of the
inhabitants of earth. The angel said, “Dhu’l-Qarnayn! The worship of
earth is not equivalent to the space occupied by one stop in heavens.
There are some angels in the heavens that stand for prayers, they
continue to stand forever, and similarly the angels that are in ruku
(genuflection) remain in that position and do not even go into
prostration. The angels who prostrate do not raise their heads.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn was moved with this description and said,  
 “Raqail! I wish to live for such a long time that I can worship Allah
to the extreme limits and as He deserves to be worshipped.”  
 “There is a divine spring on the earth, known as Ainul Hayaat (the
essence of life)”, said Raqail, “And the Almighty has made incumbent
upon Himself not to send death to a person who drinks from this spring.
Till the person himself wishes for death. If you can reach this spring
and drink from it, you can live as long as you like.”  
 “Where is it located?” asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 “I don’t know, but I have heard in the heavens that the Almighty has
created a huge darkness on earth that neither men nor jinn ever crossed,
and it is beyond that darkness,” replied Raqail.  
 “Where is this darkness?” persisted Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 “I don’t know,” said the angel and departed for the heavens.  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn was very sad because though Raqail had informed him of
the spring and the area of darkness but had not told him where it was
located. He summoned all the scholars and Fuqaha (Jurisprudents) who had
studied the heavenly books and seen the relics of Prophethood.  
 “Have you come across in the books of past rulers the fact that Allah
has created a spring known as the spring of life on this earth?” he
inquired.  
 “And He has vowed that he will not caused to die anyone who drinks from
the spring until the person himself desires death?” he added.  
 We have no knowledge of it.” confessed the Scholars.  
 Then he asked, “Have you studied in any book about a dark area
impossible for the men and jinn to traverse?”

When the people still failed to provide any information he became
sorrowful because he could not unravel the mystery of the spring of
life.  
 There was among the people a son of one of the legatees of some
Prophets. When he saw the grief of Dhu’l-Qarnayn he said, “O king! You
are asking them about something they have no knowledge of. I have the
knowledge of it.”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn has elated and he jumped from his throne in joy. He
called the young boy towards him and said, “Tell me what you know.”  
 “Yes,” agreed the youth, “I have read about it in the scripture of Adam
that was written on the day different objects of the earth like, the
spring and the tree were named. It is mentioned therein that there is a
spring called “Ainul Hayaat” (spring of life). It is related to the
divine decree, in the sense that whoever drinks from this spring will
not die until he requests the Almighty for death. The spring is located
in darkness where neither men or jinn ever entered.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn was pleased to gain this knowledge and said, “My lad! Come
closer, tell me, do you know where this darkness is located?”  
 “I have seen in a book of Adam,” replied the young man, “that the said
spring is towards the east.”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn was pleased and he issued a royal decree among the people
and summoned the scholars, doctors of religion and wise men. Around a
thousand doctors, scholars and Jurisprudents gathered. Dhu’l-Qarnayn
prepared to begin his journey accompanied with these personages and
carried vast quantities of goods and provisions. He began his journey in
the direction of sunrise (east). Crossing the oceans, passing the
mountain and cities, traversing the forests for 12 years they reached
the first darkness. It was pitch dark, darken than night and smoke. It
was surrounding both edges of horizon. Dhu’l-Qarnayn alighted at the
edge of this darkness and summoned the best of his scholars and advisors
and told them, “I wish to cross this darkness.”

All of them bowed in respect to him and said, “You wish to undertake
something no one has ever dared to do. Not even the Prophets and
messengers or the kings and rulers. No one has attempted such a
thing.”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn told them that it was necessary for him to cross it and
search for his aim. They said, “We agree that if you cross this darkness
you will achieve your aim. But we fear if you are confronted with such
an eventuality that will take away your rulership or cause your death,
the people of the earth will fall into terrible misery.”

“Apart from crossing this darkness, I don’t have any other option,” said
Dhu’l-Qarnayn and the people fell down in prostration and prayed, “O
Lord! We implore You to dissociate us from this intention of
Dhu’l-Qarnayn.”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “O scholars, tell me which animal has the sharpest
eyes?”  
 “The virgin mare!” replied the scholars.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn selected 6000 virgin mares from his huge army and gave
them to 6000 of his best soldiers. He put al-Khidhr in charge of 2000
riders and told him to take the lead. Then he ordered the first
contingent to enter the darkness.  
 He followed them at the head of the remaining 4000 troops after
instructing the remaining army to wait for him for 12 years at the same
spot. If he does not return by then, they can go back to their cities or
wherever they wished.  
 al-Khidhr addressed Dhu’l-Qarnayn and said, “O king! We are traveling
through darkness, what if some people lose their way? How shall we find
them?”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn gave him a spinel ruby that shone brilliantly as a torch
and said, “Whenever someone is lost, you must throw this ruby on the
earth. A sound will emanate from it and one who has lost his way will be
able to join you.”

al-Khidhr took the spinel ruby and marched forward into the darkness.
al-Khidhr was leading the way and whenever he moved ahead after a halt,
Dhu’l-Qarnayn camped at that same place. One day al-Khidhr entered a
haze and told his companions to wait outside and not to move from that
place. Then he stepped down from his mount and tossed the ruby in the
mist ahead of him. As he had dropped it in water it didn’t emit a sound
and continued to drop through the layers of water. al-Khidhr was worried
that it might not sound through the water. But when the gem touched the
bottom it emitted a sound that al-Khidhr followed its light. He crossed
the layers of water and suddenly came upon a spring. Its water was white
as milk, clear as ruby and sweeter than honey. al-Khidhr drank the
water, washed his clothes and bathed in it. After dressing up again, he
threw the spinal ruby towards the companions. It released a sound and he
followed it and joined his companions. Mounting the animal he proceeded
to his army.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn passed the same spot but he did not encounter the spring.
He continued to walk in dark for forty nights before reaching light. But
it neither like the light of sun nor moonlight. It was one of the
radiance of the Lord. Then he reached a red desert with soft sand and
pebbles like pearls. Suddenly he saw a huge palace, almost a parasang (4
kms) wide. Dhu’l-Qarnayn halted his army near the palace and entered it
alone. He saw a huge iron bar, its edges hiding both ends of the palace.
A black bird hung from this iron like ababeel.  
 “Who is it?” asked the bird when it heard the footsteps of
Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 “I am Dhu’l-Qarnayn,” he replied.  
 “Was the earth insufficient for you that you had to leave it behind and
travel right up to the gate of my palace?” asked the black creature. The
scene and the words of the hanging bird terrified Dhu’l-Qarnayn. “Do not
fear!” said the bird. “Just reply to my questions.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn agreed and it asked if the quantity of bricks and arc has
increased in the earth. When Dhu’l-Qarnayn replied in the positive, it
shuddered and grew up one third of the length of the iron. Dhu’l-Qarnayn
was frightened. The bird again assured him and inquired further. He
agreed to reply and asked if the people of earth have made technological
progress. When he said, ‘Yes,’ it shivered and shook and grew up two
third the size of iron.

The fear of Dhu’l-Qarnayn increased but it told him not to be afraid and
to keep replying the questions put to him. This time when Dhu’l-Qarnayn
told it to proceed with its queries, it asked. “Tell me, have people
become accustomed to giving false testimonies?”

“Yes,” replied Dhu’l-Qarnayn and the bird shook terribly increased in
size and covered the iron. Dhu’l-Qarnayn was horrified. Again the
creature reassured him and told him to continue answering its questions.
When he gave a go-ahead the bird asked, “Have the people discarded the
belief in the Oneness of Allah? Have they stopped reciting *‘Laa ilaaha
illallaah?’”* “No,” replied Dhu’l-Qarnayn and the bird reduced to two
thirds its size.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn was fearful. It said, “Do not be afraid, tell me…” and
Dhu’l-Qarnayn agreed. “Have people stopped praying?”  
 “No,” replied Dhu’l-Qarnayn. The bird reduced to one-third in size.
Again this frightened Dhu’l-Qarnayn. The bird told him not to fear.
“Keep answering my questions,” it persisted. “All right go ahead,” said
Dhu’l-Qarnayn.

“Have people given up the practice of taking a ritual bath of Janabah
(Discharge of Semen, intercourse, etc.)?” “No,” said Dhu’l-Qarnayn and
the bird returned to its original size.  
 Then Dhu’l-Qarnayn looked and saw a staircase going up the palace. The
bird told him to go up. Dhu’l-Qarnayn ascended the stairs with terror in
his heart. When he reached the top he saw a ceiling that stretched as
far as the eye could see. Suddenly he saw a handsome youth dressed in
white. It was a man. He was in the form of a human being, holding his
head high he peered at the sky and his hand covered his mouth.

“Who is it?” he asked when he heard the footsteps of Dhu’l-Qarnayn. “It
is Dhu’l-Qarnayn.” “O Dhu’l-Qarnayn,” said the man, “Was the earth that
you left behind not vast enough for you that you came here?” “Tell me
why you are holding your hand against your mouth?” asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn.
“Dhu’l-Qarnayn! I am the one who would blow the trumpet. The day of the
Resurrection Day is near. I am waiting for Allah’s Command to blow the
trumpet.”

Then he extended his hand threw an object like a stone towards
Dhu’l-Qarnayn. “Take it, Dhu’l-Qarnayn, when it is hungry you’ll be
hungry too and when it is satiated, you also be satiated. Now go back.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn picked the stone and returned to his companions and
related the whole episode to them. He also showed them the stone and
told them to find its weight. They brought a weighing scale, put the
stone in one pan and another stone of similar size in the other pan.
When they added another stone on the other side yet the stone of
Dhu’l-Qarnayn weighed down the scale. They went on adding stones to
counter it but even after putting one thousand stones the mystery stone
was heavier.

“We cannot understand the mystery of this stone,” confessed the people.
al-Khidhr said, “O king! You are asking them something of which they
have no knowledge. I am having the knowledge about the stone.”

“Inform me of it,” requested Dhu’l-Qarnayn, “What is the secret of this
stone?” al-Khidhr picked up the stone and put it in the weighing scale,
and on the other side he kept a similar stone. Then he took a handful of
dust and laid it on Dhu’l-Qarnayn’s stone. Immediately its weight
decreased and it became equal to ordinary stone.

Seeing this astounding phenomenon the people fell down in prostration.
They said, “O King! It is something beyond our understanding and we know
that al-Khidhr is not a magician. Then how is it possible that we could
outweigh the stone with a thousand stones, whereas al-Khidhr outweighed
it by putting a handful of earth on it.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn told al-Khidhr to explain the mystery.  
 al-Khidhr said, “O Great King! Indeed the Commands of Allah have been
promulgated among the people. And His kingdom is surely going to wreak
havoc upon them. His command discriminates between right and wrong. And
indeed Allah has tested some people by some others. He has put to test
the scholar through another scholar, the ignorant through an ignorant,
and the scholar through an ignorant and the ignorant one through a
scholar. Indeed I have been tested through you, and you, through me.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn addressed al-Khidhr, “May Allah bestow His Mercy upon you.
You say that Almighty tested me through you because you are more
knowledgeable than I am but you are under my command. Allah’s Mercy be
upon you, tell me the secret of this stone.”  
 “O king! The Angel with the trumpet has given you this stone as a
parable. It means that the parable of human beings is as this stone.
That even if a thousand stones are brought to satisfy it, they will not
suffice him. But when it was covered with dust, it became satiated and
it became equal to ordinary stones. You are also like this stone. The
kingdom bestowed to you by Allah is obvious. But you were not satisfied
with it. You wished for something no one else had wished before. You
entered the area no man or jinn had ever dared to enter. It is human
nature not to be satisfied until he is buried.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn wept at the words of al-Khidhr. “You are right,” he said,
“The parable is for me. After this I shall not aim for further
conquests.”  
 Again they stepped into the darkness and started on their return
journey. The hooves of the horses made a noise as if they were galloping
on pebbles. The people asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn the reason for the mysterious
sound. Dhu’l-Qarnayn told them to pick up as many pebbles as they can.
“Those who gather them will be sorry and those who do not will be sorry
too,” said he.  
 Some people collected the pebbles, some did not. When they emerged from
the darkness they found that the pebbles were actually emeralds. Thus
those who had not collected any regretted that they had not, and those
who had collected regretted they had not collected more.  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn returned towards the city of Al Jundal and continued to
reside there until his last moments.

After narrating the incident Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali said, “May Allah have
mercy upon my brother Dhu’l-Qarnayn. He did not commit any sin on the
journey that he undertook. He had passed the valley of emeralds while
heading into darkness he could have carried off all the pebbles because
at that time he was more attached towards earthly life. As he came
across the emeralds on his way back, he was not inclined towards them
because the world had lost all attraction for him.”

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq is quoted through authentic chains that
Dhu’l-Qarnayn had constructed a casket of crystal glass. Then he carried
a large quantity of provisions and along with the box boarded a hatch
and set out to the sea. Upon reaching a spot in the middle of the ocean
he sat in the glass casket and ordered that he be lowered into the sea.
He instructed his men to haul him back when he tugged at the connecting
rope. He told them to continue releasing the rope if he did not signal,
as far as the rope continues. He continued descending into the sea for
forty days. Suddenly he felt someone knocking at the side of his cage
and saying, “Dhu’l-Qarnayn! Where are you heading to?”

“I wish to visit the kingdom of my Lord under the sea like I have seen
His kingdom in the deserts.” The person said, “At this very spot Nuh had
dropped his axe during the deluge. It is yet to reach the bottom.” On
hearing this Dhu’l-Qarnayn tugged the rope and was hauled out.  
 In an authentic hadith Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says that Amir
al-Mu’minin ‘Ali said that the spot where Dhu’l-Qarnayn witnessed the
setting of the Sun in a hot spring is located at the Jabulqa.  
 In another hadith of Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali the Almighty had sent clouds
for Dhu’l-Qarnayn. He created causes for him and made wide his sight. He
could see at night just as well as he could see during the day.

An authentic tradition says that Dhu’l-Qarnayn was a righteous servant
of Allah - causes were created for him, the Almighty bestowed him
dominion of all territories. He was informed of the ‘Spring of Life.’ He
was told that anyone who drinks from this spring does not die until the
blowing of the trumpet. Dhu’l-Qarnayn set out in search of this spring.
He reached a place having 360 springs. al-Khidhr was leading the army.
He was selected by Dhu’l-Qarnayn from among all his companions.
al-Khidhr was the favorite of Dhu’l-Qarnayn, and was summoned by him
along with a large number of soldiers. Dhu’l-Qarnayn gave each of them a
salted dry fish and told them to wash it in the springs. Each one of
them was instructed to wash his fish in a particular spring and not to
allow others to wash their fish.

They separated and each man went to a particular spring and began to
wash the fish. al-Khidhr proceeded to his spring and as he washed it, it
became alive, slipped from his hand and dived into the water. When
al-Khidhr saw this, he was amused. He took off his clothes and stepped
into the water. After washing the clothes he bathed in the spring and
drank from it. Then he tried to catch the fish that had escaped from him
but couldn’t lay his hands on it. He returned with his companions to
Dhu’l-Qarnayn. Dhu’l-Qarnayn ordered all the fishes to be taken back
from his men. When the fishes were collected al-Khidhr ’s fish was
missing. When al-Khidhr was summoned he reported that the fish became
alive and escaped into the water. He said though he had dived into the
spring a number of times to retrieve the fish, he had failed.  
 “Did you drink the spring water?” asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 “Yes,” replied al-Khidhr.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn tried all means to search for the spring but did not
succeed. At last he said to al-Khidhr, “The spring was destined for you.
All my efforts are in vain.”  
 In a number of traditions, Imams have said that they are people like
Yusha‘ and Dhu’l-Qarnayn who were not Prophets but they were having
knowledge and could hear the angels.  
 A number of traditions of ‘Ali state that people asked the Messenger of
Allah whether Dhu’l-Qarnayn was a Prophet or a king, and whether his
horns were of gold or silver.  
 The Holy Prophet said, “Dhu’l-Qarnayn was a king and not a Prophet. His
horns were neither of gold nor silver. He was a righteous servant of
Allah. He loved the Lord and was loved by Him. He performed many tasks
for the Almighty and the Lord helped him in return. He was named
Dhu’l-Qarnayn because he invited the people towards Allah. The people
slashed one side of his head and martyred him. But Allah made him alive
and sent him for a community. He again called them towards the Lord.
These people hit him on the right side of his head. Therefore he was
named Dhu’l-Qarnayn.

According to authentic reports Aswad Qadi says that he went to Imam Musa
al-Ka¨im. “The Imam had not seen me before. He asked me if I was from
the people of the well. I said I was from the followers of the door of
the doors. Again Imam asked the same question and replied in the same
way. When he asked for the third time, I said, “Yes.”  
 “It is the same wall that Dhu’l-Qarnayn had constructed,” he said.  
 In a separate tradition Imam said that Dhu’l-Qarnayn became a king at
the age of twelve and ruled for thirty years.[^1]

Authentic chain of narrators quotes the following hadith from Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir, “Dhu’l-Qarnayn went to hajj with six thousand riders.
When he entered the holy precincts some of his companions went to the
Ka‘bah. When they returned they told him that they had seen the most
handsome personality. “It is Ibrahim, the Khalil (friend) of Allah,”
informed the people.  
 When Dhu’l-Qarnayn heard this he ordered them to fit saddles on 60000
horses as fast as it takes to fix one saddle. Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “I
would not ride, I will go to Ibrahim on foot. So he came on foot and met
Ibrahim. Ibrahim asked him how he has spent his life and how he traveled
until there. He replied,

*“Subh’aana man huwa baaqe laa yaghni. Subh’aana man huwa a’alaemun laa
yansaa. Subh’aana man huwa h’aafez’un laa yasqut’. Subh’aana man huwa
bas’eerun laa qaabo. Subh’aana man huwa malekun laa yaraamo. Subh’aana
man huwa moh’tajebun laa yuraa. Subh’aana man huwa waaseu’n laa
yutakallefo subh’aana man huwa qaaemun laa yalhuwa. Subh’aana man huwa
daaemun laa yasuha.”*

The Messenger of Allah says in a reliable report that Dhu’l-Qarnayn was
a righteous person whom Allah had appointed as His proof upon the
people. He called the people towards the true faith. And told them to
refrain from sins. They slashed one side of his head with a sword and he
disappeared from among them until they began to think that he has died.
Although he had gone into the wilderness. Than he appeared and returned
to the people. Again the unjust people hit him on the other side of his
head.

“Indeed there is a man among you like Dhu’l-Qarnayn,” added the Prophet
.[^2]  
 Then he said, “The Almighty Allah settled him in the Earth and imparted
him control on everything. He reached the east and west extremities of
the earth. The Almighty would very soon give a similar power to one of
my descendants, that is al-Qa’im. He would also conquer the east and the
west, and would not leave unconquered a single field, desert or mountain
that Dhu’l-Qarnayn had. The Almighty will reveal the hidden treasures
and mines for him, and instill his fear in the hearts of people. He
would fill the earth with justice and equity in the same way as it would
be filled with injustice and oppression.

Authentic chains mention that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said that
Dhu’l-Qarnayn was not a Prophet. He was an exalted servant of Allah. He
revered the Almighty and was loved by Him. He used to obey the Divine
commands therefore the Almighty helped and assisted him and gave him
authority on the soft and hard clouds. He mounted the soft cloud and
traveled on it. Wherever he went he passed the people he conveyed his
message so that they do not consider him a liar.  
 Another authentic hadith says that Dhu’l-Qarnayn was given power
between two clouds. He took for himself the soft cloud and left the hard
one for Imam al-Mahdi. When Imam was asked to explain ‘hard cloud’, he
said a hard cloud is the one that has lightening and thunderbolts.
al-Qa’im will ride such a cloud and visit the seven heavens and
penetrate the seven earths, five layers of whom are populated and two
are uninhabited and useless.”

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that when Dhu’l-Qarnayn was given authority,
he took the soft cloud and could not take the rigid one because the
Almighty had stored it for Imam al-Mahdi.  
 We have already mentioned in the chapter of Ibrahim that the first two
people to shake hands in this world were Ibrahim and Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 Traditions also mention that two believer kings have ruled upon the
whole world. One was Dhu’l-Qarnayn and the other Sulayman. Imam says
that Dhu’l-Qarnayn was ‘Abdullah the son of Zahaaka son of Sa’d.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says that the Almighty did not send any Prophet
to rule the earth after Nuh except the following four: Dhu’l-Qarnayn -
whose name was Ayaash, Dawud, Sulayman and Yusuf. Ayaash became the king
of all East and west. Dawud had his kingdom between Shamaat, Astakhra
and Fars. In the same way was Sulayman. But Yusuf ruled from Egypt and
its desert regions. He could not exceed beyond that.[^3]

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in reliable narrations that when Dhu’l-Qarnayn
passed the ‘barrier’ and entered the darkness he saw an Angel standing
atop a mountain. The Angel was mammoth, measuring five hundred hands. He
asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn if there was no way he could have gone in the other
direction. When Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked him who he was? He said that he was
an angel and that the Almighty had posted him at that mountain. And the
foundations (roots) of all mountains were connected to that one.” When
the Almighty desires to rock a particular city he commands me and I
shake its foundations from here.”

Ibn Babawayh has mentioned a report from Wahab bin Munabbah that he
said, “I have read in some books that when Dhu’l-Qarnayn accomplished
the construction of the barrier he returned with his army. On his way he
saw an aged person busy in prayers. Dhu’l-Qarnayn halted near him with
his army until he finished his prayers. Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked him, “Why
were you not frightened of my army when it stopped near you?”

“I was supplicating the One who has a much more powerful army than
yours. And One whose kingdom is much greater than your rule. And One who
is much stronger than you. If I had turned my attention towards you I
would not have been able to seek His favor.”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked him if he would accompany them so that he can
involve him in his administration and seek his help in some affairs. The
worshipper agreed upon the condition that Dhu’l-Qarnayn will bestow him
four things: “One, a bounty that is never destroyed, secondly, a
physical condition that is not affected by any disease. Thirdly, a youth
that will never transform into old age. Fourthly, a life that does not
end in death.

“Who can have control over all this?” asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 He said, “I am with the One who is having power over all these things
and controls all the affairs. You are also in His control.”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn then passed by a scholar. He asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn, “Tell
what are those two things that still exist from the time Allah created
them. And two things that continue and two things that always come after
one another. And those two things that are mutual enemies.  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “The two things that remain established are the sky
and the earth. The two things in motion are the moon and the sun. The
two things that follow each other are day and night. The two things that
are enemies of each other are life and death.”

“You may proceed on your way. You are a wise man,” said the scholar.  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn was going around the cities when he came across an old
man. He had collected human skulls and was turning them around in two
hands and inspecting them closely. Dhu’l-Qarnayn stopped with his army
and asked him why he was turning the skulls around. He replied that by
this action of his he wanted to know which of them had been noble, and
which of them stylish, which were the rich ones and who were poverty
stricken.

“I am studying these skulls for 20 years but still cannot make out the
difference,” he said. Dhu’l-Qarnayn moved ahead saying, “He only wanted
to warn me that’s all.”  
 On his excursions around the earth he reached a community of Musa.
These people practiced utmost justice. Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “Tell me
about yourself. For I have visited the east and the west, the deserts,
mountains and plains, the light and darkness. But I have never seen
people like you. Why have you made the graves of your dead right
opposite the entrance of your houses?”  
 “So that we may never forget death,” they replied.  
 “Why have you not fixed doors to your houses?” asked Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 “Because we have no thieves and cheats. All of us are trustworthy.”  
 “Why didn’t you have any officers and administrators?”  
 “We do not oppress each other,” they said.  
 “Why are there no rulers amongst you?”  
 “Because we do not fight among ourselves.”  
 “Why are there no kings among you?”  
 “Because we do not exploit each other.”  
 “Why is there no disparity among the people as regards their economical
condition?”  
 “Because we consider all people equal and we distribute equally all the
excess profits. And we have mercy upon each other.”  
 “Why are there no disputes and controversies among you?”  
 They said, “Because we are loyal to each other and we do not have
corruption.”  
 “Why don’t people murder and imprison each other?”  
 “We have control over ourselves with correct intentions, we have guided
ourselves with forbearance and self-respect.”  
 “How come you have the same opinion and correct way of doing things?”  
 “Because we never lie.” And we do not backbite and criticize each
other.”  
 “How can you account for the complete absence to the poor and destitute
among you?”  
 “It is so because we distribute our wealth equally.”  
 “Why are there no vicious and cruel people among you?”  
 “Because we have made humility and lowliness as our symbols.”  
 “Why are your life-span greater than ordinary people?”  
 “Because we fulfill the rights of each other and rule with justice. We
do not oppress.”  
 “Why do you never experience famines?”  
 “Because we never forgo repentance.”  
 “Why are you never sorrowful or aggrieved?”  
 “We control ourselves during calamities and console ourselves in
difficult times.”  
 “Why do disasters never strike you or your property?”  
 “Because we do not rely on anyone but Allah and we do not consider the
stars as causes of calamities. We regard all affairs from our Lord.”  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked them if they had seen their forefathers practicing
the same things.  
 “Yes,” they replied, “Our elders were also kind to the destitute,
behaved equitably with the beggars. If someone oppressed them, they
forgave. If someone did evil to them, they responded with goodness. They
did not pilfer the trusted property. They spoke the truth and refrained
from lying. Because of all this, Allah improved their conditions.”

After having acquired all the information, Dhu’l-Qarnayn decided to
settle among them. He remained there until the time his soul departed
for the heavenly abode. His age was 500 years.  
 According to ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “The Almighty
Allah sent Dhu’l-Qarnayn upon his people. The people hit the right side
of his head with a sword. As a result of which the Almighty caused him
to die but made him alive after 500 years and again sent him among the
people. This time they hit him on the left side of his head. He was
again martyred. Again after a period of 500 years, the Almighty gave him
life and sent him to the same people. Allah bestowed him the kingdom
that stretched from the East to the West. When he reached Yajooj and
Majooj he constructed a barrier between them and the people (who were
troubled by them). The barrier consisted of molten iron, copper, bronze
and bitumen. It confined Yajooj and Majooj to the valley.”  
 “Neither Yajooj nor Majooj would have died until they each had produced
a thousand sons each. They are the first to be created after the Angels.
Then Dhu’l-Qarnayn followed a cause.  
 He followed a guide until he reached the place of the rising sun. He
saw a community of nudes. They were ignorant of the method of wearing
clothes.

Then he went with a guide and came at the mouth of a valley. The people
petitioned him against the atrocities of Yajooj and Majooj and requested
him to construct a barrier and confine them to the valley. Dhu’l-Qarnayn
ordered them to collect slabs of iron and he raised a high wall of these
iron bricks across the mouth of the valley. Then he ordered a fire to be
lit below the well that heated the iron pieces red. Then he ordered
bronze to be melted and spread upon the wall. Thus the wall was
complete. Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “It is the mercy of my Lord. When His
promise is fulfilled He shall raze the barrier to the ground. And the
promise of my Lord is true.”

Imam said that in the last period of time when the Resurrection Day
would be near, Yajooj and Majooj shall emerge from the barred valley and
devour human beings.  
 Then Dhul-Qarnayn proceeded towards the western extremity of the earth.
He roared like a lion in every town and caused lightening, thunder, and
darkness. All those who opposed him and were inimical to him were
destroyed by these supernatural phenomena. He had yet to reach the
western horizon when all the people of the east and the west accepted
his suzerainty. Then he was told of a Divine Spring on the earth. It is
known as ‘Ainul Hayaat’. If a living being drinks from this spring he
will remain alive until the blowing of the trumpet.

Upon getting this information Dhu’l-Qarnayn summoned al-Khidhr who was
the best among his companions. He sent for al-Khidhr along with 359 of
the best soldiers. He then gave each of them a dried salted fish, and
told them to proceed to a designated place that had 360 springs. Each of
them was ordered to wash his particular fish in a separate spring. They
set for the place commanded by Dhu’l-Qarnayn and each one headed for one
spring. When al-Khidhr dipped his fish in the spring it became alive and
escaped into the water. al-Khidhr was amazed and stepped into the water
in pursuit of the fish. He drank some of the spring water. When they all
returned to Dhu’l-Qarnayn he said, “The water of that spring was in your
destiny.”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from ‘Abdullah bin Sulayman that he said, “I
have come across the fact in some heavenly books that Dhu’l-Qarnayn
belonged to Alexandria. His aged mother also belonged to the same place
and that he was her only son. He was known as Iskandari. Since the time
of his childhood, he was kind, well-mannered, good natured and a person
with pure character. Till he reached adulthood. He dreamt that he had
reached near the sun and both its edges (Qarn) were under his control.
When he related the dream to his people they named him ‘Dhu’l-Qarnayn’
(Possessor of two ‘Qarns’) (Sides/edges).

After this dream he acquired more courage and became famous and powerful
among his people. Since he was obedient to the Lord of the scholars and
he was a Muslim, the first thing that he decided to do was to call the
people towards Islam. The majority of the people accepted Islam due to
his dominant personality. He ordered the people to build a Mosque. The
people accepted his suggestion willingly.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn said that the length of the Mosque should be 400 hands and
the breadth 200 hands. Each of the walls should be 22 hands thick and
100 hands high. The people asked him where they can obtain wood that can
bear the weight of the walls. And the wood that shall serve as the
foundation of these walls. The people also had no idea how they would be
able to construct such a high ceiling. Dhu’l-Qarnayn told them that when
they finish the construction of two wells they should fill it with mud
and earth until the upper edges of the walls. Then they should collect
gold and silver according to the capacity of people. The gold and silver
(powder) should be mixed thoroughly with the earth filled in the Mosque.

After this the ceiling can be laid upon the walls. It may consist of
copper or brass or any other material selected by the people. After the
ceiling is complete the poor and needy people can be permitted to carry
out the mud from within. Since it would contain gold and silver filings,
the needy people will be eager to participate in the emptying of the
mud.

Thus the people followed the directions of Dhu’l-Qarnayn. The Mosque was
built and the ceiling constructed. The needy people earned gold and
silver and became self-sufficient.  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn divided his army into four battalions. Each battalion
consisted of 10000 soldiers. Then he spread them in different towns and
decided to visit the different places. When his people learnt of the
intention they came to him together and said, “Dhu’l-Qarnayn! By Allah
we assure you, you shall never be deprived of our service. So do not go
and settle in some other city because we are more entitled to your
company. You were born at this place and bred and brought up here. All
our wealth and property is for your sake. Order us whatever you want.
Your mother has also become aged. She has more rights on you than any
other person. It is not appropriate that you disobey and oppose her.”

“By Allah!” said Dhu’l-Qarnayn, “What you say is true. Your advice is
reasonable. But my condition is that of a person whose heart, eyes and
flesh have been possessed. Murder is in front of him and he is chased
from behind. He does not know where he is being taken and for what
purpose. But come! Let us all enter this mosque together and (you all)
become Muslims. Do not oppose or you shall be destroyed.” He summoned
the villagers and the wealthy ones of Alexandria and advised them to
frequent the Mosque, and consoled his mother on his separation.

After these requests and advices Dhu’l-Qarnayn departed from his city.
His mother was aggrieved and wept much. Her weeping did not decrease
even with the passage of time. A villager thought of a scheme to console
the old woman. He organized a grand feast and commissioned a town crier
to inform the villagers of it. All the people were invited. But on the
appointed day it was announced that only those who have not suffered any
grief can participate in the feast. Only those who are immune from every
difficulty and distress may attend. The people stood up and said, “None
of us are absolutely free of troubles and stress. All of us have
suffered the sorrow of the death of some friend or relative. When the
mother of Dhu’l-Qarnayn heard all these, she found it interesting but
she was unaware of the intention of the villager who had organized the
event.

After a few days the same villager organized a feast. This time he told
the town-crier to announce that only those people can attend who have
some problem or the other. Those who are free from troubles cannot
attend the feast. And neither can those who are not aggrieved or
sorrowful. Because one who has no trouble has no goodness.

When the people heard this announcement they remarked that the villager
had previously acted miserly and that now he had regretted his mistake
and wished to rectify himself and conceal his defect. The people
gathered and this villager delivered a sermon. He said, “I have not
called you for a feast. I wish to speak about Dhu’l-Qarnayn. And discuss
the grief that we all experience due to his absence, and the fact that
we are not able to serve him.

Remember Adam whom Allah created by his powerful hands and blew His
spirit into him. Then He ordered the Angels to prostrate before him. He
settled Adam in the Garden and bestowed him with the virtues not
bestowed on any other creature. Then He subjected him to the most severe
calamity and sent him out of the Garden. No difficulty is as serious as
that of Adam. Then Ibrahim underwent the torment of being thrown into
the fire and of obeying the command to slaughter his son - Ya‘qub faced
the sorrow - Yusuf bore the trouble of being enslaved - Ayyub was
subjected to a terrible disease - Yahya was afflicted and Zakariyya
martyred - ‘Isa was arrested - Except Allah no one knows the number of
people who have suffered something or the other. Come let us go and
console the mother of Alexander. Let us see how much patience she has.
Because she is the most aggrieved one due to her son’s separation.”

So all the people went to the old lady and asked if she had attended the
gathering and heard the sermon. She said that she saw everything that
had occurred and heard every word of the speech.  
 “There was no one among you who was more aggrieved than me,” she said.
“Now Allah has given me patience and satisfied me. He has strengthened
my heart. I have faith that my reward shall be proportionate to my
grief. And also hope for your reward that you deserve in lieu of your
sorrow for your brother. And I also hope for the reward that you have
earned for consoling and comforting his mother, and hope that Allah
would forgive me and you all and have mercy on you and me.”

The people witnessed the formidable patience of this wise lady they
returned to their homes. Dhu’l-Qarnayn continued to travel towards the
west and had come quite far. Hence by this time his soldiers were weary
and disheveled. The Almighty sent him a revelation that he was the Proof
of Allah upon all the creatures of the east and the west. And that it
was the interpretation of his dream.  
 “My Lord you wish to give me such a great responsibility and except for
You no one is aware of its greatness,” said Dhu’l-Qarnayn. “How can I
face and vanquish the great army without proper manpower and equipment?
How can I make them obedient to me? Where is the patience to bear their
oppression? Where is the tongue to speak to them? How can I understand
the various languages? Where is the hearing capability to listen to
them? Where are the eyes to see them and where is the courage to
confront them? Where is the perception to understand their desires?
Where is the wisdom to solve their problems? Where is the forbearance to
bear their injustices and remain patient? Where is the justice to judge
them? Where is the recognition (Ma’refah) to rule over them? Where is
the army to conquer them? Verily! I do not possess a single quality.

Hence bestow me power over them. Certainly, you are a Kind Lord. You do
not impose a duty beyond ones capacity. Neither do You impose a burden
exceeding ones strength.”

The Almighty revealed to him that he would be given the strength and
power soon to carry out the responsibility entrusted to him. The Lord
said, “I shall expand your breast so that you can hear everything, and
widen your understanding. So that you understand everything. I shall
bestow the power to your tongue so that you can speak to everything. I
shall make the affairs easy for you. You will not lose anything and I
will guard your affair. So that nothing is hidden from you. I shall
strengthen your back so that you are not fearful of any kind of danger.
I wish to bestow such a personality that you will not fear anything. I
will make your advice acceptable. So that you may not make a mistake. I
shall subdue your body to you so that you can feel every type of
emotion. I shall give you authority over light and darkness and they
will serve you as two armies. The light shall guide you and show you the
way. The darkness shall protect you and gather the communities from
behind you and bring them in front of you.”

Thus Dhu’l-Qarnayn set out with the message of his Lord. The Almighty
helped him and fulfilled all his promises. He set out towards the place
where the sun sets. No community came in contact with him but that he
invited them towards truth. Dhu’l-Qarnayn was satisfied with those who
accepted faith but appointed darkness upon those who refused to believe.
The darkness would darken their cities, villages, houses and buildings.
It penetrated and filled their nose, mouth and bellies. They remained in
a state of shock for sometime and then ultimately accepted invitation
towards belief. They came in submission to him at last.

Finally, Dhu’l-Qarnayn reached the place where the sun sets. Here a
group of people came to him then in the same way as he had with the
people he had encountered before. Thus, he completed the conquest of the
west. During his campaign he met so many different tribes that only
Allah knows the magnitude. He was bestowed with such strength and
splendor that no one can achieve except by the Grace of Allah.

His army become peopled with soldiers of different linguistic areas and
various sensualities also struck his men. He traveled in the darkness
for eight days and nights until he reached a large mountain that had
covered a large area. Suddenly he sighted an Angel who clung to the
mountain and recited:  
*Subh’aana rabbi minal aane ilaa muntahaddahare*  
*Subh’aana rabbi min awwaliddunyaa ilaa aakherhaa*  
*Subh’aana rabbi min mauz’le’ kafee ilaa a’rshe*  
 Subh’aana rabbi min muntahaz’a’olomate ilannoore.

When Dhu’l-Qarnayn heard these words he went into prostration and did
not lift his head until the Almighty gifted him the strength to see that
world.  
 The Angel asked him how he had achieved such power that he reached the
place where no man has ever stepped.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “I have received the capability to reach this place
from the same One Who has subdued this mountain to you. One Who
surrounds all the earth.”  
 “You are right,” said the Angel, “If this mountain had not been there
the earth would have shook with its inhabitants and smothered them.
There is no mountain larger than this on the face of the earth. And this
is the first mountain to have been created by Allah for this earth. The
peak of this mountain touches the first heaven. It roots reach up to the
seventh layer below the earth and surround the whole earth like a
circle. The root (foundations) of every city is connected to this
mountain. When Allah desires to send earthquake to a particular area He
sends a revelation upon me and I shake the roots of that area. Thus the
area has earthquake.”  
 Before returning Dhu’l-Qarnayn requested this Angel to give him some
moral advice. The Angel said, “Do not be aggrieved for your sustenance.
Do not postpone today’s job for tomorrow. Do not shed tears on something
that you have lost. Be helpful and hospitable. Do not be insolent. Do
not be arrogant and oppressive.”

After receiving this advice Dhu’l-Qarnayn returned to his companions.
Then he directed his mighty splendor towards East. And whenever he came
across people he invited them towards Allah and guided in the same way
as he had guided the people of the West. He made them obedient like the
inhabitants of the western region. After completing the mission of East
and West he turned his attention towards the valley that finds a mention
in the Holy Qur’an. He met a people who did not understand any language.
Beyond the valley lived another community that was known as Yajooj and
Majooj.

These creatures resembled the quadrupeds. They ate and drank and had
children. They had females and males and their physical features
resembled the human beings. But they were much smaller than human
beings. Like children, they did not exceed five spans. All of them were
created and wore neither clothes nor shoes. Each had a hump like camels.
It protected them from cold and heat. They had two ears. One of the ears
who covered with hair from the outside as well inside and the other ear
had humps. Instead of nails they had claws like animals, and had fangs
and jaws. When they slept they spread out one ear and covered themselves
with the other from head to toe. Their food consisted of fishes that
rained from a cloud every year. This enabled them to lead a comfortable
life. When it was time for the fishes to rain they would wait in
expectation like people await the rains. When they received the rain of
fishes their conditions improved and they prospered.

They bred quickly and their population increased. The fishes lasted them
a whole year and they did not feed or anything else. Their population
increased so much that only Allah knows its magnitude. If they did not
get fish in a particular year there was famine. They used to starve to
death and their progeny perished as a result. They walked like the
quadrupeds and mated wherever they went. In the year they did not get
rain of fish they would head towards the towns and wreaked havoc
wherever they struck and did not spare anything. Their scourge was worst
than that of locusts and hailstorms.

Wherever they attacked the inhabitants deserted their homes and fled
from that area, because no one could confront them. When they attacked a
particular area they covered it so completely that no one could stop
them. No creature of Allah know their population. It was not possible to
look at them or go near them because they were extremely dirty and
despicable. That’s why they could subdue the people. When they rushed
towards a town they made a sound akin to a storm traveling at the speed
of hundred parasangs and heavy rain. This was due to their sheer number.
Whey they fell upon a city their buzzing resembled that of the bees or
rather more intense that nothing could be heard beyond that din. All the
animals fled the land ravaged by these creatures. For they filled the
whole area and did not leave any space for other creatures. An
astonishing fact was that each of them knew the time of their death.
Because neither the male nor the female died until it had produced a
thousand offspring. When the number of their offspring reached a
thousand they knew they had to die. It used to leave the herd and spread
out its hands and legs to die.

They appeared in the time of Dhu’l-Qarnayn and destroyed city after
city. They aimed at each community and forced the people out of their
homes. They did not turn from wherever they aimed and neither did they
look left or right. When this particular community heard their sound
approaching they came to Dhu’l-Qarnayn and petitioned him saying, “We
have heard that whatever you have been bestowed by Allah is like
rulership and kingship. You possess a forceful personality and have been
helped by darkness and light and the armies of the earth. We happen to
reside in the neighborhood of Yajooj and Majooj. Between us and them is
a mountain and nothing else. Between the two mountains is a pass. If
they attack us they will drive us out of our houses. We cannot withstand
their attack. They have a teeming population. They look like humans but
they move about here and their and graze. But they can attack and kill
like carnivorous animals. They eat anything that has life, including
snakes and scorpions. None of the creatures can equal their population.
We know that one day they would cover the whole earth and purge it of
its entire people. They would spread corruption in the earth. All the
time we dread their attack through the mountain pass. The Almighty has
given you strength and might, not given to any other person. Shall we
collect some donations to offer you tithe? So that you may build a
barrier between us?”

Dhu’l-Qarnayn said, “Whatever Allah has gifted me is better than your
contribution. But you can help by providing manpower so that I can
accomplish the task of constructing a barrier. Get me iron slabs.”  
 “Where can we get so much iron and copper to build the wall?” they
asked.  
 Dhu’l-Qarnayn informed them of iron and copper mines. When they asked
him as to how they could cut the metal, Dhu’l-Qarnayn guided them
towards another mine that produced a material called saamoor. Samoor was
extremely white and it melted any metal it came in contact with. The
people made some mining tools with it and the same types of tools were
used by Sulayman to cut the slabs of stone for construction of
Jerusalem. The jinn had brought these instruments for Sulayman.

Thus the people brought to Dhu’l-Qarnayn all the iron and copper that
was sufficient to build the barrier. The iron was melted and shaped like
slabs. Instead of bricks the wall was raised with these iron slabs. In
place of cement and mortar molten copper was poured between the iron
slabs. There was a distance of one parasang between two parallel
mountains.

Dhu’l-Qarnayn first commanded that a foundation be dug for building the
wall. The people dug until they reached water. The thickness of the
barrier was one mile. After laying the iron bricks they melted the
copper into a thin liquid and poured it over the iron wall. It seemed as
if it was a single piece. The barrier touched the mountains on either
side. It shone like a red and black fabric due to iron and copper.

Yajooj and Majooj come near this wall every year because they tour
different areas. But when they reach the barrier they could not traverse
it and thus go back from where they had come. They will continue this
practice every year until time for the Resurrection Day nears. One of
the signs of the Resurrection Day is the reappearance of al-Qa’im of the
Progeny of Muhammad. The Almighty will open the barrier. As mentioned in
the Holy Qur’an:  
 “…when Gog and Magog are let loose and they shall break forth from
every elevated place.”[^4]

[^1]: It is possible that he ruled for thirty years prior to his
martyrdom or occultation. Or it might have been after that. It was
during the time when he ruled over the world that is referred in this
tradition. Thus, it does not contradict the other traditions.

[^2]: He meant Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali

[^3]: Dhu’l-Qarnayn is mistaken for a Prophet probably because he was an
undisputed ruler and is always mentioned among Prophets. It is possible
he had two names, Ayyashi and ‘Abdullah.

[^4]: After this is mentioned all that we have narrated in the tradition
of Wahab. We have refrained from repeating it. However, we must know
that all the things mention in these two narrations that do not match
with the information of previous traditions are not reliable.


