An account of Ya‘qub and Yusuf
==============================

Abu Hamza Thumali narrates through a correct chain of traditionalists
that one day he performed the morning prayers with Imam Zayn al-‘abidin
in a mosque of Madinah. After the prayers, Imam returned home. Abu Hamza
Thumali accompanied the master. When they reached the residence Imam
instructed his slave girl, Sakina, that she must serve meals to anyone
who came begging to his door as it was Friday. Abu Hamza Thumali says
that he asked, “But so may people pass by your house, surely all of them
are not deserving?”

“O Thabit!” said Imam, “I fear that (if I am discriminative) I might
spurn a genuine destitute. In that case I may be inflicted with the
calamity that befell Ya‘qub and his progeny. Indeed! We must serve food
for the needs of his family. On the eve of a Friday at the time of
breaking the fast a needy believer, who was also fasting, approached him
with a request for help. He was very pious and had a high status near
Allah. He came to the door and begged for food but no one heeded his
request.[^1]  
 Feeling disappointed and surrounded by the darkness of night he turned
and went away saying, *“Inna lillaahe wa inna ilaihe Raaje’oon”*
(Indeed, we belong to Allah and to Him we return). That night he went to
bed hungry, and he remained hungry the next day too. But he maintained
patient and continued to chant the praise of Allah.

Ya‘qub and his family ate to satiation that night and in the morning
there was food left over from the previous evening. The Almighty
revealed to Ya‘qub, and said, “You have insulted one of My servants to
such a degree that My penalty is to target you. Therefore, expect My
retribution for yourself and your family. Ya‘qub! The most beloved and
respected to me from the Prophets are those who have mercy on the poor
and destitute, and one who seats them near himself, and one who feeds
them and is a hope of refuge for them. Ya‘qub! Why did you have no mercy
for My poor servant? He is diligent in worship and satisfied on the
little he gets in the world. Last night he came to your door with a
request for some eatables to break his fast. You did not offer anything
and he complained to Me and went to sleep hungry. But he recited My
praise and again fasted the next day, whereas you and your children went
to bed satiated. And the surplus food remained with you.  
 O Ya‘qub! It seems you are unaware that My wrath is more swift for My
devotees than on My enemies. My kindness and favors are for My devotees
and My deception and tests are for My enemies.

I swear by My might that I shall sent a calamity upon you, and make your
sons the victims of a disaster. I shall make you involved in sorrow and
pain. So be prepared for My wrath and be content with it. Be patient in
the calamities.”

Abu Hamza Thumali said, “May I be sacrificed for you! When did Yusuf
have the dream?”  
 “On the same night when Ya‘qub and his sons slept satiated whereas the
beggar slept hungry,” said Imam. “That night Yusuf had a dream and he
related it to his father the next day.”

***“O my father! Surely I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon. I
saw them making obeisance to me.” (12:4)***

When Ya‘qub heard the dream the revelation of the imminent calamity had
already descended on him. So,

***“He said, O my son! Do not relate our vision to your brothers, lest
they devise a plan against you;” (12:5)***

Yusuf did not heed the warning seriously and told his brothers of the
dream.”  
 Imam said that the first calamity to strike Ya‘qub and his sons was the
envy of the brothers of Yusuf.

On the basis of what Yusuf had related of his dream, and the excessive
affection Ya‘qub had for Yusuf they hatched a plot among themselves.  
 They discussed that their father loved Yusuf and his younger brother
more than he loved them even though they were stronger and deserving.
They served him with all sincerity whereas Yusuf and his brother did not
shoulder any responsibility.

***When they said: Certainly Yusuf and his brother are dearer to our
father than we, though we are a (stronger) company; most surely our
father is in manifest error:***  
***Slay Yusuf or cast him (forth) into some land, so that your father’s
regard may be exclusively for you, and after that you may be a righteous
people. (12:8-9)***

The brothers came to Ya‘qub that very moment.

***“They said, O our father! What reason have you that you do not trust
in us with request to Yusuf? And most surely we are his sincere
well-wishers.” (12:11)***

“Please send him with us tomorrow,” they requested, “So that he may
partake of the fruits in the forest and enjoy himself. We shall take
care of him.”  
 Ya‘qub said that when Yusuf was out of his sight he was aggrieved. He
could not bear the separation of Yusuf.  
 “I fear the wolf may devour him,” Ya‘qub tried to make an excuse
fearing that the promised calamity may descend with regard to Yusuf,
because Yusuf was his favorite child. But Allah’s decree came to pass
and Ya‘qub failed to obviate Divine trial. He entrusted Yusuf to the
brothers in spite of the foreboding. When they left with Yusuf, Ya‘qub
followed them and took Yusuf and embraced him. Then returned him to the
elder brothers. They began to move on quickly lest Ya‘qub again follows
them and take Yusuf away with him, and took him far away into the
forest. The eldest of them suggested that Yusuf need not be slain in
order to separate him from his father. He could be cast into a well so
that some passers-by may fish him out and carry him away. So they took
Yusuf to well and pushed him inside thinking he would soon drown. When
Yusuf reached the bottom of the well the brothers heard a voice,  
 “O sons of Ya‘qub convey my salaams to my father.”  
 When the brothers heard this they decided not to leave the place until
they are sure Yusuf is dead. They waited until late night and returned
home lamenting and said, “O father! We had left Yusuf with our
belongings and went hunting. When we returned we found that a wolf had
carried him off.”

*“Innalillaahe wa inna ilaihe raajeo’on,* (Indeed we belong to Allah and
to Him we shall return)”, said Ya‘qub and began to weep, knowing that
the foretold calamity had descended. He maintained patience and resigned
to the Divine decree.  
 He told his sons, “What you say is not true.”

***“Nay, your souls have made the matter light for you,” (12:18)***

“The Almighty would never allow Yusuf to be devoured by a wolf before I
witness the realization of the true dream of Yusuf,” he added.  
 Next morning the brothers decided to check the condition of Yusuf.
Whether he was alive or dead. When they reached the place, they saw that
some travelers had gathered around the well. The group had previously
deputed one person to get water. He had tossed the bucket in the well
and Yusuf clung to it and was pulled out. When the bucket rose to the
surface the traveler was astonished to find a cherubic boy sitting on
it. He called his companions and showed them the child.  
 Yusuf’s brother stepped forward and said, “He is our slave-boy who fell
into the well yesterday. We came to pull him out today.”  
 Saying this, they took Yusuf aside and issued a dire warning that if he
did not support their claim that he was their slave, they would kill
him. Yusuf agreed to save his neck.  
 The brothers again approached the group of travelers and offered to
sell Yusuf to them. One of them purchased Yusuf for 20 Dirhams. The
brothers of Yusuf were same as the travelers. They were unaware of the
true value of Yusuf to have sold him for such a paltry sum. The buyer of
Yusuf took him to Egypt and sold him to ‘Aziz, the Emperor.  
 As the Qur’an says,

***“And the Egyptian who bought him said to his wife: Give him an
honorable abode, maybe he will be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a
son.” (12:21)***

The narrator says that Abu Hamza Thumali asked Imam about the age of
Yusuf when he was cast into the well. Imam said it was nine years. Some
reports mention seven years and it is considers more likely.

The narrator asked about the distance between the house of Yusuf and
Egypt. Imam said it was twelve days’ travel. Imam also said that no one
could equal the elegance and beauty of Yusuf. When he reached maturity
the king’s wife became infatuated with him and tried to lure him towards
adultery. Yusuf explained to her that he belonged to a family that did
not indulge in fornication. One day this woman bolted the door and told
him not to fear, and she lay down before him. Yusuf disengaged himself
from her and rushed to the door. Zulaykha ran after him and pulled at
his shirt and tore its neck. The king arrived at that moment and saw
them in this condition. Zulaykha tried to shift the blame on Yusuf and
said to the king,

***“What is the punishment of him who intends evil to your wife except
imprisonment or a painful chastisement?” (12:25)***

When the king decided to punish Yusuf he said, “By the God of Ya‘qub
(as..)! I never intended any evil with your wife. She herself did cling
to me and was persuading me to sin. I ran away from her. You can ask
this child which of us was guilty, as he has witnessed the scene.”  
 Someone brought an infant to her. The Almighty bestowed him the power
of speech and he said,  
 “O King! Check the garment of Yusuf. If his shirt is torn from the
front, he went for her and if it is torn from behind, she had been in
his pursuit.”

When the king saw the infant speaking he became afraid. The garment of
Yusuf was called for and found that it was torn from behind. He told
Zulaykha that it was her evil plot.

***“Surely it is a guile of you women, surely your guile is great.”
(12:26)***

Then he told Yusuf to ignore the matter and keep it confidential so that
no one may come to know of it from him. But Yusuf did not heed the
suggestion and the news spread around the town. Some women even taunted
that the wife of ‘Aziz is in love with her slave and is trying to woo
him.

***“So when she heard of their sly talk she sent for them and prepared
for them a repast, and gave each of them a knife, and said (to Yusuf):
Come forth to them. So when they saw him, they deemed him great, and cut
their hands (in amazement), and said, Remote is Allah (from
imperfection); this is not a mortal, this is but a noble angel.”
(12:31)***

Thus instead of cutting the fruit they cut their hands. Zulaykha
castigated them of having blamed her and said the attractiveness of
Yusuf was responsible for her misdemeanor.  
 The ladies dispersed from the gathering. Later one of them sent a
message to Yusuf and invited him. Yusuf refused and entreated Allah that
he preferred imprisonment to a life of sin. He prayed to Allah that if
He did not foil the plot of women he might surrender to their overtures
and became a sinner. The Almighty saved Yusuf from the guile of the
women. When the affair spread among the Egyptians, the king, instead of
following the advice of the speaking infant decided to imprison Yusuf.
And whatever occurred therein is documented in the Qur’an.

‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim relates from Jabir that Yusuf saw the following eleven
stars in his dream: *Tarriq, Hawbaan, Zeyaal, Zulkatfain, Wabaab,
Qaabis, Amoodaan, Feelaq, Masbeeh, Soo’ zaroogh.*  
 According to an authentic tradition Imam Muhammad al-Baqir was asked
about the dream of Yusuf in which he saw eleven stars, the sun and the
moon all prostrating towards him. Imam interpreted the dream and said it
forecasted that Yusuf will become the Emperor of Egypt, his eleven
brothers stood for eleven stars. The sun denoted his mother, Raheel and
the Moon represented Ya‘qub. When they reached him they thanked Allah in
prostration for having found Yusuf. They prostrated for Allah and not
for Yusuf.

Another chain reports the same Imam as saying that Yusuf had fifteen
brothers. Binyamin (Benjamin) and Yusuf had the same mother. Ya‘qub was
known as Israelullah, that means the special one of Allah or the chosen
one of Allah or simply “The chosen one.” He was the son of Ishaq the son
of Ibrahim, the Khalil (friend) of Allah. Yusuf was nine years old when
he saw that dream and related it to his father, Ya‘qub. He told Yusuf
not to mention the dream to his brothers, or they would do something
sinister to him.” They will try to get rid of you because Satan is an
enemy of man. He is about to show his enmity.” Then he said, “As you
have seen the dream, there is hope in it that your Lord will exalt your
status. In the light of Divine Knowledge the dream that you say can be
interpreted in a way that the Almighty will bestow the Divine sciences
and Prophethood upon you, as bestowed upon your forefathers, Ishaq and
Ibrahim. Indeed your Lord is wise and knowing.”

Yusuf excelled his contemporaries in elegance and physical beauty.
Ya‘qub doted on him and preferred him to other children. This caused
jealousy to triumph over Yusuf’s brothers. They discussed the matter
among themselves as narrated by the Almighty in Qur’an:

***“When they said, Certainly Yusuf and his brother are dearer to our
father than we, though we are a (stronger) company, (Imam said it means
a group); most surely our father is in manifest error.” (12:8)***

The brothers planned to kill Yusuf so the affections of Ya‘qub will be
exclusively for them.  
 One of them, named Lawi, said it was not necessary to kill Yusuf and
they can separate him from his father and hide him where Ya‘qub cannot
see him. And thus he will transfer his attention to the brothers. So
they came to Ya‘qub and asked him why he did not entrust Yusuf to him.
Even though they were concerned for his safety. They requested that
Yusuf be allowed to accompany them the next day, so that he may graze
the sheep and play about. They assured that they shall guard him.  
 The Almighty put the words into the mouth of Ya‘qub and he said,

***“Surely it grieves me that you should take him off, and I fear lest
the wolf devour him while you are heedless of him.” (12:13)***

The brothers said,

***“Surely if the wolf should devour him notwithstanding that we are a
(strong) company, we should then certainly be losers.” (12:14)***

According to Imam a company (Usbah) consists of two to thirteen persons.
Thus they set off with Yusuf and cast him into the well.  
 Allah says,

***“So when they had gone off with him and agreed that they should put
him down at the bottom of the pit, and We revealed to him: You will most
certainly inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive
(do not recognize you).” (12:15)***

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says that Archangel Gabriel descended while Yusuf
was in the well and told him that, (the Almighty says) “We shall make
you the Emperor of Egypt with honor and dignity. And shall make your
brothers needful to you so that they come to you for assistance and you
can tell them what they had done to you. And they will not recognize you
at that time.”  
 It is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when revelation descended
upon Yusuf in the well, he was seven years old.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim says that when Yusuf was separated from his father, and
they decided to kill him, Lawi suggested that instead of killing him, he
could be pushed into a well, so that some traveler will pull him out and
take him away. They brought him to the well and ordered him to undress.
Yusuf began to cry and requested them not to strip him naked. One of
them took out a knife and threatened him with it. Ultimately the clothes
were removed and Yusuf was thrown into the well. The brothers returned
home.

Yusuf began to supplicate to his Lord, “O the Lord of Ibrahim, Ishaq and
Ya‘qub. Have mercy on my helplessness, weakness, and tender age.”  
 Just then, an Egyptian caravan has arrived in the vicinity of the well.
One of them was sent to draw water from the well. When he dropped the
bucket into the well Yusuf clung to it and when they pulled out the
bucket they found a young boy having an attractive physique and elegance
as never seen in the world.

The fellow travelers were immediately conveyed the good news of having
received a handsome slave. They could sell him and add the proceeds to
their capital. When the brothers learnt of it. They came to the caravan
and said that it was their slave who had run away. And they secretly
warned Yusuf that if he did not support their claim of his slavery, they
would kill him. When the people asked Yusuf he said under duress that he
was their slave. They offered to purchase Yusuf. The brothers agreed to
sell him upon the condition that they will take him to Egypt and never
show him in this area again. Thus Yusuf was sold for eighteen Dirhams.
The brothers sold him so cheap because they were unaware of the worth
and position of Yusuf.

An authentic tradition of Imam al-Ridha says, “Yusuf was sold for twenty
Dirham and their value today is 1270 Dinars.”  
 It is quoted from the tafsir of Abu Hamza Thumali that the man who
purchased Yusuf was Malik bin Za’ra. From the time he purchased Yusuf
there was prosperity in his economic conditions, he earned more profit
during the trip. This continued until they resold him. The increase did
not continue after that. Malik was much attracted towards Yusuf and saw
in him the traces of nobility and his elegant countenance. One day he
told Yusuf to describe his genealogy. Yusuf said he was the son of
Ya‘qub, son of Ishaq, son of Ibrahim. On hearing this Malik picked him
up and began to weep. Then he told Yusuf that he had no children and
wanted Allah to bestow him with many sons. Yusuf prayed for this man and
he had twelve twins in a row - all males.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim says that when the brothers returned to Ya‘qub they
smeared the shirt of Yusuf in blood so that they can say that a wolf had
torn him apart.

Imam al-Baqir says that they slaughtered a kid and smeared the shirt in
its blood. Lawi said, “Brothers! Ya‘qub, the Israelullah is the son of
Ishaq the Prophet of Allah, the son of Ibrahim the friend (Khalil) of
Allah. Do you think the Almighty will conceal this secret from our
father.”  
 “So what do you suggest?” they asked.  
 He said, “Come let us perform Ghusl and pray in congregation and invoke
Allah that He conceal this matter from our father. Indeed! Allah is
Forgiving and Merciful.”  
 They stood up and performed the ghusl. But according to the ritual law
of Ibrahim and Ya‘qub there was a stipulation of at least eleven persons
to form a congregation. They were only ten. They said, “We have no one
to preside over the prayer.”  
 Lawi said, “Never mind, we shall regard the Almighty as the Imam of our
congregation.” They performed the prayers and pleaded to the Almighty to
withhold the secret from their father. At the time of going to bed they
came lamenting to their father. Brandishing the blood-smeared shirt of
Yusuf they said that they were running hither tither and engrossed in
recreation, leaving Yusuf to care for their belongings. The wolf had
tore him to pieces.

***“They said, O our father! Surely we went off racing and left Yusuf by
our goods, so the wolf devoured him, and you will not believe us though
we are truthful.” (12:17)***  
***“…He said, Nay, your souls have made the matter light for you, but
patience is good and Allah is He Whose help is sought for against what
you describe.” (12:18)***

Then he said, “How vicious was the wolf upon Yusuf and how kind he was
on his shirt. He tore apart Yusuf but did not damage his shirt a bit.”  
 Then the travelers took Yusuf to Egypt and sold him to the ‘Aziz
(Emperor). When the ‘Aziz beheld the elegance and beauty of Yusuf he
told his wife Zulaykha to nurture the boy with love and care so that he
may prove useful for them in the future. He decided to adopt him since
he had no children of his own. Both of them showered their affections on
Yusuf and when he reached maturity, Zulaykha fell in love with him and
all the women who saw him became infatuated with him. Even the men were
attached to regard him with affection. His face shone like a full moon.
Zulaykha tried to entice him for physical relationship and one day she
bolted the door when they were apparently alone in a room. Then she
urged him to fulfill her wishes as soon as possible. Yusuf sought the
refuge of Allah from the vile act that she was forcing him in.

“Your husband, the ‘Aziz has reared me and regards me highly. Indeed the
Almighty does not bestow salvation on the transgressors,” he reasoned.  
 But Zulaykha clung him passionately. Yusuf saw the face of Ya‘qub in a
corner. He was biting one finger with his teeth and saying, “O Yusuf!
Your name is included in the list of Prophets in the heavens. Do not
perform a misdeed for which your name may be written among the
fornicators of the earth.”

In another tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq when Zulaykha decided to
have sexual relations with Yusuf, there was an idol in the room. When
she put a curtain on it, Yusuf asked the reason behind it. She said, she
was ashamed of the idol.

“You are ashamed of the idol that neither sees nor hears you. Shall I
not be ashamed of my Lord who is manifest and informed about
everything?” asked Yusuf.  
 Then he disengaged himself and tried to flee. Zulaykha pursued him and
at that moment the ‘Aziz appeared at the doorway. Zulaykha asked him
what the punishment was for a person who intended evil with his wife,
except imprisonment or a painful punishment.  
 Yusuf pleaded innocence and said she herself harbored evil intentions
on him. There was an infant in the cradle at that time. The Almighty
sent a revelation on Yusuf and he suggested to ‘Aziz that he ask the
infant who was a witness of all that had passed. “He will tell you that
I have not betrayed trust,” said Yusuf.

‘Aziz asked the child and the Almighty gave it the power of speech to
testify in favor of Yusuf.  
 The little child said, “If the shirt of Yusuf is torn from the front,
Zulaykha speaks the truth and Yusuf is lying. But if his shirt has a
tear at the back, Zulaykha is a liar and Yusuf is truthful.”  
 ‘Aziz inspected the shirt of Yusuf and found that it was torn from
behind. He told Zulaykha that it was her evil plot. And the guile of you
women is great,” he added.

He requested Yusuf to keep the incident secret and ordered Zulaykha to
repent for her sin as she was a guilty one. Then this incident became
known and the ladies of the town castigated Zulaykha for her weakness.
When Zulaykha learnt of their criticism she invited them and arranged
for them a repast. She handed a knife and a tangerine to each of the
women and told them to slice it. The same moment she ordered Yusuf to
enter the gathering. When they saw the handsome Yusuf, they could not
discriminate between the fruit and their hands and instead of the
tangerine they slashed their fingers.

Zulaykha told them excuse her because it were they who had accused her
of misdemeanor whereas the unearthly elegance of Yusuf was responsible.
She said, “I call him towards me and he refuses. If he does not submit
to my wishes, I shall have him imprisoned.” The ladies returned home and
before the night fell, each of them sent a messenger to Yusuf and
inviting him. Yusuf was troubled and pleaded to Allah that prison was
better than the predicament he was in. And that which the women were
trying to entice him for.

“If You do not fail their attempt I might fall in the trap. I will then
be included in the ignorant ones,” he prayed.  
 The Almighty accepted his supplication and nullified the guile attempts
of women. Zulaykha ordered that Yusuf be imprisoned. Allah says,

***“Then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs that they
should imprison him until a time.” (12:35)***

According to Imam al-Baqir the ayats speaks about the testimony of
infant and the tearing of Yusuf’s shirt and Zulaykha’s pursuit of Yusuf.
Thus when Yusuf refused to oblige Zulaykha she began to plot against him
and her husband decided to imprison Yusuf.

Two young slaves of the king were also convicted with Yusuf. One of them
was a baker and one a water-carrier. Another tradition says that ‘Aziz
appointed two people to guard Yusuf. When the two of them stepped into
the prison they asked Yusuf what knowledge he had. He replied that he
could interpret dreams. One of them said he had seen himself pressing
the grapes for wine. Yusuf told him he would be released and go to
become the royal barman and win the king’s favor. The baker said he
dreamt of having a bowl of bread on his head and birds were feeding on
it. Actually he had not seen any such dream, he was only making it up.
Yusuf told him that he would be killed by the king and his corpse shall
be hung at the gate where birds would feed on his brain. The man said,
“I lied to you. I had no such dream.”

Yusuf said, “Whatever I predicted would surely come to pass.”  
 Yusuf behaved kindly with the prison inmates. He visited the sick,
helped the needy and created an amiable atmosphere for his companions.
At last the king ordered the release of the man who had seen the dream
of grape juice. Yusuf requested him to put a good word to the king
regarding Yusuf. But when this man had the opportunity, the Satan
enticed him to ignore Yusuf’s request. Thus Yusuf remained in the prison
for many years after that.

According to reliable traditions, Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that
Archangel Gabriel descended to Yusuf when he was in the prison. He told
him that the Almighty sends His salaams and says that “I have made you
the best of my creations.” Yusuf fell down and putting his cheek on the
ground said, “You Alone are my Lord.”  
 Archangel Gabriel told him, “The Almighty says that He has made you
more lovable to your father than your other brothers.”  
 Yusuf touched his cheeks to the ground and said to Allah. “You Alone
are my Lord!”  
 Archangel Gabriel said, “The Almighty says that He brought you out of
the well you had been pushed in it and were convinced that you would
perish.”  
 Again Yusuf touched his cheek on the earth and said,  
 “You Alone are my Lord.”  
 Archangel Gabriel said, “Indeed the Almighty had decreed this
punishment for you because you sought the help of someone else. So you
remain in prison for some more years.” When the prescribed term was
over, and he was permitted to recite the Dua al-Faraj (Supplication of
release) he kept his cheeks on the ground and said, “*Allahumma inkaanat
d’unoobi qad Akhlaqat wajhi in’ndaka fainni atawajjahoo ilaika be wahje
aabaais’ s’aalehe’en - Ibrahim, wa Ishaq wa Ya’qoob.*”  
 (Translation: O Allah if my sins have degraded my face near You, I
certainly turn towards You through the faces of my ancestors, Ibrahim,
Ishaq and Ya‘qub).

The Almighty forgave him and he was released from the prison.  
 The narrator asked Imam if they could also recite the same
supplication. Imam told him to recite as follows:

*“Allahumma inkaanat d’u noobi qad Akhlaqat wajhi in’ndaka fainni
atawajjahoo ilaika be nabiyyeka nabiyyar rah’ma. S’allallaaho a’laihe wa
aalehi wa Aliyy-waa Faat’emah - wal h’asane-wal-h’osaine wal aaimmah
a’laihimus salaam.”*

‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim says once the king dreamt that five lean cows were
eating five fat cows. And seven dried ears of corn striking to seven
green ears of corn and were dominant upon them. He asked his ministers
to interpret the dream but they could not understand it. They said it
was a nightmare and they did not know the interpretation of this
nightmare.

The person whose dream Yusuf had interpreted remembered Yusuf. When he
was released Yusuf had requested him to plead on his behalf to the king
but he had forgotten it. He was present in the court and seven years had
passed since his release. He told the King that he would soon provide
the interpretation of the dream if he is permitted to visit the prison.
So he came to Yusuf in the prison and said,  
 “O Yusuf! O the truthful one! What is the interpretation of seven lean
cows eating seven fat ones and seven dried ears of corn on seven green
ones. Tell me so that I may inform the king and his officers. They may
realize your special qualities, virtues and understand the
interpretation of your dreams.”

Yusuf said, “You should cultivate your lands very carefully during the
next seven years and store as much as you can. Do not thresh the crops
to keep them safe from being spoilt with grain beetles. Consume less
grain during this period, for, the next seven years there would be a
year of plentiful rains. There would also be abundance in crops and
fruit cultivation.”  
 The king’s barman returned to the king and narrated the words of Yusuf.
He expressed his desire to meet Yusuf personally and a messenger was
dispatched to summon Yusuf from the prison. When the messenger came to
Yusuf he told him to ask the king about the women whom Zulaykha had
invited for a repast, “When they had seen me they had cut their fingers.
Indeed my Lord is aware of their guile! Ask the king to summon those
women and ask them about the matter concerning me and about Zulaykha.
They were aware of all the cause of my imprisonment, that was due to my
refusal to give myself to their desires.”

‘Aziz summoned the women and asked them concerning Yusuf and how they
had tried to lure him. The women glorified Allah and said they knew
Yusuf was blameless. Zulaykha said the truth was manifested, “Actually I
had attracted him towards myself while he spoke the truth.”  
 After this Yusuf said that, “I only intended that the king should
realize that I have not betrayed trust during his absence. Because Allah
does not guide those who betray trust. And I do not acquit myself from
evil. Indeed, the soul entices one towards evil a great deal. Except
when the Almighty directs His Mercy towards me. Certainly, my Lord is
Beneficent and Merciful.”  
 The ‘Aziz said, “Bring Yusuf to me, I want to appoint him as a close
aide.” Yusuf came to him and when he conversed with him the king became
aware of the light of guidance, knowledge, wisdom and intellect that
shone from his forehead.

“From today,” said ‘Aziz, “You are my confidant and a trustworthy aide.
You can ask for whatever you like.” Yusuf told ‘Aziz to entrust him with
all the wealth and agricultural products of Egypt. “I assure that I
would manage them with absolute honesty. And I know how it should be
deployed.”  
 The king of Egypt put Yusuf in charge of the revenues and national
wealth. The Almighty Allah says,

***“And thus did We give to Yusuf power in the land — he had mastery in
it wherever he liked; We send down Our mercy on whom We please, and We
do not waste the reward of those who do good.” (12:56)***

Thus, under the directions of Yusuf all the agricultural produce of
Egypt was collected in granaries constructed with stone and mortar. All
the citizens were rationed grain only sufficient for their needs. The
excess of grains were stored without threshing in huge stacks. This
process continued for seven years. When the seven years of draught
arrived the ears of corn stored in the previous seven years were removed
and sold at the rate prescribed by Yusuf. At that time he was of a
distance for 18 days’ travel from his father. People from the adjoining
areas traveled to Egypt to purchase their requirements from Yusuf. The
respected father of Yusuf and his brothers were residents of an area
that produced a large quantity of gum. The brother’s of Yusuf used to
carry a quantity of gum and barter it with grains of Egypt. Yusuf
supervised these transactions in person.

***“And Yusuf’s brothers came and went into him, and he knew them, while
they did not recognize him.” (12:58)***

Yusuf issued food grains to his brothers and gave little more than the
measure, then asked then who they were.  
 They said, “We are the sons of Ya‘qub the son of Ishaq son of Ibrahim
the Khalil of Allah. The One whom Nimrod had cast into the fire but he
did not burn. The Almighty made the fire cool and a safety for him.”  
 Yusuf asked them the well-being of Ya‘qub and why he has not
accompanied them to Egypt. The brothers said, “He is an old and weak
person.”  
 “Do you have any other brother?” asked Yusuf.  
 “Yes,” they replied, “We have one more brother from a different
mother.”  
 Yusuf said, “Bring that brother along with you the next time you come
for rations. I give a full measure and also some extra quantity. Thus if
you do not bring your step-brother I would not be having anything to
give you and neither would I allow you to reach me.”

The brothers decided to try their best in persuading their father. Yusuf
told his servants to put back the things his brothers had brought back
into their luggage without their knowledge so that when they return home
unpack their foods they realize our generosity and come back again.”  
 The brothers of Yusuf came home and told their father the king of Egypt
had ordered them to bring their brother along with them otherwise they
would not be entitled to any food stock. “So let us accompany us and we
assure that we shall take care of him.”  
 “Shall I entrust him to you, when I had already entrusted you his
brother in the past. Verily, Allah is a greater protector and the most
Merciful.”  
 When they unpacked their goods they found the commodity they had taken
for exchange and told their father, “No one can be more generous than
the ‘Aziz who has been so generous for us. He has not even charged us
the price. So if you allow we shall take our younger brother with us and
take care of him. If we take him with us we can claim for an extra share
because whatever we have brought is not sufficient for our needs.”  
 Ya‘qub said, “I will by no means send him with you until you give me a
firm covenant in Allah’s name that you will most certainly bring him
back to me, unless you are completely surrounded.

***“And when they gave him their covenant, he said, Allah is the One in
Whom trust is placed as regards what we say.” (12:66)***

When his sons prepared to leave, Ya‘qub told them that all of them
should not enter from the same gate lest they be victims of the evil
eye.

***“And enter by different gates and I cannot avail you aught against
Allah; judgment is only Allah’s; on Him do I rely, and on Him let those
who are reliant rely. And when they had entered as their father had
bidden them, it did not avail them aught against Allah, but (it was
only) a desire in the soul of Ya‘qub which he satisfied; and surely he
was possessed of knowledge because We had given him knowledge, but most
people do not know.” (12:67-38)***

When the sons of Ya‘qub set out for Egypt, Benjamin accompanied them but
did not join them during meals. He also did not talk to them or mix with
them. When they all reached Yusuf and saluted, he saw his brother and
was delighted. When Benjamin was alone, Yusuf asked why he was sitting
separately. He said, “I had a full brother and once these people took
him out and did not bring him back. It was said a wolf had devoured him.
I have vowed not to participate in any of their affairs until I live.”  
 “Are you married?” asked Yusuf.  
 “Yes.”  
 “Do you have children?”  
 “Yes.”  
 “How many?”  
 “Three sons.”  
 “What are their names?”  
 “Wolf, garment and blood!”  
 “Why have you given them such names?”  
 “So that I may not forget my brother. That whenever I call one of them
I am reminded of my brother.”  
 Yusuf told the brothers to wait outside and retained Benjamin. They
left the room. Yusuf called Benjamin near him saying:

***“I am your brother, therefore grieve not at what they do.” (12:69)***

And he said he wanted to keep Benjamin with him. Benjamin said the
brothers will not agree to this because at the time of departure they
had given an oath to their father that they would bring him back. Yusuf
said he would find a solution, and told Benjamin that he should not
reveal anything to the brothers regarding whatever he witnessed.  
 After Yusuf provided the brothers with requisite food grains and added
some more to it he told one of his servants to hide the gold bowl used
as a measure in the pack of Benjamin. The cup was inserted into the
luggage of Benjamin without the brothers having any hint of it. When
they had packed their foods for departure Yusuf sent a messenger and
told them to halt.

***An announcer declared: “O Caravan! You are most surely thieves.”***  
***They said while they were facing them: “What is it that you
miss?”***  
***They said, “We miss the kings cup, and he who shall bring it shall
have a camel-load and I am responsible for it.”***  
***They said, “By Allah! You know for certain that we have not come to
make mischief in the land, and we are not thieves.***  
***They said, “But what shall be the requital of this, if you are
liars?”***  
***They said, “The requital of this that the person in whose bag it is
found shall himself be (held for) the satisfaction thereof; thus do we
punish the wrongdoers.”***  
***So he began with their sacks before the sack of his brother, then he
brought it out from his brother’s sack.” (12:70-76)***

Thus Yusuf had Benjamin arrested.  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq was asked how Yusuf ordered the announcement of ‘O
caravan! You are most surely thieves.’ Whereas they had not stolen
anything?  
 Imam replied, “They were not thieves and neither Yusuf make a false
statement. What he meant by ‘thieves’ was due to the fact that they had
stolen him (Yusuf) from his father.

***“They said, If he steal, a brother of his did indeed steal before;
but Yusuf kept it secret in his heart and did not disclose it to them.
He said, You are in an evil condition and Allah knows best what you
state.” (12:77)***

The brothers were infuriated and yellow liquid oozed from their bodies.
They pleaded with Yusuf to release their brother. It was a special
characteristics of the sons of Ya‘qub that whenever they were angry
their hair stood on their ends and protruded from their garments and
yellow blood dripped from the tips of their hair.

***“They said, O chief! He has a father, a very old man, therefore
retain one of us in his stead; surely we see you to be of the doers of
good.” (12:78)***

Yusuf said,

***“Allah protect us that we should seize other than him with whom we
found our property, for then most surely we would be unjust.” (12:79)***

When they failed to secure the release of Benjamin, they prepared to
return to Ya‘qub. The eldest of them Lawi according to one tradition and
according to another tradition Yahooda or Shamoun said, “Do you not know
that your father took from you a covenant in Allah’s name, and how you
fell short of your duty with respect to Yusuf before? Therefore I will
by no means depart from this land until my father permits or Allah
decides for me, and He is the best of the judges.”

***“Go back to your father and say: O our father! Surely your son
committed theft, and we do not bear witness except to what we have
known, and we could not keep watch over the unseen: And inquire in the
town in which we were and the caravan with which we proceeded, and most
surely we are truthful.” (12:80-82)***

Thus the brothers returned while Yahooda stayed back in Egypt to lobby
for Benjamin’s release. He came to Yusuf and began to argue his case.
Strong words were exchanged and the matter became so serious that
Yahooda became very angry. Whenever he lost his temper a hair from his
shoulder stood on its end and secreted blood. It continued like this
until he was touched by one from the progeny of Ya‘qub. When Yusuf saw
blood dripping from a strand of his shoulder hair he had an idea. One of
his children was playing with a golden pomegranate. Yusuf took it from
his hands and threw towards Yahooda. The child ran to retrieve his toy
and in the process touched Yahooda. The blood immediately stopped
dripping from the end of hair follicle and Yahooda’s anger cooled down
and a doubt arose in his mind. The child picked up the pomegranate
again. Once more the dialogue between Yusuf and Yahooda became a heated
argument. Again Yahooda was enraged and again blood dripped from a hair
of his shoulder. Yusuf repeated his trick the second time and Yahooda’s
temper returned to normal. The same process was repeated a third time.
Yahooda suspected the possibility that a descendant of Ya‘qub was in the
palace of Yusuf.

When the brothers of Yusuf reached home, they related the incident
concerning Benjamin.

***“He (Ya‘qub) said, Nay, your souls have made a matter light for you,
so patience is good; maybe Allah will bring them all together to me;
surely He is the Knowing, the Wise.” (12:83)***

Ya‘qub blamed his sons for Benjamin’s arrest and said they must have
familiarized the ‘Aziz with the law that thieves are to be taken as
slaves.

***“And he turned away from them, and said, O my sorrow for Yusuf! And
his eyes became white on account of the grief, and he was a repressor
(of grief).” (12:84)***

Ya‘qub became visually impaired and was very unhappy with these sons,
but he did not manifest his anger.

Traditions mention that someone asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq how much the
grief of Yusuf’s separation had affected Ya‘qub. Imam said, “His grief
equaled the combined grief of seventy women whose sons have expired. And
Ya‘qub was not conversant with the phrase “*Inna lillaahe wa inna ilaihe
raajao’on* (Indeed we belong to Allah and towards Him we shall return),
therefore he used to repeat the words, *“Waa Asafaa a’laa Yusufa’,* (O
the sorrow of Yusuf!).

Yusuf’s brother pointed out to Ya‘qub that he had not despaired due to
Yusuf’s sorrow until he died or reached the verge of death. Ya‘qub said
that he did not complain of his grief and the great sorrow but he was
aware of the Mercy and Grace of his Lord in a way his sons were not.

***“He said, I only complain of my grief and sorrow to Allah, and I know
from Allah what you do not know. O my sons! Go and inquire respecting
Yusuf and his brother, and despair not of Allah’s mercy; surely none
despairs of Allah’s mercy except the unbelieving people.” (12:86-87)***

A good chain of reporters convey a tradition wherein Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir was asked, “When Ya‘qub told his sons to go and search for
Yusuf and his brother, twenty years had elapsed after Yusuf’s
disappearance, And his eyes turned white due to excessive weeping and
were blinded. So, was Ya‘qub knowing that Yusuf was alive?”  
 Imam replied, “Yes, he knew that Yusuf was alive. Because Ya‘qub had
invocated the Almighty at dawn and requested Him to send the Angel of
death. The Angel of death appeared to him in a beautiful form.  
 “Who are you?” he asked.  
 “I am the Angel of death, you had requested the Lord to send me to you.
What can I do for you?” said the Angel.  
 “Tell me how you capture the souls? Do you employ assistants for it, or
use different means?”  
 “I use different methods.”  
 Ya‘qub said, “I request you in the Name of the God of Ibrahim, Ishaq
and Ya‘qub, tell me has the soul of Yusuf reached you yet?”  
 “No,” replied the Angel of death.  
 From that moment Ya‘qub became sure that Yusuf was alive and he told
his sons to go and search for Yusuf and his brother and not to despair
of Divine Mercy. Because no one despaired of Divine mercy except the
unbelievers.”

According to a tradition reported by ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, the ‘Aziz of
Egypt wrote to Ya‘qub: “I am having your son Yusuf as a slave, whom I
had purchased at a little price. As for your other son, Benjamin, a
missing object was found in his bag and as a result I enslaved him too.”

Ya‘qub was appalled at this message and told the messenger to wait while
he composed a reply. He wrote, “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Merciful. This is a letter from Ya‘qub the Israel of Allah, the son
of Ishaq the slaughtered one of Allah, the son of Ibrahim the Khalil of
Allah. I am in receipt of your message that you have enslaved my sons.
Indeed the accursed Nimrod who was a worldly king had cast my
grandfather, Ibrahim into the fire. But he did not burn, the Lord
Almighty commanded the fire to cool down and be comfort and safety for
Ibrahim.

Regarding my own father, Ishaq the Lord Commanded my grandfather,
Ibrahim to slaughter him with his own hands. When he complied with
Divine Orders the Almighty appointed a large ram as the requital of
Ishaq. Indeed, I had a son whom I loved more than I loved anyone. He was
the brightness of my eyes and a fruit of my heart. His brothers took him
one day and when they returned, they said that a wolf had devoured him.
The grief broke my back and due to excessive weeping my eyes became
sightless. Yusuf had a brother from his own mother, whom I liked too. He
came to you with his step-brothers in order to purchase grains. The
elder sons returned and said he had stolen the king’s cup and that you
have arrested him and enslaved him. We are not from a family that
indulges in thievery and greater sins. I request you in the Name of the
God of Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya‘qub to release my son and achieve Allah’s
pleasure.”

When Yusuf read the letter, he kissed it, touched it to his eyes, and
wept profusely. In another tradition it is mentioned that when Yusuf
opened the letter he could not control the flood of tears. He stood up,
went home, read the letter and wept much. Then he washed his face and
returned to the court. But again grief overpowered him and he could not
control his tears. Again he receded into his private quarters and gave a
free rein to his tears. When the tears receded he washed the face and
emerged from his chamber.  
 He came out addressed his brothers,

***“Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother when you were
ignorant?”***  
***They said, “Are you indeed Yusuf? He said, I am Yusuf and this is my
brother; Allah has indeed been gracious to us; surely he who guards
(against evil) and is patient (is rewarded) for surely Allah does not
waste the reward of those who do good.***  
***They said, By Allah! Now has Allah certainly chosen you over us, and
we were certainly sinners.***  
***He said, (There shall be) no reproof against you this day, Allah may
forgive you, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful.***  
***Take this my shirt and cast it on my father’s face, he will (again)
be able to see, and come to me with all your families.***  
***And when the caravan had (hardly) departed (for Ya‘qub’s home) (that)
their father (Ya‘qub) said. Most surely I perceive the odor of Yusuf.
Unless you pronounce me to be weak in judgment.” (12:89-94)***

All those who were present said that Ya‘qub’s old age has affected him.
But shortly later the brothers arrived from Egypt and cast Yusuf’s shirt
on his face.

***“…so forthwith he regained his sight. He said, Did I not say to you
that I know from Allah what you do not know? They said, O our father!
ask forgiveness of our faults for us, surely we were sinners. He said, I
will ask for you forgiveness from my Lord; surely He is the Forgiving,
the Merciful.” (12:96-98)***

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim narrates that when the messenger of ‘Aziz departed with
the reply of Ya‘qub, he (Ya‘qub) raised his hands in prayers and said,  
*Yaa h’asanal Shabate yaa kareemal mao’onate, yaa khairal aklate.* *Yaa
khairalahu aataini be rooh’e minka wa farrij min I’ndeka*  
 Archangel Gabriel descended and said, “O Ya‘qub do you want me to teach
a supplication that Allah may open your eyes and return your son to
you?”  
 Then Archangel Gabriel said, “Recite:  
*Yaa man laa ya’lamo aha’dun kaifa huwa illa huwa yaa man saddal huwaa
be samaa-e wa laisal arz”a a’lal maa-ewakhtaara le nafsehi ah’sanul
asmaa-e aataini be ruh’in minka wa farajin min I’ndeka.*

It was not yet dawn of the next day when the shirt was brought and cast
upon the face of Ya‘qub. He regained sight and was united with his
son.  
 According to another tradition when Yusuf was imprisoned by the order
of ‘Aziz, the Almighty revealed to him the interpretation of dreams.
When the two convicts related their dreams he gave his interpretation
and to the one whose release he predicted he said, “Put in a good word
regarding me to the king.” At this moment his attention was not confined
to the Almighty Whose sole refuge he should have sought. As the result
the Almighty asked him, “Who has shown you the dream (of stars
prostrating)?”  
 “You, my Lord,” said he.  
 “Who has made you the beloved of your father?”  
 “You, my Lord.”  
 “Who taught you the method of interpreting dreams?”  
 “You, my Lord.”  
 “Then how could you seek the help of someone other than me? Why did you
not call Me for help?  
 Why did you express a wish to one of My creatures? That he put in your
word to another of My creatures. One who himself is subservient to My
Power? Now, as a requital of this misdemeanor you shall remain in prison
for an additional period.”

Yusuf entreated Allah by the rights of his forefathers that He may
forgive him and save him. The Almighty said that Yusuf’s ancestors do
not command any right upon Him, Allah said, “If you mean Adam, know
that, I created him with My power and made him to dwell in the Garden. I
allowed him to partake all the fruits except that of the forbidden tree.
But he disobeyed Me. Later, when he begged for forgiveness, I accepted
his request. As far as Nuh is concerned, I raised his status among My
creatures. They disobeyed him and he prayed for their destruction. I
accepted his prayers and drowned his people. I saved him and those who
believed in him through the Ark. Regarding Ibrahim, I made him My Khalil
and saved him from the fire. And made the fire of Nimrod cool and safety
for him. If you intend to beseech in the name of Ya‘qub, I gave him
twelve sons and when I took one of his sons away from him, he wept so
much that he lost his vision. He sat on the streets and complained about
his grief to My creatures. So what rights do your ancestor have upon
Me?”

At this moment Archangel Gabriel revealed to him to recite the following
Dua: *“As-aloka be minkal a’z’eem wa ah’saane kal qadeem.”*
(Translation: “I beseech You in the name of Your Great Bounties and Your
past Favors.”)  
 When Yusuf recited this Dua, the ‘Aziz saw a dream that finally
facilitated Yusuf’s release from prison.

A reliable tradition from Imam al-Ridha says that the jailer told Yusuf
that he was devoted towards him. Yusuf said, “No misfortune befell me,
but that it was due to people’s devotion towards me. My paternal aunt
(father’s sister) adored me therefore accused me of stealing. My father
loved me and this caused my brothers’ jealousy and put me in trouble.
Zulaykha was infatuated with me and due to her misadventure, I lie in
prison.”

Imam says, “Yusuf complained to the Almighty for his misfortune and
asked Him for what error did he become liable for this punishment?”  
 The Almighty revealed to him that he had himself chosen imprisonment,
when he said, “O Allah I prefer imprisonment to what these women invited
me.” Why did he not say, “O Allah I prefer Your safety to what these
women invite me?”  
 According to reliable chain of narrators Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says,
“When the brothers of Yusuf threw him in the well, Archangel Gabriel
descended to him and asked, “Young man! Who has thrown you into the
well?”

“My brothers,” replied Yusuf, “Because I was the favorite of my father,
therefore my brothers were jealous and they pushed me in the well.”  
 “As the Lord of Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya‘qub wishes,” replied Yusuf.  
 Archangel Gabriel said the Lord instructed him to recite the following
Dua:  
*Allahumma inni as-aloka be anna lakal hamdo laa ilaaha illallaah -
Antal hannaanol mannaan. Badiee—Samaawaate wal ardh Zuljalaale wal
ikraam Salle a’laa Moh’ammadin wa aale Muh’ammad waja’l min amri farajan
warzuqni min h’aetho ah’taseb wa minh’aitho laa ahtaseb.*  
 When Yusuf implored the Lord through the above Dua, He saved him from
the well and again from the machinations of Zulaykha and made him the
Emperor of Egypt. He had never imagined he would be bestowed all this.

In an authentic hadith, Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that when Ibrahim was
to be thrown into the fire, Archangel Gabriel descended with a garment
of Paradise and dressed him with it. It was insulated against heat and
cold. When the time of his death approached Ibrahim tied his armband to
Ishaq. And Ishaq tied it to Ya‘qub. When Yusuf was born, Ya‘qub had put
this band around his neck. It remained around his neck during all the
calamities that befell him. When Yusuf removed the garment from his
amulet in Egypt, Ya‘qub felt its scent in far off Syrian Palestine and
said, “I smell the odor of Yusuf.”

It was that same garment of Paradise. The narrator asked Imam to whom
was the garment passed on after Yusuf. Imam said it was inherited by his
family and added, “All the knowledge and the personal relics of the
Prophets were inherited by the Messenger of Allah and his vicegerents.
Ya‘qub was in Palestine when the Caravan (of his sons) departed from
Egypt and he immediately perceived its scent. The fragrance was brought
from Paradise. And it is bestowed upon us in inheritance. It is with
us.”

Trustworthy channel of hadith has quoted Imam al-Ridha as saying, “The
law prevailed among the progeny of Ya‘qub that whenever a person was
convicted of theft he was enslaved. When Yusuf was a child he lived with
his aunt (father’s sister). She adored him much. Ishaq had a waistband
that he had given to Ya‘qub. This waistband was in the possession of
Ya‘qub’s sister. When Ya‘qub requested her to send back Yusuf to him she
was aggrieved and said, “Let it be. I’ll send him later.” Then she tied
the waistband under his clothes and sent him back to his father. When
Yusuf came home the aunt also accompanied him and told Ya‘qub that her
waistband has been stolen. She began to search for it. After rummaging
here and there she lifted the garment of Yusuf and exclaimed, “Here it
is! Yusuf had stolen it. I shall take him as a slave.” Therefore on this
pretext she secured the custody of young Yusuf. This was alluded to by
the brothers of Yusuf when they mentioned he had also committed a theft
in the past.”

***“They said, If he steal, a brother of his did indeed steal before.”
(12:77)***

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim relates that when Yusuf’s brothers brought his shirt
and spread it on the face of Ya‘qub, his eyes regained the vision and he
told them,

***“Did I not say to you that I know from Allah what you do not
know?”***  
***They said, O our father! Ask forgiveness of our faults for us, surely
we were sinners.***  
***He said, I will ask for your forgiveness from my Lord; surely He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful.” (12:96-98)***

In an authentic tradition Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that Ya‘qub delayed
the prayers of his sons’ forgiveness until dawn as it was a meritorious
time for fulfillment of prayers. According to other traditions he
delayed the prayers until Friday eve.  
 Traditional reports mention that when Ya‘qub and his family entered
Egypt, Ya‘qub and the brothers of Yusuf fell down in prostration. Yusuf
said,

***“O my father! This is the significance of my vision (dream) of old;
my Lord has indeed made it to be true; and He was indeed Kind to me when
He brought me forth from the prison and brought you from the desert
after the Satan had sown dissensions between me and my brothers, surely
my Lord is benignant to whom He pleases; surely He is the Knowing, the
Wise. (12:100)***

Reliable traditions mention that some people asked Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi how
Ya‘qub and his sons prostrated before Yusuf, whereas they were Prophets?
Imam replied, “They did not prostrate for Yusuf. They did so as a
gesture of thankfulness of Allah and as a mark of respect for Yusuf. The
Angels had similarly prostrated before Adam by the command of Allah.  
 Then Ya‘qub, along with his other sons and Yusuf performed the
prostration of thankfulness *(Sajdah ash-Shukr)* in response to the fact
that Allah had united them. “Did you not note how Yusuf remarked in
thankfulness,

***“My Lord! Thou hast given me of the kingdom and taught me of the
interpretation of sayings (and dreams): Originator of the heavens and
the earth! Thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter; make me
die a Muslim and join me with the good.” (12:101)***

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim narrates that Archangel Gabriel told Yusuf to extend
his hand. When he did so, a light escaped from between his fingers.
Yusuf asked what that was. Archangel Gabriel said it was the light of
Prophethood. “The Almighty has removed Prophethood from your loins
because you did not arise from your seat to respect your father (when he
entered).” Allah removed Prophethood from Yusuf (as..) so that none of
his descendants may be conferred Messengership. The Prophethood was
transferred to the loins of Lawi, the elder brother of Yusuf. He became
eligible for this honor because when the brothers had plotted to kill
Yusuf he suggested pushing him in the well instead of murdering him.

As Lawi had prevented the murder of Yusuf, the Almighty placed
Prophethood in his loins. Secondly when Benjamin was arrested and
despite their efforts the brothers failed to secure his release and
prepared to return to Ya‘qub. Lawi said he would not leave Egypt until
his father permitted or until Almighty, “decides for me, and He is the
best of the judges.”

Allah liked this gesture and Prophethood was transferred to his progeny.
Consequently the series of The Israelites Prophets were descendants of
Lawi. Musa was also from his progeny. He was the son of ‘Imran, son of
Baseer, son of Fahith son of Lawi.

Later, Ya‘qub asked Yusuf what happened to him when his brothers took
him from home. Yusuf requested his father to excuse him but Ya‘qub
insisted for at least some information. Yusuf said, “The brothers
brought me near the well, and ordered to remove my clothes. I told them
to fear Allah and not force me to strip. But they flashed a knife and
threatened me. I was compelled to undress and they pushed me in the well
naked.”

When Ya‘qub heard this, he exclaimed and fell down unconscious. After
regaining consciousness he asked Yusuf for more details. Yusuf requested
him in the name of Lord of Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya‘qub and excused himself
from narrating any of the accidents that befell him. Ya‘qub did not
press further.

According to narrations the ‘Aziz of Egypt died during the period of
famine and his wife Zulaykha was reduced to penury. She was so
impoverished that she took to begging. Yusuf became the Emperor and
people addressed him as ‘‘Aziz of Egypt’. One day people told Zulaykha
to sit in the path of Yusuf so that he might have mercy on her. She
replied that she was ashamed of him. But when people insisted she
squatted in the path of Yusuf. When Yusuf passed by in company of his
entourage she rose up and said, “Pure is the Almighty One Who turns the
disobedient Kings into slaves and Who transforms slaves into Kings due
to their obedience.”

Yusuf recognized her and ordered that she be escorted to his residence.
Zulaykha had become a wizened old woman. Yusuf reminded her of her
machinations against him. She begged him not to taunt her of her past
misdeeds. She further added that she was attracted towards evil due to
three factors that afflicted her:  
 She was madly in love with Yusuf who had no equal in elegance.  
 She was endowed with such a beauty that she had no equal in her nation.
She was also the wealthiest woman.  
 Lastly, her husband was impotent.  
 Yusuf asked her what she desired. She said, “I desire that you pray to
Allah to make me youthful once again.”  
 Yusuf prayed and she became young. Yusuf married her and found that she
was a virgin. (The report of ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim reaches this point).
Portions of this report are quoted in other narrations but we have
refrained from quoting all of them for the sake of brevity.

Ibn Babawayh has quoted Wahab bin Munabbah that he said, “I have seen in
some divine scriptures that Yusuf was passing by with his soldiers when
he came across Zulaykha. She was sitting in a ruin. When Zulaykha beheld
the glory and power of Yusuf she arose and said, “Praise and glory to
Allah, who enslaves the disobedient kings and raises slaves to the
status of rulers due to their obedience. I am deprived, give me some
alms.” Yusuf said that to consider the divine bounties lowly and to deny
them becomes a barrier for further bounties. So, turn your attention
towards Allah that He may wash the stains of your sins with water of
repentance. Indeed the acceptance of prayers is conditional to the
circumstances, purity of heart and good actions.

Zulaykha said she had not yet completed repentance and regret as she was
still ashamed before the Lord. She couldn’t bring herself to seek divine
Forgiveness and Mercy. She had not yet shed tears of regret and had not
repented as it was wont to repent. She had also not reached the stage of
absolute submission.

Yusuf said, “Seek forgiveness and try to fulfill the necessary
conditions with care. The path of actions is yet open. The arrow of
supplication reaches its target only as far as one remains alive.”  
 “I too have a firm belief in this,” said Zulaykha.  
 “If you live longer than me, you shall shortly learn of it,” she
added.  
 Yusuf ordered her to be gifted a cow-skin filled with gold. Zulaykha
said, “Indeed sustenance is allotted from Allah and it reached the
creatures. I do not wish an increase in sustenance and a life of comfort
and opulence until I am surrounded by Divine anger.”  
 When they moved ahead some of Yusuf’s sons said, “Who is that woman.
Her plight has torn our hearts due to pity. It has softened our
hearts.”  
 “She is the mid-wife of comfort and luxury. And now she is afflicted
with Divine punishment.” Later, Yusuf married Zulaykha and when he
consummated the marriage he found her a virgin. He asked how she
retained her virginity despite her being married for years. She
explained that her husband had been impotent.

Authentic hadith of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that Zulaykha was sitting
by the road when Yusuf passed by. He recognized her and told her to
return and that he shall make her self-sufficient. Then he sent for her
one hundred thousand Dirhams.

According to reliable reports Abu-Basir asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq about
the supplication recited by Yusuf in the well, that he escaped alive
from it. Imam said, “When he was thrown down the well and was almost
hopeless he recited,  
*Allahumma in kaanatil khat’aayaa wad’du’unooba qad akhlaqat wajhi
I’ndaka falan tarfaa’ lee ilaika s’autan wa lan tastajeeba lee da’watan
fainni As-aloka be h’aqqeish shekhe ya’qooba farh’am z”o’fatan wajma’
baini wa bainahu faqad a’lemta riqtahoo a’layya wa shauqee ilaihe.*  
 (Translation: O Allah! If my sins and errors have degraded my face near
You. You do not raise a voice near You for me nor do You answer my
prayers. Then I beseech You by right of the respected personality,
Ya‘qub. Have Mercy on his old age and bring us together. You are
Cognizant of his attachment for me and my love towards him.)

Abu-Basir says after relating this Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq wept and said,
“I recite the following lines in my supplication:  
*Allahumma in Kaanatil khat’aayaa wad’dhunooba qad aqhlaqat wahji
I’ndaka fa lan tarfa’a lee s’autan fainni as-aloka beka falaisa
kamithlehi shaiy-un wa atawajjaho ilaika bemuh’ammadin Nabiyyeka
nabiyyir rah’mate yaa Allaho yaa Allaho Yaa Allaho Yaa Allaho Yaa
Allah.*  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “Recite this supplication and recite it
often. I recite it again and again whenever I am in difficulties.”  
 In another reliable saying Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Archangel
Gabriel came to Yusuf while he was in prison and told him to recite the
following Dua thrice after every obligatory prayers.  
*“Allahummaja’l lee min Amri farajan wa makhrajan warzuqni min Haitho
ahtasebo wa min h’aitho laa a’h’tasebo.”*  
 Shaykh al-Tusi says that Yusuf was released from prison on the 3rd of
Muharram and Ibn Babawayh has recorded through authentic chains from
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas that when famine affected the progeny of Ya‘qub he
told his sons,  
 “I have heard that food grain is sold freely in Egypt and the owner of
food stock does not keep people waiting for long. He gives immediate
delivery of grains. So you all go to him and purchase grains. If Allah
wills he shall be generous.”

Ya‘qub’s sons packed their luggage and set out for Egypt. They arrived
in Egypt and met Yusuf who recognized them while they did not know him.
Yusuf asked them who they were. They replied they were the sons of
Ya‘qub son of Ishaq son of Ibrahim the Khalil of Allah and added that
they had come from the mountains of Canaan. Yusuf said,  
 “You are the descendants of three Prophets but you possess neither
knowledge nor forbearance. You have no dignity and respect either. I
think you are spies of a rival king and have entered my kingdom to spy
on me.”  
 They said, “O King we are neither spies nor violent people and if you
knew who our father is, you would certain accord us respect. He is the
Prophet of Allah and the son of a Prophet of Allah, and he is
grief-stricken person.”  
 “Why is he sorrowful?” asked Yusuf. “He is a Prophet and a son of a
Prophet, he has an assured place in Paradise and also has so many
healthy sons like you? So why should he be aggrieved? I think it must be
due to your foolishness, ignorance, falsehood and cheating.”  
 They said, “O king! We are not foolish and idiots and neither is he
sorrowful because of us. He had one more son who was younger to us. His
name was Yusuf. One day he accompanied us on a hunt and a wolf devoured
him. From that time our father is sorrowful and aggrieved and continues
to weep.”

Yusuf asked them if they had the same father. They replied in the
affirmative but added that they had different mothers.  
 Then Yusuf asked them why their father had sent all of them but
retained a son with him. So that he can stay close and confess him. The
brothers confirmed it. Yusuf asked them why the father had kept that
particular son with him. They said after Yusuf their father preferred
him over rest of his sons. Yusuf told them they all should return home
except one brother and request Ya‘qub to send his favorite son. He said
that he wished inquire from him the well-being of Ya‘qub and also wanted
to know the actual reason of his grief, and how he had become prone to
premature ageing. And also why he has become usually impaired due to
excess weeping.

The brother threw lots among themselves and Shamoun was selected. Yusuf
kept Shamoun in his custody and arranged for his lodging and boarding.
The rest of his brothers departed. At the time of farewell Shamoun said,
“Brothers! You all know my plight! Convey my salutations to father.”  
 When the brothers reached Ya‘qub they greeted him in a low voice. He
asked them why they were so serious. And why he had not heard the voice
of his dear son Shamoun.  
 They said, “We have come from the greatest ruler. We do not know anyone
else so wise, intelligent well-mannered and dignified. O father! If
there is anyone like you, it is him. But we belong to a family prone to
disasters. The king accused us of lying and said he would not believe us
until you send Benjamin to him and convey through him the reason for
your grief, sorrow, hoariness and visual disability.”

Ya‘qub suspected this to be a trick for taking Benjamin away from him.
He said, “My sons! You have a very bad habit. Wherever you go, one of
you disappears. I will not send Benjamin with you.”  
 When the brothers unpacked their luggage they found the goods they had
taken for barter has also been returned to them without they being aware
of it. They came back to Ya‘qub in joy and said, “We have not seen a
king like him. He abstains from sins more than any other person. He
returned our barter for fear of falling into sin. We shall again take
our goods and purchase grains for the family. And we shall also take
care of our brother. We would take a measure as his share in addition.”

Ya‘qub said, “You know that Benjamin is my favorite son. After Yusuf I
have become attached to him. He is a comfort for me among you. I shall
not send him with you until you give me Allah’s covenant that you shall
bring him back to me. Except if there is something beyond your
control.”  
 Yahooda gave his pledge and they set out for Egypt taking Benjamin with
them. When they came to Yusuf he asked if they had conveyed his message
to their father.  
 “Yes,” they replied, “And in reply we have brought our brother. You ask
him whatever you like.”  
 “Young man!” asked Yusuf, “What message has your father sent?”  
 “He has sent me to you,” replied Benjamin, “and sent his Salaams and
said that he appreciated your asking the reason for his sorrow,
pre-mature ageing, weeping and blindness,” He read the father’s message:
One who remembers the Hereafter often, weeps more. My pre-mature aging
is due to the remembrance of the day of reckoning. The sorrow of my
beloved son caused me to weep and blinded my eyes. I have heard that you
too share my sorrow and have inquired of my well-being. May Allah bless
you with great reward. The greatest favor you can do for me is to send
my son Benjamin back to me as soon as possible. Because, after Yusuf, he
is my favorite child. I like him more than my other sons and derive
consolation from him in my sorrow. I cure my loneliness by his company.”

When Yusuf heard the message of his father, tears welled up in his eyes.
He could not control himself and retired to his private chamber. Inside,
he wept bitterly. After a while he emerged from his room and ordered
food to be served for his brothers. He suggested that each pair of
brothers should sit before each tray of food. All of them paired off but
Benjamin was left standing. Yusuf asked him why he had not taken a seat.
Benjamin said it was because he had no brother from same mother. Yusuf
asked him, “Did you never have a brother?”  
 “I had,” replied Benjamin.  
 “What happened to him?”  
 “These people say a wolf devoured him.”  
 “How much aggrieved are you, on account of him?”  
 “I have twelve sons and I have named all of them with a name that
reminds me of my brother,” said Benjamin.  
 “After losing your beloved brother how did you have the heart for such
a busy marital life?” asked Yusuf.  
 “My father is a righteous person, he commanded me for matrimony and
insisted that I have many offspring so that they spread the praise of
Allah in the lands. (According to another report: that they spread the
*Kalemah* of La ilaaha illallaah on the earth.)”  
 “All right,” said Yusuf, “come and sit with me for dinner.”  
 Seeing this the brothers remarked, “Allah always honors Yusuf and his
brother over us. So much so that the king invited Benjamin to accompany
him for dinner.”  
 After this Yusuf ordered that a cup should be concealed in the baggage
of Benjamin. A search revealed it to be hidden in Benjamin’s bag.
Benjamin was arrested. When they returned to Ya‘qub and narrated the
incident he said, “My son is not a thief. You have played a trick.” He
told his sons to return to Egypt and sent with them an appeal addressed
to the king for his son’s release.

The brothers came Egypt once more and delivered the letter to Yusuf.
When he read the letter and could not control his tears. He rushed to
his quarters and wept for sometime. When he came out the brothers said,
“O king of Egypt! We are familiar with your kindness and generosity and
we are afflicted with famine and hunger. We have less money, so do not
think of its less quantity, but give us full measure. And before giving
us grains in excess return to us our brother as charity to us. Indeed
Allah rewards the generous ones with a good reward.

***“He said, Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother when you
were ignorant? They said, Are you indeed Yusuf? He said, I am Yusuf and
this is my brother; Allah has indeed been gracious to us; surely he who
guards (against evil) and is patient (is rewarded) for surely Allah does
not waste the reward of those who do good.” (12:89-90)***

Yusuf told them to return to Ya‘qub and gave them his shirt. He told
them to put it on the face of Ya‘qub and he shall regain his vision.
Then they should all come to Egypt with their families and children.  
 At this same moment Archangel Gabriel descended and asked Ya‘qub if he
wanted to learn a Dua by which he can regain his eyesight.  
 “Yes,” replied Ya‘qub.  
 “Then recite the same Dua that your father Adam had recited and through
it the Almighty had accepted his repentance,” said Archangel Gabriel.  
 “It is the same Dua recited by Nuh and it caused his Ark to anchor at
Mount Judi,” continued Archangel Gabriel, “It saved Nuh from drowning.
Your grandfather, Ibrahim mentioned the same supplication when he was
cast into the inferno. By the grace of this Dua, Allah cooled the fire
and made it safe for Ibrahim.”  
 Ya‘qub asked Archangel Gabriel what this Dua was. He said,  
 “Recite: O Allah I ask you by the right of Muhammad and ‘Ali and
Fatimah and Hasan and Husayn, unite me with Yusuf and Benjamin and
restore my vision.”  
 Ya‘qub had hardly completed the prayer when his sons arrived and spread
Yusuf’s shirt on his face. His vision was restored at once.  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that when Yusuf entered prison he was twelve
years old. He remained jailed for 18 years. After release he lived for
another 80 years. Thus he had a total life span of 110 years.

Another reliable tradition says that Ya‘qub wept so much for Yusuf that
his eyes perished. At last his sons told him, “All the time you are
nostalgic due to Yusuf. You will become sick or die, or reach the verge
of death.” Yusuf also wept a great deal in sorrow of being separated
from his father. He wept so much that the inmates of prison found it
disturbing. They requested him either weep at night and remain quiet
during the day or weep during daytime and keep silent at night.

We have already mentioned previously on the basis of authentic reports
that Yusuf was one of those Prophets who possessed worldly kingdom in
addition to Prophethood. Thus his kingdom included Egypt and its desert
regions. It did not spread beyond these limits.

Authentic chains say that Ya‘qub and A’is were twins but A’is was born
before Ya‘qub. Later Ya‘qub was named thus because he was born at the
‘aqab’ (back) of A’is. Ya‘qub is known as Israel (servant of God)
because Isra means servant and ‘eel’ means God. On the basis of another
tradition, ‘Isra’ means strength and ‘Israel’ means ‘strength of Allah.”

Ka’b bin Ahbaar is quoted to have said that Ya‘qub was the custodian of
Jerusalem. He used to be the first one to enter the shrine and last one
to leave it. He was the one who lighted the chandeliers at night and
when he came in the morning he found them extinguished. One night he sat
inside the shrine to solve the mystery. Suddenly he saw a Jinn blowing
out the flames of lanterns. Ya‘qub caught him and tied him to one of the
pillars of Jerusalem. When it was morning the people found that Ya‘qub
has arrested a Jinn and tied him to a pillar. This Jinn was named ‘eel’.
Due to this Ya‘qub earned the appellation of Israel.

According to authentic chains of reporters Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said,
“When Yusuf arrested Benjamin, Ya‘qub prayed to Allah and said, ‘Would
You not have mercy upon me? You have taken both my eyes and both my
sons.’

The Almighty revealed to him, ‘Even if I have caused them to die, I
shall enliven them and unite them to you. But don’t you remember the ram
you slaughtered and fed your family while a hungry, fasting person had
to go empty-handed from your door?’

After this Ya‘qub made a practice of announcing every morning within a
radius of one Parasang if anyone wished to have breakfast he could have
it at Ya‘qub’s residence. Similarly a caller announced in the evening if
there was anyone who wanted dinner, he could have it with the family of
Ya‘qub.”

According to a reliable tradition of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, Ya‘qub
warned Yusuf, “Do not commit fornication. For if a bird commits adultery
it loses its plumage.”  
 It mentioned in a authentic tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that a
person came to the Messenger of Allah and said, “O Messenger of Allah I
have a cousin who is beautiful and attractive. I like her very much but
she is sterile.”

The Messenger of Allah said, “Do not marry her. Because when Yusuf asked
Benjamin how despite losing Yusuf he found enjoyment in matrimony, he
said that his father had ordered him to beget many children, if
possible, so that they may establish the praise and glory of Allah on
the earth.”  
 Reliable tradition of Imam al-Sajjad says, “People have acquired three
qualities from three people: Patience from Ayyub, thankfulness from Nuh
and jealousy from the sons of Ya‘qub.”  
 In a reliable report some people raised objections against Imam
al-Ridha from having accepted the heir-appetency of Al-Ma’mun. Imam
al-Ridha justified his stand saying that Yusuf was the Prophet of Allah,
yet he asked the ‘Aziz of Egypt (who was a disbeliever) to entrust him
with royal wealth. As mentioned in the Qur’an:

***“He said, Place me (in authority) over the treasures of the land,
surely I am a good keeper, knowing well.” (12:55)***

It is quoted in an authentic report of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that when
Zulaykha was reduced to penury and deprivation people advised her to
approach Yusuf as now he was the ‘Aziz of Egypt and that he would surely
help her. Others warned her that he might take revenge from her for the
trouble she had caused him. Zulaykha said, “I do not fear the one who
fears Allah.” She went to the palace and found Yusuf on the throne.
Seeing the majesty she remarked, “Praise be to Allah. He alone deserves
praise Who made slaves the rulers due to their obedience and reduced the
rulers to slavery as a result of their disobedience. Later, Yusuf
married her and found that she was a virgin. Then he asked her if it
wasn’t better than what she had desired earlier? Zulaykha told him that
she was subjected to four conditions in connection with him. First, she
was the most beautiful woman of her time, secondly, he was the most
handsome youth. Third, she was a virgin and fourth her husband was
impotent.

When Yusuf retained Benjamin, Ya‘qub wrote a letter to him, ignorant of
the fact that he was his own Yusuf. The translation of that letter is as
follows:  
 In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. This is a
communication from Ya‘qub son of Ishaq son of Ibrahim the Khaleelur
Rahman to the progeny of ‘Aziz and the Pharaoh. Peace be upon you.
Indeed I praise that God, barring whom no one deserves divinity.
Certainly, I belong to a family engrossed in calamities. My grandfather
Ibrahim thrown into the fire due to his obedience of Allah. The Almighty
made the fire cool and a cause of safety for him. And the Lord commanded
my grandfather to slaughter my father with his own hands. Then Allah
bestowed him with whatever He desired. And I had a son who was dearest
to me among all the people. He was separated from me. Due to his sorrow
my eyes have become blind. He had a brother from the same mother. When
the former disappeared I used to remember him and embrace his brother.
This comforted me in my sorrow. He too had been arrested by you for
theft. I testify to you that I have never stolen anything and I could
never have begotten a thief.”

Yusuf read the letter and wailed in sorrow. Then he said, “Take this
shirt of mine and put it across his face so that he may regain sight.
After that, all of you come to me with your families.”  
 Another tradition says when Ya‘qub reached Egypt, Yusuf mounted his
horse and along with his escorts came to welcome him. He passed Zulaykha
on the way. She was praying in a dilapidated house. When she saw Yusuf
she recognized him and called in a sad tone, “O traveler! I have
suffered a great deal in your love. How meritorious is piety and
abstinence that frees slaves and how evil is sin that enslaves free
men.”

Another tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq mentions that Yusuf
personally supervised the disbursal of food grains and fixed the daily
prices. He used to specify the rate without using the terms ‘price rise’
and ‘sell heavy’ (reduce quantity). When he fixed the daily rate he
related it to the previous day and stated the difference that was to be
observed. One day he did not fix the rate. The cashier took his leave
but after he had gone some distance came back to inquire of the day’s
fixed price. Yusuf did state any amount but told the officer to start
selling the grains. The officer reached the granary and the sale
started. The first customer arrived and Yusuf’s representative measured
out grains. When a measure remained for the previous days quantity the
purchaser said, “That’s enough! I paid for this much quantity only.”

The representative thought the price must have been equal to one
measure. So for the next customer he decided to reduce the quantity by
one measure. Again when he had one measure remaining the buyer said it
was sufficient for the payment he had made. This continued until the
grains measured out were reduced to almost half the quantity of the
previous day.

Authentic and reliable chains of reporters record from Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq that the garment of Paradise sent for Ibrahim was later placed
in the village of Naqrah. Anyone who put it on felt elated. When the
caravan departed from Egypt, Ya‘qub was in Ramla or in Syrian Palestine,
whereas Yusuf was in Egypt. Ya‘qub said, “I could perceive the scent of
Yusuf.” He meant by this remark that he smelt the fragrance of Paradise
emanating from his garment.  
 In reliable tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq, Isma‘il bin Tafazzul
Hashmi asked him why Ya‘qub postponed the prayers of forgiveness for his
sons when they requested him for it? Why did he not pray immediately.
Whereas when the brothers asked Yusuf for mercy he immediately said,
“(There shall be) no reproof against you this day?”  
 Imam said, “Because the hearts of young people are softer as compared
to aged men. Secondly the offence of the brothers was against Yusuf
himself, therefore he took precedence in forgiving them immediately.
Whereas Ya‘qub was aggrieved indirectly due to the separation of Yusuf.
Hence his forgiveness was related to the right of a third party.
Consequently he delayed the prayers of forgiveness to the dawn of
Friday.”

Numerous reliable reports relate from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when
Yusuf came out with entourage to welcome Ya‘qub, Ya‘qub dismounted but
Yusuf wanted to maintain his dignity (among his subjects), hence he
remained on the mount. They had hardly embraced when Archangel Gabriel
descended and informed that the Lord of the lords says the Majesty and
opulence of Yusuf had been an obstacle for him to respect a chosen
servant of Allah. He told Yusuf to spread out his palm. When he did so a
brilliance shot out from it (according to another report it came out
from between his fingers) and headed for the sky. He asked Archangel
Gabriel what that was. Archangel Gabriel said that it was the light of
Prophethood and now there shall be no Prophets from Yusuf’s seed in
retaliation for the disrespect he showed to Ya‘qub by not
dismounting.[^2]

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in a reliable tradition that when Zulaykha
came to Yusuf and sought the permission to enter, the sentries told her
they feared Yusuf might take revenge from her. Zulaykha said she was not
afraid of the one who feared the Almighty and she entered. Yusuf asked
her about the profound change in her appearance. She said, “I Praise
Allah who changed the rulers into slaves because of their sins and
raised slaves to the throne due to the barakah (bounty) of their
obedience to Him.”

Yusuf asked why she had dealt with him in that manner. She said it was
due to the unsurpassed beauty of Yusuf.  
 “What would have been your condition,” asked Yusuf “if you had seen the
Prophet who shall be raised at the end of time. His name shall be
Muhammad. He is more elegant than I am, and more graceful and
generous.”  
 “You spoke the truth,” said Zulaykha.  
 “How do you know I speak the truth?” asked Yusuf.  
 “Because when you pronounced his name my heart was imbued with his
love.”  
 The Almighty revealed to Yusuf that Zulaykha was speaking the truth and
that Allah was also pleased with her because she had expressed her
devotion for His beloved, Muhammad. And Allah ordered Yusuf to marry
Zulaykha.  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that the community resembling pigs opposes
the belief in the occultation of the al-Qa’im from the Progeny of
Muhammad. Indeed the brothers of Yusuf were descendants of the Prophets.
They interacted with Yusuf and closed a deal with him but they did not
recognize him until he introduced himself.  
 “Then how do these accursed people question the ability of Allah to
conceal His Proof (hujjah) from people whenever He likes? Indeed, Yusuf
was the Emperor of Egypt and there was a distance of 18 days’ travel
from Egypt to the residence of Ya‘qub. If Allah desired He could have
made the whereabouts of Yusuf known to Ya‘qub. By Allah! After receiving
the good news, Ya‘qub and his sons reached Egypt in nine days. Then how
these people say Allah cannot repeat the process with His Last hujjah?
Yusuf used to move about in the markets, he sat among the people but
they did not recognize him until the Almighty permitted and until he
said, ‘Do you know how you treated Yusuf and his brother when you were
ignorant?’”

The same Imam remarks in another authentic hadith that when the brothers
sought permission to take Yusuf with them, Ya‘qub said he feared the
wolf might devour him. Thus Ya‘qub unknowingly suggested an excuse that
his sons later used with success.  
 In another tradition Imam says a Bedouin came to Yusuf. Yusuf gave him
food and after he had finished asked where he was going. He said he was
going towards a particular district. Yusuf said, “When you reach a
particular valley, call out for Ya‘qub and a great and elegant gentleman
would come to you. Tell him you had met a person in Egypt who sends his
salaams to him and tell him that his trust placed in the custody of
Allah shall not be wasted.” When the traveler arrived at that particular
valley he ordered his slaves to look after the camels. Then he went and
called out for Ya‘qub. A handsome personality with impaired vision came
out feeling the walls with his hands. The Bedouin asked him if he was
Ya‘qub.  
 “Yes,” replied the gentleman.  
 When he conveyed the message of Yusuf he wailed and fell down
unconscious. After regaining consciousness he asked the messenger if he
had a wish from Allah.  
 “Yes,” said the Bedouin, “I have married my cousin but do not have any
children from her. Pray to Allah that He bestows a son to me.”

Ya‘qub performed the Wudhu’ (ablution) and offered two Rak’ahs (units)
of prayers. After concluding the prayers he invocated Allah. As a result
of this Dua the Bedouin had four sets of twins, all males.

After this incident Ya‘qub had a feeling that Yusuf was alive and that
after his disappearance (ghaibat) he would be united with him. He always
told his sons, “I know the extent of Allah’s Mercy that you don’t know.”
His sons blamed him for senility and old age. Therefore, when the
fragrance of the shirt reached him he said, “I could smell the fragrance
of Yusuf and do not accuse me of senility and “weak memory.” Yahooda
told him that he was the victim of his old error. When the messenger
bearing glad-tidings arrived and spread the cloth on Ya‘qub’s face he
regained his vision and said, “Did I not say to you that I know from
Allah what you know not?”

After quoting this tradition Shaykh Ibn Babawayh says the proof that
Ya‘qub had knowledge that Yusuf was alive and that the Lord had
concealed him from him as an examination, was that when the brothers
came to him wailing and he asked them why they wept and why he did not
see Yusuf with them. They said the wolf had devoured him and displayed
Yusuf’s shirt stained with blood. Ya‘qub told them to place the shirt
before him. Then he kept the shirt on his face and swooned. After
consciousness he asked them why the odor of Yusuf’s flesh was not
apparent and how come the shirt was not torn? “You falsely blame the
wolf,” he told them. “My son is a victim of injustice and you have
played a dirty trick.” That same night he turned his face away in
abhorrence and recited a dirge for Yusuf. He used to say, “My beloved
Yusuf, whom I preferred over all my children, has been taken away from
me. My beloved Yusuf, in whom I had reposed hopes among all my children
has been snatched away from me. My beloved Yusuf on whose head I placed
my right hand and on whose face I kept my left hand has been separated
from me. My beloved Yusuf, who was my support in loneliness and helper
in my sorrow, has been taken from me. My beloved Yusuf, would I know on
which mountain they flung you on and in which sea they drowned you. My
beloved Yusuf, I wish I was with you to share your afflictions.”

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir is quoted by Abu-Basir that the sorrow of Ya‘qub
intensified and his pupils turned white due to weeping for Yusuf. He was
grief-stricken and shattered. Twice every year he requisitioned food
grains from Egypt for his family. The grains sufficed for their needs
during summer and winter. One day he dispatched some of his sons with a
caravan heading towards Egypt. He gave them a meagre amount for buying
grains. When they reached Egypt, the ‘Aziz had appointed Yusuf in his
place on the throne. They beheld the majesty of Yusuf and failed to
recognize him. Yusuf recognized them immediately and ordered his
servants to measure out grains for them. And he told them to put back
secretly the goods they had brought for barter. Then he asked his
brothers, “I have heard you had two more brothers, where are they now?”

“The wolf had devoured the elder one,” they replied, “And we have left
the younger brother with our father. Father does not part with him
because he fears for him a great deal.”  
 Yusuf said, “I desire that when you come again to purchase grains you
bring your younger brother along with you. If you fail to do so I will
not let you have any food-grains and would not even grant you an
audience.”

When the brothers returned and unpacked their luggage, they were amazed
to find the king had given back the good they carried for barter. And
the quantity of grain was more than they had purchased. They told their
father, “Let us take our younger brother so that we may procure more
grains. And we promise to take care of him.”

After a passage of six months when the stocks were depleted Ya‘qub sent
his sons to Egypt. This time Benjamin accompanied them but Ya‘qub
insisted they take an oath in Allah’s name they will bring him back safe
and sound as much as it was in their power. When they entered the court
of Yusuf he asked where Benjamin was. They said he was with their
luggage. Yusuf ordered them to present Benjamin and told them he wanted
to speak with him in private. The brothers went out and Yusuf called
Benjamin near him. He embraced him and said he was his brother Yusuf.  
 “Do not be aggrieved,” said Yusuf, “By what I have arranged with regard
to you and do not pass on this information to your brothers. Do not be
afraid or sad.”  
 He sent him back to the brothers and ordered his servants to accept
whatever goods they had brought; and to quickly deliver them
food-grains. He also told them to hide the measuring cup in Benjamin’s
bag. After the brothers loaded their caravan and set out with their
companions, Yusuf followed them accompanied with his men. He cried, “O
(people of) caravan! You are thieves!”  
 “What do you miss?” they asked.  
 “The king’s cup is missing and we shall give a camel load of wheat to
the one who locates it,” said the servants of Yusuf.

The search ended when the cup emerged from the bag of Benjamin. Yusuf
arrested Benjamin and all efforts of the brother to secure his release
failed. At last they returned to Ya‘qub in a dejected mood. When Ya‘qub
received the shocking news he said, *“Inna lillaahe wa inna ilaihe
rajao’on.”* (Surely we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return).”
Ya‘qub was so devastated that his back bent. The people ignored Ya‘qub
and his sons; and their condition deteriorated. All their food stocks
depleted and they were on the verge of starvation. Ya‘qub told his sons
to go and search for Yusuf and not to despair of Allah’s Mercy. He gave
them a meagre sum and sent them to Egypt with a letter addressed to the
‘‘Aziz’ requesting mercy for his sons. He instructed his son to give the
letter before revealing their barter goods. The letter was as follows:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.  
 This is a letter to the ‘Aziz of Egypt - one who is known for justice
and generosity in filling the measure. From Ya‘qub son of Ishaq son of
Ibrahim the Khalil, for whom Nimrod collected wood, and ignited a blaze
to burn him. But Allah made the fire cool and safe. And He saved him.  
 O ‘Aziz I inform you that I belong to a family that is prone to
calamities from the Lord, so that He may test and examine us through
bounties and afflictions. We are suffering since last 20 years. First of
all, I had a son named Yusuf. He was my consolation among all the
children. He was the light of eyes and the fruit (pleasure) of my heart.
His step-brothers persuaded me to send him with them for playing and
enjoyment. One morning I sent him with his brothers and the same night
they returned wailing with a blood-stained shirt saying a wolf had
devoured my Yusuf. Hence the loss of Yusuf caused me deep sorrow. I wept
so much that the pupils of my eyes turned white. Yusuf had a brother
from his maternal aunt and I loved him too. When I felt nostalgic for
Yusuf I embraced his younger brother. It consoled me to some extent. His
brothers even took him away from me because you had asked about us and
ordered my sons to bring their younger brother to you when they come to
collect grains the next time. And you refused to deliver food stocks if
they did not obey your request. Thus, I was compelled to send him to you
for assured supply of food grain. My sons returned without the younger
brother and said he had stolen the king’s cup. Although we belong to a
family that does not steal, you have arrested him and caused me grief
due to his separation. So much so, that my back has bent. This tragedy
has surpassed all the calamities that befell me.  
 Hence, do me a favor and release my son. And also send a greater
quantity of wheat. Be generous in fixing the rate of food grains and
liberal in weighing. And send back the sons of Ya‘qub soon.”  
 Archangel Gabriel descended to Ya‘qub and said, “Your Lord asks you how
serious was your affliction that you had to complain about it to ‘Aziz?”

Ya‘qub said, “O Allah You have subjected me to these calamities as
requital and punishment.”  
 “Is there anyone except Me to dispel your calamities?” asked Allah.  
 “No, my Lord,” replied Ya‘qub.  
 Then why didn’t you feel ashamed to complain to someone other than Me?
And why didn’t you plead to Me?”  
 “I regret my action and pray for Your forgiveness. Now I complain to
You about my grief and sorrow.”  
 Allah said, “It is the end of punishment for you and your erring sons.
O Ya‘qub, if you had prayed to me at the beginning of the afflictions I
would have removed them at that time, itself. If you had repented for
your mistakes I would have certainly rid you of calamities. Even though
I had destined them for you. But the Satan made you thoughtless of Me
and You despaired of My Mercy. But I am Ever Forgiving and Ever Merciful
God. I love My servants who repent and seek forgiveness and those who
repose faith in My Mercy. O Ya‘qub, We shall return Yusuf and his
brother to you and whatever wealth, blood and flesh you have lost shall
be restored to you. I shall restore your sight and straighten your bent
back as taut as an arrow, that you may be happy and your eyes brighten.
Whatever I decreed for you was a sort of punishment, so accept it as
such.”  
 On the other hand, the brothers reached Yusuf while he reclined on his
majestic throne. They said, ‘O ‘Aziz, you are cognizant of our
afflictions and know our condition, we have brought a meagre sum but you
be generous in giving us more food grains and give us back Benjamin as a
form of charity. This is a letter from our father, that he wrote
concerning our younger brother. He has implored you to release him.”

Yusuf took the letter and kissed it and put it to his eyes. He wept and
wailed so much that his garment became soaked in his tears. Then he
introduced himself to his brothers.

***“They said, By Allah! Now has Allah certainly chosen you over us, and
we were certainly sinners. He said, (There shall be) no reproof against
you this day; Allah may forgive you, and He is the most Merciful of the
merciful. Take my shirt and cast it on my father’s face, he will (again)
be able to see, and come to me with all your families.” (12:91-93)***

Yusuf gave them all the provisions they needed and sent them towards the
country of Ya‘qub. As the caravan left Egypt, Ya‘qub felt Yusuf’s
fragrance at home. He told his sons that he perceived Yusuf’s scent.
While his other sons were racing towards him with glad tidings and the
news of Yusuf’s kingdom and majesty. They covered the distance in nine
days and when they came to Ya‘qub they put Yusuf’s shirt across his
face. He regained sight and asked where Benjamin was. They said he was
comfortable and happy in the company of Yusuf and they had left him
behind. Ya‘qub praised Allah and fell down in prostration of
thankfulness. His eyes gained vision and his back became straight once
again. He told his sons to prepare for the journey the same day and to
set out as soon as possible.

Thus all the wives of Ya‘qub and Yaameel the maternal aunt of Yusuf
departed for Egypt with Ya‘qub and his sons, with their families. They
covered the distance in nine days. When they reached Yusuf he embraced
his father and wept. He kissed the father’s face and seated him and the
aunt at the throne. Then he went to his private quarters and anointed
himself with scented oil, applied antimony to his eyes and dressed in
the royal shirt. When he came out in this manner, his parents and
brothers fell down in prostration of thankfulness to Allah and as a mark
of respect.  
 Yusuf said:

***“O my father! this is the significance of my vision of old; my Lord
has indeed made it to be true; and He was indeed kind to me when He
brought me forth from the prison and brought you from the desert after
the Satan had sown dissension between me and my brothers, surely my Lord
is benignant to whom He pleases; surely He is the Knowing, the Wise.”
(12:100)***

During those twenty years Yusuf had abstained from using oil, antimony
and perfumes. He neither smiled nor approached women.[^3]  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq mentions in a reliable tradition that when the
‘Aziz ordered Yusuf to be imprisoned, the Almighty Allah taught him the
interpretation of dreams. He used to explain the dreams of the prison
inmates. When he interpreted the dreams of those two people he thought
he might be granted pardon and told one of them to put in a good word
for him to the Emperor. The Almighty punished him by prolonging his
imprisonment because he had sought the help of someone other than Him.
Thus he remained in prison for twenty years. However, a large number of
traditions state that he remained in prison for seven years.

According to trustworthy chain of narrators Imam Muhammad al-Baqir was
asked if the sons of Ya‘qub were Prophets.  
 “No,” replied Imam. “They were descendants of Prophets and left the
world as righteous people. They confessed of their bad deeds and
repented.”

Correct chains of hadith reporters state that Husham bin Salim asked
Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq the extent of Ya‘qub’s grief for Yusuf. Imam said
it equalled the collective sorrow of seventy women whose sons had died.
Then Imam said, “Archangel Gabriel descended when Yusuf was serving his
prison sentence and told him that the Almighty has decreed these
calamities as a test for him and his father. Allah will save him from
the prison if he implore Him for release by the right of Muhammad and
the Progeny of Muhammad, Yusuf said, “O Allah! I implore you by the
right of Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, save me soon. Give me
peace and comfort from the misfortune and calamity that surrounds me.”

Archangel Gabriel congratulated him saying, “Be happy friend! The Lord
has sent me to convey glad-tidings for you. You shall be released within
three days. Allah would raise you to the throne of Egypt. The nobles of
Egypt would be at your service. You shall be reunited with your brothers
and father. You are the chosen servant of Allah and the son of His
chosen servant - know that your future is bright.’

The same night ‘Aziz had a dream that inculcated fear in him and he
related the dream to his companions. However, they failed to provide an
explanation. The person who had been released from Yusuf’s prison was
also present in the assembly. He remembered Yusuf and said, “O king! Let
me go to the prison. There is a person there unequalled in knowledge and
self-respect. When you had convicted me and another man we had a dream.
And this person interpreted our dreams correctly. Thus you had one of us
hung from the gate and released the other.’

‘Aziz told him to go to the prison and inquire the interpretation of his
dream. He went to the prison asked Yusuf the interpretation of the
King’s dream. Then he returned to the king with explanation of the dream
and also conveyed the message of Yusuf. ‘Aziz ordered that Yusuf be
summoned. He wanted to appoint him as his close aide. Yusuf sent another
message asking how he could rely on the king’s word because even though
he was cognizant of Yusuf’s aversion of sinful acts he had still
imprisoned him for so many years. When ‘Aziz heard this he summoned the
ladies and asked them about the matter concerning Yusuf. They swore they
had not seen a single defect in Yusuf’s character. ‘Aziz deputed the
prison warden to bring Yusuf to him. When he came ‘Aziz spoke to him at
length and realized his unsurpassed intellect and wisdom. ‘Aziz asked
him about the interpretation of his dream.

Yusuf first related the dream, then explained its significance. ‘Aziz
asked him who would take the responsibility of storing surplus grains
during the first seven years? Yusuf said, ‘The Almighty has ordered me
to bear this responsibility. And that I shall make arrangements for the
years of famine.’ ‘Aziz agreed and surrendered to him the royal signet,
throne and crown. He told him to make arrangements according to his own
planning. Yusuf became actively involved in the scheme. He acquired all
the surplus food grains during the first seven years and had then stored
in royal granaries and augmented the royal treasure. When the famine
began he started selling the stored grains. The first year he bartered
against gold and silver coins and there hardly remained a single unit of
currency with the people of Egypt and surrounding areas. All the cash
entered the coffers of Egypt. In the second year Yusuf exchanged grains
for gem and jewelry and all the personal treasures entered the royal
treasury. The third year the currency were livestock and cattle. Yusuf
became the master of all the quadrupeds in Egypt. In the fourth year
Yusuf demanded slaves and slave-girls in exchange of food grains and
consequently became the master of all the slaves in his kingdom. The
fifth year began and food grain was sold in lieu of houses and
buildings.

Yusuf became the owner of every property in the country. It was the turn
of land and streams in the sixth year and the agricultural lands and
streams of Egypt and the adjoining areas came under royal control.
During the seventh year when nothing remained with the people they
offered themselves in slavery in exchange of food grains. As a result of
this barter all the free men of Egypt became enslaved to Yusuf. At this
juncture Yusuf asked the ‘Aziz what his opinion was regarding the affair
granted by Allah? ‘Aziz said he had entrusted everything to Yusuf. He
can do whatever he likes. Yusuf said, “I free all the people who had
become my slaves and I return all their property that I have received
from them. And I also return your signet, your crown and your throne
upon the condition that you rule as I had ruled and deal with them as I
had dealt. You shall govern them as I did because they were saved due to
me.’ The king said, ‘My religion and the cause of pride is this itself.
I witness the Oneness of Allah. He has no partner. And I witness that
you are a Prophet sent by Him.’

After all this the reunion of Ya‘qub and Yusuf occurred.”  
 According to correct reports Muhammad ibn Muslim asked Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir the period Ya‘qub remained alive after he was reunited with
Yusuf in Egypt.  
 “Two years,” he replied.  
 “Who was the hujjah (Proof) of Allah on Earth? Ya‘qub or Yusuf?”  
 “Ya‘qub was the proof of Allah. Yusuf was associated with the throne.
When Ya‘qub passed from this world, his mortal remains were placed in a
coffin and transported to Syria. He was buried in the Jerusalem. After
the demise of Ya‘qub, Yusuf was conferred the position of hujjahullah
(Proof of Allah).”

The narrator asked Imam if Yusuf was a Prophet and a Messenger. Imam
said, “Yes, it seems you have not heard that the Almighty says in
Qur’an:  
 And a believing man of the Pharaoh’s people who hid his faith said,
What! Will you slay a man because he says: My Lord is Allah, and indeed
he has brought to you clear arguments from your Lord? And if he be a
liar, on him will be his lie, and if he be truthful, there will befall
you some of that which he threatens you (with); surely Allah does not
guide him who is extravagant, a liar: O my people! Yours is the kingdom
this day, being masters in the land, but who will help us against the
punishment of Allah if it come to us? the Pharaoh said, I do not show
you aught but that which I see (myself), and I do not make you follow
any but the right way. And he who believed said, O my people! Surely I
fear for you the like of what befell the parties: The like of what
befell the people of Nuh and ‘Ad and Thamud and those after them, and
Allah does not desire injustice for (His) servants; And, O my people! I
fear for you the day of calling out, The day on which you will turn back
retreating; there shall be no saviour for you from Allah, and whomsoever
Allah causes to err, there is no guide for him: And certainly Yusuf came
to you before with clear arguments, but you ever remained in doubt as to
what he brought; until when he died, you said, Allah will never raise an
apostle after him.”[^4]

According to reliable reports, Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that at the
time Yusuf was sent to the prison his age was twelve. He remained in
prison for eighteen years. After being released from prison Yusuf lived
for another eighty years. Thus altogether he lived for 110 years.  
 In another hadith from the same Imam it is mentioned that the Messenger
of Allah said that both Ya‘qub and Yusuf lived for 120 years.

A reliable tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that there was a
person from the time of the people of ‘Ad and was alive right unto the
time of the Pharaoh (Ruler of Egypt). During the time of Yusuf the
people harassed him very much. They used to hurl stones on him. So he
came to the Pharaoh and said, “Save me from the mischief of people and I
promise to relate something surprising that I have witnessed in my life.
And I shall relate the truth.” the Pharaoh agreed and gave him royal
protection. The old man used to relate the past events in the court of
the Pharaoh and the Pharaoh began to believe him to a great extent. He
had also not heard any falsehood from Yusuf. One day the Pharaoh asked
Yusuf if he knew anyone who was better than him.

Yusuf said, “Yes, my father, Ya‘qub is better than me. When Ya‘qub
entered the court of the Pharaoh and saluted him according to royal
custom the Pharaoh was much impressed and in turn accorded great respect
to Ya‘qub. He called him near and honored him more than Yusuf. Then he
asked Ya‘qub his age. “One hundred and twenty years,” replied Ya‘qub.
The old man from ‘Ad said, “This is not true.” Ya‘qub maintained silence
but the Pharaoh was very embarrassed by this. Again he asked, “O
respected sir, what is your age?” “One hundred and twenty years,”
replied Ya‘qub again. Again the old man intervened, “He is lying.”
Ya‘qub prayed, “O Allah, if this man is lying make his beard fall on his
chest.” At that very moment all the hair of the old man’s beard dropped
on his chest. The Pharaoh was shocked. He said, “You have laid a curse
upon the one whom I had given refuge. I request you to pray to Allah
that He may give back his beard.”  
 Ya‘qub prayed and the old man got his beard back. The man from ‘Ad
said, “I had seen this man in a particular time in the company of
Ibrahim Khaleelur Rahman (Friend of the Beneficent). More than one
hundred and twenty years have passed since.”  
 Ya‘qub said that the person whom he had seen was not him. “He was
Ishaq.”  
 “Then who are you?” asked the old man.  
 “I am Ya‘qub, the son of Ishaq, the son of Ibrahim.”  
 “You speak the truth,” confessed the old man, “I had seen Ishaq.  
 “You both speak the truth,” said the Pharaoh.

A reliable report mentioned from Abu Hashim Ja‘far says that people
inquired from Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari regarding the statement of
Yusuf’s brothers that if Benjamin had committed theft, it was not
surprising, his brother had also committed a theft in the past.

Imam said, “Yusuf never committed theft. But Ya‘qub was in possession of
a waistband he had inherited from Ibrahim. Whenever it was misplaced or
lost Archangel Gabriel descended and pointed out its location. Anyone
found in possession of it became the slave of Ya‘qub. The waistband was
in the custody of Sarah a daughter of Ishaq she was named after her
maternal grandmother. Sarah was very fond of Yusuf and wished to adopt
him. She wrapped the waistband underneath the garments of Yusuf and told
Ya‘qub that someone has stolen it. Archangel Gabriel descended and
informed Ya‘qub that the waistband was with Yusuf. Sarah claimed that
since Yusuf had stolen the band she had a greater right to enslave him.
Ya‘qub said Yusuf shall be her slave upon the condition that she would
neither sell him nor gift him to someone else. Sarah agreed upon the
condition that Ya‘qub will not take him back, and she freed Yusuf that
very moment. After freeing him she took him with her.”

Abu Hashim says he was pondering on the incidents connected with Ya‘qub
and Yusuf and harboured a slight doubt regarding the fact that the two
of them remained separated for such a long time. So much so that the
pupils of Ya‘qub’s eyes lost their vision. Imam came to know of the
thoughts that passed through his mind and said, “O Abu Hashim! I seek
refuge from Allah regarding the doubt you harbour in your mind. If Allah
had desired He could have removed the curtain from between Ya‘qub and
Yusuf and the two of them would have seen each other. However, He had
appointed a term for their reunion. And whatever Allah does with His
servants is for their own good.”

Authentic narration from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in reply to people’s
query regarding the statement of Allah that: ‘Everything was halal
(permissible) for the descendants of Ya‘qub except what he had
prohibited for himself.”

Whenever Ya‘qub consumed camel meat the lower part of his body developed
unbearable pain. Hence he prohibited camel meat for himself. It was at
the time when the Torah had not yet been revealed and Musa had not yet
prohibited it.”

In another reliable tradition it is mentioned that Yusuf aspired
matrimony with a most beautiful woman of his time, but she refused his
offer and said that the slave of her king hoped for her hand. Yusuf
approached her father but he said the daughter was free to take her own
decision. Hence, Yusuf prayed to Allah. Allah revealed that He has
decreed the woman for him. Again he sent a messenger to her people
requesting they grant him an audience. They accepted and when Yusuf
entered, the house lit up with his brilliance. He asked for a glass of
water and the maiden rushed to comply with his request. Yusuf took a
draught and returned the tumbler. The maiden brought the glass to her
own lips, but Yusuf said, “Do not be impatient, you shall achieve your
desire soon.” Then he married her.

In another tradition Imam says that when Yusuf asked his cell-mate to
lobby for him with the king, Archangel Gabriel descended near him and
kicked the ground. A fissure developed that reached up to the seventh
layer of the earth. Archangel Gabriel said, “O Yusuf take a look at the
seventh layer beneath the earth, what do you see?”  
 “A small stone.”  
 Then he made a fissure in the stone and said, “What do you see
inside?”  
 “A minute worm.”  
 “Who bestows sustenance to this worm?” asked Archangel Gabriel.  
 “The Lord of the worlds,” replied Yusuf.  
 Archangel Gabriel said, “Your Lord says that when He had not ignored a
small worm in the seventh layer of the Earth how could you think that He
has betrayed you? Why did you request the man to mobilize support with
the King? For this misdemeanor you shall remain imprisoned for many
years.”

Yusuf wept so much due to this penalty that the walls and doorways wept
with him. The prison inmates became distraught and insisted he weep on
alternate days. But on the days he did not shed tears his condition was
more severe.  
 According to a reliable tradition of Imam al-Baqir and Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq the ‘good patience’ *(Sabrun Jamilun)* denotes that a person
does not complain to anyone regarding his afflictions. The Almighty
Allah sent Ya‘qub with a message to a pious monk. When the worshipper
saw Ya‘qub he mistook him for Ibrahim. He stood up in honor and
embracing him said, “Khalil of Allah! Welcome!”  
 “I am not Ibrahim. I am the son of Ishaq and the grandson of
Ibrahim.”  
 “Why have you aged so much?” asked the monk.  
 “Sorrow and grief has aged me,” replied Ya‘qub.  
 He had hardly reached the door after taking leave of the monk when a
revelation descended from Allah: “O Ya‘qub! You complain my servants
regarding Me?”

Ya‘qub immediately fell into prostration at the very threshold and
prayed, “My Lord! I shall never repeat this error.”  
 Allah said, “I forgive you. But refrain from such an action in
future.”  
 After this Ya‘qub never complained to anyone about his earthly
difficulties except the day he said: “I complain for my affliction but
to Allah! And I am aware of Allah’s Mercy to such an extent that you are
not aware, my sons.”  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in a reliable tradition that when Yusuf was
in prison the Almighty asked him through revelation why he had been
thrown into the prison. Yusuf confessed his guilt and Allah taught him a
supplication:  
*“Yaa kabeero kulle kabeerin yaa man laa shareeka lahu wa laa wazeera
yaa khaleqash-shamse wal Qamaril muneere. Yaa I’smatal
muz”t’arriz”z”areere yaa qaas’ema kulle jabbaarin a’needin yaa mugnial
ba-esil faqeere yaa jaaberal a’z’mil kaseere yaa mut’leqal kaneelil
aseere as-aloka beh’aqqe muh’ammadin wa aale muh’ammadin anna taja’lali
min amri h’arajan wa mukhrajan wa tarzuqni min h’aitho ah’tasib wa min
h’aitho laa ah’tasebo.”*

When it was morning the ‘Aziz summoned him and set him free.  
 Another authentic tradition says that when ‘Aziz abdicated his throne
in favor of Yusuf he put on a clean two piece garment and went far away
into wilderness. He performed two Rak‘ah prayers and at the conclusion
raised his hands towards the heavens and said:  
 “*Yaa rabbe qad aataitani minal mulke a’llamtani minal taaweelel
ah’adeethe faat’erassamaawaate wal arz” anta Waliyye fidduniya wal
aakherah.*”

Archangel Gabriel descended and asked him what he desired? Yusuf said he
had prayed to Allah that He might allow him to die a Muslim and include
him among the righteous ones. This was due to the fact that Yusuf was
afraid of corruption and transgression that can remove a person from
religion. Thus who can not be afraid of transgression when an exalted
personality like Yusuf was?  
 Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali is quoted to have mentioned that Yusuf entered
prison on a Wednesday.  
 According to reliable sources it is mentioned that people asked Imam
al-Ridha how people admired a person who ate detestable food, dressed in
coarse garments and put on an outward show of piety.  
 Imam said, “Yusuf was a Prophet and the son of the Prophet, yet he
dressed in silken robes with gold buckles. He used to attend the
gatherings of Egyptian kings and issued commands. People were not
concerned with his dress.”

Thalabi has mentioned in the book “A’raaees” that when the king learnt
of Yusuf’s explanation and realized the extent of his intellect, wisdom
and trustworthiness, he summoned him. When Yusuf emerged from the prison
he prayed that the righteous may shower their kindness upon the
prisoners. He implored Allah not to conceal the virtues of the inmates.
The effect of his supplication was that all the prisoners in every city
have something meritorious as compared to other people. Then he
inscribed the following words at the entrance. This is a grave of living
men and an abode of sorrow. It is a means for the lessons that one
derives from friends due to their friendship and the criticism one
invites from ones enemies. Then he performed the ritual bath and cleaned
his body from the dirt of prison. Put on a clean dress and headed
towards the royal court. Upon reaching the entrance he said:  
 “*H’asbi rabbi min dunyaya wa h’asbi rabbi min khalqehi a’zza jalaalehi
wa jalla thaba-ahu wa laa ilaaha ghairohu.*”

When he stepped inside he uttered the following words:  
*Allahumma inni as-aloka min sharrehi wa sharre ghairehi*.  
 When the king turned his attention towards Yusuf he saluted him in
Hebrew.  
 “What language is this?” he asked.  
 “It is the language of my uncle Isma‘il.”  
 Then he prayed for the king in Arabic.  
 “What language is that?” asked he.  
 “It is the language of my ancestors.”  
 The king also knew seven languages and in whichever language he spoke,
Yusuf replied in the same tongue. He was impressed by the
accomplishments of Yusuf at such a young age. Yusuf was thirty years at
that time.  
 The king said, “O Yusuf! I wish to hear my dream from your tongue.”  
 “You dreamt that seven grey-eyed fattened white cows came out of the
Nile,” narrated Yusuf, “Milk was flowing from the front of their heads.
When you saw them you were amazed at their graceful appearance. Suddenly
the water of Nile dried up and the bottom showed sand and wet mud. From
the muddy bottom emerged seven lean cows. They were covered with mud and
their bellies touched their backs. They were not having any udders.
Their teeth, nails and hooves were like claws of beasts and they even
possessed trunks. The lean cows attacked the fat ones and tore them up.
They devoured their meat and even crushed their bones and gulped down
the marrow. You were astonished at this sight. Suddenly you saw seven
green ears of corn and seven withered ears grow from a spot. Their roots
reached to the water. Then a wind blew the dried ears upon the green
ones and they withered down.”  
 “You speak the truth,” said ‘Aziz, “I dreamt exactly as you say.”  
 Yusuf explained the significance of the dream and ‘Aziz appointed him
in charge of the agricultural and treasury departments of his kingdom.

Shaykh al-Tusi and others have narrated that the ‘Aziz of Egypt who had
imprisoned Yusuf, was Qitfeer. He was the Prime minister of the King.
The king was Reyaan Ibn Waleed. The king had seen the dream. When Yusuf
was released from the prison the king expelled his Prime minister and
appointed Yusuf in his place. He entrusted all the powers to Yusuf and
himself retired from administration. He handed over even the seal, crown
and throne to Yusuf. During that period Qitfeer died. The king married
Yusuf to Raheel the widow of Qitfeer. From her Yusuf had two sons,
Afraeem and Yashaeem.  
*A’raees* contains a report that Yusuf called Ibn Yameen to himself and
asked his name.  
 “Yameen”, he replied.  
 “Why are you named Yameen?”  
 “Because when I was born my mother was dead. That is I am the child of
sorrow.”  
 “What was your mother known as?”  
 “Raheel, the daughter of Leyaan.”  
 “Do you have any children?”  
 “Yes, I have ten sons.”  
 “What are their names?”  
 “I have named them with epithets related to my brother who was killed.
We had the same mother.”  
 Yusuf was surprised, “You loved your brother so much that you named the
children after him? Tell me their names.”

He said, “Bala’a, Akheer, Ashkal, Ah’yaa, Khair, No’maan, Aawar, Aras,
H’eem and Yateem.”  
 “What is the meaning of their names?” asked Yusuf.  
 “I named Bala’a because the earth concealed him from me, ‘Akheer’
because he was my mother’s eldest son, ‘Ashkad’ because he was my full
brother, ‘Khair’, because he was happy whenever he lived, ‘No’maan’
because he was the beloved of our parents, ‘Aawar’ because he was like a
flower in beauty and elegance, ‘Aras’ because his body was like his
head, “H’eem’ because my father said he is alive, ‘Yateem’, because my
eyes brightened when I cast a glance on him.”  
 Yusuf said, “I wish to become your brother in place of the one who has
been killed.”  
 He said, “Who can get a brother like you! But you were not born from
Ya‘qub and Raheel.”  
 Yusuf heard this, wept, and embraced him and said, “I am your brother,
Yusuf. Do not be sad and do not say anything regarding this to your
brothers.”[^5]

[^1]: Actually his entreaty did not reach the ears of Ya‘qub. For it is
unlike for a Prophet to hear a request and not fulfill it. It is
possible that Ya‘qub had not instructed his servants to feed all those
who approach his door, and this resulted in Divine Chastisement. Imam
Zayn al-‘abidin however made it a point to instruct even his servants in
this regard - Translator.)

[^2]: Some scholars have considered the above report to be based on
Taqiyyah (dissimulation) because it supports the Sunni view. It is
possible that Yusuf refrained from dismounting not due to pride or
vanity but it may have been for some hidden wisdom due to his position
as the supreme ruler of Egypt. Though it still amounted to be Tark
al-Awla and a detestable (Makrooh) act.

[^3]: According to this tradition and other traditions like it, the
period of Yusuf’s separation from his father lasted 20 years. But
historians and commentators differ among themselves. Some state that
there was a gap of 80 years between Yusuf’s dream and his reunion with
Ya‘qub. It was 70 years according to others. While another group of
scholars thinks it was 40 years. Some even say it was 18 years.
According to hasan Basri, Yusuf was seven or ten years old when he was
into the well. His slavery, imprisonment and rulership accounted for
another 80 years. After reuniting with his family he lived for another
23 years. Consequently he lived for 120 years. Some Shi‘ah traditional
reports mention the period of separation to be more than 20 years.
Another fact that emerges from the traditions is that Benjamin was not
from the womb of Yusuf’s mother. He was from the womb of his mother’s
sister. According to interpreters when the Qur’anic verse mentions that
he took father and mother to the throne, it is only metaphorical. The
word ‘mother’ stands for his aunt. This is because the maternal aunt is
referred to as mother, just as the paternal uncle is addressed as
father. Actually Raheel the mother of Yusuf had already expired. Some
people claim that the Almighty raised her to life to fulfill the dream
of Yusuf. Some even say she was alive until the time of reunion.
However, the previous view is stronger. Thus in a reliable report when
people asked Imam al-Ri¤a how many sons accompanied Ya‘qub when he was
reunited with Yusuf, he said, “Eleven” and when asked whether Benjamin
was from the womb of Yusuf’s mother. He said, “No! He was from the womb
of his mother’s sister.”

[^4]: Surah Mu’min 40:28-34

[^5]: Many scholars have expressed doubts regarding this strange
incident and normally people view it with suspicion. Therefore instead
of separate replies it is sufficient if we give standard replies to the
common objections that would be sufficient for everyone. Why Ya‘qub
preferred Yusuf over other children when discrimination is not permitted
in this regard. And this dotage almost cost Yusuf his life. Hence
discrimination between children is not allowed especially when there is
chance of creating a dissension between them. The reply to this
objection is Ya‘qub’s intensive love for Yusuf was not only because he
was a son. He preferred him over other sons due to his knowledge and
Prophetic status. It is also possible that Ya‘qub could not rein his
emotions in his love for Yusuf. Another explanation is that Ya‘qub may
not have expected his preference for Yusuf would cause jealousy to such
an extent. Ya‘qub wept so much for Yusuf that he became blind. Whereas
the Prophets suffered greater calamities with patience and forbearance.
Reply: Sorrow and weeping are emotions beyond ones control. What is
prohibited is the uttering of some words that Allah dislikes. And Ya‘qub
never uttered any such thing. He was absolutely resigned to divine fate.
It is possible to be resigned to ones fate and sorrowful for one
circumstances at the same time. Just as a person having cancerous limb
requests the surgeon to ampute it to prevent its spread to rest of the
body. Though he is pained at the loss of his limb he is nevertheless
satisfied, or rather grateful to the surgeon for amputation.” Thus when
Ibrahim the son of the Prophet died, the Messenger of Allah said, “The
heart is restless and the eyes weep but I do not wish to say anything
that might cause Divine displeasure.” The devotees of Allah love Him
alone, if they love others it is only because Allah is pleased with
their love. They love only those people who are the beloveds of Allah.
Because they are the beloved of the beloved (Allah). Similarly they are
inimical to the enemies of Allah even though they might be their close
companions. They are prepared to slay him with sword and remain aloof
from him. On the other hand they have love and regard for a person who
loves Allah even though he might be far away from them (in relation or
location). It is obvious that Ya‘qub’s dotage for Yusuf was not due to
his physical appearance and worldly aspect. He adored him due to the
splendor of guidance and righteousness that emanated from him. Therefore
the brothers of Yusuf who were ignorant of these spiritual qualities in
Yusuf began to feel jealous of him. They claimed to be more deserving of
their father’s affection due to their greater strength and because they
served him more than Yusuf. Hence, it is obvious that the attachment of
Ya‘qub to Yusuf and his grief due to his separation did not contradict
his love for Allah. It was rather compliment for that love. 3) Why was
Ya‘qub so much aggrieved for Yusuf even though he knew about the dream
(of stars prostrating) and the Angels had also informed that Yusuf was
alive? Reply: The grief of Ya‘qub was due to the separation of Yusuf.
When people asked Imam al-Sadiq why Ya‘qub wept for Yusuf in spite of
the fact that Archangel Gabriel had informed him that he would be
reunited with him one day, Imam said it was because he had been deprived
of Yusuf’s company. 4) How is it acceptable that Ya‘qub became blind,
while such a disability is incompatible with Prophethood? Reply:
According to some scholars he had not become blind. His sight had become
weak. Due to excessive weeping a while layer developed on the pupils and
this blocked his vision. Another view is that Prophets are not immune of
each and every defect. Only those disabilities that people find
repulsive are absent in Prophets. And people do no find blindness a
repulsive quality. It should not be a cause of reducing their Prophetic
abilities. In spite of an impaired vision the Prophets could perceive
with their inner eye. Thus there was no such defect in Ya‘qub. The last
of the reasons seem more acceptable. 5) Regarding the affair of Yusuf,
Allah says: “And certainly she made for him, and he would have made for
her, were it not that he had seen the manifest evidence of his Lord;
thus (it was) that We might turn away from him evil and indecency,
surely he was one of Our sincere servants.” (12:24) The apparent meaning
of the Qur’anic ayah is that Zulaykha intended to commit adultery with
him and he would also responded in the like manner if he had not
perceived Allah’s proof. The Sunni scholars have mentioned disgraceful
things in interpreting this verse. One explanation says that Yusuf too
embraced Zulaykha and would have gone ahead but he saw the face of
Ya‘qub in the corner of the room. Ya‘qub was biting his fingers in
suspense. Seeing this Yusuf felt ashamed and dropped the idea of
fornication. Another report says that when Zulaykha covered the idol
with a cloth Yusuf felt ashamed. Other foolish interpretations are also
mentioned in traditional books. First Reply: The ayah says ‘he would
have also made for her’. It means that if he had not been a Prophet and
not seen Archangel Gabriel and the ‘manifest evidence’ he would have
succumbed to his desires. Since he was already a Prophet the possibility
of falling into sin did not arise for Yusuf. Second Reply: Zulaykha
‘made for him’ for committing adultery and Yusuf ‘would have made for
her’ to kill her if she forced him further. And it is possible that in
that shari‘ah it was allowed to kill a person who compels one to sin.
The Almighty prevented him from killing her due to hidden wisdom. The
Egyptians might have revenged her murder by executing Yusuf. Al-Ma’mun
asked about the matter and Imam al-Ri¤a said, “If Yusuf had not seen the
‘manifest evidence of his Lord’ he would have also intended what
Zulaykha did. But he was infallible (Ma’soom) and a Ma’soom never makes
an intention of committing a sin. Indeed my father has told me from his
father (Imam al-Sadiq ) that he said Zulaykha ‘intended’ to commit
fornication and Yusuf ‘intended’ to avoid it.” In another reliable
tradition when ‘Ali bin Al-Jahm asked Imam the interpretation of this
ayah, Imam said, “Zulaykha intended to sin and Yusuf intended to kill
her because his intention was very repulsive for him. But the Almighty
restrained him from murder and fornication. Allah says, “thus (it was)
that We might turn away from him evil and indecency.” (12:24). Allah
means to say that He prevented from him evil (Zulaykha’s murder) and
indecency (fornication).” The two reports of Yusuf’s vision of Ya‘qub
face and Zulaykha covering the idol do not contradict our first reply.
Their only deficiency is that they have not elaborated. It is possible
that Allah showed him the evidence so that the thought should not arise
in his mind even though there was no possibility of it because he was
already a Ma’soom. Some of the reports are present due to Taqiyyah. 6)
Yusuf commanded his brothers to bring Benjamin with them even though he
knew his father would not like it. And when Benjamin was brought to
Egypt he arrested him. This made Yusuf responsible for his father’s
sorrow. Also, even after being enthroned as the king why did he not
inform Ya‘qub of his well being, knowing well that he was aggrieved for
him. Reply: Whatever he used to do it was according to the commands
revealed to him. And whatever calamities afflict the Prophets are by way
of Divine test. Allah wishes them to undergo tribulations that they may
achieve a high status in the Hereafter. Therefore, the arrest of
Benjamin and delay in reuniting with Ya‘qub was a Divine command that
Yusuf obeyed. Allah desired the grief of Ya‘qub to reach the zenith to
qualify him for the greatest rewards. 7) Why did Yusuf cry, “O Caravan!
You are thieves!” Whereas he knew they had not stolen anything. A
Prophet can never utter a lie. Reply: Sometimes it is permitted to make
a statement with the intention of meaning something else. This is not
termed a ‘lie’. It is known as ‘Toriya’. In some circumstances it
becomes obligatory to use Toriya. Here it was a necessity because
without it, the arrest of Benjamin was not possible. Therefore Yusuf
said, ‘You are thieves’ with the intention that they had stolen Yusuf
from his father. Some people say that it was not Yusuf who passed this
remark. It was one of his servants who cried in that way without Yusuf
bidding him to do so. Another explanation is that it was a question.
“You are thieves?” and it was not an assertion. The first explanation is
more authentic. 8) How did Ya‘qub and his sons prostrate for Yusuf while
it is haram to do so except for Allah the Almighty? And how Yusuf was
supportive of their obeisance? Reply: The reply is the same that I have
stated with regard to the doubt against obeisance of Angels to Adam. The
first explanation is they prostrated as thanksgiving to Allah for
reuniting them with Yusuf and for the bounties He had showered on Yusuf.
We have already mentioned the tradition where Imam al-Sadiq says that
the Sajdah (prostration) of Ya‘qub and his sons was for worshipping
(thanking) Allah. Secondly, the prostration was not that of obeisance
but it was a gesture of respect for Yusuf. And in that shari‘ah it was
allowed to prostrate before others as a mark of honor. Third
interpretation is that it was not a Sajdah, as we know it. It was a
ritual associated with expressing respect for someone and those people
had named it ‘Sajdah’. Nevertheless the prostration was according to
Divine Command and it was intended to manifest the superiority of Yusuf
over his brothers and other people. Lastly, when we accept the
infallibility of Prophets and Imams we must know that whatever they did
must have had Divine sanctions even though we may be ignorant of the
hidden wisdom. Doubts and suspicions are created by Satan and cause
deviation and irreligiousness.


