An account of Ayyub
===================

It is well-known among the historians and Qur’anic commentators that
Ayyub was the son of Amwas, son of Aeas, son of Ishaq son of Ibrahim.
His mother was a descendant of Lut. Some scholars however maintain that
Ayyub was the son of Aaes and his wife Rahmat was the daughter of Afraem
bin Yusuf, or she was Mahir the daughter of Meesha son of Yusuf, or Liya
daughter of Ya‘qub. But the first opinion is more prevalent (i.e.. his
wife was Rahmat).

Authentic chain of narrators quotes that Abu-Basir asked Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq the reason for Ayyub being inflicted with such severe
calamities. Imam replied that it was due to the excess of bounties Allah
had bestowed on him. And he used to thank Allah in the proper way. At
that time the Satan was not barred from the heavens. He used to travel
up to the Divine Throne also. One day he saw the thankfulness of Ayyub
etched in the celestial tablets. They were carried up with great care
and respect. When Satan saw this, the fire of jealousy flared up in his
heart. He said to Allah, “Ayyub is so thankful to You because You have
bestowed bounties in huge proportions. But if you take the bounties away
he would not remain thankful. If You allow me to control his fortunes
You will realize how thankless he can become.”

The Almighty granted Satan the privilege to control the wealth and
children of Ayyub. He was elated and at once rushed towards the earth
and began to destroy the wealth and children of Ayyub. The more he
proceeded in destruction the thankfulness of Ayyub intensified.  
 Now the Satan requested for power over the cultivation owned by Ayyub.
This was also granted. He mobilized his assistants and landed on the
fields of Ayyub. They spewed out a venomous breath and all the crops
withered.

Ayyub was all the more thankful. Hence Satan demanded control over the
goats and sheep owned by Ayyub. When it was granted he killed them all.
Ayyub became more sincere and thanked Allah frequently.

Satan told Allah, “Ayyub was yet thankful because he knows You would
return the bounties soon and he prayed desperately to the Almighty and
requested Him to grant complete power over the body of Ayyub. Allah told
him, “You are given power over Ayyub’s body except his Aql (power of
reasoning) and his eyes.”

According to another version the exceptions concerned heart, eyes,
tongue and ears. When he received the permission he dashed to the earth
as he feared that if the Divine Mercy surrounds Ayyub it will be an
obstacle on his way. He came to Ayyub and blew a venomous breath into
his nostrils. As a result Ayyub was inflicted with a severe malady that
covered his whole body with sores and leprous wounds. He continued in
this condition for a long time and continued to praise and thank Allah
without any reservations. Ultimately worms developed in his infected
wounds. The patience of Ayyub reached such heights that whenever a worm
fell from his body he picked it up and put it back saying, “Stay where
the Almighty has originated you.” Such a dreadful odor emanated from his
body that the people banished him to a dirty corner of the town. His
wife Rahmat, the daughter of Yusuf went out to beg and got him whatever
she could obtain.

When a long time passed for Ayyub in such afflictions, the Satan
realized that his thankful always exceeded the intensity of the
calamities that befall him. So he went to a group of Ayyub’s followers
who had become hermits and resided in the mountains. He told them, “Come
let us go and see why Ayyub has been inflicted with such calamities.”
The people came down and mounting their horses headed towards Ayyub.
When they came near, the horses were terrified of the stench and bolted
out of control. The riders tied the horses in a far corner and proceeded
on foot. They came to Ayyub to ask him about his conditions. A young man
also accompanied them. They sat down near Ayyub and said, “If you tell
us of the deadly sin you have committed we can guard against it. We do
not dare to pray for your forgiveness lest Allah sends His wrath upon
us. We never expected you would suffer from chastisement that did not
befell anyone else. It must be due to a sin that you has concealed from
us.”

Ayyub said, “I swear by the Might of my Lord, and He is a witness that I
never ate anything without sharing it with the poor and orphans. And
whenever I came across two worship acts, I always preferred the more
difficult.”  
 Hearing these words the young man told his companions, “May Allah
destroy you! You come to Allah’s Prophet and criticized him to the
extent that he was forced to reveal a good deed he had performed in
secret.”

When they went away, Ayyub supplicated Allah and sought His permission
to express a wish. The Almighty sent a cloud that hovered over his head
and voice came out from it, “You are permitted to express your desire:
Ask, whatever you wish. I am always near you.”

Ayyub gathered all his strength and sat up with his thighs joined. Then
he said, “O My Lord! I swear by Your Might that You never sent any
afflictions upon me. But whenever I had the choice of two worship-acts,
I preferred the one, which was most difficult for my body. And I never
ate without sharing my food with orphans. Did I not echo Your praise?
Did I not thank You sufficiently? Did I not glorify and purify You (from
every kind of association)?”

Ten thousand tongues of the cloud replied, “O Ayyub Who created you with
the temperament that you prayed when all world was asleep? Who is that
made worship most likeable to you? Do you think you have obliged the
Almighty? Whereas He has favored you by granting you the divine
opportunity to worship and thank Him.”

Ayyub picked up a handful of dust and stuffed it in his mouth and said,
“I was wrong! And I beg forgiveness. All the bounties and opportunities
of worship are from You alone.”  
 The Almighty sent an Angel who kicked the earth and a spring of water
gushed out. Ayyub bathed in it and was immediately cured of all diseases
and discomfort. His body become more fresh and beautiful than before.
Then Allah caused orchards and gardens to grow around Ayyub. All the
wealth, property and farms were restored. The Angel was sitting with him
and engaged in conversation when his wife entered with a piece of dried
bread. She saw in place of a ruin, a blooming garden and orchards.
Instead of Ayyub she saw two handsome men. She began to scream and
lament as to what has befallen Ayyub. Ayyub called her and when she came
near she recognized him. Seeing the return of Divine bounties she fell
down in a prostration of thankfulness.  
 When she had gone in search of food for Ayyub she was sporting lovely
tresses. The people she had approached demanded her for her beautiful
tresses in return of food. She cut off her locks and brought food for
Ayyub. When Ayyub saw her pruned hair he was infuriated and vowed a
hundred lashes for her. But when she told him the story he became sad
and regretted his oath. The Almighty sent a revelation to him to hit her
softly with a broom containing a hundred twigs. That would suffice to
fulfill his oath.

After this, the Almighty brought to life even his sons who had died in
the calamities and those who had died before them, that they might live
with Ayyub again.  
 Later, the people asked him of the worst of the calamities that befell
him. He replied it were the sarcastic remarks of the people.  
 The Almighty showered his house with pieces of gold and Ayyub gathered
them. Whenever a piece fell out of bound he rushed towards it and picked
it eagerly. Archangel Gabriel said, “Are you never satiated?”  
 “Who can ever be satiated with Divine bounties?” replied Ayyub.[^1]  
 The Almighty says,

***“And (remember) Ayyub, when he cried to his Lord, (saying): Harm has
afflicted me, and Thou art the most Merciful of the merciful. Therefore
We responded to him and took off what harm he had, and We gave him his
family and the like of them with them: a mercy from Us and a reminder to
the worshippers.” (21:83-84)***

And on another occasion He says,  
 “And remember Our servant Ayyub, when he called upon his Lord: The
Satan has afflicted me with toil and torment. Urge with your foot; here
is a cool washing-place and a drink. And We gave him his family and the
like of them with them, as a mercy from Us, and as a reminder to those
possessed of understanding. And take in your hand a green branch and
beat her with it and do not break your oath; surely We found him
patient; most excellent the servant! Surely he was frequent in returning
(to Allah).”

This is the translation of Ayats revealed with regard to Ayyub. Some
other traditions have also been narrated in connection with the life of
Ayyub: “His family and the like of them with them” indicated his sons
who had died in bad times that Ayyub fell into and also those who had
died before the afflictions. According to some reports ‘like of them’
indicates that more sons were born to the wife of Ayyub resembling those
who were returned from dead.

As regards the granting of control to Satan over the fortunes of Ayyub
many scholars express their reservations, especially Sayyid Murtaza.
According to him it is very unlikely that Allah allowed Satan to control
His Prophet. However, it is difficult to ignore such a large number of
traditions in order to accept the views of these scholars. For example,
we know that many a times, Prophets and Imams are tyrannized and
oppressed by some people and forced to undergo untold difficulties, all
this is mostly due to Satanic instigation. So it is not impossible for
Satan to have control of Ayyub’s fortune and physical conditions.
However, we must remember that the Almighty never gave him prerogative
over the intellect and religion of Ayyub.

As mentioned in traditions the infected wounds of Ayyub began to teem
with worms. This has also been belied by few theologians who say that a
Prophet is never afflicted with a disability that is repulsive to
people. And the incidence of worms in a diseased body is indeed
repulsive. It is possible to justify this by saying that in all
probability these things have been related in Sunni sources and have
crept into Shi‘ah traditions due to Taqiyah.

Secondly we have traditions supporting the former view. Imam al-Baqir
says in a authentic tradition reported by Ibn Babawayh that, Ayyub was
involved in afflictions for seven years, without having committed any
sin; because a Prophet is infallible and purified (from sins). They
neither commit sins (small or big) nor are attracted towards evil.

Imam says, “Though Ayyub had the terrible disease there was no foul odor
in his body and his appearance did not develop any deformity. Blood and
puss also did not appear from his wounds, and thus he did not present a
repulsive sight that people would shun him. There were no worms in his
wounds and whenever the Almighty involves his Prophets and friends in
such diseases, he keeps them free from such repulsive defects. The
people avoided him not because of his disease but due to the calamities
that befell him and due to their ignorance. They could not bring
themselves to accept the fact that such a prosperous person as Ayyub
could fall into such serious calamities.

The Holy Prophet said that the calamities that befall Prophets are far
more terrible than those experienced by ordinary people. Moreover, the
more lofty the status of a person the more calamities befell him. The
Almighty sends upon His Prophets such afflictions so that people may not
be led to believe that Prophets are gods. Allah bestows untold bounties
upon His Prophets to prove to the people that Divine rewards are of two
kinds: one for performing good deeds and one for undergoing
difficulties. Also people must not belittle a poor man for his poverty
or a sick person for his disease, or a weak creature for his frailty.
The people must understand that Allah makes sick whoever He wants and
curses whoever He desires. At all times and under all circumstances
whatever Allah intends, He makes some affairs as means of deriving
lessons and some as misfortunes and sometimes He grants as felicity to
them. Allah is Just in all His affairs and Wise in all His actions. He
does what is best for His creatures and whatever they have, is from Him
alone.

According to a reliable tradition from Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali, Ayyub was
afflicted with the loss of wealth and sons in the latter part of
Wednesday.  
 Authentic traditions from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq state that Ayyub
suffered for seven years without any fault of his. In another tradition
Imam says, “Allah subjected Ayyub to afflictions without his having
committed any sin. Ayyub maintained patience until the time people began
to criticize and blame him for committing sins. Hence he complained to
the Almighty because Prophets cannot remain patient if accused of sinful
acts.

In another tradition Imam says that Ayyub prayed for divine forgiveness
during the period of afflictions.[^2]  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in a reliable tradition that when the
Almighty granted release from difficulties to Ayyub he looked at the
agricultural fields of The Israelites and said, “My Lord You have
bestowed kindness upon your afflicted servant Ayyub. But he has not sown
his fields like other people of The Israelites.”

The Almighty revealed to him that he take out a handful of soil from his
bag and spread it on the earth. After he complied he was able to harvest
lentils (Masoor) or grams.  
 The hadith apparently shows that the two crops did not exist before
this incident and Ayyub was the first to cultivate them.  
 We have another authentic report from Imam that a believer is subjected
to every kind of calamity and every kind of death, but the Almighty
never allows him to lose his power of reasoning. Imam says, “Have you
not seen how Allah gave Satan, power over the wealth, children, family
and all the things belonging to Ayyub except his ‘Aql so that we may
continue to believe in His oneness and worship Him with this belief.”

Imam is quoted through authoritative chains that a beautiful woman, who
had committed many sins, would be brought on the Resurrection Day. She
would say, “My Lord You created me in a beautiful form. And that’s why I
got involved in sins.”  
 The Almighty would summon Maryam and ask the woman, “Who is more
beautiful, you or Maryam? We bestowed her with such incomparable beauty
but she was not misguided by it.”  
 Then a handsome man will be brought forward. He was also a sinner
because of his physical attraction. When asked he’d say that due to his
physique women were attracted towards him and he was enticed into
adultery.

The Almighty will summon Yusuf and say, “Were you more handsome than
this man (Yusuf)? We made him the most attractive man but he was not
beguiled by women.”  
 Finally a person who had suffered calamities would be brought there.
When asked, he shall say that he was forced to sin due to untold
calamities. The Lord shall summon Ayyub and say, “Who has undergone more
difficulties, you or this Ayyub? We subjected him into such terrible
afflictions, yet he did not fall into sins.”

[^1]: Ayyub was eager to collect gold pieces not for their worldly
value. It was, rather, for the fact that they were an aspect of Divine
Mercy (as mentioned by him) that he was eager to collect them because
they were a gift from his Lord and signified His kindness and Favor.

[^2]: There is a difference among exegeses as regards the period of
affliction. According to some it was 18 years and according to others,
it was 7 years. The latter view is more prevalent.


