An Account of Musa and Harun
============================

Genealogy of Musa and Harun and their meritsGenealogy of Musa and Harun
and their meritsGenealogy of Musa and Harun and their meritsGenealogy of
Musa and Harun and their meritsGenealogy of Musa and Harun and their
meritsGenealogy of Musa and Harun and their meritsGenealogy of Musa and
Harun and their meritsGenealogy of Musa and Harun and their
meritsGenealogy of Musa and Harun and their merits

A group of commentators and historians have written that Musa was the
son of ‘Imran son of Yushar son of Fahit son of Lawi son of Ya‘qub.
Harun was his brother and both of them had the same mother and father.
There is difference of opinion as regards the name of his mother.
According to some it was Najeeb and according to others it was Faahiya.
Some also think it was Yoojaed. The last opinion is more prevalent. We
have already mentioned in the first chapter that the inscription on the
ring of Musa said, “Have Patience that you may be rewarded. Speak the
truth that you may succeed.” It was derived from the Torah.

An authentic tradition from the Holy Prophet says that Allah sent four
of the Prophets with sword: Ibrahim, Dawud, Musa and Muhammad. The
Almighty Allah has given authority to four families: As mentioned in the
Holy Qur’an,

***Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of ‘Imran above the nations. (3:33)***

An acceptable tradition on authority of Imam as-Sadiq quotes the
Messenger of Allah that, “When I was taken on Me’raj (the Night
Ascension) and I reached the fifth sky, I saw a man who was neither
young nor of old age. He was surrounded by a lot of people of his
nation. I asked Archangel Gabriel who was that exalted personality. He
said it was one who is the beloved of his community. That is Harun the
son of ‘Imran. Hearing Archangel Gabriel’s reply, I saluted him; he also
saluted me in return. I sought forgiveness of Allah for him, he also did
for me. Then I went to the sixth heaven. I saw a tall, wheat
complexioned person there. Though he had worn two shirts, the hair of
his body were apparent. He said, “The people of The Israelites think
that I am the best and nearest to Allah, hough Prophet Muhammad is
beloved and nearest to Allah.” I asked Archangel Gabriel, “Who is that?”
He said, “He is your brother, Musa bin ‘Imran.” I saluted him and he
saluted me in return. I sought forgiveness of Allah for him, he too
followed suit.  
 Imam Al-Hasan has stated that the age of Musa was 240 years and there
was the difference of 500 years between Prophet Ibrahim and him.

According to reliable sources, Imam ‘Ali has stated regarding Allah’s
saying (He will avoid his parents and brother and his family) that it
denotes (as cited by Musa Ibn Babawayh) that Musa had not committed any
mistake but was afraid that one of the conceited women from the
Pharaoh’s family who looked after him in his infancy was his mother, so
he avoided her.  
 Ibn Babawayh has stated that Allah, the Almighty bestowed Musa’s mother
with three hundred and sixty blessings. The Pharaoh found the basket
between the tree and water. That is why he named him Musa. ‘Mu’ means
water and ‘Sa’ means tree.

From many reliable sources Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has narrated that Allah
revealed, “O, Musa! Do you know, why We bestowed you with apostleship?”
Musa said, “No.” Allah revealed that He knew every creature of the earth
and knew them from head to toe but no one was better than him. “O ‘Musa!
Do prayer for Me; put your cheeks on the ground.” Musa bowed his head
and made obeisance to Allah. Allah, the great revealed, “O Musa! Raise
your head and touch your hand on your face and on of your body, so that
you will be protected from troubles, pain, diseases etc.  
 According to a reliable tradition Allah did not reveal anything for
thirty or forty days to Musa. So Musa went to the Oriya Mountain and
prayed, “O ‘Allah, if you have stopped sending me Your revelation due to
sins of The Israelites, I seek forgiveness on behalf of them. As You are
Kind and Merciful. And always seek Your Mercy and Kindness.” Allah sent
revelation on him and said, “O, Musa! I found no one better and truthful
than you.” Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that after concluding
prayers, Musa always touched his cheeks on the ground.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has narrated that once Musa passed along with
seventy Prophets near the valley of Roha. They were wearing Kufi scarves
and chanting ‘Labbaik’.  
 According to reliable sources, Imam al-Ridha has stated from the Holy
Prophet that Musa raised his hands and said, “O, Allah! Wherever I go, I
put myself in trouble.” Allah revealed, “O, Musa! There is a backbiter
among your followers.” Musa said, “O, Allah! Tell me who it is?” Allah
said, “How can I? It would be backbiting and I Myself hate backbiters?”

According to another tradition Musa prayed to Allah, “O, Allah! Do me a
favor; so that people may not think that I am evil.” Allah revealed,
“Musa! let them say whatever they like.”  
 People asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq, “Who expired before, Harun or Musa?”
Imam said, “Harun. He had two sons, Shabbar and Shabbir. In Arabic we
say Hasan and Husayn.” Imam also stated that from Hijr Isma‘il to the
Ka‘bah there was a small place of prayer of Harun’s sons, Shabbar and
Shabbir.

Birth of Musa and Harun and their early life:

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq states that at the time of the death of Yusuf,
Ya‘qub’s family had eighty members in all. He said that the Copts will
be successful over them and will put them in great trouble. One of his
descendants will help them in their difficulties. His name will be Musa
son of ‘Imran. He will be strong, tall and wheat complexioned. From that
day the people of The Israelites named their sons ‘Imran, and ‘Imran
used to name their sons Musa. They thought, he might be same Musa
predicted by Yusuf.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has stated that Musa did not rebel against them.
Forty persons from The Israelites claimed to be Musa whose information
was given by Yusuf. The Pharaoh came to know about this matter by the
people of The Israelites that a person called Musa will destroy his
kingdom and that he is in search of him. The soothsayers of the Pharaoh
informed that that boy will destroy his kingdom and his religion and
that he would be born in the Israelites. The Pharaoh appointed the
mid-wives to examine the pregnant women of The Israelites. A midwife was
appointed on the mother of Musa. When the Israelites learnt that they
killed all male children, they thought the generation of The Israelites
would be extinct. The male of The Israelites decided not to have sexual
relationship with their female. ‘Imran the father of Musa told the
people to continue, so that prediction of the Almighty will come true
and indeed the boy would be born. He said, “If you want to give up
marital relationships, give up but he would surely come into this
world.”

Then ‘Imran established relations with Musa’s mother and she became
pregnant. A midwife was appointed to keep a watch on her. When Musa’s
mother was sitting or standing, the midwife also did the same. The
midwife became attached to her. Once she asked why she was becoming pale
and thin. She said not to inquire her condition, “Because when my son is
born, he will be killed.” The midwife told her not to worry. “I will
keep your son hidden from others.” The mother did not believe her. When
Musa was born, his mother was uneasy and the midwife consoled her. She
wrapped the child in a cloth and hid him in a room and came out at the
door to the watchmen of the Pharaoh standing outside and asked them to
go away and said that she has given birth to a girl. Then Musa’s mother
fed him but she was worried, what if they heard him crying and came to
know the truth?

Allah revealed to her to make a wooden box for a child, close the box
and cast it on the Nile. She did as Allah commanded. When she cast the
wooden basket into the water, the basket returned to her. She pushed it
again but it came back. At last the wind pushed the basket far into the
river. She became sad for her child and wanted to cry but Allah gave her
patience. She did not utter a word.

Aasiya, the wife of the Pharaoh belonged to The Israelites and was the
best woman of her time. She asked the Pharaoh to put a tent on the bank
of the river Nile, so that she can pass her time in spring. One day she
was sitting, when all of a sudden she saw a basket floating on the
river, coming towards her. She asked her maidservants, “Can you see what
I she see?” They said, “By Allah! We can see something floating on the
water.” When the wooden basket reached her. She stood up from her place
and asked her maids to pull it out. They pulled the basket out of the
water and opened it. She found a pretty, cute baby boy in it. Seeing the
infant she became very anxious. She held him in her arms and said that
she would adopt him as her son. The maidservants also agreed and said,
“Yes madam. By Allah, you have no children and the king is also without
an heir. The child is very handsome and attractive. Adopt him.”

Aasiya went to her husband and showed him the charming baby boy from the
sea. “I want to adopt him. So do not kill him,” she said. The Pharaoh
asked her from where she got him. She said that she did not know whose
child it was. “He was floating in a casket, and I pulled him out from
the river.” the Pharaoh was satisfied with the explanation and accepted
him. When people heard that the Pharaoh has adopted a son, they sent
their wives to suckle the child but Musa did not suck. Then Aasiya asked
the Pharaoh to arrange for a wet-nurse for the baby. Many nurses tried
but Musa did not suck their milk. Musa’s mother also came to know this.
She asked her daughter to ascertain this matter. The sister of Musa came
to the door of the Pharaoh and asked whether they needed a wet nurse for
a child. She said that there was a good woman staying nearby. She would
feed the baby and look after him. The servants informed Aasiya. She
ordered them to bring the girl to her. Musa’s sister came to her. She
asked that girl which community she belonged to? She said, “She belonged
to the family of The Israelites.” Aasiya told her to go away. The
maidservants insisted upon her to call that woman and see if the child
sucks from her or not. Aasiya said, “Even if the child accepts the
Pharaoh might be unhappy. She said the child and the nurse both belong
to The Israelites; the Pharaoh will not allow her. Her maidservants
said, “Let us first see if the child suckles.” Aasiya told the girl to
call the wet-nurse. Musa’s sister ran to her mother. She came and took
the child and he began to suck. Aasiya told the Pharaoh that she has
found a wet-nurse for a child. The Pharaoh asked which community she
belonged to? His wife said that she is from The Israelites. The Pharaoh
said, “How can it be? The child and the nurse both belong to The
Israelites.” Aasiya asked him why he was afraid of the child? “Now he is
our son,” she said. “He will grow up in our care.”

By arguing and discussing she convinced him. In this way he grew up
under their loving care. Musa’s mother, sister and the mid-wife kept it
secret until the end. The people of The Israelites didn’t know about
Musa. They were searching for him and asking one another but it was
secret. When the Pharaoh came to know about these activities he
subjected them to torture and prohibited them to ask about Musa. Once
the people of The Israelites gathered on a moonlit night and went to a
learned man staying in the forest. They said that their troubles were
increasing more by the day. He said, “By Allah, you will be harassed
until Allah sends His Apostle from the family of Ya‘qub. His name will
be Musa bin ‘Imran. He will be strong, tall, brave and curly haired.”
When Musa came to them on a camel the learned man recognized him by the
description given in a Holy book. He asked, “May Allah bless you, who
are you and what is your name?” “Musa, the son of ‘Imran,” he said.

The learned man arose and kissed Musa’s hands. People gathered around
Musa and kissed his hands and feet. Musa and the people recognized each
other and made them his believer. Musa stayed there for a few days and
moved to another city. There he saw two men quarrelling. One was the
believer of Allah and other was a non-believer from the Pharaoh’s
community. The believer screamed for help. Musa hit the Egyptian on his
chest. He fell down dead. Allah gave him the natural power of strength
and terror. The news spread that Musa has killed an Egyptian. Musa
passed the night in fear. In the morning a believer of Musa came running
and asked for help as he had some dispute with another man. Musa said,
“Indeed, he is on the wrong.” Musa was angry on this man. He said, “O,
Musa if you want to kill me. Kill him as you killed a man yesterday.” He
said, “Musa you are supposed to be a superior being on the earth, but
can’t rectify the people?”

Another man came running and informed that the Egyptians were discussing
about him wanted to kill him. “O, Musa! I am your true believer and
request you to go away from this city.” So Musa left the city without
any support. He passed through the desert and reached Madyan. He rested
under a tree. There was a well and the people gathered to draw water
from the well. Suddenly he saw two girls with their animals who had came
to draw water for their animals and they stood aside. Musa asked them
reason for coming there. They said, “Our father is an old man and we are
weaker we did not oppose them so we are waiting until they draw water
and go away. Then we will water our animals.” Musa felt pity on them. He
took their bucket and asked them to bring their animals near the well.
He drew water for them. The girls returned home early. Musa again sat
under a tree and prayed to Allah. He had nothing to eat and was very
hungry.

When the girls reached home, their father Shu‘ayb asked them reason for
coming early. The girls said that a nice man drew water for them.
Shu‘ayb asked one of his daughters to call him. She came to Musa
modestly and said that her father wanted to meet him. Musa told her to
walk behind because the sons of Ya‘qub never see ladies from behind.
Musa came to Shu‘ayb greeted him and then explained his condition.
Shu‘ayb consoled him. Then one of the daughters asked her father to
employ him as he was better than others. Shu‘ayb asked Musa that he
wanted to give his daughter in marriage to him, with the condition that
he worked for him for eight or ten years. According to traditions, Musa
completed ten years in his employment. The apostle of Allah does not
wish to get any authority but he does what Allah desires for him.

After ten years, Musa took his wife and moved towards Jerusalem. But he
was lost in the desert. At this time he saw a fire at a distance. He
asked his wife to wait and went out in search of the way. When he
reached there, he saw a green tree lit up as on fire. When he neared, it
moved away from its place. Musa turned in fear but the tree moved near
Musa and he heard a voice from the right side of its valley. “O, Musa! I
am Allah, the Creator of the worlds. Cast your staff on the ground.”
Musa cast his staff down. It changed into a serpent. It increased in
size like a big tree of dates. Musa heard his hissing and fire came out
from its tongue. When Musa saw this, he started running back. Again he
heard the voice calling him. Musa came back and was shivering all over.
Musa said, “O Allah! Is it your voice?” “Yes, do not be afraid,” replied
the Lord. Musa came back. He stepped on the tail of the serpent and put
his hand into his mouth, it changed into its original form. Allah
ordered him to remove his shoes because they were made of ass’s skin.
According to another tradition, he had two fears. One of the Pharaoh and
other of the rich people of the community of the Pharaoh. Allah bestowed
him two signs and sent him to the people. The first sign was a luminous
hand and second his staff.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Musa went to get fire for his wife and
when he returned he came with Prophethood. Allah solved the problem in
one night. In this way when Allah wishes Imam al-Qa’im the family of
Muhammad will reappear in one night.

Thalabi and many other writers have stated when Musa’s mother feared
that the servants of the Pharaoh will find Musa in the house, she put
him in the oven and after some time looked inside and saw that Musa was
playing with fire.

It is a fact that Musa accepted his mother’s milk. Aasiya, the wife of
the Pharaoh asked her to stay on to feed him, but Musa’s mother refused
and took him to her own house. When he was weaned, Aasiya sent someone
to her and said that she wanted to see her son. When he was sent to the
Pharaoh’s house, the people presented him with gifts and showered money
and jewels over him.  
 According to reliable sources from Imam Zayn al-‘abidin at the time of
Yusuf ’s death, he called his believers and relatives and praised Allah
and informed them that they will be harassed and troubled by the
unbelievers. The male will be killed and the bellies of pregnant women
shall be cut open to kill the baby inside. Allah will give rights and
authority to the son of Ya‘qub to do justice and he will be will-built,
tall and wheat complexioned. The people of The Israelites became sad and
after that they had to face many difficulties. There were no Prophets at
that time. They were waiting for the Prophet for four hundred years.
When they heard the good news of Musa’s birth, their troubles increased.
The unbelievers harassed them hitting them with stones and sticks. They
went to a learned man for guidance. He had also left the city for
safety. The people sent him a message to guide them. He promised to meet
them in the forest. He told them about Musa and showed them his signs
and gave the good news, that Musa will appear very soon and he will meet
them in the night. Musa came there on a camel and had been on an
excursion and he separated from his slaves on the way and came there. He
wore a silky scarf. When the learned man saw him, he recognized him
immediately. He arose from his place and fell down on his feet and
kissed his feet as a respect and said, “I praise Allah and am very
grateful to Him. He has kept me alive for this privilege.” The believers
also fell at his and thanked Allah for His kindness. Musa told them,
“Allah, the Great, will release you from your troubles and difficulties
very soon,” and disappeared from their sight. Musa went to Madyan and
stayed with Shu‘ayb. This time the Egyptians put subjected them to more
trouble and their difficulties increased. Fifty or more years passed.
Their learned man also vanished from their sight. Again they sent a
message to him so again be appeared in the forest. He called them there
and consoled them. He said that Allah has revealed to him that you will
be free from this trouble within forty years. They all thanked the
Almighty. Again Allah revealed, “Tell them that Allah decreased for them
ten years from 40 years when they uttered *‘Al Hamdo lillah’*. They have
to wait for thirty years.” The people said Allah is kind and great. All
the bounties are bestowed by Him and thanked Him. Allah said, “Tell them
again that ten are reduced years. They said, “Allah gives reward for the
good deeds and no one else, except He.”

Again Allah revealed, “Tell your people that Allah decreased ten years
from the 20 years. Now only 10 years are left.” They all said, “No one
can remove the bad thing, except Allah.” Allah said to the learned man,
tell them not to stir from their place as He has removed all their
troubles. They were discussing about Allah and His kindness. At the same
time, Musa appeared. He was on a camel. The learned man wanted to talk
about Musa. Musa came near him and salute him. The learned man asked him
his name. “I am Musa,” he said. He asked, “Whose son are you?” Musa
said, “I am the son of ‘Imran.” The man asked, “Whose son was ‘Imran?”
“He was the son of Fahat Ibn Ladi, the son of Ya‘qub,” replied Musa He
asked why he had come there? Musa replied, “I have come from Allah as
His Prophet.”

The learned man stood up and kissed his hands with respect. Musa got
down from the camel and sat with them. He consoled them and by the
permission of Allah guided them and didn’t say anything to anyone except
Allah. After this incident, forty years passed and during these forty
years the Pharaoh was destroyed.

According to a tradition of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, when Musa’s mother
became pregnant the signs of pregnancy became apparent. The Pharaoh
appointed midwives to inquire about it and he came to know from the
people of The Israelites that a male child will born from their
community by the name Musa Ibn ‘Imran and the Pharaoh will be destroyed
by him. So the Pharaoh decided to slay the boy so that he would save
himself. He commanded the male and female of The Israelites to live
separately. He arrested the males of The Israelites and imprisoned them.
When Musa was born, his mother became sad and cried. But Allah softened
the heart of the mid-wife. She asked Musa’s mother why her face had
become pale? She said that she was worried about her son. If they knew
learnt they would slay him. The midwife consoled her. Musa was a
charming boy and everyone loved him as Allah said, “Allah filled their
heart with affection.” The midwife behaved kindly and became a friend.

Allah sent a basket from Heaven and revealed to Musa’s mother to put her
son in it and cast the basket into the river and not to worry about him.
He will bestow him with apostleship. Musa’s mother put him in the
basket, closed it and cast it into the Nile. There were a few tents of
the Pharaoh on the bank of Nile. He was sitting with his wife. He saw a
big basket floating on the waves and coming towards the bank. He ordered
his attendants to bring it to him. He saw a charming baby boy in it. He
said, “This child belongs to The Israelites!” But Allah placed affection
in their hearts. When the Pharaoh decided to kill him, His wife Aasiya
prevented him and requested to let her adopt him as she was barren. She
said, “Maybe he will be useful to us.” the Pharaoh ordered his people to
search for a wet-nurse. Many women were called whose children were
killed. Musa did not accept any foster mother.

When Musa’s mother knew that her child has been taken out from the water
by the Pharaoh, she became very sad. She felt like crying and wished to
die But Allah gave her patience and she was one of the true believer of
Allah. She asked her daughter to go in search of Musa. Musa’s sister
came to the Pharaoh’s palace and saw her brother from a distance. They
didn’t know that she was the sister of Musa. The Pharaoh was worried
Musa did not suckle any woman. The sister of Musa said, “Shall I show a
family who would treat the child well?” They said, “Yes.” She went to
her mother and brought her to the Pharaoh. Musa’s mother took him in her
arm and suckled him. The Pharaoh and his wife became happy and the
mother of Musa was highly respected by them. They told her to look after
him and said they would reward her well. Allah has stated in Qur’an,

***“So We gave him back to his mother that her eye might be refreshed,
and that she might no grieve, and that she might know that the promise
of Allah is true, but most of them do not know.” (28:13)***

The Pharaoh slaughtered the newborn of The Israelites but instead of
slaying Musa, he was taking care of him and loved him. He was not
knowing his future that he had to suffer by Musa. Musa grew up in his
care. One day Musa was sitting by the Pharaoh and the Pharaoh sneezed.
Musa recited the first verse of Surah Hamd and the Pharaoh became angry
hearing the verse of Qur’an and slapped him and asked what he was
reciting? Musa jumped from him and caught his beard tight and uprooted
it as the Pharaoh had a long beard. He decided to slay him. Aasiya said,
“He is just a child. He does not know what he says or does.” the Pharaoh
said, “He behaves like a grown up.: Aasiya said, “Test him.” the Pharaoh
ordered his men to bring two trays. He put some dates in one and put
some fire in other. Both dishes were put forth to Musa. Musa wanted to
pick the dates but Archangel Gabriel brought his hand towards fire. He
picked up the ember and put it into his mouth burning his tongue. He
wept bitterly. Aasiya said, “See! He is an innocent child.” the Pharaoh
excused him.

A narrator asked Imam for how many days Musa was separated from his
mother? Imam said, “For three days.” He asked, “Was Harun a real brother
of Musa?” Imam said, “Yes.” He asked, “Did Allah’s revelation come on
both of them?” Imam said, “Allah sent revelation only on Musa, it was
narrated to his brother Harun.” He asked, “Did they both obey and carry
out the commands of Allah?” Imam said, “Musa conversed with Allah and
wrote Allah’s sayings and ordered the people of The Israelites. Whenever
Musa was going to converse with Allah, Harun guided the people in his
absence.” The narrator asked, “Who died first?” Imam said, “Harun died
before his brother Musa in the desert and Musa also died in the desert.
Musa had no children but Harun had children. Imam said, “Musa stayed
with the Pharaoh until he became a young man. When Musa discussed about
Allah, the Pharaoh refused to accept the truth. The Pharaoh decided to
kill him so Musa went away. He came to the city and saw two people
quarrelling. One was a believer of Musa and other was an Egyptian. Musa
came to them and struck him. He fell down and died on the spot. Musa was
terrified. The next day, another Egyptian quarreled with the same
person. He asked Musa to help him. The person said, “O, Musa! Do you
intend to kill me as you killed a person yesterday?” Musa left him and
went away from there. The treasurer of the Pharaoh also became the
believer of Musa.

Then he turned his face towards Madyan, which was far away from there.
It takes three days to reach there. When he came to the gates of Madyan,
he saw a well. A group of people were drawing water for their animals.
Musa sat there hungry for three days. He saw two girls waiting with
their flocks. Musa asked them, why they did not draw water from the
well? They said they could not draw water until the shepherds go away.
“Our father is a very old man. So we have come to water our sheep. Musa
felt pity on them. He asked the shepherds to let him draw water. Musa
said, he would draw a bucket for him and then one for himself. His
bucket was so very big and heavy that ten people were needed pull it but
Musa alone pulled. Then he drew a bucket for the daughters of Shu‘ayb
and watered their sheep. Then returned to sit in the shade and said, “O,
Allah! I am starving.”

Imam ‘Ali has stated that surely, Musa was the nearest of Allah. He
asked Allah for a bread and not for anything else. On the way he
survived on grass. He became very weak and pale. Whatever he ate was
visible through his skin. When the girls came home their father, Shu‘ayb
asked how they came early. The girls explained. Shu‘ayb asked his
daughter to call Musa, so that he may reward him. The two girls came to
him happily and said, “Our father has called you that he may reward you
for helping us.” Musa stood and walked towards the house of Shu‘ayb.
While walking, the garments of the girl were blowing by the wind. Musa
asked them to walk behind and guide him and said, “We never see the
female at their back.”

So, when Musa came and introduced himself Shu‘ayb said, “Fear not, you
are secure from unjust people.” The daughter said, “Father! Employ him.
He is much better person than others and strong and faithful as well.”
Shu‘ayb said, “We knew his physical power by pulling the bucket out of
the well but how do you know about his loyalty?” She said, “He did not
allow me to walk before him, so that he cannot see any part of my body
from behind.” Shu‘ayb said that he desired to give one of his daughters
to him in marriage. But he put the condition that he should serve him
for eight years. If he completed ten years, it will be of his own free
will. Shu‘ayb said he did not wish to be hard to him; if Allah is
pleased he will find him one of the good.

Musa said, “This is an agreement between you and me. Whichever of the
two terms, I fulfill any one term, there will be no wrong doing to me.
If I complete ten years or eight years in your employment it depends and
Allah is a witness of what we say.”

People asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq the term that Musa completed? Imam
said, ‘He completed ten years’. They asked that if Musa married before
the term or afterwards? Imam said, ‘Before.’ And explained that if
anyone desires of a suitable woman and her father put terms of two
months, it is lawful. Musa knew that he would fulfill his term. Then the
man asked Imam which daughter did Shu‘ayb give in marriage to him? Imam
said, “The girl who came to him and invited him to her father for
employment as he was strong and faithful.”

When Musa completed ten years, he said that he now wanted to return to
his native place to his parents and relatives. Shu‘ayb said, “The
newborn sheep are yours, take them.” Musa made pairs and journeyed with
his family. Shu‘ayb provided the provisions of journey with them. While
leaving, Musa asked Shu‘ayb to return his staff, as he wanted his staff.
Shu‘ayb got many staffs as an ancestral property from his ancestors and
they were kept in a corner of a room. Shu‘ayb asked him to go and bring
one from it. Musa went inside the house where all staffs were kept. The
staff of Nuh and Ibrahim moved. He took it and came to Shu‘ayb. He said,
“Take another staff.” Musa took it back and kept among the other staff.
Again the same staff moved and he brought it back to Shu‘ayb. It
happened three times. In the third time Shu‘ayb allowed him to take it
and said, “This is Allah’s desire.” Musa started his journey with his
family towards Egypt. On the way they had to pass through the desert. It
was a cold night and they were shivering. All of a sudden Musa saw a
fire at a distant. Allah has stated in Qur’an that Musa completed his
term of ten years and started towards his motherland with his wife. He
saw a fire to the right side of a mountain ‘Toor’ He said to his wife;
wait here, I have seen a fire, maybe I will bring to you from it a
brand, so that you may warm yourself.

Musa went near the fire the saw a tree lighted with fire. He went near
the tree to take some fire from it but the fire itself came near him.
Musa ran in fear. The fire turned towards the tree. It happened twice
and the third time Musa turned away and ran. He heard a voice. “I am
Allah, they Sustainer, of the worlds.” Musa said, “What is the proof?”
Allah said, “What have you in your hand?” He said, “This is my staff.”
Allah the Exalted said, “Cast it down.” Musa cast it down and it changed
into a serpent. Musa feared and ran. Allah said, “Fear not, pick it up
in your hand because you are in safety. Put your hand in your armpit.
When you take out your hand, it will be whitish and illuminated without
any pain or disease.

As the color of Musa’s skin was dark when he took his hand out the
surroundings were illuminated. Allah said, "These two miracles are your
proofs. Now go to the Pharaoh and his community. Indeed he is one of the
group of unbelievers.” Musa said, “O, Allah, the Sustainer! I have
killed one of his man and I fear they will slay me and the tongue of my
brother Harun is more eloquent than me. Allow him to come with me so
that he may help me in preaching among the people and verify me. I fear
that people will falsify me.” Allah revealed, “He will strengthen his
arms with his brother and will give both an authority so that they will
not harm him with His signs: you two and those who follow you shall be
uppermost.”[^1]

According to reliable sources Al-Ma’mun asked Imam al-Ridha about the
explanation of a verse of Qur’an. Imam al-Ridha said that Musa went to
one of the cities of the Pharaoh at night. He saw two persons fighting
and quarrelling each other. One was a believer of Musa and other was an
enemy. The believer asked for help so Musa overcame him and struck him
with his fist and killed him. Musa said that this was on account of
Satan’s doing; surely he is an enemy, openly leading astray.  
 Imam said when Musa said, “My Lord surely I have done harm to myself,
so do Thou protect me.” So He protected him Surely He is the Forgiving,
the Merciful. Musa said, “My Lord! Because Thou hast bestowed a favor on
me, and I have killed a man so I shall never be a backer of the guilty
but always I will be the helpful by the permission of yours.” And Musa
was in the city fearing and awaiting that enemies will arrest him. He
saw the same person who had asked his assistance the day before was
crying out to him for aid. Today again he disputed with another and
asked Musa to help him. Musa said to him, “You are most surely one
erring manifestly. You fought with someone yesterday and today you are
fighting with another one. I will give you a strict punishment and was
going to give him a punishment.” The man, who was an unbeliever said O,
Musa! You intend to kill me as you killed a person yesterday? You desire
nothing but that you should be a tyrant in the land and you do not
desire to be of those who act aright. Hearing this Al-Ma’mun said,
“Allah may protect You.”

Imam al-Ridha said, when he came to the Pharaoh. And said, surely we are
the messengers of the lord of the worlds. That send with us the children
of Israel. The Pharaoh said, And you did that deed of yours. Which you
did and you are one of the ungrateful. Musa said, I did it while I was
of those unable to see the right course. So I fled from you when I
feared you, then my Lord granted me wisdom and made me of the apostles.

According to another tradition; Allah revealed, “I swear of my glory; a
person, you killed, if he may said that I am a Creator of the worlds and
a Sustainer of the worlds, surely, I forgave him and would give you a
punishment but he did not believe in Me, that is why I forgive you.”
Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that the two pieces of land became proud
that they are better than Karbala. Allah revealed to keep quiet and not
be proud over Karbala, “as it is the best land from where I conversed
with Musa through a tree and there is a canal which flows from the river
of heaven. That is the Euphrates. It is the best part of that land. And
the tree by which I conversed with Musa was the wonderful illumination
of Prophet Muhammad al-Mustafa and his family, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and
Husayn.”

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has stated, when Musa completed his period of
employment of ten year, he started his journey with his wife, towards
Jerusalem. He lost the way and saw a fire from the distant so he moved
towards it.

According to reliable sources a person asked Imam al-Ridha. if Musa
married the same girl, who went to Musa and asked him to come to her
father Shu‘ayb? Imam said, “Yes, she was the same and after ten years
when he wanted to go back to Egypt Shu‘ayb asked him to choose a staff
from his collection, for you protection. Shu‘ayb knew about the staff,
which Musa selected. Musa brought the same to Shu‘ayb. He recognized it
and said to bring another one. He kept it and tried to take another one
but that staff moved and he brought it again. Shu‘ayb said, “Did I not
tell you to bring to another one?” Musa said, “I kept it aside three
times but it comes back to my hand.” Shu‘ayb allowed him to take it
because Allah has granted that staff for him.

After that Musa was visited Shu‘ayb every year and served him. When
Shu‘ayb ate, Musa stood to serve him.  
 According to a reliable tradition, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has stated
that, the staff belonged to Adam and from Adam it came in the possession
of Shu‘ayb and then to Musa. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said, “Now it is
with us. Whenever I see, it is green and fresh as it was before when it
was cut and separated from the tree. If we talk with it, it will talk,
and it is kept until al-Qa’im the family of Muhammad will reappear use
it as Musa was using. Whenever we want, it comes in motion (as a
serpent). It eats when we command it. The lower part of it mouth comes
below the ground and the upper part touched to the roof. Its mouth opens
forty yards and it swallows up with its tongue whoever is near it.”

According to a tradition Imam has stated that Adam had brought it from
the heaven. It was a branch of an heavenly tree and another tradition
states that it was the branch of a date tree or a mango tree. It had two
branches. Shu‘ayb always kept it with him and when he slept, he kept it
below his bed. One day Musa took it in his hand. So Shu‘ayb said, “I
thought you were faithful. Why did you touch it without permission?” “I
would not have touched it if it had not been for me.” Then Shu‘ayb
thought he touched it by the permission of Allah and he is an apostle.
So it was given to him. Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that the staff
of Musa was a branch of the tree of heaven and Archangel Gabriel brought
it for him, when he headed towards Madyan.[^2]

Thalabi, has stated that the staff of Musa had two branches on the upper
side and two curved branches below and the top of staff was strong like
steel. When Musa went to the thick forest or desert before sunrise, the
branches of staff gave light. When Musa needed water to drink, he cast
his staff into the well and water came up. When he needed food, he cast
his stick on the ground, and food came out from the ground as usual.
When he required fruits, he fixed his stick on the ground. It changed
into a fruit tree. When it was needed for a battle against enemies, it
changed into big serpents and destroyed his enemies. The forests and
mountains moved from his way when he cast his staff on the ground. The
water of canals also split and gave him way to pass and from another
branch honey overflew. When he was tired of walking, he rode on it and
it took him where he wanted to go. It guided him on the way. It attacked
his enemies. It spread a sweet fragrance. When it was cast on the ground
it became a black serpent with four legs. It’s branches turned into two
large mouths with many teeth, twelve fangs and a terribly loud hiss
emanated from its mouth. It emitted flames from its mouth. Its wings
were shining like stars. Its eyes shone like stars. It exhaled hot air.
When it reached to a stone as big as a camel, it swallowed it. Its
stomach sounded like stones and removed huge trees from the roots.

The Holy Prophet said that in search of Musa, the Pharaoh cut the wombs
of pregnant women and slew infants. When Musa was born, Allah told his
mother to place him in a basket and cast it into the river. His mother
feared and said, “You may drown into the sea.” Musa said, “Do not fear,
Allah will send me back to you very soon.”

She was confused to hear him talking. Musa told her again to cast the
basket in the water. Musa did not eat or drink until Allah made him
reach the shore. According to traditions, Musa met his mother after
seventy days and according to another tradition Musa met his mother
after seven months.  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that Musa separated from his mother for
three day only. When the Pharaoh came to know that he would be destroyed
by Musa he called his astrologers and knew that Musa will be born in the
community of The Israelites. He ordered his attendants to rend the
stomachs of the pregnant women of The Israelites. The Pharaoh killed
more than twenty thousand children in search of Musa but he could not
slay Musa because Allah protected him.

Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari has stated regarding the verse of Holy
Qur’an,  
 O, people of The Israelites! Remember, We released your fathers and
forefathers from the Pharaoh’s tyranny.

the Pharaoh troubled them and made them work hard as a punishment and
had them construct huge buildings. He tied their legs with chains, so
they cannot run away and wearing the neck brace, chains in their legs
they climbed the ladders to the upper rooms and sometimes they fell down
and died and sometimes their hands and legs broke, nobody took care of
them. Allah revealed to Musa to tell the people, when they start doing
the work to send benediction (Salawaat) on Prophet Muhammad and the
family of Muhammad so that they can be saved from troubles and
difficulties. The people stated sending benedictions on the Holy Prophet
and his family, they felt ease.  
 Allah, the exalted says,

***And when we delivered you from the Pharaoh’s people who subjected you
to severe torment, killing your sons and sparing your women, and in this
there was a great trail from your lord.” (2:49)***

The women of The Israelites requested the midwife not to declare about
their pregnancy and when they delivered the male child, took him to the
desert or in cave and recite salawaat ten times on it. Allah appointed
an angel for his breeding. By grace of Allah, milk flew from one of the
child’s finger and the child was fed with it. Many children were killed
and only few were saved, and they kept the women as their servant or
keeper. The people complained to Musa that they kept their sisters and
daughter as a servant and deflowered them. Allah the Almighty revealed
to Musa,  
 “O Musa ask that women, if they intend to do wrong, recite salawaat on
Prophet Muhammad and his family.”

When the Egyptians intend to do the wrong, they become sick and nervous
or became busy in other work and could not harm them and the women were
relieved. This was a test from Allah. Allah, the Almighty says -O The
Israelites, remember and think that your father and forefathers were
sending salawaat on the family of-Muhammad Allah driven away their
troubles and prevented evil due to it. Allah says - When you see Prophet
Muhammad and believe him, you will be happy and satisfied with Allah’s
bounties.

Imam ‘Ali says regarding the ayah,

***So he watered (their sheep) for them, then went back to the shade and
said: My Lord! surely I stand in need of whatever good Thou mayest send
down to me. (28:24)***

“By Allah, he didn’t ask for any reward as he was eating whatever grew
on the ground and looked feeble and weak.” Imam ‘Ali says in his sermon
that Allah spoke to Musa what was necessary and Allah gave him one of
His signs. Allah is unseen and has no body or limbs. Musa heard Allah’s
voice from air.[^3]

Thalabi has narrated in his book that Allah sent Musa with special
authority in one night. He was dressed in a shirt, a jacket and a gown
and a toothpick was fixed in the buttonhole. His jacket and gown were of
wool. Allah spoke to him and said, “Go to the Pharaoh with apostleship.
I am with you, My help and strength are also with you. I am sending you
towards the people as they have become proud and fearless of My wrath.
They do not believe in Me. If I wish to chastise them, all things like
the earth, the sky, the mountains, the seas, the trees, the animals will
become furious. If I order the sky it will shower the stones instead of
rain, if I order the earth, it will destroy and demolish them. If I
order the mountains, they will crush them and if I order the sea, it
will drown them at once. Nothing is difficult for Me. I have given them
time to think, to understand My toleration also. I am the Creator of the
world and nothing is impossible for Me. I can make the rich people poor
and poor, rich and no one is rich in the world except Me. If I give him
authority and invite him to worship, and make him fear My chastisement
and remember the day of the judgment. No one is superior than Me. Talk
to him softly with respect and according to his status talk to him
softly with respect and according to this status talk to him softly. Do
not fear of him. He can’t breathe, talk or blink his without My
permission. Let him know about My authority, My forgiveness, kindness,
My wrath or chastisement. Tell him to repent for his sins ask
forgiveness. I will forgive him if he repents heartily though he claims
to be divine and prevents people from My worship. I tolerated him and
bestowed him sufficient food and comforts.” Musa was afraid of His
chastisement and also worried for his son. Allah ordered an angel to
bring his son to him. Musa circumcised him with a pointed stone and his
wound healed at once. An Angel took his son back to his mother. He
stayed with his family there. Once a shepherd from Madyan passed by this
way. He took Musa’s family to Shu‘ayb and they settled with him until
the Pharaoh was destroyed and after that Shu‘ayb sent them back to
Musa.[^4]

Musa and Harun sent as Prophets to the Pharaoh and his peopleMusa and
Harun sent as Prophets to the Pharaoh and his peopleMusa and Harun sent
as Prophets to the Pharaoh and his peopleMusa and Harun sent as Prophets
to the Pharaoh and his peopleMusa and Harun sent as Prophets to the
Pharaoh and his peopleMusa and Harun sent as Prophets to the Pharaoh and
his peopleMusa and Harun sent as Prophets to the Pharaoh and his
peopleMusa and Harun sent as Prophets to the Pharaoh and his peopleMusa
and Harun sent as Prophets to the Pharaoh and his people

According to a tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq the Pharaoh built seven
cities and seven forts and was besieged inside them in fear of Musa.
From one fort to another fort, there were forests with wild beasts. If
anybody entered without his permission, the wild beasts attacked and
killed him. Allah sent Musa with special authority towards it. When he
reached to the first gate, he cast his stick and the gate opened. Musa
entered. When the wild beasts saw him they all ran away. In this way
when he reached every gate, it opened and all wild beasts disappeared
from there. At last Prophet came to the last gate, he sat there. He was
dressed up in clothes woven of hair, and held a staff. A servant of the
Pharaoh came out. Musa asked him to get permission from him, to meet the
Pharaoh. He didn’t take notice. Prophet asked him again. He said, “Allah
has bestowed you with special authority (Prophethood) and why not any
other person?”

Musa was very angry and cast his staff so all the gates between him and
the Pharaoh opened. The Pharaoh saw him and called him in. Musa came and
sat with a group of scholar and learned people. The Pharaoh was sitting
on a throne, 80 feet high. Musa said, “I have come from the Wonderful
Originator of the heavens and the earth and I am a Prophet.” The Pharaoh
said, “If you are truthful, show us your miracle.” Musa cast his staff
which had two branches. It became a large serpent and opened its mouth
and raised one part of a palace up and remaining part below him. The
Pharaoh noticed the flame of fire coming out from his stomach. Another
head faced him. Due to fear the Pharaoh urinated in his clothes. He
cried loudly and said, “O Musa stop it.” Seeing this the other people
ran away. Musa picked up his staff. The Pharaoh came to senses and
thought of pledging allegiance to him but his vizier, Haman said, “O my
Lord! (the Pharaoh). People worship you as a God and you want to be
obedient of an ordinary person?” His ministers gathered and said that
Musa was a magician. They decided on a particular day to challenge him.
The Pharaoh invited all the famous magicians to his court to challenge
Musa. The magicians threw their ropes and staffs in front of him by
their magic, Musa also cast his staff towards them, it became a giant
serpent and swallowed their magical ropes and staffs. They were in all
seventy-two magicians. They all bowed down and made obeisance and said,
“He is not a magician. His staff is miraculous.”

Musa gathered The Israelites and moved towards Egypt. The Pharaoh
pursued with his army. When Musa and his followers entered in the water
it split and made a way to allow Musa to pass. The Pharaoh reached the
shore with his army. They were on the horseback. The Pharaoh feared to
enter the sea. By the permission of Allah, Archangel Gabriel came on a
mare and entered. Seeing the mare entering into the water, the other
male-horses along with their riders also entered. Allah, the Great,
ordered the water to close on them. They were all drowned. Allah ordered
the sea to raise the dead body of the Pharaoh on the water. So the
Israelites come to know that the Pharaoh is dead and not hidden
anywhere.

Allah commanded Musa to return with his people to Egypt. Then Allah
bestowed them all the houses and belongings of the Pharaoh.  
 Then Allah ordered him to move towards Syria. When he crossed the sea,
he saw another community. They all were gathered near an idol and
worshipping it. The people of The Israelites saw this. They asked Musa
to make an idol like that for them. Musa said, “You are ignorant. Don’t
you know that Allah is one and do you want another God like this?”

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated when Musa reached the gate he was not
granted the permission, he cast his staff on the ground. The gates
opened and he came to the court of the Pharaoh and declared himself as a
Prophet of Allah, and said, “Allah has sent me to you. Release the
people of The Israelites to me. I will take them with me.” the Pharaoh
said, “I looked after you, when you were a child, didn’t you kill a man
and became an unbeliever for me. Do you forget, how I brought up you?”
Musa said, “Yes, I forgot the real path. Then I avoided you though I was
worried to do so. But Allah, the Almighty gave me knowledge and bestowed
me with special authority and made me His Prophet. It is true that you
cared for me and provided all comforts. You did so, because you made the
people of The Israelites your slaves. You killed their sons.” Then the
Pharaoh asked, “Who is your God? What are his attributes?” the Pharaoh
wanted to know about Allah, how does He look liked etc. Musa said,
“Allah is the Creator of the heaven and the earth. Everything between
the earth and the heavens is in His commands.” the Pharaoh wa surprised
to hear this and said to his companions, that he was asking about Allah
and Musa is talking about the earth and the heaven.

The Pharaoh warned him if he worshipped any god except him, he would
punish him and send him to prison. Musa asked, “If I show you an open
miracle will you not trust me?” the Pharaoh said, “Show me if you are a
true Prophet.” Musa cast down his staff and it became a serpent. Seeing
this the Pharaoh’s followers ran away from there. The Pharaoh cried
loudly and swore at him, Musa picked up his staff and took out his hand
from his pocket, the whole palace was illuminated. When the Pharaoh came
to his sense, he thought of becoming a follower of Musa. Haman, his
vizier said, “You are the God of these people and they worship you. And
you want to believe him? Then all the members of the Pharaoh court said
that Musa was a great magician. “He is very clever and wants to evict
you from the city by his magic.” the Pharaoh asked what their opinion
was about this. They said, “Send your people around the city in search
of great magicians.” It is must be remembered that the Pharaoh and Haman
both were magicians and hypnotized the people. One thousand magicians
were collected. The Pharaoh selected a hundred and eighty were the
greatest among them. They asked what reward would they get? the Pharaoh
said they would be rewarded from his kingdom. They said if Musa could
subdue our magic, we shall become the followers and believers of Musa
the Pharaoh said, he would also do the same. “But now you try your best
to bring Musa under your control.” They gathered in an open space. Musa
was called. A throne was erected for the Pharaoh 50 feet high. It was
made of steel and shone brightly in the sun. The Pharaoh and Haman came
and sat on a dome-like throne. It was so high so that they could see
clearly.

Musa raised his head and was waiting for Allah’s revelation. The
magicians saw him watching the sky. They said, “We can’t use our magical
power on the sky. We can use our power on the earth only.” Then they
asked who would start first. Prophet asked them to begin. They threw
their magical ropes and staves towards Musa swore by the name of the
Pharaoh that they succeed. The ropes and staves moved like snakes and
serpents towards him. Allah revealed, “Musa don’t fear, you will be
successful over them. Cast down your staff, it will swallow all the
magic and magical things. It is their evil-deed but yours is a Divine
miracle.”

When Musa cast down his staff, it became a huge serpent. It raised its
head and opened its mouth. It raised its upper side up to eighty feet
high where the Pharaoh and Haman were sitting and again bent down his
head and swallowed their magic. Seeing this all men and women started
running. About ten thousand people including their children were crushed
in the stampede. Then the serpent moved towards the Pharaoh and Haman.
Their clothes spoilt in fear and hair turned gray. Seeing their
condition, Musa started running. Allah revealed to him to pick up the
staff and not to be afraid. Allah promised him that He would improve
their condition as they were before. Musa wrapped his hand in his shawl
and put his hand in serpent’s mouth and held its tongue. The serpent
turned into a staff. Seeing this all the magicians made obeisance to him
and said, “We believe in you and Allah.” the Pharaoh was very angry and
said, “You believe him and accept his religion but I do not allow you to
do that. Tell me, is Musa your leader? Has he taught you magic? You will
come to know, how, I will punish you. I will cut off your hands and legs
and hang you on the date palm.” They said, “We are not afraid of you and
your punishment as we have turned to Allah and He, the Great, will help
us and forgive us as we have accepted His Prophet ’s faith.”

The Pharaoh ordered his men to arrest them. Allah sent his chastisement
on the Pharaoh’s community and revealed to Musa to leave the city along
with his followers that night. Musa and The Israelites came to the bank
of the river Nile. The water of river split and made a way to cross the
river. Musa and his people stepped into the river.

When the Pharaoh came to know Musa’s activity, he also collected his
army of sixty thousand people and went ahead and he also came along with
his people. In the early morning at the time of sunrise, the Pharaoh and
his armies had come near. Musa ordered the river to split. The river
said, “I never disobeyed Allah and His commands. You have so many people
with you, who were disobeying Allah before.” Musa said, “O, river beware
of Allah’s wrath and you know it very well when Prophet Adam disobeyed
Allah, Allah removed him from Heaven.” The river said, “My Lord is
great. I obey his commands if He orders me.”

Yusha‘ ibn Nun came to Musa and said, “O, Prophet! What is the order of
Allah?” Musa said, “To Cross the river.” Then Yusha‘ stepped into the
river with his horse and crossed the river safely. He and his horse did
not even get wet. The people of The Israelites were afraid to cross the
river. Allah revealed to Musa to cast his staff on the river. When he
did so, the river split and made twelve ways in it. The sun dried the
watery ground. There were twelve tribes in Musa’s army. The people of
twelve tribes stepped into the river by twelve ways. A tribe, which was
with Musa cried loudly and asked about the other people. Musa said they
are crossing the river. The water of river stopped its movement like a
mountain on their head and the people were crossing the river. When Musa
said they are crossing the river, they did not believe. so Allah ordered
the river to make holes in water so that they can see each other and
talk.

When the Pharaoh saw the miracle, he said to his people, “He has split
the water for you.” But no one dared to enter the river. Even their
horses were afraid of water and running when the Pharaoh moved ahead to
enter into it. His astrologer came to him and said not to go into the
water but he didn’t heed. His horse stopped for a while. All his people
were on the horseback. At once Archangel Gabriel approached on a mare
and entered the river and the last man of the Pharaoh entered into the
river. Allah ordered the wind to move the water and the mountain of
water fell on them. This was the great chastisement from Allah. The
Pharaoh said, “I believe in Allah. No one is like Him.” Archangel
Gabriel took a handful of dirty mud and threw on his face and said, “Now
seeing the Divine chastisement, you believe in Allah. Before this you
were creating mischief on the earth.”[^5]  
 ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has stated about the Penitential Verse of the Holy
Qur’an,

But on account of mercy from your Lord — surely His grace to you is
abundant.. The Pharaoh said His community believed him to be their God.
There is no God but he. Then he ordered his chief vizier Haman to
prepare a high tower made of bricks so that he can search for Musa’s
Allah. Haman prepared a high tower. It was very high that no one can
climb or sit due to strong wind. He said, he couldn’t make it higher
than this. When it was ready Allah, sent a strong wind on it. The wind
demolished it and it fell down into pieces.

Then the Pharaoh prepared a large trunk. He towed four young ones of
vulture. When they grew up, he fixed some sticks in each side of a
trunk. He tied loaves of meat on each of the sticks. He kept them hungry
for many days. He tied their legs with the wooden sticks. Then the
Pharaoh and Haman both sat in it. The vultures flew high in the sky. The
whole day they flew in the sky. The Pharaoh asked his vizier to look at
the sky whether they reached to the sky or not, Haman said, still the
sky seemed far. Then he asked him to look down. Haman said, he couldn’t
see anything except the sea. They flew until sunset. The sea disappeared
from their sight. It was darkness everywhere. Haman looked at the sky
but it seems very far as before. Again the Pharaoh asked him whether
they reached the sky or not. Haman said the stars look very far away
from there as if he was seeing them from the earth.

So again both of them came down to the earth.  
 Shaykh Tabarsi and al-Qutb al-Rawandi have quoted from Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir and Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq and many other scholars that Musa’s
miracle made all the magicians and astrologers his believers but the
Pharaoh was one of the unbelievers. That day about sixty thousand
Israelites accepted Islam. Haman, the Vizier of the Pharaoh advised him
to arrest those who believed in Musa. Allah sent famine upon the
Egyptians. Al-Qutb al-Rawandi has said, when the community of the
Pharaoh decided to harm him the Pharaoh ordered his men to build a tall
tower so that he would go up and fight with Musa’s God. Haman prepared
it with the help of fifty thousand workers.

They built a tower of bricks, wooden sticks and iron nails. It was the
highest building of that time. Its foundation rested on a high mountain.
When it was prepared, Allah sent an earthquake and the buildings was
demolished with all the workers. They, all were destroyed. The Pharaoh
said to Musa, “Your Allah is Just and Kind to all. Was this the judgment
of your God? Now you get out from here along with your followers and
keep up preaching them.” Allah sent revelation to his apostle that he
separate from him and leave him to Allah. As he wanted to collect an
army to fight you. And decide a particular time with him. Keep your
followers separate from him, build houses for the, join with one
another. Musa fixed the period of forty days with the Pharaoh. Allah,
the Great ordered them for prayer. Allah sent revelation that he was
collecting his army for the battle but not to fear him. Musa left with
his miraculous staff, which was still a serpent. Musa was walking behind
him and the people were surprised to see him running away. Musa came to
his army and picked it up. It turned to its original shape. Prophet
collected his people and built a mosque for prayer. When the period of
forty days was over, Allah revealed to him to cast his staff on the
river Nile. When he cast his staff on water it became red like blood.

‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim has stated that when The Israelites became the
believers of Musa, the rich people of the community of the Pharaoh asked
him, “If you leave them without punishing them, they will create a great
trouble. As they do not believe in you and your idols.” The Pharaoh was
an idol-worshipper at first. The Pharaoh said, “We would kill their boys
and arrest their girls as we are ruling over them.” When the Pharaoh
arrested people of The Israelites, they said, “He killed our sons and
subjected them to torture.” Musa consoled them and urged them to have
faith in Allah. “He would destroy them soon. You will be owner of his
land. Remember Him and be grateful to Him.”

Allah, the Most High, sent different kinds of chastisements on them.
When they got something good, they said it was due to their good deeds
and if they faced any trouble, they said it was due to Musa and his
people. Musa went to the Pharaoh and said, “Release the Israelites but
he did not obey. Prophet hated them.

Allah sent heavy rainfall and many houses were demolished and many
people destroyed. The rest of them went to the forest and built tents
for themselves. But the people of The Israelites were safe. The water
collected in and around their houses, so the Pharaoh asked Musa to pray
to Allah to relieve them from wrath, we will believe in your God and the
people of The Israelites who are the prisoners will be released. Musa
prayed to Allah, and the rainstorm stopped. But they were the liars.
Again Haman said to the Pharaoh if you released them and send them to
Musa he will overcome you. The Pharaoh did not keep his promise and did
not release them. In the same year, Allah made them prosperous, so they
said, this was the blessing for them. They transgressed more.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from some other books that Allah sent
revelation on Musa and he indicated towards East and West with his
staff. Locust gathered from both the directions and the crops and fruits
were devastated. Their clothes, doors and other belongings were also
spoilt but the people of The Israelites were safe. Then the locusts
attacked their bodies and ate their hair and beards. So the Egyptian’s
came to him but the Pharaoh sent them to Musa. They requested him to
pray for them and said if he released them from this trouble, they will
become his followers and the people of The Israelites also will be free
from their prison.

Musa went towards the forest and indicated towards East and west by his
staff, at once the locust disappeared. Again Haman asked the Pharaoh,
not to release them. ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that in the third
month of the same year, Allah sent louses and some says they were tiny
locusts without wings, they spoilt their fields and uprooted their
crops.

According to another tradition, Musa went to a high mountain of Egypt by
the permission of Allah. It is known as ‘Ain-ul-Shams’, and cast down
his staff. By the permission of Allah numerous louses came out from the
ground and entered their clothes and food. Whatever they ate they found
louses in it and they hurt their bodies. Some said that they were tiny
worms and spoilt their things. Ever the flour was contaminated with
them. In every ten kilograms of flour there were three kilogram worms.
This was the severe punishment for them. The worms ate their hair,
eyelashes and their beard. Each part of their bodies was filled with it.
They could not sleep at night. But people of The Israelites were safe.
Again people complained to the Pharaoh. He sent them back to Musa and
requested him to release them from this trouble. The trouble was
removed, but they did not release the people of The Israelites from the
prison. Musa stayed with them for a week but they did not believe him
and did not release them. Then in the fourth year or fourth month, Musa
came to the bank of the river Nile and pointed to water by the order of
Allah. May frogs came out and moved towards the houses of unbelievers
and entered their food. Their houses were full of frogs. They entered
their vessels and spoilt their food. They hid in their clothes and
vessels. All the people were in trouble-all the time.

Whenever they wanted to talk or open their mouth to eat, the frogs
entered their mouth. At last they came to Musa and requested him to save
them from this trouble. They promised him, they will accept his religion
and release the people from prison. After seven days Musa went to the
river and pointed with his staff, all the frogs disappeared into the
sea. Again they did not keep their promise. Again in the fifth year or
in the fifth month Musa came to the river Nile and by the permission of
Allah, cast his staff on the water. The water of Nile and canals became
red like blood. When they drank, the water to blood. But for the people
of The Israelites it was clean. The Egyptians told The Israelites to
drop water from their mouths into their mouths. The people of The
Israelites did when water was dropped into their mouth it changed into
blood. The Pharaoh and his people were very thirsty. They ate the leaves
and suck juices of vegetables instead of water, but juice also became
blood in their mouth.

al-Qutb al-Rawandi has narrated that the water became salty. Seven days
or forty days passed. They were eating and drinking blood only. At last
they requested Musa for this and were released but their pride and
infidelity increased.

‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim narrates from Imam as-Sadiq that Allah rained red ice
on them. They had never seen it before. Many people died in this
calamity. Again they went to Musa to pray for them remove this profanity
from them. “We will believe in you and release your people,” they said.
Again Musa prayed for them and the wrath was dispelled but again their
infidelity increased.

Musa prayed, “O Allah. You have given them all comforts. Due to this
they make their people tread the wrong path and people follow them. So
make their money and all belongings useless.” Allah turned all their
belongings into stones. All things became useless but they did not
improve their conduct. Allah revealed to him that He would send the
chastisement of plague on the Pharaoh’s daughters and all females
whether human beings or beasts. They would all be destroyed. Musa
conveyed the good news to his community. The spies conveyed this news to
the Pharaoh at once. The Pharaoh ordered his men to bring all the women
of The Israelites. We shall keep them with our females. “When
chastisement will come, they will die and our females will be saved.”

It is obvious that sensible people cannot claim to be God. Allah sent
the chastisement of plague on the female species at night. The females
of every species perished except the females of The Israelites. In the
same night eighty thousand female animals also died. The females of the
Pharaoh’s community had so much of precious jewels. After that Allah
sent His revelation to Musa that He desires to give all the properties
of the Pharaoh’s family to the women of The Israelites as a gift.

Ask all the women of The Israelites to demand for all their properties
to give them as a gift. “Due to the divine chastisement, they all are in
grief and they will not refuse to give away their women’s belongings.”
When they obtained the things, Allah ordered Musa to leave the city with
his people.  
 ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim narrates from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that The
Israelites called out for help to Musa and asked him to pray to Allah to
release them from the Pharaoh’s harassment. At that time Allah sent His
revelation to Musa. “O, Musa collect all these believers and leave the
city at night.” Musa said there is a river in between. How shall we
cross it? Allah said, “I shall order it to split for you.”

Musa collected his people and moved towards the river. When the Pharaoh
came to know, he also collected his army and pursued them. When Musa
reached the shore, he asked it to split for him.  
 The water asked the reason and said it would not be split without the
permission of Allah. In the meantime the army chief of the Pharaoh came
to them. The people of The Israelites were afraid and said “O, Musa. you
have cheated us and brought us here. It was better to be a slave of the
Pharaoh than to die.” Musa consoled them and said, “Allah is Great. He
is a good Guide. He gives us guidance to follow to the right path.” Musa
did not like them talking senselessly. They said, “O, Musa! You promised
us that the water, would split and let us cross. Now the Pharaoh’s army
is upon us.”

Musa raised his hands and prayed to Allah. Allah revealed to him to cast
the staff on water. When he cast his staff the water split and Musa
along with his people entered the sea. At that the Pharaoh’s army
approached there and saw the sea split. The Pharaoh said that *he* has
split the sea by *his* order. “Now enter the sea and follow them.” the
Pharaoh and his army entered the sea. When they were half way, Allah
ordered the water to immerse them. They all drowned. When the Pharaoh
was drowning, he cried, “O, Musa! I believe in God. There is not other
God except He. I have become a Muslim.” Allah said, “First you were
disobedient and created trouble on the land. Now today I will free you
from the world.” Imam said, “the Pharaoh and his whole community drowned
no one survived. They all were all consigned to the fire (Hell).”

But the Pharaoh’s dead body was left at the seashore. So that the other
people of the city can see and recognize him and understand that he is
dead because they all believed him to be their God. So that other people
derive a lesson and knowledge from it.

It is stated that when Musa gave the news to his people that Allah has
drowned the Pharaoh the people had doubted it. They said, “He cannot
die.” So Allah ordered the sea to throw his dead body out to the
seashore that people can see him.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Archangel Gabriel was visiting the Holy
Prophet in sorrowful condition. Allah sent a magnificent verse of Holy
Qur’an to the Holy Prophet. This verse is indicated in the following
ayah. What is the verse??

Archangel Gabriel brought this Verse to the Holy Prophet in a happy
mood. Prophet asked him why he looked so happy. Archangel Gabriel said,
“O Prophet when the Pharaoh was drowning and said he believed that there
is no God but He is whom the people of Israel believe and he is one of
them. But I threw a handful mud and filled his mouth with it and recited
this above Verse. And I recited this verse without the permission of
Allah. I was worried Allah will dislike it. But when Allah ordered me to
bring this verse to you, I was assured that Allah was pleased with me.”

Imam al-Ridha has stated that when the Pharaoh pursued Musa there were
six lakh people in his army and one lakh people in another army. When
both the armies reached the seashore the Pharaoh’s horse reared and did
not step into the sea. In the meanwhile Archangel Gabriel approached on
a mare and passed by the horse and stepped into the sea. The Pharaoh’s
horse also followed the mare and then the whole army behind them.

According to a tradition of Imam al-Ridha Allah revealed to Musa, “When
the moon appears in the heavens, you should all enter the sea and also
take with you Yusuf ’s body from Egypt. So that He can send Chastisement
on the Pharaoh. That day the moon appeared late so Musa thought Allah
delays to send chastisement because Yusuf ’s body was not taken out as
nobody knew the place where Yusuf was buried. The people said that an
old woman knew it. When she was brought to Musa. She was very old, weak
and blind. Musa asked the old lady about Yusuf ’s grave. She said she
knew the place but will not show it until he grants her four wishes.
According to another tradition she asked Musa to guarantee a good place
in Heaven. Musa was confused.

But Allah revealed, “Give her whatever she wants, I will accept it
Whatever you grant her.” Musa prayed and Allah granted her wishes. She
indicated the grave of Yusuf on the banks of river Nile. Yusuf ’s body
was placed in a marble coffin. Musa took it out and at once the moon
appeared in the sky. Yusuf ’s body was taken to Syria and buried there.
That is why the people of the book like to go to Syria. Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq has narrated that when Musa called that old woman and asked her
to show the place of Yusuf ’s grave she said, “By Allah, unless and
until you promise me to grant my wishes I will not show you the place.
Allah sent him revelation, “What is the difficulty?” Musa told her to
ask whatever she wanted. She said that her desire was to stay in heaven
near him.

According to another tradition it is said that the Pharaoh tried to
destroy the Israelites. He made a plan to kill all the believers of The
Israelites. One day he invited them for a feast. It was Sunday, the day
of the Pharaoh’s ‘Id. He mixed poison in their food. Allah revealed to
Musa, “Give them some kind of medicine to eat, so that poison will be
useless.” Musa attended the feast with The Israelites. He told the women
and children to go back and ordered the remaining people not to touch
food before taking the medicine prescribed by Allah. The poison was in a
small quantity; as little as a hole of a needle. When food was served
they started eating as much as possible. Musa, his brother Harun and
Yusha‘ ibn Nun and many others were sitting in a special place. Their
food was more poisonous. The Pharaoh swore, that he would not allow
anyone else to serve them you. He himself served them the poisoned food.

When all were satiated Musa said, “We have not brought our women and
children with us.” the Pharaoh said food would be given for them. Musa
returned with his people. The Pharaoh had prepared the food without
poison, for his people. But when they ate the food they died at once.
About 70,000 male, and 1,60,000 women of his community died, except
animals. But Musa’s people were safe. The Pharaoh and his close friends
were surprised but they did not believe in Allah and His Prophet.

According to a reliable tradition Imam ‘Ali has said that six things
were born without a mother. They are (1) Prophet Adam, (2) Hawwa’ (3)
Ram of Prophet Ibrahim (4) Staff of Musa (5) She-Camel of Prophet Salih
(6) A heavenly bird named Tayur which was made by ‘Isa who came to life
by ‘Isa ’s order.

According to a reliable tradition Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that
the people of The Israelites were divided into groups. One group joined
the Pharaoh’s army. They thought if Musa will not succeed they shall go
to the Pharaoh’s side. When Musa and his community separated from the
Pharaoh the people of that group also galloped on their horses and ran
towards Musa. But Allah sent His Angels on them. They slapped them and
turned them to the Pharaoh’s army and at last they all were destroyed
with them.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam al-Ridha one of the
companions of Musa’s had his father in the group of the Pharaoh. When
the Egyptian army came to Musa, the companion came to his father to
persuade him by good words and make him a believer of Musa. While
talking, they both entered the water but both of them drowned. When Musa
came to know he said, “They died according to Allah’s will. But when the
chastisement comes upon the sinners, it destroys both.” the Pharaoh is
one of the five individuals that will get the most severe punishment on
the day of judgment.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that Allah gave him ample time- forty
years. First, when the Pharaoh declared himself God and said there is no
other God except he. Second, he said, He is a God, the greatest of all.
Due to this he was hated by Allah and His Prophets Musa and Harun. Allah
sent the revelation on His Prophet. His prayer is accepted. This
revelation came on him when forty years passed after the Pharaoh’s
death.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has narrated that at the time of the Pharaoh’s
infidelity, Archangel Gabriel prayed to Allah, “You give him sufficient
time and leave him without punishing him and he (the Pharaoh) claimed
himself as God.” Allah said, “This thought is like that of an ordinary
person who is afraid that an opportunity once lost never comes back.”

Imam al-Ridha has stated about the land of Egypt, that Allah did not
punish the people of The Israelites and was not satisfied until they
returned to Egypt.  
 Imam Musa bin Ja‘far has narrated that Musa was reciting a Dua while
entering the court of the Pharaoh. Due to his prayer, Allah changed his
happy mind into a fearful person.  
 Once people asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when the Pharaoh said let
me kill Musa, what stopped him from it? Imam said that he was of
legitimate birth and that itself was the obstacle because only a bastard
can kill a Prophet and his family members. According to a tradition Imam
has stated that when Musa and Harun entered the court of the Pharaoh,
they saw that all courtiers were of legitimate birth and not bastards.
If any bastard were there, he would have told him to kill Musa. Whenever
the Pharaoh sought their advise on killing Musa they showed him another
plan to harass him. One who advised to kill was a real bastard.

Hasan, the narrator has stated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when the
Pharaoh intended to punish anyone he made him lie down with his face to
the ground or on a plank and drove pegs in his hands and legs and left
him in this condition until he died. That is why the Pharaoh was known
as “possessor of pegs” in his community.

Allah says that He has bestowed nine symbols to Musa. According to a
reliable tradition from the Imam the nine symbols were (1) The Staff (2)
Luminous hand (3) locusts (4) louses (5) Frogs (6) blood (7) storm (8)
Splitting of water (9) and the stone from which twelve streams flow.  
 According to another tradition from Imam as-Sadiq when Allah sent a
revelation on Prophet Ibrahim that He would bestow him a son named Ishaq
by his wife Sarah his wife said that her husband had become old and she
too. Allah sent a revelation that they will get a son and said, his
family will be very big and the Pharaoh will kill many people from his
family. “It would happened because Sarah rejected my words.” When the
people of The Israelites were in Allah’s chastisement, they recited
prayer for forty days and urged Allah to release them. Allah sent His
revelation to Musa and Harun to them free from the Pharaoh’s punishment.
Due to their request, Allah subtracted 170 years from 400 years. Imam
Ja‘far as-Sadiq says, “To save yourself from sorrow and unhappiness,
request Allah, the Merciful. He will make you free from all the troubles
and our last Imam al-Mahdi will be appear soon. If you do not do so, the
difficulties will increase.

Imam ‘Ali has stated that Allah takes trial of infidels people by His
friends. Musa and Harun came to the Pharaoh in woolen clothes with a
miraculous staff and had decided, if he would accept Islam and become a
Muslim, his kingship and his respect will remain safe. Hearing them the
Pharaoh said to his companions, “They both are giving false advice to
usurp my kingdom and sovereignty. See their condition and their dress.
They are like beggars. So they are after wealth only.” He said because
he was a greedy person himself and felt insulted to wear woolen clothes.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq it was
Wednesday when he was drowned. It was the same day that he decided to
kill Musa and the people of The Israelites and in the same day Allah
sent chastisement on him.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says when Musa came to his wife she asked him
where he comes from? He said, “From the owner of the fire.” In the
morning he came to the Pharaoh. Imam said, “By Allah, he came raising
his hands, his body was full of hair, his skin was wheatish. He had worn
a woolen coat. He had a staff in his hand and a bunch of dates was tied
to his waist and his shoes were made of donkey hide. People informed the
Pharaoh that a young man was waiting at the door and says that he is an
apostle of Allah. The Pharaoh ordered his man (the master of lions) to
release the lions on him. It was his habit when he was in anger.

Musa cast down his staff on the door. At once all nine doors opened. The
Pharaoh had kept the door closed for his own safety. When the doors
opened the lions came out, and bowed their head on Musa’s feet and began
to circle him.

The Pharaoh and his men were astounded. Then Musa entered in his court.
Allah says in Qur’an about the argument of the Pharaoh and Musa. The
Pharaoh ordered his man to hold Musa’s hands and asked another man to
kill him. They came to Musa for this purpose; Archangel Gabriel killed
them with his sword at once. They were six, who came one by one and they
all were killed by Archangel Gabriel. Seeing this the Pharaoh ordered
them to let Musa free. Then Musa took out his hand from his pocket. His
hand was shining like the sun and nobody could fix his glance at it.
Then Musa cast down his staff. It became a large serpent and held the
whole palace into its mouth to swallow it. But the Pharaoh asked Musa to
spare him time for a day.[^6]

Ibn Babawayh has quoted that water of Nile became lesser. People come to
the Pharaoh and asked him to increase the water. The Pharaoh said, he is
not happy with them, that is why he had made the water flow slowly.
Again the people came to him and complained that their all animals died
of thirst and warned, “If you don’t increase the water flow we will
search for another God in your place.” The Pharaoh said, “All right,
come with me to the forest.” He went aside in a corner, so the people
cannot see or hear him. He kept his face on the ground and raised his
forefinger towards the heavens and requested Allah and said, “There is
no other God except He. And He is only able to make the water flow or
stop it. Increase the flow for the sake of your people.” Allah heard his
prayer as he is Knowing and Hearing. At once the water of Nile started
flowing more as before. The Pharaoh said to his people that he had
increased the water flow. Seeing this they made obeisance to the
Pharaoh. Archangel Gabriel came to him and said, “I have a claim, so
please be impartial.” He asked, what his complaint was? He (Archangel
Gabriel said, “I gave the full authority to one of my servants on
others. Now he keeps enmity with me and became a friend of my enemy. He
is also against my friends. Do justice, and clear the matter.” the
Pharaoh said, “Your servant has become disobedient. If he comes under my
control I will drown him in the sea.” Archangel Gabriel said give me
your assurance in writing. The Pharaoh ordered for a pen and a paper and
wrote, “A person who is disobedient to his master and keeps enmity and
makes friendship with the enemies of his master should be drowned in
deep water.” Archangel Gabriel took his signature.  
 When the Pharaoh entered the water, Archangel Gabriel approached him
with that paper and said, “This is the order for you, you have written
it yourself.”

Imam as-Sadiq and Imam al-Kadhim have narrated regarding the verse from
the Holy Qur’an-Allah ordered His Prophets Musa and Harun to go to the
Pharaoh as he has become an infidel. “Talk to him softly so he would be
obedient and fear of My chastisement.” Imam has stated ‘softly’ means,
to talk to him with respect by saying My Lord. This word shows respect,
but Allah knew the Pharaoh was disobedient and did not believe in them.
Besides, he did not like to follow the advise of others. But when he was
caught in divine chastisement and was drowning he feared and accepted
the truth. He said He believed in Allah and became a Muslim, as the
people of The Israelites believe in Him. But it was too late. Allah did
not accept his prayer. Allah said, “Now you accept Me as your God,
seeing my chastisement. First you were disobeying Me and spreading
dispute and disturbance on the land. Now today I shall raise your body
from the land so that the new generation will take lesson.” Allah has
declared in the Qur’an,

***What! Now! And indeed you disobeyed before and you were of the
mischief-makers.***  
***But We will this day deliver you with your body that you may be a
sign to those after you, and most surely the majority of the people are
heedless to Our communications. (10:90-91)***

Imam al-Ridha was asked why Allah destroyed the Pharaoh in His
Chastisement, what was his fault? In the last moment, he accepted faith
and believed in Allah. Imam replied, “He believed in Allah when he
beheld the chastisement. Allah has declared clearly in Qur’an about His
commands and chastisement. His judgment is equal to all and for the new
generations, Allah has stated: O Prophet Muhammad! Say- ‘When the signs
of His chastisement came into light, and unbelievers, who were not
believing in Me, will not be excused.” In this way Allah did not accept
his request at the time of chastisement. Allah said, (to the Pharaoh)
his body would be thrown at them, so that the new generations and
remaining people will take example from it. The Pharaoh was drowned with
the weight of iron from top to bottom. When he was drowned, his body was
thrown out to the height, so that the people would see him. It was the
example for the people. Due to divine power his body floated on water
instead of sinking, first as an example for the people and secondly when
he was drowning, he cried to Musa to save him. Allah revealed to Musa
not to accept his request because “you have not created him” but He. If
he asked Him to help, he would help him but he did not do.[^7]

Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari has stated that Allah says,

***“And when we parted the sea for you, so We saved you and drowned the
followers of the Pharaoh and you watched by.” (2:50)***

When Musa reached the shore, Allah revealed to him to keep up praying
and “recite the names of the Holy Five i.e. Muhammad ‘Ali, Fatimah,
Hasan and Husayn and pray to Me.”

Imam Al-Hasan ‘Askari has stated, “If you do so, Allah, the Great will
change waterways into land and you can pass on it easily.” The people of
The Israelites said to Musa, “You always advise us something and we
don’t like that. We left the city in the fear of the Pharaoh and you ask
us to recite the names and enter into the sea. We are afraid, if we do
so, what will happen to us?” At that time Qalib bin Yukna came to Musa
on the horseback. They had to cross the gulf which was far from there He
asked, “O, Prophet of Allah! Has Allah ordered you to recite these
auspicious name and enter?” Musa said, “Yes.” He said, “Do you agree
with this and order us to say so?” Musa said, “Yes.”

He obeyed the order and started reciting the names, put faith in Allah
and prayed to Allah to help him pass the gulf. He stepped into the
water. The way of the sea became hard below the hooves of the horse and
reached to the gulf. Again he came back running to Musa and faced The
Israelites and asked them to obey Musa. He said, “This is not a prayer
but these auspicious names are the key of Heaven and a lock of Hell.
This is a good support to earn living and it is a good security for the
followers of Allah and makes Him happy.” But the people refused to walk
on the water and said they would prefer to walk on the land. Allah sent
a revelation on him to cast his staff on water by taking the auspicious
name of the Holy Prophet and his family and order the water to split.
When Musa did so, a path appeared in water. Then Musa asked them to
walk. They said there is dirt and mud on the surface of the sea, if they
go in, they will stick into it. Allah revealed to him to pray to the
Almighty for the sake of the Holy Prophet and his family, to dry the
surface of the sea. “We will dry the surface for the sake of the
auspicious names.”

Allah sent favorable wind to dry the surface. Then Musa asked his people
to move. They said they were of twelve tribes. If they walk on one path,
they will try to go ahead from one another. They doubt they would
quarrel among themselves. They wanted to go by different paths. Allah
revealed to him to cast the staff by the name of Prophet and his family
and pray to him to make the land appear for them and remove their
sorrow. In this way the twelve paths appeared and the morning breeze
dried the surface. Musa asked them to walk. They said that their twelve
groups will walk on the twelve paths, but they will be unknown for one
another. Musa prayed to Allah for the sake of Holy Prophet and his
family to make holes in the mountains of water so that they can see one
another and talk through the holes. When they entered the sea, the
Pharaoh came to the shore with his army. Seeing them walking in the sea,
the Pharaoh and his army also entered. The Egyptians wanted to come out
from the sea. Allah ordered the sea to flow high, so all the people sank
into sea and Musa’s followers watched them drown.

In the time of the Prophet Allah revealed to the Jews of that time why
they did not believe in him (Muhammad) when they know very well that
Allah completed all the bounties on their ancestors as the Sadaqah of
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad?  
 Merits of Aasiya the wife of the Pharaoh and the Believer of the people
of the PharaohMerits of Aasiya the wife of the Pharaoh and the Believer
of the people of the PharaohMerits of Aasiya the wife of the Pharaoh and
the Believer of the people of the PharaohMerits of Aasiya the wife of
the Pharaoh and the Believer of the people of the PharaohMerits of
Aasiya the wife of the Pharaoh and the Believer of the people of the
PharaohMerits of Aasiya the wife of the Pharaoh and the Believer of the
people of the PharaohMerits of Aasiya the wife of the Pharaoh and the
Believer of the people of the PharaohMerits of Aasiya the wife of the
Pharaoh and the Believer of the people of the PharaohMerits of Aasiya
the wife of the Pharaoh and the Believer of the people of the Pharaoh  
 Allah says,

***And certainly We sent Musa with Our communications and clear
authority,***  
***To the Pharaoh, Haman and Qarun, but they said: A lying magician.
(40:23-24)***  
 When Musa came to them with a sign of authority the people said, kill
their sons and leave their daughters alive. They were following the
wrong path. The Pharaoh cried in anger, “Let me kill Musa. I am afraid
of him that he seeks help from his God. He will spoil your religion and
will spread mischief on the land.” One of the believers of the Pharaoh
who believed in Allah secretly said, “You want to kill a man who
believes in Allah, the Lord of the world? Though he has come to you with
an open sign of miraculous staff. If he is a liar, he will suffer and if
he is true, he will benefit you with his good deeds. Allah does not help
the sinners and liars. O, people of my community, you are ruling and
enjoying and settled in your land in Egypt. But say, if Allah’s
chastisement comes upon us, who will save us? the Pharaoh said, “I know
you, what you are and I also follow your advice and respect you.” A man
who believed in Allah in private, said, “O, people! Indeed I am afraid
for you, as the community of previous Prophets were disbelievers and
they all were destroyed in Divine chastisement.

The peoples of Prophet Nuh, Hud and Salih were also destroyed in
chastisement. Allah does not oppress the people. O, my people, fear
Allah’s judgment, when you will be thrown in Hell and no one will help
you from the wrath. And indeed, Allah sent His apostle Yusuf to you,
with clear sign but you did not believe in him until he passed away. You
doubted that he was a real Prophet and you said, ‘Allah will not send
any other Prophet after him.’ Allah also leaves the sinners and doubters
in the dark. Then the believer of Allah asked the people to believe in
him so he makes them follow the right path. He said life is short and
temporary in the world. O, people you invite me to your wrong path and I
invite you to follow the right path. You want me to become a disbeliever
and give respect to one who has no knowledge. I call you towards Allah,
the Merciful and you invite me to your God. Indeed, the disbeliever will
go to Hell. I leave everything on Allah, the Great. He is Knowing and
Hearing. Allah kept his believers in his protection and involved the
disbelievers, in strict punishment.  
 Allah has given the example of the Pharaoh’s wife. He is quoted in Holy
Qur’an,

***“When she said, My Lord! Build for me a house in Heaven and deliver
me from the Pharaoh and his doing, and deliver me from the unjust
people.” (28:11)***

The Holy Prophet has said that three persons were the good believers of
Allah. i.e. (1) The believer of the Pharaoh’s people (2) ‘Ali Ibn
Abi-Talib and (3) Aasiya  
 The Holy Prophet has said, “Khadijah bint Khuwaylid, Fatimah al-Zahra’,
Maryam the daughter of ‘Imran and Aasiya, the wife of the Pharaoh are
the four ladies of Paradise.”

Imam Al-Hasan ‘Askari has stated that Prophet Hizqil (Ezekiel) invited
the Egyptians towards Allah and towards the Prophethood of Musa and
declared Prophet Muhammad one of the best from all Prophets and Imam
‘Ali and the families of other Prophets. He advised the people to avoid
the Pharaoh’s lordship. The back-biters said to the Pharaoh that Prophet
Hizqil instigates people against him. The Pharaoh said, “He is my cousin
and my heir. If he is against with me, he will be punished and if you
are wrong in this matter, you will be punished.” Then he ordered Prophet
Hizqil to be present in the court. The people asked him to appear to the
Pharaoh but he refused to accept the Pharaoh as God. Prophet Hizqil
said, “O, Lord! Have you ever heard me lying? the Pharaoh said, “No.”
Then he asked the Pharaoh to ask his people, who their God is? They
said, “the Pharaoh is our Lord.” Then he asked the Pharaoh to ask them
who has created them? They said, “Of course, the Pharaoh.” Then he said
to ask them who gives them sustenance and other necessities and who
saves them from troubles? They said, “the Pharaoh, our Lord.” Prophet
Hizqil said, I witness you and all the people of your court that *their*
God, is *my* God. The God, who provides all the bounties, livelihood to
all, is my God. There is no other God, except He. And O, Lord! I make
you and all who are present here as my witness, that I am very much
annoyed of other gods except He and I do not believe in them.”

Prophet Hizqil told them indirectly that he believes in Allah only and
not their Lord. They could not understand what he said and whom he
meant. The Pharaoh became very angry and said that they have created a
rift between them. They are liable for his severe punishment because
they wished to create disturbance in his kingdom and spoil
relationships. As a punishment, he ordered his people to make them
sleep, putting their legs on their breasts and nailed their hands and
legs and sawed their flesh from their bones. Allah, the Great, kept his
Prophet safe from the Pharaoh’s punishment.  
 ‘Ali Ibn Ibrahim has narrated that a believer of Allah, from the family
of the Pharaoh kept his belief secret for six hundred years. He was
suffering some kind of disease. His fingers fell off. He was raising his
hands towards the people and inviting them to Allah. so Allah made him
safe from their fraud.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has narrated that the Pharaoh gave him much
trouble, but Allah saved him.  
 Al-Qutb al-Rawandi has narrated that the Pharaoh sent two of his men to
bring Hizqil. They found him on a mountain in prayer. They saw animals
around him and decided to arrest him. But Allah, the Great, ordered an
animal as tall as camel to come in between and attacked them until
Hizqil was free from prayer. When he saw them he feared and prayed to
Allah to save him the Pharaoh’s harassment. “You are my Lord and I trust
you. You are my owner and I believe in You. O Allah! I request you, if
they intend to attack me, let the Pharaoh come over them and if they are
good, help them and guide them.” Seeing him, the two men returned. While
returning one said to another, “I will keep secret about Hizqil. What
will we get if he is killed.” Another said, “We will inform the Pharaoh
about him.” When they came to the Pharaoh, he told him, what they had
seen but the first one did not say anything. When Hizqil came to the
Pharaoh, he asked his two men, who was their God? They said, ‘You’. Then
the Pharaoh asked Hizqil, who is his God? Hizqil said, ‘Their and my God
is same’. The Pharaoh thought that Hizqil believed in him. He became
very happy and killed the man who had given information about Hizqil.
After this incident that man became the follower of Prophet and was
killed with other magicians by the Pharaoh’s order.[^8]

Thalabi has written that Prophet Hizqil was one the companions of the
Pharaoh. He was the same person who made a coffin for the mother of
Musa. Some has said that he was the treasurer of the Pharaoh. He kept
his belief secret for a hundred years, until Musa overcame the
magicians. On that day Prophet Hizqil declared himself as a believer of
Allah. So he was killed by the Pharaoh who killed the other magicians
also.

Hizqil’s wife was a dresser of the daughters of the Pharaoh and she was
good and believed in Allah. One day a comb slipped from her hand, so she
said ‘Bismillah’. The daughter of the Pharoah asked whether she has
uttered this word for his father. She said, No. She has uttered this
word for Allah, the Great. The daughter of the Pharaoh said she will
inform her father and she did. The Pharaoh called her with her children
and asked her “Who is her God”? She said “Allah, my Lord and your Lord
is same and He has created all on the earth and in the Heaven.”

The Pharaoh ordered a large stove of copper and lighted it with fire.
Then he called Hizqil’s wife with her children near it. She said her
last desire is that their bones be buried in the earth. The Pharaoh
agreed to do so. He put them one by one in the heated stove. The last
tiny babe, who was suckling, said to his mother by the permission of
Allah. “O, mother! Be patient, Allah is with you.”  
 Aasiya, the wife of the Pharaoh belonged to The Israelites. She was
pious and believed in Allah and she prayed secretly. When the Pharaoh
burnt the wife of Hizqil, she watched the Angels taking her soul to
heaven and Aasiya’s faith increased. The Pharaoh came to her and told
her what had happened. Aasiya became very sad and said to her husband
“Shame on you! What a shameful task you did against the law of Allah!”
The Pharaoh said, “You have became mad, like that woman. She said that
she believes in Allah, who is the Lord of the world.”

The Pharaoh became very angry and called Aasiya’s mother and said that
her daughter has become mad. “Tell her not to believe in Musa’s Lord or
she will be killed.” Her mother tried but she refused to believe the
Pharaoh.

By the order of the Pharaoh his executioner drove pegs in her. Musa
passed and prayed for her. Allah, the Merciful relieved her pain and
Aasiya prayed to Him to make a house for her in Heaven. Allah revealed
to her to look at the sky. She looked up and became happy and satisfied
to see her house in the Heaven.

An account of the Israelites after Exodus
-----------------------------------------

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that when The Israelites came out of the
river and camped in desert they began to tell Musa that you have
destroyed us by dumping in a desert after taking us out of our homes.
Now there was no shade nor water so Allah sent a cloud over them. It was
shaded during day and descending upon them in the night to become their
food settling on grass, rock or tree. Then it was dropping toasted
chicken fowls on their tablecloths. Thereby they were eating to
satiation. After this the birds use to fly away by the command of Allah.
Musa had a stone which he used to put in the midst of his army. Then he
used to hit it with his stick thereby flew streams of water for every
clan (of an Israel). They were twelve clans. After a period of time they
told Musa, “O Musa. We are not content with only one type of food. Pray
to Allah that He may create vegetable, cucumber, and wheat.” And some
say it was lentil, others are of the opinion it was bread. Musa said,
“Do you want to exchange such nice things with ordinary ones? Then go to
Egypt or any other city where you will get such things.”

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam al-Baqir that Almighty
Allah commanded to Musa to lead The Israelites to the Holy Land and
drive out the disbelievers from there and to reside there. The
Population of The Israelites was 600000. Musa told them, “Allah had
written and destined for you to go and settle in the Holy Land; do not
become deniers and disobedient otherwise you would be in a loss.” They
replied, “A group of tyrants lives in the Holy Land whom we cannot
confront. Therefore we will never enter that city until they get out of
it.” Two persons from them, that is, Yusha‘ ibn Nun and Kaalab said,
“Fear Allah. Allah had guided them to obey him.” They said, “The defiant
of Amaaliqah have twelve cities. So when you will enter them you will
overcome them. Rely on Allah if at all you believe in him.” They
replied, “O Musa! We will never enter that city so long as tyrants are
living there. You along with your God may go and fight with them. We sit
here.” Musa said, “My Lord! I possess power only on myself and on my
brother. Separate me from the group of these sinners.” The Lord said,
“Since they did not accept the admission to they holy lands I have made
it unlawful for them enter it for forty years. They will wander
restlessly in this land. Do not sorrowful because of the sinners.”

Imam al-Baqir said they wandered restlessly for forty years in an area
of four Parasang (24 Kms), because they rejected Allah’s commandment and
did not agree to enter the holy Lands. Every evening an announcer used
to announce, “Load yourself.” Then they used to start singing epics and
traveled until next dawn. But next morning they found themselves at the
spot from where they had started walking and say, “We lost our path.” So
they remained in this state for forty years. The Lord used to send Manna
and salwa for them. They had a stone which Musa used to hit that stone
with his staff when they halted (camped). This caused twelve springs to
flow from that stone, that is, every spring flew toward every clan. When
Musa wanted to take it (stone) to another place the water used to draw
back to that stone. The stone was put on an animal. All except Yusha‘
ibn Nun and Kalaab bin Yuqanna died in these circumstances because these
two had not rejected the Divine commandment to enter the Holy Land. Musa
and Harun also expired in the desert of Tiyah.

It is recorded in many hadiths from Imam al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq that
Allah had destined for them the entrance of the Holy land but they
denied and it was made unlawful for them and it was decided that their
sons should enter it. So all of them died in that very desert. Their
children entered the Holy Land with Yusha‘ and Kalaab. Allah cancels
whatever he wants and confirms whatever he wills. And he has the *ummul
kitab*. (The mother scriptures). It is mentioned in other narrations
that their sons too did not enter but their grandsons did.

It is mentioned in yet another reliable tradition that Imam al-Baqir
said, “The land of Syria is very nice and the best but its residents are
very bad and Egypt is the worst land because it is the prison of the one
upon whom Allah frowns. The entry of The Israelites into Egypt was for
no other reason but that Allah had been angry with them because of their
sin. Allah had asked them to enter the holy land as it was destined for
them, but they declined. So they kept on wandering and moving restlessly
for forty years in Egypt and its deserts. They could not come out of
Egypt and enter Syria but only after they repented and Allah became
pleased. I abhor eating anything in a vessel made with the clay of Egypt
nor do I like to wash my head with the earth of Egypt fearing that it
might become cause of my disgrace and might snatch away my prestige and
honor.”

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that when The Israelites told Musa, “Go
with your Lord to fight; we shall sit here”, Musa held the hand of Harun
and wanted to go away from their midst. The Israelites feared that if he
goes away Allah’s chastisement would fall on them. So they went to Musa
weeping and requested him to remain with them and to pray to Allah so
that He may accept their repentance. Then Allah revealed to Musa, “I
have accepted their penitence but I will keep them roaming restlessly
for forty years as a punishment for their disobedience.” Then all of
them except Harun entered Tiyah for repenting from the night they
started for Tiyah reciting Torah towards Egypt. There was distance of
four parasang between them and Egypt. When they were reaching the gate
of Egypt the earth used to roll back to the point from where they had
started.

Similarly there is a narration according to which when The Israelites
crossed the river they reached an idol worshipping people. They said to
Musa, “Make for us also a god, like the god of these people.” “You are
an ignorant people,” Musa retorted. “These people are about to be
destroyed due to this deed because their action is false. Should I find
out any other god besides Allah though He has given you superiority over
the entire world?”

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas that when The Israelites
crossed the river they said, “O Musa! With what strength and power would
we reach the Holy land when women and children and aged are also with
us?” Musa said, “I do not think Allah has given to anyone more than what
he has given you from worldly wealth and means as heritage from the
Pharaoh. Henceforth He will manage your affairs. So remember Allah and
leave every affair to Him and me as He is more kind to you then you are
to yourselves.” They said, “O Musa! Pray to Allah so that now He may
give us food and water and clothing and terminate our wandering and give
us shade from the sun.”

Allah revealed to Musa, “I have ordered that the heavens may send Manna
and Salwa to them from above, that the air may bake Salwa for them, that
the stone may gush out water for them and the cloud may give them
shade.” He also ordained that the dresses they were wearing should
enlarge with the enlargement of their bodies. Anyway Musa turned toward
the holy land along with them, which is known as Palestine in the
vicinity of Syria.  
 It is called Holy (Muqaddas) because Ya‘qub was born there and it was
the residence of Ishaq and Yusuf and all of them were shifted there
after their deaths.

The Tafsir of Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari says: Allah said, “Remember O The
Israelites the time when he had made a cloud give a shade when you were
in Tiyah so that it may protect you from the heat of sun and cold of the
moon and we dropped on you Manna which is called Taranjadeen which used
to drop under the trees and they used to collect it.” And Allah sent for
them Salwa which was a bird of the sky. Its meat was better than that of
all other birds and they used to catch it without any trouble and were
eating it.

In short Allah told them, “eat the pure thing which We have given to you
and thank Me for My bounties which I have bestowed on you and give
respect to Me and My preferred slaves Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad because I have made them honorable. So give them honor, because
it is I who has made them great and I have taken from you the oath about
their Wilayah (Holy Guardianship). and they did not do Us any harm,
meaning they have not oppressed Us, that whatever oath and undertaking
We had taken from them regarding those great persons has been changed by
them and they did not fulfill the commitment. So the blasphemy of the
infidels cannot harm Our Kingdom just as nothing is added to Our Kingdom
by the faith of the faithful but they made their own souls suffer the
loss means: They have oppressed themselves by becoming infidels and by
altering Our commandment.

Remember the time when we ordered your ancestors that: Enter this city
Areeha that is a city of the country called Shaam (Syria). This was when
The Israelites were freed from the desert of Tiyah. Then eat from it a
plenteous (food) wherever you wish, means: Eat the provisions in this
city from wherever you please in abundance and without any trouble.
Enter this city, means: And enter the gate of the city after making a
prostration.

Imam said that Allah had sketched the figures of Muhammad and ‘Ali on
the gate of that city and it was ordered that they should prostrate to
give respect to those sketches and to refresh their allegiance and love
in their hearts and remember the promise and undertaking regarding their
Wilayah (authority) and the belief of their superiority which were
obtained from them. Then eat from it a plenteous (food) wherever you
wish, meaning: and Say that this Sajdah (prostration or bowing) is for
Allah and is an indication of honoring the figure of Muhammad and ‘Ali
and that the belief of their Wilayah will decrease our sins and scrap
our errors. We will forgive you your wrongs. meaning: So that We may
pardon your sins. and give more to those who do good (to others). means:
And soon We will increase the reward of the righteous, that is, who will
do this and who will not have sinned earlier, we will give them higher
positions and stations.

But those who were unjust changed it for a saying other than that which
had been spoken to them, means: To those who had oppressed themselves
changes this word. Imam said, they did not bow as Allah had ordered
neither uttered the word as Allah had ordained and they entered the door
with their backs towards the door: they neither bowed nor prostrated
while entering and said, Why should we bow when the door is so high as
it may make us bow for false and senseless things.! So while entering
they uttered *Hintaa Samqaanaa* instead of *Hittah* meaning thereby that
word and deed. so We sent upon those who were unjust a pestilence from
heaven, because they transgressed. means: So we, due to the sinfulness
of those who had oppressed themselves, sent a sort of chastisement from
the heavens because they did not accept the Wilayah of Muhammad and the
family of Muhammad.

The said chastisement was such that within one day 120000 persons from
them died of plague. They were those about whom Allah knew that they
would not be alive nor will anyone be born out of their loins who will
worship Allah unilaterally or believe in the Prophethood of Muhammad and
recognize the Wilayah of ‘Ali. Allah said, And when Musa prayed for
drink for his people, means: O The Israelites’ Remember the time when
Musa requested water for his people as they had come to him weeping and
crying and complaining that in the desert of Tiyah they were dying of
thirst. Musa said, My Lord! Quench the thirst of these slaves of Yours
for the sake of the leader of Prophets of Muhammad and the leader of the
legates ‘Ali and the leader of the womenfolk Fatimah and the best Wali
Hasan and the greatest martyr Husayn and their successors and the
progeny who are the best among all sagacious and spotless people. We
said: Strike the rock with your staff meaning: Allah revealed, “O Musa!
Strike your staff on the stone (rock). When he struck the staff on the
stone twelve springs flew from it. Every one of the twelve tribes of the
progeny of Ya‘qub recognized their place obtaining water so that they
might not dispute and quarrel. Thereafter Allah addressed them: Eat and
drink from this provision. and do not act corruptly in the land, means:
And do not be of those who spread corruption in the land.

And when you said: O Musa! we cannot bear with one food, therefore pray
to the Lord on our behalf to bring forth for us out of what the earth
grows, of its herbs and its cucumbers and its garlic and its lentils and
its onions. He said: Will you exchange that which is better for that
which is worse? Enter a city, so you will have what you ask for.

Means: And recall the time when your forefathers who lived in the days
of Musa told him: We cannot remain content with only one kind of food,
that is, manna and salwa. We need other foods for variety. So pray to
your Lord so that He may provide us with things He grows from earth.
Vegetables, cucumber, garlic (or wheat), lentil and onions etc. Musa
replied, “Do you wish that a better thing should be taken away from you
and you be given which is worse?” Then get down, that is, go away from
Tiyah desert to any city where whatever you desire will be made
available to you.

It is written, according to reliable sources, that Imam al-Baqir has, in
explanation of the verse and enter the gate making obeisance, It is
written that this had taken place when Musa came out of the land of
Tiyah and the entire The Israelites entered a residential area. They had
sinned. So Allah desired to free them from the sin and to pardon them if
if they repent. Therefore he ordered them that when they reach the gate
of the city they may prostrate and utter *Hittah,* meaning pardon so
that their errors might be forgiven and their sins be blotted out. Those
among them who were pious complied and their repentance was accepted.
But those who were oppressors uttered *hintae humaraa* (red wheat)
instead so as to obtain wheat. So the divine chastisement descended on
them.  
 Both Shi‘ahs and Sunnis have noted in recurring traditions that the
Holy Prophet said, “In this Ummah the example of my family is like the
Door of Repentance of the Israelites those who entered were pardoned and
those who refused were destroyed. Similarly anyone from this Ummah, who
will enter the love of my Ahl al-Bayt and believe in Imamate
(leadership), and will abide by their knowledge and consider them as a
means of their salvation will get salvation and the one who will defy
their obedience and will follow the false world, as did they demanded
red wheat, will be destroyed.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said,
sleeping before sunrise is ominous, it makes your face yellowish and
deprive one of his provision, because the Almighty distributes provision
between dawn and sunrise. Manna and Salwa was being dropped on The
Israelites at this time, and the one who was asleep at this time was not
getting his ration, but was obliged to ask for it from others.

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when
al-Qa’im -the family of Muhammad will appear in Makkah and will intend
to turn towards al-Kufah his announcer will announce to his companions
that nobody should keep food and water with him. He will be having the
stone of Musa with him which will form a camel load. A water spring will
gush from it wherever they camp. Every hungry and thirsty person will be
satisfied with that water which will be his provision until he with all
others settle graciously in Najaf al-Ashraf.[^9]  
 Thalabi has narrated from Wahab bin Munabbah that Allah revealed to
Musa: to construct a mosque for his people so that they might pray in
congregation and also build Jerusalem for Torah and Ark of the Covenant
and also to built dome for sacrificial rites. He was asked to make
curtains for the Masjid and that its front and back must be of skin of
sacrificed animals. Their bands (ropes) must also have been made up of
wool of sacrificed animals and that women of menses should not touch
those bands nor the unclean man should make the skins impure.

The pillar of the mosque must be of copper. Each pillar must be forty
yards high and that each should be divided into twelve portions to be
lifted by a separate group. The curtains should be 600 yards long. They
should make seven domes. Seven of them for sacrificial rites should made
of gold and silver and they should be raised on silver pillars. Each
pillar must be 40 yards high. Silver tables should be placed between
them to put the sacrifice on and each table should be four yard long and
one yard wide. The four legs of every table should be made of silver and
each should be three yards high so that nobody could be able to pick up
anything from it without getting up. The Jerusalem which is the seventh
dome must be raised on golden pillars seventy yards high and it should
be placed on golden Seebaa, which also should decorated with different
jewels. Gold and silver nets must be provided beneath. Ropes should be
made up of fur of the sacrificed animals and must be colored in various
shades, that is red, green and yellow. All the curtains must be placed
one upon another. The lowest must be made up of thick green silk the
second of purple, then of fine silk and brocade of white and yellow
shade and the topmost seventh of skin of sacrificed animals, which may
protect the others from rain and dust. Its width must be seventy yards.
The carpets of the domes should be of red fine silk and the golden box
should be fixed in that dome which will contain the covenant). It must
be decorated with various jewels. Its legs will be of gold, its length 9
yard, width four yards and height equal to Musa. The dome will have four
doors. One will be for Angels to enter another for Musa, third Harun and
the fourth for the children of Harun who will be in charge of dome. They
will protect the box.

Almighty Allah ordered Musa that one mithqal (5 grams) gold should must
be collected from everyone from the Israelites for Jerusalem and extra
needs should be met within from what has been taken from the wealth and
ornaments from the Pharaoh and his associates. Musa did the same. The
total number of The Israelites was 600000 at that time. The aforesaid
amount was collected from 780 of them. Allah revealed to Musa, “I am
about to send down to you from the heavens a kind of fire which will not
have smoke. It will neither burn anything nor will extinguish. It will
burn only the sacrifices accepted by me and it will light the lamps of
Jerusalem.”

Those lamps were made up of gold and were hanging by golden chains
studded with rubies and pearls as well as different kinds of jewels. And
Allah ordered that a big stone should be placed in the middle. A pit
should be made in its midst so that the fire coming from the heavens
might stay therein. Then Musa called Harun and informed him that, “The
Lord had honored me through a fire from the sky so that it will burn the
acceptable sacrifices as well as light the lamps of Jerusalem. And He
has commanded me about it and I choose you as per that will and I
authorize you. So Harun called his sons Shabbar and Shabbir and said to
them, “The Lord has authorized and chosen Musa for an affair and has
willed in that regard and now I will and authorize you in this matter.”
So thenceforth the trusteeship of Jerusalem and protection of the Ark
and the celestial fire remained with Harun.[^10]

Revelation of Torah, disobedience of The Israelites etc.Revelation of
Torah, disobedience of The Israelites etc.Revelation of Torah,
disobedience of The Israelites etc.Revelation of Torah, disobedience of
The Israelites etc.Revelation of Torah, disobedience of The Israelites
etc.Revelation of Torah, disobedience of The Israelites etc.Revelation
of Torah, disobedience of The Israelites etc.Revelation of Torah,
disobedience of The Israelites etc.Revelation of Torah, disobedience of
The Israelites etc.  
 Allah says in Surah Baqarah,

***O The Israelites! “….. And when we appointed a time of forty nights
with Musa, then you took the calf (for a god) after him and you were
unjust.” “And when We gave Musa the book and the distinction that you
might walk aright. And when Musa said to his people: O my people! You
have surely been unjust to yourselves by talking the calf (as a God),
therefore turn to your creator (penitently), so kill your people, that
is best for you with your creator; so he turned to you (mercifully), for
surely he is the oft returning (to mercy), the merciful. And when you
said, O Musa! We will not believe in you until we see Allah manifestly,
so the punishment overtook you while you looked on. Then we raised you
up after your death that you may give thanks. “And when we took a
promise from you (to obey the commandments in torah) and lifted the
mountain over you (saying): Take hold of the law (Torah) we have given
you with firmness and bear in mind what is in it (like commands and
admissions), so that you may guard (against evil). Then you turned back
after that; so were it not for the grace of Allah and His mercy on you,
you would certainly have been among the losers.” Then He said, “And most
certainly Musa came to you with clear arguments, then you took the calf
(for a God) in his absence and you were unjust. And*** ***when we made a
covenant with you and raised the mountain over you: Take hold of what we
have given you with firmness and be obedient. They said, we hear and
disobey. And they were made to imbibe (the love of) the calf into their
hearts on account of their unbelievers.”***

And it is mentioned in Surah Maidah that

***“and certainly Allah made a covenant with the children of Israel, and
we raised up among them twelve chieftains; and then Allah said, surely I
am with you; if you keep up prayer. Pay the poor rate and believe in My
apostles and assists them and offer to Allah a goodly gift certainly
cause you to enter into grand beneath which rivers flow, out but whoever
disbelieves from among you after that, he indeed shall lose the right
way.”***  
 And in Surah Al-A‘raf it is stated: “And we appointed with Musa a time
of thirty nights and completed them with ten (more), so the appointed
time of his Lord was completed forty nights, and Musa said to his
brother Harun; Take my place among my people, and act well and do not
follow the way of the mischief makers. And when Musa came at our
appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said my Lord! Show me
(thyself), so that I may look upon thee. He said you cannot bear to see
me, But look at the mountain if it remains firm in its place, then will
you see me; But when his Lord manifested his Glory to the mountain he
made it crumble and Musa fell down in a swoon; then when he recovered he
said, Glory be to Thee (You are above visibility) and I am the first
believers (in believing that no one can ever see you).

Then Allah said, O Musa! Surely I haven chosen you the people with my
message and my words, therefore take hold of what (Torah) I give you and
be of the grateful ones. And we ordained for him for the tablets
admonition of every kind and clear explanation of all things; so take
hold of them with firmness and enjoin your people to take hold of what
is best thereof; I will show you the abode of the transgressors (in
Egypt or Syria) and he said, And Musa’s people (after he went to tour)
made of their ornament of gold a calf after him, a (mere) body, which
gave a mooning sound. What! They could not see that it did not speak to
them nor guide them in the way? They took it (for worship) and they were
unjust. And when they repented and saw that they have gone astray, they
said, if our Lord show no mercy to us and forgive us, we shall certainly
be of the losers. And when Musa returned to his people, wrathful (and)
in violent grief, he said, Evil is it that you have done after me; did
you turn away from the bidding of your lord? And he threw down the
tablets (of Torah) and seized his brother by the head dragging him
towards him. He (Harun) said, Son of my mother! Surely the people
reckoned me weak and had well nigh slain, therefore make not the enemies
to rejoice over me and count me not among the unjust people.

Musa said, My lord! Forgive me and my brothers and cause us to enter
into Thy Mercy, and Thou art the most Merciful of all the Merciful ones.
(As for) those who took the calf (for a gold), surely wrath from their
lord and disgrace from this world’s life shall overtake them, and thus
do we recompense the devisers of lies. And (as to) those who do evil
deeds, then repent after that and believe your Lord after that is most
surely forgiving, merciful. And when Musa’s anger calmed down he took up
the tablets, and in the writing thereof was guidance and mercy for those
who fear for the sake of their lord. And Musa chose out of his people
seventy men for our appointment: so when the earthquake overtook them,
he said, My Lord! If Thou hadst pleased, Thou hadst destroyed them
before myself (too): will Thou destroy us for what the fools among us
have done? It is naught but Thy trail, Thou makest err with it whom you
pleases: Thou art our guardian, therefore forgive us and have mercy on
us, Thou art the best of the forgivers. And ordain for us good in this
world’s life and in hereafter, for surely we turned to Thee. He said (as
for) my chastisement, I will afflict with it whom I please, and my mercy
encompasses all things; so I will ordain it (specially) for those who
guard (against evil) and pay the poor-rate, and those who believe in our
communications.  
 By those who guard is meant the Prophet of the last age and his
legatees and pious people from his Ummah.

They said, “And when we shook the mountain over them as if it were a
covering overhead, and they thought it was going to fall upon them: Take
hold of what we have given you with firmness, and be mindful of what is
in it, so that you may guard (against evil).

And he has said in Surah Taha that; O children of Israel! Indeed we
delivered you from your enemy, and we made a covenant with you on the
blessed side of the mountain, and we sent you the manna and the quails.
Eat of the good things we have given you for sustenance, and be not
inordinate with respect to them, lest my wrath should be due to you, and
whomsoever my wrath is due will perish indeed. And most surely I am most
forgiving to him who repents and is guided by the Wilayah of the true
Imams.

And Allah said, “and caused you to hasten you from your people, O Musa?
He said, they are here on my track and I hastened on to Thee, My lord,
that Thou mightest be pleased. The lord said, So surely have tried your
people after you, and the Samiri has led them astray. So Musa returned
to his people wrathful, sorrowing. Said he: O my people! Did not your
lord promise you a goodly promise: did then the time seem long to you,
or did you wish that displeasure from your lord should be due to you, so
that you broke (our) promise to you of our own accord, but we were made
to bear the burdens of the ornaments of the people, then we made the
casting of them, and thus did the Samiri suggest. Samiri also mixed with
it what was with him. Then he brought forth for them a calf a (mere)
body, which had a mooing sound, so they said, This is your God and the
God of Musa, but he forgot (as he had to tour to meet God). What! Could
they not see that it did return to them reply, and (that) it did not
control any harm or benefit for them? And certainly Harun had said to
them before: O my people! You are only tried but by it, and surely your
lord is beneficent God, therefore follow me and obey my order. They
said, we will by no means cease to keep to its worship until Musa return
to us. Musa said, O Harun! What prevented you, when you saw them going
astray, so that you did not follow me? Did you then disobey my orders?
He said, O son of my mother! Seize me not by my beard nor by my head;
surely I was afraid lest you should say: You had caused a division among
the children of Israel and not waited for my lord. Then Musa said, What
was then your object, O Samiri? He said, I saw (Archangel Gabriel) what
they did not see, so took a handful (of the dust) from the footsteps of
the messenger, then I threw it in the casting: thus did my soul command
to me. (When Archangel Gabriel came so that they may drown the Pharaoh,
I saw that the dust of the place where the foot of his horse falls
remains moving so I took up a handful of that dust and threw it into
this calf and it began to make noise. Musa said, be gone then, surely
for you it will be in this life to say, touch (me) not; and surely there
is a threat for you, which shall not be made to fail you, and look at
your God to whose worship you kept (so long); we will certainly burn it,
then we will certainly scatter it a (wide) scattering in the sea. Your
God is only Allah, there is no God but he; He comprehends all things in
his knowledge.

There is a difference of opinion about Samiri. Some have said that Musa
had ordered all not to sit near him nor to talk with him, nor to give
him anything to eat nor should he approach anyone. Some have said it was
the divine order according to which whenever anyone sat near him both of
them become ill. Therefore he was not allowing anybody to come near him
and this effect still continues in his progeny. Whenever anybody touches
them both of them become ill with fever. Some have said that he ran away
for fear of hell and continued to wander with uncivilized people until
he entered hell.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that Allah promised Musa that the Torah
and the tablets will be sent to him within thirty days. He gave this
information to The Israelites and went towards the mountain of Toor and
made is brother Harun his caliph in his community. When thirty days
passed and Musa did not return they discontinued obeying Harun and
intended to kill him and said that Musa lied and ran away from us. Satan
came to them in the form of a man and told them, “Musa has ran away from
you and he will not return. So collect your ornaments so that I may make
a God out of it for you.” Samiri was the chief of Musa’s vanguard army.

The day on which Allah drowned the Pharaoh and his companions he saw
that Archangel Gabriel was leading a mare and at the spot where the mare
puts its hoof begins to move. So Samiri took some dust from under the
hoof the mare of Archangel Gabriel and saw it moving. He put it into a
bag and began to boast among the Israelites that “I have such a dust.”
When Satan deceived them they made a calf. Then Shaitan came to Samiri
and told him, “Bring the dust, which is with you.” He put it into the
belly of the calf. At once that calf moved and also mooed and developed
hair and tail. The Israelites bowed before it. They were 70,000 people.
Harun admonished them but they paid no need and said, “We will not stop
worshipping the calf until Musa returns.” They intended to kill Harun.
Harun did not resist. Anyway, they remained on this disastrous path
until 40 days passed since the departure of Musa.

Allah gave him Torah on the 10th of Dhu’l-hijjah. It was inscribed on
tablets. In them were all things like commandments, admonitions and
stories that were required for them. Allah revealed to Musa, “We have
taken the test of your community behind you; that Samiri cheated them
and misguided them and now they are worshipping a golden calf that
speaks.” Musa said, “My Lord! Samiri molded the calf but who made it
speak? Allah said, “I, O Musa! When I saw that they have turned their
face from Me and have inclined toward the calf and then I also made
their trial more difficult.” So Musa returned in anger towards his
people. When he saw them in this condition he threw down the tablets
dragged Harun by his beard and told him, “What prevented you from coming
to me when you saw that they are going astray?” Harun said, “My brother!
Do not pull my beard and head. I was afraid that you may say that I have
created dissension among The Israelites and did not obey your word.”

Then The Israelites said, “We did not breach your promise willfully. But
we had unfathomable wealth belonging to the Pharaoh and his people,
(their ornaments etc.) So we melted all of it and it began to speak.
Therefore we worshipped it.” Musa scolded Samiri, “Why did you do so?”
He said, “I took up a handful of mud from beneath the hoof Archangel
Gabriel’s animal. I threw it into the belly of the calf and it began to
make noise and my heart made this attractive to me.” Hearing this Musa
burned the calf and scattered it in the sea and said to Samiri, “Go
away; it will be your routine throughout your life to say, “Don’t
Touch!” meaning none should touch you. So it continues until today in
his progeny that people may recognize him and not be deceived. People
call them Laa Misaa in Egypt and Syria. Musa desired to kill Samiri but
Allah revealed not to kill him as he was generous.

According to a reliable narration Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Allah
did not send any messenger but there were always two devils (Shaitans)
to harass them. They (devils) used to spread corruption and trouble
among their people and were misguiding people after the departure of the
messengers. In the time of Nuh there were Fanteghoos and Hizaam, in the
days of Musa were Samiri and Maraqbaa and during the days of ‘Isa were
Molos and Marisaan.

It is also narrated that Allah revealed to Musa, “I will send Torah on
you within forty days, that is, during the ten days of the months of
Dhu’l-Qa’dah and Dhu’l-hijjah and it will contain commandments.” Musa
told his companions that Allah had promised to send Torah in thirty
days. Allah had commanded him to tell thirty days to the Israelites so
that they might not be disappointed. Musa made Harun his vicegerent and
proceeded to Mount Toor. When thirty days passed and Musa did not
return, The Israelites became angry and intended to kill Harun. They
said, “Musa told us a lie or he has fled from us.” They made a calf and
began to worship it. Allah sent tablets of Torah to Musa on 10th of the
month of Dhu’l-hijjah containing commandments, news, stories and
traditions everything, which they needed.

When Allah sent down Torah upon Musa and spoke with him he said, “My
Lord! Show me Your Self to me. Allah said, “I am invisible and no one
has the power of looking at My grandeur. But look at this mountain. If
it remains at its place you can see Me.” So the Lord raised up the
curtain and descended one of the sings of His greatness on the mountain.
The mountain was drowned in the ocean and will continue to drown until
day of the Resurrection Day (the Resurrection Day). Angels came down and
doors of the heavens opened up. Allah revealed to the angels to see that
Musa does not run away. So the angels came down and surrounding Musa
said, “O son of ‘Imran! You have asked a great thing from Allah.” When
Musa saw that the mountain had drowned and observed the position of the
angels he fell face down and his soul departed from his body. Allah made
his soul return to his body. He lifted up his head and said, “I consider
You greater than that can be seen, I seek forgiveness and I am the first
person to believe that no one can ever see you.” Allah sent a
revelation, “O Musa! I have given you distinction over people by making
you My messenger and through a discourse with you and I have selected
you. So take whatever I have given to you and be of those who are
thankful.” Then Archangel Gabriel told him, “I am your brother.”  
 Explaining the word of Allah,

***And We appointed with Musa a time of thirty nights and completed them
with ten (more), so the appointed time of his Lord was complete forty
nights, and Musa said to his brother Harun: Take my place among my
people, and act well and do not follow the way of the mischief-makers.
(7:142)***

It is said in the commentary of Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari that Imam said,
Musa told The Israelites that Allah will give you salvation. A Book of
commandments and admonitions and examples will be sent by Allah (SWT).
When Allah delivered them from their troubles, He ordered Musa to arrive
at the promised spot, and to fast for thirty days at the foot of the
mountain. Musa thought that Allah would give him the Book after thirty
days.

So he fasted for thirty days at the foot of the mountain. Musa brushed
his teeth before breaking the fast. Allah revealed, “O Musa! Perhaps you
are not aware that the smell of the mouth of the one who has fasted (for
me) is, to me, dearer than the fragrance of musk. So fast for ten more
days and do not brush your teeth at the time of breaking the fast.” Musa
complied. Allah had promised that He would give him the Book after forty
days. So he revealed the book after forty days. On the other hand,
Samiri misguided those who had weak faith making them think that Musa
had promised to them to return after forty days; that 20 days and 20
nights have already passed (purporting to say that the total was 40) and
the promise of Musa had ended; that Musa did not see his Lord; that he
has come back to you and intends to show himself to you as He (Allah) is
able to call you to him without the intervention of Musa; so understand
that Musa has not been sent by Allah and He did not need him.

Then Samiri presented to them the calf that he had molded. The
Israelites said, “How can a calf be our God?” Samiri replied, “Your Lord
will talk with you through this calf as he had conversed with Musa
through a tree.” Then when they heard the voice coming out of the calf
they said, “Verily God has arrived in this calf as he had entered the
tree.” When Musa returned and saw this situation he asked the calf, “Was
your lord in you as these people say?”

The calf began to talk and said, “My Lord is above the possibility of
being within a calf or a tree or a house. By Allah! O Musa! This is not
possible. But Samiri made my hind part rest with the wall and he made a
hole in the ground from the other side and then made one of his
misguided men to hide there who was speaking by placing his mouth from
the direction of my tail. Then The Israelites showed laziness in sending
Salawaat on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and they denied his love
and deviated from the faith in the Prophethood of the last Prophet and
the Imamate of his selected legatee. So they became dishonored and
thought that I was their god. Because of this error, Allah’s guidance
disappeared from them so much that they forgot the command of their
Lord. Almighty Allah said when people became disgraced due to their
refusal to send Salawaat on Muhammad and his Legatee, that is, they
began to worship calf, then, O The Israelites! How is it that you do not
fear making enmity against Muhammad and ‘Ali while you do observe the
signs and miracles.”

I forgave your forefathers’ calf-worship earlier, perhaps O The
Israelites of the age of Muhammad! Maybe you be thankful for the
bounties bestowed upon you and your grandfathers. Imam said, Allah did
not forgive them but they prayed through the intercession of Muhammad
and the family of Muhammad and accepted their affection. Then Allah said
His mercy was on them and pardoned their error.

Remember the time when we gave the book to Musa that is, Torah, when we
took promise from The Israelites to believe and to obey every command
written obligatory from them. And We gave the Criterion which
distinguishes between truth and falsehood and it is also a command which
makes the true people distinct from untrue people, because when Allah
gave order to The Israelites due to their faith in the book (Torah) and
obeying its command, thereafter Allah revealed, “O Musa! Those people
did put faith in the book but still separates the believers and the true
from disbeliever and falsehood. So renew the oath in this regard because
I have sworn by My Holy Self that the oath is true in which Allah does
not accept anyone’s word and deed until he does not believe in it.
(Furqan)” Musa asked, “What is Furqan?” Came the reply, “It is that of
The Israelites that Muhammad is best of the creation and the greatest of
all the Prophets and their leader ‘Ali is the best of all the successors
of the Prophets and that their Legatees will be appointed as their Imams
and that those holy personalities are the best of creation and that
their Shi‘ahs (partisans) who will follow their commands will be the
stars of the grand Firdaus in the heaven and the kings of the Eden
gardens.” So Musa took from them the covenant. Some accepted it orally
and by heart; some did not believe in their hearts. So they did not gain
the light of faith. This was the Furqan given to Musa by Allah. The
Almighty said, perhaps you may be guided, that is, you may understand
that, in the sight of Allah, a slave’s honor is connected with his
belief in Wilayah just as your predecessors were honored.

O The Israelites! Recall that time when Musa told his people; who had
worshipped the calf: you have oppressed your own souls and harmed
yourselves by making the calf your god. So return and seek pardon of the
Lord who created you and set right your figures and kill yourselves,
that is, those who did not worship calf should kill those who had
worshipped it. This killing of yours is better in the sight of your Lord
than your remaining alive in the world and not to be pardoned and the
worldly bounties may reach you but you have to enter hell. And when you
will get killed and will repent, Allah will make your killing expiation
for your sins and will grant you the bounties of the eternal paradise.
Allah accepted your repentance and kept you alive for His worship and
surely he is the greatest acceptors of repentance and very Kind. It was
a fact that when the falsehood of the calf was exposed by Musa and when
the calf exposed the cheating of the Samiri, Musa ordered those who had
not worshipped the calf to kill those who worshipped it. So Allah
ordered Musa to break that calf (statue) into pieces and to throw them
in the river and make all of them drink that water. The lips and noses
of those who had the worshipped the calf will turn black and thus they
will be identified. Those who did not worship the calf numbered twelve
thousand. Musa ordered them to come out with their swords and to kill
the sinners. The announcer announced that curse of Allah be on those who
move their hands and feet. They should get themselves killed silently
and from among the killers one who thinks about the person who is being
killed and the one who makes distinction between himself and others will
also be cursed. Hearing this, the sinners did not rebel and bowed down
to be killed. Innocent people came to Musa complaining that we did not
worship the calf and yet our punishment is harsher than the sinners
(calf worshippers) as we are being asked to kill with our hands our own
fathers and mothers and brothers and relatives.

The Almighty revealed to Musa, “I have put these people in this severe
trail because they did not separate themselves from those who had
worshipped the calf, nor denied them or became angry with them. Well,
now tell them to pray to Allah through the right of Muhammad and the
family of Muhammad so that I may make the massacre easy for them.” So
they prayed to Allah and sought the intercession of the Prophet of Allah
and the guiding of Imams. Then Allah made the affairs easy for them so
that they did not experience any grief and sorrow due to that killing.
When the massacre began Allah guided some of them and so one told the
other that: when the intercession of Muhammad and his progeny in such a
thing that the one who resort to it never get disappointed and that none
of his prayers remain unanswered by Allah and when all the messenger
have sought their intercession, why we should not do so? After making
joint consultation on this point all of them gathered and complained to
Allah, “O Lord! For the sake of Muhammad who is the best and the
greatest of creation and for the sake of ‘Ali who, after Muhammad is the
best and the greatest of creation and for the sake of their pious
progeny we request you to forgive our sins and to overlook our errors
and to remove this state of being killed from us.”

Allah revealed to Musa to tell them to put down their hands because some
of them has given him an oath. “Had they done so in the beginning I
would have given them good guidance and would have saved them from
calf-worship. And even if the devil had given me such an oath I would
have certainly guided him and even if the Pharaoh and Nimrod too would
have done so I would have given them salvation.” So the punishment of
killing was withdrawn. They said, “Alas! If we had not been unmindful of
the intercession of Muhammad and his progeny in the beginning the Lord
of the worlds would have protected us from this trail.

Remember the time when your predecessors said, O Musa! We will not put
faith in you until we see Allah with our own eyes. Lightening took them.
Then we made your predecessors alive after their death. Perhaps they may
be thankful for that life span due to which they could repent before
Allah and to turn towards Him and “we made them die”, and it was not a
permanent death, which might take them to hell forever. Imam said, “The
cause of that lightening was that when Musa intended to take the oath of
Furqan from the Prophethood of Muhammad and the Imamate of ‘Ali bin
Abi-Talib and all the pious Imams, they said, “We do not believe that
this is the order of your Lord. We shall not put faith in it until we
see Allah with our own eyes and He may give us the order.” Then the
lightning fell on them and they saw that the lightning was falling on
them. Allah said, “O Musa! I give honor of those of my friends who
testify to my selected salves and in this matter I care for no one.”
Then Musa told the remaining people who were not harmed by lightning,
“Do you accept and confess? If not, you will meet the same fate.” They
said, “O Musa we do not know for what reason the lightning fell on them.
If you are true in your word that it fell for not accepting the Wilayah
of Muhammad and the family of Muhammad then pray to Allah for the sake
of Muhammad and the family of Muhammad so that he may make them alive
and so that we may ask them about the reason.” Musa prayed to Allah and
they became alive.

The Israelites asked them and they replied that the chastisement
overtook them because they had denied the Prophethood of Muhammad and
the Imamate of ‘Ali and his progeny. “Then after death we saw the
kingdom of our lord in the heavens. We observed curtains, Chair, Throne
and hell and we saw that no ones kingdom and rules is greater and more
effective than that of Muhammad and ‘Ali and Fatimah and Hasan and
Husayn. When we died due to the lightning and when angels began to drive
our souls towards hell, Muhammad and ‘Ali called out to the angels to
postpone chastisement group saying that these people will become alive
again by the prayer of one who will pray for it for the sake of us and
our pious progeny.” This voice reached us when we were about to be
thrown out in the *Haawiya*. But hearing it the angels stopped pushing
us until we became alive due to your prayer.” So the Almighty said to
the Prophet of time: “When our elders became alive through the
intercession of Muhammad and the family of Muhammad you too do not deny
their right and do not invite the divine punishment by yourselves and be
worthy of the divine punishment yourselves.”

Believe for sure of the time when We took a covenant from your
forefathers to do as We had ordered them to do through Torah and with
that particular message which was sent about Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad that they are the best of creation and that they are to rise up
in the world with truth, it is incumbent upon you to confess this and
also to make your children aware of this command of this Allah and to
appoint them on the job of conveying this to their offspring’s. This
should continue until the end of the world, that they should put faith
in Allah’s Prophet, Muhammad and to accept all that he may say about his
legatee ‘Ali bin Abi-Talib and which ‘Ali may say regarding the Imams
who are to rise with truth after ‘Ali. So O The Israelites! Your
predecessors refused to accept them.

So we ordered Archangel Gabriel to lift from the mountain, a piece equal
to the size of the army camp of Musa (one square parasang) and Archangel
Gabriel made it hang over their heads. Then Musa asked them, “Do you
believe or this will be thrown on you.” They sought shelter and believed
for fear to their lives. Allah protected them from their enemies those
who believed sincerely. So when they accepted they fell downs in
prostration and put their cheeks on the earth. But many of them placed
their cheeks on the earth only to see whether or not the mountain falls
on them. Very few of them placed their heads on ground sincerely before
their Lord.

Take and accept whatever we have given to you from the duties, which we
have imposed on you with the strength that we have granted to you. We
have given you enough power to obey our commands and we have lifted
conditions from you.

We heard your word and we denied, that is, disobeyed thereafter or made
up mind at that time not to obey the command. They were commanded to
drink the water where the pieces of the calf were thrown so that it may
become clear as to who is calf-worshipper and who did not worship it.

They were ordered to do so due to their disbelief. O Muhammad! Tell them
that if you have faith in Torah then realized that what they ordered you
was a bad thing, that is not to put faith in Musa so that you deny
Muhammad and ‘Ali and their progeny but he commands you to believe in
those great persons. ‘Ali said that when Musa returned to The Israelites
and when those who had worshipped the calf came to him repenting Musa
asked, “Tell me who has worshipped the calf so that I may carry out
Allah’s command.” All denied and everyone of them said, “I did not do
it, others did.” Musa told Samiri “Look at the God which you worshipped
as I am breaking it into pieces and throwing it into the river.”

Allah commanded Musa and he broke it into pieces with a hammer and threw
it the river, and ordered The Israelites to drink that water. So the one
who had worshipped it and who was fair complexioned got his lips and
nose black and if he was black colored these parts of his body became
white. Then Divine commands were issued to them.

Amir al-Mu’minin says that Musa had promised to The Israelites that when
they will be freed from the Pharaoh, Allah would send a Book for them
containing commands (orders and prohibitions) and there will be, in it,
punishments and duties. When they got freedom and approached Musa he
brought the Book for them. It was written in that “I do not accept the
deed of the one who does not respect Muhammad and his progeny, and who
does not honor their friends and companions as they should truly do. O
slaves of Allah! Understand and be witness that Muhammad is the best in
My creation and his brother ‘Ali is, in his Ummah (followers) his
legatee and the inheritor of his knowledge and his deputy and the best
of creation after him (the Prophet). The progeny of the Prophet are the
best of the progenies of all Prophets and his companions are the best
among the Prophet’s companions and his (Muhammad’s) Ummah is the best of
the Ummahs of all the Prophets. The Israelites said, “We do not accept
it.” They said, “O Musa! This is very hard to accept. But we accept its
conditions as rules as it is easy and how can we accept it when we
believe that our Prophet is better than all other Prophets and that his
Progeny is better than that of all others and we, who are in his
community, are better than the communities of all other Prophets. So we
do not accept the grace of that group whom we have never seen nor do we
know them.”

Allah ordered Archangel Gabriel to lift a mountain from Palestine having
the area of one square parasang, that is the size of the camp of Musa
and raised it over their heads and said, “Accept whatever Musa has
brought for you otherwise I am about to drop this mountain on you
whereby all of you will be crushed and vanished.” Then they became
restless and cried, “O Musa what should we do?” Musa said, “Prostrate
for Allah and rub your forehead and both cheeks on dust and say, ‘O
Lord! We have heard and we have accepted, confessed and submitted and
have become satisfied.’”

They did as told by Musa. But most of them did not do it with sincerity
and they were saying in their heart we heard but we opposed. Though they
put their right cheek on the dust (earth) their intention was not to
express humility before Allah and to repent for their past sins. Rather
they had done so just to see if the mountain falls on them or not. Then
they also put down their left cheek but that too with the same
intention. Archangel Gabriel told Musa, “I will destroy most of these
people because they have confessed only apparently and since the Lord
also deals with people in this world only according to their apparent
deeds their bloods is protected and they will live here in safety but,
in the hereafter, their affair is with the Lord who will punish them on
the ground of their false belief and incorrect intention.”

The Israelites saw that the mountain broke into two, one pieces of white
pearl and went toward the sky and, piercing the clouds, disappeared from
sight and the other piece became fire, tore through the earth and
disappeared from their eyes. They asked the reason from Musa who said,
“The piece which went towards sky went up, got appended to paradise and
the Lord multiplied it unlimitedly, so much that no one knows its extent
except the Lord himself and He ordered that it should be utilized for
building mansions, palaces and stations for those who believed
truthfully (from heart); that those building will have all kinds of
bounties such as gardens, good-natured houries and slaves having
permanent beauty who would be like scattered pearls.

They will get all the bounties as promised by Allah to His righteous
slaves. And another piece which pierced the earth has got annexed to
hell and the Lord added innumerable piece to it and ordered that they
should be used for building houses and stations full of calamities like
rivers of fire and Ghisleen (the water oozing from wounds) and the tanks
of Ghassak (a dirty thing like pus etc.) and canals of foul water and
thorny trees and poisonous grass and snakes, scorpions and bullets and
pallet bows and chains and all sorts of chastisement and calamities
having the angels in charge of hell with clubs in their hands for
punishing the disbelievers who denied the orders of this Book. The Lord
has provided all these things for the dwellers of hell. The Prophet
asked The Israelites, “Don’t you fear chastisement of Allah? While
denying the distinctions for which Allah had selected me and my pious
progeny?”

According to reliable narrations Tawus Yamani, who is one of the Ulama
(scholars) of the Sunnis asked Imam al-Baqir which is that bird which
flew only once and will never fly thereafter? Imam said, “It is the Toor
mountain. Allah Almighty had raised it up over the heads of The
Israelites. There were different kind of chastisement in it until people
accepted the word of Allah,

***And when We took a promise from you and lifted the mountain over you:
Take hold of the law (Torah) We have given you with firmness and bear in
mind what is in it, so that you may guard (against evil). (2:63)***

In another hadith Imam has said, while explaining the same verse, “When
the Almighty sent Torah for The Israelites and they did not accept it he
raised mount Toor over their heads.” Musa told them, “If you do not
accept the mountain will be made to fall on you.” Then they accepted and
put down their heads in prostration.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that when Musa told The Israelites that
Allah speaks to him, they did not believe him. He said, “Select a group
from your people to accompany me to hear the talk of Allah with me. They
selected 70 righteous people from their community and sent them to Musa
to hear the divine speech. When Musa went near the place and when Allah
conversed to him by creating vibration in the air, Musa asked them to
hear and be witness before The Israelites. They said we will not believe
that this voice is of Allah until we see him with our own eyes. Then a
lightening fell on them and all of them were burnt down into ashes. Musa
became sorrowful on seeing this and appealed, “My Lord! Do you kill us
all because of what some of our fools did?” Musa has imagined that those
people were destroyed because of the sins of The Israelites.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq
said that when Musa requested Allah to show Himself, He revealed to him,
“You will never be able to see Me.” But He promised, “I will send My
might on this mountain so that Musa might understand that He is beyond
visibility (vision).” Musa went up the Toor mountain. The gates of
heavens were open, the army of angels came down and began to pass by
Musa holding radiant clubs in the big columns along with lightening
roars and stormy winds. Every column was saying, “O son of ‘Imran! You
have asked a great thing from your Lord.” And Musa was trembling on
seeing each and every column. Fire encircled him by the command of Allah
due to which he was not able to move out of out of it in any direction
until the Allah shed a particle of his radiant grandeur on that
mountain. The mountain went down the earth and Musa fell
unconscious.[^11]

It is recorded in reliable sources that Al-Ma’mun asked this question to
Imam al-Ridha. He replied that Kaleemullah (the one who conversed with
Allah), that is Musa knew that the lord is above vision. Yet since the
Lord conversed with him and made him His confidant and when he informed
his community about this fact they said we will not believe in what you
say unless and until we hear Allah’s words just as you heard them. They
were 700000 people in all. Musa selected 7000 out of them, then 700
therefrom and thereafter 70 and took them to Mount Toor with him which
was the venue of his worship. He made them wait at the foot of the hill
and went up and prayed to Allah to speak with him in a way that it could
be heard by those 70 at the foothill.

The Lord conversed with him and all of them heard His words
simultaneously from above their heads and from below their feet and from
their right and left and front and behind because Allah had created
sound in the tree, which spread in all directions. Thus they heard it
from every direction so that they may realize that it was the word of
Allah, because, had it been the voice of anyone else it would have
reached them from only one direction. Those seventy men said we do not
believe it until we see Allah with our own eyes. As this demand was made
by them was a very unbecoming outrage and harsh rebellion Allah made
lightening to fall on them that killed them due to their injustice.

Then Musa said, “My lord! What shall I say after returning to my people,
as they will say to me, ‘O Musa! You took our brothers with you since
you were not true in your claim of having conversed with Allah you
killed them.’” The Lord made them alive as requested by Musa. When they
became alive they said, “O Musa all this happened because you had asked
for it to show it to us. So now ask Allah to show himself to you so that
you may look at him as He will accept your wish. Then you see Him and
tell us about it so that we will recognize Him as He should be
recognized.” Musa said, “My Lord! You hear the words of The Israelites
and also know what is better for them.” The Lord then revealed to Musa,
“Ask Me as they ask I will not question you for their ignorance and
folly.” Musa said, “My Lord! Show yourself to me.” The Lord said, “You
can never see me, however look at the mountain. If it remains at its
place you will be able to see me.” Then the Lord shed one of his sign of
grandeur on the mountain, which leveled the mountain to the ground and
Musa fainted. When he gained consciousness he said, “My Lord! I Praise
your inviolability and, O Lord’ I repent before You, that is, I turn my
back to my peoples’ nonsense and ignorance and return to Your
recognition which was with me earlier. And I am the first person from
The Israelites to have faith in You with the belief that you are beyond
visibility.”

It is recorded in authentic traditions that Imam as-Sadiq asked the
people, “Do you know why Harun said ‘O son of my mother!’ do not pull my
beard and head why did he not say: ‘ O son of my father! Then he
clarified that jealously takes place among brothers when they are from
one father and different mother. When they are from one mother, enmity
remains less among them unless Satan creates corruption between them and
when they obey Satan.. So Harun said to Musa: O my brother born from one
and the same mother! (not from a different mother) Do not hold my head
and bread. He did not say: “O son of my father!” because enmity is not
uncommon between sons of one father and different mothers, except those
protected by Allah.

Then the questioners ask the Imam why Musa held the head and beard of
Harun and pulled when he did not take part in calf worship? Imam
replied, “Because when The Israelites indulge in calf worship and thus
became infidels he did not distance himself from them and joined Musa.
Had he separated himself from them joined Musa the anger would not have
fallen on him. Do you not see that Musa said to Harun, ‘When you saw
them go astray what prevented you from coming up to me?’ Harun said,
‘Had I done so The Israelites would have divided themselves into groups
and I was afraid that you would say that I created discord among The
Israelites and did not care for you in the matter of their
reform.’”[^12]  
 It is recorded in reliable traditions that Imam al-Ridha said, “People
asked Amir al-Mu’minin what is the reason behind that fact that a cow
cannot raise her eyes up towards the sky? He replied, ‘As the community
of Musa had worshipped calf she keeps her head down being ashamed and
does not looks up towards the sky.’” It is reported that the Holy
Prophet said, “Love the cow as she is the best among the four footed
animals and she does not look towards the sky because she is ashamed of
being worshipped (by the misguided).”

It is mentioned in another tradition that when Musa asked and the
Almighty shed His radiance on the mountain range seven of them broke up
from it and flew away and fell towards hijaz and Yemen. The one who came
to Medina was Uhad and Ruqaan and one, which came to Makkah, was Sabeer
and Harraa and one, which came to Yemen, were Sabr and Hasoor.  
 It is mentioned in reliable tradition that Amir al-Mu’minin said, “When
you take my bier towards Najaf Ashraf, a wind will confront you and it
will throw you down on a ground. So bury on that spot as it is the first
mount Sinai.”

According to authentic narration Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, Najaf Ashraf
is the piece of the mountain on which Allah had spoken to Musa.  
 It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that when the Almighty
rained His radiance on mount Toor it began to drown in the sea and will
continue to go down until the Resurrection Day.  
 It is mentioned in yet another reliable tradition that Karroobiyaan is
a group of our Shi‘ahs (companions) whom Allah created first and he has
placed them on the back of the throne. If he distributes a radiance of
anyone of them between all the residents of the earth surely it would
suffice for all. And when the Musa asked for seeing the Lord, He ordered
one of those Karroobiyaan to shed its radiance on the mount. It
complied. The mountain could not bear it and was drowned in the
sea.[^13]

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that when The Israelites repented and when
Musa told them to kill one another (by way of punishment) they asked how
it should be done? He said, “You come at Jerusalem next morning and
bring with you knives, sword or other arms and keeping your face hidden
(covered) so that you may not recognize one another. Start killing when
I climb the pulpit.” Next morning the 70000 People who had worshipped
the calf gathered near Jerusalem. Musa offered prayers and ascended the
pulpit. Massacre started. When 10000 of them were killed Archangel
Gabriel came down and said, “O Musa! Ask them to stop killing as
Almighty Allah has accepted their repentance by His Grace.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said, “Musa
has selected 70 person from his community and took them to mount Toor
with him. When they asked to see Allah, a lightening feel on them and
all were burnt to death.” Musa prayed, “My Lord these were my
companions.” Came the divine revelation, “O Musa! I will give you better
companions.” Musa said, “My Lord! I am attached to them. I know all of
them with their names.” He prayed thrice like this. So Allah made them
alive and made all of them messengers.[^14]  
 It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq that when the Almighty Allah sent
down Torah on Musa which contained information about everything that to
be seen until the Resurrection Day and when Musa reached his age (life
span) Allah asked him to entrust the tablets to the mountain. Those
tablets were made of Heaven’s Emerald. Musa brought them to the
mountain. The gap closed in and the tablets disappeared until the last
Prophet of Allah arrived. Once a caravan of Yemeni people came to him.
When it reached that mountain, it split up and the tablets reappeared.
They (caravan) took them up and brought them to the Holy Prophet. “From
that time they are all with us until today.”

In another reliable tradition it is mentioned that Imam al-Baqir said
when Musa threw the tablets some of them broke and went down that ground
(rock) and became preserved there until the holy Prophet Muhammad came.
Then that rock sent them to him. There are several hadiths that Allah
did not send any book to any Prophet nor gave any miracle to any
messenger but that all of them (Books and Miracles) are with the progeny
of the holy Prophet. InshaAllah these hadiths will be quoted at their
appropriate place.

It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq that when Musa cursed the Israelites
in June, 300000 persons of them died within twenty-four hours.  
 It is narrated from the Holy Prophet that Qur’an is called Furqan
because its chapters and verses came separately without being inscribed
on a tablet while Torah and Injeel and Zabur had been sent down
inscribed on tablets and written on pages.  
 According to reliable sources Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Torah was
sent down on the 6th of Ramadhan.[^15]91919191919191

An Account of QarunAn Account of QarunAn Account of QarunAn Account of
QarunAn Account of QarunAn Account of QarunAn Account of QarunAn Account
of QarunAn Account of Qarun

The Almighty has said in Surah Qasas,

***“Verily Qarun belonged to the community of Musa. 28:76-83”***

Imam as-Sadiq is reported to have said that he was the son of Musa’s
aunt. Some have said he was the son of his uncle. *Fa Baghaa Alaihim*
(so he rebelled against them and committed excesses). There is a
difference of opinion about the nature of his rebellion. Some people say
that when they were living in Egypt, the Pharaoh had made him the ruler
(governor) of The Israelites and that he had oppressed them at that
time. Some say he was keeping his dress about a foot higher than others
and some have said that he was proud and showing arrogance because of
his richness and wealth.  
 So he rebelled against them and committed excesses.

There is a difference of opinion about the nature of his rebellion. Some
people say that when they were living in Egypt, the Pharaoh had made him
the ruler (governor) of The Israelites and that he had oppressed them at
that time. Some say he was proud keeping his dress about a foot higher
than others and some have said that he was proud and showing arrogance
because of his richness and wealth.

And We had given him treasures the keys to which proved difficult even
for a strong group to lift.  
 ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has said Usbah (group) consists of ten or fifteen men.
Some have said the number was ten or forty while some others have opined
that the number was forty. Some have said sixty and some seventy. It is
mentioned in the narrations that the keys of his treasures were being
loaded on sixty asses and that no key was larger than a finger but as
they were of iron they were very heavy, he got it made of wood. When it
too proved much heavy, he made them of leather.

When his community told him, “Do not be haughty and do not show
arrogance because of your wealth. Allah does not like those who are
pleased solely with the worldly wealth and its beauty.” Some say that
Musa had said, “Seek the House in the hereafter with what Allah has
given to you. And do not forget your share in the worldly material that
is either earned for the hereafter or be content with taking according
to your need. And behave benevolently with people and be kind to them,
as Allah has been Kind to you. And do not try to create trouble and
mischief in the world. Verily Allah does not befriend the
mischief-makers. He said no one has given me this wealth. I have earned
it with the knowledge, which I possess. ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim says the
meaning of what he said was that “I have earned this wealth due to my
knowledge of chemistry. It is said that Musa had thought him this
Alchemy and according to some his thinking was that his since I was
superior to you in knowledge Allah gave me this wealth and status. In
the opinion of some he meant by saying Ilm (knowledge) was the knowledge
of business trade and agriculture and other occupations. Did he not
understand that Allah had destroyed, centuries ago, those who were much
wealthier and superior in army? And the criminals and the deniers will
not be questioned in the Resurrection Day about their sins because Allah
already knows their deeds.

So Qarun came before his community with his adornments, that is he had
worn clothes of various colors which he was dragging on the ground
arrogantly with pride. Some have said he came with 4000 mounted men and
that the saddles of his horses were of gold and red clothes covered them
and more than 3000 beautiful slave girls were with him reading Kabood
(black and blues) white asses and that all were in red attires. Some
have said 70000 persons were with him and that all of them were dressed
in red. That those who loved the world (on seeing him) said, How nice
would it have been had we also been given what Qarun has been given.

Verily he is the fortunate man in the world. And those were given
knowledge by and who believed in the hereafter said, “woe unto you! The
reward of the hereafter is better for the one who believes and who does
good deeds and such good sense is given to the one who gives up the
world and a remains patient.” And so we pushed Qarun and his house in
the earth. So there was no group to save him from the Divine punishment
and he himself could not remove the chastisement from him. And those who
yesterday were longing for the status of Qarun woke up next morning to
exclaim, “Verily Allah, according to His wisdom, widens the provision of
the one whom he wishes and narrows for one whom He wills.

Had He not been kind to us and had we continued to keep our eyes on his
wealth, surely we would have also been pushed into the earth. Surely
thankless people do not prosper or the deniers will not get salvation in
the hereafter. We build this house of the hereafter for those who do not
seek to be high and great nor is spread mischief in the land and the
good end only for the righteous.”

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that what caused Qarun to be destroyed was
that when Musa brought The Israelites from the river and when Allah
showered His blessings on them fully, he ordered them to fight with the
Amaaliqah. They did not obey. So it was decided that they should wander
with anxiety in the desert of Tiyah for forty years. They used to get up
in the beginning of the night and to recite Torah and prayers weeping.
Qarun was also among them, he was also reciting Torah. No one had a
voice sweeter than him. He was called Manonnon because of his melodious
recitation. He knew Alchemy and practiced it. When the affair of The
Israelites got lengthy, they began to repent and to weep with humility.
But Qarun did not like to join them in penitence. As Musa liked him he
went to him and asked him, “How is it that your people are busy in
repentance and you are sitting here? Go and join them. Otherwise Divine
punishment will fall on you.”

He paid no attention to the advice of Musa and began to ridicule him.
Musa became sorrowful and returned and sat nearby. He was wearing a gown
made of hair and was holding a staff. Musa became very angry. He had
hair on his shoulders, which used to become stiff and come out of his
clothing. Blood also used to ooze therefrom Musa said, “My Lord! If You
do not frown upon Qarun because of me, then I am not your messenger.”

The Lord revealed to him that, “I have made the skies and the land
subservient to you. Ask them do whatever you like.” Qarun had closed the
gates of his palace for Musa. Hearing about it Musa came there pointed
toward the gates and all of them opened due to his miracle. He entered
the palace. When Qarun saw Musa he understood that he had come to punish
him. So he said, “O Musa! I appeal to you for the sake of my right owing
to relationship with you, be kind to me. Musa said, “O son of Laadi! Do
not talk with me.” Then he commanded the earth to devour Qarun. So the
palace and all that was in it went down in the ground and Qarun was also
thrust into the earth up to his things. He began to weep and gave Musa a
swearing for mercy. Musa again retorted, “O son of Laadi! Do not talk
with me.”

He appealed repeatedly but to no avail, until he disappeared beneath the
ground. When Musa came to his place of worship Almighty Allah said, “O
son of Laadi! Do not talk with me.” Musa understood that Allah was angry
with him for not being kind to Qarun. Musa said, “My Lord! Qarun asked
of me without mentioning without Your name. Had he sworn by you I would
have been kind to him. I would have accepted it.” The Lord again said
the same thing in reply which Musa had given to Qarun. Then Musa said,
“My Lord! Had I known that Your pleasure was in accepting his wish I
would have accepted it.” Allah said, “O Musa! I swear by My Might, Grace
and Greatness, had Qarun begged for mercy from Me as he did from you I
would have accepted it. But since he had asked for your help and had
resorted to you, I left him to you. O son of ‘Imran! Do not be afraid of
death because I have fixed the time of death for every living being and
have provided a place of comfort for you. If you see it and reach it,
your eyes would become bright.

Thereafter Musa went to Toor mountain one day along with Yusha‘. When
they reached Mt. Toor, they saw a man walking with a shovel and a
basket. Being asked as to where he was going he replied, “A friend of
Allah has died and I want to prepare a grave for him.” Musa asked what
he was doing? He said, “I want to ensure that the grave is all right.”
Musa said, “I am going therein.” So Musa went in the grave and slept
there in and liked it. The angel of death arrived and retrieved his soul
then and there. The mountain got leveled and the grave disappeared.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said, “When
Yunus was in the belly of a fish, he reached the spot where Qarun was
pushed into the earth due to the curse from Musa, Allah had appointed an
angel to push him in the ground daily up to a depth of a man’s height.
Yunus was remembering and hallowing Allah in the belly of the fish. When
Qarun heard that human voice he requested the angel to give him some
respite as he was hearing a human voice. Almighty Allah ordered the
angel to give the requested respite. Then Qarun addressed Yunus and
asked, “Who are you?” He replied, “I am a sinner, Yunus son of Matta who
has erred.” Qarun asked where is the oft-angering, for the cause of
Allah, that is Musa son of ‘Imran? Yunus replied, “Alas he has passed
away from the world long ago. Then what about that man who was very kind
to his community.” That is, Harun. Yunus replied, “He also expired.”
Then Qarun asked, “How about Kulthum daughter of ‘Imran who was named
(for marriage) with me? Yunus replied, “Alas! No one from the progeny of
‘Imran remains.” Qarun said, “Very sorry for the family of ‘Imran!”
Allah liked this sorrow very much and, as a reward, ordered that angel
to stop punishing him until the world existed.

Al-Qutb al-Rawandi and Thalabi have narrated that the Almighty Allah
revealed to Musa to order The Israelites to stick four blue-black ropes
with their sheets in every side and also to hang a heavenly rope. Musa
called The Israelites and said, “Allah has ordered that you should stick
ropes of sky color to your chadors so that you may remember Allah
whenever you see them. Very soon he will reveal his book for you.”
Hearing this Qarun said rebelliously, the master (Musa) is saying all
these things to his slaves so that he may remain distinct among others.
When Musa came out of the river with The Israelites he entrusted the
governance and administration of the sacrificial place and its
trusteeship to Harun where The Israelites were sacrificing their
offerings and were placing them in the slaughter house and where a
heavenly fire used to come and burn them. Qarun developed jealousy
against Harun. He said to Musa, “You took up Messengership and gave
jasoorah to Harun? No share for me even though I recite Torah better
than both of you?”

Musa said, “By Allah! I did not give Jasoorah to Harun. Allah gave it to
him.” Qarun said, “By Allah! I will never testify to it unless and until
you give some evidence or argument.” Hearing this Musa gathered the
chiefs of The Israelites and asked all of them to bring their staves.
Musa placed all the staves during the night. Next day he ordered them to
remove them. When they were brought out there was no change in any of
them but the staff of the Harun had become green and leaves like the
leaves of almond had sprouted from it. Musa said, “O Qarun! Can you now
understand that the distinction of Harun is God-given? Qarun said, “This
trick is no greater than magic.” Then he stood up angrily and separated
himself along with his men from the army of Musa. Even then Musa
continued to behave with him kindly and maintained relations. He
continued to give trouble and pain to Musa and his rebellion and ego
multiplied daily until he built a house and fixed golden swords on its
walls.

The Israelites used to come to him every morning. He was feeding them
and all of them were ridiculing Musa. This continued until Allah sent
the commandment collecting Zakat on Musa so that he may collect it from
the rich among The Israelites. Musa went to Qarun and asked him to give
Zakat at the rate of one Dinar for every thousand Dinars, one sheep for
every thousand sheep and thus for all of his wealth. Qarun went to home
and calculated. He felt that he was losing much money, which he disliked
to part with. So he was not prepared to pay Zakat. The Israelites told
him, “You are our chief and elder. We shall do whatever you order.” He
said, “Call such and such prostitute. We shall hatch a conspiracy in
collusion with her so that she may make an allegation of adultery on
Musa. Thereby The Israelites will hate Musa. Thus we shall get rid of
him.” Qarun promised to give that prostitute one thousand gold coins or
a golden plate or whatever she demanded on condition that she makes an
allegation of adultery on Musa next day before The Israelites. She
agreed.

Next day Qarun came along with The Israelites to Musa and told him, “The
people who have gathered at your residence want you to come out and
teach them commandments of the shari‘ah (religion) to them.” Musa came
out and went up the pulpit, read out sermon and said, “Anyone who
commits a theft will get his hand cut and I shall give 80 lashes to the
one who commits an indecent deed and if an unmarried man commits
adultery I will give him 100 lashes and if he had a wife I will stone
him to death.” Qarun spoke up, “Even if it be you?” Musa said, “Yes.”
Finally, that woman was called. Musa asked her, “Did I commit adultery
with you? Tell the truth swearing by the Lord Who split the river for
The Israelites and Who sent down Torah on me.” That woman said, “No,
these people are lying. Rather Qarun has lured me with money and wanted
me to make a false allegation against you.” Hearing this Qarun bowed
down his head and The Israelites were dumbfounded. Musa fell down in
prostration before Allah and weeping said, “My Lord! Your enemy is bent
upon harming me and wants to dishonor me and give me power over him.”
Almighty Allah revealed to Musa, “Lift up your head from prostration and
order whatever you wish to the earth. It will obey your command.”

Musa told The Israelites, “Almighty Allah has given me power over Qarun
as he had appointed me over the Pharaoh.” Then he ordered them that who
is his (Qarun’s companion) may remain with him and who does not like him
may get separated from him. All except two persons separated from Qarun.
Musa ordered the earth to swallow him. He went down in the ground. Musa
said, “Swallow more of him.” He went down up to his thighs. Then Qarun
went on giving him the oath of mercy.

According to some narrations he gave oaths seventy times but Musa did
not pay attention to him until they were pushed in the earth completely.
Allah revealed to Musa, “They requested for mercy seventy times but you
did not hear them. By My Grandeur! Had they appealed to Me like that,
even once, they would have found My help.” Then The Israelites told Musa
to pray for Qarun’s destruction and for his sinking into the earth so
that it may take possession of the wealth of Qarun. Musa prayed to
Allah, whereby all the wealth and property, mansions, treasures etc also
went down the earth.[^16]

The Israelites decide to slaughter the cowThe Israelites decide to
slaughter the cowThe Israelites decide to slaughter the cowThe
Israelites decide to slaughter the cowThe Israelites decide to slaughter
the cowThe Israelites decide to slaughter the cowThe Israelites decide
to slaughter the cowThe Israelites decide to slaughter the cowThe
Israelites decide to slaughter the cow

It is written in the explanation of Allah’s words in the tafsir of Imam
Al-Hasan al-’Askari that Almighty Allah addressed the Jews living in
Medina to recall the time when Musa told his people, “Verily Allah
orders you to slaughter the cow and to hit the body of the killed person
with a piece of the slaughtered cow so that the corpse may become alive
by the order of Allah to tell you who killed him.” This pertains to the
events when a corpse was found lying among a tribe of The Israelites and
Musa had compelled their fifty chief leading men to come up and swear by
Allah who is the God of The Israelites and who has given grace to
Muhammad and his progeny and solemnly say that they did not kill that
man nor do they know the killer. If they swear and pay the blood money
it is good, otherwise they should expose the killer so that, that man
may be killed in retaliation. If they do not kill him then they may
imprison him in a narrow cell. They should do either of these things.

They said, “O Messenger of Allah! We may swear and also pay blood money.
But it is not Allah’s command. The fact behind is that there was, in The
Israelites, a very beautiful, learned, knowledgeable, respected and
modest (veiling) woman. Many men desired to marry her. Her uncle had
three sons. One of them was most learned and pious. She agreed and
desired to marry him. Her other two cousins were jealous. They called
him one night for a feast and killed him. Then they threw out his body.”
Next morning the two brothers who were the killers came to Musa tore
their collars, threw dust on their heads and complained to Musa for
justice. Musa called all the people of that tribe and inquired about the
murdered man and they replied, “We did not kill him nor do we know who
killed him.” Musa said, fifty men from among you should, as desired by
Allah, swear solemnly, pay the blood money or give information about the
killer.

They said, “Why do we have to pay blood money even after swearing? Musa
said, “All the benefits are in obeying Divine orders. Whatever He
commands must be carried out.” They said, “O Prophet of Allah! This is
fine and this charge of sin is very grave as no one has any right on our
heads. So pray to Allah that He may let us know the real killer so that
you may give him a deserving punishment, and we may get rid of the fine
and the punishment.” Musa said, “Almighty Allah has given me commands in
this cause and hence I have no courage to ask for anything else. It is
binding upon us to bow before His command, obey Him, and not raise any
objection. Do you not see that He has prohibited us from working on
Saturday and from eating camel meat? So we cannot disobey His command or
make any changes in it. Rather we must obey Him.”

Musa desired to enforce the command upon them. Almighty Allah revealed
to him that He might accept their word. “so that I may expose the killer
and others may get rid of the allegations because, in connection with
the answering to their request, I will widen the provision of the one
who is one of the most righteous people among you and who believes in
sending Salawaat on Muhammad and his Progeny and after him, giving
respect to ‘Ali, I wish that, in this respect, I may make him needless
(rich) in this world so that he may get a part of his reward for sending
blessings on Muhammad and his progeny and thereby for giving them
respect.”

Musa said, “My Lord! Tell me who the killer is.” Came the revelation,
“Allah will intimate to you the killer if you slaughter a cow and hit
the corpse of the killed man with a part of slaughtered cow. Then I will
make him alive. This will happen if you obey the Divine orders.
Otherwise accept my earlier order.” They said, “O Musa! Do you play a
joke with us by asking us that if we hit a part of a corpse with a part
of another earlier will come to life?”

Musa said, “I seek Allah’s protection from becoming ignorant or
senseless, that is, I may attribute a word to Allah even if He did not
say it, or I may reject the Divine word by imagining it to be nonsense
according to my imperfect intelligence, just as you are denying. Is the
seed of the man and the woman not lifeless? But when the two meet in the
female womb, Allah creates from the two (lifeless elements) a living
man. Is it not a fact that you are sowing a lifeless seed in the dead
land and, therefrom, Allah brings out living grass and various trees?”
When Musa’s arguments concluded for them, they said, “O Musa! Pray to
your Lord so that He may describe the quality of that cow.”

Musa prayed to Allah and subsequently told those people that Allah
commands that, that cow should be neither aged nor very young but of
middle age. So do what you have been asked to do.” They said, “O Musa!
Ask for the color of that cow and that from your Lord.” After asking,
Musa said that the Lord says that it should be a yellow and its
yellowness should be clear that is, neither so faint as to appear white
nor so dark that it may appear blackish. Rather its attractive colors
must make the viewers happy.”

They said, “O Musa! Pray to your Lord to describe more attributes of the
cow because we have become confused due to the fact that there are many
such cows. Now, Inshallah, we will recognize the one which He wants to
be slaughtered.” Musa said, “The Lord commands that the cow should not
be so much trained that it may plough land or water the fields but it
ought to have been kept away from such tasks and that it should not have
any defects no should it contain any other color shade except its
original one.” Now the attributes of the cow have been described as they
ought to have been described. It was not easy for them to carry out the
command due to its being very costly.  
 But then it was incumbent on them because they had made allegation
against Musa that he was not able to do what they demanded. So they were
obliged to slaughter the described cow. Imam said, “After hearing all
the attributes of the cow they asked Musa, “O Musa! Has our Lord ordered
us to slaughter such a cow having all these attributes?”

He said, “Yes.” But had they, in the beginning, complied with the Divine
order without hesitation, any cow would have sufficed. After their
questioning it was not binding for Musa to inquire further from Allah.
Rather, in response, he ought to have told them any cow would do.
Anyway, when the matter reached a particular type of cow they went in
search of it but could not find it anywhere. But there was a youth in
The Israelites.

Allah has shown him, in dream, the holy Prophet and ‘Ali and the holy
Imams from his progeny and they had informed him that since he loved
them and gave them preference over others, they wished to give a part of
his reward in this world. “So, when they come to you to purchase your
cow, do not sell it without consulting your mother. If you will do so,
Allah will reveal some matters to your mother, which will cause you and
your children to be rich. The youth became very happy. Next morning The
Israelites people came to him for purchasing his cow and asked about the
price. He said, “Two Dinars. But my mother may alter the amount.” They
said, “We will pay one Dinar.” The youth consulted his mother who told
him to sell it for four Dinars. He came back to The Israelites and said,
that my mother says it would cost four Dinars. They agreed to give two
Dinars. The youth returned to his mother and asked for her opinion. Now
she said a hundred Dinars. Then The Israelites said they were prepared
to pay fifty. In this way, the price went on increasing with the rise in
offer and demand until it reached to the demand that they should pay for
it by filling its skin with gold. Finally, they agreed to do so,
purchased the cow, and slaughtered it. Then they picked up its tail
(wherefrom people are created in the beginning and with which their
bodies will be rebuilt in the hereafter) and hit it on the corpse of the
murdered man. While doing so they said, “O Lord! By the grace of
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad make this man alive and speak out as
to who has killed him.” The man stood up by the command of Allah and
said, “O Prophet of Allah these two cousins of mine envied me on account
of my cousin sister, killed me and threw me in this area so as to
collect my blood money from the residents of this area.” Musa executed
both of them.

When the corpse was hit with a piece of a slaughtered cow, it did not
become alive. The Israelites said, “O Prophet of Allah what about your
promise to us?” Allah revealed, “My promise never remains unfulfilled.
But until the skin of this cow is not filled with gold and given to its
owners this dead body will not rise up alive.” So they gathered their
wealth. The Almighty made the skin of that cow larger until it was
filled with gold worth 5000000 Dinars. Then after the gold was given to
that youth and a piece of dead cow was hit on the corpse of the murdered
man he became alive some people of The Israelites said, “Nothing can be
more astonishing than the Divine deed of resurrecting this dead man and
of making that youth so rich. Allah revealed to Musa, “Tell The
Israelites that whoever from you wants that I may grant him a purer and
better life in this world and raise his status in paradise and keep him
there with Muhammad and the family of Muhammad must also do as this
youth did. He had heard the name of Muhammad and ‘Ali and their pious
progeny and was always sending Salawaat on them and was giving them
preference over jinn, men and angels in the matter of respect. Therefore
I gave him so much wealth so that he may deal nicely with people and be
kind to his friends and defeat his enemies.” Then that youth said to
Musa, “O Messenger of Allah how should I protect this wealth from the
enmity of the enemies and envy of the jealous?”

Musa said, “Recite blessings with true faith on Muhammad and the family
of Muhammad with true faith over this wealth as you were doing earlier.
Allah will protect it if a thief, tyrant or a jealous person intends to
harm you. The youth who had just become alive heard this and said, “My
Lord! I ask you in the name of Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and
their sacred radiance that you please keep me in this world so that I
may enjoy my marriage with my cousin, dishonor my enemies, and grant me
better.

At once Allah revealed to Musa, “Through the intercession of the sacred
souls I have granted him a life span of 130 years during which he shall
remain fit and healthy will not develop any weakness and will enjoy a
married life. At the end of that period, I will call them back to me
simultaneously and give them a house in Paradise where both of them will
enjoy heavily bounties. O Musa! Even if those unfortunate murderers had
asked me in the way this youth did and had they resorted to those holy
souls after repenting I would not have disgraced them and would have
made content on what they were given and would not have cared for The
Israelites in finding out the killer and I would have made people forget
this murder and would have made heirs of the victim spare them from
retaliation. But I guide whom I wish to love Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad and make them resort to the holy souls and I prevent (due to my
justice) the causes of the evil of their misdeeds and I am the
Omnipotent and the wise Allah.”

The Israelites complained to Musa, “We entangled ourselves in trouble by
way of disobedience and gave away all of our provision.” Musa said, “Woe
unto you, How much kind hearted you are! Perhaps you did not hear the
prayers of this youth and of the murdered man and did not see how much
benefit they got. So you too pray like that and resort to the sacred
souls of those holy personalities. Allah will end your hunger and
poverty and will increase your provision.” So they prayed, “Our Lord! We
beg of You and we rely on Your Grace and Mercy. So, by the piety of
Muhammad and ‘Ali and Fatimah and Hasan and Husayn and the holy Imams
remove our poverty.” Allah revealed to Musa, “Tell them to go to such
and such wasteland and to dig out such and such spot and to take out
10000000 Dinars buried there and to return the amounts to those from
whom the price of the cow was collected and to distribute the remaining
wealth among themselves so that it may add to their property and so also
to the reward to which they are entitled as they resorted to the holy
souls of Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and believed in the
superiority of their grace over all creation.”

Remember the time when O The Israelites you killed a man and disputed
about his killer and when every one of you absolved himself and made
allegation on the other. Allah is to expose what you were concealing
with the intention of falsifying Musa imagining that Allah will not
except Musa’s request to make the murdered man alive.” So we said strike
a part of that cow on the dead body. So likewise Allah makes the dead
alive in the world and in the hereafter by the meeting of the lifeless
things. That is, Allah brings life from the meeting of the water of men
and women in wombs.

The same thing will happen in the hereafter. The water of the sea, which
is near the first heaven, is like the semen of man. After the blowing of
the bugle for the first time, which will kill all living beings Allah,
will drop the said water on the worn and torn dusted bodies of the dead
and recreate their original bodies. At the blowing of the second bugle,
all will become alive. And this will prove His Oneness and the
Prophethood of Musa and the superiority of Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad over all the creation. May be you think and ponder that the
Lord who makes miraculous things manifest does not order His creation to
do anything except that which is for their betterment and that He did
not give distinction to Muhammad and the family of Muhammad but only
because they are superior to and higher than all the intelligent beings.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has related from reliable authorities that a righteous
and learned man from The Israelites asked for the hand of a woman of The
Israelites and she accepted. She had a cousin who was wicked and a bad
character. He also wanted to marry her but she did not accept him. So he
envied the former man and went after him until he murdered him and
picked him up and brought him to Musa and said, “This is my cousin and
he has been murdered.” Musa asked, “Who killed him?” He said he did not
know. The punishment of murder was severe among The Israelites.

Eventually The Israelites gathered and said, “O Prophet of Allah! What
is your opinion in this matter?” Among them, there was a man who had a
cow. He also had a very good and obedient son. He had something for
purchasing which people came to him. The key of the place wherein that
thing was locked was with the father of that boy. The father was asleep.
With an intention of not disturbing his father, he turned away the
purchaser. After the father awoke and asked him, what he did with the
property? He replied, “It is where it was. I did not sell it because the
key was with you and you were asleep and I did not like to disturb your
sleep.” The father said, “In exchange of the profit you had to forgo by
not selling it I gift this cow to you.” Allah also like this good deed
of that boy, and as a reward commanded The Israelites to purchase that
particular cow and slaughter it.

Finally when The Israelites gathered around Musa and complained about
the murdered man weeping Musa said, “Allah orders you to slaughter a
cow.” The Israelites expressed astonishment and said, “Are you joking?
We have brought our victim to you and inquiring about his killer and you
are telling us to slaughter a cow!” Musa said, “I seek Allah’s refuge
from being ignorant or a joker.” They felt that they had insulted Musa
so they requested him to pray Allah to ascertain what kind of a cow it
should be? Musa said, “It should be neither advanced in age nor too
young.” They said, ‘Pray to Allah so that He may tell its color. Musa
said, “Allah said it should be yellow and very yellow which may attract
people and people may like it to see.”

Then they said, “Pray to Allah to tell us what else distinction it ought
to have.” Musa said, “The lord says that it should be a cow which must
not have tilled the land nor fetched water; that except being yellowish
it should not have any spots or dots of any other color.” Then they
said, “Now that you described it, such a cow is only with such and such
man who has gifted it to his son as reward of some good deed.” They went
to that boy to purchase the cow. He said, “Fill the skin of this cow
with gold.” Hearing this, they came to Musa and told him that the owner
asked this much. Musa said, “You have to purchase it as there is no
alternative. Verily the same cow should be slaughtered. So purchase it
for the said amount.”

At last, the people purchased it, slaughtered it, and said, “O Prophet
of Allah! What should we do now?” Allah revealed, “O Musa! Tell them to
pick up a piece of slaughtered animal and strike it on the body of the
murdered man, and to ask him as to who killed him?” They took the tail
of the slaughtered cow, stroked it on the murdered man, and asked him as
to who killed him. He said so and so son of so and so, that is, the son
of his uncle who had claimed his blood money.

It is mentioned in the reliable tradition that Imam al-Ridha said a man
from The Israelites killed one his relatives and threw his body in the
path of a noblest tribe of The Israelites and then, coming to Musa
claimed the blood money. The Israelites told Musa, “Expose to us who
killed him.” Musa said, “Bring a cow.” Had The Israelites brought any
cow, it would have been enough. But they began to argue and counter
argue that is, they went on asking questions after question. So Allah
went on getting harsh on them until a cow was pinpointed which was only
in the possession of a youth belonging to The Israelites who agreed to
sell it only if its skin was filled with gold. Left with no alternative
they had to purchase it at that price and to slaughtered it.

Then as ordered by Musa they hit the body of the killed man with the
tail of the slaughtered cow. The corpse became alive and spoke, “O
Messenger of Allah! My cousin had killed me, not those against whom that
he is claiming.” A man told Musa, “There is an event behind this cow.”
Being asked about it he said, “The youth who is the owner of this cow is
very obedient son of his father. One day he purchased something and went
home to pay its price. But he saw his father asleep with the keys
beneath his pillow (head). He did not like to awaken his father. So
returned that thing thereby foregoing its benefits or profit cancelled
the deal. When his father awoke, he described the happening to him. His
father said, “You did a very good deed. I have now gifted this cow to
you in exchange of the profit, which you missed.” Musa said, “Just
ponder, behaving nicely with parents raises man to such height.” There
are several hadiths in this regard. As it would be lengthy to narrate
them, I suffice with this.

Musa meets al-Khidhr; An Account of al-KhidhrMusa meets al-Khidhr; An
Account of al-KhidhrMusa meets al-Khidhr; An Account of al-KhidhrMusa
meets al-Khidhr; An Account of al-KhidhrMusa meets al-Khidhr; An Account
of al-KhidhrMusa meets al-Khidhr; An Account of al-KhidhrMusa meets
al-Khidhr; An Account of al-KhidhrMusa meets al-Khidhr; An Account of
al-KhidhrMusa meets al-Khidhr; An Account of al-Khidhr

Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an,

“***And when Musa said to his servant: I will not cease until I reach
the junction of the two rivers or I will go on for year” (17:60)***

Some have said ‘Huqubaa’ means a span of 80 years and some have said of
70 years. The first saying is attributed to Imam al-Baqir. It should be
kept in mind that in this verse Musa means Musa bin ‘Imran and his
companion is Yusha‘ ibn Nun the legatee of Musa. hadiths of common and
distinct groups agree on this meaning. A weak saying of the People of
the Book has also been noted according to which here Musa is the son of
Yashaa bin Yusuf. He had lived prior to Musa bin ‘Imran and it is
popularly understood that the said two rivers are Faaris and Room. Some
have said that here it means the rivers of knowledge i.e.. The apparent
river of knowledge was Musa and the hidden river of knowledge was
al-Khidhr.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that when Almighty Allah conversed with
Musa and sent down the tablets that contained many sciences, Musa
returned to The Israelites and informed them that Allah had given him
Torah and had conversed with him a thought passed through his mind that
Allah has not created anyone wiser than him. Allah informed Archangel
Gabriel about Musa that such pride might soon destroy him therefore tell
him that where the two rivers meet there is a man sitting on a rock who
is wiser than him. That he should acquire some knowledge from him.
Archangel Gabriel descended and conveyed the divine message to Musa.
Musa felt ashamed and was frightened of his mistake and said to his
legatee Yusha‘, “Allah has ordered me to go to a man who lives at the
junction of the two rivers and to learn from him.” So Yusha‘ took a
whole salted fish with him (in his Tiffin) and both started on their
journey. When they reached the appointed spot, they saw that al-Khidhr
was fast asleep. Musa did not recognize him. Yusha‘ brought out the
fish, washed it in water and put it on a rock. The fish became alive and
slipped away into the water because that water (with which it was
washed) was the water of life (nectar). Then they carried on their
journey. When they grew tired they sat at a place and Musa asked Yusha‘
to take out the tiffin so that they could eat as they were tired of the
journey. Yusha‘ told him about the fish. On hearing this Musa said, “The
man we are looking for is the same one who was asleep at that rock.”

So they returned taking the same path. When they reached that point they
saw that al-Khidhr was praying. So they sat down waiting. When al-Khidhr
concluded his prayers they saluted him. It is mentioned in some
narrations that Almighty Allah revealed to Musa that the desired person
will be found where the fish disappears. Musa said to Yusha‘, “Inform me
when the fish disappears.” So when Musa and his companion reached the
confluence of two rivers (they forgot or left their fish). Musa did not
ask about the fish but Yusha‘ told him, “The fish turned towards the sea
and went into the water.” Some have said that Musa had fallen asleep and
the fish became alive and went into the river due to the miracle of
al-Khidhr. Some say that Yusha‘ performed ablution, its water touched
the fish and it became alive and jumped into the river.

But when they had gone further, he said to his servant, “Bring to us our
morning meal, certainly we have met with fatigue from this our journey.”
The servant said, “Did you see when we took refuge on the rock, the fish
took its way into the river. I forgot about the fish and nothing except
Satan has made me forget to tell you about it.” “What a wonder!” said
Musa. “This is what we sought for.” So they retraced their footsteps.
There they found “One from among Our servants whom We had granted mercy
from Ourselves and whom We had taught knowledge from Ourselves.” Musa
said to him, “Shall I follow you on condition that you teach me right
knowledge of what you have been taught?” He said, “Surely you will not
have patience with me. How can you have patience in that which you have
not got comprehensive knowledge?”

Musa replied, “If Allah pleases, you will find me patient and I shall
not disobey you in any matter.” He said, “If you follow me do not
question me about anything until I myself speak to you about it.” So
they went on (their way) until when they embarked from a boat he made a
hole in it. Musa said, “Have you made a hole in it to drown its inmates?
Certainly you have done a grievous thing.” He said, “Did I not say that
you would not be able to have patience with me?” He said, “Blame me not
for what I forgot and do not constrain me to a difficult thing in my
affair.” So they went on until when they met a boy, al-Khidhr slew him.
Musa said, “Have you slain an innocent person other than for
manslaughter? Certainly you have done an evil thing.”

He said, “Did I not say to you that you will not be able to have
patience with me?” He said, “If I ask you about anything after this
don’t keep me \\ in your company. Indeed you shall have (then) found an
excuse in my case.” So they went on until they came to a certain town
(they say it was the town of Antakiyah, Basra or Armenia). They asked
the people of that town for food but they refused to entertain them as
guests. Then they found there a wall that was on the point of falling so
al-Khidhr put it into a right state. (al-Khidhr began to repair it or he
propped up a pillar or he just stroked it with his hand and it was
repaired miraculously).

Musa said, “If you had pleased you might certainly have taken a
recompense for it.” He said, “This shall be the time of separation
between you and me. Now I will inform you of the significance of that
which you could not have patience. As for the boat, it belonged to
(some) poor men who worked on the river. I wished to damage it as there
was behind them a king who seized every boat by force. As for the boy,
his parents were believers and we feared lest his disobedience and
ingratitude comes upon them. So we desired that the Lord might give them
in his place one better than him in purity and nearer to having
compassion. As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city.
There was beneath it a treasure belonging to them. Their father was a
righteous man so the Lord desired that they should attain their maturity
and take out that treasure. A mercy from your Lord and I did not do it
of my own accord. This is the significance of that with which you could
not have patience.”[^17]

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from reliable reporters that Yunus and
Husham bin Ibrahim disputed in their opinion about the learned man to
whom Musa had gone. Did he know more than Musa? Is it permissible (and
believable) that someone can be a hujjah or Imam above Musa who himself
was the hujjah of Allah over the creation. Finally they wrote about this
dispute to Imam al-Ridha who replied: When Musa went in search of the
A’alim and found him on the island, he was sometimes sitting, sometimes
sleeping and sometimes reclining. When Musa said Salaam to him that man
felt it strange because he was in a land where ‘Salaam’ did not exist.
He asked, “Who are you?” Musa said that he was Musa. He asked, “Are you
the same Musa bin ‘Imran with whom Allah had conversed with?” “Yes,”
replied Musa. Then that person asked what he wanted. Musa said “I have
come so that you may teach me from god-given knowledge.” He replied,
“Allah has appointed me for jobs which are beyond your power nor do I
have the strength for the works entrusted to you.”

Then that A’alim described the calamities that would befall the family
of Muhammad. Both of them wept profusely. Thereafter he described the
greatness of the family of Muhammad to Musa that the latter repeatedly
expressed his desire to be from the household. Then he described the
appointment of the Prophet of Allah on their community and how they
would deny him and oppress him and gave the explanation of this ayah,
meaning: We will overturn the hearts and eyes of those who do not
believe on the first occasion. He said, What was meant by the first
occasion was the Day of Covenant when Almighty Allah had taken an oath
from all the souls before creating their bodies. Anyway, Musa requested
the A’alim to let him stay with him. He refused saying, “You have no
patience to observe my deeds.”

But when Musa insisted he took a promise from him that he would not
object to his work nor create any hindrance to anything he did until he
himself explained the cause. Musa agreed. So Musa, Yusha‘ and that
A’alim proceeded together and reached the bank of a river. There they
saw a ship full of men and goods, which was about to sail when the ship
owners said, “Let us take these three persons also with us as they look
like gentlemen.

So they also rode the ship. When it reached midstream al-Khidhr rose,
went to a corner of that ship, made a hole in it and filled it with old
cloth and mud. Seeing this Musa became angry and said, You made a hole
in this ship to drown the inmates; you have done a strange deed indeed.
al-Khidhr said, “Did I not tell you that you will not be able to bear
with me and that you do not have the patience to observe my jobs?” Musa
said, “Please pardon this breach of oath and do not put me in
difficulty.” Then when they alighted from the ship, al-Khidhr saw a boy
playing with other boys. He was handsome lad. There were two earrings of
pearls in his ears. al-Khidhr looked at him for a while then caught him
and killed him. Seeing this Musa rushed to al-Khidhr and flung him to
the ground saying, “How did you kill an innocent child though he had not
murdered anyone? You have done a very bad deed indeed.” al-Khidhr said,
“Did I not tell you that you would not be able to have patience with my
actions.”

Musa ashamedly asserted, “If I ask you henceforth about anything you may
separate me from you because then you shall have a cause.” Anyhow, they
went further and by the evening reached a village called Naasirah and
the people of that village were called Nasaaraa. These people had never
before entertained anyone as a guest nor had they ever fed the hungry.
The three asked for food but they neither came out of their homes nor
fed them. Then al-Khidhr saw a wall nearby, which had become
dilapidated. He approached it, put his hand on it and said, “Be repaired
by the command of Allah.” It was repaired instantly. Musa said, “It was
not proper on your part to repair the wall unless they had fed us and
allowed us to lodge in their houses.”

This is the meaning of Musa’s words, “You might certainly have taken a
recompense.” al-Khidhr said, “This is the time of parting. Now I will
inform you of the significance of that with which you could not have
patience. As for the boat, it belonged to some poor men who worked on
the river. I damaged it as there was behind them in another boat a king
who seized every (good) boat by force. I damaged it so that he may not
usurp it and it may remain with these poor people.” This verse is like
one in the Qur’an of the Ahl al-Bayt meaning. He said, It was descended
like this. It means regarding that boy, his parents were Mu’min
(faithful) and he was inclined towards unbelief. al-Khidhr said, “When I
saw him I saw the words meaning: It is in the knowledge of Allah that if
he remains alive he will be a disbeliever. I feared that his blasphemy
might engulf his parents therefore I wished that Allah may give them in
place of this boy a child who may be spiritually better and nearer to
his parents.” Allah gave them a daughter in place of that boy who later
gave birth to a Prophet. According to other narrations, seventy Prophets
of The Israelites were born in the progeny of that girl.

It is narrated from Imam ‘Ali, Zayn al-‘abidin, al-Baqir, as-Sadiq and
al-Ridha that in the treasure which was beneath that wall belonging to
the two boys, was a golden plate on which were written the words: I
wonder how the man who knows that death is a true fact remains happy and
I wonder how the person who has faith in act of God remains fearful. It
is mentioned in other narrations how he becomes gloomy due to
calamities. And I am surprised how he remembers Hell and still laughs;
and it is surprising that a man sees the world and also how it changes
from one state to another and yet he loves it. In another tradition, it
is mentioned: I wonder how a man believes in the accounting of the Day
of Judgment and yet commits sins. Does it befit a man who had been given
wisdom by Allah to understand that whatever is provided to him is from
Allah to which he should testify and he should not complain against the
delay in getting his provision.

It is recorded through reliable reporters from Imam al-Baqir that, “By
Allah! That treasure did not contain gold or silver. It was a plate with
the following inscription: I am the God besides whom there is no God and
Muhammad is My Messenger. I wonder how a man who has faith in the Day of
Judgment shows his teeth while laughing and it is astonishing how the
one who has faith in destiny becomes sorrowful when his provision or
sustenance is delayed and how is it that a man who sees this world
denies the Hereafter.”

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that the companion of Musa
on his journey to confluence of two rivers was Yusha‘ ibn Nun. It is
said that the reason why Musa objected to the deeds of al-Khidhr was
that the former hated oppression and the deeds that he observed were
apparently oppressive.

Authentic narrators mention that al-Khidhr was a Mursal Messenger. Allah
had appointed him over a community and he was calling them towards
Tawhid (Monotheism) and inviting them to Prophets and divine books. His
miracle was such that whenever he sat on earth that piece of earth
became green and grass grew on it. If he sat on a wooden plank or
inclined over a dry piece of wood that wood would also become green and
leaves would sprout from it as well as buds. That is why he was called
al-Khidhr (green). His name was Taaliyaa and he was the son of Malkaan
bin Ghaabar bin Arfahshad bin Sam ibn Nuh.

When Allah conversed with Musa and scribed every kind of command and
wisdom on the slabs for him (Musa) and gave him the miracles of the
gleaming hand, staff, locust, bugs, lice, flood of blood, splitting of
the sea and drowning the Pharaoh and his community (to help Musa), Musa
felt sort of proud (which is natural to man). He thought that Allah has
not created anybody more knowledgeable than him. So before pride might
destroy him Allah sent Archangel Gabriel to Musa with a revelation, “Go
to a worshipper who lives at the confluence of the two rivers and
acquire some knowledge from him.”

Archangel Gabriel conveyed Allah’s command to Musa. Musa understood that
this revelation was due to the thought he had entertained in his heart.
He went to that junction with his young companion Yusha‘ ibn Nun. He
found al-Khidhr praying to as Allah says, “Then they found one from
among our servants whom We had taught knowledge from Ourselves.” Musa
said to him, “I shall follow you on condition that you teach me
knowledge of what you have been taught?” He said, “Surely you cannot
have patience with me. How can you have patience in that which you have
no comprehensive knowledge?” He said, “If Allah pleases you will find me
patient and I shall not disobey you in any matter.” He said, “If you
would follow me, do not question me about anything until I myself speak
to you about it.” So they went (their way) until when they embarked from
a boat al-Khidhr made a hole in it. Musa said, “Have you made a hole in
it to drown its inmates? Certainly you have done a grievous thing.”

He said, “Did I not say that you will not be able to have patience with
me?” He said, “Blame me not for what I forgot and do not constrain me to
a difficult thing in my affair.” Imam says, Here ‘forgot’ means giving
up or leaving and not escaping the memory. That is ‘do not catch hold of
me for the first preferable thing which I gave up.’ So they went on
until they met a boy and al-Khidhr slew him. Musa became angry. He took
hold of al-Khidhr by the collar and said, “Have you slain an innocent
person other than for manslaughter? Certainly you have done an evil
thing.” al-Khidhr told him, “Minds cannot comprehend Allah’s affairs,
rather divine affairs must command minds. It is compulsory to obey the
Divine Wishes even if minds do not comprehend them.”

He said, “Did I not say to you that you will not be able to have
patience with me?” He said, “If I ask you about anything after this keep
me not in your company; indeed you shall have (then) found an excuse in
my case.” Then they went on until they reached the village of Nasirah
and asked for food from the residents of that village. They refused to
feed them nor lodge them. Near that village Musa and al-Khidhr saw a
crumbling wall. al-Khidhr went to that wall and repaired it with his
power. Musa took objection to this deed as is mentioned in the Qur’an.

Then al-Khidhr said, “This is the time of separation between you and me.
I will now enlighten you on the causes for which you did not have
patience. Listen! As for the boat, it belonged to some poor laborers who
toiled on the river. I wished to make a hole in it to make it defective
so that it may remain with them because a king was arriving (in his
ship) confiscating every working boat. So I did this deed for their
benefit.” al-Khidhr said, “I wished to damage it so that the deed (of
damaging the boat) may not be attributed to Allah. Allah wanted
improvement not harm. As regards the boy, his parents were faithful and
the boy was born a disbeliever. Allah knew that when he grew, his
parents too, due to their love for him would become unbelievers as he
would misguide them. So Allah ordered me to kill him as Allah desired
that they should reach the point of His forgiveness so that He may
improve their future (hereafter).”

Imam said, “At this point al-Khidhr said, ‘I feared that he will make
them disbelievers so I wished that Allah may bestow on them in place of
this boy, another one who may be better than this one.’ This was the
type of human talk that had influenced him because he had become the
teacher of a Prophet like Musa. Hence respect demanded that he should
attribute fear to himself instead of saying that “We (al-Khidhr and
Allah) feared” because fear cannot be felt by Allah. Rather he was
fearful that perhaps Allah might cancel the order of killing the boy or
some other hindrance may come up from the creation due to which he might
not be able to carry out Allah’s command about killing that boy. Thereby
he would be deprived of the reward of that deed and also not succeed in
obeying the Divine order.

Thus, it was desirable that he should attribute the opposite of it to
Allah without including himself in it as he had said “I wished” and
would have said “Allah wished” to give a child to them in lieu of him.
It was not that al-Khidhr was given the status of a teacher for Musa.
Musa (being a Prophet) was superior to al-Khidhr but Allah wished that
He should make it known to Musa that knowledge is not limited only to
what he knew and also that if he was not to continue getting knowledge
from the Lord he would remain ignorant and unaware.

Then al-Khidhr described the reason of repairing the wall. He said that
the treasure (belonging to the boy) was not of gold and silver; that it
was a golden plate and on it was written: It is astonishing that man,
who is sure of his death, remains happy and it is surprising that one
who believes in the Day of Judgment commits oppression and it is very
wonderful that a man sees the world changing from one state to another
and yet is inclined towards it and attached to it. Then he said that
there was a time gap of seventy years between those two boys and their
parents. Allah (due to their father being pious), preserved the honor of
the two boys.

Thus al-Khidhr said, ‘Your Lord desired that when the two boys reached
puberty they should obtain their treasure.’ Here he separated his desire
and mentioned Allah’s wish as this was the last story and that
thereafter it would be known to Musa that nothing else remained about
which he had to speak and that Musa might hear him carefully. al-Khidhr
wished that he should remove the effects of whatever he had said in the
first and the middle parts of the story that he attributed to himself
(because of human nature or in order to caution Musa. So now he
separated his slavery (of Allah) from his wishes and presented himself
like an honest slave of Allah and in doing so descended to the status of
an apology from the claim of his intention of which he was while
performing his affairs and said, ‘This was a mercy from your Lord that I
did not do anything of my own accord but only carried out my Lord’s
orders.’

Imam as-Sadiq said that when Musa wished to part from al-Khidhr he
requested al-Khidhr to give him some parting advice. So among his
admonishments were these words also: Never be obstinate, never walk or
travel without need, do not laugh without appropriate reason, remember
your errors and do not pay any attention to the sins of others.

It is mentioned in reliable tradition that Imam Zayn al-‘abidin said,
“al-Khidhr’s last will to Musa was: Do not reproach others for their
sins and that Allah likes three things most i.e.. To behave moderately
when rich, to forgive while having power to revenge, to treat Allah’s
slaves (people) kindly and mercifully and that if a person behaves
nicely with another person Allah surely becomes kinder to the former on
the Day of Judgment and that the secret of wisdom is the fear of Allah.”

It is reported in authentic traditions from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that
al-Khidhr said to Musa, “O Musa, your best day is yet to come i.e.. The
Day of the Resurrection Day. So think of how it will be for you and be
prepared for giving replies when you are made to stand for accounting.
Get admonition from the changes you observe in the condition of the
world and understand that the worldly life (age) is long for the one who
does good deeds and it is short for the one who wastes it.

So act in such a way as if you are seeing the reward of your deeds with
your own eyes It is narrated with evidences that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq
said, “When Musa was commanded by Allah to meet al-Khidhr, Allah sent
him a basket that contained a salted fish. Allah revealed to Musa that
the fish would show him al-Khidhr near a stream, whose water makes the
dead, alive. It was called the life-giving stream. Musa and Yusha‘
embarked on their journey and reached that stream and the rock. Yusha‘
went to the bank of the stream and washed the fish therein. The touch of
that water made it come alive and it began to move in his hands. It
struggled so much that it injured his hand and jumped off into the
water. He forgot to tell this event to Musa (or did not narrate it
deliberately) and they continued on their journey.

Since Musa had passed the venue which was fixed by Allah he became tired
soon after walking some distance (he did not feel tired until he had
reached the appointed place). He said to Yusha‘, “Bring our tiffin as we
have toiled and are tired much with this journey.” Yusha‘ narrated to
him the story of the fish. So Musa and Yusha‘ returned to that stream
and when they reached the rock they saw the passage of the fish was
still visible in the water.

Then they saw al-Khidhr on an island of that rivulet. He was sitting
there covered by a sheet of cloth. Musa greeted him with a ‘Salaam’.
al-Khidhr responded to the Salaam but wondered at it because he was
living in a land where salaam was not used. al-Khidhr asked him who he
was and Musa replied, “I am Musa.” He inquired, “Are you the same Musa
(son of ‘Imran) with whom Allah had conversed with?” He replied in the
affirmative. al-Khidhr asked him why he had come. Musa replied, “That I
may acquire some knowledge from you.” al-Khidhr told Musa, “I am
entrusted with jobs that you cannot bear.” Then al-Khidhr narrated to
Musa the events and the calamities to befall Muhammad and his progeny.
Both of them wept much. al-Khidhr described the nobilities and grace of
Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn and of the Imams from their
progeny to such an extent that Musa repeatedly said how nice it would
have been had he too been born in the Ummah of Muhammad.”

Then Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq described the story of the boat and the boy
and the wall and said that had Musa been patient, al-Khidhr would have
shown him seventy astonishing events. It is mentioned in another hadith
that: May Allah have mercy on Musa, he made haste before al-Khidhr. Had
he shown more patience he would have seen many more such events, the
like of which he had never witnessed.

so that it may increase your longing for the reward in the Hereafter.
Verily the one who goes there from this world is like the one who passes
away. From that which has passed away nothing remains except your good
deeds and this will continue henceforth too.”

According to another reliable tradition, he said, “When al-Khidhr
repaired the wall of the orphans for the well-being of their parents,
the Almighty revealed to Musa, “I give reward to children for the
efforts made by their forefathers i.e.. good for good and bad for bad.
Do not indulge in adultery with the wives of others so that others may
not indulge in adultery with your wives. If anybody steps in the bed of
the wife of a Muslim, the latter too steps in the bed of his wife with a
bad motive. Thus you will certainly get the recompense of your deeds.”

It is mentioned in other authentic narrations that he said, “I swear by
the Lord of Ka‘bah! Had I been between Musa and al-Khidhr I would have
told them that I knew more than both of them and surely I would have
enlightened them on matters which were not in their knowledge because
Allah had adorned Musa and al-Khidhr with knowledge of the matters of
the past whereas we have knowledge of future events until the
Resurrection Day which has reached us as heritage of the Prophets.”

It is recorded through Imam al-Baqir that when Musa questioned al-Khidhr
he replied, Musa saw abaabeel (a martin bird of the swallow family)
flying in the middle of the stream. al-Khidhr asked Musa, “Do you know
what this bird is saying.” Musa replied in the negative and asked, “What
does it say?” al-Khidhr said, “It says ‘By the Lord of the heaven and
the earth and the sea, your knowledge compared to the knowledge of Allah
is only equal to the quantity of water which I can take in my beak from
the sea or even less than that.’”

It is mentioned in yet another narration that when Musa came back to his
people after meeting al-Khidhr, Harun asked him about the knowledge Musa
had obtained from al-Khidhr and about the wonders he had observed in the
river. Musa said, “al-Khidhr and I were standing on the banks of the
river when suddenly we saw a bird come to the river from the air, take a
drop of water in its beak and throw it in the east, then it threw
another drop towards the west, then one drop towards the sky and one to
the earth. Then it took a drop from the sea and threw it back in the
river. I asked al-Khidhr the cause of these actions of the bird, but
al-Khidhr did not know. Suddenly I saw a hunter fishing on the banks of
the river. He looked towards me with surprise and asked, ‘What makes you
wonder?’ I said, ‘This bird’s gesture makes us wonder.’

He said, ‘I am only a hunter and I know the cause of these actions of
the bird. How is it that despite being Messengers of Allah you two do
not comprehend it.’ We said, ‘We know only that which Allah has taught
us.’ The hunter said, ‘This is a bird which is known in the river by the
name of ‘Muslim’ because it utters ‘Muslim” whenever it twitters. What
it points out by its gestures is that Allah will send a Messenger after
you whose followers will rule over the east and the west throughout the
world, will go up in the sky and will be buried in the ground and that
in the sight of that Prophet the knowledge of other scholars will be
just like a drop of water of this river (in proportion) and his
knowledge will reach his cousin and his legatee as heritage.’ O Harun!
At that time, our knowledge felt little in our own eyes and then the
hunter disappeared. So we understood that he was an angel sent by Allah
to discipline us.”

In a reliable hadith it is recorded that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said,
“Musa knew more than al-Khidhr and it is mentioned in another authentic
hadith that al-Khidhr and Dhu’l-Qarnayn were scholars but not
Prophets.”[^18]

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that one day Musa went up
the pulpit (which had three legs). At that time, a thought crossed his
mind that Allah had not created anyone wiser than him. So the Archangel
Gabriel approached him and said, “This pride has destroyed you and has
put you in the divine field of trial. So get down from the pulpit
because there is a man on this earth who knows more than you. Go and
search for him.” Musa informed Yusha‘, “Allah has put me on trial, so
prepare a tiffin for me and let us both go in search of that scholar as
commanded by Allah.” Yusha‘ purchased a fish, fried it and put it in
their basket and began their journey towards Azerbaijan. They reached
the banks of a river in that direction. Suddenly they saw a man lying on
his back. He had covered his face with a sheet and had put his staff by
his side. When he pulled the sheet towards his face, his legs became
bare and when he covered his feet, his face was exposed. Musa engaged
himself in prayers (prayer) and asked Yusha‘ to take care of their
tiffin. Suddenly a drop of water from the sky fell on their basket. The
fish began to move and dragged itself to the river. Then came a bird who
sat on the bank of the river, took a drop of water in its beak and said,
“O Musa! You have not obtained from Allah knowledge equal even to this
little drop of water that I have taken from this vast river.” Musa arose
and started on his journey along with Yusha‘.

After walking for a while, he became tired though he had traveled longer
distances before that without getting tired. That was because a
Messenger never gets tired in reaching the venue destined for him.
Anyway when Musa heard the story of the fish (i.e.. its disappearance)
he understood that they had passed the meeting place fixed by Allah. So
they traveled back to that place and saw that man sleeping as before.
Musa said to him, “Peace be upon you, O scholar!” al-Khidhr replied,
“And upon you be peace, O scholar of The Israelites!” He jumped up took
up his staff as if to go away at once. Musa told him, “Allah has asked
me to remain with you so that you may teach me from your knowledge.”

After the conditions and promises as mentioned earlier Musa and
al-Khidhr proceeded until they reached a boat. The boatmen considering
them gentlemen seated them in their boat gratis. When they reached the
middle of the river al-Khidhr made a hole in the boat there was a
dialogue between Musa and al-Khidhr that has been quoted above. Then
they came out of the boat and saw a boy on the bank of the river playing
with other children. He was wearing a dress of green silk and earrings
of pearls. al-Khidhr pressed that boy under his feet and beheaded him.
Then they reached the village of Nasirah on the banks of the river. The
residents of that place did not make them their guests though the two
were hungry. When al-Khidhr repaired a wall in that village despite
being hungry Musa exclaimed, “Had you obtained some remuneration for
this job we would have least purchased bread.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said, “One
day Musa was sitting with the nobles of The Israelites. Suddenly a man
came and said to Musa, “I don’t think there is anybody who knows more
about Allah than you.” Musa said, “I think so too.” Allah sent to him a
revelation, “al-Khidhr is more knowledgeable than you Go and search him
out. You will find him where your fish will disappear.”

In a reliable tradition Imam as-Sadiq said, “When Musa and al-Khidhr
reached the boy playing with other children, al-Khidhr hit him with his
hand and he died. When Musa objected to it, al-Khidhr put his hand on
the body of that boy and separated his shoulder and showed it to Musa.
On it was written: He is a disbeliever and his naturally disposed to
disbelief. al-Khidhr said, ‘I killed him because his parents were
virtuous. I was afraid he would draw his parents towards disbelief after
growing up and that they will fulfill his wish because of their love for
him and in this way become infidels.’” Imam said, “The Almighty gave the
parents a daughter in lieu of the boy. Seventy Prophets were born in the
progeny of that girl. There was a time gap of 700 years between the two
orphan boys (for whom al-Khidhr repaired the wall) and their father.”
(perhaps several generations had passed-Tr.).

It is mentioned in another hadith that Almighty Allah, as a reward of
one good deed done by a virtuous man, grants salvation to his sons and
grandsons and his family members and also to his neighbors. Thus, all of
them get protection due to the greatness of that faithful person. Then
he said, ‘Did you not observe that as a reward for virtuous parents
Allah sent al-Khidhr so that he may repair the wall for their
benefit.[^19]

Ibn Babawayh has said that his name was Khizruya and that he was the son
of Qabil bin Adam. Some have said that his name was Khizroon and some
have called him Khaleeaa. He is called al-Khidhr because wherever he sat
the ground became green and grassy. His age is more than all the
children of Adam. The correct information is that his name is Taaliyaa
son of Malkaan son of Aabir son of Fahshad son of Sam son of Nuh.[^20]

It is reliably narrated that Imam as-Sadiq said, “When the Prophet of
Allah went for Me’raj he felt a fragrance of musk in his path. He asked
Archangel Gabriel about it who replied that the fragrance was coming
from a house in which people were tortured and killed for worshipping
the One, Allah. Archangel Gabriel informed him that al-Khidhr belonged
to the progeny of kings. He believed in Allah and lived alone in one of
the rooms of his father’s house and was busy in worship. He was the only
issue of his father. People advised the king that as al-Khidhr was his
only son he should get him married so that maybe Allah will give him a
son and then the kingship might continue in their progeny.

Finally the king married al-Khidhr with a virgin girl. But on the
wedding night al-Khidhr did not pay any attention to her. Next day he
said to his wife to keep the night affair a secret and that if you are
asked whether al-Khidhr approached you at night then say ‘yes’. She did
what al-Khidhr asked of her and said ‘yes’. However, the people did not
believe her and told the king that this woman tells a lie so have her
examined to see if she is still a virgin. When the women saw that she
was intact, they taunted the king saying: You have joined two fools.
Neither of them is aware of what is expected of married couples. So give
him as a wife who has already been married so that she may teach him.
When such a woman was brought to al-Khidhr he paid no attention to her
and requested her also to keep the matter hidden from his father. She
agreed to do so but when the king questioned the woman, she replied
that: Your son is a woman. Have you ever heard of a woman getting
pregnant by another woman? Hearing this, the king became very angry with
al-Khidhr. He imprisoned him and sealed its door with earth and stone.
But the next day his paternal love overcame him and he ordered the doors
to be opened. When the people opened the door they did not find
al-Khidhr there. Allah gave him such a power whereby he was able to take
any form of his choice and also remain hidden from the public eye. Then
he joined the army of Dhu’l-Qarnayn and became its vanguard until he
drank the water of life. The one who drinks that water (nectar) remains
alive until the day the bugle of destruction will be blown by Divine
Order.

In the meantime, from his father’s city two men boarded a ship and set
out for trade. On their way, the ship got wrecked and they landed on an
island. There they saw al-Khidhr, busy in prayers. When he concluded his
prayer, he called the two men and inquired about their condition.. When
they described their accounts, he told them, “If I send you back to your
place will you keep my story a secret?” They agreed. But only one of the
two had really intended to keep the matter a secret while the other one
had already thought of informing the father of al-Khidhr of his
whereabouts.

al-Khidhr called a cloud and commanded it to carry the two men right up
to their homes. The cloud took them up and carried them to their city
that very day. One of the traders kept his promise but the other
revealed it to the father of al-Khidhr. The king asked him, “Who will
give witness that whatever you say is true.” He replied, “The trader was
with me.” The king called for that man and asked him but he denied it
saying that he did not know anything about it and that he did not even
know this fellow.” The former then said, “O King! Send an army with me
so that I may go and bring al-Khidhr back here from that island. Also
arrest this fellow so that I may prove him a liar.” The King sent an
army with that man but released the trader who had kept the story
hidden. Then the residents of that city indulged in many sins so Allah
destroyed them and overturned that city.

All of them were annihilated except the man and woman (the woman was the
first wife of al-Khidhr towards whom al-Khidhr had not inclined on the
marriage night and whom he had asked the next morning to keep the night
affair a secret) who had kept the story of al-Khidhr hidden from his
father. Both of them got out of the devastated city separately but in
one direction. Then when they met one another they told their stories to
one another and were convinced that they got salvation only because they
had kept the secret of al-Khidhr. Then both of them put faith in the
Allah of al-Khidhr. They got married and went to live in another king’s
kingdom. The woman gained access to the royal palace and got a job of
dressing and beautifying the royal princesses. Once while combing the
hair of the princess the comb fell down from her hand and she
exclaimed;  
 “There is no power, except of Allah.”  
 The princess asked her what she had uttered.  
 “I have One Allah who has the might of ruling everywhere,”  
 “Have you any other Allah besides my father?”  
 “Yes, He is the God of you and your father too.”  
 The princess went to her father and related the conversation. The king
called the lady and ordered to take back her words but she refused. The
king asked who her companion coreligionist was. She said, “My husband
and my children.” The king called all of them and put severe pressure on
them to give up the worship of only One Allah. But they defied him
firmly. The angry king boiled water in a big vessel and threw all of
them in it and then broke the house on them. After describing this story
Archangel Gabriel said, “O Prophet of Allah, this fragrance which you
are smelling now is emanating from the house in which those worshippers
of only One Allah were killed.”  
 An authentic tradition from Imam al-Ridha says that al-Khidhr drank
elixir of life and will remain alive until the time of the blowing of
Bugle and that those who are dying are coming to us and they salute (say
salaam) us; then we hear the voice of al-Khidhr but do not see him. He
reaches wherever his name is mentioned. So it is necessary that anyone
who remembers him should also say Salaam to him. He comes to Makkah in
every hajj, performs hajj and stands in ‘Arafat and says ‘Amen’ to the
prayers of the faithful; that very soon Almighty Allah will make
al-Khidhr confidante of al-Qa’im (aj) the family of Muhammad; that when
he (al-Qa’im) will be hidden from the public eye he (al-Khidhr) will be
his companion in solitude.

It is narrated with reliable evidence from Imam al-Baqir that when
Dhu’l-Qarnayn heard that there was a stream of water of life and that
whoever drinks from it remains alive until the day of blowing of the
bugle, he went in search of it. al-Khidhr was the commander-in-chief of
his army. Dhu’l-Qarnayn loved him most. Finally, they reached a place
where there were 360 streams. Dhu’l-Qarnayn called 360 persons from his
army. al-Khidhr was one of them. All of them were given a salted fish
and told, “Bring them separately to me after washing it in different
streams.” When al-Khidhr put his fish in the water it became alive and
slipped from his hands.

al-Khidhr took off his clothes and jumped into the water and dived
several times in search of that fish and in the process drank that water
but that fish could not be found. He came out and went to Dhu’l-Qarnayn.
When Dhu’l-Qarnayn counted the fish, he found that one was missing.
After inquiry, it came to be known that al-Khidhr had not brought back
his fish. When asked al-Khidhr told his story. Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked,
“Then what did you do.” He said, “I jumped into that stream to find the
fish and also dived many times but could not catch it so I came out.”
Dhu’l-Qarnayn asked, “Did you also drink the water of the stream?”
“Yes,” he replied. Then Dhu’l-Qarnayn made many efforts to find out that
stream but failed. Finally he said to al-Khidhr you were created for
that stream and that stream for you.

It is mentioned in many reliable traditions through the holy Imams that
when the Prophet passed away from this world and calamities came down on
the holy Ahl al-Bayt at that time Amir al-Mu’minin, Fatimah, Hasan and
Husayn were present in the room in which the holy body of the holy
Prophet was laid. Suddenly there came a voice, “Assalaamu alaikum O Ahl
al-Bayt! Every living being will taste the taste of death. Your reward
will be given fully to you in the Resurrection Day. If anyone dies,
verily, Allah is his substitute and successor Who provides patience in
every calamity and He is the remover of its harm. He compensates every
loss. So rely only on Him because the (real) loser is he who loses the
reward of Allah.” Amir al-Mu’minin said, “He (the invisible speaker) is
my brother al-Khidhr. He has come to condole you on the death of your
Prophet.”

It is mentioned in reliable traditions that Masjid e Sahla is the place
where al-Khidhr descends and it is stated at many places in the books of
Mazarr etc. That a group of pious people met al-Khidhr in Masjid Sahla
and so also Sahsaah etc. in blessed places. Its description will be too
lengthy for this book.

Ibn Tawus has related that al-Khidhr and Ilyas meet one another in every
Hajj season and that they recite this prayer while departing from one
another:  
*Maasha allaho wa laa h’awla wa laa quwwata illa billaah.* *Maasha
allaho kulle ne’matin. Maasha allahul khaire kullehi be yadillaha a’zza
wa jalla.* *Maasha allaho laa yasrifus-soo-o illallaah.*

Many events of al-Khidhr have been mentioned in the chapter concerning
Dhu’l-Qarnayn.  
 Wisdom and teachings revealed by the Almighty to MusaWisdom and
teachings revealed by the Almighty to MusaWisdom and teachings revealed
by the Almighty to MusaWisdom and teachings revealed by the Almighty to
MusaWisdom and teachings revealed by the Almighty to MusaWisdom and
teachings revealed by the Almighty to MusaWisdom and teachings revealed
by the Almighty to MusaWisdom and teachings revealed by the Almighty to
MusaWisdom and teachings revealed by the Almighty to Musa  
 It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi that when
Musa prayed to Allah, “My Lord! What is the reward of one who testifies
that I am Your messenger and that you have conversed with me?” The
Almighty replied, “O Musa! My angels approach him at the time of his
death and give him good tidings of Paradise.” Musa inquired, “What is
the reward of one who stands before You and prays?” He replied, “I feel
proud of him along with my angels when that person is in the state of
Ruku (bowing) or Sajdah (prostration) or he is standing or is sitting. I
take pride in him and also my angels and I do not chastise him.” Musa
asked, “What is the reward of one who feeds the poor only to please
you?” Allah replied, “O Musa! I will order the announcer to proclaim
loudly (so that the entire creation may hear) on the Day of Judgment
that so and so man, the son of so and so has been freed from the fire of
Hell.” Musa inquired, “My Lord! What is the reward of one who behaves
nicely with his relatives?” Allah replied, “O Musa! I prolong his life
and make the hour of his death easy for him and on the Day of the
Resurrection Day the gatekeepers of Paradise will say to him, “Come
towards us and enter from whichever gate you please.”

Musa asked, “My Lord! What is the reward of one who never hurts anyone
but does good to all?” He replied, “On the Day of the Resurrection Day,
Hell will say to him: Your path is not towards me.” Musa inquired, “What
is the reward of one who remembers you both by his heart and his
tongue?” Allah replied, “On the Resurrection Day I will keep him under
the shade of My throne (the Holy Throne) and will protect him.” Musa
asked, “My Lord! What is the reward of one who recites your book both
openly and secretly?” He said, “O Musa! He will cross the most difficult
bridge with lightning speed.” Musa asked, “My Lord! What is the reward
of one who keeps patience just for Your pleasure when people hurt and
abuse him?” Almighty Allah replied, “I will protect him from the terror
of the Day of Judgment.” Musa inquired, “My Lord! What is the reward of
one who weeps due to Your fear?” Allah Almighty replied, “O Musa! I will
protect his face from the heat of hell fire and will also save him from
the terror of the Day of Judgment.”

Musa asked, “My Lord! What is the reward of one who gives up a dishonest
deal being ashamed of you?” Allah replied, “O Musa! I will give him
security on the Day of the Resurrection Day.” Musa asked, “My Lord! What
is the requital of one who kills a Mu’min intentionally?” Allah replied,
“I will not be kind to him on the Day of the Resurrection Day and will
not forgive any of his sins.”

Musa asked, “What is the reward of one who invites a disbeliever to
Islam?” He responded, “I will permit him on the Day of Judgment to
recommend the case of anyone of his choice.” Musa inquired, “My Lord!
What is the reward of one who performs prayers in time?” He replied, “He
will be granted whatever he asks and I will make My Paradise available
to him.” Musa asked, “My Lord! What is the reward of one who performs
ablution completely for fear of your chastisement?” Allah replied, “On
the Resurrection Day I will raise him. There will be radiance between
his eyes (on the forehead) that will light up the plains of gathering.”

Musa asked, “What will be the reward of one who fasts during the month
of Ramadhan for your pleasure?” He replied, “I will station him on the
Day of Judgment at such a place where he will feel no fear.” Musa asked,
“What will be the recompense of the one who fasts during Ramadhan for
showing it to others?” He responded, “His reward will be like that of
the one who did not fast at all.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam al-Baqir that it is
written in Torah: O Musa! I have created you for My Messengership and
have strengthened you for My worship. I enjoined upon you My worship and
prohibited you from sins (disobedience). If you obey me, I will assist
you in my obedience but if you disobey me, I will not help you. O Musa!
In obedience you will have My favor and in disobedience My Proof. O
Musa! Fear Me regarding your hidden defects so that I may hide your
shortcomings from public eyes and remember Me in solitude and in your
desires and tastes so that I may remember you during your errors and may
save you from slipping. Restrain your anger from those on whom I have
given you control so that I may restrain My anger from you. Keep My
secrets concealed in your heart and compromise with My enemies
outwardly. Do not expose My disposition and secret to your enemy
otherwise they will use unfair words for Me and you will be a partner in
this evil of theirs.

Then Musa said, “Who will reside in the Holy Precinct?” He said, “Those
men whose eyes did not look at stranger women, whose wealth did not get
mixed up with usury and interest and who never took corrupt money while
dealing with Divine commandments.”

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam as-Sadiq that Almighty
Allah said to Musa, “O Son of ‘Imran! Who claims to be my friend and yet
remains asleep at nights is telling a lie. Is it not a fact that every
friend wants to meet his friend in solitude? O son of ‘Imran! I am well
aware of My friends when night encircles them. I turn their eyes away
from others and attract them towards Me and I make my chastisement
apparent before them. They address me like those who talk face to face.
O Son of ‘Imran! Give the leniency of your heart and meekness of your
body and the tears of your eyes to Me in the darkness of night and pray
to Me and you will find that I answer you.”  
 It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq that when Musa went to the mountain
of Toor and spoke with his Lord, he said, “O My Nourisher! Show me Your
treasures. The Lord replied, “O Musa! My treasures are that whenever I
intend something I merely say ‘Be’ and it becomes. I need no treasures.
Whatever I wish, I bring into existence from non-existence.”

In a reliable hadith it is recorded that Imam al-Baqir said, “When Musa
prayed, “My Lord! Give me admonition.” The Almighty said, “I admonish
you that you should (for your benefit) recognize My right and not
disobey Me.” Musa made this request thrice and got the same response
thrice. When Musa repeated it for the fourth time the Lord said, “I
admonish you to take care of your mother’s right.” He got the same reply
to his next request. When he repeated it the sixth time, the divine
reply was, “I admonish you to recognize your father’s right.” Imam then
said, “That is why it is said that two-third of beneficence is for
mothers and one-third for fathers.”

It is recorded in reliable sources that one of the sayings of Almighty
Allah to Musa is, “O Musa! Do not have high ambitions in the world
otherwise your heart will become hard and a hard heart remains away from
Me. O Musa! Be, as I want. I want that my servants should obey Me and
that they must not disobey Me. Make your heart dead (empty) of worldly
desires due to My fear. Be pleased with old clothes so that you may
remain unknown in the world and well known with beneficence among the
residents of heaven. Lighten the dark nights with the radiance of
worship and recite prayer chanting like that of the patients with
meekness before Me. Submit penitence for your sins and all your
complaints before Me like a man who has after fleeing from his enemy
takes shelter from the Omnipotent and Almighty Allah.

Also, seek My help in worship as I am the best helper. O Musa! I am the
Lord who has full control over His slaves. All of my servants are within
My might and all are subservient to me. So keep your heart indicted and
do not be cheated by it. Let your children become fearless in the matter
of religion when your son like you loves the righteous.

O Musa! Wash your clothes and bathe yourself and be in the company of My
decent slaves. O Musa! Lead them in their prayers and adjudicate
whenever they have any dispute and pass orders in the light of apparent
evidence, clear argument and with the light of wisdom that I have
bestowed on you. That light shows what has passed and what is to happen
in the last age. O Musa! I give you an advice, which is like the advice
of a kind friend about a great and noble son that is ‘Isa son of Maryam
who will ride a donkey, wear a cap like slaves and possess olive oil,
olive and altar. Thereafter I admonish you about the possessor of a red
camel. He will have a holy, pious and virtuous nature and will be free
of all evils. His virtues mentioned in your Book are that he will
believe in all divine books and that he is the one who will give witness
and will be bowing and prostrating (before Only One Allah). He will be
inclining towards the divine reward and fearing divine chastisement. The
poor and needy will be his brothers (in faith). People belonging to
other (than his) tribes will be his helpers and companions. His time
will face scarcities, hardships, troubles, corruption and dearth of
money. His name is Ahmad, Muhammad and Ameen and he will be the epitome
of all the past Prophets. He will believe in all the divine scriptures
and will testify to all the Messengers of Allah. He will give witness
with sincerity to all those messengers and his Ummah is the Ummah on
which Allah has showered His mercy and bliss so that it may remain
steadfast on the true religion and may not destroy his religion. They
(followers of the last Prophet) know some such timings (hours) in which
they will perform their prayers (prayers) like a slave who spends most
of his time in serving his master. So testify to that Prophet and follow
his ways because he is your brother. O Musa! He is Ummi. That is, he
will not learn from anybody. He is a My virtuous slave. I will give
affluence in whatever he does and I will also increase his knowledge as
I myself have created him with bliss.

The Resurrection Day will take place in his time (of Prophethood). I
will conclude the world with his followers. So command the oppressors of
The Israelites that they should not erase his name from My Books, though
I know that they will remove it. His love (love for Me) is a very big
virtue (good) in My sight. I am with him and I am among his helpers. He
belongs to My army and My army is above all armies. In short, My word
and My plan have been perfected that surely I will make his religion win
over all other religions so that people may be able to worship Me with
integrity. I will descend on him such a Qur’an which will be a
compendium of all sciences and which will separate wrong and untruth
from truth and which will cure hearts from the mischief of the devil.
So, O son of ‘Imran! Send Salawaat on him because I and My angels send
Salawaat on him.

O Musa! You are My slave. I am your Lord. Do not consider any poor and
troubled person lowly. Do not long for some of those things, which I
have given to them from the worldly wealth. Adopt humility while
remembering Me. Be hopeful of My mercy while reciting Torah and read out
the Torah to me in a voice full of fear and worry. Keep your heart
peaceful with My remembrance. I also remember the one whose heart
inclines towards Me. Worship Me alone. Do not attribute any partner to
Me and continue your efforts for pleasing Me. Verily I am your great
Lord. I have created you from insignificant dirty water (semen) and
built your foundation from the dust that was taken from various parts of
the lowly earth. Then I blew spirit in it and made it a man. Thus I am
the creator of the creation and Myself is affluent and My heart is holy
and nothing is similar to Me and I am existent forever because
non-existence has nothing to do with Me.

O Musa! Be fearful and frightened whenever you pray to Me and put your
face on earth before Me and prostrate before Me with the best of your
limbs. Adopt humility and meekness when you stand before Me and tell Me
your secrets with a fearful heart whenever you submit your supplication
to me and keep yourself alive by living with Torah. Teach My praise to
the ignorant and remind them of My favors and tell them not to remain in
so much disobedience and waywardness because when I will arrest, My
arrest will be the severest of all and My chastisement is very painful.

O Musa! If your relation with Me will break off no other relation will
be of any avail to you. So worship Me and stand like a lowly servant
before Me and condemn your soul because it deserves more condemnation
and do not become proud in front of The Israelites because of the Book
which I have given you as the same Book is sufficient to admonish you
and to enlighten your heart as it is the Word of the Lord of the Worlds.

O Musa! When you pray before Me be hopeful of My mercy. I will pardon
you even if you have sinned. The heaven is hallowing me for my fear and
the angels continue to tremble because of My terror. The earth goes on
praising Me looking to My mercy. The entire creation glorifies Me and is
meek before Me. The prayer must seem pleasant to you because it is great
in My sight and it has a big covenant with Me because it presents before
Me everyone as he should be presented and I forgive. Keep a deed always
connected with prayers, which is one of the conditions for its
acceptance and its sacrifice, and offer in My path the best of wealth
and food because I do not accept anything unless it is legal and clean
and is offered with the intention only of pleasing Me. In addition to
giving them Zakat also, behave nicely to your relatives because I am
Allah, the Beneficent and the Merciful and I have created relationships
and have measured it with My mercy so that My slaves may behave
mercifully with one another due to that. I will give a kingdom in the
Hereafter to the one who maintains kind relations and I disconnect My
mercy with the one who will cut off kindness I will deal kindly with the
one who will have dealt kindly with others and who will have done good
to his relatives and similarly I will do accordingly with the one who
will have disobeyed my command.

O Musa! Give respect to the one who asks from you something and give him
something when he approaches you, or give him a soft reply because no
one comes to you from men or jinn but are angels who test you as desired
by the Beneficent Lord. They ascertain as to how you spend from what I
have given to you and how you thank Me and how you maintain equity
between the faithful. Remain meek before Me with humility and weeping
and raise your voice while reciting Torah and while weeping and know
that I call you in My presence as a master calls his slave so that he
may give him the top position and a high status near him. This is My
bounty on you and on your forefathers who have passed away.

O Musa! Do not forget Me under any circumstances and do not feel happy
over affluence of wealth as the heart becomes hard with the affluence in
wealth and sins also increase with an increase in wealth. The land, sea
and the heavens all are subservient to Me but disobedience has hardened
the hearts of men and jinn. I am the Merciful and the Beneficent Lord. I
am kind to all in every age. I cause ease after hardship and give bounty
after scarcity. I bring kings after kings and My kingdom is intact and
continuous which never end. Nothing in the earth and heavens is hidden
from Me and how can it be hidden when it is I who created them. How can
your heart not incline towards my pleasure and reward while your return
is only to Me. O Musa! Make Me your shelter and reliance and deposit
your treasure of good deeds with Me. Fear Me and do not be afraid of
anyone else because your return is only to Me.

O Musa! Be kind to the one who among My creation is lower than you and
do not envy those who are higher than you because jealousy consumes good
deeds as fire consumes wood. O Musa! Two sons of Adam showed meekness
before me and submitted their sacrifice that they may earn My grace and
I accept the sacrifice offered by pious people. Hence, the offer of one
is accepted and the other rejected. Thereafter to what extent their
affair reached is known to you. Then how do you rely on and trust your
viziers and companions when a brother did what he did with his own
brother. O Musa! Give up pride and ego and remember that you will have
to be a resident of the grave. This thought will restrain you from
worldly desires.

O Musa make haste in repenting and postpone sinning. Prolong standing
before Me during your prayer and attach no hope with anyone except Me.
Make Me your shelter in warding off hardships and consider Me your forte
for defending yourself against calamities. O Musa! How does a slave fear
Me who considers My grace and bounties on him whereas he does not ponder
over it and does not believe. How does he believe and hope for reward
when he is satisfied with the worldly belongings and has made it his
shelter and turns toward the world like oppressors. O Musa! Contest with
the virtuous in virtues because virtue is as sweet as its name and leave
the evil for the one who is mad after the world.

O Musa! Keep your tongue behind your heart so that you may be protected
from the evil of the tongues, that is think before speaking anything and
speak only after you understand that there is nothing wrong or bad in
it. Remember Me more and more during the day and the night as long as
you have the chance to do so and do not follow sins so that you may not
have to repent. Surely, the reward of sins is hellfire. O Musa! Talk
softly for those who have given up sinning and sit with them and take
them as your brothers and try to worship Me with them so that they may
also try (to do so) with you. O Musa! Certainly, you will face death, so
advance a better provision for the Hereafter like the one who knows that
he will get his provision.

O Musa! Whatever is done for My pleasure, its small is big, and whatever
is done for other than Me its big is small. Verily your best day is
which is to come that is the Day of the Resurrection Day so think how
that day will be for you and be prepared for the answers you will have
to give on that day because undoubtedly you will be made to stand to
account for your deeds. Take admonition from the people of your times.
Its secret is minute for the careless and wide open for the obedient.
Everything will end, so perform your deeds as if you are seeing their
reward so that you may remain inclined more towards the Hereafter
because a worldly thing, which is existing, is just like the thing,
which has passed away. From the things that have passed away like this,
nothing has remained with you except your worship. It will be so in
future also and everyone who does anything does it in his interest. So
select as your aim everything that is better so that you may get Allah’s
reward on the day when the wrongdoers (deniers) will be the losers.

O Musa! Do not feel degraded when standing before Me the degradation
that a slave feels when he approaches his master for making some
complaint. When you do so, you will find My mercy with you and I am the
mightiest of the mighty. O Musa! Seek My grace and My mercy from only Me
because both are in my control and none else has any power over grace
and mercy. And whenever you seek anything from Me just think how much
longing do you have for what is with me. There is a reward with Me for
every performer of a deed and I give the reward of a good deed even to
the deniers.

O Musa! Give up the world with a happy heart and keep away from it
because you are not for the world nor are the world for you. What have
you to do with the residence of oppressors. It is for the one who
engages in deeds for the Hereafter while remaining here (in the world).
The world is a better place for him. O Musa! Listen to what I command to
you and keep in your heart whatever I see in your interest and also the
truths of Torah, and remain awake with it during day and night without
falling in the sleep of negligence. Do not give any room in your heart
to the talks of the world-lovers or to their love because it builds its
nest therein like the nest of a bird.

O Musa! The sons of the world and the residents of the world are the
cause of trials for one another. The world is beautified for those who
are in it and for the faithful is the beauty of the Hereafter. So he is
always after the Hereafter and never looks at any other thing. The
longing for the Hereafter has become a barrier between him and the
tastes of this world. So he traverses forests for advancing his status
in worship and nearness to his Lord, like a rider who races in a field
to overtake others and may win the race and may reach his aim at the
earliest but who remains gloomy during his daytime due to his worry for
the Hereafter and who passes his nights in grief. What to say about his
luck? How much he will he be able to see, if the cover is removed from
his eyes, the things that will make him happy?

O Musa! The world is short and will not last nor is it vast enough to
accommodate the reward of the faithful nor can it provide sufficient
chastisement to the sinners. So the eternal loss and hurt is for the one
who sells out his reward of the Hereafter in exchange of the worldly
pleasures which won’t last and who sells it in exchange of the tastes of
his tongue which goes away soon. So live as I command and whatever I
order you will be for your growth and well being. O Musa! When you see
that richness turns towards you imagine that you have erred and
therefore you are getting its punishment in the world And when you see
that distress advances towards you bravo, bravo for the righteous! Do
not live like oppressors and tyrants nor approach them or sit with them.
O Musa! Life is fleeting however long it may be. A thing that is taken
away from you in the world causes you no loss when its end in the
hereafter is everlasting bounty.

O Musa! My book calls out to you loudly and warns you of your return. So
can the eyes become sleepy in such circumstances. And how can any group
enjoy the worldly life. Had it not been so that they have lived in
carelessness since long and have been captive of their hardheartedness
and habituated to various kinds of desires and pleasures, the Truthful
might have cried out in response to a few admonishments described by Me
in My Book. O Musa! Ask My servants to confess about Me that I am the
most merciful of all the merciful and I answer the supplications of the
uneasy souls and I ward off the troubles and turn the conditions of time
and I grant bounties after calamities and appreciate even small deeds
and give reward generously and turn the needy into the affluent and that
I am the everlasting mighty and omnipotent Lord and that they should
pray to me. Thereafter if a sinner seeks shelter and approaches you tell
him, “Well done! You have stepped in a wider environment and camped
therein and have entered the vastness of Divine Might and Mercy of the
Lord of the Worlds. Be happy, He will accept your penitence and (O Musa)
seek pardon from Me for them and live with them like them and do not be
proud of the bounty which I have bestowed on you and ask them to beseech
My Mercy and Grace only from Me as none except Me owns My Mercy and
Grace and that I possess the Greatest Grace and how lucky you are.

O Musa! You are a shelter for the misguided and a brother for the
sinners and a companion of the troubled and the seeker of forgiveness
for the sinners and you hold a desired status in My Sight. So pray to Me
with a pure heart and a truthful tongue and live as I have commanded you
to live. Obey my orders and do not behave with pride and excessiveness
with my servants due to the few bounties that I have bestowed on you
though they were not initiated from your side. And attain nearness to Me
because I am near you. Verily I have not asked from you anything which
is heavy for you. I only wish you to pray for me so that I may accept
your prayer and then I will grant. And gain nearness to Me by conveying
my messages which I have descended (revealed) to you and which I have
explained to you.

O Musa look at the earth that will soon become your grave and raise your
eyes towards the sky as the kingdom of your Lord is greater. Weep over
your soul until you remain in the world and fear the fatalities. Let not
the beauty of the world deceive you. Do not rest content on knowledge
and do not become an oppressor because I am always aiming at the tyrants
and I will make the oppressed overpower them. O Musa! I give a tenfold
reward of every good deed but only an equal punishment for an evil. Then
the sinners turn it into ten times bigger and got ruined. And do not
involve anyone else in My worship and be moderate in every deal and pray
like a candidate who is longing for My reward. Be repentant of your
deeds because the day removes the darkness of the night. Similarly good
deeds obliterate sins and sins darken good deeds just as the darkness of
night obliterates daylight.”

It is mentioned in reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said: Once
Satan came to Musa when he was praying to his Lord. An angel asked him
(Satan), “What do you expect from him (Musa) in this condition?” Satan
said the same hope which he had entertained from his father Adam when he
was in Paradise.

Imam said some of the admonitions given by Allah to Musa are these: O
Musa! I accept the prayer of the one who adopts lowliness and humility
for honoring My greatness and who fills his heart with My fear and
spends his day in My remembrance and who passes his night confessing to
his sins and recognizes the rights of My saints and friends. Musa asked:
By your saints and friends do you mean Ibrahim, Isma‘il, and Ya‘qub? He
replied, “O Musa! Of course they are such and are My friends but now
what I mean is not they, what I mean is the one for whose sake I created
Adam and Hawwa’ and created Paradise and Hell.” Musa asked: My Lord! Who
is he? He replied, “Muhammad and his name is Ahmad. I gave him this name
that is derived from My name because one of My names is Mahmud.”

Musa said, My Lord! Settle me in his Ummah (followers). The Lord
replied, “O Musa! When you will recognize him and understand him and his
progeny’s status in My sight, you will be in his Ummah. Surely, the
example of him and his progeny among my entire creation is like the
Garden of Firdaus among all gardens. Its leaves never dry up, its taste
never changes. So whosoever will appreciate his and his progeny’s rights
I will for him, bring wisdom near ignorance and light near darkness. I
will accept his prayer before he prays and give him before he asks. O
Musa! When you see that trouble is coming towards you, welcome it saying
Bravo! I am glad to greet the condition of the good, and when you notice
that wealth in turning towards you say that its cause is some sin the
punishment for which has been hastened for me because this world is a
field of punishment. When Adam erred, I sent him in the world as a
punishment of his deed. And I have cursed the world and everything in
it, except the thing which is for Me, and which involves My pleasure. O
Musa! Verily My good slaves have kept themselves away from the world in
proportion to their knowledge about Me and many in My creation have
loved the world because of their ignorance and because they did not know
Me and the eyes of the one who loved the world and considered it great
were never brightened nor did they get any benefit from the world and
the one who looked down at the world benefited from it.”

In a reliable hadith it is recorded from Imam al-Ridha that when Allah
appointed Musa as His messenger and gave him honor and split the river
for him and relieved The Israelites from the evil of the Pharaoh and
granted him Torah and Commandments, Musa said, My Lord! You have given
me an honor that You have not given to anyone before me. Allah said, O
Musa! Probably you do not know that Muhammad is in My sight most
honorable among all of My angels and the entire creation. Musa asked: If
Muhammad is better than all of Your creation then is the progeny of any
Prophet better than My progeny. Allah said, O Musa! Perhaps you do not
know that the progeny of Muhammad is superior to the progenies of all
Prophets just as Muhammad is superior to all Prophets. Musa inquired: My
Lord! If the progeny of Muhammad is like that then is the Ummah
(followers) of any of the Prophet superior to my followers as You made
clouds give them shade and You rained manna and salwa on them and You
parted the river for their sake? The Lord replied, “O Musa! Perhaps you
do not know that the superiority of the Ummah of Muhammad to all other
Ummahs is like the superiority of Muhammad to all other creation.”

Musa said, “My Lord! how good it would have been had I seen them?” The
Lord replied, “O Musa! You will never see them because this is not the
time of their appearance but you will see them before Muhammad in the
High Heavens when they will be given the bounties of paradise and will
be enjoying its pleasure. Do you like that I should tell you more about
them?” Musa said, “Yes, My Lord.” Allah said, “Then stand up before Me
like a lowly slave who stands meekly before a mighty king.” Musa
complied. Allah pronounced: O Ummah of Muhammad! All responded from the
bellies of their mothers and the loins of their fathers: *Labbaik
Allahumma labbaik laa shareeka laka labbaik innal hamda wan ne’mata laka
wal mulk. Laa shareeka laka.*

So the Almighty made it the thalbiya of hajj. Then He announced: O Ummah
of Muhammad! My decision and My command about you is that My mercy
precedes My anger and My pardon precedes My chastisement. I have
accepted your asking before you ask and anyone of you who will come to
Me in such a condition that he gives witness (testimony) that I am the
Only One Allah and that Muhammad is My slave and messenger and that he
is true in his words and deeds and testifies that ‘Ali bin Abi-Talib is
his brother, legatee and Caliph and subjects himself to obedience of
‘Ali as he has subjected himself to the obedience of Muhammad and
testifies that His selected and sinless friends and saints who are
distinct with Divine miracles are the caliphs of Allah, I will admit him
to Paradise even if his sins are equal in quantity to the foam of
rivers. Imam said, “When Allah appointed our Prophet He revealed to him
meaning: O Muhammad! You were on the Mount Toor when I called out to
your community with this greatness and you were not on this side of the
mountain when We called to him. Say that I praise and glorify the Lord
Who is the Lord of the worlds because of the blessing whereby He granted
me this grace exclusively and said to his Ummah: We praise the Allah who
is the Lord of all worlds because He granted us these graces
exclusively.”

And it is mentioned in other reliable traditions that Imam al-Ridha
asked Raas al Jalut the greatest scholar among the Jews, “I challenge
you with ten verses of Torah revealed to Moses, tell me does Torah not
give the news about Muhammad in these words? When the people of the last
Ummah will come who will be the followers of a camel-rider Prophet and
who will glorify Allah in various ways in new places of worship, The
Israelites will take the shelter of their Prophet until their souls will
be satisfied (convinced) and surely the swords will be in their hands
with which they will take revenge from the enemies of the Prophet in the
world. Is this not written in Torah?”  
 Raas al Jalut said, “Yes.”  
 Then Imam said, “O Jew! Musa stated to The Israelites in his will that
soon a Prophet from your brothers will come to you. So testify to him
and obey him. Are there any brothers of The Israelites except the sons
of Isma‘il?”  
 Raas al Jalut replied, “I cannot deny this statement of Musa but I want
that it be pointed out to me from Torah.”

Imam said, “Do you deny that it is mentioned in Torah that light came
from Mount Toor and gave us brightness from Mount Saaeer and appeared
from Mount Paran. So the radiance on Mount Toor was revelation to Musa
and Mount Paran is in Makkah and there is a distance of a day’s journey
between them and it is the same revelation which was revealed to
Muhammad.”

This hadith is very lengthy. We have quoted here in proportion to the
need of this occasion.  
 It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam as-Sadiq that The
Israelites approached Musa and said, “Ask Allah for rain whenever we ask
for it and may stop when we do not want it.” Musa conveyed this request
to Allah and Allah accepted it. They tilled the land, sowed what they
wanted to grow and then asked for rains and it rained as much as they
wanted. It also stopped raining when they desired so. Thus it continued
to rain when they wanted and stopped raining when they so desired until
their agricultural products became sound and high. But when they
harvested there was no seed in it at all. Everything had become grass.
They went to Musa with this complaint and narrated what had happened.
Allah revealed to Musa, “I did not decide for The Israelites but allowed
what they desired. Since they were not agreeable with My decision, I
left them to their planning. The result is what you see.”

In a reliable hadith it is recorded from Imam al-Baqir, Imam as-Sadiq
and Imam al-Ridha that it is written in the unexpunged Torah that Musa
asked his Lord, “Are you near to me with Whom I can talk softly or are
You away from me with Whom I must talk loudly?” Allah revealed to him,
“O Musa! I am the companion of the one who remembers Me.” Musa said, “My
Lord! Who will be under Your shade when there will be no shade except
the shade of Your Throne?” The Lord replied, “I remember those who
remember Me and I befriend those who love one another for My sake. So
whenever I propose to send My chastisement to earth I do not send it due
to the auspiciousness of such people.” Musa requested, “My Lord!
Sometimes I find myself in such a condition when I feel You too great to
be remembered.” The Lord responded, “Remember Me under all circumstances
as My remembrance is good in all conditions.”[^21]

It is mentioned from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that Allah revealed to Musa,
“O Musa! What prevents you from praying to Me?” He replied, “My Lord!
The awe of your greatness as to how I can call you with my dirty mouth?”
The Almighty revealed, “The odor of the mouth of fasting people is
dearer to Me than the fragrance of musk.”

It is mentioned with authentic evidence from Imam al-Ridha that wherever
‘O those who believe’ is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an, the Words in
Torah are, *O Group of the poor and the needy*.  
 According to another narration, it is written in Torah that: *If you
are friends of Allah, desire death*. So Almighty addressed the Jews in
the Holy Qur’an,

***O Jews! If you imagine that you are friends of Allah and that others
are not, then, if you are true, wish for death. (62:6)***

It is narrated by Ibn ‘Abbas that the Holy Prophet said, “Allah
discussed 1,24,000 things with Musa in three days and that Musa did not
eat or drink anything during that time. When he returned to The
Israelites and heard the voice of human beings he abhorred it as the
sweetness of the Divine voice was still ringing in his ears.”

Amir al-Mu’minin said that Almighty Allah revealed to Musa bin ‘Imran,
“O Musa! Learn My will by heart. Four things are for you: First do not
be after the sins of others until you come to know that your sins have
been forgiven, second do not become gloomy for your provision unless you
know that My treasures have become empty, thirdly do not pin your hopes
on others except me until you know that my kingdom has ended, fourthly
do not feel yourself safe from the conspiracies of Satan until you know
that he (devil) has died.”

It is mentioned with two authentic chains from Imam as-Sadiq that four
words of wisdom are written in Torah together with four other words side
by side. The first four words are: The one who gets up from bed with
worldly worries shows anger against his Lord, the one who wakes up in
the morning with complaints against what has befallen him complains
against his Lord and the one who approaches a wealthy person with the
intention of gaining some earthly gains from him destroys two-thirds of
his religion and the one who reads Allah’s book and then indulges in
deeds leading to Hell has ridiculed Allah and the other four words are:
You will get the reward of what you do and the one who becomes a king or
gets power wants that he should become the owner of everything and the
one who does not consult others in his affairs repents and that
restlessness and need is bigger than people.”

It is mentioned in another hadith that Almighty revealed to Musa, “O
Musa! I have not created any creation which is dearer to Me than My
faithful Mu’min slave and I do not put him into any trouble unless it is
in his interest and I do not give him ease but for his betterment and I
am more aware of what is in the interests of My slaves so he should be
patient during the calamities sent by Me and should thank Me for My
bounties and should rest content on My decisions so that I may note
(place) him near Me among My truthful ones whenever he works for My
pleasure and obeys My Commandments.”

It is narrated by Imam al-Baqir that some of the words given to Musa by
Allah on Mount Toor are: O Musa! Tell your community that those who gain
nearness to Me do not get the nearness but through weeping and fearing
Me and the worshippers who worship me do not do so but by abstaining
from the things prohibited by Me and the adorned ones do not gain
adornment but by giving up some things in the world which they do not
need. Then Musa said, “O Most Merciful One! What reward will you give to
them for their good deeds? He said, O Musa! Those who seek my nearness
through weeping due to My fear will be in the highest place in Paradise
and none will be their partner in that position. And for those who
worship Me while refraining from the things prohibited by Me, I will
inquire into the deeds of people in the Resurrection Day but will
overlook their conditions and for those who seek My nearness by giving
up worldly desires I will make the entire Paradise admissible to them so
that they may reside therein wherever they please.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that one day Musa was sitting
when Satan appeared before him wearing a multicolored cap. He took off
his cap and approached Musa. Musa asked as to who he was? He said,
“Iblis.” Musa said, “May Allah not give residence to anyone near your
residence. Why have you donned this cap on your head?”  
 He said, “I attract the children of Adam through these colors.” Musa
said, “Tell me the sin which if committed by the son of Adam you
overpower him fully.”  
 “When he overestimates his deed and gets vain and then underestimates
his sin.”

Then he said, O Musa! Never stay alone with a woman who is not
permissible for you. Such people I do not leave to my companions but
personally make efforts in misleading them and do not leave his side
until he indulges in sin. Also never, give any promise to your God
because whoever gives any promise to Allah I do not leave them to my
companions but attend personally to him to endeavor that he may not
fulfill his promise. And (O Musa)! Whenever you think of giving charity,
make haste because whenever one intends to give charity I pay attention
to him myself and do not leave him to my assistants. I make maximum
efforts to make him regret it.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam as-Sadiq that there
was a tyrant king in the times of Musa. At the same time, there was a
pious man. He went to the king for fulfilling a need of a faithful man
and recommended his case to the king. The king accepted his
recommendation and fulfilled the need of that faithful man. That king
and the believer died on the same day. People mourned the death of the
king for three days and kept their bazaars closed but the corpse of that
mo-min remained in his house unattended until the worms began to feed on
it. After three days Musa saw it and prayed to Allah, “My Lord! That
king was Your enemy yet people gave him a respectful burial while this
mo-min is lying in this condition.” The Lord sent a revelation to him,
“A friend of mine once recommended the case of one of my faithful slaves
to the king and the latter fulfilled that need. So I gave honor to the
king in this way. But I made the earth’s insects overpower that man
because he made a request before a tyrant king.”

It is narrated from Imam Zayn al-‘abidin with authentic proofs that Musa
prayed to Allah, “My Lord! Who are Your selected slaves? The ones whom
You will keep under the shade of Your throne. For on that day there will
be no other shade except that of the throne.” The Lord responded, “Those
whose hearts are clean, empty of condemnable desires and habits and
sinful desires and whose hearts are empty of worldly wealth. Whenever
they remember Me, My Greatness and Awe is seen in their eyes and they
are those who rest content in obeying Me just like a child rests content
by suckling. They are the people who take refuge in My mosques just like
vultures take shelter in their nests, when they see people disobeying Me
they become fierce like an angry leopard.”

In a reliable hadith it is recorded from Imam as-Sadiq that Allah
revealed to Musa, “O Musa! Thank Me as I deserve.” Musa asked, “My Lord!
How can I thank You as You deserve for whatever thanksgiving I offer
will only be a bounty from You because it is You who inclined me towards
it.” The Lord replied, “O Musa! When you have understood that you are
unable to thank Me fully and that thanksgiving is also My bounty then
you have thanked Me as I deserve.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam al-Baqir that Allah
revealed to Musa, “Befriend Me and make Me friend of My creation.” Musa
asked, “My Lord! You know that none of your creations is dearer to me
than You but what control do I have over the hearts of others.” Allah
revealed to him, “Make them aware of my bounties so that they may
befriend Me.”

According to the same source it is mentioned in this hadith that Musa
asked Allah, “Let me know the time of early decline of the sun.” The
Almighty ordained an angel to inform Musa everyday. So one day that
angel told Musa that the time of decline of the sun has arrived.” Musa
asked, “When?” The angel said, “Exactly when I told you, but by the time
you made this inquiry the sun had already traveled a distance of five
hundred years (westward).”

According to authentic hadith Imam as-Sadiq said, “Once Musa got a
revelation from Allah that a certain person from among his friends was
backbiting him and conveying his words to his enemies so he should keep
away from him. Musa said, ‘My Lord! When I do not know him, how can I
keep away from him? So let me know who he is.’ The Lord said, ‘I
described the evil of his slander and now you want me to backbite about
him too?’ Musa said, ‘My Lord! What should I do then?’ The Lord said,
‘Select ten persons from your companions, then make groups of ten from
your men and draw lots. The lot will appear in the name of the group in
which that person is. Then draw again a lot from among that group and it
will expose that man. When that man saw that Musa was drawing lots and
that he was about to be disgraced he arose and said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah! It was I who did this deed. I will not do so again.’”

It is noted in another authentic hadith that Musa saw a man under the
throne of Allah and asked, “My Lord! Who is this person whom you have
kept so near to You? So near that you gave him a place under Your
throne.” Allah replied, “This man was not cursed by his parents nor did
he envy people because of the things I gave them by My Grace.”

According to a reliable narration Imam as-Sadiq said, “The Almighty
conversed with Musa telling him that he should not incline towards the
world like oppressors nor like the one who had made worldly things his
parents. If I leave you, you will surely be attracted towards worldly
adornments. O Musa! Leave those worldly things that you do not need and
do not look at those who love the world. I have left them. And know that
the seed of all troubles is the love of this world. Do you want to be
like the one who is liked by masses until you know that I am also
pleased with him? And do not long for the position of the man who is
being obeyed by people unjustly because he is the cause of his
followers’ destruction.”

It is narrated in another reliable tradition from Imam al-Baqir that
Musa prayed to Allah, “My Lord! Who among Your slaves is most disliked
by you and who you consider your worst enemy? The Lord replied, “The one
who drops down in his bed at night like a dead body and passes his day
in senseless things.” Musa asked: What is the reward of one who visits a
sick fellow? Allah replied, “I appoint an angel to give him company in
his grave until he is resurrected.” He asked: My Lord! What is the
reward of one who bathes a dead body? Allah replied, “I make him as
clean of sins as he was at birth.” He asked: My Lord! What is the reward
of one who attends a funeral procession? Allah replied, “I appoint some
angels for him bearing flags so that they will escort him in the Field
of Reckoning (Mahshar).” Musa asked: My Lord! What is the reward of one
who condoles the death of a child? Allah replied, “I will give him a
place under the Divine Throne on the day when there will be no shade
except that of the Divine Throne.”

According to a reliable tradition Imam as-Sadiq said, “Once on his way
to work Musa passed by a man praying to Allah with raised hands towards
the sky. When he returned by the same way after seven days he saw that
that man was still in the same position, praying and weeping.” Allah
said, “O Musa! Even if this man goes on praying until his tongue drops
down, I will not accept his supplication until and unless he does not
come to Me the way I want him to come. That is, he must love and follow
you.” That man wanted to worship Allah in a way other than following the
teachings of Musa.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition through the same source that
once when Musa went to Mount Toor he took with him one of his pious
companions. He made him sit at the foot of the mountain and he proceeded
to the top and began talking with his Lord. When he returned he saw that
that man was torn into pieces by a wild beast which had eaten up his
face. Allah revealed to Musa that that man had committed a sin against
Me and I desired that when he returns to Me no sin should remain with
him so I took him thus from the world.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition of Imam al-Baqir that Allah
revealed to Musa, “Sometimes it so happens that a slave of mine seeks My
nearness with a single good deed and I issue orders that he may be given
a place of his choice in Paradise.” Musa inquired about that good deed.
Allah replied, “To undertake a journey for the sake of his brother in
faith.”

Reliable sources quote Imam al-Baqir that once Musa asked his Lord, “My
Lord! Who among your creations do you consider as your worst enemy?” The
Almighty said, “The one who makes allegations against Me.” Musa asked,
“My Lord! Is there anyone among Your creation who makes allegations
against You?” The Lord replied, “Yes, the man who asks something from Me
and I decide only that which is in his interest, but as he is not
pleased with it he makes allegations against Me.”

It is mentioned in a true hadith that Imam as-Sadiq said, “It is written
in Torah that: O Son of Adam! Make yourself available for My worship
setting aside your worldly affairs so that I may fill up your heart with
My fear. Otherwise, I will fill up your heart with worldly engagements
and will leave you to run after the world and then your need will never
be satisfied.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam al-Baqir said, “Divine
Revelation was stopped for thirty days for Musa bin ‘Imran. So one
evening he went to Mount Areeha and said, My Lord! Why have you stopped
talking with me and discontinued your revelation? Is it because of any
sin that I have committed? So now, I am standing before You. Punish me
until You become pleased with me. If you have stopped your revelations
due to the sins of The Israelites then I beseech pardon for them.
Almighty revealed to him: O Musa! Do you know why I have selected you
from among My entire creation for My talks and revelations? Musa said,
“My Lord! I do not know it.” Allah said, “O Musa! My knowledge has
covered the entire creation. I did not find among them anyone whose
humility before Me was more than yours. So I reserved you for My talks
and Revelations.” Thereafter whenever Musa prayed he did not rise from
the prayer mat until he rubbed the right and left of his face on the
ground.

It is reported from the holy Prophet that it was written on the tablets:
Thank Me and your parents so that I may protect you from calamities and
troubles which cause your destruction and so that I may lengthen your
life and keep you alive with a better living and may grant you a life
which will be much better after this earthly life.  
 It is mentioned with authentic evidences that The Grand Names consists
of seventy-three letters out of which Allah sent four letters on Musa.

It is mentioned in an authentic hadith from Imam as-Sadiq that it is
written in Torah: O Son of Adam! Remember Me whenever you are angry with
anyone so that I may remember you when I am angry. Then I may not
destroy you with those people who I want to destroy. Whenever someone
oppresses you leave its retaliation thinking of Me because My revenge is
better than yours.

In another hadith the Prophet of Allah said that Allah revealed to Musa,
“O Son of ‘Imran! Do not envy what I have given from My Grace to others
and do not look at it with a tempting eye because he who does not remain
pleased with what I have distributed among my slaves and becomes envious
of it does not remain happy, rather it comes in the way of the right
distribution which I have made. Such a person is not Mine nor am I his.”

It is recorded from Imam al-Baqir that The Israelites complained to Musa
that many among us have become lepers. The Almighty revealed to Musa:
Ask them to eat cow’s meat with beetroot.  
 It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam as-Sadiq that it is
mentioned in Torah: Thank the one who gives you good things and reward
the one who thanks you because there is no decline of bounties when they
are thanked for. And they do not last when not thanked for and an
increase in thanksgiving causes protection from calamities. It is
mentioned in authentic hadith from the same Imam that it is written in
Torah that if anyone sells any land with water and in exchange does not
purchase land and water then its price becomes unlawful and it gives no
profit.

It is mentioned in another narration that Musa visited a city of The
Israelites where he saw that rich men wearing clothes made of canvas
(sackcloth) were standing and throwing dust on their heads and weeping
profusely. Tears were rolling down their cheeks. Musa felt pity on them.
He himself also wept in sympathy and prayed to Allah, “O My Lord! These
people are in the progeny of Ya‘qub who has taken shelter in You like a
dove takes shelter in its nest and are crying like the sheep and are
barking like dogs.” The Lord revealed, “Why are they doing this; perhaps
in their view the treasure of My mercy has emptied or My wealth has
ended or I am not the Most Merciful! Tell them that I know what is in
their hearts. Though they are calling Me their hearts are not inclined
towards Me but towards the world.”

It is mentioned in another authentic hadith that one day Musa was giving
a sermon to his companions when suddenly a man got up and tore his
clothes. Allah revealed to Musa, “Ask him to tear his heart and weed out
from it whatever I do not like. What is the use of tearing his clothes?”
One day Musa passed by one of his companions in Sajdah. When Musa
returned after finishing his business he saw that that man was still
prostrating. Musa told him, “Had it been in my power I would have
fulfilled your demand.” Allah revealed, “O Musa! Even if this man
prolongs his prostration until his neck breaks, I will not accept his
prayer unless he gives up what I do not like and inclines towards what I
like.”[^22]

### Death of Musa and Harun

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam al-Baqir that Musa prayed
to Allah, “Of course I rest content on what You have decided and
distributed. Do not kill an aged person, let alone a child.” The Lord
replied, “O Musa! Are you not happy that I am the provider of provisions
and I am the maintainer?” Musa submitted, “My Lord! I am happy;
doubtlessly You are the Best Caretaker and the Best Maintainer.”

Imam as-Sadiq said that one day Musa went to Mount Toor with Harun. On
the way, they saw a house. There was a tree at its door. Before that,
they had neither seen that house nor the tree. Two clothes hung on that
tree and there was a couch in that house. Musa asked Harun, “Remove your
clothes and wear these, then enter this house and sleep on the couch.”
Harun complied with the order. When he slept on the couch, Allah seized
the soul of Harun, and that couch and that house went up in the sky.
Musa returned to The Israelites and informed them that Almighty Allah
had seized the life of Harun and called him up in the heavens. The
Israelites said, “You are lying. You killed him because we loved him and
because he was kind towards us.” Musa complained to Allah about the
allegation made against him by The Israelites. The Almighty commanded
and two angels lowered the couch with Harun from the heavens and kept it
hanging between earth and heavens until The Israelites saw and were
convinced that he had died and that Musa did not kill him.  
 According to another hadith (narration) Harun spoke up from the couch
and said, I have died my death and Musa did not kill me.

It is mentioned in another hadith that the bereaved can tear off his
collar while mourning one’s father or brother as Musa had torn his
collar at the death of Harun.  
 According to a reliable tradition Imam al-Ridha said that Musa asked
Allah, “My Lord! My brother has died so forgive him. Allah revealed to
Musa, “O Musa! if you wish Me to forgive all those who have died and
also who are yet to die I will pardon all of them except the killers of
Husayn bin ‘Ali; from whom I will take revenge.”

It is mentioned in some reliable and authentic hadiths that Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq said that when the end of Musa’s life approached and the angel
of death came and said, ‘O Kalimullah (the one with whom Allah
conversed)! *Assalaamo A’laikum’,* Musa responded, “*Wa a’laikas
salaam!* Who are you?” The angel replied, “I am the angel of death.” He
asked, “Why have you come?” He replied, “To take your soul.” Musa asked,
“From where will you seize it?” He replied, “From your mouth.” Musa
asked, “How will you seize it from the mouth when I have conversed with
the Almighty with it?” The angel replied, “All right! I will seize it
from your hands.” Musa exclaimed, “How will you seize it from my hands
when these hands have held the Torah?” The angel said, “I will seize it
from your feet.” Musa said,”I have gone to Mount Toor on these very feet
to talk with My Lord.” The angel said, “Then I will take it from your
eyes.” Musa said, “I have always looked with these eyes hopefully
towards my Lord’s Mercy.” The angel said, “Then from your ear.” Musa
said, “I have heard my Lord’s Words with these very ears.” Then Almighty
Allah revealed to the angel, “Do not seize his soul until he himself
desires it.” So the angel of death went back and Musa lived for quite a
long time thereafter. Then one day he called Yusha‘, gave his will to
him, made him his legatee and asked him to keep the will a secret until
the time of his (Musa’s) death. He also asked Yusha‘ to pass on the
Wasiyyah (Will) at the time of his (Yusha‘’s) death to someone else as
desired by Allah. Saying this Musa disappeared from his people.

During these days of his absence, he once met a man digging a grave.
Musa told him that he would like to help him in digging that grave. He
said, ‘That is good.’ Musa engaged himself in the digging. Soon the
grave was completed by them. The man intended to go and lie in that
grave to ascertain whether it was properly dug or not.

But Musa said, Wait! let me do it. Saying this Musa entered the grave
and slept therein. Allah removed the curtain from his eyes and he saw
his place in Paradise. He said, My Lord Call me back to You. So the
angel of death seized his holy soul then and there. That person buried
him in the same grave and closed it by filling it with earth. That man
digging the grave was an angel in the shape of a man. Musa died in
Tiyah. An announcer announced from the heavens that Musa Kalimullah has
died and who is he who will not die? (The Imam) said, This is why Musa’s
grave is not known to people and The Israelites do not know its
location. People asked the Prophet of Allah about the location of the
grave of Musa. He replied, “Near the highway adjacent to the red
hillock.” After Musa, Yusha‘ became the leader of The Israelites. He was
always busy in their affairs and was bearing all kinds of difficulties
caused to him by the kings of those days. Three of those kings died.
Thereafter the condition of Yusha‘ became strong and be became
independent in the matter of law and order (giving orders to do or to
refrain from doing things). Then two hypocrites of the community of Musa
conspired and took Safra daughter of Shu‘ayb, the wife of Musa with them
and revolted against Yusha‘ with 100000 men. Yusha‘ overpowered them.
Many groups of them were killed and those who remained alive fled by the
Divine Order and Safra daughter of Shu‘ayb became the captive of Yusha‘.
Yusha‘ told her, “I am leaving you in this world so that in the other
world when I meet Musa the Prophet of Allah, I may complain to him about
you and your community about what I have suffered due to you.” Safra
said, “By Allah! If Paradise is made open to me so that I can enter it I
will feel ashamed of seeing there Musa the Prophet of Allah, as I have
torn his veil and thereafter I revolted against his legatee.”[^23]

Sunnis have narrated from ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud that he said, “I asked
the Prophet of Allah, ‘Who will bathe you after your demise?’ The holy
Prophet replied, ‘Every Prophet is given a bath by his Wasi.’ I asked,
‘O Messenger of Allah! Who is your Wasi?’ He replied, ‘‘Ali bin
Abi-Talib.’ I asked, ‘O Prophet of Allah! How long will he live after
you?’ He said, ‘Thirty years as Yusha‘ ibn Nun the legatee of Musa and
Safra daughter of Shu‘ayb revolted against him (Yusha‘) and had said, ‘I
am more entitled than you to be ruler of The Israelites.’ Yusha‘ fought
her, destroyed her army and arrested her. After capturing her he behaved
nicely with her and in this way the daughter of so and so will along
with thousands of men of my Ummah revolt against ‘Ali. ‘Ali will defeat
her army, make her captive and will behave nicely to her after arresting
her.’ This verse has come in that connection:

(O Wives of the Prophet). Remain seated in your house and...... do not
come out in a style of olden day ignorance. And said that olden day
ignorance means coming out in the field like Safra daughter of Shu‘ayb.”

Authentic narrators mention from Imam al-Baqir that the wife of Musa had
revolted against Yusha‘ ibn Nun riding on a giraffe. Wife of Musa had
the upper hand on the first day but on the second day Yusha‘ subdued
her. Some people said to Yusha‘, “Punish her.” But Yusha‘ said, “Since
Musa had rested by her side, I have given her respect due to Musa’s
honor. I leave the revenge to Allah.”

It is mentioned in reliable tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that
Angel of Death came to Musa and saluted him. Musa inquired, “Why have
you come?” He said, “I have come to seize your soul but I have been
ordered to do so only when you so desire.” Then the angel went away.
After sometime Musa called Yusha‘, made him his legatee and disappeared
from his people. During this absence, he went to some angels who were
busy digging a grave. Musa asked, “For whom are you digging this grave?”
They replied, “By Allah! For a slave of Allah who is very high in the
sight of Allah.” Musa said, “Indeed he must be very great in the sight
of Allah because I have never seen a grave better than this one.” The
angels inquired, “O Slave of Allah! Do you wish to be the same fellow.”
Musa said, “Of course I do.” The angels said, “Then go and sleep in it
thinking about your Lord.” Musa went in it and slept and saw his place
in Paradise and desired for his death from the Almighty. His soul was
seized then and there and the angels buried him. It is mentioned in
another reliable tradition that Musa lived for one hundred twenty six
years and Harun for one hundred and thirty years. It is mentioned in yet
another reliable tradition that the 21st night of the month of Ramadhan
is the auspicious night in which the legatees of Prophets left this
world. ‘Isa was lifted up on this night and Musa also passed away on
this night.

It is authentically narrated from Imam al-Baqir that during the night in
which Amir al-Mu’minin was martyred, fresh blood was gushing out of
every stone that was picked up until sunrise and that Yusha‘ ibn Nun was
also martyred on this night.  
 It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam as-Sadiq said, “Musa
willed to Yusha‘ ibn Nun and made him his successor, then Yusha‘ made
the son of Harun his Successor and Khalifah. He did not make his or
Musa’s son his caliph because Khalifah or Imam is appointed by Allah and
no one else has any authority in this matter.”

It is mentioned in some reliable traditions that when Musa and Harun
were appointed by Divine Mercy in Tiyah, Yusha‘ ibn Nun prepared The
Israelites for war and marched towards Syria for the battle of Alqalama.
He conquered every town on his way towards Syria until he reached
Balgaa. The king of that place was called Baalaq. There were several
battles between him and Yusha‘ but neither was killed. People asked for
its reason. It was replied that as neither of them possessed a flag
neither got killed. Then they made a treaty and marched forward to
another city. When the king of that place knew that he did not have
enough strength to confront Yusha‘ he sent someone for Bal-am Baoor so
that he may pray with The Grand Name so that they may win. Bal-am
thought of going to the king riding his donkey. The donkey became so
overjoyed that he fell down. When he asked the ass the reason of doing
so, the animal by the power given to it by Allah replied, “How can I not
become overjoyed when this Archangel Gabriel, holding a weapon in hand
prevents you from going to fight with him?” This did not impress him and
he went further.

When he reached the king the latter asked him to recite the Grand Name
and to curse the people of Yusha‘. Bal-am said Allah’s Prophet is with
him and therefore no curse will affect them but I am planning
differently for your sake. Decorate many beautiful women, send them to
their army under pretext of sale, and purchase so that when presented to
men they may indulge in adultery because Allah sends the disease of
plague to those people who make excess in adultery. When he did so the
community of Yusha‘ indulged in much adultery. Allah revealed to Yusha‘,
“These people have angered Me much by doing such a heinous deed. Now if
you desire I will have them subdued by the enemy or if you like I will
have them killed through famine and if you so desire I may destroy them
with a hard and quick death.” Yusha‘ said, “My Lord! They are the
children of Ya‘qub and therefore I would not like the enemy to control
them nor would I like them to be killed by famine. So if you so desire
you may punish them with instant death. Then seventy thousand of those
people died within three hours of the plague.”

It is mentioned in the narrations of Shi‘ahs and Sunnis that, thereafter
when Yusha‘ fought with them and was about to overpower them the sun
set. Yusha‘ prayed to Allah and He made the sun reappear by His Might
and kept it shining until they won the war. Only then did the sun set.
Likewise the sun reappeared for the successor of the last Prophet, Amir
al-Mu’minin.  
 It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam al-Ridha that Allah had
given Bal-am Baoor the Grand Name. Every supplication made by him was
accepted because of it. At last, he inclined towards Pharaoh. When the
Pharaoh intended to follow Musa and his people, he requested Bal-am to
pray to Allah so that he may detain Musa and his men thus enabling him
to reach them. Bal-am rode his ass to lead the Pharaoh following Musa’s
army but his donkey stopped and did not budge thought he kicked it much.
Allah made the animal talk and it asked: Woe unto you! Why are you
hitting me? Do you want me to be with you so that you may curse the
Prophet of Allah and the faithful? Then he beat the donkey so much that
it died and went away from him. It was wiped out from his heart as has
been mentioned by Allah in Qur’an,

“(O Prophet!) Tell your people the tale of the one whom We had given our
signs, that is Our evidences or arguments, then he came out of those
signs and sciences and was taken back from him, then he obeyed the devil
and became misguided. Had We wished, We would have raised him high with
the same signs but he leaned down towards the earth, preferred the
world, and followed his desires), his example is like a dog. It brings
out its tongue if you attack it and also if you leave it unhurt. It is
mentioned in narrations that the tongue of Bal-am was hanging out of his
mouth like the tongue of a dog reaching up to his chest. Imam al-Ridha
said, No animal will enter Paradise except three-the donkey of Bal-am,
the dog of the people of the cave and the wolf (the story of which is
that a tyrant king sent his cattleman to fetch a group of the faithful
with an intention to punish them. The cattleman had a son whom he loved
very much. The said wolf came and ate up the boy which made the
cattleman very sorry. Therefore Allah will admit that wolf in Paradise
as it made that wicked cattleman sorrowful).

It is recorded with many evidences that in the night wherein Amir
al-Mu’minin was martyred, Imam Al-Hasan went up the pulpit and said, “O
People! That night was also like this one when ‘Isa son of Maryam went
up the heavens. That night was also like this one when Yusha‘ ibn Nun
was killed. That is the 21st of Ramadham.”

It is mentioned with authentic evidences that Imam al-Ridha said, “A
companion of the holy Prophet got a letter, which was brought to the
holy Prophet. The holy Prophet had an announcement made that all should
be present in the mosque. Then he went up to the pulpit and said, ‘This
letter has been written by Yusha‘ ibn Nun the legatee of Musa. The
subject matter is like this: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. Surely your Lord and your Friend is kind to you. Verily the
best among all the slaves of Allah is the unknown pious and the worst
among the creation of Allah is the one who is conspicuous with his
wrongful power (state). So whosoever wants to get full reward and wants
to be thankful to Allah should recite this supplication daily:

*Subhaan Allah kama yambghi allaaho laa ilaaha illa kamaa yambaghi
allaaho wal h’amdo lillaahe kamaa yambaghi allaaho wa laa h’awla walaa
quwwata illa billaahe wa s’allallaaho a’laa jamee’il mursaleena wan
nabeeyeena h’atta yarz”allaaho.*

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that among The Israelites
were four faithful persons who were connected with one another. One day
three of them gathered in a house for some work. The fourth one also
arrived and knocked on the door which was opened by a slave. He asked
him, “Where is your master?” He replied, “He is not in the house.” So
that person went back. The slave returned to his master who asked him,
“Who knocked the door?” He replied, “He was so and so and I told him
that the owner of the house is not at home.” The owner of the house and
his friends did not say anything about this and kept quiet. They did not
care about the going back of the faithful. They resumed their talks.
Next morning he returned and saw them coming out of the house. He
observed that they intended to go to the farm of one of them. He saluted
them and asked whether he too could accompany them.

They said, ‘All right! Come along.’ But they did not express any sorrow
for the previous day’s incident when he had returned. He was a poor man
among them. On the way, a cloud appeared in the sky and came over their
heads. Thinking that it would start raining they started to run.
Suddenly a voice was heard from the cloud: O Fire! Burn them away. I am
Archangel Gabriel, the Messenger of Allah. All of a sudden, fire
separated from that cloud and fell on those three men. The fourth became
astonished and also fearful. He could not understand the reason of what
had happened. He came back to the town and went to Yusha‘ ibn Nun and
narrated the whole happening to him. Yusha‘ said, “Allah punished them
due to you, despite being pleased with them.” Then Yusha‘ told him the
previous day’s incident. The man said, “I condone their deed.” Yusha‘
said, “Had this happened before the Divine chastisement fell on them
this pardoning by you would have benefited them. Now it is of no use in
the worldly life. Perhaps it may give them some benefit in the
Hereafter.” It is mentioned in a narration that Yusha‘ lived for 133
years and he made Kaalab bin Yuqanna his successor and caliph.

[^1]: Some people believe that it was unlawful that Musa killed that
man. So Musa was a sinner and suppose it was permissible then why Musa
said, this is on account of the Satan’s doing and why did he say, ‘Allah
I have done harm to myself, so do Thou protect me and when the Pharaoh
raised an objection, he has done wrong and became an unbeliever of him.
Why Musa said, he was on wrong path. The answer of these questions will
be given by other way. First, Musa did not intend to kill him but he
wanted to protect an innocent person from his tyranny but people said,
his deed was a sin in his part. If a person try to protect himself or
others from a tyrant it is not a sin. Secondly, he was an unbeliever. So
Prophet Musa said that it was devilish deed. Many thinkers say it was
lawful to kill the unbeliever but it was better if Musa kept patience
and may did not involve after killing the victim, repenting himself like
Prophet Adam that he agreed for doing the wrong deed and requested Allah
he had not done any wrong except this as it was the deed of Satan. When
Prophet Musa also said, “I fear, I have done harm to myself.” to protect
himself when the Pharaoh raised an objection. So Allah helped him the
Pharaoh. The Pharaoh said to Musa that he was one of the unbeliever that
means he was brought up in the Pharaoh’s care. Prophet Musa said,
perhaps he was on the wrong path or was not knowing.

[^2]: Maybe, Prophet Musa had two sticks. One, which was given by
Prophet Shu‘ayb and other, which Archangel Gabriel brought.

[^3]: Allah asked Prophet Musa to cast off his shoes and come up as he
is in the blessed spot of the in the valley and is Tuwa. A narrator says
(1) shoes were made of the skin of animals (2) Imam Ja’far-al-Sadiq
said, shoes were made of a cow and Allah ordered him to remove his shoes
so that his feet would touch the blessed spot. And Prophet says that
place is called Wadi al-Muqaddas because souls of Prophets and Angels
were being exalted and Allah chose the same place to speak to Musa (3)
Allah ordered him to come there barefoot to visit the supreme power (4)
Prophet Musa put on shoes for protection from serpents etc. (5) Allah
says the shoes allude to the world. O Musa there is no need to put on
shoes as you are close to Me. I am Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
Believe in Me and love Me. (6) Prophet Musa had came to take fire for
his wife and his attention was there so Allah revealed him to remove all
the worldly desires from the heart and remember Him and His bounties
also not give importance to worldly life. Then Allah said, “One who sees
in a dream that his shoes are lost tell him, this is the sign of his
wife’s death.” When our last Imam was very young and was sitting on his
father’s lap, a man came and asked the explanation of this verse of
Qur’an. Imam al-Mahdi replied at once that Musa’s shoes were made of the
dead animal’s skin, that is why Allah asked him to remove the shoes down
the hill. One asked what was better. Musa’s shoes or his prayers? Imam
said, “One who think or say like this is surely ignorant and does not
know when to pray and when not. The narrator asked Imam to explain the
verse. Imam said, “When Musa reached the valley and said, ‘O Allah, my
whole attention and affection is for you and nor for others.’ Though
Musa loved his wife. That is why Allah asked him to remove his shoes
down the hill; means remove your affection towards your wife if you love
Me truly. Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq said, “To remove the shoes means to
remove his two fears from the mind of Prophet, first he was afraid of
his wife’s death because he left her alone suffering with pain. He saw a
fire far away and had come there to bring fire to warm her. Secondly he
was afraid of the Pharaoh. Allah said, do not fear him, you are quite
safe in My protection.’”

[^4]: Prophet Musa came back to his wife.

[^5]: There are different opinions about the fear of Musa -According to
another tradition Musa thought that people will think he is a magician
like other magicians. Imam ‘Ali quotes Musa was waiting for Allah’s
revelation. It was rather late so Musa was afraid that people would
think that the Pharaoh’s magicians were true. But it is doubtful matter
whether the Pharaoh killed all the magicians or not. But it is true, he
hanged them and cut off their hands and legs. Indeed they all were
magicians and unbelievers. But in their last time they became loyal and
faithful to Musa According to another tradition, they all were arrested
and were involved in divine’s chastisement and were released with the
people of The Israelites. The people said to the Pharaoh not to taunt
them. Then they prayed to Allah to give them patience against the
Pharaoh. In another tradition it is stated that the Pharaoh said to his
magicians that Musa has taught them magic power and he is their leader.
He said they would be hanged on the date tree and then realize whose
chastisement is severe. The people said, “Allah, the Almighty has
created the world and all of us. We do not believe in you. Therefore do
whatever you like. Life is very short and your order is also temporary.
We believe in Allah. Indeed He is great and we have faith, He will
forgive our sins you compelled us to use magic power on Prophet. But
Allah is Kind and He is immortal.”

[^6]: There are different opinions about it. Some say that the Pharaoh
wanted to threaten him and some says, he wanted to kill him. Some says
it is possible that he wanted to threaten him only and not to kill him.

[^7]: Regarding the reason of repentance of the Pharaoh that Allah did
not accept his repentance on account of final Chastisement some writer
says He did not repent by heart but he was pretending to save himself
from divine wrath. Another writer says: He believed in Allah but he had
to accept the Prophethood of Musa.

[^8]: There are different opinions of different authors. In many books
it is recorded that there were three people who verified the Prophets.
They were Mu’min Ale the Pharaoh, Mu’min Ale Yasin and best of them ‘Ali
Ibn Abu-Talib

[^9]: Commentators have differed in their opinion about the Holy Land as
to what place is it. Some have said it is Jerusalem (Jerusalem), Some
have said it is Damascus and Palestine. According to some it is Syria
and some say it is the land between Toor and the land around it.
Traditions regarding this have been quoted earlier. Similarly there is
difference of opinion as to whether Musa had entered the Holy Land or
not. But reliable traditions mentioned that Musa expired in Tiyah and
that his Legatee Yusha‘ ibn Nun took out The Israelites from Tiyah. It
is also not unanimous weather or not the Bab al-Hitta was in the desert
they faced it after getting out of it. Most of the people are of Tiyah
desert The Israelites were ordered that they should enter the gate of
Jerusalem or of Areehah in the aforesaid manner. According to this
belief Musa should not have been with them at that time. Some have said
that Musa had made a Qubbah (cupola=dome) in Tiyah and he was praying
Salat facing it. The Israelites were commanded to enter the gate bowing
and requesting Divine pardon for their sins in a state of humanity. It
might have meant Ruku (Bowing). Some have said, prostrating after
entering means seeking pardon. The earlier hadiths make these two
reasons preferable) Saalaba has narrated in Araais that Lord Almighty
had given a promise to Musa that He will grant him and his community the
Holy land of Syria as their place of residence and will destroy the
community of Amaalaqah who were then ruling over Syria. When The
Israelites entered Egypt after the Pharaoh was drowned, the Lord
Almighty ordered them to turn toward the city of Areeha in Syria because
“I have decided that it should be your residence. So go, fight with
Amaalaqah and occupy Areeha. And He ordered Musa to appoint twelve
Naqueeb (chiefs); that every Sabt (tribe) should have one Naqueeb who
should be their chief. The Israelites said, We will not proceed to fight
with them until we know more about them. Musa sent those Nauqeebs to
ascertain about Amaaliqah. When they arrived near the city of Areehaa
they met with a rebellious man Auj bin Unnaaq. It is narrated that he
was 23330 hands tall and that he used to catch fish himself from the
bottom of the sea and to bake it high in his hand and then eat it. Water
had reached only his thighs during the flood of Noah. His age was 30000
years and his mother khunnaaq was the daughter of Adam. It is said that
he fetched a mountain rock equal in size to the camp of Musa so as to
throw it on them. Allah Almighty sent the bird The hoopoe, which made a
hole in that rock which turned into a yoke for his neck and felled him
down. Musa came to him. His height was ten yards and his stick was also
10 yards long. He (Musa) jumped to the height of ten yards and struck
Auj with that stick. It hit his ankle and killed him. When Auj saw the
Naqueebs he lifted up them and placing them in his lap took them to his
mother. He told her that this group had come to fight me. He intended to
crush them under his feet but his mother told her to free them so that
they would tell his story to others. They returned from there and
roaming around the city collected information. A bunch of their grapes
were so huge that five men from The Israelites were required to lift it
with its branches. Their pomegranate was so big that four man could sit
on half of its skin. When the Nauqeebs started for their people they
consulted among themselves as they were of the opinion that if they said
all that they had observe to The Israelites they (latter) would doubt
the word of Musa and would become infidels. So it was to keep this
information secret and to inform Musa and Harun privately so that they
may do as they think. They agreed and made a covenant among themselves
on this point. They went to Musa after 40 days and narrated to him
whatever they had seen. Then every Naqeeb went back to his tribe and,
breaking the aforesaid covenant, told their clans everything about the
Amaaliqah and made them fearful of jihad with them. But Yusha‘ and
Kaalab remained firm on their promise. Musa’s sister Maryam was wife of
Kalab. When this information went around The Israelites they began to
cry loudly and began to scream that: It would have better had we died in
Egypt or in the desert without entering this city so that our wealth and
wives and children would not have been caught by the fierce Amaaliqah.
Then they talked among themselves: Let us make one of our chief and
return to Egypt. Musa repeatedly advised them saying that the only one
Allah Who made you win over the Pharaoh will also enable you to
overpower the Amaaliqah as He has promised victory and as He never
breaks his word. But they did not need and intended to return to Egypt.
Seeing this Yusha‘ and Kaalab tore up the collars of their shirts and
said to them: Fear Allah Almighty and come along with us to the city of
these rebellious people Amaaliqah and come along with the help of Allah.
We have tried them. Though their bodies are strong their hearts are very
weak. So do not be afraid of them and rely on the Lord. The Israelites
did not pay attention to their words and intended to stone them to
death. They told Musa: We will never enter that city. You may go their
with your God and fight with them. We will not budge from our place.
Musa became very angry and cursing them said, My Lord! I am the owner of
only myself and of my brother. My Lord! Discount me from the sinners.

[^10]: Though the narration of Thalabi is not quite reliable. We have
quoted it as it talks about some strange events and so that the wise can
understand that it was on the basis of the traditions of the Shi‘ah
scholars. The Holy Prophet had told Amir al-Mu’minin that: your relation
with me is the same, which was of Harun with Musa. But there will be no
Prophet after me. Likewise what has been narrated through the Shi‘ah
scholars and the Sunni is that the holy Prophet named Imam al-Husayn and
Imam al-Husayn in the Arabic language like the name of the names of the
sons of Harun because, just as the trusteeship of Jerusalem, which was
the Kiblah and an honored place of The Israelites and the protection of
the Chest, which was the treasure of their spiritual knowledge and the
celestial fire, which was the criteria of the acceptance or rejection of
their deeds was according to Thalabi who is one of their great
commentators and hadith scholar was related to Amir al-Mu’minin and his
progeny pious; that these personalities should be the centre point of
the raining of divine Radiances and the treasures of the spiritual
knowledge and secrets and that the acceptance or rejection of the deeds
of the creation ought to be in their hands and that their obedience and
prayers of this Ummah must be connected with their radiant Wilayah.
Rather the Jerusalem of this Ummah is the Wilayah of these great
personalities.

[^11]: It should be remembered that it is the part of the religious
beliefs of the Shi‘ahs that Allah is invisible: that His holiness cannot
be viewed with an eye, rather the inward eyes of the heart and mind too
are unable to comprehend the self and attributions of the lord. How can
He be seen when He does not posses either a body on an environment or a
place (space) nor can he be in any direction. Then how did Musa despite
being greatest messenger put such a question before Him? This doubtful
question can be answered in two ways. First: the asking of Musa was not
for seeing with the eye and that he wanted to comprehend Him and His
attributes through understanding and that at the same time he may also
attain the maximum limit of the human understanding. Since the first
wish was prohibited and the second was above his status, the lord, by
shedding the particle of His greatness on the mount and by making Musa
unconscious, made it clear that no one has the strength to comprehend
his grandeur and that no one has ability to of reaching the maximum of
state of understanding because it is only for the Prophet of the last
era (Muhammad saw). Second the asking by Musa was on behalf of his
community and he was appointed to take care and to cater the needs of
their including to declare whatever they asked for, he made this
question on the demand of his people even though he know that it was
impossible thing and a prohibited affair. But he wished his people
should also understand this truth. And this second cause is clearer as
will be seen from the following hadith of Imam al-Ri¤a

[^12]: This story is one of those which concern those who are in doubt
about the sin or error of Messengers because both Musa and Harun were
great messengers. If Harun had done a thing which angered Musa so much
that he held his head and bread and pulled toward himself and made him
talk very harshly with him then Harun had committed a sin. And if he did
not commit a sin then it was a sin or an error on the part of Musa to
insult his brother who too was a Prophet, especially the former’s
gesture of throwing the tablets of Torah. Some reasons can be given for
this: First: which is most clear is that this was a dispute between two
Prophets for reforming their people and to make them repentant because
when The Israelites indulged in such a heinous sin and considered it is
a light one it was necessary for Musa to expose the evil of that deed
perfectly and no way was more perfect than to deal harshly with his
great brother who besides having a blood relation with him was a great
messenger and to throw the tablets on the ground thus hinting that he
had abandoned the work of reforming them and that bringing the Book to
them was of no avail so that they too might realize that they had surely
done a gruesome deed which became the cause of such strange happenings
and which ended the patience of Musa and verily Musa did not err nor he
intended to harm Harun. It is a common diplomacy of rulers when the near
ones are being punished so that others may be warned. Allah Almighty too
has, on a number occasion in Holy Qur’an, used angry words for the Holy
Prophet but the main aim was to discipline the Ummah as will be
described hereafter in the events of the Holy Prophet-Inshallah. The
second reason is that these gestures of Musa were due to his extreme
anger against the Ummah. Just as a man bites his lips or pulls his beard
when very angry Musa did so to Harun who was near to him like his own
life. And Harun requested Musa not to do so because, he thought that The
Israelites might not understand the main reason and mistake them for
enmity and its blame might fall on him Musa. The third reason is that he
pulled the head and beard of Harun by way of love and affection so that
the community would draw some other meaning out of it. So he requested
him to stop doing so, so that somebody may not think bad about Musa. The
fourth cause is that what Musa did to Harun or the deeds of both of them
were a sort of Tark al-Awla (giving up the desirable), which did not
amount to a sin or disobedience, which could be contrary to Prophethood.
Other reason also have been mentioned besides these but the first one is
the clearest and as regards throwing of tablets it is possible that they
might have dropped from his hands due to extreme anger and hence
unintentionally or perhaps they were thrown to show Divine worth or
toughness in religion or a refutation of the opponents and that such
throwing cannot be regarded as a disrespect. It should be borne in mind
that there are various and varying hadiths about Musa’s promise to his
people. Most of them mention that Musa had promised that he would remain
absent for thirty days but that the Almighty, due to some contingency,
by way of Badaa (novel gesture) turned that promise into that of forty
days. The 30-days promise had a condition attached to it and that
condition was not fulfilled and this appears from some verse and also
some hadiths that Musa had given them a promise of 40 days and it was
merely due to the length of time those people did like that until Satan
misguided them so they made a count of days and nights separately and at
the end of 20 days they said that 40 had passed away. It is easy to
connect the verse, as the Ayat is not specific that the promise was
definitely of 30 days. Even if it had been specific the connecting is
possible because it was told Musa that the promise would be of 40 days
and it was due to some strategy that he was asked to give them a promise
of 30 days. Thus it is possible for yet another cause too that Musa’s
promise to his people might have been for 40 days in this way that he
might have told them: I will not be present among you until 30 days and
it is possible that some of the hadiths might have been based on
Taqiyyah.

[^13]: Maybe that mountain range was divided into several pieces and
part might have gone down in the earth and some pieces have been flown
onto various directions in the world and some might have turned into
sand grain. Hence it is also mentioned and it requires lengthy
discussion in the matter of raining of Radiance on the mountain for
which this book is too short.

[^14]: According to Shi‘ah belief it is difficult to believe them as
messengers because apparently they were sinners and their asking was the
sin due to which they were chastised. How can then they be messengers
despite committing such a sin? Its reply is possible with such causes:
first: The description of their becoming messengers might have been by
way of Taqiyyah because most of the Sunni (non-Shi‘ahs) have related
like that. Second: when they died their first (earlier) life with sin
had ended and they might have been innocent in their second life, which
is sufficient for their Messengership. There is scope for discussion in
this cause. Third: Their asking might also have been behalf of their
community and the chastisement might have been by way of disciplining
the community. This also appears difficult to believe. Fourth: The word
‘messenger’ might have been used figuratively, that is to convey the
sense that after being alive they turned pious like Prophets. But the
first cause is clearer. It must be understood that this event is to give
witness the truth in the belief of Raj‘ah (resurrection); that as it is
in this event, in the time of the al-Qa’im (al-Mahdi). Some have said
that what has happened in The Israelites will happen in this Ummah also,
which will be mentioned in a following chapter-Inshallah. It should be
remembered that it was according to these repeated hadiths about the
repetition of what had happened in The Israelites, that the holy Prophet
had told Amir al-Mu’minin that you are for me as Harun was for Musa. And
in this Ummah the story of the first oppressor, like that of Samiri and
the calf and he was worse than the calf and the second was more cunning
than Samiri and as they did not obey Harun, these did not obey the last
Prophet’s rightful Legatee and when they dragged the Emir forcibly to
mosque so that allegiance may be obtained from him. ‘Ali facing the
grave of the holy Prophet addressed him as Harun had addressed Musa. And
when the era of caliphate passed away which was like that of the calf
and Samiri and Qarun and when people gave allegiance to Amir
al-Mu’minin, swords came out of their sheets like The Israelites and
they began to kill one another. Just as The Israelites remained restless
in the desert of Tiyah for apparently forty years, this Ummah also will,
by the command of Allah, due to their own selection, remain restless in
their worldly and otherworldly affairs until the time of al-Qa’im aale
Muhammad Many things have been narrated about each of these affairs
through Shi‘ah and non-Shi‘ah sources which will, Inshallah, be
mentioned henceforth in their appropriate place.

[^15]: Possibly Torah began to come down in Rama¤an and was concluded in
the month of Dhu’l-hijjah or may be the tablets had, after being broken,
sent (down again).

[^16]: It is mentioned in many tradition that Amir al-Mu’minin and all
the pious Imam have said that the Pharaoh of this Ummah was the first
oppressor and the second was its Haman and third was Qarun and this
hadith also support those traditions according to which what had
happened in The Israelites will also happen in this Ummah too. A little
pondering will show how similar is the state of those three hypocrites
to the aforesaid three person because, if the Pharaoh claimed to be God
without right the first grabbed Caliphate and it too is sheer Polytheism
and it is a confrontation with the holy and the sacred God and just as
the Pharaoh intended to obey Musa but Haman obstructed him likewise he
was saying AQEELOONI (lift up hands from me) and was apparently showing
repentance but the second hypocrites was coming in the way. Just as
those along with their companions were drowned in the apparent sea and
were openly destroyed likewise all of there drowned themselves in the
ocean of deviation and blasphemy and were caught by eternal destruction
and in the time of Raj‘ah will get drowned in the water of sword of
al-Qa’im the family of Muhammad. And the similarity between the third
hypocrite with Qarun in the matter of mutual gathering of wealth,
temptation and worldly decoration and adoration etc is not hidden from
any intelligent fellow. If Qarun had blood relation with Musa, he too
was having casual rather apparent family relation with the Prophet of
Allah and if he was pushed in the earth due to the curse of Musa along
with his wealth so this was also destroyed due to the curse of Amir
al-Mu’minin and the Emir said in his first sermon after getting back
Caliphate that Almighty Allah destroyed the Pharaoh and Haman and Qarun.
If you ponder over their conditions you will also find other similar
causes also which will be, God-willing- described at appropriate places.
I suffice here only with some hints.

[^17]: This is the translation of the verses was according to the
commentators. Explanations of Ahl al-Bayt will follow.

[^18]: Maybe what is meant by this is that al-Khi¤r was not a Prophet
when he was with Dhu’l-Qarnayn). It is mentioned in yet another
tradition that Imam al-Sadiq said, In this Ummah the example (or
likeness) of us (i.e.. ‘Ali and me) is like Musa and al-Khi¤r. When Musa
met with him and talked with him he wished to remain with him.
Thereafter what happened is as mentioned by Allah in the holy Qur’an
that the Lord revealed to Musa that: I have made you superior to other
people with My Messengership and by My talking with you. So now take up
whatever I have given you and remain thankful to Me. He also said: We
have written for Musa the description of everything in the tablets and
have inscribed admonitions. And certainly al-Khi¤r did possess the
knowledge which was not written in tablets for Musa and Musa had
imagined that all the things required by man are there in the Torah and
that the tablets contained everything. It is similar to the claim of the
group which says that they themselves are faqihs (jurisprudents) and
scholars (Ulama) of this Ummah and that everything required by this
Ummah and this religion is with them and that they have got it from the
Prophet and they have imagined all this though they are lying. They do
not know all that the Prophet knew nor have they understood everything.
There are many problems wherein they do not know what is permissible
(Halaal) and what is prohibited (haram) and they do not like that people
should approach them for clarification lest they be called ignorant.
This is because they do not seek knowledge from the real treasure and
they interfere in Allah’s religion through their personal guessing. They
have left the Prophetic signs and worship Allah through self-made
rituals even though the Messenger of Allah has said that every
innovation is ignorance and deviation. Enmity towards us and jealousy
has prevented them from seeking knowledge from us. By Allah! Musa
despite his high status did not entertain jealousy towards al-Khi¤r and
his great knowledge also did not prevent him from asking questions to
al-Khi¤r. When Musa desired from al-Khi¤r that he may teach him
knowledge and since al-Khi¤r knew that the former did not have the
patience required for his company nor was he able to observe events
(coolly), he told him (Musa): How can you be patient at observing those
things over which you have no power and which are beyond your circle of
knowledge. Musa tried with total humility to make al-Khi¤r kind to him
and to allow him his company. So he said, Allah willing, you will find
me patient and I will not disobey you in any matter. al-Khi¤r did know
that Musa had no strength to know those things (which he was to see) nor
was he able to attain that power. Accordingly Musa did not remain
patient at the knowledge of that A’alim when he saw the jobs that he did
not like though Allah like them. Similarly our knowledge is disliked by
the ignorant but it is liked by the Lord of the worlds.

[^19]: Satan has many ways to misguide those who are less intelligent
concerning this strange story). But an honest believer must not try to
delve deep into its cause especially into everyone of them lest they may
slip. He should from the beginning tell Satan that it has been proved on
the basis of sound arguments that whatever Allah says is justice and
wisdom and strategy and that whatever the Messengers of Allah do is
correct and appropriate even if our intelligence fails to understand
some of their special affairs. Regarding the detailed replies to doubts,
the first doubt is that a Messenger must be the wisest person of his
time then how can it be that Musa who is a Messenger should need the
guidance of anybody else? Its reply is that a messenger must be the most
knowledgeable person of his time and al-Khi¤r was a messenger of Allah.
Maybe he was not in the Ummah of Musa. Further the knowledge in which a
messenger must not need anyone else’s help is the knowledge of religious
laws and rulings. There should be no objection if Allah teaches a
messenger some such things through a man as He does through an angel. So
it is not to be imagined that al-Khi¤r was superior to Musa if the
latter needed guidance of the former in some matters. It is possible
that a kind of knowledge was exclusively with Musa and it was not known
to al-Khi¤r and vice versa as is mentioned in some reliable traditions.
Secondly how did al-Khi¤r kill a boy who did not commit any crime. The
reply is that maybe he had attained puberty and might have opted for
Kufr. It is also possible that he might have been called a boy in the
holy Qur’an as he was just entering the age of puberty and hence might
have drawn the punishment of killing. Above all, even if he had not
become a major Allah had the right of taking back the life which He had
given in view of some strategy (known only to Him) just as even today
the angel of death has the authority to retrieve the souls of people.
But the apparent Prophets have normally been assigned (by Allah) to deal
on the basis of apparent things. However, intelligence does agree that
Allah may appoint some of them (messengers) with the factual (though
unseen) knowledge and that they may act according to that knowledge.
Thus they may kill some disbeliever on the basis of the knowledge which
they possess because it is as a matter of fact only in the interest of
the one who is killed not to go to Hell by committing blasphemy.
Moreover it is better for others also so that they may not misguide
others. The third point is that how did Musa make haste in objecting to
the acts of al-Khi¤r when he already knew the supremacy of the former
and how did he tell al-Khi¤r that ‘you have committed a sin?’ The reply
is that possibly Musa was made responsible only for apparent (visible)
knowledge because it so happens that a deed which is a sin apparently,
and as the main factual cause behind it is not known to one, he abhors
it. When Musa told al-Khi¤r that: You have committed a Munkar
(detestable deed) what he meant was that you did a thing that apparently
is a Munkar. Some have said that the words of Musa were conditional to
express that you have done a thing that astonishes and confuses the
mind. The fourth objection is that when Musa had given a promise that he
would not take any objection nor ask any questions until al-Khi¤r
mentioned the causes, how did he make a breach of that word of promise.
It reply is that it is not known for sure and that the keeping of the
word was obligatory, especially when it might have been based on the
Will of Allah. When he had in the beginning said Inshallah it was not
obligatory to keep the word under all circumstances. Hence it is no sin
if it was not kept.. Fifth, how did Musa say LAA TU AA KHIZ NEE BI MAA
NA SEETU, because ‘Nisyaan’ means forgetting and according to the Shi‘ah
Ulama a Prophet cannot forget anything. Reply to this objection is that
It is mentioned in traditions that at this place and also when Yusha‘
has said IN NEE NA SEETUL HOOT the meaning of ‘Nisyaan’ is giving up or
leaving and the meaning of this word is found in the Arabic vocabulary
also. All other replies to these objections and doubts have been
mentioned in the book Behaarul Anwaar and as this book has no room for
including all those replies I have not written them here. Now I am
writing all events of al-Khi¤r. Most of it has been included here in
this story so I have not formed a separate chapter for al-Khi¤r.

[^20]: Some have said his name was Yalbaa and according to some others
al-Yasa‘. Others say it was Ilyas.

[^21]: Perhaps what Musa meant to convey was that He might inform him
about the etiquette of calling Him, that is, whether he should call him
in a low voice like those who are near or in a loud voice like those who
are far away. The Lord responded: Consider Me your companion and pray in
a low voice. Otherwise Musa did know that the Lord Almighty is, from the
viewpoint of knowledge and greatness near to everything and maybe he
asked this question also like the question on behalf of his community.

[^22]: Maybe this was about his wrong beliefs which Allah knew better.

[^23]: If pondered over it will be seen how similar the state of this
Ummah is to that of Musa, as the holy Prophet has (according to
narration of both the Shi‘ah and the Sunni written that whatever has
happened in The Israelites will happen to this Ummah. Just as Yusha‘ was
apparently overpowered by three kings so Amir al-Mu’minin was also
apparently overpowered. Thereafter when those people proceeded towards
the Hereafter he came to caliphate. Then two persons of this Ummah viz
Talha and Zubair revolted against the along with the holy Prophet’s wife
himyarah It was just like the deed of two hypocrites of that Ummah who
had revolted against the legatee of Musa along with Safra wife of Musa.
Likewise as they were defeated and Safra was made captive and Yusha‘ did
not take revenge from her in this world, similarly Amir al-Mu’minin also
won the war and when he caught himyarah he gave respect to her and
postponed the revenge until the Day of Judgment.


