An account of Hizqil
====================

According to a tradition of Shaykh Tabarsi, the people of The Israelites
left the city to save themselves from the epidemic. Some said they left
the city due to war. Some said they belonged to the family of Hizqil the
third Khalifah of Musa. The first was Yusha‘ ibn Nun, the second Kalab
bin Yuqanna and the third Hizqil known as Ibn Al Majus because in his
old age his mother beseeched Allah for a son and Allah fulfilled her
wish and Hizqil was born.

According to another tradition, people called him Dhulkifl because he
saved seventy Prophets from the tyrants. He asked the people to leave
the country as early as possible and said it would be better if I would
be killed instead of all of you. Thus, they all were saved from the
cruel tyrant. After that, the Jews came to him and asked about them. He
said that he does not know where they have gone. They all left but Allah
kept him under His security.

There are different opinions about the population of The Israelites.
Some say that the population was about 3,000 to 10,000 people or 40,000
to 60 or 70,000 people and that they all died by the curse of Shamoun.
At that time, the city’s name was ‘Ovardan’. Some said Hizqil also
cursed them. According to ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, they were staying in one of
the city of Syria. In that city, there was a plague and they all died.
Their bones were scattered all along the way. One of the Prophets
passing by that way saw the bones lying here and there. He raised his
hands in prayer. So Allah brought them back to life and they all
returned to their own houses. They lived for many years and died
according to their time.

Hanaran asked about this from Imam al-Baqir. Imam replied that this
incident happened twice. They got a new life twice meaning Allah made
them alive twice. They lived for many years i.e.. according to the years
prescribed to them on earth and then died. Imam says Allah the Glorified
said,

***“Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them, Die;
again He gave them life; most surely Allah is Gracious to people, but
most people are not grateful.” (2:243)***[^1]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq have
narrated this when the people asked the explanation of the above Ayat.
They described as follows:  
 The people of The Israelites lived in a town of Syria. The population
of the city was about 70,000. Once a plague started in the city. At
once, the rich people left the city and went to another place to save
themselves from death but the poor stayed there. As the epidemic spread
and people started dying those people started thinking that if they had
left the city they too would have been saved. After that, they decided
that the next time there was an epidemic they would not stay in the
city. When they were struck again by the epidemic they all left their
houses and went to another city. The houses of that city were vacant
because the people of that city had also died by an epidemic. Their dead
bodies were annihilated except their bones. The people of The Israelites
settled in the empty houses. Again by the order of Almighty they all
died. Many years passed. Once a caravan passed by the way where the
bones were scattered. They saw the bones lying on the way. They
collected the bones, kept them aside, and cleared the way for the
passers-by.

Hizqil passed this way. When he saw the human bones lying in a bad
condition he grieved and wept much. He raised his hand to Allah and
prayed: O Allah! Make them alive again in the same way as you have taken
away their lives so that the city can again be prosperous and they can
increase the number of your followers and true believers. Allah was
pleased with him and asked, “O Prophet! Do you want me to make them
alive?” The Prophet replied, “Yes, My Lord.” Then Allah answered his
prayer and Hizqil saw the scattered bones regaining their original form
until the parts of their bodies came to their original form and they
were alive. They met each other, thanked Allah, performed prayers and
thanked Allah again and again. Seeing this the Prophet said “I witness
that Allah is one and Almighty.”

According to the tradition of Imam as-Sadiq, these people regained their
lives on Navroz (21st of March). Allah asked the Prophet to spray water
on their bones. He did so and the people became alive again. According
to the Prophet, there were about 30,000 people. From that day, on every
Navroz, the people of Aazam spray water on each other but they do not
know the real reason.[^2]  
 According to hadith, an atheist accepted Islam by listening to the
arguments of Prophet. The Prophet narrated, “A group of The Israelites
left their city to save themselves from death. By Allah’s order they all
were destroyed and died. Their body parts and bones were dispersed.
Allah sent Hizqil towards that city. He raised his hands for Dua and
they all regained their life.”

Imam al-Ridha visited Al-Ma’mun and argued with the Christians that “You
believe that ‘Isa is Allah because he used to bring the dead back to
life. Even Yusha‘ used to make dead men alive. Then why don’t you
believe him to be a God? Even Prophet Hizqil made 35,000 dead people
alive after 60 years. Why don’t you consider him to be a God?” Then he
said, “Don’t you know that these people were Palestinians which are also
discussed in Torah-the Holy Book of Palestinians. Many Palestinians were
killed then Allah sent Hizqil to Palestine and by his Dua all became
alive.” After that Imam al-Ridha narrated the incident that took place
when the plague spread and the people left the city to save themselves.
He also said that the residents of the city drew a boundary in the city
in which the bodies of dead people were kept. By passing that way Hizqil
made them alive by the order of Allah.

There is a tradition from Imam al-Baqir that King Kabath decided to send
his troops to destroy Jerusalem. The people gathered and went to Hizqil
and requested him to relieve them from this trouble. He said, “I will
pray to Allah about it in the night.” He prayed to Allah and Allah
promised to save the people from the cruel king. Allah ordered the Angel
of wind to take away the life of the king’s troops and they all died. In
the morning Hizqil informed his people that the troops have been killed.
The people of Palestine came out of the city and saw them dead. After
that Hizqil thought to himself that there is no difference between him
and Sulayman. He became depressed about the incident and became ill.
Then he pleaded to Allah to cure him from that unbearable disease. Allah
ordered him to go near the fig tree and apply its juice on his chest.
When he applied it, he was cured.[^3]

According to a tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq, Allah revealed to the
Prophet to inform the king that he would expire on a particular day.
Hizqil informed the king. When the king heard the news, he came down
from his throne, wept and pleaded to Allah to keep him alive until his
son grew up and sat on the throne. Allah heard his prayer and asked the
Prophet to tell the king that Allah has extended his life by another
fifteen years. He said, “O Allah! The people trust me and trust my
words. They have never heard a lie from me. When I inform the king about
this the people will think that I am a liar.” Allah said, “You are my
true believer. You must obey and listen to Me. Do as I say and keep on
preaching to them.”

[^1]: This is the true incident of The Israelites. They left their
houses to save themselves from death, but they died. Again Allah made
them alive. No doubt Allah is merciful but many people do not thank him.
Shi‘ah scholars have also agreed and accepted this).

[^2]: The people are spraying colored water on each other on Navroz day
like the Hindus. This custom is not indicated in any Islamic books. This
is strictly prohibited. Allah and his Prophets are displeased with this.
Allah, Mercy on them.

[^3]: Note: From the above discussion it is clear that Hizqil came after
Sulayman and he was the third Khalifah of Musa.


