Prophet Isma‘il
===============

Allah Glorified has bestowed Isma‘il with the title “Keeper of
promise”.  
 Allah says:

***And mention Isma‘il in the Book; surely he was truthful in (his)
promise, and he was an apostle, a Prophet.***  
***And he enjoined on his family prayer and almsgiving, and was one in
whom his Lord was well pleased. (19:54-55)***

Imam al-Ridha has stated that Allah called him “Keeper of promise”
because a man asked him to meet at a particular place. He kept his
promise and waited there for a whole year but the man did not turn up.

Imam as-Sadiq has stated that Isma‘il was the son of a Prophet. He
preached to the people about Allah and His commands but they did not
believe him. They kept enmity with him. Once his people beat him and
removed the skin of his head and face. Allah sent his angel to him. The
angel said, “Allah has given you His regards and has asked you about the
people who have behaved very brutally with you and asks what kind of
punishment should be given to them?” He replied that he did not want to
take any revenge from the world. He was patient like Imam al-Husayn the
grandson of Prophet Muhammad al-Mustafa.

According to another tradition once Bareed Ajali asked Imam as-Sadiq
that people believed he was the son of Ibrahim but is Isma‘il who has
been given the title “Keeper of promise” the son of Ibrahim or someone
else? Imam replied, “Allah had bestowed him with Prophethood in the
presence of Ibrahim. He was the Prophet of that time. If there is one
Prophet in the world, there cannot be another Prophet at the same time.
Prophet Ibrahim was Nabi and not a Rasul.

Allah says in the Qur’an that he was the son of Hizqil. Allah had given
him Prophethood among the people. They did not believe him. They behaved
very brutally with him and removed the skin of his head and face. Allah
became very angry and sent an angel of punishment named Satataeel to
him. He asked the Prophet, “If you wish me to make the people fall in
different kinds of punishment, I can.” But the Prophet said that he did
not want to give any punishment. Allah asked, “What is your intention?”
The Prophet said, “O Allah! you have promised that at the time of
Raj‘ah, Imam al-Husayn will come again in the world and take revenge of
his murderers. My wish is also the same. Allah agreed and promised him
that: I will send you with Imam al-Husayn at the time of Raj‘ah.”

The Holy Prophet has stated that it is much better to take care of the
people by good words, remove their evil deeds, and benefit the Muslims.
“In The Israelites there was a man very religious and helpful to others.
Once when he was going to the king for recommending some person he met
Isma‘il bin Hizqil on the way. He requested him to wait for him until
his return. When he reached the king, he forgot to come back to the
Prophet. Isma‘il waited for him but he did not return. Isma‘il did not
leave that spot and remained there only for nearly a year. By the grace
of Allah some vegetables grew there for him to eat, a stream of water
flowed by from which he could drink and there was a cloud to shade him.
A king passed by that way. That man was with the king when they reached
the place and saw Isma‘il still waiting. That man asked the Prophet if
he was here all this time. “Yes,” the Prophet replied. For this reason,
Allah has given him the title of “Keeper of promise”.

There was another man named Jabir. He claimed that the Prophet was
telling a lie for whenever he passed by that way he had never seen him.
The Prophet said he was lying and cursed him saying that Allah will take
away one of the useful things from you. Right away, his teeth fell out.
Then he accepted that he had lied and had unnecessarily blamed the
Prophet. He requested the king to ask the Prophet to forgive him and ask
the Prophet to pray for him to Allah for getting back his teeth as now
he had become like an old man. The king requested the Prophet. The
Prophet said he would pray for him the next morning. The Prophet prayed
for him and he got back his teeth. Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that
morning is the best time for prayer. Allah also states that morning is
best for prayers.

According to a tradition of Imam Ja‘far Sadiq, Isma‘il promised a man
that he would wait for him. The name of the place was ‘Safa’ which is
near ‘Makkah’. He waited there for one year. The people of Makkah
searched for him but did not know where he was. Coincidentally a man
reached the Prophet and said we have become old and weak without you and
asked the reason for his isolation. He said that a man had promised to
return so he waited there. When the people of Makkah heard this they
went to the person named ‘Taifee’ and said that you have taken a promise
from the Prophet but did not return to him. Hearing this, the man came
running and apologized and said, “By Allah I had forgotten the promise.”
The Prophet said that he would not have left the place until his death.
Allah also praised him in the Qur’an and his title “Keeper of promise”
is true.


