A Brief Sketch of Ilyas and Yusha‘
==================================

According to a tradition from of Ibn ‘Abbas, after Musa, Yusha‘ Bin Noon
divided the population of The Israelites in Syria and Syria was divided
among them. One of the groups was settled in the city named Baelbak
where Ilyas preached the people. There was an idol worshipper king who
compelled his subjects to worship the statue named ‘Baggal’ as their
god.  
 Allah the exalted says,

***“And Ilyas was most surely of the apostles. When he said to his
people, do you not guard (against evil): (Are you not afraid of Allah’s
chastisement? What! Do you call upon Ba’l and for sake the best of
creators. Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your father of yore?”
(37:123-6)***

But they called him a liar and didn’t believe his words. The king’s wife
was a sinful woman. When the king went abroad, he entrusted the kingdom
to his wife. She had a clerk. He was very wise and intelligent who saved
the lives of three hundred people from her. She was the most sinful
woman of the world. Seven kings of Jerusalem married her. She was mother
of 90 children and grandchildren.  
 The king’s neighbor was virtuous. He believed in Allah and His
apostles. His garden was next to the king’s palace. The income of garden
was his livelihood. The king also respected him. Once the king went for
a traveling. She took a chance of the absence of the king and murdered
him and took away the garden from his family. Allah became very angry.
When the king returned from the journey, he was informed by his wife.
The king said that she had done wrong.

Allah commissioned Ilyas on the people to preach them about true
religion and pray to Allah and Him only, and give up idol worship but
the people said that he was a liar, insulted him and threatened to kill
him but he remained patient. Again, he invited people towards Allah and
to obey his commands but their attitude became worst day by day.
According to Allah’s revelation, Ilyas informed the king to “give up all
controversies otherwise Allah will destroy you.” The king became very
angry and decided to punish him severely and kill him. Ilyas learnt of
it and left the city and took shelter on a mountain. He stayed there for
seven years and spent his time in prayer and survived on fruits only.
Allah kept His Prophet in His protection and kept his place secret from
their sight. In the meantime the king’s son became worst, people lost
all hopes and were disappointed. He was very much beloved to king.
People worshipped their idols for the recovery of king’s son but failed.
The king thought that Ilyas would be on the mountain so he sent his men.
The men called out to him and requested him to come down and pray for
the king’s son. Ilyas came down and said, “Allah the creator has sent me
to you and I am the Prophet. Listen to me. Go to the king and give the
message. Allah is one. He is alone and has no partner. Allah gives
livelihood to every one. He creates men and He can destroy. He has power
and command. Why does the king not request Allah, the merciful and
instead prays to the dumb and idols?”

The people went to the king and narrated that to him. The king got
annoyed and ordered his men to bring him as a prisoner “because he is my
enemy.” The people could not find him and returned. The king sent his
fifty chiefs from the army to arrest him. He said, “First tell him that
we trust you and your Allah. When he comes to you, arrest him and bring
him here.” The fifty commanders went to the mountain and said in the
loud voice, “We trust you so please come down and meet us.” Ilyas was in
the forest, he heard them. He raised his hands to Allah for the prayed
to allow him to go to them “and if they are liars, protect me from them
and send a chastisement of fire to burn them.” Allah is knowing and
hearing. Allah sent a chastisement of fire at once and they were all
destroyed in a moment. When the king came to know he was furious and
ordered his wife’s clerk who was good and pious and a believer of Allah
to go along with people. And said, “It is time of repentance, go to
Ilyas and pay allegiance to him and ask him to come and preach and show
the right path.” Then he told his people to give up idol worship.

The clerk went along with the people to the mountain and called out.
Ilyas recognized his voice. Allah revealed to him to go to the believer,
greet him and shake hands. Ilyas came to him. The clerk narrated the
king’s condition and said, “If you won’t come the king will kill me.”
Allah revealed to His apostle that the king’s message is false. He wants
you under his control and wants to kills you. Allah said, “Tell the
clerk not to worry of the king. His son will die. The king will be sad
and not harm him.” When the clerk reached the king, he saw the condition
of his son becoming worst and he died.” The king did not take care for
them as he was sorrowful of his son’s death. After a long time the king
became comfortable and asked the clerk about the Ilyas. He said he
didn’t meet Ilyas. After that Ilyas came down from the mountain and
stayed in the house of Prophet Yunus for a year.  
 When Yunus was born, Ilyas left his house and went to the mountain
again where he was staying before. When Yunus was young, his mother
stopped suckling. She went towards the mountain in search of Ilyas and
gave the sad news of her son’s death and said that Allah has revealed to
her “to come to you for my child’s life. If you pray Allah for my son,
Allah will make my son alive. I have kept my son secretly and I have not
informed anyone of his death nor buried him.” Ilyas asked, “How many
days have passed since his death?” She said, “Seven days.”

Ilyas came to the house, raising his hands for prayer, requested Allah
to make him alive. Allah the merciful granted his prayer and gave him a
new life and then Ilyas went back.  
 When Yunus was forty years old, Allah appointed him as a Prophet. When
Allah granted him a new life Ilyas went away to his own place. After
seven years Allah revealed and said to Ilyas to ask whatever he wants,
He will grant him. Ilyas said, he was fed up with life, and tired of The
Israelites. They are deadly against You and because of You I am also
against them. Allah revealed, “O Ilyas there is a time to come to me. I
do not intend to keep my land empty without you. There must be an
apostle on land. Ask any other thing.” Ilyas said, “Take my revenge with
them, do not send rain for seven years. When they come to me with
request, I will pray to you for rain.” Due to Ilyas’s curse there was no
rain, and there was a famine. The people understood that this was due to
curse of Ilyas.” All of them approached him and said, “We will obey you
and do whatever you say.”

Ilyas along with his companion Yusha‘ went to the king. The king said
you have destroyed the country with divine wrath. Ilyas said, “Allah has
destroyed the unbelievers who had no faith.” The king requested him to
pray to Allah to relieve them from His wrath. In the dark Ilyas raised
his hands and prayed to free people from chastisement and asked Yusha‘
to watch the sky. Yusha‘ said he sees a cloud. Ilyas asked him to inform
the people, it will be raining now and to be careful for their safety.
Rain started falling everywhere and famine disappeared by the grace of
Allah. Ilyas stayed there for a long time. People also spent their lives
doing good deeds. Then after sometime they all turned against the
Prophet. Sometimes Allah takes revenge by His apostle and sometimes He
takes revenge by sending the enemy of his own community.

All of a sudden, one of the king’s enemies attacked him and killed the
king and queen and threw them in the garden of the follower of Allah.
Ilyas declared Yusha‘ his legatee. Almighty Allah favored him with wings
and raised him up to the heaven. While moving towards the heaven Ilyas
threw his scarf for Yusha‘ and Allah appointed Yusha‘ as a Prophet of
Palestinians and bestowed him with all His bounties by revelation upon
him. The Israelites respected him and followed his path.

Muzaffar bin Qamar has stated that one day they went to Imam as-Sadiq’s
house and asked for permission to enter. Upon entering they heard the
Imam’s voice speaking with someone in a strange language. It was Syriac.
The Prophet wept too much and we also wept with him. After that the
servant came out and asked us to go in. We all entered the house. The
narrator said that he heard his voice at the door and asked whether the
language was Arabic or Syriac? “You wept and we also wept.” Imam replied
that I remembered Ilyas one of the best Prophets and I was reciting the
dua that he recited. The Imam recited the same Dua in front of the
people. The people had never heard recitation of such verses before.
Then he translated it in Arabic and said when was recited this Dua,
Allah revealed to him to raise his head from prostration. That He will
not give any punishment to him.” Ilyas said, “I am Your servant and you
are My Lord, the Beneficent.” Allah revealed to him to raise his head
from Sajdah. He will keep his promise what he said.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has narrated the same story. (By Musa bin Aqeel)
indicated the name Iliya instead of Ilyas.  
 According to a tradition Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “Ilyas and Yusha‘
ibn Nun ate Parsley seeds with their food.”

Imam Muhammad al-Taqi is quoted in a book that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said
that once his father Imam Muhammad al-Baqir was circumambulating the
Ka‘bah when a man came. After the Imam’s circumambulation he took him to
a house near the hill of Makkah. “He called me there. The three of us
were there and no one else. He welcomed Imam as-Sadiq and blessed the
Imam by putting his head on Imam’s head. Then he turned his face to Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir and said, “Would you like to inform me first or I
question you? Imam- Muhammad al-Baqir said, “As you like.”

The man said, “If I ask you question, answer me only with what is
inspired in your heart.” Imam al-Baqir replied that he had heard from
his father that he who ask like this has two types of knowledge (ideas)
which are different from each other, the knowledge of divine has no
differentiation. The man said my question this, what is that? Imam
replied- Allah, the great. And he has given the knowledge to the Prophet
and Imams for the necessity of the people. Hearing this he lifted his
veil from his face and sat comfortably and became very happy and said, I
have came for this reason. Then he inquired that the necessity of the
knowledge for the people has been given to the Prophet and their
descendent but say how they know? Imam said, by revelation of Allah and
they hear the voice of angels but the Prophets can see them, the
descendents can’t. They can listen the angel’s voice. The status of the
Prophet is very high and they can go to Allah and talk in the moment and
come back. But this position is not given to all. The man said, “It is
true what you have said, O, the son of Prophet! Now I will ask you a
difficult problem. Why does Imam not disclose their knowledge on the
people as the Prophet did?”

Hearing this Imam al-Baqir laughed and said that Allah does not want the
ordinary people to be notified of divine knowledge except His apostles,
as Allah has tested their hearts. Prophet Muhammad al-Mustafa kept
patience on high handedness of the people of Makkah by the permission of
Allah and Allah had not given permission of war against the unbelievers
and kept secret of his Prophethood to his community. Then after a long
period Allah revealed to him to do publicize His orders to the
unbelievers. The Prophet did, first he was worried to tell them openly.
He was waiting for the correct time to show his position and his Divine
knowledge because he knew people would not believe him. He had no
permission of war. Prophet said, to wait until the approach of Imam
al-Mahdi and take revenge of Prophet’s killer and ungrateful persons and
give them punishment with their companions. Hearing him the man drew his
sword and said, “This sword is one of the sword when there will be great
battle against sinners.” Imam al-Baqir said, “Yes, By Allah, Prophet
Muhammad is a true and respectable Prophet.” Again that person covered
his face and said, “I am Ilyas and whatever I asked, I knew it well. But
I wanted to strengthen faith.” Then he asked many questions and
disappeared.

According to a tradition of Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari Prophet told his
follower Zaid bin Arqam that if he wanted to save himself from drowning,
burning, choking to death, he should recite this Dua every morning:  
 “*Bismillahe MashaAllaho la yasrifus-su’a, Il-lallaho, Bismillahe
MashaAllaho la-yasukul Khaira illallaho. Bismillahe Masha Allaho
Ma-yakuno min-nehmatin, famenallahe. Bismillahe MashaAllaho la haulo
wala kuwwata illa billahil Aliyal Azeem. Bismillahe MashaAllaho
Sal-lul-laho ala Muhammadin wa-alehit Taiyabin.*”

Those who recite this Dua three times in the morning and three times in
the evening will be protected from all kinds of troubles.  
 Prophet said that al-Khidhr and Ilyas meet each other in Hajj every
year and recite the above Dua when they depart part.[^1]  
 According to Shaykh Muhammad bin Shahr Aashoob one day the Prophet
heard someone saying ‘O Allah let me be the disciple of Prophet Muhammad
the last age’s community.’ Prophet went to the top of the mountain. He
saw an old man with white hair. His height was 300 feet in length. He
saw Prophet Muhammad and stood up and embraced him and said, “I eat only
once a year and this is my time to eat.” A dish full of different
eatables came for heaven and they ate together. He was Ilyas.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated there was a person named Ilya. He was a
leader of four hundred people of The Israelites. The king of The
Israelites fell in love with a woman of another community. She was an
idol-worshipper. The king proposed to her. She said yes if he allowed
her to bring her idol along with her and worship it. The king refused
then he accepted her terms and married her and brought her with the
idol. Another eight hundred people came with her with their idols. At
that time Prophet Ilya came to the king and said, “Allah has made you a
king with a long life and you have become disobedient to Allah.” The
king did not care what he said. Ilya cursed him and prayed to Allah to
let them be struck with famine for three years. The famine struck
everywhere, they slaughtered their animals and ate them except one foal
on which king was riding. The king’s minister was good, religious and a
believer of Allah.

He was staying with Prophet Ilya along with his followers. Allah
revealed to his Prophet to go to the king and ask him to repent and that
Allah will forgive him. Prophet went to the king and gave him the
message of Allah and said to him to obey him. The king argued and
promised him he will obey him. Then the Prophet called all his
followers. First he sacrificed an animal as offering, secondly he killed
the king’s wife and burnt her idol. The king repented very much and
became a true follower of Ilya. Allah the Merciful showered the rain and
made them free from famine.  
 Imam al-Ridha said, the people of Jerusalem believed ‘Isa as their god
because he made the dead alive. Yusha‘ also made all dead, alive, walked
on water and healed the blind.[^2]

[^1]: Ilyas is still on the earth like al-Khi¤r and he will be there
until the time of Imam al-Mahdi’s.

[^2]: It is possible that Ilya and Ilyas are the same as their names are
alike. Shaykh Tabarsi has stated that there are different opinions about
him. Some say, “He is Idris and some said he belonged to the family of
Harun and was the paternal cousin Ya’saa and was one of the Prophets of
The Israelites. According to the ancient tradition, he was the
descendant of Hizqil. When Allah raised him up. Prophet Ya’saa came
after him. It is said that Ilyas helped the weak and the travelers like
al-Khi¤r and they both meet each other in the time of hajj. According to
a tradition Ilyas is Dhulkifl.


