An account of Dhulkifl
======================

According to reliable sources ‘Abd al-‘Alim has said that he sent a
letter to Imam Muhammad al-Taqi to ask him the name of Dhulkifl and
whether he was a Prophet? In reply the Imam stated that Allah has sent
One lakh and twenty four thousand Prophets in the world. Among them
three hundred and thirteen were apostles. Dhulkifl was one of them and
he was appointed after Sulayman. He was very quiet and calm-natured
person. Allah, the great stated in the Qur’an,

‘Remember Isma‘il and Dhulkifl and Yasa’a they all were good and true
believers.’  
 Ibn Babawayh has stated that the people asked the Prophet about
Dhulkifl and he said, “Dhulkif belonged to Hadarmaut and his first name
was Owaidya. His father’s name was Oriyan. Yasa’a once asked, “Who will
be successor after me upon certain conditions, and preach the people
calmly and never became angry with them?” According to another tradition
he used to fast in the daytime and pass the night in prayers, and not to
be angry on anyone. Owaidya stood up and said, “I accept your terms.
Again Yasa’a repeated twice, Owaidya said, “I will follow your terms.”
After that Yasa’a died and Owaidya became the successor and preached the
people. One day Iblis asked one of his companion, “Which one of you
would go to Owaidya, make him angry and compel him to break his
promise?” A companion of Iblis, named Abyaiz said, he was prepared to do
this. Iblis ordered him to go and try.

At that time the Dhulkifl was resting after solving the problems of the
peoples. The Satan came and said that he has been harassed by someone.
The Prophet said to him to go and call the person who has harassed him.
He said, “He will not come if I ask him.” The Prophet gave him his ring
as a sign and told him to show him and bring him. The Satan took
Prophet’s ring and went away. Dhulkifl could not take rest and could not
sleep at night. The next day after solving the problems of his people
decided to take rest. Again that Satan approached to him and said, “The
person, who harassed me had not accepted the ring and refused to come.”

The servant of Dhulkifl told him to wait or go away. Prophet was taking
rest as he could not sleep last night and the whole day he was busy. But
Satan said he wanted justice that very moment. The servant informed him.
The Prophet wrote a letter and gave him and told him to show it to his
enemy. The Satan took the letter and moved away. The Prophet could not
sleep and passed the night in prayers. It same was repeated the third
day. He came and said that his foe had not accepted his letter and
denied to come. Then Prophet arose, held his hand and went alone with
him. It was very hot and Prophet was walking in the severe heat of the
Sun. He felt ashamed seeing the Prophet’s patience. He became
disappointed and thought that he can’t control over him. He left his
hand and disappeared.

For this reason he is called Dhulkifl because he was firm to his
promise. Allah, the Almighty stated about his patience to his last
Prophet so that he can also have patience on the troubles give by his
community.

Shaykh Tabarsi has stated that many seditious people said, “He was a
good person but he was not a Prophet. To get the Prophethood he was
fasting in the daytime and was praying in the night and did not get
angry on anyone, and followed the Divine orders. Dhulkifl acted upon all
the practical laws.” Other people believe that he was a real Prophet and
his name was Dhulkifl and Allah has increased his rewards for his deeds.

Some say he was Ilyas and belonged to the family of Yasa’a. Allah says
in Qur’an that he was Prophet Ilyas and Dhulkifl was another Prophet
after him.  
 Note: A narrator has described in his book that Dhulkifl was the son of
Ayyub the patient one and Allah granted the apostleship after his father
and sent him to Rome. The people accepted him as his Prophet. Allah
ordered them to fight the enemies. But they said they like to live in
the world peacefully and do not like to die and “we do not want to go
against Allah and his Prophet. O Prophet: pray for us. We die according
to our own will. So that we can pray to Allah and join the battle.
Dhulkifl prayed to Allah, “You have ordered me for the battle with the
enemy but You know better what my community says. You are knowing and
hearing I am afraid of Your chastisement.” Allah revealed to him that He
has heard him and to tell the people that their wish is granted. “They
will not die unless and until they ask. Make them follow you and My
orders.” That is why he is called Dhulkifl.

The population of the community increased day by day and their condition
became weak, then again they requested the Prophet to pray to Allah for
them, to let them live and die according to Allah’s desire. Allah
revealed that your community was not knowing what was better for them.
After that they were dying according to Allah’s will.The population of
the community increased day by day and their condition became weak, then
again they requested the Prophet to pray to Allah for them, to let them
live and die according to Allah’s desire. Allah revealed that your
community was not knowing what was better for them. After that they were
dying according to Allah’s will.


