An account of Luqman and his words of wisdom
============================================

The Lord of the worlds has made a mention of Luqman in the Holy
Qur’an,  
***And certainly we gave wisdom to Luqman, sayings: Be grateful to
Allah. And whoever is grateful, he is only grateful for his own soul and
whoever is ungrateful, then surely Allah is Self-sufficient, Praised.
And when Luqman said to his son while he admonished him: O my son! Do
not associate ought with Allah; most surely polytheism is a grievous
inequity -O my son! Surely if it is the very weight of the grain of a
mustard -seed, even though it is in (the heart of) rock, or (high above)
in the heaven or (deep down) in the earth, Allah will bring it (to
light); surely Allah is Knower of subtleties, Aware. O my son! Keep up
prayer and enjoin the good and forbid the evil, and bear patiently that
which befalls you; surely these acts require courage: And do not turn
your face away from people in contempt, nor go about in the land
exulting overmuch; surely Allah does not love any self-conceited
boaster: And pursue the right course in your going about and lower your
voice; surely the most hateful of voice is braying of the asses. (31:12,
13, 16-19)***

Shaykh Tabarsi says there is difference of opinion about Luqman. Some
say he knew Divine Wisdom but was not a Prophet. Some say that he was a
Prophet. Other commentators have said that Luqman was son of Bao’or and
belonged to the Az tribe and that he was the son of the sister of the
aunt of Ayyub; that he lived up to the time of Dawud and learned
knowledge from him.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “I
swear by Allah and say that Allah did not give wisdom owing to his
lineage, wealth, family or physique but only because he was steadfast in
obeying Allah and refraining from His disobedience. He was a silent
gentleman who never talked without wisdom. He possessed a peaceful heart
and a thoughtful mind. His eyes were ever ready to pick up admonition
and did not required others’ advice. He did not sleep in daytime. Nobody
ever saw him bathing or answering nature’s calls openly like others of
that time because he carried out all such affairs secretly. He had a
sharp eye but he never liked to be aware of others’ secrets. He never
laughed on any occasion fearing his sins nor did he frown upon anybody
for his own sake. He never ridiculed anyone. He neither became overjoyed
by getting any worldly gift nor became sorrowful due to losing anything.
He married many women and begot many children. Many of his children died
but he never wept at their loss nor counted their number to be proud (of
their number). He never went away from two quarrelling persons until he
made peace between them and they gave up fighting. He never got pleased
with anyone’s good word unless he obtained its meaning and explanation.
He also asked from whom the other person heard it. Most of the time he
sat with the wise, the intelligent and jurisprudents. He used to go to
the judges and the kings and the rulers only to get lesson from their
conditions. While seeing the judges he used to be kind looking to their
difficult duties. He was also kind toward the kings thinking that being
ignorant they were running away from Allah and were loving the material
world. He took lessons from their (kings) events. He also used to
remember some of their undesirable things whereby he controlled his
desires. He was fought his desires and kept away from conspiracies of
Satan. He was treating the diseases of his soul through contemplation
and by obtaining lessons from worldly people. He never moved from his
place unless he had a hope of any gain by doing anything. Because of all
these qualities Allah had bestowed upon him His wisdom and had made him
sinless. In the middle part of a day when the rest of the people were
taking rest Allah sent some of His angels to Luqman. The angels called
Luqman but in such a way that he could only hear their voice without
seeing them.

The angels asked him, “O Luqman! Do you wish that Allah may make you His
caliph so that you may solve people affairs (disputes etc)?” Luqman
replied, “If the Lord of the worlds commands me to do so I will obey Him
because, if I accept it by His order, He will help me, will also teach
me the necessary things for that office and he will then also protect me
from making mistakes. But if He has given me an option about accepting
that post I would prefer safety (I want to be excused).” The angels
asked, “Why so?” Luqman replied, “Though settling people’s disputes
carries much value in the sight of Allah and it has much weight in the
religion of Allah, its tests and criterions are also very hard. If Allah
does not help someone and leaves him on his own then oppression and
darkness encircles him from all sides. Such a man is discarded. He will
either make correct judgment and be saved or will make mistake and will
become deviated. The one who becomes dishonorable in the world will be
better off in the Hereafter because the one who orders becomes big in
the eyes of the people and the one who purchases this world at the cost
of the Hereafter suffers loss in both the places because this world
slips away from him very soon and he had no share in the Hereafter.”

Hearing this, the angels were astonished at his wisdom and intelligence
and the Lord liked their dialogue. When night fell and Luqman went to
bed Allah rained the radiance of wisdom on him and made him full of
light. He was asleep and Allah covered him with the cloth of wisdom.
When he arose he was the wisest man of his time. He came out before the
people when words of wisdom were coming out of his mouth and he was
describing the Divine wisdom and intelligence and justice to all. And
when he did not accept Prophethood, Allah asked the angels to invite
Dawud to it. Dawud accepted and did not put forth the conditions that
Luqman had submitted. So Allah made him His caliph in the world on
earth. Allah, often tested those (Prophets) and on some occasions they
missed the preferable (*Tark al-Awla*) and Allah pardoned them for it.
Luqman used to meet Dawud often and give him words of wisdom and
admonition. Dawud used to tell him: Congratulations! For you have been
given wisdom, and tests have been lifted up from you and caliphate has
been given to Dawud and he has been put to test. Luqman gave so many
admonitions to his son that he became embodiment of the enlightening
wisdom of Luqman.”

Some of the admonitions given by Luqman to his son are:  
 O My son! From the very day you have arrived in the world you have
turned your back to the world and verily turned your face toward the
Hereafter (you have started your journey toward the Hereafter from the
very moment you were born), and you are passing various stages of that
journey. Hence the house towards which you have turned your face is
coming nearer and nearer to you and the house in which you are now is
getting more and more away from you every day. O my son! Be a companion
of the wise and sit with them and do not argue with them that they may
prevent their knowledge from you. Take from this world only that which
is essential and enough for you. Also do not give up earning in this
world that you may become needy (and others may have to care for you).
Also do not get involved so much in this world that you may lose your
Hereafter. Fast to an extent your passions are controlled. Do not fast
so much that you may not have strength enough even for performing your
prayer because Allah loves prayers more than fasting. This world is a
deep ocean. Innumerable people have drowned in it and destroyed due to
it. So it is essential for you to make faith your ship for saving
yourself from the dangers of this world. You should make ‘Reliance on
only one Allah’ the sail of your ship. You provision in the ship should
be avoidance of the illegal and the undesirable. Thereafter if you are
saved it is due to Allah’s Mercy and if you get destroyed it is because
of your sins. According to another narration, “O Son! Make the fear of
Allah your ship and that the capital you should put in it should be
faith in Allah, His Prophets and their Words. The sail of your ship
should be reliance on Allah; the captain must be intelligence which
should direct its course; its guide ought to be knowledge and its anchor
should be refraining from the prohibited and patience for bearing the
hardships in obeying Allah.

O Son! If you learn discipline in childhood you will benefit from it
after you grow up. One who knows the grace of good behavior tries to
achieve it and who cares to achieve it also tolerates the hardships of
that path and the one who achieves virtues like this also makes great
efforts in maintaining them and when he obtains those virtues he adorns
himself with them and when he becomes the embodiment of those virtues he
gets their benefits in both this life and in the Hereafter. So be
habituated with good habits so that you may prove to be the heir of the
virtuous and benefit those who come after you, that they may follow your
footsteps and your friends may hope for good from you and your enemies
remain afraid of you. Never remain slack in the matter of attaining
virtue nor pay any attention to anything except good behavior and
habits. If people defeat you and snatch away the world (material things)
from you, do not worry. Rather try to assure that you may not be
defeated in the otherworldly (spiritual) matters; that no one may be
able to snatch away the Hereafter from you that is, you may not obtain
knowledge from where it should be obtained. You must set aside some
hours in the day and night for achieving knowledge because there is
nothing which can destroy man’s knowledge. The example is that of giving
up learning. It means, giving up learning is the results of your losing
whatever knowledge you have learned. (So be after it and continue
learning). Do not quarrel with the quarrelsome nor argue with any wise
and learned person. Do not make the rich your enemy and do not keep
company of the oppressors and do not cultivate brotherhood with a sinner
nor sit with a disgraced and notorious person and keep your knowledge
hidden just as you hide your wealth.

My precious son! Fear Allah, as He deserves to be feared. Be afraid of
Him even if you have at your credit all the virtues and good deeds done
by all men and jinn if you have to stand before Him for giving account
of your deeds. You should always be afraid of His chastisement.
Similarly also remain hopeful of His Mercy even if you have sinned
totaling the sins of all men and jinn and be hopeful that He will
forgive you. Hearing this, the son said, My respected father! From where
can I get enough strength to entertain both hope and fear together when
I have only one heart in my chest? Luqman said, My son! If a faithful
heart is cut open two rays will come out o it. One light of the fear of
Allah and the other light of hope from Allah. If both the lights are
weighted neither will weigh either more or less even by the weight of an
atom. So one who believes in Allah, also testifies to His Words and the
one who testifies His Words also acts according to His commands and if
someone does not act according to the word of Allah then surely he did
not understand (believe) the words of Allah because some of the virtues
give witness of some other virtues. So the one who has truly and
sincerely believed in Allah will surely act honestly for Allah with a
hope for good. One who acts in this way really believes in Allah and the
one who believes in Allah also fears Him and the one who fears Him loves
Him and the one who loves Him also obeys Him and the one who obeys Him
makes himself eligible for His pleasure and Paradise and the one who
does not want Allah’s pleasure makes His punishment swift upon him and I
seek Allah’s protection from His punishment.

O my dear son! Do not have a wish for the world and do not engage
yourself in it because no creation of Allah is more worthless than the
world in the sight of Allah. Do you not see that Allah has not made the
worldly bounties the reward of His obedient nor has He made the worldly
hardships the punishment of His disobedient and the sinners?  
 According to another reliable tradition, Imam as-Sadiq said that Luqman
said (as a will) to his son: O my son! You must keep a weapon ready by
which you can fell (defeat) your enemy and that weapon (tactic) is that
you should shake hands with him and show pleasure to him without
separating from him, without showing enmity to him so that he may reveal
to you what is hidden in his heart about harming you.

My son! I have lifted iron and stone and all heavy things and have been
able to bear their weight but have not found anything heavier than an
evil neighbor. I have tasted bitter things but have not found anything
more bitterly than restlessness and need for others.  
 It is mentioned in another hadith that Luqman said, O my son! Make a
thousand friends because even a thousand friends are less but do not
make even one enemy because even one enemy is sufficient.

It is recorded from same Imam in another hadith that ‘Ali said, “One of
the admonitions of Luqman to his son is:  
 The one whose faith in Allah’s attribute of being the Provider is less,
must take a lesson of advice and the one who is weak in asking provision
from the Almighty must take a lesson of advice because it is only Allah
who brought him from non-existence into existence and gave him provision
in three states and there was no source of getting provision whatsoever
in any of the said three states. So he much have rest assured that He
will provide him maintenance in the fourth state of his life also. One
of the above mentioned three states is when he was in the womb of his
mother. It was only Allah who provided him sustenance and sheltered him
in a restful place where he suffered neither heat nor cold. In another
state he was brought out of his mother’s womb by Allah and he provided
his provision of milk from his mother’s breast. It was a pure and clean
and enough for him in that state. Allah nourished and raised him in that
state wherein there was no other source of nourishment and training, no
strength for earning and no power of warding off harms.

The third state was when his milk supply ended. Then he was provided
maintenance through his parent’s earnings that spent on him with maximum
love and pleasure and compassion, so much so that sometimes they gave
him preference over themselves. This continued until he grew up and got
enough strength and intelligence to earn his provision himself. Then he
himself made things difficult for him by entertaining undesirable
thoughts about his Lord and did not spend for fulfilling and observing
the rights of Allah and began to give less to his family members fearing
loss of wealth thereby losing faith in Allah. This was despite the fact
that Allah always rewards him for spending in His path both in this
world and in Hereafter. So bad indeed is such a slave.”

My son! Everything has a sign by which it is recognized. That sign gives
witness for that thing. So religion too has three signs: Faith (Iman),
Knowledge (Ilm) and Deeds (A’mal). Faith has three signs: Testifying of
Allah’s Books. Knowledge also has three signs: Knowing his Lord,
ascertaining what his Lord likes and what He dislikes. Again there are
three signs of the one who acts according to his Knowledge: Daily
prayers, fasts and Zakat poor tax. Also there are three signs of a man
who closes the door of knowledge for himself and does not become
learned: He quarrels with one who is wiser than him, mentions things
which are higher than his level of intelligence though he acts against
it, oppresses the weak and assists the oppressors. And there are three
sings of the hypocrites: His tongue does not corroborate his heart, his
heart does not corroborate his character and his outward appearance is
different from his inner self.

There are three signs of a sinner: He embezzles people’s wealth, tells
lies and acts contrary to his words. There are three signs of
ostentation: He is slack in his worship while he is alone but makes a
show of full attentiveness in worship while in public and he does it so
that people may praise him. The envious has also three signs: He
backbites people and flatters them on the face, feels happy when people
are in trouble. There are three sings of extravagant: He eats things
which are beyond his capacity and so also he wears likewise, and he
feeds others crossing his limits of capacity. There are three signs of
an indolent: He is slack in doing good deeds and he postpones good deeds
until and unless he is threatened and he becomes so lazy that the job is
spoiled and thus he becomes a defaulter. There are three signs of a
negligent man: He is doubtful in his worship, becomes careless in matter
of remembering his Lord and he forgets good deeds.

O my son! Do not ask for things which are not within your power and for
which you do not have sources and leave aside things which you can
achieve and for which you have resources so that you opinion may not
falter and your wisdom may not go waste.

My son! Confront your enemy by giving up the prohibited, help yourself
by achieving grace in your religion through magnanimity. Keep your soul
clean of Allah’s disobedience. Keep your secrets hidden and your inner
self, pure. When you will do so you will due to Allah’s secret, (will)
have no fear of your enemy becoming aware of your weakness and defect.
Do not become fearless (careless) of the enemy’s conspiracies, lest he
finds you unaware and overpowers you and then there will be no excuse.
You should always show him your happiness.

My son! Hard work for attaining a useful thing should be considered
light and less effort in achieving a harmful thing should be considered
heavy.

O my son! Do no go against the prevalent practice of company while with
people and do not expect from them things which are difficult for them
otherwise your companions will abhor your forever and others will also
part company with you and you will become lonely. There will be no
companion to sympathize with you and no friend to help you. When you
will become alone, you also will be disrespected and valueless. Do not
offer excuse before a person who may not accept your apology and who may
not recognize any of your rights. Do not seek anybody’s help for serving
your purpose except the one who may charge something for that service,
because, in that case he will do your job just as he does something for
himself. In this way, after fulfilling that need, he will be benefited
both in this passing world as well as get some reward in the Hereafter
and hence he will make a good effort to do that job. You should also
select compassionate, wealthy, wise and respected persons for making
friends or for seeking help in your affairs so that if you give them any
benefit, they may thank you and if you part with them they may remember
you.

O my son! If the learned persons whom you have befriended are loyal to
you then you must think of improving yourself. If they turn away from
you then keep distance from them because their enmity will be more
harmful to you than the enmity of others, because, people will believe
whatever they will say about you as they know you.

O my son! If you dislike something in your friends do not get impatient
and do not get nostalgic or misbehave with them because friendship
cannot be maintained in this way. Make it a point to act with restraint
and without haste. Do not rush to do anything without properly thinking
over its consequences. Be tolerant if you get any pain from your
brothers and friends and try to make your character the noblest of all.

O my son! If you do not have enough wealth to help your kith and kin or
to spend over your brothers-in-faith then do not be stingy in keeping
your face smiling and your tongue sweet while meeting and behaving with
them because people befriend persons having good character and evil
persons keep away from them. Be content on what Allah has fixed for you
so that you may always remain happy. If you want all honors and respects
of the world then drive away your desires for those things that are in
possession of others because no Prophet or Truthful has ever attained
that honorable status without being careless about the possessions of
others.

O my son! If you need a king’s help in any matter, ask with much respect
and earnestness and humility. Do not ask for anything unless the time is
appropriate. That time is when he is pleased with you and when he is
carefree. Do not despair if you fail in getting any needed thing because
its fulfillment is in the control of Allah and it will be fulfilled only
at an appointed time. When that time comes the work is done. Always
remember Allah and ask only from Him and keep your fingers moving with
total humility while praying to Allah.

O my son! The world is small and your age is short. Do not care much for
achieving anything from a limited world in a short lifetime. O My son!
Never be envious. Consider it against your status to be envious. Never
behave badly with others. Do not make it your wish to do so. These two
evils can harm none but you. When you harm yourself you carried out the
business of your enemy yourself because your enmity with yourself is
more harmful than the enmity of others.

O my son! Do good to the person who deserves it and your purpose behind
it must be to please Allah and not any worldly interest. Be moderate in
spending for others. Do not be so miserly that your may not give even
though you can and also do not give away so much that you may become
needy of others.

O my son! The best behavior is wisdom, acquiring of which is very
essential. It is the religion of Allah and it is similar to a grown up
tree. Its water is belief in Allah, which keeps it alive and standing.
Its root is prayer, which keeps it straight and steadfast. Its trunk is
Zakat poor tax and its branches are the efforts for maintenance of
brotherly relations with one’s brothers-in-faith merely for the pleasure
of Allah. Its leaves are good morals. Its fruits are abandoning
disobedience of Allah. No tree is complete unless its fruit is not nice
and similarly a man’s religion is not complete until one gives up all
the things prohibited by Allah.

O my son! The worst restlessness is disruption of intellect. The
greatest sin is a sin against religion and the greatest calamity is the
danger to faith and the most profitable wealth is the wealth of heart.
So enrich your heart with knowledge, faith, good morality and rest
content on whatever you get in this world. Remain pleased and happy on
what Allah has fixed for you, because, whoever pilfers people’s property
does not get legal and permissible provision as Allah stops it from him,
as fixed by Him and such persons earn only sins. A man who is patient,
gets halal (permissible) provision and he is protected from the
chastisement of both this world and of the Hereafter.

O My son! Make your obedience pure and let it not be contaminated by any
act of sin and adorn your obedience by following the truthful because
following the truthful follow Allah. Beautify it with knowledge and
wisdom. Protect your knowledge through tolerance which should not be
senseless. Collect your knowledge through humility, which must not have
folly in it. And strengthen its gate through farsightedness, which
should not have meekness and mix your farsightedness with kindness,
which must not have harshness and rigidity in it.  
 O My son! Do not engage an ignorant person for conveying any message
anywhere. If you do not find a wise man then convey your message
yourself. My Son! Keep away from evil so that it may itself remain away
from you.

Amir al-Mu’minin said, “People asked Luqman who was the best of the
people. He replied, ‘A rich faithful.’ They asked, ‘You mean richness of
money?’ He said, ‘No, of knowledge, so that when need be people may
benefit from his knowledge. If people do not require his knowledge then
he can pull on with his own knowledge.’ People asked, ‘Who is the worst
among us?’ He replied, ‘The one who does not care if people see him
sinning.’” Luqman told his son: O My Son! Whenever you travel with a
group of people take their advice very often regarding your problems and
so also about their affairs. Do not smile much in front of them and be
generous in your expense.

Go to them whenever they call you and give them assistance whenever they
call for it and be ahead of them in three matters viz. in silence, in
prayers and in generosity of wealth and in manliness. Whenever they ask
for your witness to someone’s right then be their witness and whenever
they seek your advice make utmost efforts for their benefit, and good.
Do not make haste in giving your opinion in their favor until your think
over it deeply and do not give your reply in that consultation until you
get up from there, move, sleep, offer prayers and spend all your
intelligence in their consultation because, if a man does not make his
well-wishing pure, Allah snatches away his intelligence and removes
honesty from him. (My son!) when you see your companions traveling on
foot you too should walk with them. When they are busy, you also should
participate in their work.

Also accompany them when they testify something or give loan to someone.
Listen to the one who is elder than you in age and do not refuse if they
ask you to do something or ask something from you because refusal is an
illness of soul and a sign of incompetence. Stop traveling when you lose
your path and make mutual consultation. If you meet a lone person and
ask him the way do not trust his reply because a lonely person puts
people in doubt in a forest. Sometimes it so happens that a person is a
spy of thieves or is a Satan (devil) who wants you to misguide you and
to put you to trouble. Also avoid if they are two unless you find signs
of truthfulness in them, which I cannot describe. So rely on them
because when an eye observes something it finds out the truth of it and
the one who is present and observes knows what an absent person cannot
know and see.

My son! When the time for prayer comes do not postpone it because of
your engagement in some other work. First finish the prayers
satisfactorily because prayer is the base of religion and do not miss a
congregational prayer even under a sword and do not sleep on the
animal’s back as it can hurt and is not a wise act. Of course you may
sleep in a pannier if you like but keep your body joints straight and
when the destination is near, get down from the animal and walk on foot.
After reaching there first feed the animals. When you intend to camp,
select a land which is good in color, softer and has more grass and when
you are about to camp, first offer two Rak’ahs (units) of prayer. When
you have to answer call of nature go to a far from the people. When you
leave the place salute (say ‘salaam’) to the residents of that place
because there are angels on every piece of land and, if possible, do not
eat before giving anything as alms. It is necessary to recite the Book
of Allah so long as you are riding and keep remembering and praising
(hallowing) Allah in every work. It is also necessary to pray on
conclusion of every job and never start your journey in the first part
of the night. You should travel from midnight until dawn and must not
raise your voice in the way.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam al-Baqir said, “People
asked Luqman: what among your problems and your wise actions is such on
which you have utmost faith and which you never leave?” He said, “I do
not take up any issue for which Allah Himself has already become a
guarantor on my behalf and I do not spoil a work which He has left to
me.”

According to the same source Luqman told his son: My son! Be friendly
with a hundred persons but do not make even a single one your enemy. My
Son! Nothing except your morals and good behavior will benefit you. Your
character between you and your God is your religion. Your behavior
between you and your people is your contact (with them). Therefore, Do
not create enmity with others but always show a pleasing behavior. O My
Son! Become a slave of good people but never prepare to be the son of
the evil persons. My Son! If anybody gives you anything as a trust
return it as it is so that your world and the Hereafter may by
protected. Be honest so that you may remain rich and needless.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam al-Ka¨im said, Luqman
told his son: O My Son! How is it that people do not fear the divine
chastisement which has been promised to them even though they are
becoming weaker and lower day by day? How they do not remain ready for
Allah’s promise of the hour of death though their age is speedily
approaching end. My Son! Do not acquire knowledge to show pride over the
learned and the wise nor to quarrel with the fools and the unwise nor to
make a show of yourself in gatherings. But also do not give up learning
because they caution.

O My Son! Attend meetings and gatherings and look around with and eye
ready to get lessons and if you see a group busy in remembering Allah
then sit with them because, if you are learned your knowledge will
benefit you and your knowledge will increase and if you lack knowledge
you will gain knowledge from them. Maybe Allah’s Mercy descends on them
and it may envelop you too.  
 It is mentioned in a reliable tradition from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
that one of the admonitions given by Luqman to his son is that, “My Son!
If you have at all any doubt about your impending death then remove
sleep from you. You cannot do it. And if you have any doubt about rising
up again after death them avoid awaking after your sleep. You cannot
ever do it. So if you ponder over these two things you will realize that
your life is in the hand of someone else; that sleep is like death and
awakening is like rising up after death.

My Son! Do not develop more than necessary relations with people so that
they may cause separation and create enmity. Nor remain far away from
others otherwise you will become disrespected and dishonored. Every
living thing loves its category but man does not love man. Do not be
extra kind to anyone but who desires it. Just as a sheep cannot be
friendly with a wolf so a good man cannot be friendly with a bad person.
Whoever nears the evil also develops some of that evil in him. Similarly
a man who keeps company with a bad character also learns some of the
latter’s evils. The one who likes to quarrel with others gets abused and
the one who enters the gathering of bad people gets allegation. A man
who mixes up with evildoers remains safe from their evils. The one who
does not control his tongue feels ashamed. My Son! Always be honest and
trustworthy because Allah does not love the dishonest. My Son! Pose
yourself before others as if your heart is sinful and that you are
terrified by Allah’s anger.”

According to another narration Luqman said, “The man who says that evil
can be removed by evil and corruption by corruption is not correct. If
he thinks that he is correct then he should ignite a fire and see
whether fire extinguishes fire. (Never). But patience, tolerance and
good behavior stems evil and corruption just as water extinguishes fire.
O My Son! Sell your world for the Hereafter so that you may be benefited
in both this world and in the other. Do not sell the Hereafter for this
world otherwise you will suffer loss at both the places.”

It is said that Luqman lived alone most of the time. Once a man went to
him and said, “Sir, you remain mostly in solitude. If you mix up with
others it will increase affection.” He replied, “Loneliness gives more
scope for thinking and thinking leads towards paradise.”

It is reported reliably from Imam as-Sadiq that Luqman, in his will
asked his son: My Son: People before you gathered wealth for their
family members. Then neither they lived nor their wealth lasted nor
those for whom it was gathered. You are a laborer who has been ordered
to do some jobs on fixed remuneration. So carry out your duties, take
your remuneration and not to live in this world like a sheep which goes
to a field and grazes so much that it becomes fat and then it is
slaughtered because of its obesity. But you should pass through this
world like crossing a bridge that is built over a river. After crossing
it you never return to it. Do not develop your worldly habitation
because you are not commanded to do so and remember that when you will
be made to stand before your Lord on the Day of Judgment you will be
questioned about four things: About your youth as to how you spent it,
about your age (life) as to how you finished it, about your wealth as to
from where you earned it and for that you used it. So be ready to answer
these queries and never be sorry for the loss of worldly wealth because
little wealth does not last long and one should not be carefree of the
big troubles. So always be away from the evils of this world and be busy
with the deeds for the Hereafter. Remove the blindfold from your eyes
and admit yourself in the happiness of your Lord through good deeds.
Always repent in your heart and make efforts for achieving virtues until
you have time and before they (angels) target you and Allah’s will turns
toward you and these things become a barrier between you and your
desires.

It is said in another narration that Luqman said, “O My Son! If the wise
and the learned people hit you and harm you it is better for you
compared to the (compared to) situation in which the ignorant anoint you
with oil and perfumes.”

It is said that someone asked Luqman, “Were you not a slave of such and
such family?” He replied, “Yes, I was.” They asked, “What made you reach
this (high) status?” He replied, “Because I always remained truthful,
never breached a trust, avoided every word and deed which would not
benefit me, I closed my eyes from seeing the things prohibited by my
Lord, I stopped my tongue from uttering nonsense and ate only lawful
provision. These things led me to this stage. So now the one who will
act more than me on these lines will overtake me, the one who will act
less than me will remain behind me and the one who will act just like me
will be like me.”

And Luqman said, “My Son! Never delay repentance because death arrives
all of a sudden without warning. Do not criticize anybody about his
death because death will come to you also. Do not ridicule a man who
falls in trouble and never stop doing good to others. My Son! Be honest
so that you may remain needless of others’ wealth. My Son! Consider
piety as a business which will give you profit without investing any
capital. If you commit a sin send a donation in advance (spend to help
the needy or do a good deed) which may remove that sin. My son!
Admonition seldom impresses a fool just as it is difficult for an old
person to climb a height. My Son! If be you not be kind to the one whom
you are oppressing, be kind to yourself because you are harming yourself
through that oppression. When your position of power invites you to
oppress somebody then remember the Power of Allah. My Son! Learn from
the learned what you do not know and teach others what you know.”

It is mentioned in another tradition that when Luqman left his city he
(first) camped in a village called Maas in Moosal. When he found no
follower and nobody agreed with him he became disheartened. He closed
the door of his house and cornered himself with his son. Advising him he
gave him several admonitions. Some of them are:  
 O My Son! Talk less and remember Allah at all places because He has
warned you of His chastisement and has made you a wise observer.

O Son! Take admonition from other people so that they may take advice
from you. Be cautioned by little trouble before a big calamity comes
down on you and then you may not be able to avoid it.

O My son! Keep control on yourself when angry so that you may not be
ditched in Hell. O Son! Distress is better than the wealth earned
through oppression and becoming an oppressor. My Son! peoples’ lives are
mortgaged for their character. So woe unto them due to the earnings of
their hands and hearts. O My Son! The people of the past were caught in
the net of the world. So how those who came after them can remain
protected? My Son! Regard this world as a prison for you so that you may
enter Paradise in the Hereafter. My Son! Do not approach the kings
otherwise they will kill you. Do not do as they say otherwise you will
become a disbeliever. O My Son! Sit with needy people and poor Muslims
and behave like a kind father with the orphans and like a sympathetic
husband with widows. My Son! Allah does not pardon the one who says
‘pardon me’ but He pardons the sins of the one who obeys Him. My son!
First make companions and then start traveling. My son! Living alone is
better than having a bad companion, and a good company is better than
solitude. My Son! Do good to one who does good to you and leave the one
on his evil who does evil to you., because, he is doing a worse thing to
himself then what you would do to him (by revenge).

My Son! Who is he who obeyed Allah and Allah did not help him and who is
he who searched for Allah and yet he did not find Him and who is he who
remembered his Lord and the Lord did not remember him and who is he who
relied on Allah and yet Allah left him to others and who is he who wept
before Allah and Allah did not pity him?

My Son! Consult the elders and be ashamed of consulting the younger. My
son! Never be in the company of sinners because they are like dogs who,
if they find anything with you will eat it up otherwise will condemn and
disgrace you and their love is but for a split second. My Son! Enmity of
the virtuous is better than friendship with the sinners because, if you
oppress a virtuous Mu’min (faithful) he will not oppress you and if you
think badly of him, he will wish good for you and remain pleased with
you and how will the sinner give you your rights when he does not give
his rights to himself?

My Son! Make more and more friends and do not be fearless about enemies
because enmity remains hidden in their hearts just as water remains
hidden in the soil. My Son! Whomsoever you meet, first salute him (say
Salaam) then shake hands with him and thereafter talk with him. My Son!
Do not harm others otherwise they will become your enemies and do not
take blames from them otherwise they will disrespect you. Do not become
so much sweet that they may devour you nor so sour that they may throw
you away.

My Son! Fear Allah as is His right to be feared of and never lose hope
in Him and His mercy. Have hope in Him but not such a hope that you may
become fearless of His anger and chastisement. My son! Restrain your
heart from desires because the desires are killers. My son! Never be
proud and haughty and egotist otherwise your neighbor in the Hell will
be the devil. You must beware that your last place is the grave. My son!
Woe unto the one who is proud. How can he consider himself big when he
is made from earth and he is to return to dust. He does not know whether
he will go to Heaven and be successful or to Hell and be a loser. How
can anybody be proud when he has come out of the passage of urine twice.

My son! How the son of Adam fall asleep when death is in search of him.
How can he ignore death when death does not ignore him. My Son! When the
Prophets of Allah and His friends and all the great men could not escape
death that can live in this world forever?

My son! Do not reveal your secret to your wife and do not make the door
of your hose your assembly hall. My Son! Woman is made up of a crooked
bone. If you will try to make it straight (forcibly) it will break, if
you leave it as it is it will remain crooked. Do not give them (extra)
freedom so they may leave the house. So when they do a good thing accept
it and if they do anything bad, be patient because there is no other way
out. My Son! There are four kinds of women. Two are well disciplined and
two cursed. Among the disciplined one kind is that which is respected by
her people and also well-behaved yet remains humble for her husband. If
the husband is kind and nice to her she becomes happy and if she falls
in hardship she remains patient. Less money is sufficient for her.

Another kind of a good woman is that who bears many children and who
loves her husband and wishes well for him. She behaves with love like a
mother, also with the relatives and children of the husband and gives
respect to the elders. She is kind toward children and loves those
children of her husband who were born of another wife of her husband.
She reforms herself and her house and household and children. If her
husband is present she helps him in his jobs and if he is absent takes
care of him in every respect. Such a woman is as rare as red earth.
Fortunate is the man who gets such a wife. And among those two cursed
types of woman is one who thinks very high of herself but she has no
respect in her community. If the husband gives her something she becomes
angry and if he does not she becomes furious.

Hence the husband always remains ashamed and in distress and her
neighbors restless due to her behavior. Thus she is like a tigress. If
you live with it will eat you up and if you run away it will kill you.
And another kind of the cursed ones is that who is very quick in
becoming angry and who starts weeping instantaneously. She gives no
benefit to her husband if he is present and she maligns and disgraces
him if he is absent. Such woman is like a salty land. If you water it,
it will become salty and bear nothing and if you do not water it will
remain thirsty. If such woman bears a child you will get no benefit from
it.

My Son! Never marry a slave girl, lest she bears a son and sell him in
exchange of you. My Son! If it was possible to taste and eat women like
other eatables nobody would marry a bad woman.

My Son! Do good to a man who harms you and do not earn the world
(wealth) too much because you have to (one day) get out of it. Just see
where have you to go from there. My Son! Never devour the wealth and
property of orphans otherwise you will be disgraced on the Day of
Judgment and you will be forced to return that property on that Day. But
you will not have kept it there (will not have it there to return). My
Son! The Hellfire will envelop every body on the Day of the Resurrection
Day and no one will get salvation except the one upon whom Allah sheds
His Mercy. My Son! You do not like a man whose tongue is harsh and with
whose tongue people fear. On the Day of Judgment the heart and tongue of
such people will be sealed and his limbs and organs will give witness to
what he had done in the worldly life.

My Son! Do not abuse people because it is like abusing your own parents.
My Son! Every day that dawn is a new day and it witnesses about your
deeds before the Lord of the worlds. My Son! Remember that people will
wrap you in a shroud and put you in a grave where you will see all that
you had done during life. My Son! Just think how you can live in the
premises of the one whom you have angered by disobedience. My Son! Never
give anyone authority over yourself and never leave your wealth for your
enemies. [^1]

My Son! Do accept the admonition of your kind father and make haste in
doing good deeds before death overtakes you and before mountains fall
off on the Day of Judgment and the sun and the moon mix up and stop
moving and skies fold up and rows of frightened angels come down on
earth and you may be asked to cross the Bridge. Then you will see your
deeds and balance will be fixed for weighing the deeds and the accounts
of the deeds of all the creations will be opened.

My Son! I have given you four thousand words of wisdom. If you remember
even four of them it will suffice you provided you act upon them. They
are: (1) make your ship strong as the sea is very deep, (2) lighten your
burden because the voyage which you have to undertake is very difficult,
(3) keep ample provision as the journey is very long and (4) make your
deeds pure because the one who is to accept them is very wise and
Omniscient. According to another narration it was, by the order of
Luqman, inscribed on the door of his latrine that sitting for a long
time in latrine can cause piles.

[^1]: As wealthy people have usually more enemies. It is also seen often
that even the progeny (children) of a wealthy man also wish an early
death to their father so that may get his wealth as inheritance. When
this wish is fulfilled, obviously, the inheritors engage in luxuries and
forget their late father whose wealth gave them ease and thus, they
never think of doing something good for him.


