An account of the People of Saba And People of Tharthaar
========================================================

Allah says:

***Certainly there was a sign for Saba in their abode; two gardens on
the right and the left; eat of the sustenance of your Lord and give
thanks to Him: a good land and a Forgiving Lord! But they turned aside,
so We sent upon them a torrent of which the rush could not be withstood,
and in place of their two gardens We gave to them two gardens yielding
bitter fruit and (growing) tamarisk and a few lote-trees.***  
***This We requited them with because they disbelieved; and We do not
punish any but the ungrateful.***  
***And We made between them and the towns which We had blessed (other)
towns to be easily seen, and We apportioned the journey therein: Travel
through them nights and days, secure.***  
***And they said: O our Lord! make spaces to be longer between our
journeys; and they were unjust to themselves so We made them stories and
scattered them with an utter scattering; most surely there are signs in
this for every patient, grateful one.*** ***(34:15-19)***

Imam as-Sadiq says regarding the exegesis of the above ayats, that the
nation of Sabah inhabited towns close to each other so that they could
interact among themselves. They were very prosperous and had flourishing
agriculture. Streams irrigated their townships and there was an economic
upsurge. But these people denied Allah’s bounty and invited a change to
occur in their fortunes. The Almighty sent a flood on them and it
destroyed their towns, submerged their houses and ravaged their
properties. In place of their orchards Allah caused to grow the
plantations that He has mentioned.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that Sulayman commanded his army to
construct a gulf from the fresh water sea to India and they built a dam
of stone and lime through which canals supplied water to the Kingdom of
Sabah. This dam had ducts at regular intervals and by opening and
closing the ducts water supply was regulated to any given town of the
Sabah Kingdom. On both sides of the city were flourishing orchards
comprising of an area of ten days’ travel. The orchards were thick with
trees laden with fruits and decked with flowers. If one traveled from
one side to the other he would not be able to see the sun for ten days
at a stretch. When the inhabitants of this flourishing kingdom began to
transgress, disobey the commands of their Lord, not heed the advice of
righteous people and did not desist from their evil deeds the Almighty
sent giant rats that began to dig at the dam and remove huge stones from
it, tossing them aside, though each stone was so heavy that even a
strong and healthy man could not lift it. Witnessing such a scenario
many people fled the city leaving behind their belongings and
properties. The rats continued to dig at the dam until it leveled and a
flooded the country. The flood destroyed the city, uprooted the trees
carrying them away as mentioned by Allah in the description of Sabah.

In an authentic tradition Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “After every meal I
lick my fingers so much that my servant thinks it is because of greed,
though it is for respecting Allah’s bounty.  
 Know that! There was a nation bestowed with divine bounties. They owned
a stream called Tharthaar. They had such excessive wealth that they used
pure wheat bread for cleansing the genitals of their children after they
dirtied passed stool. Instead of washing them with water they wiped them
with bread and discarded it. This went on for such a long time and a
mountain of this dirty bread built up. One day a righteous person passed
by and saw a woman cleaning her child with bread. He told her, “Fear
Allah! Do not be haughty and deny His divine bounties due to their
excessiveness.” The lady replied, “Do not terrify me with hunger. We
need never worry for food as long as the stream flows.” Allah was
infuriated at this and cut off the stream from them. He stopped the rain
and cultivation of crops. The people of Sabah became impoverished and
deprived. Now they weighed and distributed among themselves the same
bread for consumption.”Know that! There was a nation bestowed with
divine bounties. They owned a stream called Tharthaar. They had such
excessive wealth that they used pure wheat bread for cleansing the
genitals of their children after they dirtied passed stool. Instead of
washing them with water they wiped them with bread and discarded it.
This went on for such a long time and a mountain of this dirty bread
built up. One day a righteous person passed by and saw a woman cleaning
her child with bread. He told her, “Fear Allah! Do not be haughty and
deny His divine bounties due to their excessiveness.” The lady replied,
“Do not terrify me with hunger. We need never worry for food as long as
the stream flows.” Allah was infuriated at this and cut off the stream
from them. He stopped the rain and cultivation of crops. The people of
Sabah became impoverished and deprived. Now they weighed and distributed
among themselves the same bread for consumption.”


