An account of the people of Ras
===============================

Imam al-Ridha mentioned that one of the nobles of the Tamim tribe
approached Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (‘a) three days prior to his martyrdom
and requested him to relate the facts regarding the People of Ras; where
they lived, in what period, who were their rulers, whom did Allah send
as a Prophet for guiding these people, how they were destroyed? etc. The
inquirer told ‘Ali that though they are mentioned in the Holy Qur’an no
details available.

‘Ali said, “You have inquired about something that none have inquired
before. After me there is no one who will be able to relate their
account except one who quotes me. There is no verse in the Holy Qur’an
whose exegesis in unknown to me. I know the place of revelation of each
ayah. Whether it was revealed at night or day. On a mountain or in
plains.” Then pointing towards his breast said, “It contains unlimited
knowledge and its seekers are few. People would regret why they did not
obtain knowledge from me.

O Brother! The People of Ras were a particular group. They worshipped
the pine tree and called it the ‘King of Trees’. It had been planted by
Yafith the son of Nuh besides a spring. The spring was known as
Rooshtaab and had formed after the deluge. They were known as ‘People of
Ras’ because they had buried alive a Prophet who came after Sulayman The
People of Ras inhabited twelve cities on the bank of the river Ras in
the eastern hemisphere. The area was known as Aras and the people were
named after the river Ras. During that time it was the best fresh water
river in the world and the Kingdom of Ras was the most prosperous nation
of its time. The nation consisted of cities named as Abaan, Aazar, Dee,
Bahman, Isfandaar, Farwarrdeen, Urdi-Behisht, Khordaad, Mardaad, Teer
and Shaharpoor. Isfandar was the largest city and the seat of the ruler
Tarkooz son of Ghaboor son of Yarish son of Saazan son of Narmood son of
Canaan. Nimrod was the contemporary of Ibrahim. The spring and the tree
called Sanobar were situated in this city. The people of Ras had taken
some seeds from that tree to other towns and sowed them near streams.
Then they took some water from the original spring and mixed it in the
spring of each town. It irrigated the saplings that gradually grew into
thick trees laden with sour fruits. The people prohibited themselves and
their animals from partaking in any of the products of these trees. They
also refrained from drinking the water of those springs and claimed that
it was the cause of existence of their gods.

Thus it did not befit them to drink this water that would result in the
decrease of their god’s lives. They used the water from the river Ras
that flowed by their cities for themselves and their animals. Every
month one of the towns celebrated ‘Id. On this day, people of that
particular town gathered near the Sanobar tree situated there. They
covered the tree with a silk curtain embroidered with pictures. Cows and
sheep were sacrificed at the tree and later burnt with firewood. When
the smoke and ashes darkened the atmosphere they fell down prostrate in
front of that tree. They wept and wailed and implored the tree to be
pleased with them. The Satan used to sit upon the tree and shake its
branches. He would hide in the trunk of the tree and say in the voice of
a young boy, “My servants! I am pleased with you. May you be happy and
your eyes brighten with joy.” Hearing this, the people would arise. They
would celebrate the next few days in drinking, playing drums, singing
and making merry. Then they would return home. “

The Persians have named the months after the cities of Ras, Abaan,
Aazar, etc. Every month was associated with the feast of a particular
city, hence that month was named after that city. When it was the turn
of their largest town to celebrate the festival, people from all the
other cities came there. They would gather at the great tree near the
spring and cover the tree with a large curtain embroidered with icons.
The curtain was partitioned to have twelve entrances, one for each city.
They would prostrate before the tree from outside the curtain. They
sacrificed animals equal to those slaughtered from all the other cities
collectively. The accursed Iblis sat on the tree and shook its branches.
He would call out to them and speak to them. He would make promises to
them greater than the promises made by the Shaitans of the other trees.
Then they would rise and drink a lot of wine. For twelve long days they
indulged in merry making and enjoyment equal to all the festivals of the
other towns together. After the celebration they returned home. When the
transgression crossed all limits Allah sent towards them a Prophet from
the Israelites to make them recognize Allah and worship Him. But they
refused to obey the Prophet.

After the Prophet had exhausted all efforts to guide them and was
convinced that they would not come on the right path he complained to
Allah “My Lord, these people do nothing but falsify me and refuse to
believe in You. Therefore at the time of their great festival manifest
your power to them by causing the trees that they worship to wither.”
The curse was effective and the next day the people saw that their trees
had dried and withered. They were astonished and terrified. They were
divided among themselves on what they thought had happened to the trees.
One group said that the man from Allah had performed sorcery in order to
transfer the credit of sustenance bestowed by their gods to his Lord.
The second group said that their gods were displeased with them because
the Prophet mentioned their defects and criticized them and the people
did not object to this. It was for this reason that their god had
concealed its freshness and budding to show his anger against that
Prophet so that the people would rise up against him.

Having formed such an opinion the people discussed ways of eliminating
the Prophet. After consultations they agreed that he should be killed.
They constructed huge pipes of lead and fixed them to the spring
reaching its bottom. Then they climbed down and after removing all the
water and dug a well underground. After this the people caught hold of
the Prophet and imprisoned him in that well. Then they closed the mouth
of the well with a huge boulder. They climbed up, removed the pipes and
allowed the water to flow over the well into the spring. They said, “Now
our gods shall be pleased with us for we have killed the Prophet who
maligned us. We have buried him at the base of the greatest Sanobar
tree. Maybe now it will regain its freshness and bloom.” The whole day
they heard the pleas of the Prophet buried inside. He was praying to his
Lord thus: “O my Lord! You are aware of my confinement and see my sorrow
and grief. Have mercy on my helplessness and take away my soul at the
earliest. Do not delay it.” Ultimately the oppressed Prophet met his
end. Peace of Allah be upon him.

Allah revealed to Archangel Gabriel, “My creatures have become very
sinful and unheeding of My wrath. They feel secure from disaster. They
worship something other than Me and have killed My messenger. Do they
think they shall be able to face My Chastisement? Can they escape from
My Kingdom and Dominion? I shall send retribution to all those who
disobey Me and are not fearful of My punishment. By My Might and Honor I
shall punish them in such a way that they would be an example to all
mankind.”

Thus when the People of Ras were engrossed in celebrating their
festival, a red storm caught them by surprise. They clung to each other.
The ground beneath their feet became melting sulphur and a black cloud
overshadowed them. Fire began to rain from this cloud melting the bodies
of men, just like lead melts in fire.

‘Ali says, “I seek Allah’s refuge from this wrath.” *Wa laa h’awla walaa
quwwate illa billahil a’liyyil a’z’eem* (and there is no power and
strength except that of Allah the High and the Great).”  
 A number of reliable traditions mention that the women of Ras practiced
lesbianism and that was the reason the Almighty destroyed them.

Ibn Babawayh, al-Qutb al-Rawandi and Thalabi in his book ‘Arais’ have
recorded from Imam al-Ka¨im that the People of Ras consisted of two
groups. One of these groups have not been mentioned by Allah in the Holy
Qur’an. They inhabited a village and possessed a large number of sheep.
Prophet Salih sent a Prophet towards them. The people murdered him.
Another Prophet was sent in his place and he too was killed. The third
Prophet also met with the same fate. Now a Prophet was sent with an
assistant (wali) When they put to death this Prophet too, the wali
exhausted all proofs on them and called out to the fish that was
worshipped by those people. The fish emerged from the sea and came to
the land and sat besides the wali. The people still denied him. Allah
sent a wind towards them that lifted all the people and their sheep and
tossed them into the sea. The representative of Salih distributed the
booty of gold, silver and utensils, etc. among his followers. Thus the
generations of this nation became extinct.

The above incident has been mentioned by us in the Account of Salih.

Imam Musa al-Ka¨im says that the group mentioned in the Qur’an is the
one that inhabited the banks of river Ras. They are known as the People
of Ras. Allah sent many Prophets among them. There was never a time when
they had been devoid of a Prophet who warned and exhorted them and they
invariably killed all of the Prophets. The river flowed between
Azerbaijan and Armenia and reached to the northern tip of Azerbaijan
where people worshipped the lizard. According to one report they
worshipped virgin girls. When that virgin girl completed thirty years of
age they would kill her and install another in her place as a deity. The
stream was three *parasang* wide. The stream swelled every day to such
an extent that its level reached to half the size of their mountains,
but its water did not flow into the sea or plains. It reached only up to
the inhabited areas and not beyond. It flowed through their towns and
cities. Allah sent thirty Prophets to them in a single month but they
killed them all.

Allah sent to them a Prophet and made his wali accompany him. The
Prophet waged an intense struggle against them. The people confronted
him and when they became busy in repelling his attack, the Almighty sent
Mika’il to them during their sowing season. A lot of water was in demand
for irrigating the fields. Mika’il diverted all their canals towards the
sea. All the springs originating from the streams were blocked by walls.
Mika’il was assisted by 500 angels in this venture. The angels took out
each drop of water from the canals and threw it into the sea. The canals
were completely dry now. Allah sent Archangel Gabriel who caused all the
streams and springs of their country to dry up. The angel of death was
dispatched and he decimated all their cattle. The south wind, north
wind, zephyr and west wind were commanded to destroy their clothes and
belongings etc. by snatching everything and dropping it over the
mountains and in the seas. The earth was commanded to devour all their
utensils, gold and silver. All their treasure shall remain underground
and will be thrown out during the time of the great grandson of ‘Ali,
Muhammad (Imam al-Mahdi.

They woke up in the morning and saw that they had neither any belongings
nor cattle, vessels or clothes. All their food grain has been destroyed.
Even then only a few converted to the faith in Allah, and Allah guided
them. They took shelter in a nearby cave. Altogether they were 21 men,
four women and ten boys. Ultimately they achieved salvation. Those who
remained adamant in their disbelief were 600,000. They died of the agony
of starvation and thirst. Not a single infidel escaped. Later the thirty
five people who had accepted faith returned to their hometown. They saw
everything devastated and the inhabitants exterminated. They fell down
in obeisance to the Almighty and with all sincerity pleaded to Him to
bestow them with water, food and cattle sufficient enough for their
needs. They did not wish for excess bounties lest it cause transgression
in their hearts. They took an oath and vowed that if the Almighty sent a
Prophet for them they would help and assist him and believe in him.
Allah knew their sincerity and hence showered His Mercy by causing
streams to flow and bestowed more than they had prayed for. After that
they remained obedient to Allah for their life. But their progeny though
outwardly pious practiced hypocrisy. They were also given respite by
Allah but their transgression crossed all limits. They remained busy in
opposing the righteous servants of Allah. Allah gave their enemies power
over them. Many of them were killed and the survivors were subjected to
a dreadful plague that wiped them completely. The canals and edifices
remained dilapidated for two hundred years.

Allah brought another people to inhabit those abandoned dwellings. For a
long time they treaded the path of Allah’s obedience, then lacunae set
in and they became sinful. They fell to degraded habits and practices.
The notable thing about them was that they considered it a gesture of
goodwill and hospitality when they offered their women and daughters to
fulfill the sexual desires of their friends and acquaintances. They
receded further into sin and homosexuality and lesbianism became
rampant. Lesbianism was taught to them by Walhaas the daughter of Satan.
She came to them with her sister Shaisaar in a human form and
demonstrated the method of sexual contact between two women.

At last Allah sent upon them a thunderbolt. All of them began to sink
into the earth during the night. A dreadful scream came from the depths
of the earth. Not a single person survived to witness the sunrise next
morning. Imam Musa al-Ka¨im said “I do not think that that part of the
earth was ever inhabited again.”

According to Shaykh Tabarsi, the People of Ras were the ones who buried
alive their Prophet in a well. Some historians mention that the people
reared cattle and dug a well around which they sat and worshipped idols.
Allah sent Shu‘ayb for their guidance but they refused to believe him.
Therefore their well was destroyed and all of them sunk into the earth.
Some people say Allah had sent to them a Prophet named han¨alah. They
slew the Prophet and hence were doomed to perdition. Ras is believed to
be a well in Antioch. People of Ras killed habib al-Najjar (the
carpenter) and threw him into the well.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says, “Their women practiced sexual contact between
themselves. They have been mentioned in the following ayah,

***So how many a town did We destroy while it was unjust, so it was
fallen down upon its roofs, and (how many a) deserted well and palace
raised high.” (22:45)***

The well was located in Hadramaut and according to some scholars in the
city of Khaazoora. It was inhabited by 4000 people who had put their
faith in Prophet Salih. Salih also lived with them. Because he breathed
his last here, it was called Hadramaut (death).

Later the population increased and progenies proliferated. They began to
fall into transgression and idol-worship. Allah sent towards them a
Prophet named han¨alah. He was put to death mercilessly in public view.
They were destroyed as a result of this cruel act. All of them died.
Their well became useless and the palace of their ruler was razed to the
ground.


