An account of Maryam, the mother of ‘Isa
========================================

Allah, the most high declares in Qur’an,

***“When a woman of ‘Imran said, My Lord! Surely I vow to Thee what is
in my womb, to be devoted (to thy service); accept therefore from me,
surely Thou art the Hearing, the knowing.” (3:35)***

‘Imran’s wife Hanna was the maternal grandmother of ‘Isa and he was
different from ‘Imran the father of Musa. He was the son of Masaan and
Hanna’s sister Aaisha was Zakariyya’s wife. Yahya and Maryam were
cousins.

‘Imran’s wife had taken a vow that she would devote her child that is in
her womb (whether boy or a girl) in the service of Jerusalem or for the
prayer in the mosque. (A devoted child cannot leave the place). ‘Ali ibn
Ibrahim has stated that Allah is Knowing and Hearing. Ayyashi has
written: According to a tradition ‘Imran’s wife vowed that she will
devote her child in the service of Jerusalem. (He or she worked as a
keeper of the mosque and he was strictly prohibited to go out from the
mosque.)

Regarding Hanna, the mother of Maryam it is said,

***“So when she brought forth, she said, My Lord! Surely I have brought
forth a female- and Allah knows best what she brought forth- and the
male is not like the female, and I have named it Maryam, and I command
her and her offspring into Thy protection from the accused Satan.”
(3:36)***

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, female is not like male as (when female comes
in menstrual period, she cannot stay in mosque. She must leave the place
and go away) and the keeper of mosque should not go out. (And Hanna
said, I have named her Maryam , Maryam means virgin. I have given her in
the protection of Allah.)

The Qur’an says,

***“So her Lord accepted her with a good acceptance and made her grow up
a good growing.” (3:36)***

It is said that she was growing day by day in wisdom with others. When
she completed nine years she became perfect in prayers and in fasting.
She became more perfect than others in worship.  
 In continuation of Ayat 36, Allah gave her in the change of Zakariyya .
It is stated that Maryam ’s mother brought her, wrapping her in a piece
of cloth and said that she has devoted her for the service of Jerusalem.
Maryam was the daughter of Prophet so the other people said they would
take charge of her, to look after her. But Zakariyya said that Allah has
appointed him as her guardian, “as my wife is Maryam ’s aunt.” Other
scholars said, “You are not, but her mother is a rightful person.” To
find out the right person they decided to cast their pens in flowing
water. They all were twenty-nine. The pens were very heavy, made up of
iron and were used for writing the verses of Torah. They cast their pens
in flowing water one by one, Zakariyya also cast his pen. All the pens
sank. Only the pen of Zakariyya floated.

The Qur’an further states, “Whenever Zakariyya entered the sanctuary to
(see) her, he found with her food. He said, O Maryam! Whence comes this
to you? She said, It is from Allah. Surely Allah gives to whom He
pleases without measure.”

Imam said, “She was not drinking milk but getting her provision from
Allah.” Imam al-Baqir said that, many people tried to take charge of
Maryam but Zakariyya’s pen remained afloat and he became her guardian.
Then Zakariyya brought her in the mosque. When she came of age,
(menstruating), Allah ordered Zakariyya to keep her in a separate part
of the mosque. Maryam was a very beautiful lady. When she was standing
for prayer the house illuminated with Divine light. Whenever Zakariyya
went to see Maryam he found fruits of different seasons with her, when
he inquired about the fruits of summer in winter and winter fruits in
summer Maryam replied, “It is from Allah. Surely Allah gives to whom he
pleases without measures.” Zakariyya prayed to Allah to grant him a
virtuous offspring.

According to Imam as-Sadiq Allah revealed to ‘Imran that he would be
bestowed with a son, who will give sight to the blind, he will cure the
lepers and bring the dead to life with his order. “I will send him as My
apostle to the people of The Israelites.”

‘Imran gave the good news to his wife Hanna and she was pregnant. She
thought that Allah has given the good news of a male child. So she
decided that she would devote the child (whether boy or girl) in the
service of Jerusalem. When Maryam was born, she said, “O Allah! I
delivered a female child. And a Prophet can’t be female.” When Allah
blessed Maryam with a son ‘Isa it was the fulfillment of His promise to
‘Imran.

According to another tradition people asked Imam al-Ridha if Allah had
any information about anything, can anyone go against of it? Imam said,
“Yes, in the period of Musa, Allah ordered the Israelites not to enter a
holy place. The people obeyed and didn’t enter but their grandsons
entered did. In the same way ‘Imran was informed by Allah, he will
bestow him a son in a particular month of a year and the son would be a
Prophet. And he went somewhere else.”

When Maryam was born in ‘Imran’s house and Zakariyya took charge of her,
some said, “‘Imran is a true Prophet of Allah and some said he wasn’t.”
When ‘Isa was born, people who believed, said, “What Allah promised to
‘Imran was true.”

According to another tradition people asked Imam al-Baqir if ‘Imran was
a Prophet? Imam replied, “Yes, he was a Prophet sent by Allah to his
community. And Hanna was the wife of ‘Imran and Hanana was the wife of
Zakariyya . They both were sisters. Hanna was the mother of Maryam and
Yahya was the son of Zakariyya . And ‘Isa was the son of Maryam.  
 ‘Isa was the son of Yahya aunt’s daughter (Hanna) and Yahya was the son
of Maryam’s aunt. So they both were maternal cousins.[^1]

Regarding the religious book, Isma‘il Zohfi a follower of Imam al-Baqir
asked him that others say one cannot pray in menstrual period and can’t
fast during the period. What is true? Imam replied him giving him
example of Maryam that the mother of Maryam will devote her child in
service of Jerusalem and one devoted to Jerusalem did not come out. When
Maryam was brought up by Zakariyya and many people demanded the
guardianship of Maryam they cast their pens with their names in the sea.
All pens sunk except Zakariyya’s. Zakariyya took charge of her and
looked after her until she grew up. As a woman she could not stay in a
mosque during menses and can’t pray. But it is true that she had to stay
in a mosque, as she was pure and virgin.[^2]

Allah says,

***O Maryam! keep to obedience to your Lord and humble yourself, and bow
down with those who bow. “This is of the announcements relating to the
unseen which we reveal to you; and you were not with them, when they
cast their pens (to decide) which of them should have Maryam in his
charge and you were not with them when they contented one with another.”
(3:43-44)***

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said that the casting of pens in water was for
the guardianship of Maryam whose parents were dead and she was an
orphan. And in last part states the affair of the guardianship of ‘Isa  
 According to another tradition the first time lots were drawn for
Maryam and they were six person who cast their pens.

al-Qutb al-Rawandi has stated that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “Maryam
had protected herself from evil since five hundred years before the
birth of ‘Isa. Maryam’s mother decided to devote her child in the
service of Jerusalem. When Maryam born, she was brought up in Jerusalem.
When she grew up she served the worshippers, Allah the high, ordered
Zakariyya to make arrangement for her veil and curtain in the mosque. So
that she can conceal herself from strangers. Only Zakariyya was visiting
her. She lived for 500 years after her father’s death.”[^3]

According to Imam al-Baqir, ‘Ali asked Fatimah for food. Fatimah said
that by Allah, she had nothing to give since three days. Imam asked, why
she did not inform him. She said that her father Prophet forbade her to
make too many requests.

After that ‘Ali came out of his house and met one of his followers,
Miqdad. Imam inquired where he was going in the hot afternoon. He said,
“Because of hunger.” Imam ‘Ali said that he had also came out of his
house for the same thing. Imam ‘Ali gave him a Dirham, which he had
borrowed and returned empty-handed. He saw the Prophet sitting and
Fatimah in prayers. He found that there was a tray of food, covered with
a cloth. After prayers she brought it before them. When they uncovered
it they saw meat dish and hot chapattis. Imam ‘Ali inquired from where
it had come? Fatimah replied, “It is from Allah. Surely Allah gives to
whom He pleases without measures.” The Holy Prophet said, “Shall I show
you your and Fatimah’s example? Imam said, “Yes.” Prophet said, “O ‘Ali,
your status and example is like Zakariyya when he saw the seasonal
fruits of different seasons near Maryam He inquired about them. When you
asked Fatimah for this and she answered you.”

By the grace of Allah the family of Prophet were having food for one
month from that tray. Imam al-Baqir said that tray was still with them.
This will be discussed in the chapter of the family of Prophet and in
the miracle of Fatimah.[^4]

Ibn ‘Abbas has stated that once the Holy Prophet informed his family
about cruelty and oppression on Fatimah after him, and said that angels
will weep in sorrow and grief, as they revealed to Maryam and will say,
“O Fatimah Allah has given you superiority above all the women of the
world. O Fatimah! Pray to Allah, prostrate and bow the forehead on the
pray mat. When you will be crush under the falling door, you will suffer
great pain. Then by the permission of Allah, Maryam will come for your
treatment.”

According to a tradition, some people asked Imam Ja‘far as- Sadiq who
gave the last bath (ghusl) to Fatimah? Imam said, “Amir al-Mu’minin. As
she was an infallible, sinless lady. So Imam ‘Ali gave her last bath of
her body. In this way ‘Isa gave the last bath to his mother Maryam
.”[^5]

[^1]: There are different opinions in different books (hadith) that the
mother of Yahya was the sister of Maryam and another tradition says, she
was an aunt. It is difficult to understand the proper relationship.

[^2]: It is very difficult to solve this problem. In the book Behaarul
Anwaar it is indicated that the daughters of Prophets were not having
menstrual course and it will be discussed in the chapter of Fa§imah.
Some hadith indicates that they were having menstrual course (Qur’an
says (3:42) O Maryam! Surely Allah has chosen you and purified you and
chose you above the women of the world.” Allah says, O Maryam! Keep to
obedience to your Lord and humble yourself, and bow down with those who
bow.” Allah has kept her pure and chosen her above the women of the
world. Allah says twice regarding the status of Maryam in His holy book.
First He chose her from the Prophet’s family and made her most
respectable above the all women of the world. ‘Isa was born by Allah’s
will without father and secondly Allah has recorded ‘Isa ’s events for
the last Prophet. According to reliable sources Allah has given
Excellency to Fa§imah the daughter of Prophet Muhammad al-Mus§afa above
the women of the world. Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq has stated Fa§imah was
called Muhadditha because Angels visited her and spoke to her. As the
(Angels) were visiting Maryam and talking with her. It was said: Fa§imah
I have chosen you, given you superiority above all the women of the
world. O Fa§imah, Pray to Allah, prostrate and bow down in Allah’s
adoration.” Even Angels were conversed with Fa§imah. One night, while
speaking to the Angels, Fa§imah said, ‘Maryam is superior on all the
women of the world.’ Angels said, ‘Maryam was superior in the period of
‘Isa but Allah the glorious has given you superiority with on all the
women of the world until the day of judgment.’ It is related that one
day the Prophet drew four lines on the ground and asked the followers,
“Do you know, why I have drawn these four lines?” The followers said,
“No, Allah and His Prophet know better.” Prophet said, “These lines
indicate four best ladies of the Heaven. 1) Khadijah bint Khuwaylid 2)
Fa§imah my daughter 3) Maryam bint ‘Imran 4) Aasiya Bint Mazahim, the
wife of the Pharaoh.” According to Imam Musa al-Ka¨im the Holy Prophet
has said that Allah has appointed these four with all His bounties, and
in all respects, above all the women of the world. They are Maryam
Aasiya Khadijah and Fa§imah.

[^3]: Such a great age of Maryam is against established belief.

[^4]: From the ancient writings we come to know what was happening in
the past will be happen in future. Allah sent bounties from the heaven
for Maryam as well as for Fa§imah.

[^5]: More incidents of Maryam will be discussed in the chapter of ‘Isa.


