An account of ‘Isa ibn Maryam
=============================

Birth of ‘IsaBirth of ‘IsaBirth of ‘IsaBirth of ‘IsaBirth of ‘IsaBirth
of ‘IsaBirth of ‘IsaBirth of ‘IsaBirth of ‘Isa  
 Allah says,

***“When the angels said, O Maryam, surely Allah gives you good news
with a word from Him (of one) whose name is Messiah ‘Isa son of Maryam,
worthy of regard in this world and the Hereafter and of those who are
made near (to Allah).” (3:45)***

‘Isa is called ‘word’ because he was born with the Divine Word ‘kun’
(Be) without a father, or Allah guided people through his words. And he
is called ‘Messiah’ because he was as a Divine bounty, given a treatment
of ‘Masah’ (caress) by the Mercy of Allah and thus purified (from sins),
or as olive oil was applied to his body after his birth or Archangel
Gabriel touched him with his wing so that he might remain safe from
mischief of Satan or as he used to caress his head with his hands or as
the blind could see through his touch and the sick were healed. It is
said that in the Hebrew language it was ‘Messiaha’ which became
‘Messiah’ in Arabic.

***“And he shall speak to the people when in cradle and when of old age,
and (he shall) be one of the good ones.” (3:46)***

“She said, My Lord, how shall there be a son (born) to me when man has
not touched me?” He (the angel) said, “Even so, Allah creates what He
pleases. When He has decreed a matter He only says to it ‘Be’ and it is.
He will teach him the Book and the Torah and the Injeel and (make him)
an apostle to the children of Israel. That I have come to you with a
sign from your Lord, that I determine for you out of dust like the form
of a bird, then breathe into it and it becomes a bird with Allah’s
permission and I heal the blind and the leprous and bring the dead to
life with Allah’s permission and I inform you of what you eat and what
you store in your houses; most surely there is a sign in this for you,
if you are a believer.”

And a verifier of that which is before me of the Torah and that I may
allow you part of that which has been forbidden to you, and I have come
to you with a sign from your Lord therefore be careful of (your duty to)
Allah and obey me.

Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this is the
right path. (3:47-51)  
 The Almighty also says, Surely the likeness of ‘Isa is with Allah as
the likeness of Adam; He created him from dust, then said to him, “Be”,
and he was. (3:59)

In yet another place the Qur’an says: “And mention Maryam in the Book
when she drew aside from her family to an eastern place.” (19:16)

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim narrates that Archangel Gabriel blew into the neckline
of Maryam thus passing air into her belly. It resulted in conception of
‘Isa the same night and she delivered the next morning. The time of this
pregnancy was only nine hours that became equal to the period of nine
months required by other women. Imam al-Baqir is reported to have said
that Archangel Gabriel blew into the neckline of Maryam holding her
garment and it resulted in instant perfection of ‘Isa in her womb the
same way offspring develop in their mother’s wombs in nine months. Then
she came out of the bathing place with a child’s burden like those
ladies who have completed their period of pregnancy and who are on the
verge of delivery. When her aunt saw her she became astonished. Feeling
ashamed Maryam went away from Zakariyya and his wife as mentioned by
Allah, “So she conceived him; then withdrew herself with him to a remote
place.” It is mentioned in a reliable tradition of Imam as-Sadiq that a
child born after six months pregnancy does not remain alive, but ‘Isa
and Imam al-Husayn did live though both were born within six months of
pregnancy.[^1]  
 “And the throes (of child birth) compelled her to betake herself to the
trunk of a palm tree. She said, “Oh, would that I had died before this,
and had been a thing quite forgotten.” She desired death fearing that
people would misunderstand her.

Imam as-Sadiq is reported to have said that any good, wise person might
not attribute a wrong thing to her. ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that
when Maryam came out due to labor pains to find shelter somewhere it was
market day and the place was full of tradesmen. Maryam passed by the
weavers. In those days weaving was a prestigious profession. The weavers
were atop donkeys. Maryam inquired from them whereabouts of the old palm
tree. But the weavers made a mockery of her and spoke with contempt. So
Maryam angrily prayed to Allah that He may degrade their profession and
dishonor them among the people. Then she saw a group of businessmen and
asked them whereabouts of the palm tree. They gave her the correct
information. She wished good for them praying to Allah for progress of
their trade and for making people eager for them. When she reached the
tree ‘Isa was born. Immediately on seeing ‘Isa she exclaimed, “Would
that I had died before the arrival of this day. Now what shall I say to
my aunt and what will be my answer to the questions of The Israelites?”

Then (the child) called out from beneath her: “Grieve not, surely your
Lord has made a stream to flow beneath you” (19:24)  
 ‘Isa called out from beneath or Archangel Gabriel told Maryam from the
hillock do not grieve because your Lord has made a stream flow beneath
you or made ‘Isa a great personality. Imam al-Baqir is reported to have
said that the stream where was born was dry for years but Allah made it
flow afresh since that moment. Then the Lord said, “(Maryam) Shake the
trunk of the palm tree which is towards you, it will drop on you fresh
ripe dates.”

Imam al-Baqir is reported to have said that nothing is more beneficial
to a woman in confinement after childbirth than dates because Allah had
made it the food for Maryam after delivery and he (the Imam) also said
that tree had dried up and had no fruits, because had it been full of
fruits Allah would not have asked Maryam to shake it and she herself
would have fulfilled her desired. It was the winter season when trees
have no fruits. Therefore, Allah, in order to show His miracle,
instantly made leaves and fruits grow on that old dry tree.

Ibn ‘Abbas has narrated that when Maryam experienced labor pains and
became restless, she came out and walked towards a hillock. When she
climbed it she saw the trunk of a dried palm tree that had neither
leaves nor fruits. She sat down beneath that tree and ‘Isa was born
there. When Maryam desired death Archangel Gabriel called out to her
from beneath the hillock neither to fear nor to grieve as Allah had
already provided water for her in the stream so that she may drink and
purify herself by bathing and to shake the tree for causing the dates to
drop.

***“So eat and drink and refresh the eye. Then if you see any mortal
say: Surely I have vowed a fast to the Beneficent Allah, so I shall not
speak to any man today.” (19:26)***

Perhaps she was allowed to speak this much or to convey it by gestures.
In their shari‘ah a fast meant to remain silent or it (silence) might
have been a part of fasting. These things were said by ‘Isa. ‘Ali ibn
Ibrahim has narrated that when Maryam became grief-stricken and
sorrowful after the birth of ‘Isa and longed for death, ‘Isa spoke from
near her feet to tell her not to grieve (as described) and when Maryam
extended her hand toward the palm tree the ripe fruits dropped down into
her hands. Seeing this she became very pleased then miraculously ‘Isa
told her, “Roll me up in a cloth.” He (‘Isa told her whatever was
necessary and also told her, “If you meet with anyone tell him that you
are fasting.” (Etc as described).

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “A
fast does not mean refraining from food and drink. Do you not know that
Maryam said, ‘I have vowed to fast’ meaning ‘I will keep silent except
uttering the Names of Almighty Allah and remembering Him.’” And it is
mentioned in reliable traditions that the tree from which Maryam had
eaten dates was *Ajwah* dates which was of the best quality palm tree.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from Wahab bin Munabbah that when Maryam
approached the palm tree she was shivering due to cold. So Yusuf Najjar
gathered wood around her and made a fire. Thus Maryam got warmth. He
also gave her seven walnuts from his packsaddle. It was because of this
that the Christians light up fires in the birth night of ‘Isa and play
with walnuts.  
 And she came to her people, carrying him (with her). They said, “O
Maryam! Surely you have done a strange thing.” (You have brought a child
without having a husband, you have committed a bad deed). “O sister of
Harun! Your father was not a bad man, nor was your mother an unchaste
woman.”

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated that when the people did not find Maryam
in the hall of worship they went out in search of her and Zakariyya also
began to look for her. Then they saw her coming with a ‘Isa in arms. The
women of The Israelites gathered, taunted her and spat on her. Maryam
did not pay any attention to them and entered the niche of the Masjid.
Zakariyya and the people of The Israelites came to her and said, “O
Maryam! You have done a wrong deed. What a grave disgrace you have
brought on The Israelites.” They addressed her as ‘sister of Harun’ by a
way of taunting her. Harun was a debaucher criminal very notorious. Some
say Harun was a very good person and people used to name him in the
matter of good deeds. Some have said that Harun was the maternal uncle
of Maryam . Reportedly Imam al-Baqir has said that seventy women had
made allegations against Maryam and said, “Surely you have done a
strange thing.” So Allah gave ‘Isa the power of speech. He addressed the
women, “Woe unto you for making false allegations against my mother. I
am a slave (creation) of Allah. He has made me His Messenger and has
given me the Book. By Allah! I will prosecute you.” He did punish them
for libel after becoming a (grown-up) Prophet. She pointed out to him
and they said, “How should we speak to one who is a child in the
cradle.” He said, “I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and
made me a Prophet. He has made me blessed wherever I may be, and He has
enjoined on me prayer and Zakat (poor-rate) As long as I live.” It is
reported that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said (it meant) “I have been made
beneficent because people will benefit from me as I have knowledge and
perfection and an ability to heal the ill and to raise those who have
died outwardly and inwardly.” “And he has enjoined on me prayer and
charity as long as I live and dutiful to my mother. He has not made me
insolent and unblessed. He has protected me from becoming a disobedient,
unworthy son my mother. Peace be on me the day I was born and on the day
I die and on the day I am raised to life. When this miracle occurred and
‘Isa spoke about all these things, the people realized that Maryam was
pure and was never involved in the things imagined by them and that
these were the signs of Allah’s Might.

Reportedly Imam al-Baqir has said how Maryam was given good tidings of
‘Isa: One day she was sitting in the prayer room of the house of worship
when Archangel Gabriel came down in form of a man and dropped his saliva
into the collar of her frock. She at once conceived ‘Isa who was born
the same day. Till that time, on the surface of the earth there was no
tree which did not have fruits and also no tree had thorns until the
sinner offspring of Adam attributed wife and son to Allah made the earth
shiver. Fruits disappeared from the trees and thorns came up in place of
fruits. ‘Isa appeared from the trees and thorns came up in place of
fruits. Shaitans gathered around their chief Iblis and said, “Tonight a
child is born because of whom every idol in the world has toppled down.”
Hearing this, the accursed Iblis became worried. He went from east to
west to find the child but could not find any trace of him until he
approached a Monastery. There he saw that the angels had encircled that
house. The accursed Satan tried to enter the house but the angels
ordered him to go away from there. He asked who the father of the
newborn child was. They said his case was an example of Adam whom Allah
had created without a father. Iblis retorted “I will destroy four out of
five parts of human population due to this son.”

Through reliable sources Shaykh al-Tusi had narrated a tradition from
Imam Zayn al-‘abidin that the place described as a far-off place by
Allah where Maryam had moved for delivering ‘Isa is Karbala. Maryam had
covered a long distance from Damascus to Karbala in a split second; ‘Isa
was born at a point near the grave of Imam al-Husayn and she returned to
Damascus that same night.

al-Qutb al-Rawandi has with authentic proofs, narrated from Yahya bin
‘Abdullah that, “I was with Imam as-Sadiq in Heerah. One day we went
riding and reached a village in the vicinity of Nasirah and came near
river Euphrates.” Imam said, ‘Here it is, Here it is’ and then
dismounted, prayed two Rak’ahs of prayers and asked me, ‘Do you know
where ‘Isa was born?’ I said, ‘No.’ He said ‘It is here, where I am now
sitting.’ Then he said, ‘Where was the palm tree which was shaken by
Maryam for its fruits?’

I replied that I did not know. He pointed to his back with his hand and
said it was at this spot. Thereafter he asked me whether I knew the
meaning of Rabawah, mentioned in the Divine Ayat of Holy Qur’an reading
“And we made the son of Maryam and his mother a sign, and we gave them
shelter on a lofty ground (rabwah) having meadows and springs.’ This
means we sheltered ‘Isa and his mother on a high ground that we turned
into a living place with abundance of fruits and populace and running
streams of water. I said I did not know. He pointed to his right with
his hand toward Najaf and said this is that hill. Then he said the
‘Maaum Maeen’ mentioned by the Lord is the river Euphrates and added
when the pregnancy of Maryam became apparent she was in that valley
where five hundred virgin girls were busy praying to Allah and that her
(Maryam’s) period of pregnancy was nine hours. When she suffered labor
pains she came out of the worship place and came home that was her
monastery. Therefrom she approached the palm tree that was old. ‘Isa was
born there. She carried him and came to her people. They became fearful
on seeing her in that condition and were astonished. The Israelites fell
in dispute about ‘Isa. Some said, ‘He is the son of Allah’ some other
said ‘He is a servant of Allah and His Messenger’ and the Jews said
Allah forbid. “He is the fruit of adultery” and that palm tree was
Ajwah.”

Several other reliable traditions have been recorded explaining this
holy verse of the Graceful Qur’an saying Rabwah is the other end of
al-Kufah and its sawad (outskirt) is Karbala or Najaf and the Qaraar
(meadow) is the mosque of al-Kufah and ‘Maeen’ (spring) is the river
Euphrates.  
 It is mentioned in authentic hadith of Imam Musa al-Ka¨im that
Archangel Gabriel had brought heavenly dates for Maryam -- ‘Safran’.
When she ate them she became pregnant.  
 It is mentioned in other reliable records that a Christian scholar once
approached Imam al-Ka¨im. Imam asked him whether he knew which river
(spring) is one by which ‘Isa was born? He replied in negative whereupon
Imam said it is river Euphrates.

Another similar hadith quotes that once, giving them proofs told
Christian scholars that the name of the mother of Maryam was Murtaa,
which meant ‘waheebah’ in Arabic. The day was Friday and time was zawaal
(afternoon) when Archangel Gabriel had come to Maryam and she conceived
‘Isa and that day was ever since a day of ‘Id (rejoicing or
celebration), and the day when ‘Isa was born was a Tuesday and his birth
took place at half past four, and the river on the bank of which he was
born was river Euphrates. On that day he was not permitted by Allah to
talk. When the king of those days came to know about this event he
started for that place with his son and his courtiers with an intention
of harming ‘Isa. He called the family of ‘Imran (family members of
‘Imran) so that they may see Maryam in that extraordinary condition
until all that came to pass which has been described in the holy Qur’an
(that is, he spoke from the cradle).

Reliable traditions have recorded that, according to Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir ‘Isa was born on the night of 25th Dhu’l-Qa’dah.

Kulaini has, with authentic narrations said that hafs bin Giyath has
said, “I have seen Imam as-Sadiq in the gardens of al-Kufah. When he
came near a particular palm tree he offered two Rak’ahs of prayers with
bowing and prostration and I counted that he had recited Tasbih
(sanctified Allah five hundred times) then he continued to recite Dua
for a long time and then said, “O Rafas! By Allah! This is the tree
about which is mentioned in the holy Qur’an. Allah had asked Maryam to
shake it so as to cause its fruits to fall for her.”

Through a good authority it is reported that Imam as-Sadiq said, “On the
night of Me’raj (ascension of the holy Prophet) Archangel Gabriel had,
at one point, requested the holy Prophet to alight from his heavenly
horse flying at supersonic speed and to offer prayers.” The Prophet
offered prayers and asked what place it was. Archangel Gabriel replied
that it was Mount Sinai where Allah has conversed with Musa. From there
they went further. After some time Archangel Gabriel again requested the
holy Prophet to get down and pray. He inquired about that place
whereupon he was informed that it was Bethlehem where ‘Isa was born.

In other reliable tradition the same person has recorded that various
parts of the earth began to feel proud over one another, Ka‘bah thought
it was superior to the ground of Karbala. But Allah silenced it saying
do not think like that because Karbala is the place where We (Allah)
conversed with Musa. Rabwah is the same place where We made Maryam and
Messiah reside and that is the junction where the Holy head of husayn
was washed and it is the same spot where ‘Isa was given a wash after he
was born.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Zayn al-‘abidin said, “When
‘Ali was returning from Nahrawan after fighting the Kharijites, he
camped in Buratha Masjid near Baghdad. There was a monastery. When that
monk observed the impressive features and great virtues of Imam about
which he had read in earlier scriptures, he became a Muslim and said, “I
have read your virtues and praise in Injeel wherein it is mentioned that
you will camp in Buratha Masjid which is the House of Maryam and the
land of ‘Isa.” Then ‘Ali went to a spot near that monastery and kicked
the ground. Instantly clear water spring gushed out from there. ‘Ali
said, “This is the spring that gushed out for Maryam .” Then he said,
“Take a measurement of seven arm lengths from here and dig the ground.”
When people complied with Imam ’s commandment there appeared a white
rock. said this is the rock on which Maryam put ‘Isa after taking him
down from her lap. Then he offered prayers there and said, “This ground
of Buratha is the house of Maryam ”[^2]

It has been, reliably noted that Imam as-Sadiq said, “When ‘Isa was
born, Allah kept him hidden from the eyes of people, because when Maryam
conceived she had gone into isolation at a distant place out of
habitation as described by Allah. Zakariyya and the aunt of Maryam went
in search of her. They reached Maryam when she had already delivered
‘Isa. At that time Maryam was longing for death due to a feeling of
shame. Allah made ‘Isa speak and concluded the arguments for her. When
‘Isa appeared, the enemies of religion had increased their harassment
and hardship on The Israelites. Cruel kings of that time rose up to
torture and finish them until ‘Isa went up to the heaven and Shamoun and
his followers went into hiding for fear. They hid themselves in one of
the islands of a river and stayed there for quite a long time. Allah
issued springs of sweet water for them and caused all kind of fruits,
and created four-footed and other animals. He also sent a fish called
Amad which did not have flesh and bones only skin and blood. Allah
ordered the fish to come to the surface, then honeybees settled on her
back and it carried them to that island. The bees built honeycombs in
the trees of the island. In this way ample honey was provided for the
residents of that island. News about ‘Isa continued to reach them.

Ibn Tawus has noted from Ibn Babawayh’s book *An Nabuwwah* that when
‘Isa was born a group of great men from Gabar came to pay their respects
to ‘Isa and Maryam . They said, “We have the knowledge of the movements
of stars. When this boy was born we observed a kingly star rise in the
heavens. After pondering over it we understood that the kingdom of this
child is a Prophet-related kingdom that will never be stripped from him
until Allah raises him up to the heavens. When the world comes to an end
his kingdom will turn into another worldly eternal kingdom. We come from
the east and have reached here with the guidance of the said star. After
arriving here we observed that that star stayed right above the head of
this child of yours. We have brought some presents to be showered upon
him. These things were never before gifted to anyone else because we
considered them worthy of this child only. Here they are: gold and myrrh
and mandar. Gold is a worldly wealth and your son is the best man in
this world. Myrrh is a medicine useful for curing wounds and illness and
madness. Since your son will be a healer of the sick, this thing will be
suitable for him, and kandar is an essence the smoke of which reaches up
to the sky. No other smoke rises so high. As your child will be
ascending to heavens this thing is appropriate for him.

It is written in reliable traditions that Abu-Basir asked Imam as-Sadiq
why Allah created ‘Isa without a father. He replied, “So that people may
understand his perfection and realize that Allah is able to do
everything.”

It is recorded in many authentic traditions that the spirit which was
blown into ‘Isa was created by Him (Allah) and it was superior to and
higher than other spirits.

It is narrated in many hadiths by Sunnis as well as Shi‘ah sources that
the holy Prophet told Amir al-Mu’minin, “You are similar to ‘Isa son of
Maryam about whom many indulged in extremism. They began to call him
Allah and Allah’s son. Some became his enemies to such an extent that
(Allah forbid) they called him an illegitimate born and alleged that he
was the son of Yusuf Najjar. Both these groups went to Hell. The group
that considered him a slave and a Prophet of Allah remained in his
religion. Likewise, O ‘Ali one group will call you God and another
(Allah forbid) will call you ‘Kafir’ (unbeliever). Both these groups
will go to Hell. Those who consider you a slave and a caliph of his
Prophet will attain salvation.”

Merits and perfections of ‘Isa
------------------------------

Allah Almighty says,

***“And we gave ‘Isa, the son of Maryam, clear arguments and
strengthened him with the Holy Spirit.”*** ***(2:87)***

Some have said that the holy spirit was created by Allah and blown by
Him into ‘Isa. It is recorded in reliable traditions that the Holy
Spirit is a creation of Allah which is higher than Archangel Gabriel and
Mika’il and all the angels who had relations with great Prophets and the
sinless Imams and who keeps helping them from the time of their birth
and guides them up to the last. Some hadiths which have been mentioned
in the beginning of this book are concerning this subject. Allah
Almighty says elsewhere,

***“When Allah will say: O ‘Isa, son of Maryam; Remember my favor on you
and your mother, when I strengthened you with the holy spirit and you
spoke to the people in the cradle; and when of old age I taught you the
Book and the wisdom and the Torah and the Injeel; and when you
determined out of clay a thing like the form of a bird by My permission,
and you healed the blind and the leprous by My permission; and when you
brought forth the dead by My permission.” (5:110)***

It is well known that the bird made by ‘Isa was a bat. It is described
in the hadith of Amir al-Mu’minin that there were six animals, which
were not delivered from the womb of their mother. One of them is the bat
that was molded from clay by ‘Isa. By the command of Allah it became a
living thing and flew away. It is narrated by Wahab ibn Munabbah that
once it so happened that fifty thousand ailing persons had gathered
around ‘Isa. Whoever was unable to come up to ‘Isa, would go to that
ailing person himself. He used to heal him on condition that he would
believe in his message. It is said that in the very beginning he brought
four dead persons back to life. The first was his friend Aazar. Three
days after his death ‘Isa told the deceased’s sister to take him to her
brother’s grave.

On reaching there, ‘Isa said, “O Lord of the seven Heavens and the
Earth! Verily you have sent me towards The Israelites so that I may call
them to Your religion and inform them that I am bringing the dead back
to life. So bring Aazar back to life.” Aazar was made alive and came out
of his grave. Thereafter he lived long enough to beget children. The
second person was the son of an old woman whose coffin was being carried
by people before the eyes of ‘Isa. In response to ‘Isa ’s prayer to
Allah the dead person became alive and sat up in the coffin. He then
descended from the coffin by putting his feet on the shoulders of the
coffin carriers. Then he called for his clothes, wore them and went
home. He also fathered children thereafter. The third person was a girl
named Ashaar. People told ‘Isa that she had died the previous day and
asked him to bring her back to life. ‘Isa prayed to Allah and she became
alive and got sons thereafter. The fourth person was Noah’s son called
Sam whom ‘Isa made alive with the help of (the Glorious Names of Allah).
Sam came out of his grave. Half of his hair was white. Sam said, Perhaps
this is the final day of judgment. ‘Isa said, No, I prayed to Allah
through His Glorious Names so that He may give you life. Now Sam had
lived in the world for five hundred years yet his hair had not whitened.
But at the said hour his hair turned grey for fear of the Day of
Judgment. ‘Isa said to him, “Well, now be dead.” Sam said, “On condition
that Allah protects me from the agony of death.” Then ‘Isa prayed for
him and he met his Lord.

“And I withheld the children of Israel from you when you came to them
with clear arguments, but those who disbelieved among them said, This is
nothing but clear enchantment.” (5:110)  
 It is recorded in reliable sources by Imam al-Baqir that When ‘Isa
said, “I am a Messenger of Allah for you. I can mould a bird from clay
and give it life. I am the one who can cure people who are blind from
birth.” The people of The Israelites said, “All this is enchantment.
Give us some other proof so that we may become faithful believers.” ‘Isa
said, “If I tell you what it is that you have eaten and what you have
stored in your house, would you then believe that I am telling truth.”
They said, “Yes.” ‘Isa began to reveal daily what they had eaten, what
they had purchased and what they had kept in storage. Some of them
believed in him but others still remained adamant on their disbelief.

It is authentically narrated that Imam as-Sadiq said that there was a
gap of four hundred and eighty years between Prophet Dawud and ‘Isa. The
religion of ‘Isa was that Only One Allah should be worshipped without
selfishness or show. He was also ordained by Allah to propagate all the
related things. Allah had revealed Injeel to him and took some vows from
him as He had done from other Prophets. It was ordained for them in
Torah that they should establish prayers and pay the poor-rate (Zakat),
order good and prohibit evil and pronounce the divinely permissible
things as permissible and the unlawful as unlawful. There were
admonitions and examples in Injeel. The criminal code and rules
regarding punishments and rights and inheritances were not therein.
Allah had given some relief in the hard and fast commandments given by
Torah. For example it is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an that ‘Isa said, “I
am appointed to permit for you some things, which were prohibited
(according to Torah).” ‘Isa asked those who believed in him that they
should have faith in both the Torah and Injeel. ‘Isa talked with them
while he was yet in the cradle. Thereafter he did not talk with them for
seven or eight years after which he began propagation among The
Israelites and started to tell them what they had eaten and what they
had stored in their dwellings. He began to raise up the dead, heal the
blind and leprous and to teach them Torah. When Allah willed to conclude
the arguments for The Israelites He revealed Injeel on ‘Isa.

It is mentioned in another hadith that Abaan bin Saalab asked the same
Imam whether ‘Isa had raised up any dead person who after revival had
lived long enough to have children? He said, “Yes! ‘Isa had a friend
with whom he had established brotherhood just to please Allah. ‘Isa use
to live in his friend’s house whenever he visited him. (By chance) ‘Isa
could not meet him for sometime, and when he went to see him he was met
at the doorstep of the house by his friend’s mother instead. ‘Isa
inquired about his friend. She replied, ‘O Messenger of Allah! He is
dead.’ ‘Isa inquired from her whether she would like to see him again.
She replied, ‘Surely O Prophet of Allah!’ ‘Isa said, ‘All right, I will
come back tomorrow and by the command of Allah bring him back to life
for you.’ The next day ‘Isa went back to the house and asked the mother
to accompany him to the grave of her deceased son. She took ‘Isa to the
grave. ‘Isa stood at the grave and recited a supplication to Allah. The
grave opened and the son came out alive. When mother and son saw each
other, they wept. ‘Isa felt pity for them and inquired of the son
whether he would like to live with his mother? He asked whether it would
be with provision, and food and a span of life or without all of it?
‘Isa said it would be with all that. He then told him, ‘You will live
with all these things for another twenty years in the world, and that
you will get married and beget children.’ The youth replied that he
would like to live that way. So ‘Isa entrusted him to his mother. That
youth thereafter lived for another twenty year, got married and reared
his children.”

Another authentic hadith tells us that some companions of ‘Isa requested
him to make the dead alive. So he enlivened Sam, son of Noah and asked
him whether he wanted to live in this world or to revert to his past
position. Sam said he did not want to remain alive as the agony of his
(former) death was still painful to him.[^3]

According to authentic sources it is mentioned that, according to Imam
as-Sadiq some people asked ‘Isa as to why he did not marry? He replied,
“Of what use will a woman be for me?” People said, “She will bear sons
for you.” He said, “What shall I gain from sons. If they remain alive
they will create trouble and disturbance for me and if they die they
will only give me grief and gloom!”  
 It is recorded in reliable sources that ‘Isa used to recline on a
pillow of rock and wear thick rough clothes while sleeping. He remained
hungry most of the time. At night, the moonlight was his light. During
the cold season his holdings were the entire east and the west under the
sun. (He was always on the move). The grass which sprouted from the
earth for animals provided him with fruits and fragrance. He had no
woman whom he would love nor a son to worry about. He had no wealth
which could deter him from the remembrance of Almighty Allah nor did he
entertain any greed which could bring about disgrace. His vehicle were
his feet and his servants his hands.

As recorded in reliable traditions Imam as-Sadiq said that ‘Isa in some
of his sermons to The Israelites mentioned: My helpers are my hands and
my vehicle my legs. The earth is my bed and my pillow the rock. The sun
is the warmth giving fire for me and my lamp during the night is the
moon. My food is hunger. My clothing is fear of Allah and my covering is
thick rough clothes made of hair. My fruits and flowers are the grass
which animals eat. I pass my night without possessing any belongings.
When I awake I have nothing with me on the surface of this earth yet no
one is more rich or needless than me.

Another narration mentions that the wife of Kinaan had a son who was
physically disabled. She brought him to ‘Isa. ‘Isa told her that he had
been entrusted with the service of healing the ailing persons among The
Israelites. The wife of Kinaan said, “O spirit of Allah! Dogs obtain
food from the tablecloths shaken off by the rich. So you too, through
your wisdom help us and do not turn us out in despair.”

‘Isa sought permission from his Lord and then prayed and the son of that
woman was cured.  
 It is mentioned in a true hadith that some people inquired of Imam
as-Sadiq whether ‘Isa also suffered from ailments like all other
children of Adam? Imam said, “Yes, he had suffered from serious old age
ailments in his childhood. Once he had suffered from an ailment which
generally troubles seamen. He requested his mother to bring a little
honey mixed with olive oil. Maryam gave it to him. While drinking it
‘Isa showed disgust at its taste. The holy mother asked as to why he was
showing dislike after calling for it himself? ‘Isa replied that it was
through his knowledge as a divine Prophet that he called for it but its
taste was unpalatable and like any normal child he showed his dislike
for it. Yet he took it (and was cured).”

In another narration the same Imam has said that ‘Isa (During his
childhood cried so much that it worried his mother very much. Then he
would tell his mother, “O kind mother! Feed me with the powder of the
skin of such and such tree so that my pain will subside and I will stop
crying.” When Maryam put that medicine in the throat of the ‘Isa but he
cried even more. Maryam asked him why he cried even more when he himself
had desired it. The child replied, “My prescription is based on my
Messengership and my crying is natural (due to my young age).”

According to authentic narrations Imam al-Ridha said that the Prophet of
Allah has said, “May Allah make Masoor (lentils pulse) tasteful for you.
It is blissful and pure, it softens the heart and increasing weeping
(tenderness). Seventy Prophets have blessed it of whom ‘Isa is the
last.”  
 According to the same chain of narrators Imam said that two engraved
(oft repeated) phrases of ‘Isa were:  
 “Good is for a slave who remembers Allah because of Him and bad is for
a person who forgets Allah because of Him.”

According to reliable sources hasan al-Mujtaba said, “‘Isa reached the
age of thirty-three years in this world. Allah raised him up to heaven.
He will ascend to the world in Damascus and kill Dajjal.”  
 According to authentic and reliable traditions Imam as-Sadiq said,
“‘Isa went on a pilgrimage for hajj of Ka‘bah and passed by Safaih
Rauhaa and he was repeatedly reciting *labbaik abdu ka wabnuummahika
labaik* (Here I am, your servant and the son of your slave girl, here I
am).”

It is reliably reported that the holy Prophet said, “I saw ‘Isa on the
night of Me’raj (ascension to heavens). He had a red face, curly hair
and was of moderate stature.”  
 It is also reported that Allah had appointed ‘Isa only to The
Israelites and the jurisdiction of his Messengership was limited to the
Jerusalem. After him his twelve Haaris (associates) became his
successors.

It is mentioned in Abu-Dharr’s hadith that the holy Prophet said, “The
first Prophet of The Israelites was Musa and their last messenger was
‘Isa. In between them six hundred Prophets had been appointed (by
Allah).”

According to a true hadith it is reported that a person asked Imam
al-Baqir when ‘Isa spoke in the cradle was he the Proof of Allah for the
people of his time? Imam replied, “Yes, he was a Prophet and hujjah but
he was not Mursal (i.e.. he was not appointed for Tabligh). Have you not
heard that Allah has said that he spoke up in the cradle saying that ‘I
am a slave of Allah. He has given me the Book and made me a Messenger!’”
The narrator inquired was Zakariyya also Proof at that time? He replied,
“In that environment he was a proof of Allah for the people and was the
Mercy of Allah for Maryam as he testified to the chastity of Maryam at a
time when people were misunderstanding her. And he was a Prophet of
Allah and hujjah of Allah for those who heard his words at that time.
Then he became silent. Thereafter when Zakariyya returned to Allah
(expired), Yahya became his deputy. He inherited his property and wisdom
when he was still very young. When ‘Isa attained the age of seven years
he announced his Messengership and Allah revealed His word to him. Thus
‘Isa became the hujjah of Allah for Yahya and for all others. Since the
advent of Adam until the Resurrection Day the world is not to exist
without the hujjah of Allah.”

It is recorded in reliable reports that Safwan asked Imam al-Ridha, “May
Allah not keep me alive when you are not in the world. If it so happens
who will be our Imam (leader)?” Imam al-Ridha pointed towards Imam
Muhammad al-Taqi standing nearby. Safwan exclaimed that he was only
three years old. Imam said, “So what? ‘Isa attained his Messengership
when he was only three years old!”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam al-Baqir said, “After
‘Isa was born he grew up speedily. In one day he grew as much as others
grow in two months. When he was seven his mother took him to a school
and seated him in front of the teacher. The teacher said *bismillah hir
rahman nir raheem* (In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful)
and ‘Isa at once repeated the words. Then the teacher asked him: say
ABJAD. ‘Isa raised his head and asked the teacher whether he knew the
meaning of ABJAD? The teacher picked up a lash to hit him. ‘Isa said, ‘O
teacher! Do not hit me. If you know the meaning tell it to me otherwise
ask me to describe it.’ The teacher said, ‘Describe it.’ ‘Isa, ‘A (Alif)
is AALAA meaning the bounties of Allah, B is for BAHJAT meaning ‘GRACE’
and Divine Attributes, J is for (Jamaal e Ilaahi), D that is Daal is for
Deen e Ilahi (religion), H (hey) stands for Haul (hell), V (vaav)
indicates VAIL LI AHLIN NAAR which means woe unto the dwellers of Hell,
Z (Ze) points to Zafeer which indicates the screaming of sinners in the
hell and the bursting of hellfire, Huttiya shows that sins are washed
away by Istgfaar, KALMAN is ‘Kalma e Khudaa’ (words of Allah) and that
nobody can alter His words and figures, SA A FA SA means the
Resurrection Day (Dooms day of Final Judgment) which will exhibit tit
for tat (perfect justice will be given to all by exact measure) QRESHAT
means all will be made to sleep in the grave and will be resurrected on
the Day of Judgment.’ Hearing all this, the teacher told the lady to
take away her son as he possessed divine Knowledge and needed no
teachers.”  
 It is narrated in reliable traditions that Imam as-Sadiq said, “One day
‘Isa went to the bank of a river and threw bread from his box into the
water.” One of his companions asked, “Why, O spirit of Allah! Did you
throw away a part of your food?” ‘Isa explained, “So that creatures in
water may eat it. It carries a great reward.”

It is also recorded with authentic chains that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq
said, “There are 73 Graceful Names of Allah. ‘Isa was bestowed with two
of them thereby he could show all miracles. Allah has taught all His 72
Names to us reserving one for Himself that has not been taught to any
one.” (That is, including the two given to ‘Isa too. Thus 72 Names in
all were taught).

It is recorded through the same sources that Imam said, “Fear Allah and
do not envy one another.” Doubtlessly the holy ‘Isa’s shari‘ah included
his tours in the world too. Once during such tours his companions
included a short stature gentleman who was always keeping close to him.
When they came across a river ‘Isa said, Bismillah (In the Name of the
Allah) and stepped onto the water with firm faith and began to cross the
river on foot. His companion also uttered ‘Bismillah’ and followed him
trustfully and came very near to the . His soul became proud with a
thought about ‘Isa that since he also was walking like ‘Isa on water,
how is ‘Isa superior to me? Immediately he began to drown. So he
complained to ‘Isa who held his hand and fetching him out asked him, ‘O
little man! What thought did your heart nurture, which resulted in this
calamity for you?’ He described whatever had come to his mind. ‘Isa told
him that he (the pigmy man) had turned his heart in a direction in which
Allah had not wanted it and also explained to him that he had imagined
himself to be on a level that was higher than his. Therefore Allah
regarded him as His enemy. So ‘Repent’. He repented and got his earlier
status.” Imam said, “Repent before Allah and do not envy one another.”

He (Imam) said in another reliable tradition that one day ‘Isa passed by
a group of people who were rejoicing noisily. He asked them why were
they so joyful? He was informed that the daughter of such and such
person was marrying the son of such and such person. ‘Isa told them that
though they were merrymaking that day, they would mourn and grieve on
the next day. Someone asked him, ‘O Messenger of Allah! How would it be
so on the next day?’ ‘Isa told them that the girl would die that night.
So those who had put faith in ‘Isa said that his word was true but the
hypocrites retorted, ‘Tomorrow is not too far to prove the falsity of
his word!’ Next morning all of them went to the door of that girl’s
house and inquired about her. They were informed that she was alive.
Returning to ‘Isa they exclaimed that though he had told them that the
girl about whom he had said would die was yet alive. ‘Isa replied,
‘Allah does what He wills.’ He added, ‘Come let us see what took place’.
Reaching the girl’s house her husband came out. ‘Isa asked his
permission to talk with his wife. That man went to his wife and told her
that ‘Isa wanted to ask her something, in the presence of some people.
That lady covered herself with a sheet and called ‘Isa into the house.
‘Isa asked her as to what kind of a deed she done the previous night.
She replied, “Nothing except what I do every Friday night. On every
Friday night a beggar comes to me and I give him away what suffices him
until next Friday. Since last night all in the house were busy due to my
marriage ceremony no one attended to the calls of the said beggar. But I
heard him so, I stealthily (so that others might not recognize me) went
to the beggar and gave him something as usual.” ‘Isa asked her to get up
from her bed. Accordingly she rose and swapped the bedding beneath it
snake resembling the branch of a palm tree came out holding its tale in
its mouth. ‘Isa said that it was due to this action of that lady for the
poor beggar that Allah removed the calamity of the snakebite and
postponed her death.  
 In another narration of Ibn ‘Abbas it is mentioned that one day when
‘Isa was in the valley of Jerusalem some Shaitans approached him with
the intention of harming him. Allah Almighty asked Archangel Gabriel to
hit the Shaitans with his right wing. Archangel Gabriel did so and ‘Isa
was saved from harm.

Babawayh has narrated through Ibn ‘Abbas that when ‘Isa who was then 30
year old was in the aqabah (vale) of Jerusalem called Aqaba ar-Rafeeq,
the accursed Iblis approached him and told him that since he had talked
while in the cradle only his sovereignty (Godhood) was the highest. But
‘Isa retorted, ‘O Iblis. It is not so. Only One Allah is the Greatest.
The one who has empowered me to talk in the cradle. He could have made
me dumb, had He willed so’. Then that condemned Satan repeated, ‘Only
you are the great Allah who is able to shape a bird with clay and blow
into it to make it alive.” ‘Isa replied instantly, “Greatness is
reserved only for Allah who created me and who creates a bird with my
hands.” That condemned Satan spoke again: “Your Godhood is so high that
you heal the ill.” ‘Isa told him: “Godhood is only for Him with whose
permission I heal the ill, because if He wills it He can make me ill.”
Then Iblis continued: “It is none but you who with your divine power
make the dead alive. ‘Isa retorted: “But the real greatness belongs only
to Allah at Whose command I raise up the dead, and it is only Allah Who
will make those dead whom I have made live and also make me dead. Only
He will remain ever alive.” Iblis said again, “It is only you whose
godhood is so great that you walk on water without even wetting your
feet.” said, “No, but sovereignty belongs only to the One Who made the
water subservient to me, if He wills Allah may drown me.” Then that
accursed said, “O ‘Isa, it is only you that one day the heavens and the
earth and whatever is in between the two will come beneath your feet and
you will be upon all of them and will direct their affairs and you will
distribute their provisions.” These words of Satan made ‘Isa very uneasy
and he said, “Subhaan.....Nafsih (meaning Highly Exalted is Allah above
all that you utter. I will glorify him so much that both the heavens and
earth will be full of it and the ink (writing his never-ending
knowledge) will finish and the weight of his glorification will equal
his throne so that he may be pleased with me. Hearing these words Iblis
ran away and jumped into the sea of Akhzar. A female jinn going towards
the seashore saw Iblis prostrating on a hard stone. Tears flew from his
wretched eyes across his inauspicious face. That she Jinn who was
astonished to observe this spoke, ‘O Iblis! Woe unto you. What the hell
do you expect to get by making such a long prostration? He said, “O
lucky daughter of a virtuous gentleman. I hope that Allah, after
throwing me into Hell according to His swearing will also free me from
hell by virtue of His Mercy.”

According to a reliable narration from Imam as-Sadiq ‘Isa had once gone
up mountain named Areehaa. Satan approached him in the form of the King
of Palestine and said, “O Roohullaah (Spirit of Allah), since you make
the dead alive and cure the ill and the blind and the leprous just make
yourself fall down from this hill.” ‘Isa replied, “I do everything as
ordered by Allah and He has not commanded me to do so.”

It is also recorded according to the same sources that once upon a time
the crafty Iblis came to ‘Isa and told him, “Are you the one who claims
to be able to make the dead alive?” said, “Yes.” Satan said, “If you are
telling the truth, just make yourself fall off this wall and show us
that you are still alive thereafter.” ‘Isa replied, ‘Woe unto you! a
slave who is subordinate to the commands of Allah cannot experiment upon
himself as he likes.” Then Iblis said, “Is your Lord able enough to
close up the entire universe into an egg without shortening the universe
or enlarging the egg?” ‘Isa replied, “Inability can never apply to
Allah. What you ask for is absurd and hence unlikely to happen and this
is not against the perfection of the ability of Allah.”

In another authentic hadith it is reported by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
that one day ‘Isa, having seen Iblis, asked him, “Has anyone of the webs
of your deceit ever reached me?” He replied, “How can I ever cheat you
when your respected maternal grandmother had, at the time of the birth
of your mother Maryam prayed to Allah, ‘O Allah! I entrust her and her
progeny to your fold so protect them from the deceits of Satan (and you
belong to their progeny).” It is mentioned in some books that when
Maryam had arrived in Egypt ‘Isa was until that time a child. She (Mary)
had taken shelter in the house of a farmer because she was very friendly
with the poor and helped in nourishing them too. One day some of that
farmer’s wealth was stolen. He made allegation against those poor people
who then were living in his house. This made Maryam very sorrowful.
Seeing this ‘Isa asked his mother whether would she like him to reveal
who actually stole the property of the farmer? She said, Yes. ‘Isa said,
Such and such blind man and lame man have jointly made theft. When the
blind man was asked to pick up the lame man he said he was unable to do
so. ‘Isa said, “Last night how were you able to lift him up (and carry
him away). How is it that you are not able to do so now?” Then both of
them confessed and all the other inmates were thereby proved not guilty.
Next day it so happened that some more guests came to the farmer’s
house. The farmer worried as there was not water enough for them all.
Observing this ‘Isa went into the room where empty waterspouts were
kept. He scanned his hand over those pots and all were filled up. he
(‘Isa) was twelve-years old.

It is recorded that, in his childhood, ‘Isa was standing with some boys.
One of the boys had killed another boy and threw his dead body at the
feet of ‘Isa. Relatives of the dead boy took ‘Isa to the court of the
Qadi. The ruler asked ‘Isa about this and ‘Isa replied that he had not
killed the boy. The ruler wanted to punish ‘Isa. Thereupon ‘Isa demanded
that the dead boy should be brought before him. Then he (‘Isa) prayed to
Allah. Consequently the dead boy came alive. Then ‘Isa asked the dead
boy as to who had killed him. He replied that such and such person had
killed him. Then The Israelites asked him who the man standing before
him was. He replied that he was ‘Isa son of Maryam, then he dropped down
dead.

It is reported in narrations that Maryam entrusted ‘Isa to a dyer for
learning the art of dying. The dyer had a lot of clothes to be dyed.
While going out for some other work he explained to ‘Isa that he should
die the clothes in particular colors. But ‘Isa put all of them into a
single color tub. On inquiry, after the dyer returned, ‘Isa told him
that he had put all the clothes in such and such tub. ‘Isa told him not
to worry. The dyer shouted angrily, “You have spoiled all the clothes.”
He arose and took out the clothes. All of them were colored in different
colors as desired by the dyer. The astonished dyer realized that ‘Isa
was Allah’s Messenger and so he became a Muslim (faithful). Finally when
Maryam took back ‘Isa and went to Syria she camped in a hamlet called
Naasirah. The word Nasara therefore has this connection. Then ‘Isa
started the mission of guiding Allah’s creation and conveying the
Messages of the Creator.  
 ‘Isa propagates his Prophethood, dispatches messengers to the adjoining
areas‘Isa propagates his Prophethood, dispatches messengers to the
adjoining areas‘Isa propagates his Prophethood, dispatches messengers to
the adjoining areas‘Isa propagates his Prophethood, dispatches
messengers to the adjoining areas‘Isa propagates his Prophethood,
dispatches messengers to the adjoining areas‘Isa propagates his
Prophethood, dispatches messengers to the adjoining areas‘Isa propagates
his Prophethood, dispatches messengers to the adjoining areas‘Isa
propagates his Prophethood, dispatches messengers to the adjoining
areas‘Isa propagates his Prophethood, dispatches messengers to the
adjoining areas

Allah says, “And Set out an example to the people of the town (Antakya).
When the messengers (sent by ‘Isa) reached the town (When we sent to
them two messengers, they rejected both of them, then we strengthened
them with a third and they said, surely we are messengers to you). Some
say those two were Yuhannaa and Shamoun and that the third one was Yunus
and according to some the first two were Sadiq and Sidq and the third
one Saloon.

Shaykh Tabarsi, Thalabi, and a group of commentators have narrated that
‘Isa sent two messengers to the city of Antioch so they might guide the
people there. On reaching there, they saw an old man grazing his sheep.
He was habib Najjar (carpenter), the Mu’min (faithful) of the family of
Yasin. Both of them saluted (told Salaam to) him. When habib inquired as
to who were they, they replied that they were sent by ‘Isa, who advised
people to worship only one Allah instead of idols. When habib further
inquired whether they possessed ay sign of their being messengers
(divine) they replied in the affirmative saying they could heal the ill
and make the blind and the leprous healthy. habib asked them to heal his
son who was ill for years. They asked habib to show them his son. habib
took them to his house where as soon as the two divine messengers
applied their hands to the body of the boy he arose hale and hearty by
the Grace of Allah. This news went round the city resulting in many
people’s recovery from their ill health. The news also reached the king
of that place who was called Shanaakhan and was one of the kings of Room
(Byzantine) who used to worship idols. The king called for both the
messengers of ‘Isa and asked them as to who they were. They told him
that they were sent by ‘Isa.

He inquired what miracles were they performing. They replied that they
were healing the blind and the leprous by the Command of Allah. The king
asked them as to why ‘Isa had sent them. They replied that they were
sent to tell the people not to worship the idols that could neither hear
nor see and to convey the Commandment of the only one Allah who sees and
also hears. He said, Perhaps your Allah is someone other than the idols.
They replied, “Yes and it is He who has created you and also your gods.”
He said, “Well, for the present you can go but I will ponder over what
you have said.” So they left the king and continued to preach to the
people. Later they were arrested by the order of the king.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim etc. has on reliable and authentic narrations, said
that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said that Allah sent two persons to the
residents of Antioch. Those two messengers made haste in conveying
things in which the people did not believe. So they behaved harshly with
the messengers and imprisoned them in their idol-temple. Allah sent a
third person as His messenger who after entering the town requested the
residents to take him to their king. When they reached the gate of the
royal palace the messenger said, I was worshipping in the forests and
now intend to worship the Lord of your king. They conveyed this message
to the king who ordered them to take him to their temple so that he may
worship his Allah. Accordingly he was sent to the temple of the idols
where he along with the earlier two, continued to worship only Allah.

In short, when this third messenger met with the earlier two messengers
he told them that it was strange that they acted harshly in their effort
to make the idol worshipers leave the religion and embrace a new one and
inquired as to why they not took a lenient approach. Then he told the
two not to make it known to the people that they knew him. Then he went
to the court of the king. The king told him that he had heard that he
had worshipped his god and therefore he was his brother-in-faith and so
it was his duty to assist him and hence he may tell him (the king)
whatever he needed. He said, ‘O king! I do not need anything but I have
seen two persons imprisoned in your temple. Who are they? The king
retorted that they had come to him with an intention to turn him away
from his religion and to falsify his religion they invited him to
worship the heavenly god.” The third Messenger said, ‘O king! It is
better on our part to have a regular and systematic dialogue with them.
If it is proved that truth is with them then we may follow them and if
it is established that the truth is with us then they should enter our
religion and become eligible for all the relief and concessions
available to us.

The king agreed to this proposal and called the two from the temple.
When they arrived in the court the third messenger asked them as to why
they had come there? They replied “So that we may invite the king to the
religion of worship of that Lord who has created the earth and the
heavens and who, in the womb of a mother creates whatever (male or
female) He wills and gives it the shape of his liking. He created the
trees and made fruits. It is only He who sends rain from the sky.”

The third messenger then asked them,” Is your god able to heal a blind
man and make him see? They replied, “We will pray to Him and if He wills
He will heal the blind.” Then the third messenger requested the king to
call for a blind person who has never been able to see anything in his
life. Accordingly a man who was blind since his birth was brought. The
two messengers were then told to pray to their Lord to heal the blind
man in order to see if they were true in their claim. The two arose,
prayed two Rakat of prayer and prayed to Allah and lo and behold, the
blind man opened his eyes and saw the sky. Then the third messenger
requested the king to call another ailing person.

So another ill man was brought there. Then the third messenger himself
made a Sajdah (prostration) before Allah and prayed for enabling the
second blind man to see. He too was healed. Then he (the third
messenger) said to the king, “If they have proved before us an argument
we too have proved one before them. Now call a person who being
handicapped is unable to walk.” On the arrival of such a handicapped
person the third messenger asked the two to pray for his recovery. They
again offered Salat and prayed to Allah who made the immobile man
healthy and able to walk.

Thereafter the third messenger requested the king to call for one more
handicapped person who too was cured through his prayer to Allah. After
this he told the king that like the two proofs given by the two we also
have produced similar two. Now only one thing remains. If they fulfill
it I will enter their religion. O king, I have heard that you had a son
who has died. If they are able to bring him back to life, I will embrace
their faith. The king retorted, “In that case I also will follow their
religion.” So the two (earlier men) were told that only one thing had
remained for settling the matter that the king had a son who was dead
and buried. If you bring him back to life we will enter your faith.
Hearing this those two messengers of Allah fell down in prostration
before Allah, made long prayers and then raising their heads said to the
king, “O king, send some persons to the grave of your son. They will
find him alive and out of his grave, by the will of Allah.” People
rushed to the grave of the prince where they saw that the dead prince
had come out of his grave and was shaking off the dust from his head.

They took him to the king who recognized him and asked, “O my son, how
are you?” He replied, “I was dead, but then I saw two persons
prostrating before my Allah and praying to Him for my life. Allah
accepted their prayer and made me alive.” The king asked him, “O my son,
if you see those persons can you recognize them?” He said, “Yes.” So the
king went along with the prince to a jungle and made him stand there.
Then a number of people paraded before the prince. After hundreds had
passed before his eyes the prince one of the two messengers was brought
before him and he at once spoke, “Yes, this aged gentleman is one of the
two.” Then many more were made to pass before the other messenger came
before him and the prince again recognized him instantly and said that
he was the other person. Seeing this the third messenger said, “I put
faith in your Allah as I am convinced that the message brought by you is
the Truth.” The king also became a believer and so did all of his people
who became Muslims.

Ibn Babawayh and al-Qutb al-Rawandi have narrated from Imam as-Sadiq
that when ‘Isa desired to dispatch his companions he gathered them
before him and advised them to pay attention to the weak and not to
clash with the kings and the oppressors. He directed two of them to
Antioch who reached there on the day of ‘Id (annual celebration). The
two saw that the people there had opened their temples (idol houses) and
were busy worshipping the idols. When they rebuked them harshly they
chained them and threw them in jail. When Shamoun came to know about it
he came to Antioch, reached the jail after some efforts and reminded the
two messengers that they were advised not to clash with hotheaded and
oppressive people. Then he departed from them and continued to meet with
the poor people and have little talks with the poor who used to keep
such dialogues secret from all except their own who were somewhat
strong. After some time this matter came to the knowledge of the king
who inquired since when has this man had entered the city. The people
told him that he had arrived there since the last two months. The king
ordered him to be brought before him.

He was brought to the king who talked with him and became so friendly
with him that he asked him to remain in the court all the time before
him. One night the king saw a fearful dream and described it to Shamoun.
Shamoun gave its interpretation that pleased the king. Thereafter he saw
one more distressing dream. Shamoun again gave its interpretation that
made the king even happier. Thus he continued to live besides the king
and the longer he did so the more respectable he became in his eyes.
When he was satisfied that his words completely impressed the king he
one day inquired about the two persons jailed by him who according to
what he had heard, had found defects in the king’s religion. The king
confirmed the matter. Shamoun desired that they be brought before him.
When they were brought Shamoun asked them, “Who is the god whom you
worship?” They said, “He is the Lord of the worlds.” He asked whether
their Allah heard what they said and answered what they prayed. They
replied, “Of course our Lord hears whatever we say and accepts our
prayers.” Shamoun told them that he wanted to test them and the two
agreed.

Shamoun inquired of them as to whether their Allah cold heal a leper if
they prayed for his healing? They said, “Yes.” Shamoun called for a
leper and asked the two messengers to pray to their Allah for his
recovery. The two passed their hands over the ailing man’s body and he
became healthy instantly. Shamoun said he too could do the same. Another
leper was brought there who too recovered when Shamoun scanned his body
with his hand. Thereafter Shamoun told the two that only one thing
remained unresolved and if they solved that he would also put faith in
their Allah. They said what it was. Shamoun asked them if they could
make a dead person alive. They replied, “Yes (by the order of Allah a
dead man can also become alive).” Then Shamoun inquired of the king
whether he knew any expired person with whom he had any relation? The
ruler replied in the affirmative and said his son had died. Shamoun
said, Well, let us all go to your dead son’s grave and check the reality
of these two gentlemen’s claim, (that possibly they might lose respect).
So all of them reached the grave of the dead prince. The two raised
their hands in supplication before only one Allah and Shamoun too began
to recite a prayer (Dua) silently. Within no time the grave cracked open
and the prince came out alive. When the king inquired about his
condition he said that he was dead; that of late he experienced some
fear and restlessness but “then I saw that three gentlemen were praying
to Allah so that I might become alive and that they were these three
gentlemen.’ While saying this the prince pointed to Shamoun and the two
earlier messengers. Shamoun told the two that he was putting faith in
their Allah. The king said that he too believed. His ministers too
believed. Then following them the entire habitation of Antioch became
Muslims (believer in Truth).

According to an authentic and reliable source it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq that when Injeel (Bible) was revealed to him and he wished to
conclude the argument (hujjah) before the people he sent one of his
companions to the king of Room (Byzantine) with a miracle through which
he could cure lepers, make the blind see, heal the ill whom doctors had
declared incurable. When he reached there and worked these miracles his
fame spread far and wide. When the king came to know about it he was
brought before the king and asked whether he was able to cure the blind
and the leper he replied in the affirmative. The king called a man who
was born blind. His eyes had dried up and he had never seen anything.
‘Isa’s companion was asked to cure him.

He prepared two little balls of clay, put them in the place of his
eyeballs and prayed to Allah for his eyesight. He began to see at once.
Seeing this the king seated him near him, befriended him and told him to
stay there and not to go anywhere else. He gave him much respect and
honor. Then ‘Isa sent another messenger and taught him the prayer for
making the dead alive. When he reached Rome he told the people there
that he was better than the physician of their king. Hearing this, the
king became very angry and ordered that he should be executed. The first
messenger told the king not to make haste in executing him but to call
him and examine his claim. If his claim proved false he might be killed,
so that the argument might be concluded in his case.

Anyway he was called in the presence of the ruler. He told the king that
he could make the dead alive. Around that time the son of that king had
died. So the king along with the second Rasul and all of his court men
and ministers went to the grave of his son and ordered that he might be
brought back to life. The messenger prayed to Allah and the first
messenger said ‘Amen’ until the grave cracked open and the prince came
out and sat in the lap of the king. The king asked his son as to who
made him alive? He pointed toward the two divine messengers. Then both
messengers said that they had come from ‘Isa. As you were not listening
to any of the earlier messengers of ‘Isa but were executing them we were
sent to convey his (‘Isa’s) message to you in this way.”

Hearing this, the king declared his faith in ‘Isa and his shari‘ah
(religion). In short ‘Isa ’s propagation and his message spread far and
wide in this way until the time a group of Allah’s enemies began to call
him (‘Isa) Allah and Allah’s son. The Jews called him a liar and wanted
to kill him.

According to some traditions when ‘Isa sent his two messengers to
Antioch they could not find a way to approach the king for quite a long
time. One day when the king came out for a royal round the two came in
his path, pronounced Allahu Akbar (Allah is the Greatest) loudly and
began to explain Tawhid (Divine Unity). The king became angry and
ordered their arrest and flogging of a hundred whips each. When ‘Isa
came to know about it he sent Shamoun-as-Safa the leader of his
companions for helping the earlier two messengers. Reaching there the
third (Shamoun) did not reveal that he was a messenger of ‘Isa but
cultivated contacts with the royal court men. Then he entered the king’s
court. The king liked his manners. So he befriended him. After some days
Shamoun asked the king about the two persons he had imprisoned and
inquired as to whether he had at all talked to them and had ever asked
for any evidence in support of their words? The king said, No, I was
very angry with them then. Then he called both of them from the jail.
Shamoun asked the two who sent them there? They said the One who has
created everything and who never associates anyone in His Godhood and
Sovereignty.

Shamoun asked them to describe His attributes briefly. They said, “He
does what He wills and commands what He desires.” Shamoun asked them
what the proof of what they had said was. They inquired what was his
desire and what did they want? Then the king called for a boy who did
not have eyes and not even any blocks or holes in place of eyes. His
forehead was plain. He asked them to make him see. Then the two
messengers prayed as a result of which two holes appeared at the place
of eyes. Then they made two clay balls and placed them in those holes in
the forehead of that blind boy and he began to see. The king was
astonished. Then Shamoun told the king that had he also made such a
request to his Allah and had he responded similarly it would a matter of
honor for both him and for his Allah. The king said he did not hide
anything from him and that it was a fact that the Allah whom he
worshipped neither could hear anything nor see anything, nor could he
harm or benefit anyone. Shamoun told the two messengers that if their
Allah could make a dead man alive he would put faith in Him.

They said their Allah was able to do everything. The king said here is
the dead body of a farmer’s son and I have not allowed its burial for
the last one week, make him alive before his father arrives. The corpse
was then brought there. It had become swollen and decomposed. Then the
two messengers prayed openly and the third (Shamoun) silently to Allah
until the dead boy arose and said, ‘I was dead for the last seven days
and I was pushed into seven vales of Hellfire. I disown the religion
that you are following. Put faith in the Godhood of the Lord of the
Worlds Who is the Only One Allah. I saw that the gates of the heavens
were opened for the entrance of these three men and I saw a handsome
youth praying for these persons (pointing toward Shamoun and the two
messengers) who were sent by ‘Isa Messiah. They (three) propagated the
Prophethood of ‘Isa. The king and some groups became believers and the
rest remained infidels. Some say the king and all the people of that
city remained adamant on their unbelief and only one person, habib
Najjar became a believer who was killed.

The following verses also indicate that many became faithful and many
suffered punishment. It is possible that what is said in the end part of
the ayats is about some other villagers. Possibly the hadith indicates
that those who remained alive after the Chastisement became believers as
says the Almighty:

***“They said, You are nought but mortals like ourselves, nor has the
Beneficent Allah revealed anything; you only lie. They said, Our Lord
knows that we are most surely messengers to you. And nothing devolves on
us but a clear deliverance (of the message). They said, Surely we augur
evil from you; if you do not desist, we will certainly stone you, and
there shall certainly afflict you a painful chastisement from us. They
said, Your evil fortune is with you; what! if you are reminded! Nay, you
are an extravagant people. And from the remote part of the city there
came a man running; he said, O my people! Follow the messengers: Follow
him who does not ask you for reward., and they are the followers of the
right course.”*** ***(36:15-21)***

It is described that the name of that man was habib Najjar and that the
very first person to put faith in the Messengers when they entered the
township was he. His house was situated on the outskirt of the town.
When he heard that all the people of his community disbelieved in them
and wanted to kill them he came down running to his people and advised
them in these words. People caught hold of him and took him to the king.
When the king asked had he followed the messengers habib replied:

***“And what reason have I that I should not serve Him Who brought me
into existence? And to Him you shall be brought back: What! Shall I take
besides Him Gods whose intercession, if the Beneficent Allah should
desire to afflict me with harm, shall not avail me aught, nor shall they
be able to deliver me? In that case, I shall most surely be in clear
error: Surely, I believe in your Lord, therefore hear me. It was said,
Enter the Garden. He said, O would that my people had known.”
(36:22-26)***

It is narrated that when habib gave them this advice they (the
disbelievers) belied him so much that he was killed (martyred) or he was
stoned to death. Allah admitted him to Paradise and he began to enjoy
the God-given subsistence. Some say he was lifted up in the heavens;
that people could not kill him. According to some, he was beheaded and
Allah made him alive and admitted him in Paradise.

“Of that on account of which my Lord has forgiven me and made me of the
honored ones! And We did not send down upon his people after him any
hosts from heaven, nor do We ever send down. It was not but a single
cry, and lo! They were still.” (36:27-29) It is described that when the
oppressors killed habib Najjar, Allah became angry with them. He sent
Archangel Gabriel who placed his hands on the gates on both ends of the
town and gave out such a frightening scream that souls of all the
oppressors left their bodies at once en masse.

Thalabi and all Shi‘ah and Sunni commentators and compilers of
traditions have, by way of continuous narrations, mentioned that the
Holy Prophet said, among all the communities there were three persons
who had topped all in the matter of following and obeying the Truth and
who never disbelieved in Only One Allah even for a second and they were:
Hizqil the Believer belonging to the family of the Pharaoh, habib
Najjar, the Believer from the family of Yasin and ‘Ali bin Abu-Talib and
he (the last one) is the most excellent among them.

It has also been reported through several reliable sources that the Holy
Prophet said, three persons did not disbelieve in Allah’s revelation
even for the tiniest fragment of a second and they were the Mu’min of
the family of Yasin, ‘Ali bin Abu-Talib and Aasiya, wife of the Pharaoh.

It is reported authentically that people asked Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
can a Mu’min (believer) ever suffer from ailments like falling away of
hair or leprosy? He said, Suffering is only for the believer. Mu’min of
the family of Yasin was suffering from khoorah. According to another
reliable narration the fingers of his hands had become dry (dead or
lifeless). I can imagine as if he is pointing toward his people with
such fingers and admonishing them: “O My People, Follow the Messengers.
When he went once more to advise his people, they killed him.

At another place, the Almighty says:  
 “And when I revealed to the disciples saying, believe in Me and My
apostle, they said, We believe and bear witness and we submit
(ourselves).” It is said that the Divine Revelation towards them was
brought on the tongues of the Prophets whereby the people accepted the
word of Allah. And it is reported through a trustworthy hadith that Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir said, “The Almighty had given them Ilham
(inspiration).”

It is recorded in reliable sources that hasan bin Afzal once asked Imam
al-Ridha why the companions of ‘Isa are called Hawaari He replied, “It
is said that they were called Hawaari because they were clothes-washers
(laundry-men). They used to clean the clothes of dirt and impurity and
that the word (hawaari) is from the root ‘Khubz e hawaar’ which means
‘white bread’. But we Ahl al-Bayt say that they are called hawaari
because they used to clean both themselves and others of sins and
immoralities by their sermons and admonitions.” It was asked why the
followers of ‘Isa are called ‘Nasaaraa’. He replied that their base and
origin is in the city of Naasirah situated in Syria where Maryam and
‘Isa resided after returning from Egypt.[^4]

It is recorded in a reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said, “‘Isa’s
Hawaaris were the Shi‘ahs of ‘Isa and his (Imam’s) Shi‘ahs were the
Hawaris of Ahl al-Bayt. ‘Isa’s Hawaris did not obey ‘Isa as our Hawaris
obeyed and followed us.” Therefore ‘Isa asked: Who is my helper in the
matter of Allah and His religion? The Hawaris said, “We are the
assistants of Allah.” But by Allah, they did not help (‘Isa) in the city
of the Jews and they did not fight in support of ‘Isa. But our Shi‘ahs
by Allah, are our helpers and assistants. They have been fighting with
our enemies ever since the departure of the Holy Prophet from this
world. The enemies of Allah burn them in fire, harass them, drive them
out of their cities and yet our friends do not refrain from their love
for us. May Allah them give good reward on behalf of us.

In another reliable tradition, it is mentioned that once upon a time
‘Isa told his Hawaris: O my group of supporters! Fulfill a desire of
mine. They inquired as to what it was. He (‘Isa) arose and washed their
feet. The Hawaris exclaimed: O Spirit of Allah! It is befitting for us
to wash your honor’s feet. ‘Isa replied, “One who knows is more worthy
of serving other. I expressed this humility and humbleness so that you
too may, after me, behave with lowliness with people as I did with you.
Wisdom gets propagated through politeness and humility, not through
pride and haughtiness. Grass and grains grow in soft and smooth earth,
not on hard ground.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition replying to a question as to how
were the companions of ‘Isa able to walk on water whereas the companions
of Muhammad did not have this power. Imam said the monetary affairs of
the companions of ‘Isa were being managed (directly) by Allah but this
community (followers of Muhammad) has been made responsible for toiling
to earn their subsistence.[^5]

It is recorded from reliable narrators that someone asked Imam as-Sadiq:
Sometimes it so happens that I see a person who is very humble, who
prays and worships a lot but does not have faith in your religion. Can
his worship benefit him? Imam replied, “Such people are like that group
of The Israelites wherein whoever passed forty nights in worship and
then prayed would get whatever he prayed for. But once when one of them
did so his prayer remained unanswered. So he came to ‘Isa and complained
about it, and requested him to pray for him. ‘Isa made ablution offered
two Rak’ahs of prayers and prayed to Allah. Consequently, Allah revealed
to him, ‘That man had approached Him but from an incorrect way (path),
which is other than, the one I had shown.’ And that man was doubtful
about (‘Isa’s) Prophethood. ‘So I will not hear his request even if he
goes on praying until his neck is dislocated and his fingers have
dropped.’ Hearing this ‘Isa looked toward that person and asked, ‘Do you
harbour any doubt about my Messengership?’ He replied, ‘Yes, O Spirit of
Allah, it is so. Kindly pray to Allah for a change in my condition for
the better.’ ‘Isa then prayed for him. Allah accepted his repentance and
he too, like his family members, became a Mu’min (Faithful).”

It is mentioned in an authentic hadith that according to Imam al-Ridha
the Hawaris (companions or apostles) of ‘Isa were twelve persons the
best among them was Luke and that among the Nasaaraa three scholars knew
the Injeel very well among whom Johanna was at the top ranking as he
used to write (Injeel) and that another Johanna used to live in Africa
and that Johanna lived in Zaqaar and they all possessed the description
of the Prophet of the last era and of his Ahl al-Bayt and they had given
the good tidings about the last Prophet to ‘Isa and to The Israelites.
(This indicates that they were more knowledgeable then even ‘Isa which
is difficult to believe and incomprehensible-Translator).

In another hadith It is narrated through Imam as-Sadiq that Musa once
said something to his people who could not obey it so they revolted in
Egypt. They fought them and killed them. (Likewise) ‘Isa said a thing to
his community which they could not tolerate (comprehend) and so they
rose against him and fought with him in Tikreet (Iraq) and all were
killed as mentioned by the Almighty:

***“So a party of the children of Israel believed and another party
disbelieved. Then we aided those who believed against their enemy, and
then became uppermost.” (61:14)***

It is recorded in another tradition that one day ‘Isa went to a village
for some work along with three of his companions. They found three gold
bricks in their path. ‘Isa said, “These bricks will kill people,” and
went past them. After going, some steps further one of his companions
asked for his permission to go back for some work. He allowed him. He
went. Likewise, the other two also went away taking his permission. They
gathered those gold bricks. Two of them asked the third one to go to the
bazaar and fetch something to eat, telling him that they would await him
at that place.

The third one went to the market and mixed poison with the food,
imagining that the others would die after eating it and he might become
the owner of the gold bricks. On the other hand, the two joined in
conspiracy against the third one and planned to kill him and then divide
the gold only between them. Finally when the man returned the two
together killed him and then ate the food with ease, only to die soon
thereafter. When ‘Isa returned from his work he saw all three lying dead
near the gold bricks. He brought them back to life saying ‘Get up with
the permission of Allah.’ He then asked them whether he had not told
them in advance that those bricks would kill many!

It is mentioned in some books that once ‘Isa was busy admonishing people
along with some of his the Disciples touring the land. He was passing
from one place to another so that he may guide those who were worthy and
deliver them from their state of misguidance.

When they arrived near a city they saw a treasure that tempted the
Disciples who requested ‘Isa to permit them to preserve it so that it
might not be lost in the forest. ‘Isa told them that that treasure would
not give them anything except sorrow and trouble. “In fact I am
traveling to find a treasure which will not cause any trouble or sorrow.
So remain here until I come back.” They told ‘Isa that the city folk are
very bad; they kill whosoever goes there. ‘Isa said, they kill only
those who look at their wealth and property with passion but I care the
least for their belongings.” Anyway, ‘Isa entered that town and began to
observe everything thoughtfully.

Suddenly he saw a dilapidated old house that was the smallest and most
unattractive. He said to himself: treasure is always in the wilderness.
If there can be anybody worthy of guidance he ought to be in this poor
house. He knocked at the door that was opened by an old woman. She
inquired as to who he was. ‘Isa replied that he was a traveler newly
arrived in her town and that he intended to stay overnight in her house
as it was dark. She said it was the order of their king not to allow any
outsider into our home but since the appearance of your face is so
gentle, I cannot dare to ignore a guest like you. “Bismillah” (Most
Welcome-come in). And lo!

On the one hand, the shining sun set in the west and on the other the
moonlike messenger shone in the dark house of the poor old lady, turning
it into a garden of paradise. The owner of this dilapidated house was a
hardworking woodcutter who had died leaving behind this old widow and
his orphan son. The son was also working painstakingly to make both ends
meet with a little income. At night, that boy returned home. The mother
told him that an honorable guest had arrived in their home and that
whatever he brought ought to be spent in feeding him. The boy submitted
some dried bread (loaves), which he had brought before the guest. ‘Isa
ate it and then began talking and with his Prophetic intelligence
learned about the good and modest manners etc. of the boy but he also
noticed a sign of great grief lurking in his heart. The more he tried to
find out the cause of the hidden sorrow the more that boy tried to
conceal it.

At last, the boy went to his mother and informed her that the guest is
insisting very much to know my inner trouble and promises to remove it
as far as possible. Should I reveal my uneasiness to him? The mother
told her son that the shining and radiant face of the honorable guest
tells me that he is worthy of telling everything to him and he looks
like he is able to remove everybody’s troubles. So do not keep anything
hidden from him and also do not ignore his apparent qualification. So
the boy returned to ‘Isa and told him that his father was a woodcutter;
that when he expired his mother asked him to follow his late father’s
occupation. “Our king has an extremely beautiful and intelligent
daughter whose hand in marriage has been asked for by many kings but she
has not accepted anybody’s offer. The princess resides in a very big and
spacious palace. Once when I was passing by that palace, my eyesight
fell on that princess and ever since I admire her ceaselessly. I have
not informed anyone except my mother about this inner uneasiness of my
heart. It was this grief which you detected though I never wanted to
reveal it to anybody.”

‘Isa asked the boy whether he should obtain that girl for him. The boy
replied that it was an impossible task and that it was really
astonishing that a great man like him should make a mockery of him
despite seeing his poverty! ‘Isa said, I have never made a joke. Mockery
is a deed of the ignorant. Had I been unable to fulfill this task I
would have never spoken like this. If you desire, I can make that girl
come to you the next night. The boy went to his mother and narrated the
conversation to her. She replied, “I have no doubt that that great man
will do whatever he says so do not leave his side.” In short, ‘Isa
engaged himself in long prayers and the boy passed the night turning in
his bed.

Next morning ‘Isa called the boy and asked him to go to the gate of the
royal palace and when the courtiers arrived to tell them that you had
come to ask from the king the hand of his daughter. Then at once report
to me what takes place. Accordingly the boy stood at the gate of the
royal court and acted as directed by ‘Isa. The courtiers were very
surprised and when they reached the court they narrated the event as if
it was a joke. The king also laughed a lot and called that boy into his
court. When he saw the boy he at once noticed that though his clothes
were worn and torn the radiance on his face indicated his inner nobility
and purity of heart. Moreover, during his talk with the boy the king did
not observe anything to indicate his foolishness or madness. This
astonished the king very much and he, with an intention of taking his
test, asked the boy that if he was prepared to pay the dowry for his
daughter if he would give her to him in marriage and that for the dowry
he should bring a big tray full of precious pebbles of ruby and that
each pebble should weigh not less than a hundred misqal. The boy asked
the king to give him some time.

Then he came to ‘Isa and narrated everything to him. ‘Isa exclaimed that
it was no problem. Then he called for a tray and sent the boy in the
ruins and began to pray to Allah. Consequently all the lumps of clay
lying there turned into valuable rubies. Then he told the boy to fill up
the tray and carry it to the king. When the boy went back to the court
of the king and removed the cover cloth from the tray the eyes of all
were dazzled and all were spellbound. With a view to try him some more,
the king said one tray was not enough and that he wanted ten trays full
of various kinds of precious stones (jewels).

Returning to ‘Isa the boy conveyed this to him. He called for ten trays
and got them filled with jewelry which none had seen before in the
world. The boy took them to the king where all were again extremely
surprised. Then the king took the boy aside in isolation and told him
that he certainly did not possess such power himself nor could he ever
have courage enough to ask for the hand of the princess and asked him to
reveal who was behind all this miraculous happenings. When the boy told
the facts to the king he said that the man behind all that could be none
other than ‘Isa bin Maryam . He then asked the boy to bring ‘Isa with
him so that he himself might give the hand of his daughter in his (the
boy’s) hand.

Finally ‘Isa went to the royal palace and performed the marriage of the
princess with that boy. The boy was clothed in fine dress with full
decorations and the king himself took him into his palace and entrusted
his daughter (the princess) to him. Next morning when the king called
the boy and talked with him he found him full of wisdom. Since the king
had no other issue except the girl he made that boy his heir-apparent.
According to royal commandment, all the emirs accepted obedience to the
boy and then the king seated him on his royal throne.

Next night the king fell ill and passed away from this world. The boy
took the reins of the government in his hands and obtained control of
all the treasures and wealth of the late king. During all this time ‘Isa
had stayed in the house of that old lady. At the time of sunset on the
fourth day ‘Isa went to that boy to bid him goodbye. The boy alighted
from the throne and clung to ‘Isa and said, O my wise and learned guide!
Your right on this poor and weak person is so much that even its
thousandth part cannot be compensated by way of thanksgiving even if he
would remain in your service until eternity. But, he said, a doubt has
arisen in my heart due to which I remain worrying throughout the night
and cannot take benefit of the luxury “provided by you so generously and
if you will not solve my confusion I will not be able to take any
benefit from your gifts,”

‘Isa inquired as to what thought was harassing him. He said “the problem
is that I am unable to understand when you have such a great ability to
lift me up from the vales of poverty and place me on top of the mountain
of worldly wealth how is it that you yourself are content with worn and
torn clothes and are toiling without any servant or any transport
facility or assistance?” ‘Isa asked the boy that when his desire had
already been fulfilled why he should bother about his (‘Isa’s)
condition. The boy submitted, “O my virtuous and pious guardian! I will
not gain anything from your gifts if you will not remove this confusion
from my mind and I will get no benefit from anything.”

Isa then told him, “O my son, The pleasures of this temporary and
transient world can be of any value only in the eyes of a person who is
unaware of the permanent delight of the everlasting life in the
Hereafter (after death). The very person who until a few days ago
enjoyed sitting on this throne and who took pride in having worldly
power is now lying beneath the earth underground and no hearts entertain
his thoughts any more. This is enough to realize that the wealth which
ends in dishonor and a delight that turns into pain is useless. The
pleasure of the friends of Truth is in attaining nearness to Allah and
realizing His Might and Grace. The earth and transient enjoyments are
nothing compared to the never-ending sweetness of the Hereafter.

Hearing these words of the ‘Isa the boy once again clung to his feet and
said that he fully understood what he said and you have so kindly opened
the knot that was troubling my mind. But then another knot which is more
complicated has come up now before me.” ‘Isa asked what it was. The boy
said that the greater confusion was that he could not comprehend as to
how he (‘Isa) could go away from whom he loved and would not do to him
what his (the latter’s) welfare demanded. When your honor arrived at our
house abruptly and spread the shade of your bliss on us it is unfair
that you should prove stingy in bestowing on us the bounty, which is
main, and permanent and that you would deprive me of the eternal kingdom
by gifting me the worldly empire.

Then ‘Isa replied, “I have taken a test of your mind and heart in this
way and I wanted to know whether or not you are worthy of the really
high ranks and whether or not you were able to give up the transient
joys in order to attain the eternal ones. Now if you leave this royal
grandeur you will earn a greater heavenly reward and prove to be a
completion of argument for those in whose case the false worldly
treasures are blocking the attainment of the perfect bliss.”

As soon as the boy heard these words he threw away his silken robes and
decorations and giving up his superficial empire, began to tread the
path leading to eternal success. ‘Isa brought him to his the Disciples
and told them that the treasure which was in my mind was this orphaned
jewel whom I had lifted, within three days, from wood-cutting to
world-ruling and yet he kicked off all that and is prepared to follow
me. On the other hand it is you, who, despite years of company with me,
became mad after the sorrowful treasure and left me. It is said that the
dead boy whom ‘Isa made alive was this very son of a poor old lady. He
became one of the great religious leaders and many got guidance through
him.

It is recorded in reliable sources that the holy Prophet said, ‘My
brother ‘Isa arrived in a city where a man and his wife were quarrelling
and shouting aloud. ‘Isa asked them the reason where upon the man
replied that this, my wife, is very virtuous and pious. Yet I do not
like her and want to be separated from her. ‘Isa again asked but why?
Then man said that her face is faint and not attractive at all even
though she is not aged. ‘Isa advised that woman not to eat making her
belly full of food as in an overloaded stomach its content boils up and
makes one’s face listless. When the lady followed ‘Isa ’s advice she
became beautiful enough to attract her husband.

Therefore ‘Isa went to another town where people complained to him that
the fruits growing on their trees were getting rotten. ‘Isa guided them
that while sowing seeds they should put water first. As they were
filling the earth before watering it, it rotted their fruits. When the
people acted as directed by ‘Isa their fruits were saved from the rot.

Leaving that township ‘Isa entered another habitation to find that the
eyes of its residents were grey and their faces pale. When people
inquired about its reason ‘Isa replied that it was because they did not
wash the meat before cooking. There always remains some impurity in the
meat of any animal, which is cleaned only after it is washed. When the
people followed the way shown by ‘Isa their ailment disappeared.

‘Isa reached another place. There he met with many people whose teeth
had fallen and faces were swollen. Inquiries were made from ‘Isa who
replied that they were sleeping with their teeth pressed hard, which
hindered the breathing process and also weakened the roots of the teeth.
When people left that habit of sleeping with pressed teeth their
troubles too disappeared.

It is narrated through Imam as-Sadiq that once ‘Isa entered a city full
of dead people whose bones were scattered on the roads and in their
homes. Seeing this ‘Isa exclaimed that they had fallen prey to Divine
Chastisement because had they died natural deaths they would have buried
one another. His companions asked the reason for the Divine wrath.

Allah Almighty revealed to ‘Isa: O spirit of Allah! You ask these dead
men. They will give a reply. When ‘Isa addressed them one of them arose
and said, “Yes, here we are, O, Spirit of Allah.” ‘Isa asked them who
were they and what had happened to them.  
 “Since morning up to the evening they were safe but then suddenly at
night they found themselves in Hawiyah (the lowermost part of Hell).”

‘Isa inquired what was Hawiyah. “It is made up of rivers of fire with
mountains of fire therein.” ‘Isa asked them the cause, which resulted in
this punishment to them. He said it was due to their love for the
material world and the worship of Taghut meaning obedience of wrongdoers
who were against truth. ‘Isa asked to what extent was their love of the
world. They said, it was like the love of a mother for her child such
that when the child looked at her she became happy and when the child
turned its face from her it made her unhappy and sorrowful.

‘Isa asked up to what extend had they obeyed Taghut (false deities)?
They replied they did every wrong thing they were ordered to do. Then
‘Isa asked the spokesman as to why he alone, among all others, arose to
talk with him? He said it was because all others had reins of fire in
their mouths and some extremely merciless and harsh angels were
overseeing them. Then he added that though he resided among them he was
not like them. When the Divine Chastisement caught them I was also
overtaken by it but am hanging by my hair on the brink of Hell and I am
afraid of falling in it any moment. ‘Isa said sleeping in ruins and
living on bread of barley is a great good, which safeguards one’s
religion.

According to another tradition ‘Isa, while traveling with some of his
companions, saw the corpses of a dead man and a rotten dog. The
Disciples said how much foul smell emanates from the dog. ‘Isa said how
shining and beautiful its teeth are, thereby conveying that they should
not see the defects even if many but pay attention to what was good
therein.

According to a narration, once it was raining heavily with thunder and
lightning. ‘Isa was looking for shelter. As he observed a tent at a
distance he went there. Seeing only a woman in it he returned and turned
towards a mountain. A tiger was sleeping in its cave. He put his hand on
the tiger and exclaimed, “O Almighty! You have provided a shelter for
everything but I am shelterless.” Allah informed him through revelation
that his shelter was where His Mercy remained and told him that: By My
Might and Honor! On the Day of Resurrection I will marry you with a
hundred huris whom I have made with my own hands of power and will give
a feast, as your marriage reception to a population of four thousand
years each day that would be equal to the life of the entire world. I
will make the announcer proclaim: Where are those who had discarded the
world. Those who had ignored the world for worshipping Allah will attend
‘Isa bin Maryam’s feast.

It is mentioned in another narration that the world was presented to
‘Isa in the form of a fearful old ugly woman who had no teeth but had
decorated herself very much. ‘Isa asked her how many husbands she had.
She said she could not count. Thereupon ‘Isa asked her whether all of
them had died or was she divorced by them? She replied, ‘No, I killed
all of them.’ ‘Isa exclaimed: ‘Woe unto your remaining husbands who do
not ignore you even though they see that you are killing them every
day!”

It is recorded in another narration that once ‘Isa saw an old man
toiling hard with a spade in hand. He was preparing the ground for
tilling. ‘Isa prayed to Allah for the removal of longing from the heart
of that old man. Allah accepted ‘Isa ’s prayer and that old man put down
his spade and went to sleep. Then ‘Isa prayed for re-entry of longing in
that man’s heart. Consequently he got up instantly took his tool in hand
and began working. ‘Isa then asked him as to why he had put down his
tool and then again began to work? He replied “in the meantime it had
occurred to my mind that I had become so old that it was not certain
when I would die and hence it was not necessary to go on toiling. I went
to sleep and took rest. But then again a thought came to my mind that
sustenance is required until I die so I got up to restart my work.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that the holy Prophet said that
once the Disciples asked ‘Isa, “O Spirit of Allah! Whose company should
we keep?” He replied be with those persons whose appearance may make you
remember Allah, and by talking with whom your knowledge may increase and
whose character may make you think about the Hereafter.

According to an authentic narration Imam as-Sadiq is reported to have
said that once ‘Isa passed by a group of people who were weeping. On
making inquiry he was informed that they were weeping so that Allah
might pardon their sins. ‘Isa said they should not stop weeping until
Allah pardoned them  
 In another reliable tradition the same Imam is reported to have said
that the holy Prophet had said, Once upon a time ‘Isa passed by a grave
that was being chastised. The next year when he passed by the same grave
it was not being punished. ‘Isa prayed to know the reason. Divine
revelation enlightened him that the dead man had a son who had just
become a youth. He repaired a path for Muslims and made it easy for
people to pass through it. Moreover he maintained an orphan. So Allah
pardoned him.

One day ‘Isa told Yahya that if people malign you of an evil which you
possess, you might consider it and ask him to seek forgiveness and pray
for forgiveness. But if he accuses you of an evil which do not possess
then it is goodness in your favor which you have earned without
toiling.  
 Descent of MaidahDescent of MaidahDescent of Maidah

Allah Almighty says,

***“When the disciples said, O ‘Isa son of Maryam! Will your Lord
consent to send down to us food from heaven?”*** ***(5:112)***

It is said that this questioning of them was prior to the perfection of
their faith. Or they did not know the Might of Allah or they intended to
learn whether Allah considered it fitting to do so or they wanted to
ascertain whether Allah answers his call if he (‘Isa) prays to Him?

It is recorded in reliable sources that according to Imam as-Sadiq the
Ahl al-Bayt pronounced the word “Rabbaka” (and not ‘Rabbuka’) which
meant: “Can you put such demand before your Lord?”  
 ‘Isa said, “If you believe in Allah and in His Prophet, fear Allah and
do not raise questions, which might produce undesirable replies.”  
 “They said, We desire that we should eat of it and that our heart
should be at rest, and that we may know that you have indeed spoken the
truth to us and that we may be of witnesses to it. ‘Isa, son of Maryam
said, O Allah, Our Lord! Send down to us food from heaven which should
be to us an ever recurring happiness to the first of us, and a sign from
thee, and grant us means of subsistence for Thou art the best of the
Providers.”  
 According to the narration the Divine Tray of food came down on Sunday
therefore the Christians celebrated that day.  
 “Allah said, Surely I will send it down to you, but whoever shall
disbelieve afterwards from among you, surely I will chastise him with a
chastisement with which I will not chastise anyone among the nations.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition according to Imam as-Sadiq that
when Allah Almighty descended the tray of food (Maidah), ‘Isa commanded
the Disciples that nobody should eat from it unless he permitted them to
do so. But one of them ate from it and somebody informed ‘Isa about it.
When ‘Isa asked him he denied having eaten it but all the Disciples
testified that he had done so. ‘Isa asserted that when your Mu’min
brother denied having done a thing which you have seen with your own
eyes, you should refute your eyes and testify to what the faithful
person says.

It is recorded that the tray which was sent from heaven was lowered by a
golden chain and it contained eatables of nine colors and nine breads
and nine fishes plus nine breads according to another narration. It is
said on the authority of Imam al-Ridha that those who did not become
believers when the tray was sent by Allah, they became pigs. According
to another tradition they became pigs and monkeys.

According to a reliable saying of Imam Musa al-Ka¨im those who were
turned into pigs were a group of washer men who had denied the descent
of Maidah. It is mentioned in the tafsir (commentary) of Imam Al-Hasan
al-’Askari that the Maidah sent by Almighty Allah on ‘Isa contained only
a few loafs but there was so much barakah (God-given abundance) in it
that four thousand seven hundred persons could take satisfactory food
from it for several months. It is also mentioned in the same tafsir that
the holy Prophet said, When the people of ‘Isa became ungrateful after
demanding the Divine Maidah, Allah turned them into seven sorts of
animals like pigs, monkeys, bears, cats and some sea and desert
creatures.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim narrated that when the Divine Maidah was coming down
The Israelites used to gather round the tray and eat to their satiation.
Finally the rich and proud people of The Israelites began to say that
they would not allow the poor and down trodden people to take food from
the Maidah. So Allah fetched the Maidah up and turned those people into
pigs.

Shaykh Tabarsi has recorded that people have differed about the details
of Maidah and its contents. ‘Ammar Yasir has said the holy Prophet had
said that there was bread and meat in it, because people had demanded
from ‘Isa that they wanted food which might not finish and they could go
on eating. Allah Almighty informed them that the blessing would remain
with them so long as they did not show dishonesty and did no hoarding,
and that if they did so they would be chastised. But they proved
dishonest on the very day.

Ibn ‘Abbas has narrated that ‘Isa told The Israelites: Fast for thirty
days and then Allah will fulfill whatever you demand. They fasted for
thirty days and then told ‘Isa, “If we work for anyone they give us food
to eat. We fasted for thirty days and suffered hunger. Now pray to Allah
so that He may send a tray full of food from heavens.” Soon the angels
brought Maidah for them with seven loaves and seven fishes in it. All
ate from it. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has also said so. Another narration
says that there was all kind of food except meat. Yet another narration
says the Maidah contained everything except loaf and meat. One narration
says meat and fish was not there. Another narration says it contained
only fish having the taste of everything. According to one narration it
contained heavenly fruits. Yet another tradition says Manna and Salwa
was dropping every morning and evening from the sky.

It is mentioned by Salman Farsi that ‘Isa never found faults with
people, never shouted at anyone, never laughed loudly, never removed
anybody away from him, never blocked his nose against a foul smell
emanating from anyone’s body, never engaged in any game or play nor
engaged in any meaningless work. When the Hawaaris (his close
companions) demanded a heavenly tray of food (Maidah) from him he was
wearing a thick woolen wear. He wept and prayed whereupon a red trey
came down from the heavens which was visible to all over there. It
reached them quickly. ‘Isa then arose, made Wudhu’ (ablution) prayed a
lengthy prayers and removing the cloth covering the divine tray uttered
*Bismillahi Khairur Raazeqeen* (In the Name of Allah Who is the best
Provider of Sustenance).

People saw that the tray contained fried fish without scab (scrub), full
of fat. There was salt near its head and vinegar near its tail. Around
it were all kinds of vegetables except garlic. Also there were five
breads, with olive oil on one, honey on the second, Ghee (refined
butter) on the third, cheese on the fourth and kebab (roast) on the
fifth. Shamoun asked, “O Roohullah (Spirit of Allah)! Is this a worldly
food or a heavenly one?” ‘Isa replied, “Neither. Allah has just created
it by His Might. Eat it, as you have demanded it from Allah so that he
may help you and shower more blessings on you with His grace.”

The Disciples said, “O Roohullaah! We want to see another miracle.” ‘Isa
uttered, “O fish! Be alive with the Command of Allah.” Instantly the
fish began to move, developed skin-scab over it and spikes within it.
This frightened them. He said, “Why do you ask for a thing, which, if
complied with, may disgust you? I worry much about you, lest you be
caught in the Divine chastisement.” Then ‘Isa ordered the fish, “O fish!
By the Command of Almighty Allah, be as you were earlier.” Then it was a
fried fish again. People said, “O Prophet of Allah! You eat first from
it and we will follow. He said, I seek Allah’s refuge in the matter of
dining it. Since you demanded for it you should eat it. As the people
became fearful ‘Isa called the poor, the needy and the ill so that they
might eat it and told them, “Eat it as it is healthy for you and a
calamity for others.” Thirteen hundred sick and poor penniless people
ate to satiation but the fish did not diminish. Then the tray rose up
towards the heavens and went out of sight within no time while people
watched with wide eyes. Every ill person who ate from it became healthy.
The poor who ate it became rich. Those who did not eat repented. Then
whenever it came down again both the poor and the rich used to gather
round it making it very crowded.

So ‘Isa fixed turns: One day for the needy and the other for the
needless. The tray continued to come down for forty days. People used to
eat from it from morning until noon. It went up in the afternoon. This
happened on alternate days. Allah Almighty revealed to ‘Isa that he
might reserve it only for the poor and prevent the rich from eating it.
The rich became angry with this. They became doubtful about the Maidah
and began to spread doubts about it among others. Allah sent a
revelation that He had put a condition for the deniers that if they
become infidel after the arrival of Maidah He would give them a severe
punishment with which none would have been chastised among the residents
of the worlds. ‘Isa said, “O Allah! If You punish them, they are Your
slaves (creatures) and if you forgive them you are the Mighty, the
Wise.” So Allah metamorphosed three hundred thirteen people from them
who were sleeping with their family members during the night but when
they arose the next morning they had become pigs. They wandered in the
streets and ruins for three days and then died.

Revelations and teachings revealed to ‘Isa
------------------------------------------

Almighty says, “And when Allah will say: O ‘Isa son of Maryam! Did you
say to men, Take my mother and me for two Gods besides Allah?”

It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq Allah has not yet said these words to
‘Isa but He will say so on the Day of Resurrection when He will gather
the Christians before him (Christ) to conclude the argument, in the
matter of those who are making false assertions though ‘Isa never taught
such things and never propagated such beliefs (that they should call
‘Isa the Allah or the son of Allah). Allah Almighty will put this
question to ‘Isa despite the obvious fact that He knows better that
Jesus never taught such beliefs. And Allah always describes the
forthcoming event in such a way as if it had already occurred,

***“He will say: Glory be to Thee, it did not befit me that I should say
what I had no right to (say); if I had said it, Thou wouldst indeed have
known it; Thou knowest what is in my mind, but I do not know what is in
Thy mind, surely thou art the great Knower of the unseen things.”
(5:116)***

According to reliable record, while explaining this verse of the holy
Qur’an, Imam al-Baqir said, There are seventy-three ‘ (Great Graceful)
names of Allah. He has taught seventy-two of them to Adam which all the
holy Prophets up to ‘Isa got in heritage. Allah kept one of His Holy
Names secret, which He has not revealed to anybody. So the meaning of
‘Isa ’s reply would be: “I know only those 72 Great Names which You have
taught me and that what is secret with You () is not know to me.”[^6]

***“I did not say to them aught save what thou didst enjoin me with:
That serve Allah, my Lord and your Lord, and I was a witness of them so
long as I was among them, but when Thou didst cause me to die, Thou were
the watcher over them, and Thou art witness of all things. If Thou
shouldst chastise them, then surely they are thy servants; and if Thou
shouldst forgive them, then surely Thou art the Mighty, the wise.”
(5:117-118)***

According to reliable proofs Imam as-Sadiq has said, Injeel was sent
down (revealed) on the 13th night of the month of Ramadhan. In another
hadith according to the same source it was on the 12th night.[^7]

According to authentic reports when Imam al-Ridha asked the Christian
scholar Catholic, “Have you (not) read in Injeel: I am going toward my
and your Lord and that after me will arrive Barqalita and he will
testify to my Prophethood just as I am giving the testimony (and
information) of his (Prophethood). He will give explanation of
everything. It is only he who will point out the waywardness of groups
and he alone will break down the pillars of Kufr
(blasphemy-infidelity-unbelief).”

Catholic replied, I confirm all that you have quoted from Injeel. He
asked again, “Is not whatever I said there in Injeel,” He said, “Why
not?” (It is indeed). said, “O Catholic! Do you people not tell us that
Injeel had become untraceable and that from whom it was found out and
that who prepared Injeel for you?” Catholic said, “One day Injeel had
become untraceable and we could not find it. Then (after some time)
Johanna and Mata brought it to us in a freshly written form for us.”

Imam said, “How much ignorant are you about the mystery of Injeel and
its scholars? If whatever you say is true then why do all of you differ
in Injeel. Had the Injeel which is now in your hands been exactly just
as it was revealed then you would not have differed. I know the secret
behind your difference. Hear it from me: When Injeel had disappeared
initially the Christians gathered round their scholars and said, ‘‘Isa
has been executed and that Injeel has vanished. Since you are
knowledgeable tell us what is behind all this.’ Then Luke and Marqaaboo
told them that Injeel has remained protected in our hearts and that we
shall read a chapter of it for you on every Sunday. So do not worry and
do not leave your places of worship empty. Every Sunday we will show you
one Safar (one chapter) of Injeel when all of you should gather. Then
Luke Marqaaboos, Johanna and Matthews prepared this Injeel jointly, when
the original Injeel had disappeared. These four were the disciples of
the earlier ones. Do you know all this?” He said, “No, I have only just
known it from you and now the great extent of your knowledge about
Injeel had dawned on me. I have heard some such things regarding this
matter about which my heart tells me that they are true.”

Imam said to the audience and Al-Ma’mun, “Be witness to whatever he said
and confessed.” All of them replied that they were witness to all that.
Imam turned toward Catholic and told him, “By the truthfulness of ‘Isa
and Maryam , tell us whether you know that Matta said that ‘Isa is son
of Dawud son of Ibrahim son of Ya‘qub son of Yehuda son of Khazroon and
that Marqaboos has described the dynasty of ‘Isa saying that he (‘Isa)
is the son of Maryam and that he is the word of Allah that Allah entered
him in the form of man and he became man and that Luke said ‘Isa son of
Maryam and his mother Maryam both were human beings made of flesh and
blood and that Holy Spirit entered him and that you say that ‘Isa gave
witness unto himself saying that “I truthfully say that nobody can enter
the heavens except the one who has come down from the heavens and that
he is the noble Seal of the Prophets who will ascend to the heavens and
will return to earth.” So what have you to say about this?” Catholic
said, “These are the words of ‘Isa and I cannot deny it.” Imam asked
him, “What is your opinion about what Luke and Marqaboos and Matta have
said regarding ‘Isa and what they have attributed to him?” Catholic
said, “All of them have attributed false things to ‘Isa. Then he said,
“Did you not hear that he had praised all of them and said that they
were the scholars of Injeel and that they were truthful?” Then Catholic
said, “O scholar of the Muslims! Pardon me.” Then after a prolonged
debate Imam asked him, “Is it not mentioned in Injeel that a son of a
pious woman will work for your betterment and will testify and will toil
hard and will explain everything for you just as I am testifying to his
Prophethood; that I have brought some parables for you and that he (the
one to come after me) will explain its meaning to you? O Catholic! Do
you give witness that all these things are in Injeel?” Catholic said,
“Why not (surely I give witness).”

According to reliable and authentic hadith Imam as-Sadiq said that some
of the advices and admonitions that Allah reveled to ‘Isa are:  
 ‘O ‘Isa! I am your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors. My Name is Ahad
(The Only One). I am the Only One Who has created everything myself. All
things are My creations and of My making. All of them will return to Me
on the Day of Resurrection.  
 O ‘Isa! You are the Blessed Messiah. Through My Command you mould a
bird with clay and make it alive. You raise up the dead by My Order.
Keep up your love for Me. None can be saved from My chastisement except
the one who turns to Me.  
 O ‘Isa! I admonish you like the admonisher Who is kind and Merciful to
you. My Mercy and love for you has become incumbent ever since you asked
from Me some things which pleased Me. So I have made you Graceful in
abundance wherever you be. I give witness that you are My slave
(creature) and the son of My maid (Maryam).  
 O ‘Isa! Imagine Me with you all the time, like everything that comes to
your heart. Always remember Me for enriching you in the Hereafter.
Attain My nearness by performing desirable and also optional deeds and
rely on Me so that I may fulfill your intentions. Never trust anyone
besides Me because (in that case) you leave Your affairs to him and then
I will not help you.  
 O ‘Isa! Tolerate patiently whatever befalls you from Me and remain
pleased and content on My decisions. Be as I like you to be. Surely I
like that people should obey Me and not disobey My commands.  
 O ‘Isa! keep my remembrance on your tongue and keep your heart full of
my love all the time.  
 O ‘Isa! Remain alert and awake when people are unmindful and asleep.
Relate stories of My wisdom to people.  
 O ‘Isa! long for My Reward and be frightened of My Chastisement and
make your heart dead in the matter of earthly desires and fear none but
Me.  
 O ‘Isa, “Pass your nights in pleasing Me and fast in the daytime to
experience thirst, for the presentation of your needs on the Day of
Resurrection.  
 O ‘Isa! Settle disputes of people as I have commanded you to wishing
well for them and maintain My Order among them. Doubtlessly I have sent
to you a Book which cures the heart of all Satanic doubts.  
 O ‘Isa: I truthfully tell you that not one of my creature puts faith in
(believes in) Me except the one who weeps due to My fear and only he
fears Me who is hopeful of My Reward. I make you Witness (and announce)
that such People will remain safe from My Chastisement so long as they
do not change My Way.  
 O ‘Isa: O son of the virgin lady Maryam who had disconnected herself
from the whole world and had attachment only for Me! Weep on your
condition like the one who weeps at the moment of departing from his
near and dear ones, and who regards the (material) world as his enemy
and who gives it (earthly desires) up for those who love it (worldly
life) and like the one whose longing is for nothing but the Reward of
the Hereafter which is only with the Only One Allah.  
 O ‘Isa: In spite of giving up worldly desires, as advised by Me, do
talk politely with people, salute (say Salaam) everyone you meet. Even
when good men are unmindful you should remain awake and alert keeping in
mind the Day of Judgment when severe trembling will shake all hearts,
when neither relatives nor riches will be of any help.  
 O ‘Isa: apply the powder antimony of sorrow and grief to your eyes when
those who do not believe in the Truth are laughing.  
 O ‘Isa: What a success when you remain fearful (only of Me) and patient
when you will attain all that I promise to the patient.  
 O ‘Isa: continue to make daily deductions from your worldly attachments
so that the final departure may not be difficult for you. Taste the
pleasure of worldly life which have been withdrawn. I tell you
truthfully that you have at your disposal only that time and chance and
day (for endeavoring) on which you are alive. So be content on getting
from the worldly life which is absolutely necessary and go on toiling
for enriching your life in the other world (Hereafter). Suffice to have
rough clothing and tasteless food as you know what is to be the end (of
a dress). All of your occupations are being recorded, that is, what you
obtained, from where did you get it and in what you spent it.  
 O ‘Isa: I will question you on the Day of the Resurrection Day. So be
kind and merciful to the poor and the weak as I have been Kind and
Merciful to you. Never be harsh toward the orphan.  
 O ‘Isa: Keep up weeping on your condition in your prayer and keep your
legs busy walking toward the prayer house. Continue to make Me hear your
pleasant voice full of my Remembrance as I have showered many bounties
on you.  
 O ‘Isa! I have destroyed many people due to their sins but I have saved
you.  
 O ‘Isa! Be kind to the weak and open your eyes looking up and ask only
from Me because I am very near to you. Do not pray to Me but with
weeping and empty your heart keeping only Me therein. I will answer your
call if you will call me thus.  
 O ‘Isa: I have created this transient world for rewarding and not for
punishing those who preceded you nor to avenge their disobedience.
Rather I have postponed both reward and chastisement until Resurrection
which is eternal and unendingly permanent.  
 O ‘Isa You will be no more and I am everlasting. Your life is from Me
and your return too is towards Me. The time of your death is in my
control and you are to return unto Me and your accountability is before
Me. So ask whatever you ask from Me and from none else and beg from Me
in a better manner so that I may accept your prayer in a better way.  
 O ‘Isa: How big is the number of people (almost innumerable) but how
few of them are patient, like the small number of fruitful trees
compared to the fruitless ones. So you should not be deceived by seeing
a green and fresh tree until you taste its fruit, that is, do not be
deceived by the apparent goodness of people unless you test their morals
and deeds.  
 O ‘Isa: You should not be deceived by the one who has rebelled against
me (and is well to do), who is eating sustenance provided by Me and yet
is worshipping others; who, while in trouble, calls and invokes Me and
when I answer his prayers reverts to the same sin of polytheism, rises
against me and becomes liable to My anger and chastisement. By My
Majesty and Grandeur, I will catch him in such a severe way that he will
never find any escape and where will he ever go leaving the boundaries
of my earth and heavens?  
 O ‘Isa! tell the oppressors of The Israelites not to call me (not to
invoke) while they are holding prohibited things in their arms and have
placed idols on their dinning tables, that is, they have turned their
wealth and their sons etc. into idols (deities) and have replaced My
pleasure by their pleasure. I swear that I do answer the call of the one
who invokes Me but those who Call Me in the aforesaid wrong way only
earn My condemnation and curse until they disperse.  
 O ‘Isa how often I invite them towards Me but they are always found
negligent (though I look at them mercifully). Yet they pay no attention
and the word of Truth gets no room in their hearts and their souls
remain in the dark. Thus they become liable to My chastisement due to
their sinfulness though (outwardly) they love the faithful.  
 O ‘Isa: Close your eyes for things which give no benefit but only loss.
Often it so happens that a man looks at a thing (intentionally) and such
look sews seeds of illegal desires in his heart and those desires
finally kill him.  
 O ‘Isa: Be kind to My servants just as you wish servants to be kind to
you and remember at all times and always keep in mind that you will have
to depart from your near and dear ones one day and never indulge in
meaningless plays and games because games pollute hearts. Do not forget
Me because the neglecter gets away from Me. Remember Me through your
good behavior and moral deeds so that I may keep you in mind for a
merciful reward.  
 O ‘Isa: Seek My pardon after committing a sin (error) and invite the
repeaters toward Me and rest assured that I do accept repentance. Be
near to the Believers love fully and ask them to invoke Me together with
you. Never be carefree about the oppressed because the cry of the
oppressed rises up to reach Me. By my Holiness, I open up all doors of
the heavens for the prayers of the oppressed which I do accept though it
may take some time. O ‘Isa: Remember that company of bad people makes
them wayward and a bad companion is a killer. So be careful whose
company you adopt. Always select the faithful brothers for your company.
O ‘Isa: Do whatever you can for your own self until you are not dead. No
one else will ever perform good deeds for you. Verily I give manifold
reward for every good deed. Surely the sins of the sinner destroys him.
Make haste in performing good deeds and go on toiling for there are many
meetings which deliver the audience from Hell. O ‘Isa: Get disconnected
from the mortal world and observe the path signs of your predecessors
(are they traceable or not?). Call them either loudly or silently and
see whether they hear or respond. Take admonition from their events and
remember that you too, will together with all living ones, join them
(the dead). O ‘Isa! Tell those who disobey me and rise against me and
who keep company of the sinners and who are asking for my anger and who
are awaiting their destruction that, very soon, they also will be
annihilated along with others.  
 O Son of Maryam! What a good fortune for you if you follow the path
commanded by the Lord. He is very kind and Merciful to you and began to
give you His bounties even before you asked. He is there to help you in
every difficulty and trouble. So never disobey Him.  
 O ‘Isa! Verily it is not permissible for you to disobey Me, because I
have promised for you the same thing which I had promised the earlier
Prophets, and I am a witness to it.  
 O ‘Isa No other thing except My religion, is dearer and precious in My
view in the entire creation No reward is higher than My Mercy, for any
one.  
 O ‘Isa! Cleanse the apparent filth with water and remove the internal
impurities through good deeds and worship because your return is to Me.
O ‘Isa! I bestowed upon you My reward fully without polluting it with
any trouble. It was for your own benefit that I asked for a loan from
you but you were miserly until you were destroyed.[^8]  
 O ‘Isa! Adorn yourself with your Religion and with your friendship with
the poor and the needy and walk on earth with humility and offer prayer
on any portion of the earth because it is clean.  
 O ‘Isa! Remain ever ready for My worship because the happening which is
to happen (that is death) is near and recite My Book after making Wudhu’
(ablution) and cleanliness. And recite it to Me in a sorrowful voice.  
 O ‘Isa! There is nothing with an everlasting tastefulness and there is
no luxury which will not depart from the indulgent in luxury.  
 O ‘Isa! If your eyes can see the things which I have written (reserved)
for My friends your heart will melt and you will die longing for them.
The house of the Hereafter is like a house wherein live the angels who
are near to Allah with pious people who are safe from all the dangers of
the Day of Judgment. The bounties possessed by the residents of that
residence never change nor vanish.  
 O Son of Maryam! Long with those who long for gaining the possession of
the house in the Hereafter because that place is on top of all the
ambitions of the ambitious and its sight is very pleasing to the eyes.  
 O son of Maryam! How lucky will you be if you do good deeds for getting
entry to that House along with your ancestors Adam and Ibrahim and (that
house) is like a garden which has bounties incomparable with the
bounties of this world and from there nobody can shift you. I give such
award to the pious.  
 O ‘Isa! rush toward Me along with those who rush for fear of fire, the
flames whereof keep on leaping forever and which will be full of all
sorts of tortures. Cool air will have no passage therein. There is no
pain or trouble which will not be in that fire. Some places therein are
darker than the darkest night. Only he is successful who is saved from
that fire. Those who cannot escape it can never attain salvation. That
place is for the merciless oppressors who are driven out of the Mercy of
the Most Merciful Allah. It is for every bad tempered egoistic and proud
person.  
 O ‘Isa! Hell is a very bad place and it is for those who tend toward it
and that place is for the oppressors to taste the severest chastisement.
I command you to save yourself from every evil of your soul and to fear
My anger and confess that I have created you, that you are My slave that
I shaped your figure and I have sent to you out of My Mercy and kindness
on earth.  
 O ‘Isa! Just as it is not possible that there can be two tongues in one
mouth and two souls in one chest likewise there cannot be two loves and
two thoughts in one heart. So remove love for everyone and everything
else other than Me from your heart and purify your deeds only for My
sake.  
 O ‘Isa! Do not awaken others while you yourself are asleep in
negligence and do not prevent others from playfulness when you are busy
in it. Restrain your heart from the killer desires of the world and its
passions just as people restrain a child from (harmful) milk. Keep
distance from every wish that may keep you away from Me because you are
holding the position of being My honest messenger. So continue to fear
Me because the more one is nearer to Me the more he fears Me. It is
essential that you should be lowly and meek when you worship Me. Your
heart must be full of humility when you admonish people to fear Me. You
should remain awake when others are asleep.  
 O ‘Isa! This is My admonition for you so accept it and ask whatever you
ask from Me because only I am the Nourisher of all the worlds.  
 O ‘Isa! when my servant shows patience for my sake when he is under
pressure and in trouble I am near him and I reserve My Reward for him. I
am sufficient to take revenge from those who disobey Me when My
oppressed servant calls Me. Where after all can the oppressors escape
from Me?  
 O ‘Isa! Make Sajdah (prostration) properly. Live with wisdom and
intelligence wherever you be and continue to seek knowledge from Me.  
 O ‘Isa! Forward good deeds to Me so that I may reserve them for you.
Hold fast My Revelations and admonitions (act according to them) because
therein lies the health of the hearts.  
 O ‘Isa! My fear must deter you from making a fraud. Fear My planning.
Do not forget My remembrance if at all you ever commit a sin in
solitude.  
 O ‘Isa! make a reckoning of your soul constantly, as your return is to
me, so that you may gain my reward reserved for the doers of good deeds.
Being the Best of bestowers I increase the rewards of good deeds.  
 O ‘Isa! I have created you through Maryam without a father, by My Word.
It was according to my command that Archangel Gabriel blew the Sprit,
which I had selected into Maryam and thus were you born, and are now
walking on earth. All this was caused in view of some strategies which
were in My knowledge since eternity.  
 O ‘Isa! Zakariyya is like your father, He was looking after your mother
and observing heavenly provisions in front of her in the hall of
worship. And among all My creation, Yahya is like you. I had given him
to his mother at an advanced age when her husband had no more strength
of producing a child. I wish that My Might and Power should appear for
him and similarly My might should be manifested through your birth
because I am able to create anything in anyway I like. Remember that
only that person should be most beloved in your eyes that obeys and
fears Me most.  
 O ‘Isa! Remain awake and do not be disappointed of My Mercy and with
those who are busy glorifying Me. Continue mentioning My Holiness
(Needlessness) by chanting My Holy Names.  
 O ‘Isa! How are My servants denying Me when all of them are under My
control and they are walking on My earth and are unmindful of My
blessings and Bounties and are befriending My enemies. Verily the
unbelievers are being destroyed in this manner.  
 O ‘Isa! This world is a stingy prison and it is made to appear
beautiful through some things for people and to attain that which
oppressors and merciless people kill one another for. Always remain
aloof from the world because its bounty is to vanish and there are but
few comforts therein.  
 O ‘Isa! invoke me when you prepare to take rest at night, you will find
me near you at that time also and call me with sincere love and faith as
I am the best of hearers. I answer the prayers of those who pray. Fear
only me and also frighten my slaves from my chastisement maybe they will
refrain from their evil deeds so that if they ruin themselves they will
do so knowingly.  
 O ‘Isa! if you are afraid of killer animals and if you fear death then
why do you not fear Me when it is I who has created them all? O ‘Isa!
Sovereignty belongs only to Me. I am the Real Ruler. If you will obey Me
I will admit you in my Paradise and keep you besides the pious.  
 O ‘Isa! If I am displeased with you the pleasure of anyone else will
not give me any benefit and if I am pleased with you the displeasure of
anyone else cannot harm you at all.  
 O ‘Isa! Remember Me in solitude so that I may remember you with my
secret hidden mercies. Also remember Me openly so that I may remember
you in the gatherings of the heavenly angels which will be better than
worldly gatherings.  
 O ‘Isa! Remember Me like the drowning ones who do not find any helper.
O ‘Isa! Never swear by Me falsely because it makes My throne tremble
with anger. O ‘Isa! the life of this world is very limited and ambitions
very lengthy. I have houses which are better than the ones made by
man.  
 O ‘Isa! Ask the oppressors of The Israelites what will they do when I
bring forth for you the Book which will disclose your hidden secrets and
all that you were doing (in the world)? O ‘Isa! Tell the hot-headed and
rebellious The Israelites, whether they are washing and cleaning their
faces to show me their pride or when they are transgressing me and using
perfumes to please the world lovers, that their souls are decomposed
like rotten dead bodies!  
 O ‘Isa! tell them to cut off their nails by unlawful earnings and to
deafen their ears to hearing ugly and obscene voices and to come to Me
after cleaning their hearts because I do not want the beauty of their
faces but want the piety of their souls. O ‘Isa! Experience happiness
over good deeds which make Me happy and weep over sins which cause Me to
be angry. Wish for others that which you should like others to do to
you. Do not wish for others what you wish others should not do to you If
somebody hits you on the right side of your face present its left side
too to him. Gain nearness to Me by behaving lovingly to others as much
as you can and keep distance from the utterly ignorant and the fools and
do not indulge in arguments with them.  
 O ‘Isa! Be kind and polite towards those who are doing good deeds and
participate in their good deeds and be witness to them. Tell the
oppressive The Israelites that: O friends of the evildoers! If you do
not refrain from your misdeeds I will metamorphose you in the shape of
monkeys and pigs. O ‘Isa! Tell the rebels among the Israelites that
while the knowledgeable and the wise and the virtuous people run away
from sinful acts, you are proud of your bad characters. Have you found
out any decree of salvation from My chastisement? Or are you willfully
inviting My anger? In that case I also swear by My Holy Self that I will
punish you with a chastisement which will become a lesson for the coming
generations.  
 So, O son of the virgin Maryam! O the one who remains away from
worldliness! I command you as I would My beloved Ahmad who is the leader
of Prophets who is the owner of red-faced radiant camels and whose
radiance will enlighten the entire world. That pious hearted Prophet
will become angry (upon the world-worshippers) for My sake. He is
extremely modest and very kind-hearted.

Verily he is a mercy for all the worlds and Doubtlessly, on the Day of
Judgment, he will be, in My sight, the best of all the descendants of
Adam. His position will be most high in My view and he will be nearest
to Me among all the past Prophets. He will take birth in the Arab land
and without learning to read and write from anybody he will be appointed
Prophet with knowledge of all the past and future sciences. He will
propagate My religion to the people of the world and tolerate all kinds
of troubles for gaining My pleasure and will fight with the polytheists
for protecting My religion (the Divine way of Life).

O ‘Isa! I command you to inform The Israelites about his coming and
order that all of them should testify to him, believe in his
Prophethood, follow him and help him. His name is Muhammad . He will be
My Messenger for the entire population of the world. His position will
be most high in My Eyes and it will be incumbent on Me to concede to his
intercession more than all others. How fortunate is that Prophet and how
high the position of the people who will remain steadfast on his faith
properly at the time of their death.

All the residents of the world will praise that Prophet and his
followers and all the dwellers of the heavens will pray for his pardon.
He is the honest trustee of My Books (Messages) and he is blessed. He is
cleansed of all undesirable habits and bad needs and is entirely
sinless. He is the best of all of My earlier and latter Prophets. He
will be appointed in the last age. When he arrives in the world, the
heavens will rain mercy on earth and the earth will throw (sprout) out
all kinds of bounties and adorations. I will give abundance in whatever
he does. He will marry a number of women. He will reside in Makkah where
Ibrahim has raised the structure of Ka‘bah. O ‘Isa! his religion is easy
to follow. His Kiblah (direction of prayers) will be Ka‘bah. He is among
My selected slaves. I am with him. What should I say about him! For him
is the heavenly spring of Kauthar and the best clothing of the gardens
of Eden. He will live in the best style of living and will depart from
the world attaining martyrdom (He was not martyred apparently but as
mentioned in successive traditions, his martyrdom was expressed through
the martyrdom of his grandsons (Hasan and Husayn -Tr.)). In the
Resurrection Day for him, will be the spring of pure drink extending
from Makkah to the point of the rising sun. Around that spring will be
as many glasses as the stars shining in the heavens and as many pitchers
as are the particles on earth and the water of that Hauz of Kauthar will
have the best tastes of all kinds of heavenly fruits and drinks. One who
will sip only a drop from it will never feel thirsty, I will appoint him
after you and there will be a considerable distance between your time
and his time. His outward and his inward will be the same. His deeds
will be like his words. He will not ask anybody to do a thing unless he
did it himself. His religion will require struggle both in ease and in
trouble. Dwellers of cities will obey him and the king of Rome
(Byzantine) will bow down before him and his father Ibrahim’s religion.
He will recite the Name of Allah before eating and will say Salaam
(Salute) before meeting anyone. He will offer prayers at a time when
others will be asleep (night). For him there will be five obligatory
prayers during day and night. His prayers will begin with Allahu Akbar
(Allah is the Greatest) and will end with Salaam (peace). At the time of
every prayer they will give Azaan (Call for prayers) for all to attend
and people will offer prayers in a row like the angels. This Prophet’s
soul will be soft and full of fear of Allah. There will be light in his
heart and Truth on his tongue. He will live truthfully wherever he may
be. He will be an orphan and will be distinct among the entire creation.
He will live with (in) his community for a period of time. People will
not recognize his greatness and will not appreciate his position. His
heart will remain awake when his eyes will be asleep. The clothing
(dress) of Shafa’ah (intercession) befits only him. The period of his
people will be nearer to the Day of Judgment. When his people swear
allegiance to him My Mercy will remain over his hand. Whoever will break
that loyalty will oppress himself. I will fulfill my promise of giving
paradise to the one who will remain loyal to him. So give orders to the
rebellious The Israelites that they should not remove his name from
their scriptures and must not make changes in his attributes mentioned
by Me in their Books (Divine), and to convey My Salaam to him as his
status will be very high in the Hereafter.  
 O ‘Isa! I have commanded to you those deeds which will bring you nearer
to Me and I have asked you to keep distance from all those deeds
prohibited to you for it can take you away from Me. So now do what is in
your interest.  
 O ‘Isa! Apparently the world is sweet. I have fixed for you the duty of
obeying Me in the world and of refraining from whatever I have denied to
you. Obtain from the world whatever I have given you out of My Grace.
Keep an eye on your deeds like a sinner and do not look at the deeds of
others like thy Lord. Lead your life in the world like an austere person
and avoid earthly joys. Do not tilt towards them as they will destroy
you.  
 O ‘Isa! Contemplate and observe all around the world and ponder over
the end of the oppressors. O ‘Isa! Whatever advice I have given you is
only for your benefit and all of My words are Truth. I am the Lord who
reveals the Truth and tell you truthfully that if you disobey me despite
warning then there will be none who can help to save you from My
Chastisement.  
 O ‘Isa! Keep your heart servile and, in the worldly life, look only at
him who is lower than you and be thankful to me. In the world do not
look at him who is higher than you in earthly matters and always keep in
mind that the head[^9] of every error and sin is admiration for material
things Therefore, do not befriend the world because I do not love the
world.  
 O ‘Isa! Keep your heart happy through My Remembrance and remember Me in
solitude and remember that I admire weeping very much and so also
repentance as you are doing in My Presence. It is essential that while
worshipping Me you should be lively and not spiritless.[^10]  
 O ‘Isa! Never make anyone (or anything) a partner of mine while
worshipping me and fear My anger. Do not be proud of your physical
strength and health and strength and do not make yourself the centre of
attention in the world because the world is like a shade which passes
away very soon and the incoming (shade) is also like the one which has
disappeared leaving no sign. If a short length of it has at all remained
that too will be no more very soon similarly. Therefore make the maximum
effort in doing good and be with the Truth to the best of your ability
even if people tear you into pieces or burn you alive. In short, after
recognizing Me never turn into a disbeliever and an ignorant.  
 O ‘Isa! Continue weeping earnestly in My Presence and keep your heart
full of My fear. O ‘Isa! Invoke Me and only Me in times of trouble
because it is I who hears the call, who accepts and answers prayers and
I am the best of the Merciful beings.’”  
 As authentically recorded Imam al-Ridha said that ‘Isa told his
Hawaris: O The Israelites! Do not feel sorry over what you lose from the
worldly things so far as your faith is safe. As you see the world-lovers
do not feel sorry if their Religion is lost so long as their worldly
(material) belongings are safe.  
 It is mentioned in reliable books that ‘Isa said, Very lucky are those
who are kind to one another. They will earn Allah’s Kindness in the
Hereafter. How fortunate are those who are reforming people as they will
attain nearness to their Lord on the Day of Reckoning. How blessed are
those who purify their hearts of immorality as they will gain My special
Favor on the Day of Judgment. How good are those who maintain humility
during their worldly life as they will be allotted royal seats in the
other life. Lucky indeed are those who remained penniless and poor in
the earthly life as the kingdom of Heaven will be theirs. Really happy
are those whose worldly life was full of sorrow and unhappiness as in
the Resurrection Day they will enjoy all sorts of luxuries.  
 Auspicious are those who, due to their humility, remain hungry and
thirsty in the world as they will drink the heavenly drinks. Very
fortunate are those who suffer bad words despite being guiltless and who
keep their patience as they will get the kingdom of Heaven. What should
I say about your fortune, if people are jealous of you, abusing you and
making false allegations against you quite wrongfully yet you feel happy
because your Reward in the Hereafter is very high.  
 ‘Isa said, O wicked people: you are condemning others only on the
ground of conjectures and do not condemn yourself even for the ills you
are sure you possess. O worshippers of the world! You are clipping your
hair and shortening your apparel to demean others but do not remove
enmity and bad instincts from your own hearts. O world-worshippers! your
example is like a grave which has been decorated outwardly to please
onlookers but, from inside, it is full of dirty broken bones.  
 O slaves of the world! You are like a lamp which lightens the
environment but burns itself out. O The Israelites! Go to the meetings
of the religious scholars and sit there respectfully as Allah enlivens
dead soul with the light of wisdom (knowledge) just as He enlivens the
dead earth with drops of rain.  
 O The Israelites! Speaking less is a great wisdom. So it befits you to
keep silence as it is the best comfort and it removes sins. So
strengthen the forte of knowledge as its forte is silence. Doubtlessly
the creator of the universe abhors untimely laughing and needless
wandering. Allah loves a ruler and a leader who is not unmindful of his
people like a responsible shepherd. Hence feel ashamed before Allah
secretly as you are feeling ashamed of people openly. Since a word of
wisdom is a lost property of the faithful you must endeavor to gain it
before it is taken up and goes out of your reach and (its going up means
those who describe the wisdom of Divine wisdom may not live).  
 O knowledgeable: give respect to the scholar due to his knowledge and
do not quarrel with him and do not consider the unintelligent and the
ignorant inferior due to their lack of knowledge or ignorance and do not
remove them from your presence. Rather bring them near and teach them
wisdom.  
 O intelligent! Every bounty which does not draw your thankfulness is
like a sin which you have adopted and every sin which does not make you
repent is like a chastisement which you drew on yourself. (This means
that the very thought of being unable to be thankful is thankfulness in
itself and to consider every error a great sin is in itself real
repentance).  
 O wise man! Many are the troubles and calamities which you know not
when will attack you so be prepared to overcome them before they fall on
you.  
 It is also recorded that once ‘Isa asked his companions: If anyone of
you passes by his faithful brother whose private parts are uncovered
(either due to helplessness like illness or inadvertence due to sleep)
will you open it wide and reveal them more or will you put a cloth over
him? The companions replied, “We will cover our brother’s body.”
Thereupon ‘Isa said, But you are removing the cover and revealing them
more! The companions said, “How is it possible, O Spirit of Allah?”

‘Isa said, Do you not look at the defects of your brother-in-faith and
then reveal them to others thereby dishonoring him? Therefore I tell you
rather teach him so that he may learn and also teach others. I do not
teach you so that you may become proud. Remember that the heavenly
reward which you want cannot be attained until you give up worldly
doubtfulness and misgivings and you will not reach the high status of
your liking unless you bear difficulties and hardships with patience.
Never cast an unlawful look, as it sows the seed of evil desire and is
enough for spreading corruption. Lucky is he who sees with the inner eye
of his heart and not his head.

Do not look at the defects of others like the owners. Rather look at
your own shortcomings like slaves because people are of two kinds. Some
of them indulge in sins and some keep away from sins. So if you happen
to see the sinner be kind to him and be thankful to your Lord Who saved
you from this evil. And if you come across those who are pious, try to
be like them and pray to Allah for attaining goodness.

O The Israelites: How shamelesss are you! Don’t you feel ashamed in the
presence of Allah! You do not like to drink water if it contains even a
little straw but you devour unlawful property like a (hungry) elephant
without caring for anything: O The Israelites! Allah has commanded you
in Torah (Torah) that you should do good to your relatives and behave as
nicely with them as you wish them to behave with you. And I order you
and advise you that you should cultivate loving relations with those who
cut off friendship with you and give to those who deprive you and behave
gracefully with those who behave badly with you. Salute him who abuses
you. Do justice to him who oppresses you. Forgive him who harasses you
just as you want that others should forgive you. Take admonition from
Allah’s mercy upon you.

Don’t you observe that the sun shines equally on the good and on the
bad. Allah’s rain benefits both the pious and the sinner. How can you be
better if you do good only to the one who does good to you and befriend
only him who is friendly with you? The fools and ignorant do that. But
if you want to be among the select of Allah and be His friends then
behave nicely with those who behave badly with you and forgive those who
harass you. Salute him who turns away his face from you. Hear my words
and remember my admonitions and maintain my promise so that you may
become like wise scholars. I tell you the truth that your hearts lean
toward the place where you have buried your treasures and you worry
about its missing.

Deposit your wealth in Heaven so as to rest assured that they will not
rut there nor be solemn. I tell you the truth that a man cannot serve
two Gods at a time. He will surely select one of the two. Likewise your
heart cannot love both Allah and the world at a time simultaneously. I
tell you truthfully that the worst scholar (Salim) is the one who in
spite of his knowledge selects this world and loves it and tries to fool
others and cares for nothing in His pursuit of the worldly gains. How
can the blind benefit from the widespread light of the sun when he is
unable to see anything? Likewise the knowledge of a scholar cannot give
him any benefit if he does not act according to its wisdom. How many
trees are there full of fruits; but all the fruits are not eatable. How
wide is this earth? but every place is not worth living thereon.
Similarly there are many talkers but every word is not true and much of
what they say is unreliable.

Therefore, O people! Protect yourselves from untrue scholars who wear
thick clothes and make a false show of devotion. They are, cunningly,
making their wrong deeds look like worship in the eyes of the people.
They stare at people like wolves. Their deeds are contrary to their
claims. Is it possible to obtain grapes from a babul tree? Can one pluck
figs from a colocynth tree? Similarly the talk of a false scholar is of
no avail, their talks lead others only toward evil. The talkers do not
tell the truth always. I tell you the truth that a seed grows in a soft
ground not in hilly land. Similarly wisdom (words of wisdom) find place
and nourishment only in soft and humble hearts not in the hearts of
oppressors and hot-headed persons. Do you not know that the one who
raises his head high under a low ceiling only breaks it and the one who
sits low under it with humility takes the benefit of its shade.

Likewise Allah breaks the head of the one who raises his head with pride
and egoism in the mean mansion of this world and degrades and dishonors
him. The one who adopts humility and humbleness benefits from the world
and Allah honors him. Remember that honey does not remain fresh and good
in every leather bottle but can be preserved in good condition only in
that container which is not torn, dried or has a foul smell. Similarly
human hearts are the containers of the words of wisdom. If the delights
and desires of worldly things do not make holes in them and passions do
not make them impure and tastes do not dry them up only then can they
preserve wisdom, not otherwise. I tell you the truth that if a house
catches fire, that fire spreads from that house to another and then to
the third and many more houses and destroys them all. But if the first
one is broken down to such an extent that the fire cannot go further
then other houses can be saved.

Oppression is also like that fire. If people restrain the first
oppressor and break up his hands another oppressor will not come up to
follow his footsteps. The fire in one house cannot damage another one if
it does not find combustible material in the latter. I tell you the
truth that if a believer sees that a snake is advancing toward another
brother-in-faith to bite him and if he does not warn his brother who is
bitten then has he not become a partner in killing him? He should not
remain carefree in this account. Likewise if a believer sees that his
other brother-in-faith is committing a sin and yet does not warn him
then he should not feel satisfied that he will not be treated as his
partner in the sin. The one who does not restrain anyone from committing
oppression despite being able to stop him then he himself is like the
one who has committed oppression. Why after all, will an oppressor stop
from harming others if he knows for sure that there is no one among you
who will condemn or stop him.

Then why do the oppressors not feel proud of their oppressions? Is it
enough for you to go on saying that we are not oppressors while you are
mere spectators of the oppression and do not make any effort to stop
injustice. If what you imagine is correct then, when Allah chastises the
oppressors they ought to be saved who did not oppress others and also
did not stop others from oppression. On the contrary whenever Allah
chastised a community His punishment engulfed both (oppressors and who
did not oppress) groups.

O sinners! Woe unto you. You hope that Allah will save you from the
pains of the Day of Judgment even thought you fear men in obeying Allah
and you obey men while disobeying Allah and your loyalty remains with
them in those deeds which break the covenant with Allah. I tell you with
truth that Allah does not protect, on the severest Day of Judgment,
those people who consider Allah’s servants as ‘Gods’ besides Him (that
is, who strive to earn their pleasure as they should strive to gain
Allah’s pleasure and are disobeying Allah).

Woe unto you, O Bad Characters! You have put aside the eternal and
everlasting Paradise to take up the transient world and its vanishing
delights and you have forgotten the hardships of the Day of Judgment. O
slaves of the world! Woe unto you because you are running away from your
Lord and do not long for His everlasting Rewards just for the sake of
the fleeting bounties of the ephemeral life. Why then should Allah wish
you life? You do not like to meet Allah so He too does not like to see
you). Allah loves only those who prefers to meet Him and does not meet
those who dislikes to meet Him. How can you claim that you are the
favorite of Allah to the exclusion of others while you are running away
from death? You are clinging to the worldly life! What benefit can a
corpses have from the fragrance of camphor and the whiteness of the
coffin cloth when they are hidden beneath the earth? Likewise you cannot
benefit from the beauty of the world which has caught hold of your eyes
when all of you are to vanish and will be no more? What will you gain
from the cleanliness and colorfulness of your bodies when you are
returning towards death to mix up with dust and remain in the darkness
of the grave? You have forgotten all these facts.

O Slaves of the world! You are like the one who lights up a lamp in
front of the sun without any benefit and does not light a lamp during
the night but continue to remain in darkness though he was given a lamp.
Similarly you are wasting the light of knowledge (which was provided to
ward off the darkness of ignorance) on the earthly life though the
provider of your worldly needs is Only One Allah and your knowledge does
not benefit you in this matter. You are not using the light of knowledge
to gain the (the benefits of the) Hereafter even though it was given to
you for the same purpose.

The journey leading to the Hereafter cannot be completed without the
road lights of knowledge. You continue to repeat that the Hereafter is a
fact yet you are eve busy in worldly affairs. You go on saying that
death is a fact and yet you are always trying to run away from it. You
say and also know that Allah sees (every deed) and yet you do not fear
that he has already encircled your bad deeds. How then can anybody
testify to your claim of being a believer? He hears your saying and
witnesses your working.

Verily the one who tells a lie unknowingly can be regarded as more
helpless that the one who tells an untruth knowingly. No lie, however,
is pardonable. I tell you the truth that if you will not ride an animal
and will not work hard on it, it will become useless and its form will
also change. In the same way if you will not make your heart soft by
remembering your death and will not make it work hard your heart too
will become rebellious. What is the use of lighting a lamp on the
terrace of a house while its inner part is dark and fearful. Likewise
that knowledge of your cannot benefit you which, though flowing out of
your mouth, keeps your heart empty and hollow. So light up your homes
very soon and enlighten your dark hearts with the radiance of knowledge
and wisdom before it gets rusted with your sins and becomes as hard as
stone.

He can lift heavy weights who seeks others’ help. How can the burden of
his sins become light unless he seeks Allah’s help (pardon) from Allah?
How can one’s clothes remain clean unless he takes them out and washes
them? Similarly how can a man become pious and clean (of sins) if he
does not remove the dirt of sins with the soap of good deeds. How can he
who wants to cross a river without a ship save himself from drowning?
How can a man protect himself from worldly calamities if he does not
endeavor to remedy them through Allah-worship? How can a traveler reach
his destination without a guide? Likewise how can one go to Paradise
unless he learns his religious issues and how can one please Allah
unless he obeys His Commandments?

How can one remove defects on his face if he never looks into a mirror?
Similarly how can man complete his friendship with his beloved until he
gives to him from out of his belongings? I tell you the truth that a sea
loses nothing if a ship sinks in it. Likewise Allah’s grandeur cannot be
diminished due to your sins. Nor can your disobedience ever harm Him.
Rather you will harm yourself. Just as the multitude of people living
under the sun and getting benefit from it does not decrease the light of
the sun, the limitless provision provided by the Lord never becomes less
due to extravagance and luxurious lives. Allah gives more to the one who
thanks Him as He is the Giver of Rewards and the Wise.

Woe unto you, O laborers! You work dishonestly but collect full wages.
You eat from the provision given so generously by Allah, wear clothes
provided by Him, build houses on His land to live in but destroy the
Guidance given by Him. Very soon he will demand from you the things
which you destroyed. Then He will give you a severe punishment which
will dishonor you. He will order the cutting off of your necks and
dislocating of your joints from their bases and dislocating your hands
from their joints. Your bodies will remain lying on roads so that the
pious ones may take lessons therefrom and your condition may become a
source of admonition for oppressors. Woe unto you, o characterless
scholars! Keep well in mind that Allah has delayed your death
purposefully....

You will die very soon and will be take out of your dwellings. So give
place to Allah’s invitation in your ears (listen attentively) today
(rather just now). Begin weeping on your condition from today. Start
lamenting over your sins right from today and be busy preparing for your
journey to the Hereafter. Repent before your Lord. I tell you with truth
that just as an ill man looks at tasteful food but has no appetite for
it and even if he eats it he does not find it pleasing because of his
illness, similarly one whose heart has become ill due to his love for
the world cannot get any pleasure in worship. He cannot understand the
sweetness of worshipping his Lord, because the love for worldly things
has made him sickly. A sick man is attracted toward the utility of
medicine prescribed by a physician due to hope of his recovery. But the
thought of the bad taste of the medicine makes him hesitate and thus his
recovery is delayed. Similarly people get pleasure from various kinds of
things of beauty but then suddenly the though of death makes everything
sour and their luxury becomes pale. I tell you the truth that everybody
looks at the stars but all of them do not get guidance (of the true
path) except those who are aware of the movements and directions of the
stars. Likewise you are giving lessons of truth and wisdom but nobody is
guided except he who acts upon it.

Woe unto you, o slaves of the world! You clean the wheat minutely and
then crush it into flour to obtain its taste when eating. In the same
way why do you not clean your beliefs of doubts and hypocrisy and why do
you not make it perfect through good deeds so that you may feel its
sweetness and you may get its good results. I tell you the truth that if
in a dark night you get a lamp burning with the oil of a pine tree (oil
with a foul smell) you will take its benefit despite its bad smell.
Similarly you should take up the light of wisdom and knowledge from
whomsoever it be, never mind that that person does not act according to
his wisdom.

Woe unto you, O characterless people! You are not like those
knowledgeable persons who can recognize the truth with their
intelligence nor are you like those patient persons who become aware of
religious problems by thinking and pondering over them. You are not like
the scholars who are able to understand divine sciences. Neither are you
like pious slaves nor like virtuous free persons who have freed
themselves from passions and desires through their devotion in worship.
The time is very near when this world will uproot you and throw you
upside down and rob away your respect. Your sins will drag you by your
hair, your knowledge will hit you on your neck until you are brought
alone and naked before the sovereign Ruler who will punish you for your
bad deeds. World worshippers! You have not been given rule over the
entire creation on account of the knowledge and wisdom (given to you)
because you threw aside your knowledge and did not act according to it
and you have inclined wholly toward the world and are issuing orders
only for selfish aims and material benefits and have opted for the world
in lieu of the Hereafter. You are building this world so that you too
may become one of the world-lovers. You behave as if Allah has no right
on you!

I tell you the truth that you can never attain the honor and status in
the Hereafter until and unless you do not give up those worldly things
which are most dear to you. Therefore do not postpone repentance and
pardon-seeking until tomorrow because one day and one night are still
between today and tomorrow and the order of Allah (death warrant)
reaches the slaves by the beginning or the end of a day. How, then, can
you be sure that you will be alive tomorrow and that you will get enough
time for repentance? I tell you the truth that little sins, considered
insignificant by people, are the webs of Satan who belittles sins in
your eyes and makes you careless. In this way your sins multiply and its
heavy burden then kills you and destroys you. With disgrace. I tell you
the truth that wrongful praise and imagining yourself to be pure in
religious matters and self-extolling is the root cause of all evils and
love of material world is the head of every sin.

I tell you the truth that no other deed is more helpful than prayer in
attaining high status in Hereafter and in removing calamities of this
world. So be steadfast in prayers. No other deed except Salat brings one
near Allah. So go on performing Salat regularly and constantly because
Salat is better than every act which brings man near to Allah. It is
very precious in view of Allah.

I tell you the truth that every act of that oppressed man fetches great
reward in heaven who (the oppressed one) did not take revenge from the
oppressor because of hatred in his heart. Tell me has anyone of you ever
seen a light named darkness or a darkness named light? Likewise it is
not possible for any man to be both a believer (mo-min) and a
disbeliever or denier (Kafir) at a time, or to adopt both Hereafter and
this mortal world simultaneously. Have you ever seen anybody who sows
barley and obtains wheat? Or have you seen one who sows wheat and
obtains barley? Likewise every slave will find in the Hereafter what he
had sown in this world. He will get the reward of what he had done in
this life. I tell you the truth that there are two kinds of people who
possess wisdom. Some fortify wisdom by their words but destroy it
through their deeds. Others strengthen wisdom and testify it through
their deeds. How vast a difference is there between these two! How
fortunate are those who behave wisely and how unlucky are the
characterless talkers. I tell you the truth that the one who does not
clear his fields of useless grass but allows it to spread his
agriculture will get spoilt in the end. Similarly the one who does not
drive out love of world from his heart but lets its roots go deep making
his heart totally covered by it is then unable to taste the sweetness of
the love of the Hereafter.

O slaves of the material world! Turn your Lord’s mosques into prisons
for your physiques and make your hearts the centers of piety and divine
fear. Do not make your hearts the dwellings of desires. I tell you the
truth: Whoever from you makes a hue and cry during troubles has a heart
which is full of fondness for the world. The one who is more patient and
forbearing is a great devout.

O characterless scholars! Woe unto you! Were you not dead? Allah brought
you to life. He gave you life by perfecting knowledge, so that you may
act according to that guidance but you turned dead to that purpose.
Cursed are you. Were you not ignorant and useless? He gave you knowledge
and made you great. When He bestowed intelligence on you it was He whom
you forgot. Were you not void of discipline and culture? He taught you
good ways. After you learned good manners (how) you returned to
waywardness and ignorance and fallacy. Woe unto you! Were you not
wandering? He guided you. After He showed you the right path you again
lost it. Woe unto you! Were you not blind? He made you see Then again
you turned blind. Alas! Were you not deaf? He enabled you to hear, but
thereafter once more you turned deaf. Alas! Were you not dumb? He taught
you to talk but you became dumb for telling the truth. Ah! Did you not
seek success from Allah? When He helped you to succeed you turned away
from Him.

Woe unto you! Were you not abject among the peoples? Allah gave you
honor and uplifted you. Then you began to oppress the weak and crossed
all limits and engaged in disobeying the lord. Woe unto you! Were you
not weak and meek on earth and were you not afraid of being enslaved by
others? Allah assisted you and gave you strength and power. But then you
became proud and arrogant. Woe unto you! How disgraced will you be on
the Day of Judgment! Woe unto you O characterless religious scholars!
You behave like atheists and yet hope for the status of those for whom
Allah has reserved paradise.

You have become fearless of Allah’s chastisement as if you were sinless
like one who never errs, as if Allah’s decisions will conform
necessarily with your wishes. You have come in the world to die. You are
constructing mansions for destruction and hoarding wealth only for your
heirs. I tell you the truth that my brother Musa had said emphatically
not to swear by Allah falsely, rather to tell the truth without
swearing.

O The Israelites! Eat vegetables and loaves of barley. I advise you to
avoid wheat loaves because I am afraid you will not be thankful to
Allah. I tell you the truth that you will have to hear the reply of any
bad word used by you for anyone (in this world), in the Hereafter.

O bad characters! Whoever from you intends to offer any sacrifice before
Allah, and if any faithful is displeased with you, he should first
please that man and only then come forward to make his sacrifice so that
his tithe may be accepted by Him.  
 O characterless people! If somebody deprives you of your sheet give
away your shirt too to him. If someone hits you on one of your cheeks,
produce the other cheek also to him. If someone forces you to carry a
burden for a distance of one mile, take it voluntarily for another mile.
I tell you truly how can you at all benefit from your outwardly
betterment and cleanliness when your inner hearts are dirty and
corrupted? What is the use of your fragrant bodies when your souls give
out foul smell of your condemnable character? The Purity of your skins
will not be of any avail to you when your spirit is unclean due to sins.

I truthfully ask you not to be like the sieve which lets out fine flour
but retains chaff and straws within it. Likewise you speak good and wise
words while keeping bad intentions, foul habits and malice and corrupt
thoughts in your hearts.

I tell you the truth you should first remove the evil from your hearts
and then do good deeds so that it may benefit you, because, as long as
you mix up good with bad the good will not benefit you. I tell you truly
that the one who enters the sea will surely wet his clothing despite all
efforts. Like wise the one who loves the world cannot save himself from
sins.

I tell you the truth that lucky are those who do not sleep deeply in
their beds at night but get up in the midst of night to worship their
Lord. A permanent light is reserved for them in the Hereafter because
they in the darkness of night stand on their feet in Mosques and worship
their Allah and weep with a hope to be saved of the hardships and pains
of the Day of Judgment.

I tell you the truth that this world is a field wherein people sow both
good and bad as well as sweet and bitter. In the Hereafter the result of
good will be nothing but good and the consequence of the evil will be
nothing but pain and suffering.

I tell you the truth that wise people take admonition from the state of
the ignorant and the unwise come to their senses only when understanding
is of no avail.  
 I tell you the truth, O slaves of the world! Really speaking you make
neither this world nor the Hereafter because had you loved you world you
would have done deeds which can make you successful in the world, and
had you loved the Hereafter, you would have worked like the one who
likes the Hereafter.

O slaves of the world! When your defects are shown to you, you become
unhappy and feel ill and you become pleased when some of those good
things are attributed to you which in fact are not in you. Remember well
that Satan has not built a house for him anywhere as he has done so in
your hearts. Mind well that Allah has given you this world so that you
may endeavor in it for your Hereafter, not to make you carefree of the
next world. He has rained his bounties in this world so that you may
realize that Allah has thereby helped you in His worship, not for
assisting you in sins. He has commanded you to obey Him in the world not
to disobey and turn away from Him. He has asked you emphatically to
strive for earning lawful sustenance (provision) and not to get illegal
income. He has widened His provision so that you may do good to one
another, not for indulging in enmity and ill will.

I tell you truthfully they everyone of you wants the reward and bounties
of the other world but only he will get it who endeavors for it. I tell
you the truth that a tree comes to perfection with its good fruits.
Similarly religion is perfected by discarding unlawful things. I tell
you the truth that a seed does not grow but in the company of water and
earth. Likewise faith does not remain firm but only with understanding
and action.

I tell you the truth that just as water puts off fire, patience and
forbearing puts off Divine fury. I tell you truthfully that fire and
water cannot remain together in a vessel. Similarly wisdom and verbal
humility cannot live together in one soul. I tell you the truth that it
does not rain without clouds. Likewise a deed which can please Allah
cannot come out of a heart which is not clean and pious.  
 I tell you the truth that just as the sun enlightens everything, wisdom
enlightens hearts and piety and fear of Allah is the root of wisdom and
truth and straightforwardness is the threshold of everything. Mercy of
Allah is the threshold of every truth and straightforwardness and the
key to Allah’s mercy is good deeds and weeping before Him. How then can
a door be opened without the key?  
 I tell you the truth that a wise man sows only a tree which he likes
and rides only a horse of his likening. Likewise an intelligent believer
does only those deeds which are liked by his Lord.  
 I tell you the truth that a sword performs properly if it is sharpened.
Similarly a wise word sharpens the soul and also makes it shining. A
word of wisdom enlivens the heart of a wise person, just as water brings
the dead earth to life. Wisdom is like light for a wise soul whereby he
is enabled to walk among people in darkness.

I tell you the truth that it is more difficult to make one understand
the truth who does not want to understand than to shift a mountain to
another place. Making efforts to impress such people with the truth is
like rubbing a stone in water to make it soft. It is like carrying food
to a graveyard for feasting with the dead. Lucky is the one who is
afraid of talking uselessly as it makes Allah angry. He does not long
for good words of others until he does not understand their good deeds.
How fortunate is the one who respects scholars for the sake of their
knowledge and takes no interest in their personal affairs and who
dislikes ignorant due to their ignorance and does not like their company
yet seats them near him to teach them knowledge.

I tell you the truth, O my companions! Today, you are like the living
among the dead (and yet) but you are dying the death of those living
people who remain away from Allah due to their passions.  
 ‘Isa said, “Almighty says that My faithful slave remains gloomy due to
the fact that I remove the world (worldly wealth) from him though this
condition of his is most dear to me and in this state he is nearest to
Me. And he feels happy when I open up the world for him, though I abhor
this condition and such people are very far from Me.”

According to authentic sources Imam as-Sadiq said that ‘Isa gave a
sermon before The Israelites and said, “O The Israelites! Do not utter a
word of wisdom before ignorant as it would be a cruelty toward wisdom.
Do not withholds words of wisdom from those who are able to understand
it otherwise it will be a cruelty towards them. Do not assist an
oppressor in his oppression otherwise your greatness and grace will
vanish.”

In another reliable tradition Imam as-Sadiq said that once the Hawaris
said to ‘Isa, “O teacher of virtues! Tell us which thing is the most
severe thing?”  
 He replied, “The severest of all the severe things is the anger of
Allah.”  
 They asked, “How can one save himself from the anger of Allah?”  
 “Do not frown on His slaves.”  
 “What was the beginning of frowning, that is, how does it takes
place?”  
 “By becoming proud and arrogant and by considering others inferior.”  
 In another reliable tradition it is recorded from the same source that
‘Isa used to tell his companions, “O children of Adam! Run away from the
world and empty your hearts of the love for the world as it is not
appropriate for you. Neither does it befit you nor are you becoming of
it. Neither will the world stay put for you nor will you stay put for
it. The world is deceptive and the cause of calamities. Cheated is he
who is deceived by the world; lost is he who is satisfied with the
world; destroyed is he who loves the world and desires to obtain it. So
repent before your Creator and keep away from the anger of your
Nourisher and fear that Day on which neither a father can be ransom of
his son nor a son of his father.

Where are your ancestors? Where are your mothers? Where are your
brothers and sisters? Where are your children? The executors of the
Divine will have called them up towards Hereafter. They accepted the
invitation and passed away. People entrusted them to the earth (dust)
and all of them became neighbors of the dead and joined the perished.
They left the world and became separated from their friends. They became
needy except for what they had already sent to the Hereafter. They
became carefree of what they had left in the world. You are being
repeatedly admonished and yet you are forgetful and carelessly indulge
in meaningless things. You are like animals. Your efforts are limited to
eating and drinking and in gratifying your passions.

Do you not feel shameful before Allah who created you though He has
frightened the sinners with the fires of hell. You have no ability to
suffer this Hellfire. He has promised His heaven and His nearness to
those who obey him. So lean toward the promise of Allah and make
yourself worthy of his mercy. Be just to your own selves.

Do not oppress others. Be kind to those who are weaker than you. Help
the helpless. Seek pardon from Allah for your sins and make repentance-a
real repentance that you will never again turn toward sins. Be virtuous
slaves of the Lord. Do not be oppressive rulers nor be like the
merciless and hot-headed rebels and Pharaohs who rebelled against their
Lord who punished them through death, Who is harshest of the harsh, Who
is Lord of the earth and the skies, Who is the Allah of all the past as
well as the future people and Who is the king of the Day of Judgment
whose chastisement is severe and whose punishment extremely painful. No
oppressor can escape from His punishment and nothing can go out of His
control. Nothing can be unknown to Him and nothing can be a secret from
Him. His knowledge has encircled everything. He has given room to
everybody either in Heaven or in Hell.

O son of Adam! You being weak how can you escape from the One Who
summons you up both in broad daylight and in the darkness of the night
and who takes you up in His custody in whatever condition you may be.
You are in his control every moment. Both, who are admonished and who
accept the admonition are successful.”

It is reported that in Injeel that ‘Isa said, “You have heard what was
told to the past ones that they should not indulge in adultery. I say:
The one who looks at a woman with passion has already committed adultery
with that woman. If your right eye becomes dishonest and looks toward
the forbidden (toward a woman with whom marriage is permissible) gorge
it out and throw away the eyes as the dissection of one part of the body
is better than burning of all the limbs in the fires of Hell.

I tell you the truth that do not worry about what to eat and what to
wear. Is not the heart better than the body and the body better than the
dress? Save your body and your soul from the fires of Hell. Just look at
the birds. They neither sow nor reap nor do they worry about their
sustenance. Your Glorious Lord provides them sustenance. Are you not
better than them? Who among you is able to put even a yard of cloth on
his body himself? Then why do you worry about your clothing? The One Who
gave you the body will has also provided covering for you.”

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam Zayn al-‘abidin that it is
written in Injeel: Do not acquire knowledge according to which you do
not act because, when it is not acted upon, Allah removes that knowledge
from its possessor. Imam said once ‘Isa said to the Hawaris that the
world is a bridge. You should just cross it and not begin to build
houses on it.”

Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali said that wealth and property is an ailment of
religion and its physician is the religious scholar (A’alim). So when
you observe that the scholar himself is drawing the ailment toward him,
do not consider him to be your sympathizer. Realize that when he does
not care for himself how can he be a well-wisher of others? In another
reliable tradition it is mentioned that ‘Isa said, how lucky is he whose
silence is due to pondering over Allah’s marvels and whose eyes seek
admonitions and who is the servant of his own household and who keeps
weeping for his sins and people remain safe from his hand and tongue!

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam as-Sadiq said, Allah
revealed to ‘Isa, “O ‘Isa! Give Me the tears of your eyes and the
humility of your heart. When the followers of the untruth laugh you
should remain worried and gloomy for fear of the Hereafter and stand by
the graves and call the dead. You should take a lessons from them and
tell them: I am also to join you.”

In another reliable tradition it is recorded that ‘Isa gave a sermon to
his companions that: You are toiling for the world even though you get
sustenance without working (that is Allah has guaranteed it) but you are
not making efforts for the Hereafter though sustenance over there is not
available without toiling (which must be done in this worldly life).

Woe unto you, O wicked Scholars! You do not work and yet collect the
wages. Very soon the Owner will demand from you (the deeds of His
liking) and very soon you will be transferred from this world to a dark
grave. How can he be a scholar (knowledgeable) who is to return to the
Hereafter and yet he is busy with worldly things and like only those
things more which are harmful to him than those which are beneficial.”

It is narrated in another tradition that people asked ‘Isa, “O spirit of
Allah! How are you?”  
 He replied, “I wake up in the morning when my Lord is watching over me
and He is aware of my conditions. The fires of Hell is before my eyes
and death is in ambush for me. I am unable to attain what I long for. I
cannot remove the things not liked by me. So no poor is poorer than me
and no helpless more helpless.”

According to authentic reports from the Holy Prophet that Allah sent a
revelation to ‘Isa, “Strive in worshipping Me and do not abandon praying
to Me because I created you without a father so that you may become My
Sign, for the whole world. Enlighten the Israelites who have put faith
in Me and in My illiterate Prophet of the last era whose progeny will be
established through a blessed lady who will be with your mother
(Maryam); that Tuba in the Heaven is for him who will be living in the
time of that Prophet, who will hear him and who will obey him. ‘Isa
asked: My Lord! what is Tuba? Replied the Mighty Lord: Tuba is a tree in
Paradise beneath which passes a stream. Whoever drinks even one mouthful
from its water never feels thirsty. ‘Isa appealed: My Lord! just give me
a drop from it. Allah said, O ‘Isa! It is forbidden to all the Prophets
until that Prophet of the last are drinks from it even entrance to
paradise is prohibited to all adherents until the adherents of that last
Prophet enters it.”

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam as-Sadiq said, “‘Isa
asked Archangel Gabriel, ‘When will arrive the Day of Judgment?’
Archangel Gabriel began to tremble fearing that Day and fell down
unconscious. After recovering he replied, “O Spirit of Allah! I also do
not know as you do not. It is not known to anyone when the Day of the
Resurrection Day will rise. However it will dawn suddenly and without
notice.”

According to another reliable tradition ‘Isa said, “I treated the ill
and all of them recovered by the Grace of Allah. I remedied the blind
and the lepers and they became healthy by the Mercy of Allah. I
enlivened the dead by the Command of Allah, but I could not cure the
idiot.” People asked who was an idiot. He replied, “The one who likes
only his own opinion and admirers his own deeds and who thinks that he
is more graceful and benevolent than all others and who never thanks any
one. He claims his rights over all but never recognizes the rights of
others over him. Such is the idiot who I could not cure in spite of my
efforts.”

According to another hadith ‘Isa said to his companions, “If you are my
friends and my brothers, attribute the enmity and rancor to yourself
(that is, realize that enmity towards others is enmity against
yourselves). Otherwise, you are not my brothers. Fortunate are those who
see the attractive worldly things with their eyes and yet never
entertain a thought of disobeying his Lord. When a thing slips out of
your hand and goes away how far way it goes. Similarly if a thing is to
be available to you how much near it is! Woe unto them who become proud
of their worldly belongings. When the destined will come up before them
(when they will die) and when al the things of their liking will depart
from them and when they will be given what was promised to them, then
will they repent. This rotation of day and night is enough for
admonition. Woe unto him who is fully engaged in earning the world and
his record is full of sins. How disgraced will he be before his Lord!

O people! Do not talk much except for describing and remembering Allah.
The hearts of those who go on talking without mentioning and remembering
Allah become hard and they do not understand (the truth). They look at
the defects of others as if they were their Gods. Rather be concerned
for the salvation of yourselves as you are like purchased slaves. If
water continues to flow on stony land how long will it remain hard (not
become soft)? Similarly if you go on reciting wise words your hearts
will become soft at last. Your example is like oleander which is
attractive like a colorful flower but whoever tastes it spits it out and
whoever devours it dies.”[^11]

It was revealed to ‘Isa: In the matter of tolerance and patience live
among the people like the earth which is under their feet (but never
grudges), in philanthropy live like the flowing water and in kindness
and mercy be like the moon and sun who give light to all be they good or
bad. ‘Isa said, Do not make the world your Allah so that it may think
that you are its slaves. Entrust your treasures to the one Who may not
spill it and he is Your Lord (who never destroys anyone’s treasure of
deeds).

Do not leave behind the treasures (wealth) of the Hereafter in this
world which is a place of calamities. ‘Isa said, I am damning the world
for you. Do not raise it up after me. Doubtlessly one of the evils of
the world is that Allah is being disobeyed in it and another wickedness
of it is that without giving it up no one can reach the Hereafter. So
just pass over the world. Do not make it flourish and remember that the
root of every sin is the love for this world. There are many desires
which are accompanied by sorrow and lengthy pains and troubles. Then he
said, I have thrown down the world in front of you. You are sitting
before it. No one can quarrel with you in worldly affairs except kings
and women. Do not be entangle with kings about worldly things but leave
it to them. They also will not quarrel with you. But save yourselves
from the evils of women with the help of prayers and fasting.

It is recorded that once people requested ‘Isa to build a house for
himself.’Isa replied, “The end of the past people is enough for us and
we consider it better. Do not befriend the world so that Allah may
befriend you.”

It is mentioned that once Allah revealed to ‘Isa, “When I send a bounty
for you, welcome it with humility and meekness so that I may perfect
that bounty for you.”

‘Isa said, “What good has he done to himself who sold out his soul for
this world. Whatever he buys he leaves behind for his heirs and destroys
himself. How lucky is he who saves himself from destruction and opts for
the Hereafter. Condemning wealth he said, There are three kinds of
dealing with it. If the earner earned it through illegal means he will
be punished. If he obtained it lawfully but spent it in wrong ways then
also he will be chastised. But if he earned wealth in the permitted
manner and also spent it in right manner then such wealth and money
helps its owner in the worship of his Lord.”

Once ‘Isa passed by a house where its owner had died. Others were
sitting in it. He said, “Woe unto those who left this house in
inheritance. Why do people not take lesson from those who lived here (in
this house) earlier.

He used to say: O Mansion! You will become dilapidated and your dwellers
will also be no more. O Soul! Work for your Lord so that you may get
sustenance. O body! Make efforts so that you may get rest. ‘Isa said, O
weak offspring of Adam! Keep away from Your Lord’s chastisement and do
not become lusty. Live weak in the world and habituate your physique to
labor and obtain provision (sustenance) for your uplift as well as
slavery. Praise Allah more and more when you are in trouble because one
of the reasons of being saved from sinning is that you cannot do what
you want. He used to say: O group of Disciples! Make Allah your friend
by becoming enemies of sinners and the rebellious. Be near to Allah by
remaining away from them. Earn Allah’s pleasure by being angry with
them.”

One day the materialistic world appeared before ‘Isa in guise of a
grey-eyed woman. He asked her, “How many husbands did you marry?”
“Innumerable,” she replied. He inquired whether all of them divorced
her? She said, “No, I killed them all.” ‘Isa said, “Woe unto your
remaining husbands who did not take lesson from the fate of your
murdered husbands.”

According to another authentic hadith, ‘Isa used to say, “You do not
know when the fearful calamity of the Resurrection Day will catch hold
of you. Then what comes in the way of making preparations, before it
strikes you suddenly? The provision of Hereafter has become very hard.
But when you extend your hand to take up something from the worldly
provisions, a criminal picks it up before you. However, you will find no
one to be helpful to you in the matter of the provision for the
Hereafter.”

According to another narration from the same source (Imam as-Sadiq said
that once the companions of ‘Isa came to him and said, “O teacher of the
good! Show us the right path.” He said, Musa Kalimullah had commanded
you not to swear falsely in the name of Allah. But I order you not to
swear by Allah either truly or falsely.” They requested, “O Sprit of
Allah! Preach something more.” He said, “Musa had ordered you not to
commit adultery, (I say) never ever even think about adultery because a
heart which allows a thought of adultery is like a house having golden
paintings on its walls but it is on fire. Though it does not burn, smoke
spoils all the adornment and paintings etc.”

According to authentic chains Haaris Aawar has narrated: One day I was
going to the city of Heerah with Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali. By chance we
came across a church wherein they were blowing a conch. ‘Ali asked me,
“O Haaris! Do you know what this conch say?” I replied, “Allah and His
Messenger and his brother know better.” He said, “It is describing the
world and its evils and says: I give witness to the oneness of Allah;
that He is Truth; He is Truth. Verily the world has deceived us and have
made us careless about the Hereafter and destroyed our intelligence and
have misguided us. O sons of the world! Postpone your worldly affairs. O
son of the world you are being crushed every day under calamities. For
gathering worldly wealth either all of you will destroy one another or
you will vanish very soon. O son of the world! How long will you go on
collecting material properties? The world destroys one century after
another century (‘Qarn means either a period of 100 years or of 30
years) Not a single year of our age passes by without the weakening of
one or the other limb of our body. Doubtlessly we have destroyed our
permanent abode and made the transient house our residence. We do not
feel this loss now in the world but will realize only after death (with
no avail).” Thereafter Amir al-Mu’minin asked me, “O Harris! Do the
Christians follow this call of the conch? Had they followed it they
would have never made ‘Isa a partner of Allah. Harris says he went to a
Christian the next day who lived in that church. I told him for the sake
of Jesus please blow this conch as you were blowing it earlier. He began
blowing it and I began to compare each and every phrase of ‘Ali with its
tune and found that it tallied fully. Hearing all this the Christian
asked me: By the truth of your Prophet, please tell me who told you all
this? Harris said, The great man who accompanied me here yesterday
acquainted me with this call of the conch. He enquired whether he (‘Ali
was related to the Prophet? I said, He is his cousin. Then he asked
whether he had heard this from the Prophet? I said, Yes. Hearing this
that Christian became a Muslim and said, By Allah, I have read in Torah
that the last Prophet will explain the call of the conch. “ sd”  
 The ascension of ‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the Earth towards the
end of time, an account of Shammon bin Hamoon al-SafaThe ascension of
‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the Earth towards the end of time, an
account of Shammon bin Hamoon al-SafaThe ascension of ‘Isa to heaven,
his descent to the Earth towards the end of time, an account of Shammon
bin Hamoon al-SafaThe ascension of ‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the
Earth towards the end of time, an account of Shammon bin Hamoon
al-SafaThe ascension of ‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the Earth towards
the end of time, an account of Shammon bin Hamoon al-SafaThe ascension
of ‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the Earth towards the end of time, an
account of Shammon bin Hamoon al-SafaThe ascension of ‘Isa to heaven,
his descent to the Earth towards the end of time, an account of Shammon
bin Hamoon al-SafaThe ascension of ‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the
Earth towards the end of time, an account of Shammon bin Hamoon
al-SafaThe ascension of ‘Isa to heaven, his descent to the Earth towards
the end of time, an account of Shammon bin Hamoon al-Safa

Almighty Allah says: ‘And when Allah said, O ‘Isa! I am going to
terminate the period of your stay (on earth) and cause you to ascend
unto Me and purify you of those who disbelieves.) so that you will not
be between them and you will receive no harm from them. Some said the
word ‘Tawaffaa’ (in this verse of the holy Qur’an) means ‘death’ and
that Allah killed him first then made him alive after three hours, and
fetched him up into the heavens. Some others say that his death will
occur after coming back to earth in the last era.

(and make those who follow you, above those who disbelieve you on the
Day of Resurrection).  
 Accordingly, the Christians have always been above the Jews in might
and similarly the Ummah (community) of the Prophet of the Last Era
(Muhammad) too, who also believe in ‘Isa, has always remained above the
Jews and kingship went out of the hands of Jews. It is also one of the
miracles of the holy Qur’an that whatever was foretold by it is coming
true. At another place, the Lord has said,

And for their unbelief and for their having uttered against Maryam a
grievous calumny.  
 Allah chastised those (Jews) because of their disbelief and for making
a grievous allegation against Maryam. ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has said, The
Jews made allegation of adultery against Maryam. Shaykh Tabarsi has
narrated that when ‘Isa passed by a group of Jews they uttered: “Lo, the
son of a magician and adulteress woman has come.” Hearing these ugly
words ‘Isa prayed to Almighty Allah: O Allah! You alone are my Lord. You
have created me without a father and therefore, these people are
addressing me as a son of the fruit of adultery. O Allah! condemn those
who abuse me and my mother. Instantly they became pigs.

And their saying: Surely we have killed the Messiah, ‘Isa son of Maryam,
the apostle of Allah; and they did not kill him nor did they crucify
him, but it appeared to them so (like ‘Isa.).  
 There is a difference of opinion about this doubt. According to Ibn
‘Abbas, when Allah Almighty disfigured (in the form of swine those who
had abused ‘Isa and his mother and when king Yehuda of the Jews came to
know that ‘Isa had cursed him also, he gathered the Jews and all of them
unanimously decided to kill ‘Isa. Allah Almighty sent Archangel Gabriel
to help ‘Isa. The Jews had gathered around ‘Isa and were questioning
him. ‘Isa told them: ‘O Jews! Allah considers you His enemies.’ Hearing
this all of them rose up to assassinate him. But Archangel Gabriel took
‘Isa up to a window of that building which was situated at a great
height. From there Archangel Gabriel lifted ‘Isa to Heaven. Yehuda sent
one of his companions named Tetanus to go up to that window and catch
hold of ‘Isa. He went up there but could not find ‘Isa. There Allah
changed Tetanus’s face in such a way that it resembled the face of ‘Isa.
Anyone looking at him would take him to be as ‘Isa. When he came out of
the house to tell the others that ‘Isa was not in that house, the people
caught hold him, killed him and nailed him to the cross. Almost similar
events have been narrated in the version of Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari.
Anyway, when Tetanus was killed and when nobody else was found in that
house they began to talk: If the one we killed was Tetanus then what
happened to ‘Isa? And if he was ‘Isa then where did Tetanus go? This
caused doubt among them.

According to another tradition, when ‘Isa fled with his seventeen
companions fearing the Jews and hid inside a house, the Jews surrounded
that house. When they entered that house, Allah made the faces of all of
them appear like the face of ‘Isa. The Jews claimed: All of you have
been magic-stricken. Tell me which one of you is ‘Isa or we will kill
all of you. ‘Isa asked his companions: Who among you is prepared today
to have my appearance, get killed and be admitted to Paradise? One of
them named Sarjis came out and announced that he was ‘Isa. So the people
killed him and nailed him to the cross. Allah Almighty raised ‘Isa up
into Heaven that very day. Some say when ‘Isa was raised up and the
people could not catch him, they arrested one of his companions took him
up to a height and crucified him with a view to deceive the people and
said that he was ‘Isa. They did not allow anyone to approach him. Hence,
the matter became doubtful for them.

***And most surely, those who differ therein are only in a doubt about
it; they have no knowledge regarding it but only follow a conjecture.
And they killed him and for sure, Nay! Allah took him up to Himself; and
Allah is Mighty, Wise.” (4:157-158)***

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said,
‘Isa once gave a promise to his companions about a night wherein Allah
would take him up. So they gathered around him from evening that day.
There were twelve persons. ‘Isa made them enter a house. In one of its
corners, there was a spring. ‘Isa bathed himself therein and came to
them while the water was still dropping from his head. Then he said,
Allah has revealed to me that He will lift me up right now to the
heavens to save me from the evil of the Jews. Who from you agrees to
take my appearance so that they may take him as me and then kill and
crucify him? Then that person will be with me in paradise in the
Hereafter, and he will be in my class.

Hearing this, a young man from his companions said, O Spirit of Allah! I
am prepared for it. ‘Isa said, Yes, you can do it and added: one from
you will become a disbeliever in my matter twelve times before the next
morning. One of them said, I am not that person. ‘Isa said, If you find
this thing in your heart, then you will be that person. Then ‘Isa said,
you will from three groups after I have gone. Two sects will attribute
falsehood to Allah and enter Hell because of that and the third sect
will follow and obey my Successor (executor of the will). Shamoun will
not attribute falsehood to Allah and therefore will go to Paradise.
Shortly after that from a corner of the house, ‘Isa was taken up into
the heavens. As the people were observing this, the Jews came in search
of ‘Isa. They arrested the man about whom ‘Isa had foretold would become
a denier and another who had agreed to appear like ‘Isa. The latter was
killed while the other one as foretold by ‘Isa denied the Prophethood of
‘Isa twelve times.

Ibn Babawayh has with authentic proofs, narrated that the Holy Prophet
said that Archangel Gabriel once brought a communication for the Holy
Prophet which contained information about worldly kings. It was
mentioned therein that when Ashanj Ibn Ash-haan became a king he ruled
for 266 years. After he completed 51 years of his rule ‘Isa was made a
Prophet (by Allah). Allah had bestowed on him (‘Isa) light, and
knowledge and wisdom along with the knowledge of all the past Prophets.
‘Isa began his mission with all this God-given sciences (awareness) for
propagation of Allah’s word. Allah gave him Injeel (Bible) and guided
him toward Jerusalem. He was sent to guide the people of The Israelites
but they became deniers and rebelled. So ‘Isa cursed them and prayed to
Allah against them. Consequently, some of them were disfigured in the
shape of Shaitans so that he may show them one of the signs of his
Prophethood and they may take admonition. Anyhow, ‘Isa continued to
propagate among them for 33 years in Jerusalem and give them
encouragement to rush toward Divine rewards. But their rebellion only
increased. (At last Allah raised him up to heaven).

Then the people began to look for him. Some claimed that they had
punished him and buried him alive and some said they had killed and
crucified him. But all of them were speaking untruths. Allah never
allowed them to gain control over ‘Isa and this matter became doubtful
for them. They never had enough power to kill or bury alive or punish
‘Isa. But as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an, Allah lifted him up into the
heavens and when He decided to take him up he revealed to him to entrust
his light and wisdom and the knowledge of the Divine scripture to
Shamoun bin Hamoon who is called Safa. ‘Isa willed him as his caliph on
the believers (Mu’mineen). Then Shamoun kept on propagating Allah’s Word
and continued to give the directives of ‘Isa to his community and to
struggle against the disbelievers. Whoever obeyed him and believed (put
faith) in the things which he possessed from Allah became a Mu’min
(Faithful) and whoever denied and disobeyed him became a Kafir until
Allah called Shamoun back to Him.

Then He sent another Messenger from His virtuous slaves to guide the
people. He was Yahya, son of Zakariyya.. When Shamoun passed away from
this world, Urdeshir son of Scotish became king and ruled for 14 years
and ten months. When he completed 14 years of his rule the Jews martyred
Yahya son of Zakariyya. At the time of the martyrdom of Yahya Allah sent
a revelation (revelation) to him that he should bestow his will
(Wasiyyah) and leadership (Imamate) to the progeny of Shamoun and to
order the Disciples and the companions of ‘Isa to remain with them and
to obey them. They did so.

According to authentic narratives, it is noted that Imam Al-Hasan said
that ‘Isa went up into the heavens on the 21st night of the month of
Ramadan.  
 It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that
during the night in which ‘Isa was lifted up into the heavens blood
sprouted from every stone that was lifted from the ground, until
morning. Thee same thing happened on the days of the martyrdom of Imam
‘Ali and Imam Hussein.  
 In another reliable and authentic hadith it is mentioned that the holy
the Holy Prophet said, when ‘Isa was lifted, his eyes saw these words
inscribed on his arms:  
 When ‘Isa recited this supplication Allah revealed to Archangel
Gabriel: “Raise him up to my place of Grandeur and lift him up to the
heaven.” The holy Prophet said, ‘O sons of Abdul Muttalib! Pray to your
Lord in these words. I swear by the same Lord in whose Hands is my life
whenever any body prays to Allah in these words with honesty of purpose
and selflessness the Holy Throne (Throne) of the Lord begins to tremble.
So Allah directs the angels and tells them that: ‘Be witness that I have
responded to the prayer of this slave due to the auspiciousness of these
words and have fulfilled all his needs in this world and the Hereafter.’

According to authentic narrations Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq is reported to
have said that when ‘Isa went up to the heaven he had put on a woolen
coat, the wool whereof was spun by Maryam and also woven by her. She had
even sewn it. When he reached heaven, a Divine Voice came: ‘O ‘Isa! Give
up your worldly adornments.’

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam al-Ridha said that,
except in the case of ‘Isa the killing or the death of any Messenger or
hujjah (proof) had never been doubtful to people because he was lifted
(raised) alive from the ground and his soul was retrieved between the
earth and the heavens. When he reached the heavens his spirit was again
put into his body as says the Lord:

***O ‘Isa: I am going to terminate the period of your stay (on earth)
and cause you to ascend unto Me. (2:54)***

And He describes to ‘Isa:

***But when Thou didst cause me to die, Thou wert the Watcher over them.
(5:117)***

Both these verses prove that ‘Isa was raised up by Allah.  
 It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam as-Sadiq said, When Imam
al-Mahdi will appear, 9000 angels will descend and there will be those
313 angels who had accompanied ‘Isa when he was raised up to the heaven.
According to many reliable and authentic narrations, Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq had said that Sahib al Amr has four features
of the Messengers. One of them belongs to ‘Isa about whom it is said he
either died or was killed, whereas he neither died nor was he killed.

According to a reliable tradition, Imam al-Ridha said that when the Jews
desired to kill ‘Isa he swore by the truthfulness of Ahl al-Bayt. Allah
saved him from execution and raised him up to the heaven.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, After
the departure of ‘Isa his followers split up into 72 sects. One of them
got salvation and the remaining 71 went to Hell.  
 According to another reliable tradition, Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali called
the greatest religious leaders of the Christians and the Jews and told
them: I want to ask you a thing of which I am more knowledgeable than
you. So do not hide the Truth and give the right answer. Then he called
the Christian priest and asked him: I give you the oath of the Lord Who
descended Injeel (Bible) to ‘Isa. He had given strength to the legs of
(‘Isa). ‘Isa was curing the blind and the lepers with his hand. He
formed a bird of clay and then blew spirit into it (and the bird became
alive and flew away). He used to tell the people what they were eating
and what they were hoarding. Tell me how many sects sprang up in The
Israelites after ‘Isa. He said there was no sect except one community.
‘Ali retorted: You have lied. By the Lord except Whom there is no Allah,
there were 72 sects out of whom only one earned salvation. Remaining all
were confined to Hell., as says the Almighty:

***“There is a party of them keeping to the moderate course, and (as
for) most of them, evil is that which they do.” (5:66)***

It is narrated by Ibn Babawayh that on many occasions ‘Isa had been in
occultation (out of sight) from his community. He kept on touring and
visiting several cities but his partisans (Shi‘ahs) and the people of
his community did not know where he was. Thereafter he reappeared and
made Shamoun bin Hamoon his legatee. When Shamoun passed away, the
hujjahs (Signs) of Allah remained out of sight. Oppressors and
rebellious people searched them and subjected the faithful to added
torture and hardship. The Religion of Allah became old-fashioned and
discarded. Rights began to be trampled. People gave up their duties and
responsibilities and traditions. They became dispersed in the matter of
religion and everyone took to his own way. Religion became a doubtful
affair for the common man. This period of occultation lasted for 250
years.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that
until 250 years after ‘Isa people lived without an apparent Imam or
al-hujjah. Their Guide and Proof was in hiding. In another true hadith
it is mentioned by him that there was a span of five hundred years
between the times of ‘Isa and the Holy Messenger Muhammad. During 250
years in this span, there was neither a Prophet nor an apparent Imam.
The narrator asked how did the people of that era act? Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq replied, “They belonged to the faith of ‘Isa and were following
his shari‘ah (code of life conduct).” He added that the earth never
remains void of a Prophet or an Imam but some time they live apparently
and sometimes in hiding (ghaibat or occultation).[^12]

It is mentioned in a reliable narration that Imam al-Baqir said that a
time will come when people will not know what is Allah and what is meant
by oneness of Allah (Tawhid). Dajjal will come out at that time and ‘Isa
will descend from the heaven to earth and he will kill Dajjal, will
offer prayer in the leadership of al-Qa’im and had we, Ahl al-Bayt, not
been better than earlier messengers ‘Isa would not pray behind us.

According to another authentic hadith the Holy Prophet said that
al-Mahdi is one of my sons; that when he will appear, ‘Isa will descend
from the heaven to assist him and will pray behind him.

[^1]: Possibly, it was Yahya and not ‘Isa in the hadith and the writers
of narrations might have misunderstood ‘Isa for Yahya or we say, the
beginning of the formation of foetus of ‘Isa might have started in the
womb by the might of Allah and as Archangel Gabriel had blown spirit
(soul) in the foetus pregnancy might have become apparent only nine
hours prior to the actual birth. It is also possible that this hadith
might have been based on Taqiyyah.

[^2]: It is possible that this could be a spring other than one that had
sprung at the time of ’s birth. It is also possible that Bethlehem was
some other place where he had camped while returning from al-Kufah. It
is also likely that he might have in the beginning gone there and then
it might have been destroyed and as a miracle of it might have appeared
from Karbala and al-Kufah. Anyway there are several reliable traditions
to show that the birthplace of ‘Isa is somewhere near Euphrates and
al-Kufah. There is some hearsay going round Sunni circles. Some things
are such which cannot be comprehended by those who do not believe in the
tradition of Ahl al-Bayt. They deny mutawatir hadiths merely due to
their dislike for them. But such mutawatir traditions cannot be rejected
on basis of their denial. It is also possible that some hadiths that are
found contrary to this might have been recorded by way of Taqiyyah or
some might have been written as prevalent among people of the Book for
furnishing proof. Likewise several varying hadiths about the date of
birth and the period of pregnancy etc. were possibly noted due to anyone
of the above-mentioned reasons. Trying to make them conform can create
apprehensive descriptions of which would be very lengthy. Allah knows
best.

[^3]: The re-enlivening of Yahya has already been narrated in his story
earlier. Both these stories tell us that the bitterness of death and
agony changes after being brought back to life and living in the world
for sometime with worldly relations and anyway one way or the other one
has to die. It is learnt from this story that, for a Mu’min (true
believer), it is not hard and painful to die again after coming out of
the grave. Maybe it is for warning others that the beloved’s of Allah
say that there is relief in death. It is also possible that despite the
said relief there may also be some hardship. May Allah protect us all
from the agony of death and also from subsequent pains.

[^4]: These words make an indication towards what historians and
commentators have described that when Behroos the king of Syria heard
about the birth and the miracles of ‘Isa he became sorrowful and worried
as some people had observed through astrology that a man was about to be
born who would remove their sins and change their way of life. Therefore
Behroos planned to kill him. So Allah sent an angel to Yusuf Najjar who
was a cousin of Maryam and who used to serve and protect her (Maryam)
and ‘Isa. The angel told him to shift Maryam and ‘Isa to Egypt and to
return only after Behroos died. Yusuf took them to Egypt. Most of the
commentators have said that the place mentioned by the name of ‘Rabwah'
in the Ayat was Egypt and that “Maeen” was the Nile river. It is said
that they lived in Egypt for twelve years where many miracles were shown
by ‘Isa. When Behroos died Allah inspired them to go to Nasirah situated
in Syria. So they returned and lived in Nasirah and ‘Isa performed his
mission of propagation there.

[^5]: The purpose, perhaps, is to convey that they (the followers of
‘Isa were required to remain aloof from worldly affairs most of the
time. But since this community of Muslims is loaded with a double and
harder responsibility of remembering Allah even while living and working
in society their reward is greater but they do not have those facilities
in this life (which were available to the Disciples of ‘Isa. Therefore
their reward in heaven too has been enhanced as is mentioned in this
hadith. In other words there is an indication to the narration of Shaykh
Tabarsi according to which when the companions of ‘Isa became hungry
they only said to ‘Isa that they were hungry whereupon ‘Isa used to hit
the ground wherever they would be and lo! two loafs would come up for
each of the gentle fellows. Similarly when they became thirsty they only
said, ‘O Spirit of Allah! We are thirsty and ‘Isa used to hit his hand
on the ground and water would spring up instantly then and there. Once
the Disciples said to ‘Isa: O Roohullaah:! Are there any other people
who are better than us, for, we have put faith in you and you feed us
whenever we become hungry and you provide water for us wherever and
whenever we become thirsty. ‘Isa replied: Those who earn their
livelihood by working with their hands are indeed better than you.
Thereafter they adopted the occupation of washer men and they earned
their sustenance provision by hard work.

[^6]: This hadith contradicts many mentioned earlier and to be quoted
hereafter, which say that the knowledge of these 72 Names is reserved
with the Last Prophet and his Awsiya (the willed or authorized ones).
Maybe these Asmaa e Aazam are other than those Names.

[^7]: Perhaps the first hadith was regarding the revelation of Injeel in
Baitul Maamoor as is indicated in the first hadith). It is recorded from
the Prophet of Allah that Injeel had come down at a time written on
Alwaah (stone slates).

[^8]: This address, like all other addresses, is though apparently to
‘Isa the real addressees are the people and also all other servants of
God-Tr.

[^9]: Love of worldly things is called the head of sins as in one’s body
the head is the part which if cut off, ends life. Hence when love for
worldly matters, which has been described as the head is cut off there
can be no sins at all. Or if this Persian word is pronounced ‘Sir’
(meaning secret) then it would mean that the secret behind all sins is
love for the world and that if one understands this secret one would
refrain from sins.-Tr.).

[^10]: Meaning, while praying to me your heart should remain fully
attentive, It should not be that there is supplication on the tongue but
the heart is leaning toward something else as it is a sign of a dead
heart-Tr.

[^11]: Difl is a kind of grass which resembles very attractive colorful
flowers. Its taste is very bitter and is fatally poisonous.

[^12]: Both prominent and common people have narrated that ‘Isa will
descend from the heaven at the time of al-Mahdi the family of Muhammad
to earth and will offer Salat prayer behind Imam al-Mahdi and will be
among the helpers of Imam al-Mahdi as will be discussed
hereafter-Inshallah). The Lord Almighty says: Meaning: “And there is not
one of the followers of the Book but most certainly believers in this
before his death...” (4:159). Many commentators (of the holy Qur’an)
have said that this verse means no one from among the Ahl al-Kitab, that
is, the Jews and the Christians will die before believing in ‘Isa when
he will descend from the heaven at the time of the Imam of the last era.
Some have said that this assertion pertains to the particular people who
will be living in that era. Perhaps it means all of them, because the
wording is of a common nature and as in the time of Raj‘ah (returning or
Resurrection) all will be brought to life. They will see that ‘Isa
believes in the religion of Prophet Muhammad and follows the Sahib
al-‘Amr (Imam al-Mahdi) though the faith at that moment will be of no
avail to them. It is recorded from reliable chains that hujjah called
Shahr bin Joshab and asked him to explain this verse and warned him that
he had killed many Jews and Christians and had observed that they died
without even moving their lips. “Then how he becomes faithful?” I am
unable to understand the meaning of this Ayat.” Shahr replied: “O Ruler!
The meaning of this verse is not what you have imagined. But it means
that, before the final day of the Resurrection Day, ‘Isa will come down
to earth and everybody following any faith will put faith in him and
will pray behind Imam al-Mahdi. Hujjah asked: “From where did you obtain
this explanation?” He said from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir. Hujjah said you
have drawn (knowledge) from a pure spring. It is mentioned in authentic
sources that according to Imam al-Hasan Mujtaba, after this, no one from
us (Ahl al-Bayt) will outlive the oppressor of his time except Imam
al-Mahdi who is the twelfth Imam and except ‘Isa Ibn-Maryam the spirit
of Allah will pray behind him as these two gentlemen will never give the
Bait (allegiance) to any oppressor.


