Merits of Adam and Hawwa’ (Eve), Reasons behind naming them so, the beginning of creation
=========================================================================================

It is related through authentic chains that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and
Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “Adam was named ‘Adam’ because he was ‘Adeemul
Arz’, that is he was created from the face of the earth (from dust). And
Hawwa’ is named so because she was created from a being (Hayya), that is
Adam.” According to another opinion “Adeemul Arz” is the fourth (layer
of) earth.

In another report it is mentioned that ‘Abdullah bin Salaam asked the
Messenger of Allah why Adam is named thus. The Prophet replied it was
because Adam has been created from the dust of the Earth. ‘Abdullah
asked whether Adam was created from dust of one particular location or
from a mixture of dust collected from various places. The Prophet said,
“The dust resembles him most because it is white, red, green, pink and
blue. It has sweet, sour tastes, agreeable and disagreeable
temperaments, hard and soft qualities of mind. This has caused the
people to be soft and hard, red, black, yellow, pink based on different
types of soil.”

‘Abdullah asked him whether Hawwa’ was created from Adam or Adam created
from Hawwa’. The Prophet replied that Hawwa’ was created from Adam and
if Adam had been created from Hawwa’, the woman would have had the
prerogative to divorce.

‘Abdullah asked whether Hawwa’ was created from a specific part of
Adam’s body or from this whole body. The Prophet replied, “From a
specific portion and if she had been created from his whole body the
commands of retaliation would have been equal for both.”

‘Abdullah asked whether she was created from the external part of Adam’s
body or from an internal portion. The Prophet replied, “From the
internal. If she were created from an external part, she would have been
allowed, like men, to go out without Hijab (veil). Therefore it is
necessary that men should have their women covered in Hijab.”

‘Abdullah asked if she was created from the right side or the left side.
The Prophet replied, “If she had been created from the right side, men
and women would have received equal shares of inheritance. Because as
she was created from the left side the woman has one share and men have
two shares. And the testimony of two women is equal to that of one man.”

‘Abdullah asked, “From which part of Adam’s body was she created?” The
Prophet replied, “She was created from the clay that was left over after
making of the rib of Adam.”

According to a reliable chain, Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq had said that woman
is known as Mar’ah (Arabic word meaning woman) because she had been
created from ‘Mar’ (Arabic word for man), this is based on the fact that
Hawwa’ is created from Adam.

In another reliable tradition Imam says that women are known as ‘Nisa’
(Arabic word for women) because Adam was not interested (having ‘uns’)
in anything before he got the company of Hawwa’.  
 Authentic narrations from Imam ‘Ali state that the Almighty created
Adam from the soil of all the surface of the earth. Thus, as there are
different types of soil, like salty, sweet, fertile and infertile, the
progeny of Adam also consists of people who are good and evil.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has been quoted through trustworthy chains of
narrators that he said, “When the Almighty sent Archangel Gabriel to
bring a handful of dust from the earth for the creation of Adam the
earth said, “I seek refuge of Allah from you taking away my soil.”
Archangel Gabriel returned and said to Allah that the earth sought His
refuge. The Almighty sent Israfil and authorized him similarly. The
earth again prayed for Allah’s refuge. Israfil also returned due to the
entreaty of the earth. Now, Mika’il was ordered to collect the soil. He
too came back as the earth pleaded for Allah’s refuge. Finally the Angel
of death was deputed with the command to collect some mud from the
Earth. It requested for Divine refuge from this Angel too. The Angel of
death said he too sought refuge of Allah from returning empty-handed.
Thus, he collected a handful of dust from every part of the earth.

From correct chains of narrators, the Holy Prophet is quoted to have
remarked, “When Angels passed by the body of Adam who had been created
from clay and was lying in heavens, they used to say, ‘You have been
created for an important affair.’ When the accursed Satan passed by, he
kicked the body of Adam and said, ‘You are made for a great affair.’

From reliable chains of traditionalists, ‘Abd al-‘Alim wrote a letter to
Imam Muhammad al-Taqi and asked him why the urine and stool of man had
such a foul smell. Imam replied that it was so, because when the
Almighty created Adam his body was clean and he lay in that position for
forty years. The Angels passed by remarking, ‘You have been created for
a great affair.’ The Satan enHtered his mouth and passed through him
emerging from the other side (anus). As a result, whatever is inside the
belly of son of Adam is smelly and unclean.

Another tradition from the Messenger of Allah states that the Almighty
created Adam on a Friday.  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that when the soul was ordered to enter the
body of Adam it found it detestable. The Almighty said that it should
enter with dislike (forced in) and leave it in dislike (forced out).

Authentic chains mention that Abu-Basir asked the same Imam the reason
for Allah creating Adam without a father and mother, and of creating
‘Isa without a father whereas He created the rest of humans from both
parents. Imam replied it was so that people may become aware of the
Omnipotence of Allah that He is capable of creating without a male and
of creating without a male and female. They should realize that Allah is
the Creator of every being and has power over everything.

In another reliable tradition, Imam says that when the Almighty created
Adam and ordered the soul to enter his body, the soul had not completely
permeated into the body and according to another tradition it had
reached only unto the knees, when Adam tried to stand up but he could
not, and fell back; thus, the Almighty said, “Man is created with a
hasty temperament.”

Salman the Persian is quoted in authentic books to have remarked that
the first organs of man to be created were the eyes. Adam saw the
creation of the rest of his body. Before the creation of legs was
complete, he tried to stand up but could not succeed. That is why the
Almighty said, “Man is created a hasty being.” When the soul entered his
complete body he grasped a bunch of grapes and began to eat them.

According to an authentic tradition of Imam as-Sadiq, there are three
fathers; the first is Adam the progenitor of the believers, second is
Jaan the progenitor of Jinn and third is Satan the progenitor of
infidels. The progeny of Satan is not created through pregnancy. It
multiplies through eggs and chicks are hatched. All of them are males.
They have no females.

Imam al-Baqir says that the Almighty decided to create a being, by His
power. This was 7000 years after the Jinn and men had inhabited the
earth. When Allah intended to create Adam, He opened the layers of the
heavens and addressed the Angels: “Look at the inhabitants of the earth
and behold the Jinn and men.” The Angels witnessed the vile acts and saw
the unjust bloodshed in the earth as also the widespread corruption.
Then they understood the great matter. They were infuriated at the
inhabitants of the earth and they lost their temper. They addressed
Allah: “O our Lord! You are superior, powerful, forceful, punisher and
possess a great honor whereas these creatures of yours are weak, lowly
and subjected to Your power. They survive only because You provide them
with sustenance but they are oblivious of Your kindness. They disobey
Your commands and sin blatantly, yet You are not infuriated at them and
do not take revenge. We feel it is a great affair and perceive the
audacity of these creatures.” When the Almighty heard this, He said that
He was going to appoint a vicegerent on the earth. “He shall be My proof
on My Creatures.”

The Angels said, “We consider You to be purified from every defect.
Would You create such a group on the Earth that it will cause bloodshed
and corruption as the progeny of Jinn initiated bloodshed and
corruption, and envied each other and bore enmity with one another?
Appoint one of us as Your Caliph (representative). We shall neither
cause bloodshed and corruption nor practice jealousy and rivalry. We
would rather praise and glorify You. We shall consider you absolutely
Pure (of any deficiency).” The Almighty said,

***“I know what you know not.”*** ***(2:30)***

“I wish to create a being and from his progeny create Prophets,
Messenger, righteous servants and guiding Imams and appoint them as My
representatives on the inhabitants of the Earth so that they may
prohibit the people from My disobedience, warn them of My chastisement,
invite them towards My worship and lead them on the way liked by Me. I
shall appoint them as My proof on My creatures and remove the Jinn from
the earth, and purify the Earth from their filth. I shall remove the
filthy Jinn away from My new creation and from My greatness, and make
them inhabit the atmosphere surrounding the Earth. My new creation will
not be in their company. I shall put a curtain between the jinn and Men
so that humans cannot see the jinn and cannot interact and associate
with them. Then whomsoever from the progeny of humans disobeys Me, I
shall put him in the vicinity of transgressors, that is in Hell and I
shall not care from them.”  
 “As you wish,” said the Angels,

***“We have no knowledge but that which Thou hast taught us; surely Thou
art the Knowing, the Wise.” (2:32)***

As a result of this misdemeanor of theirs, the Angels were removed by
Allah to a distance of 500 years’ travel. The Angels took refuge at the
Divine Throne and pleaded for forgiveness pointing out with their
fingers. The Almighty saw their humility and sincerity and bestowed His
Mercy upon them. He appointed them at al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur (the
much-frequented Fane) and ordered them to leave the Holy Throne and keep
on circling the al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur. That would earn His satisfaction.

So the Angels began to circle al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur. It is a house where
70000 Angels enter everyday, and none ever returns. The Almighty has
created al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur as a site of repenting for the inhabitants of
the heavens and appointed the Ka‘bah for the inhabitants of the Earth,
that they may seek forgiveness here.

Then, Almighty Allah said, “I shall produce a being from dry mud that
produces a sound and a mixture of clay and sand. (That is, from foul
smelling and dirty clay that has changed its appearance). So when I
complete it and blow My soul in it you all shall fall down in
prostration.”  
 This was the preface to the creation of Adam that the Almighty used to
complete His argument upon the Angels.

Imam al-Baqir says, “Our Lord kneaded the clay with sweet water and
said, ‘I shall create from this until the Resurrection Day, Prophets,
Messengers, righteous servants and guided Imams who shall invite the
people towards Paradise and the people who follow these personalities. I
do not care if anyone questions this action of Mine.’” Then He took some
sour water and kneaded the clay with it saying, ‘I shall create from
you, until the Resurrection Day, the oppressors, aggressors, people of
‘ad and the brethren of Satan. They shall invite the people towards Hell
and I shall also create from this clay the followers of these people. I
don’t care if anyone raises an objection against this action of Mine and
all of them shall be questioned. I shall subject them to Badaa (change
of destiny).

Allah can change them into the people of the right (for heaven) or
transform them into the people of the left (dwellers of Hell). Thus, He
mixed the two kinds of clay and threw it before the Divine Throne. The
clay broke into a few pieces. Then he ordered the four Angels of
different winds (North, South, East and West) to blow their respective
breezes on those pieces of clay. They blew at the pieces, pulverized
them, and shaped them with the four elements: Madness due to the effect
of north wind, phlegm due to east, bile due to west and blood as a
result of the Southern wind. Thus, the body of Adam was complete.

One part of it is madness that creates an attraction for the female sex
and instigates hope and vying for their love. Phlegm is responsible for
desire to eat, drink, to act charitably, intelligence and hospitality.
Bile causes anger, stupidity, evil, oppression, injustice and haste. The
four element of blood creates sexuality, instigation to perform illegal
acts and sexual desires. Imam says, ‘We found it mentioned in the same
way in the book of Amir al-Mu’minin.  
 Thus, Adam was created and remained in his original form for forty
years. When the accursed Satan passed by, he remarked, “You have been
created for something great,” and used to say, “If Allah commands us to
prostrate before him, I shall indeed disobey.”

Then Allah blew the soul into Adam’s body. When it reached his brain, he
sneezed. *“Alhamdo lillaah!”* exclaimed Adam.

*“Yarh’amokallaah!”* responded the Almighty.  
 ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas narrates from the Holy Prophet that after creating
Adam Allah made him stand near Him. Adam sneezed. The Almighty sent a
direct revelation to him and he praised Allah.  
 The Almighty said, “O Adam! You have praised Me! By My Might and
Greatness if I did not intend to create two persons at the time, I would
not have created you.”  
 “O my Lord!” said Adam, “By the exalted status of those personalities,
please inform who those two are.”

“O Adam! Look upon the Divine Throne.” When Adam looked he saw two lines
inscribed on the Holy Throne. The first line said, “Muhammad is the
Prophet of Mercy and ‘Ali is the key to Paradise.” The second line was:
“I swear by My Holiness, I shall have mercy on those who love them and
punish those who hate them and are inimical to them.

According to a reliable tradition of Ja‘far as-Sadiq some people
gathered in a house and initiated a discussion. Some claimed that the
father of men, Adam was the best of the creatures. Some said it were the
proximate Angels. Others maintained the bearers of the Divine Throne to
be the most exalted beings. Just then he entered and the people said,
“One who will solve this problem for us has arrived.” He saluted and
took a seat and asked what the discussion was about. They told him. He
said, “Be patient! I shall return to you shortly.” So saying he went to
his father Adam and narrated the facts. Adam said, “O my son! When I
stood near the Lord of the Worlds, I saw the following inscription on
the Holy Throne:

*Bismillaahir Rah’maanir rah’eem Muh’ammadinw wa aalo Muh’ammadin
Khairun min barrillaah.*  
 (Translation: In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful.
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad are the best of Allah’s creatures.)

Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali is quoted in a reliable tradition that Hawwa’ was
created from a small rib of Adam while he was sleeping. The rib was
replaced with flesh in the body of Adam.  
 According to authentic reports from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq: “Allah
created Adam from dust and water. That’s why the efforts of men are
centered on the acquisition and construction of buildings (That are
composed of dust and water). Similarly Hawwa’ was created from the rib
of Adam; therefore, women are less daring than men. So protect them in
your houses.”  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq remarks in an authentic tradition, “Hawwa’ was
named thus because she was created through ‘wahy’ (revelation). As the
Almighty says,

***“Created you from a single being and created its mate of the same
(kind).” (4:1)***

In authentic traditions, people asked Ja‘far as-Sadiq regarding the
creation of Hawwa’. They said, “Some people say that Allah created
Hawwa’ from the left rib of Adam?” Imam said, “Allah is Purer and Higher
than what these people allege. One who utters such a thing believes that
Allah is not Omnipotent. They provide opportunities for those who taunt
and raise objections. Why do they make such statements? Allah shall
decide between us and them.”

Then he said, “The Almighty created Adam and commanded the Angels to pay
obedience to him. Then He induced sleep on Adam. When Adam was asleep,
the Almighty created a new being and placed her between the feet of Adam
so that women remain obedient to men. Hawwa’ moved and woke Adam. Hawwa’
was ordered to separate from Adam. Adam’s sight fell on Hawwa’ and he
beheld a beautiful face. He saw that she resembled him, but was a
female.

He began to converse with her and asked who she was. Hawwa’ spoke in his
tongue and said that she was a creature of Allah as he could see.” Adam
addressed the Almighty and asked, “Who is this beautiful creation that
attracts me? Seeing whom I lost my fear?”

“She is my slave-girl, Hawwa’,” said the Lord. “Do you want her to live
with you, remain attached to you, converse with you and do what you bide
her?”  
 “Yes, my Lord!” replied Adam, “As long as I live, I shall continue to
thank you.”  
 “Then you pray for her and request me so.”  
 At that moment Allah created in Adam the desire of seeking the nearness
of woman and He had already taught Adam the tenets of faith. Adam said,
“My Lord! You have permitted me to take her, but what can I give in
return so that You are pleased?”  
 “Impart to her religious knowledge and I shall be satisfied with
you.”  
 “I shall do as You desire,” agreed Adam, “I accept!” said Allah, “I
hereby marry her to you. Take her.”

Adam called Hawwa’ towards him but the Almighty told Adam to get up
himself and go towards Hawwa’. So Adam arose and moved towards Hawwa’.
If this had not been so women would have required to come as suitors to
men. This was the account of Hawwa’.

Through authentic chains we know that Abdul Miqdam asked Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir how the Almighty created Hawwa’. Imam asked what other people
say about it. He was told they think Allah created her from a rib of
Adam. Imam said that they were liars. “Was Allah incapable of creating
her other than from Adam’s rib?” The narrator said, “May I be your
ransom, then how did Allah create her?”

“My father has quoted my forefathers and they in turn report that the
Messenger of Allah said, “The Almighty took a handful of dust and by His
power created Adam and from the leftover of the same dust He created
Hawwa’.”

Both Shi‘ah as well as Sunni scholars have recorded the tradition from
Wahab bin Munabbah which says that Allah created Hawwa’ from the
leftovers of the clay in the same form and while Adam was made to go to
sleep and dream, he was shown Hawwa’. It was the first dream that
occurred to people on the earth. When Adam awoke he saw Hawwa’ near his
head. The Almighty revealed, “O Adam Who is sitting near you?” “She is
the same one I saw in my dream,” replied Adam.  
 It is related through authentic channels that a Jew came to Amir
al-Mu’minin ‘Ali and asked him why Adam was named Adam and Hawwa’ as
Hawwa’?

Imam replied, “Adam is named thus because he is ‘Adeemul Arz’, that is,
he was created from the face of the earth. The Almighty ordered
Archangel Gabriel to collect white, red, black and brown mud, as also
hard and soft earth. He also commanded him to bring four kinds of
waters; sweet, salty, sour and dirty in order to knead the different
kinds of mud. The sweet water was used for his throat, salty water for
the eyes, sour water for the ears and dirty water for the nose. Hawwa’
is called Hawwa’ because she is created from haywan (animal/living
being)!”

On the basis of authentic and well-known traditions Amir al-Mu’minin
‘Ali says describing the creation of Adam, “Hard and rigid, soft and
slippery, sweet and salty mud was gathered. They were kneaded with water
and it became a homogenous mixture. From this mixture Allah constructed
a face, hands, legs, organs, tissues and joints. They were dried until
they became solid and strong. They sounded like cymbals and were left to
lie in that condition until the time Almighty had appointed for blowing
the spirit. At the appointed hour the Almighty blew into it His exalted
spirit. It resulted in the creation of a human being capable of flexing
his muscles and moving his joints. He can use his limbs and organs in a
number of ways, he puts them into his service and moves them in
different ways. The Human being was capable of knowing his creator and
had the sense of discrimination between right and wrong. He has the
sense of taste and sense of smell. He can distinguish colors and kinds.
In short, man was a conglomeration of different kinds of essences and
temperaments. He became a collection of different contradictory
qualities. Like heat and cold, dryness and moisture, sorrow and
happiness.”

Sayyid Ibn Tawus says he has seen in the scrolls of Idris that he
praised the creation of Adam in the following words:  
 “The Almighty introduced the earth by creating from it a species
consisting of those who obey and those who disobey. The earth shuddered
by itself due to the Might of Allah. It implored Allah not to create a
being that would disobey Him and become eligible for Hell. Archangel
Gabriel came to Earth to take the dust for Adam’s creation. The Earth
protested in the name of Allah’s Might and requested him not to pick up
any dust. It sought refuge from Allah by extreme courtesy. Archangel
Gabriel refrained from collecting the dust and Allah commanded him to
return. Then Allah ordered Mika’il. When the Earth repeated its
protests, Israfil was dispatched, but he also met the same sort of
resistance.

Finally Israel was issued the order. When he reached the Earth it
shivered and expressed its humble request. Israel said, “My Lord has
commanded me and I shall obey His commands, whether you are happy or
aggrieved.” Thus he took a handful of dust, flew to the heavens and
stood at his appointed place. The Almighty revealed to him that just as
he had collected dust from the surface of the Earth despite its
protests, he would be appointed to capture all the souls from creatures
of the dust until the Resurrection Day. When the morning of the second
Sunday dawned, it was the eighth day of creation. An angel was ordered
to knead and mix the mud for Adam’s creation. He continued to leaven it
for 40 years until it became sticky. Then for forty years it was made
into Lajn.

For the next forty years he dried it like a pot created from a potter’s
wheel. When 120 years had passed, Allah announced to the angels that He
would create a man from this clay.  
 The Almighty said, “So when I have shaped him and blow My spirit into
Him, all of you fall down before him in prostration.”

The Angels agreed. Allah created Adam in the form that was already
decreed and recorded in the Protected Tablet (al-Lawh al-Mahfuz). Then
He created the body of Adam and left it to lie for forty years on the
way that the Angels frequented while going to the heavens.

When the jinn who were the inhabitants of Earth perpetrated untold
corruption Iblis complained to Allah and prayed that he be raised to the
ranks of Angels. His request was granted and he joined the rank of
Angels in heaven. When the transgression of jinn crossed the limit,
Allah ordered Iblis to go to the earth with other Angels and drive out
the jinn.

Then Allah blew the spirit into the body of Adam and commanded the
Angels to prostrate. All of them fell in prostration except Satan who
was from the jinn.  
 Adam sneezed and Allah sent a revelation to say *‘Alhamdolillaah.’*  
 When he said ‘Alhamdolillaah, Allah said, ‘Yarh’amokallah’.  
 Allah said, “I have created you so that you believe in My Oneness,
worship Me, have faith in Me, do not deny Me and do not associate anyone
with Me.”  
 Authentic reports say one person asked Imam al-Ridha,  
 “O son of the Messenger of Allah, people claim that the Holy Prophet
said Allah has created Adam in His Own form?”  
 Imam replied, “May Allah destroy them! They have omitted the first part
of hadith. One day the Messenger of Allah passed by two men who were
calling each other names. Each one them was saying, “May Allah disfigure
your face and the faces of all your relatives.” The Messenger of Allah
said, “O servant of Allah do not say such things to your brother. Verily
Allah has created Adam in His image.” A similar type of hadith has been
recorded from ‘Ali also.

It is related through authentic chain of narrators from Imam as-Sadiq
that when Allah wished to create Adam He sent Archangel Gabriel in the
first part of a Friday who took a handful of dust. His fist moved from
the first heaven to the seventh taking some dust each of them. In the
left hand he took samples of dust from the first layer of the Earth to
the last.  
 The Almighty said addressing the dust in his right hand, “From you I
shall create the Prophets, messengers, vicegerents, the truthful ones,
believers and the righteous people. And those whom I shall raise in
status.”

Then He said to the dust in Archangel Gabriel’s left hand, “From you I
shall create the tyrants, polytheists, disbelievers and the deviated
people. And those whose evil and corruption is known to Me. Then
Archangel Gabriel mixed the dust of both his fists. This is the
interpretation of the ayah.

***“Surely Allah causes the grain and the stone to germinate,”*** (6:95)

Imam says ‘Hab’ is the clay of the believers in which Allah has
appointed His love and ‘Nawaa’ is the clay of disbelievers, which is
away from every type of goodness. This is the meaning of Allah’s words:

***“He brings forth the living from the dead and He is the bringer forth
of the dead from the living.”*** ***(6:95)***

The living from the dead are those believers who are born from the Tinah
(essence) of disbelievers and the dead that emerge from the living is
the disbeliever who is born from the ‘Tinah’ of a believer.

According to trustworthy chains Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said, “Before the
Almighty created the creatures He told them to become sweet water so
that He can create from it the Paradise and His worshippers. And He told
it to become bitter than water that he may create from it Hell and
people who disobey Him. Then He commanded and the two liquids mixed with
each other. This is the reason that believers are born from disbelievers
and disbelievers are born from believers. Then He took some dust from
the Earth and after mixing it He dusted it with His mighty hands.
resulted in the creation of tiny ant like organisms. To the ones that
were on the right side, Allah said, “You can proceed towards Paradise
safely.” And to those on the left, He said, “Go towards Hell, I don’t
care.”

The same Imam says in a good traditional report that the Almighty took a
handful of Adam’s clay, mixed it with sweet water and left it for forty
days. Then he mixed it with sour water and left it for another forty
days. When it became like leavened bread, Archangel Gabriel kneaded it
thoroughly and ant-like organisms fell on the left and the right side.
Then Allah ordered a fire to be made, and directed all of these
creatures to enter the fire. When the organisms from the right side
entered, it became cool and safe for them. The ones on the left were
terrified and abstained from entering the fire. On that very day the
obedience of the creatures was tested. Then Allah ordered all of them to
revert to their clay form. Finally Adam was created from this clay.

In another good tradition the Holy Prophet is quoted to have said that
when the Almighty extracted the progeny of Adam from his loins to take
their covenant regarding His absolute authority and the belief in all
the Prophets, the first Prophet about whom He took the covenant was
Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah. Then the Almighty Allah revealed to Adam to cast
a glance at his progeny. He saw that they were minute particles filling
up the whole sky.

“How numerous is my progeny!” exclaimed Adam. “My Lord! You have created
them for a great affair. Why did you take a covenant from them?”  
 “So that they may worship Me; And do not attribute partners to Me. That
they may believe in the Prophets and follow them,” replied the Lord.  
 Adam said, “But some of these particles are greater in size. Some of
them more luminous. While others are dim or completely dark. What is the
reason for this?”  
 “They are created like this so that I may examine them in every way,”
replied Allah.  
 “Can I ask some more questions?” asked Adam.  
 “Yes, you may.”  
 Adam said, “If You had created them equal, of one mood, one creation,
one color, one age and bestowed the same amount of sustenance. Some of
them would not have oppressed others. There wouldn’t have been jealousy,
enmity and any kind of controversy among them.”

Allah the Almighty addressed Adam, “You have opened your mouth against
the spirit which is most exalted in my eyes. And you have said something
about it due to your lack of knowledge. I am the All-knowing Creator. I
have created the variety. My Wisdom and My command runs over them. And
each of them is subservient to what I have destined. There is no change
in My creation. I have created human beings and jinn only that they
worship Me. I have created Paradise for those who worship and obey Me
and follow My Prophets. But I care less if they don’t. I created Hell
for the infidels. Those who would disobey Me and deny My Prophets. I do
not care for these also.

I created you and your progeny not because I had any need for them. I
created them in order to test them as to which of them are of the best
in character. It is for this reason I created the world and Hereafter,
life and death, obedience and disobedience, Paradise and Hell. This is
what I intended with predestination and free will and in the light of My
knowledge that encompasses all of them.

I created them with different hues and colors, different faces, physical
features, ages, difference in the quality of their sustenance, and
differences in the extent of their obedience and disobedience. Among
them are evil and the righteous, blind and seeing, short and tall,
beautiful and ugly, intelligent and foolish, rich and poor, obedient and
disobedient, sick and healthy. Some of them will be involved in
different kinds of discomforts while most of them shall never have any
problems. So that when the healthy ones look at the sick they praise Me
for being spared. The sick may see the healthy people and pray to Me for
cure. Also, that they may remain patient and earn divine rewards for the
same, and be raised in degrees.

In the same way the rich man would see a destitute and thank Me for the
affluence that I have bestowed upon him. On the other hand the less
privileged one would see the affluent and supplicate Me. The Believer
shall see the infidels and Praise Me that I have guided him and created
him for examination in good times and bad, through the trails and
tribulations that I shall subject them to, through the bounties that I
shall bestow upon them, and through the things that I have prohibited
for them. I am Allah the King of Power, it is for Me to cause the things
that I have decreed. It is also for Me to cause change in whatever I
have destined. I can advance the occurrence of one thing and I can
postpone another. I am One that can do anything He desires. No one can
dare question My actions. But I shall question my creatures regarding
their actions.”[^1]  
 According to authentic chain of narrators Imam al-Ridha has been
reported to have said, “The finger ring of Adam had the inscription, *La
ilaaha illallaah Muhammadur-Rasulollaah.* He had brought it from the
Paradise.”

The Almighty informs the Angels of Adam’s Creation and orders them to
prostrate before himThe Almighty informs the Angels of Adam’s Creation
and orders them to prostrate before himThe Almighty informs the Angels
of Adam’s Creation and orders them to prostrate before himThe Almighty
informs the Angels of Adam’s Creation and orders them to prostrate
before himThe Almighty informs the Angels of Adam’s Creation and orders
them to prostrate before himThe Almighty informs the Angels of Adam’s
Creation and orders them to prostrate before himThe Almighty informs the
Angels of Adam’s Creation and orders them to prostrate before himThe
Almighty informs the Angels of Adam’s Creation and orders them to
prostrate before himThe Almighty informs the Angels of Adam’s Creation
and orders them to prostrate before him

***“And when your Lord said to the angels, I am going to place in the
earth a khalif, they said: What! wilt Thou place in it such as shall
make mischief in it and shed blood, and we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy holiness? He said: Surely I know what you do not know.”***
***(2:30)***

According to Tafsir of Imam Al-Hasan al-‘Askari, exegesis of the above
verse is that man was created at a time when the Angels had purged the
Earth from Shaitans, jinn and their progeny, and were themselves
inhabiting the earth. They were engrossed in Allah’s worship without any
disturbance when Allah said,  
 “Indeed I shall appoint a vicegerent upon the earth.”  
 That is, “In your place I shall appoint a legatee and vicegerent on the
earth; and I shall raise you to the heavens.” This was very disturbing
for the Angels. Because their worship acts were less likely to be
rejected near the heavens.

***“They said: What! wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief
in it and shed blood, and we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy
holiness?”*** ***(2:30)***

The Angels said, “O our Lord! Would You inhabit the earth with creatures
who shall spread corruption and bloodshed like the jinn? Whom we had to
purge from the earth? Whereas we glorify Your Praise and consider You
free from all impurities? We also purify Your earth from those who
disobey You.”  
 “He said: Surely I know what you do not know.”  
 Allah said,

***“I have knowledge of the creation that I shall bring after you in the
earth. Whereas you don’t know anything. I also know that there is a
denier (Kafir) among you, (Satan). You don’t know anything about that
too. (2:30)***

And He taught Adam all the names, then presented them to the angels;
then He said:

***Tell me the names of those if you are right.*** ***(2:31)***

Imam says, “The Almighty taught Adam the names of Prophets, Prophet
Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, and Hasan and Husayn. He also taught him the
names of the purified Imams and the names of some exalted personalities
of the Shi‘ahs. Also the names of their enemies and other well-known
transgressors.”

Then Allah presented the ethereal bodies of Muhammad, ‘Ali and the Imams
to the Angels. He ordered them to identify them if they spoke the truth.
Though the Angels glorified Allah to the fullest and worshipped Him with
utmost sincerity, they were not having any knowledge of what type of
creatures would inhabit the earth after them and what defects and merits
they shall have. Just as they were ignorant of the personalities shown
to them by Allah.

***They said,*** ***Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but that
which Thou hast taught us; surely Thou art the Knowing, the Wise.
(2:32)***  
***So Almighty Allah ordered Adam to recite the names of Prophets and
Imams. Adam did as bidden and named all of them. The Almighty told the
Angels to believe in them and to consider them superior than their own
selves.” (2:33)***

Iblis had already decided in his heart that if they were ordered to
prostrate before Adam he would refuse. He also knew that if given power
over Adam, he could destroy him. The Angels were thinking that they
should remain superior to whoever is created after them.  
 Therefore, Allah told them that they were not superior but Muhammad and
his progeny was much more superior to them. And they were the ones whose
names Adam had mentioned.[^2]  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says, when Allah informed that He was about to
appoint a Caliph on the earth, the Angels were distraught. They implored
Him to take one of them as His Caliph on the earth. But Allah did not
heed their advice. The Angels thought that they were being subjected to
some Divine punishment. So they took refuge toward the Holy Throne and
began to encircle it. The Almighty ordered them to circumambulate around
the al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur whose roof is of Crimson Ruby and pillars of
Emeralds. Every day 70000 Angels enter this house and shall not enter it
(again) until the appointed day and hour. The appointed hour is the
blowing of the trumpet and the Satan would die between the two trumpets.

In another reliable tradition people asked Ja‘far as-Sadiq the origin of
the circumambulation Holy Ka‘bah. Imam said, “When Allah decided to
create Adam He told the Angels that He wished to appoint a Caliph on the
Earth. The Angels said, “Would you appoint such a creature as shall
spread corruption and bloodshed?” When they put this question there came
a barrier between them and the Divine Luminescence. A curtain that did
not exist before. They realized that Allah is infuriated at their
blatant objection. They held consultations among themselves to find the
best way of expiation. It was decided that nothing could be better than
seeking shelter at the Divine Throne.

Thus they look refuge in the Holy Throne until the time Almighty
accepted their repentance and removed the curtains between them and His
splendor. Allah wanted the people to worship Him in the same manner, so
he created the Holy Ka‘bah on the Earth and made incumbent on the people
circle it. He created the al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur on the heavens. Every day
70000 Angels enter it. They do not return. They shall continue to enter
it until the Resurrection Day.

In another reliable tradition Imam al-Ridha is reported to have said,
“When Angels did not accept the Divine vicegerency of Adam even though
Allah had said so they realized that they had committed a mistake, and
regretted it. They took refuge in the Holy Throne and repented for their
misdemeanor. Allah wished that they continued to worship Him in the same
way. So He created a Zaraah, a house in the line of the Holy Throne on
the 4th heaven. He also made a house on 1st heaven, it is called Ma’mur.
He made the Holy Ka‘bah on the Earth in the line of al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur.
He commanded Adam to go around this house.

After this Allah accepted the repentance of Angels and the custom of
circumambulating the Ka‘bah came into existence.”

According to a reliable report from Imam Zayn al-‘abidin. He says, “I
asked my father why seven circumambulations of Ka‘bah have been
prescribed for us? He replied, ‘Because when the Almighty said that He
was about to appoint a Caliph on the earth, the Angels did not accept
it. They asked Allah if He wanted to appoint such people as would spread
corruption and bloodshed? The Almighty said He was aware of what they
were not. Allah had never concealed His splendor from the Angels before
this but after this objection He concealed it from the Angels for a
thousand years. The Angels sought refuge in the Holy Throne. Then Allah
the Almighty had mercy on them and accepted their repentance. He created
for them the al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur on the 4th heaven. Allah appointed it as
the point of reference and safety for the inhabitants of the heavens. He
made the Holy Ka‘bah exactly below the al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur. And appointed
it the point of reference and place of reward and a safe sanctuary for
the people of the earth. It was for this reason that seven rounds of
Ka‘bah were made obligatory on people. For each thousand years of
Angels’ circumambulation, Allah made one round incumbent on men.’”[^3]

In reliable traditional reports Ja‘far as-Sadiq is believed to have
said, “The Angels expected corruption from human beings because they had
already witnessed a group that had spread corruption and bloodshed on
the Earth.”

Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in an authentic tradition when people inquired from
him the Tafsir of the Verse. “And He taught Adam all their names.” And
asked him regarding the names taught to Adam:  
 “The names of lands, mountains, seas valleys.” Then Imam pointed to the
mat he was sitting on and said “This mat was also mentioned in it.”  
 In another reliable tradition Imam says, “Allah taught Adam the names
of valley passes, grasses, trees and mountains.”

According to reliable and good chains of narrators Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir was asked the interpretation of the ayah,

***So when I have made him complete and breathed into him of My spirit,
fall down making obeisance to him. (15:29)***

Imam said that it was a soul that Allah created. Then He exalted it in
status and associated it with Himself. He gave it superiority over all
other souls. Then He ordered that this spirit be blown into Adam.

In another authentic hadith people asked Imam how the spirit was blown
into Adam  
 Imam says that the spirit is moves like breeze. That is the reason that
it is known as ‘Ruh’ derived from ‘Reeh’ (breeze). It is a kind of
breeze. Allah referred to it as His spirit because he bestowed it
superiority over other spirits. Just as He prefers Ka‘bah to all houses
and refers to it as ‘My House’ and mentions one of His Prophets as ‘My
Khalil’. All these creatures and things are Created and brought into
existence by Him and trained by Him.

One tradition from Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that the ‘Ruh’ mentioned in this
ayah refers to ‘Power’.  
 In another reliable chain when people asked Imam the Tafsir of the
concerned ayah he said, “The Almighty created a being and created a
soul. He ordered an Angel to blow this soul into that body. This does
not belittle Allah’s Might.

Sajdah for Adam as described in the Holy Qur’anSajdah for Adam as
described in the Holy Qur’anSajdah for Adam as described in the Holy
Qur’anSajdah for Adam as described in the Holy Qur’anSajdah for Adam as
described in the Holy Qur’anSajdah for Adam as described in the Holy
Qur’anSajdah for Adam as described in the Holy Qur’anSajdah for Adam as
described in the Holy Qur’anSajdah for Adam as described in the Holy
Qur’an  
 Allah says in the Holy Qur’an,

***“They said, Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but that which
Thou hast taught us; surely Thou art the Knowing, the Wise.” (2:32)***  
 In another place he says,  
***And certainly We created you, then We fashioned you, then We said to
the angels: Make obeisance to Adam. So they did obeisance except Iblis;
he was not of those who did obeisance.***  
***He said, What hindered you so that you did not make obeisance when I
commanded you? He said, I am better than he: Thou hast created me of
fire, while him Thou didst create of dust.***  
***He said, Then get forth from this (state), for it does not befit you
to behave proudly therein. Go forth, therefore, surely you are of the
abject ones.***  
***He said, Respite me until the day when they are raised up.***  
***He said, Surely you are of the respited ones.***  
***He said, As Thou hast caused me to remain disappointed I will
certainly lie in wait for them in Thy straight path.***  
***Then I will certainly come to them from before them and from behind
them, and from their right and from their left; and Thou shalt not find
most of them thankful.***  
***He said, Get out of this (state), despised, driven away; whoever of
them will follow you, I will certainly fill hell with you all.
(7:11-18)***

In the third instance He says,

***And certainly We created man of clay that gives forth sound, of black
mud fashioned in shape. And the jinn We created before, of intensely hot
fire. And when your Lord said to the angels: Surely I am going to create
a mortal of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape. So when I have
made him complete and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down making
obeisance to him. So the angels made obeisance, all of them together,
But Iblis (did it not); he refused to be with those who made obeisance.
He said: O Iblis! what excuse have you that you are not with those who
make obeisance? He said: I am not such that I should make obeisance to a
mortal whom Thou hast created of the essence of black mud fashioned in
shape. He said: Then get out of it, for surely you are driven away: And
surely on you is curse until the day of judgment. He said: My Lord! then
respite me until the time when they are raised. He said: So surely you
are of the respited ones until the period of the time made known. He
said: My Lord! because Thou hast made life evil to me, I will certainly
make (evil) fair-seeming to them on earth, and I will certainly cause
them all to deviate except Thy servants from among them, the devoted
ones. He said: This is a right way with Me: Surely. as regards My
servants, you have no authority over them except those who follow you of
the deviators. (15:26-42)***

On the fourth occasion Allah says,

***And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam; they made
obeisance, but Iblis (did it not). He said, Shall I make obeisance to
him whom Thou hast created of dust?***  
***He said, Tell me, is this he whom Thou hast honored above me? If Thou
shouldst respite me to the day of resurrection, I will most certainly
cause his progeny to perish except a few.***  
***He said, Be gone! for whoever of them will follow you, then surely
hell is your recompense, a full recompense:***

***And beguile whomsoever of them you can with your voice, and collect
against them your forces riding and on foot, and share with them in
wealth and children, and hold out promises to them; and the Satan makes
not promises to them but to deceive:***  
***Surely (as for) My servants, you have no authority over them; and
your Lord is sufficient as a Protector.*** ***(17:61-65)***

Fifthly the Almighty, says,

***And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam; they made
obeisance but Iblis (did it not). He was of the jinn, so he transgressed
the commandment of his Lord. What! would you then take him and his
offspring for friends rather than Me, and they are your enemies? Evil is
(this) change for the unjust. (18:50)***

Sixth,

***When your Lord said to the angels; Surely I am going to create a
mortal from dust:***  
***So when I have made him complete and breathed into him of My spirit,
then fall down making obeisance to him.***  
***And the angels did obeisance, all of them,***  
***But not Iblis: he was proud and he was one of the unbelievers.***  
***He said: O Iblis! what prevented you that you should do obeisance to
him whom I created with My two hands? Are you proud or are you of the
exalted ones?***  
***He said: I am better than he; Thou hast created me of fire, and him
Thou didst create of dust.***  
***He said: Then get out of it, for surely you are driven away:***  
***And surely My curse is on you to the day of judgment.***  
***He said: My Lord! then respite me to the day that they are
raised.***  
***He said: Surely you are of the respited ones,***  
***Till the period of the time made known.***  
***He said: Then by Thy Might I will surely make them live an evil life,
all,***  
***Except Thy servants from among them, the purified ones.***  
***He said: The truth then is and the truth do I speak:***  
***That I will most certainly fill hell with you and with those among
them who follow you, all. (38:71-75)***

The above is the literal translation of Ayats. Now we shall present the
traditions of the Infallibles to explain the Qur’anic verses.

It is mentioned in the Tafsir of Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari that some
hypocrites asked the Holy Prophet, who is superior, ‘Ali or the
proximate Angels?” The Messenger of Allah said,

“The Angels of Allah achieved a high position due to the acceptance of
the Wilayah of Muhammad and ‘Ali. Indeed, those who love ‘Ali and keep
their heart pure from deceit, hatred, animosity and other sins, are
better and purer than the (proximate) angels. Allah ordered the Angels
to prostrate before Adam because they were under the impression that
Adam’s progeny will be inferior to them. Hence, Allah wanted to prove
them wrong in thinking thus. So He created Adam and taught him all the
names. Then He put them to the Angels and they failed to recognize the
ones whose names had seen taught to Adam. Allah then ordered Adam to
inform the Angels about the names so that the superiority of Adam’s
knowledge (and of his progeny consisting of the Holy Prophet and the
exalted servants) over that of the Angels’ is proved.

After this Almighty Allah brought out from Paradise the progeny of
Prophet and the righteous among his followers and introduced them to the
Angels. Those who would bear the responsibilities imposed upon them by
Allah. Who would have to keep aloof from the cohorts of Satan. Who shall
fight Jihad with the sensual desires and struggle to provide for their
families. In order to earn halal Sustenance they would pay no heed to
worldly people. They’ll face the intensity of perils. They’ll live in
fear of thieves, robbers and tyrant rulers that lay in wait for them on
the paths that they have to traverse for obtaining sustenance for their
family. They shall put their self into danger. They shall find release
from all these problems only after death. They shall fight with the
Shaitans and deflect them with the help of method taught by Allah,
through the suppression of carnal desires, sensuality, pomp and power,
food, dress, pride and arrogance etc. They shall bear patiently the
severity of the accursed Satan and his cohorts. They shall not be misled
by the Satanic instigations and the evil thoughts created in their
hearts by the Satan.

It would be necessary for them to be patient on the taunts and criticism
of Allah’s enemies, on the evil designs of the oppressors, on the
utterances of evil people. They shall have to be patient in difficulties
faced during requisition of their sustenance. They shall be patient in
confronting their enemies and have to bear the atrocities due to the
fact that they have to obtain from those of rival faiths.

Allah said, ‘O My Angels! You are free from all such responsibilities
and desires. Sexual desires do not trouble you. Hunger and thirst does
not instigate you to sin. You have no fear of enemies of religion and
world. Satans do not try to mislead you, either in Heaven or Hell.
Because I have protected you through infallibility. O Angels! Those who
obey Me (in spite of their carnal desires and instigation of Satan) and
protect their faith in spite of difficulties and problems, are qualified
to bear some responsibilities in the path of My hujjah. You (angels) are
not qualified for that. They shall achieve nearness to Me due to the
difficulties they bear, that you cannot.

Imam says that Allah explained to the Angels the superiority of the
Ummah of Muhammad the Shi‘ahs of ‘Ali and the righteous among their
successors. Allah mentioned the trials and tribulations that they shall
go through the love of their Lord. The Angels could not attain this
position. The Almighty distinguished the righteous people of Adam’s
progeny over the Angels and they were ordered to prostrate before Adam.

Actually the Angels who are created from Divine luminescence and are the
best of creations did not prostrate to Adam. Adam was merely the Kiblah
(direction for prayers). The Angels prostrated to Almighty Allah. When
Allah commanded, all of them turned to Adam to prostrate before him due
to his exalted position and respect. Because it is not permitted to
prostrate before anybody and anything with such devotion and humility as
one would bow to Allah.

Imam says, “If it had been permitted to prostrate before anyone in
addition to Allah I would have ordered my ignorant and less
knowledgeable Shi‘ahs to prostrate before the scholars who had put in
great efforts to master the knowledge of the Prophet and his successors.
The scholars who were sincerely devoted to Amir al-Mu’minin, the best of
creatures after Muhammad The scholars who had borne difficulties in
order to unravel religious laws bore afflictions due to their Shi‘ahs
faith. And they did not waver in their belief in our Wilayah.”

In the same Tafsir Imam remarked that when Imam al-Husayn was surrounded
by the forces of Yazid he told his followers that he was releasing them
from his allegiance. They could take shelter with their relatives,
tribesmen and friends. Imam al-Husayn told the male members of his
family that he was permitting them to leave him because they were few in
comparison their rivals. Enemies exceeded their companions and their
military strength was much greater. “I am their sole target,” explained
husayn, “They have nothing against anyone else. Leave me to the enemies,
the Almighty shall certainly help me. Allah shall not deprive me of His
Mercy. As had been His practice with my predecessors from the Prophets
and their legatees.”

Upon hearing this many people left Imam’s army but his close relatives
refused to budge. They said, “We shall never betray you. We shall bear
the same difficulties that you have to face. We shall face the same
tragedies as you would. Our position before the Almighty lies in the
fact that we remain in you service.”

Chief of the Martyrs (Sayyid-ush-Shohda) said, “If you have left your
fate to the One on Whom I have, then know that Allah does not exalt the
Station of any creature fill he has been subjected to trials and
tribulations. Although Allah has bestowed me with all the merits as
bestowed on my ancestors, but in spite of this it is necessary to bear
the difficulties. You shall share the rewards that I gain. Know that the
world is like those sweet and sour things that one sees in dream. The
awakening is in the Hereafter. Successful are those who succeeds in the
Hereafter. Wretched is one who remains deprived in the Hereafter. O my
Shi‘ahs! My friends and supporters! Shall I inform you first of the
affair that it becomes easy for you to bear the imminent hardships?”  
 “Yes, O Son of the Messenger of Allah ” replied all of them.

Imam al-Husayn said, “Indeed the Almighty Allah created Adam and taught
him all the names and presented him to the Angels. And placed the five
beings of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn in the loins of
Adam. Although their divine lights had already existed in the heavens
and were veiled in the vicinity of the Holy Throne. Allah ordered the
Angels to prostrate to Adam as a mark of respect. Because he had the
virtue of being the carrier of the purified lights of those whose
brilliance had enveloped the horizons. All the Angels prostrated except
Iblis. He refused to respect of our lights that had been placed in
Adam’s body. Although the Angels relented to our exalted states Iblis
refused due to arrogance and pride (of a disbeliever).”

‘Ali Ibnul husayn says, “My respected father has related through his
respected father from the Messenger of Allah that he said, ‘O Servants
of Allah! (O People!) When the Almighty Allah transferred our lights
from the Holy Throne to the backbone to Adam, he (Adam) saw a bright
incandescent light emanating from his back. He asked, “O Allah! What are
these lights?” Allah said, ‘These are some personalities whom I have
transferred from the best place in the Holy Throne to your backbone. It
is due to the greatness of these personalities that I ordered the angels
to prostrate before you. For you are the carrier of there
personalities.’ Adam said, ‘O my Lord! It would have been better if you
had made these personalities apparent for me.’ Allah told him to look at
the Divine Throne. When Adam looked towards the Holy Throne our lights
emerged from his backbone and began to shine brightly. There the faces
of our ethereal bodies were hidden. Just as a person can clearly see his
face in the mirror Adam saw the lights on the Holy Throne. He asked what
was the appearance or shape of our bodies (faces).”

Allah said, “These are the best of creatures and they have been created
by Me. This is Muhammad and I am Praiseworthy (hamid) and Praised
(Mahmud). Because whatever I do for my creatures deserves praise. I have
named him as a derivative of one of My names. This is ‘Ali and I am
A’laa and A’zeem (High and Great). This name (‘Ali) is also a form of
one of My names. This is Fatimah and I am Fatir (originator) of the
Earth and the Heavens. This Fatimah shall separate My enemies from My
Mercy on the Resurrection Day and she shall remove the defects from my
devotees. That is why I named her with conjugation of My Quality. This
is Hasan and Husayn and I am Mohsin (One who does Ahsaan-goodness). I
have given them names related to this little of Mine because they are my
exalted creation and the most honored. I shall accept My worship only
through their channel and through them would I bestow salvation to My
creatures. Through them shall I punish and reward. O Adam! Approach Me
through their mediation. If a detestable action is committed by you,
seek forgiveness through their intercession. Because I have vowed not to
reject anyone who petitions Me through them. I shall not spurn anyone
who prays for forgiveness through their intercession.” When Adam
committed *Tark al-Awla*, he prayed for Divine forgiveness through them
and was forgiven.

According to an authentic source Imam Musa Ibn Ja‘far said, “A Jew came
to Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali and requested him to show a miracle like the
Prophets of the past had shown. He asked, “Was it due to the lofty
position of Muhammad that Almighty Allah ordered the angels to prostrate
before Adam?”

‘Ali said, “That’s right. But their prostrations were not those of
worship. The Angels did not worship Adam. Their prostration was an
acknowledgement of respect for Adam due to his extraordinary virtues.”

It was Divine Mercy for Adam that was bestowed through Muhammad who was
superior to him. Indeed, the Almighty Allah sent benedictions upon them
in His heavenly Majesty and all the Angels followed suit. The believers
were also commanded to recite Salawaat for them. Thus his status was
higher than that of Adam himself.

Authentic chains quote Imam al-Ridha from his ancestors from Amir
al-Mu’minin ‘Ali that the Holy Prophet said, “The Almighty Allah has
exalted His Prophets and Messengers over the Angels, and He is has
exalted me over the other Prophets and Messengers. And after me you ‘Ali
and the Imams from your progeny have been exalted over the other people.
Then he said, “The Almighty Allah created Adam and entrusted us to his
backbone. Then Allah commanded the Angels to bow down as a mark of
respect. But their prostration denoted Allah’s worship and obedience and
an acknowledgement of Adam’s exalted position. It was a Sajdah of
obedience because we were in his (Adam’s) loins. Thus how could we not
be superior to the Angels? While they all prostrated to Adam.[^4]

In an authentic tradition a person asked Ja‘far as-Sadiq whether it was
allowed to do Sajdah to someone other than Allah.  
 “Certainly not!” replied Imam “Then how Allah the Almighty Commanded
the Angels to prostrate before Adam?”

Imam said, “One who prostrates in compliance with Divine Commands,
prostrates for Allah.”  
 The enquired then asked about Iblis. Imam explained, “Iblis was a
creature whom the Almighty had created that he may worship Him and
confess to His Oneness. Although Allah knew what Iblis actually was and
what was to be his final end. Iblis worshipped Allah in the ranks of the
Angels. Till the time he was tested by Adam’s Sajdah. He refused to do
Sajdah due to jealousy and evil that overpowered him. Allah cursed him
and drove him out of the ranks of Angels. Allah made him an outcast and
sent him to the earth. Iblis became an avowed enemy of Adam and his
progeny. He has no authority upon the children of Adam except that he
makes evil suggestions to them and deviate them from Allah’s path. In
spite of such a disobedience he is a believer in Allah’s sovereignty.”  
 Another reliable report mentions that Abu-Basir asked Ja‘far as-Sadiq
“Did the Angels perform Adam’s Sajdah by putting their foreheads on the
ground?”  
 “Yes”, replied Imam “This was a distinction granted to Adam.”

Imam ‘Ali an-Naqi says in another reliable tradition that the Sajdah of
Angels was not for Adam. It was a sign of their compliance to the Divine
Commands. It was a proof (hujjah) from them to Adam  
 A correct chain of narrators from Ja‘far as-Sadiq mentions that he
said, “When Allah the Almighty commanded Satan to bow down before Adam
he said ‘If you excuse me from Adam’s Sajdah I shall worship you with
such fervor as no one has ever worshipped before.’

The Almighty said, “I want to be worshipped in a way *I* prefer.  
 Ja‘far as-Sadiq says in another reliable tradition that when the
Almighty ordered the Angels to perform Adam’s Sajdah, all of them obeyed
but Iblis refused due to the jealousy that afflicted his heart. Allah
was enraged and He asked him what prevented him.

Iblis said, “I am better than Adam because you created me from fire and
him from clay.” Imam said, “The first one to draw analogy (Qiyas) was
Satan. He was proud. That was the first sin. He said, ‘O Lord! Exempt me
from Adam’s Sajdah, and I will perform your worship in a way that not
even a proximate angel or a Messenger Prophet has done.” Allah said, ‘I
am not in need of your worship acts. I want my servants to worship Me in
the way *I* prefer and not as they like.’ Get out of the heaven, you are
the rejected one. You are cursed until the Resurrection Day. Iblis said,
“O Allah You are not unjust, so who do You deprive me of the rewards
that I deserve for my worship?” Allah said, “Ask whatever you wish.” The
first thing that Iblis asked was to be able to live until the
Resurrection Day. Allah allowed him.

Then he asked for the power to subdue the sons of Adam. Allah agreed. He
said, “Authorize me over the people and grant me the ability to
penetrate them like blood that circulates in the body.” Allah agreed. He
said, “If they have one child, I will urge them for more. A child for
them and two for me. I can see them but they cannot see me. I will put
them in trouble in every way, at every time.” Allah said, “I have given
you all these powers.” He said, “O, Sustainer! This is enough for me. I
swear by Your glory. I will make them to follow the wrong path and
perform bad deeds except your true believers. I will put them in all
kinds of difficulties from left, right, from front and behind. And they
will be the ungrateful to You.”

According to another tradition he will put them in trouble from front
means he will make the people doubtful about the day of judgment. He
says, “There is no heaven, no hell. Everything is present here, whether
good or bad. From behind means that he makes the people busy in worldly
life and prevents them from good deeds like, looking after their
children, worshipping Allah etc. He confuses them in worldly matters.
Trouble from the right side denotes the pain a disbeliever gives to the
believers and from the left means he makes the people busy in enjoyment
etc.

According to reliable sources Imam has stated that Allah strengthened
Iblis and granted him all his desires. Prophet Adam asked, “O! Allah,
You gave him power over my children and allowed him to control their
mind and heart and penetrate every cell of their bodies. But what will
you grant to my sons?” Allah said, “A single good deed will be counted
as ten and one sin will be count as one sin only.” Prophet Adam said,
“Grant something more than this.” Allah said, “I will accept their
repentance until their last breath.” Prophet Adam said, “Grant something
more.” Allah said, “I will forgive their sins and will overlook their
evil deeds.” Prophet Adam said, “This is enough for me.” The narrator
asked Imam, “May I be sacrificed for you, explain to me why Allah has
granted Iblis the authority on the people’s heart and mind?” Imam said,
“He recited a two Rak‘ah prayer in standing position and performed it in
four thousand years.”

According to another reliable source Prophet Adam prayed to Allah, “You
have authorized Iblis on my children and on me. He has the power to
control the mind and heart and is also in blood. What do you say about
me? What is your order?” Allah said, “If anyone intends to do evil, his
sin will not count and if he intends to do virtuous deed but does not do
it, then only his reward will be counted.” Prophet Adam said, “Grant us
more.” Allah said, “If anyone of you does wrong and repent for it, I
will forgive the sin.” Prophet Adam said, “Increase Your favor.” Allah
said that He would accept their repentance until the last breath.”
Prophet Adam said that was enough for him.

There are different views regarding whether Iblis was from the Angels or
not? According to some views, he was not from Angels but belonged to the
Jinn community. Some scholars say that he was from the Angels but
actually he lived with the Angels and performed Allah’s worship with
them. Jamil asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq whether Iblis was from the
community of Angels or jinn? Imam said, “Angels were thinking that he
was from them but when he was asked to make obeisance to Prophet Adam,
he refused.”

Regarding this matter, Jamil, the narrator, asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq
if Iblis was an angel or a caretaker of some heavenly affair? Imam said,
“He was not an angel but the angels thought he was one of them. He was
not connected to any heavenly affair and neither commanded any special
position. The Jamil went to Tiyar and told him what Imam has said. He
said, “How this is possible. If Iblis were not from the Angels when
Allah ordered the Angels to bow down, the command was not applicable for
him. He cannot be said to have disobeyed when the order was not meant
for him in the first place.” Tiyar himself came to Imam and asked, “When
Allah mentions the group of believers, does it also include some
hypocrites?”

Imam replied, “Hypocrites are deviated people and all those who make an
outward show of faith. All are included in this.”  
 Abu-Sa‘id asked the Holy Prophet Muhammad about Iblis. Prophet Muhammad
said, Allah says in Qur’an:

***“He said, O Iblis! What prevented from paying obeisance to one that I
created? Are you proud or one of the exalted ones?” (38:75)***

The narrator asked the Holy Prophet who were superior than Angels.
Prophet Muhammad replied: They are ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn. And
two, thousand years before Prophet Adam they were at Allah’s empyrean
glorifying Allah. Hearing them, the angels also repeated. When Allah,
the Almighty created Adam and asked His angels to bow to Adam it was not
an obeisance to Adam alone. All the angels prostrated except Satan.
Allah said, “Are you proud or are you of the exalted ones?” That means
the five names of five exalted persons were written on the curtain of
empyrean.  
 According to another tradition from the Holy Prophet has stated when
Iblis refused to make obeisance to Adam he was expelled from the
heavens. Then Allah asked Adam to go to the angels and salute them.
Allah taught Adam to say *Salaamo A’lakum wa Rah’matullahe wa
barakaatoh.* Adam went to them and saluted. The angels saluted him in
return. When Adam returned to his place, Allah said, “This salutation is
recommended for you and your community until the day of judgment.”

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that Satan was the first one to think
that he was better than Adam and said that Allah had created him from
fire and Adam from dust. If he had compared his fire with the matter
from which the spirit of Adam was created he would have certainly found
it hotter.  
 Another tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq states that the first one to
fall a prey to vanity was Satan when he said:

“I am better than he; Thou hast created me of fire, and him Thou didst
create of dust.”  
 If he had compared Adam ’s brilliance with that of his own fire he
would have found that Adam’s brilliance was more than that of his own
fire. [^5]  
 According to a reliable tradition from Imam ‘Ali the first prayer was
performed on the land behind al-Kufah. Today it is known as
Najaf-ul-Ashraf and by the order of the Almighty, Angels made obeisance
on the same land. From a reliable tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq the
first profanity was when Allah created Adam and Satan became a
unbeliever and refused to obey the command of Allah. The first jealousy
was manifested between Habil and Qabil. The first instance of greed was
when Adam tasted the forbidden tree even though he had access to all
other fruits of Paradise. This greed caused him to be expelled from
Paradise.

According to the same Imam, Satan asked Allah to respite him until the
appointed hour and Allah agreed. That is the day when Prophet Muhammad
will crush him below the stone of Jerusalem.  
 According to another tradition that Imam asked Ishaq bin Jarir that
what his companions’ opinion regarding the claim of Iblis that Allah
created him from fire and Adam from dust? He said, “May I be sacrificed
for you. It is as Allah declared in Qur’an.” Imam said, “Iblis lied. O
Ishaq, Allah created him from dust and not from fire. Allah says that He
created fire from a green tree and created Iblis from that fire. But the
origin of that tree is dust. Allah has created the world from dust.”

In another tradition it is mentioned that in Satan the component of fire
was more than that of dust.  
 Sayyid Ibn Tawus has quoted from the book of Idris that when Satan
asked Allah for respite until day of judgment, Allah said, “No, you will
be spared, until the appointed hour. It is the time when I have decreed
purge the earth of polytheism, disbelief and sin and evil. For this I
will select some whom I would have tested for firmness of belief; and
piety, sincerity, belief, abstemiousness. They eagerly await the day of
judgment. They have a true belief regarding the Resurrection Day. They
are my devotees and friends. I have created for them a great Prophet and
they shall be his helpers. I have kept the day of their appearance a
secret. Surely, that day will came and on that day you and your
followers will perish. Now, get out from here until the appointed time.”

Then Allah told Adam to open his eyes and see the Angels standing before
him. “They have made obeisance to you. Salute them with the words *“As
salaamo a’laikum wa rahmatullahe wa* *barakaatoh.”* Adam came to them
and saluted. Angels returned his salutations, *Wa a’laika yaa aadamo wa
rahmatullahe was barakaatoh*.

Allah said, “O, Adam! This is a salutation for you and your children
until the Resurrection Day.” Then Allah brought out his offspring from
the backbone and took the covenant of His oneness. Prophet Adam saw a
group from his progeny, bright and brilliant and hee asked who they
were. Allah said, “They are the apostles from your offspring.” Adam
asked their number and Allah responded, “They are One hundred and twenty
four thousand. Among them are three hundred and fifteen Prophets.” Adam
asked, “Who is the last of them and who looks more luminous than
others?”

Allah said, “He is Muhammad My Messenger, My trustworthy, My beloved and
My friend, My chosen one and most exalted of My creatures. He is My
favorite and one who has recognized more than anyone else. He is the
best with regard to forbearance, knowledge, faith, belief,
righteousness, worship, humility, piety and obedience. I have taken an
oath from the bearers of the throne and those who are below that they
believe in him and recognize his Prophethood. O, Adam! You also believe
in him, so that your status and respect increases.”

Prophet Adam said, “I believe in Allah and His Prophet.” Allah said, “O,
Adam I have exalted your respect and appointed you as the first Prophet.
And your son Muhammad is the seal of the Prophets and Messengers. He is
the one for whom I created and the heavens and the Earth, and he will be
the first to arrive on the day of judgment. The angels shall clothe him
in heavenly garments and bring him astride a horse. He would be the
first person to intercede and his intercession will be accepted. He will
be first person for whom the doors of Heaven will be opened and he will
enter first. O, Adam! Your patronymic is from him. You are Abu Muhammad,
the Father of human beings.” Adam said, “Praise be to Allah. I am very
grateful to Him, that He created such a personality from my offspring
who would be the first to enter Paradise. And I am not jealous of him.”

Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari has stated that when Iblis disobeyed Allah, He
cursed him and exalted the Angels who made obeisance to Adam. Allah
ordered them to take Adam and his wife Hawwa’ to the Garden. Allah
mentions in Qur’an:

***“And We said, O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the garden and eat
from it a plenteous (food) wherever you wish and do not approach this
tree or you will be of the unjust?” (2:35)***

Allah ordered Prophet Adam and Hawwa’ not to approach the tree because
it was the tree of knowledge of Prophet Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad. Because they are specially selected for this tree. No one is
allowed to eat from this tree except them.

And ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn distributed their food to poor,
orphans and prisoners and themselves fasted for three days at a stretch
and ate with the Prophet. Whatever was made available to him was sent
from this very tree. Allah sent the Qur’anic Verses (Hal Ata) by
revelation and sent for them food from heaven. After having this food,
they never felt hunger and thirst. That tree was more eminent than other
trees because different kinds of trees produce different kinds of fruits
but this tree was producing every kind of fruits and grains like wheat,
grapes, figs, jujube and many other things.

That is the reason that scholars hold different views about this tree.
Some say, it was a wheat tree. According to some it was a grapevine.
Some think it was a jujube tree. Allah said, “Do not go near that tree
because it you may vie the status of Muhammad and his progeny.” That is
beause Allah has chosen them as His favorites. If anyone were to eat
from that tree by permission of Allah, he would be given the knowledge
of divine revelation. If anyone eats by his own will, he would be
disappointed and hopeless and would have disobeyed Allah. Allah says
clearly regarding this tree:

***“And do not approach this tree or you will be of the unjust?”
(2:35)***

That is, if you disobey in this matter you would fall into degradation.

***But the Satan made them both fall from it, (2.36)***

Satan began to make evil suggestion to them and said,

***“Your Lord has not forbidden you this tree except that you may not
both become two angels or that you may (not) become of the immortals.”
(7:20)***

***“And he swore to them both: Most surely I am a sincere adviser to
you.” (2:21)***

The Satan entered the Garden by hiding in the serpent’s mouth. Adam
thought the serpent was speaking to him. Initially Adam rejected his
suggestion and said, “O serpent! This is Satan’s suggestion. How can
Allah deceive us? Why do you swear of Allah? You say that Allah deceives
us yet you say that you are a sincere adviser to us? You know very well
that Allah is Kind and Merciful. Allah has forbidden me not to approach
the tree without His permission, so how can I do so?” The Satan was
disappointed and again he entered the garden with the help of a serpent.
Hiding in its mouth he met Hawwa’ the wife of Adam and spoke to her. She
thought the serpent was speaking. Satan said, “O Hawwa’! Allah had
forbidden you to approach the tree but now He has made it legitimate for
you because you have obeyed His orders faithfully. The angels are
appointed to guard this tree and protect it from the beasts, it will not
prevent you if you approach it. Then you can rest assured that it has
become legitimate for you. If you taste the fruit before Adam you will
subdue him and rule over him.”

Hawwa’ looked towards the tree. The angels tried to prevent her, but
Allah revealed to them, “A person who has been given the knowledge but
disobeys My orders is repelled from here. Let them do whatever they
like. I have told them if they obey My orders I will be pleased and if
they disobey, they would deserve My punishment.” So the angels did not
come forward to prevent them. Hawwa’ thought that Allah has ordered His
angels not to prevent them from eating from the tree and made the tree
legitimate for them, and that this serpent has been a true advisor.

Hawwa’ ate the fruit and did not feel any change in herself. She
narrated everything to Adam who was also deceived and he too tasted the
forbidden tree. As soon as he ate from it he was driven out of the
Garden. Allah says in Qur’an:

***“But the Satan made them both fall from it, and caused them to depart
from that (state) in which they were; and We said, Get forth some of you
being the enemies of others, and there is for you in the earth an abode
and a provision for a time.” (2:36)***

Then He says:

***“Then Adam received (some) words (Archangel Gabriel taught Adam to
ask forgiveness of Allah for the sake of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan
and Husayn) from his Lord, so He turned to him mercifully; He is oft
returning (to mercy), the Merciful.” (2:37)***

***“We said, Go forth from this (state) all.” (2:38)***

Imam explains that Allah ordered Adam, Hawwa’, Satan and the serpent to
go away together and not one by one. The serpent was better than other
animals and the Satan came down on the earth by the side of heaven as it
was unlawful for him to enter the heaven.

Finally Allah says,

***“So surely there will come to you a guidance from Me, then whoever
follows My guidance, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they
grieve.” (2:38)***

Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari has stated that when Allah accepted Adam’s
repentance, Prophet Adam requested the Almighty that He accept his
repentance and grant him the same position as before. Indeed their evil
inclinations became manifest to them. Then Allah said, “O Adam! You
didn’t remember My Order, seek My help by the sake of Muhammad and his
family.” Prophet Adam said that he had forgotten. Allah said, “Implore
Me by the names of Muhammad ‘Ali Fatimah Hasan and Husayn, and I will
accept your prayer.” Prophet Adam said, “O Allah, the Sustainer! For the
sake of your five noble followers accept my prayer and forgive my
mistake. I am your first Prophet and your angels made obeisance to me
and you appointed the angels for my service.” Allah said, “O Adam! I
ordered the angels to make obeisance to you because you were the vessel
of their lights. If you had implored Me through their names I would have
kept you safe from disobedience and warned you of the deception of
Iblis. But whatever I had anticipated has occurred. Now, pray to Me so
that I accept your request.

Prophet Adam prayed to Allah with the names of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah,
Hasan and Husayn and asked Him for forgiveness. Allah was pleased with
him and said that his repentance was accepted. Imam has stated that
Allah taught him the five auspicious names. Then Allah told Prophet Adam
and Hawwa’, the serpent and the Satan, “There are provisions for you on
the earth and you will be happy on the earth until you die.” Allah has
created the fruits, flowers and vegetables for them, to make them happy
and do good deeds for the hereafter. Sometimes Allah puts His believers
in trial by subjecting them to difficulties and disease. Allah bestows
all the bounties as rewards and it is not possible to get all the
benefits without toiling for them. The bounties of the hereafter are
much better than worldly life. Allah tests us by pain and difficulties
so that we would be aware of the punishment of the Resurrection Day when
there shall be no relief.[^6]

The Almighty Allah says,

***“And We said, O Adam! dwell you and your wife in the garden and eat
from it a plenteous (food) where ever you wish and do not approach this
tree, then you will be of the unjust.” (2:35)***

However Satan put them in doubt. He wanted them to become conscious of
their sexuality. He said, “Allah has forbidden for you this tree so that
you may not become angels and stay in the heaven forever.” And he swore
to them that he was a sincere advisor. In this way Satan deceived them
and Adam could not refuse him. Satan convinced them to taste the
forbidden tree. When they tasted their heavenly garments vanished and
they became nude. They tried to cover their nudity with leaves. Allah
said, “Did I not forbid you that tree? Did I not warn you that Satan is
your avowed enemy? Adam said, “Our Lord! We had been unjust on
ourselves. If You do not have Mercy upon us and do not forgive us, we
shall be of the losers.” The Almighty told him to leave the Paradise and
dwell on the Earth:

***Get forth some of you being the enemies of others, and there is for
you in the earth an abode and a provision for a time.” (2:37)***

Allah said that they will have to stay on the Earth until they die and
will be raised from here on the day of judgment.

At another occasion Allah said, (7:27)

***“O, Son of Adam! Do not follow the wrong path. Your parents were
expelled from heaven and were deprived of their heavenly garments, that
their private parts became apparent. We took promise from Adam but he
did not keep it. When We asked the angels to make obeisance to Adam;
they obeyed. But Satan disobeyed. We told Adam that Satan is your open
enemy and would cause you to be expelled from Paradise and as a result
you will have to face troubles and difficulties. The Garden is the best
place for you. You will be free from thirst and hunger, and you will not
be naked. You shall remain in shade.”***

***But the Satan misguided him and said, ‘Shall I show you the way to
the eternal tree? One who tastes the fruit of this tree, becomes
immortal, he never dies. His kingdom and kingship never decline.’ Thus
they tasted the fruit from that tree and at once became nude. They began
to cover themselves with leaves. They disobeyed Allah’s order and
followed the wrong path. Allah forgave them and accepted their
repentance and asked them to leave the Garden. He said, “Go to the earth
and some of you shall be enemies of others. If any apostle comes to you,
believe him. He will guide you against evil. If anyone will believe in
Me, he will be free from the wrath. If not, he will be deserving the
chastisement.”***

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has stated that the people asked Imam regarding the
verse

***O you who believe! Obey Allah and His Apostle and do not turn back
from Him while you hear. (8:20)***

Imam said, “The private parts of Adam and Hawwa’ were covered, that is,
they were not apparent outwardly, but when they tasted the fruit, they
became visible.” The tree forbidden by Allah, were the ears of wheat and
according to another report, it was a grapevine.

People asked Imam al-Baqir regarding the verse of Qur’an:

***“and do not approach this tree,” (2:35)***

Imam replied that Allah meant to say that they should not partake the
fruit of that tree.  
 Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi has stated that the tree forbidden to Adam was the
tree of jealousy. Allah took the oath from Adam and Hawwa’ that they
will not be jealous of those who were more exalted to them and to all
the creatures. But Allah did not find Adam firm in this.  
 People asked Imam Muhammad al-Baqir regarding the verse from Qur’an:

***And certainly We gave a commandment to Adam before, but he forgot;
and We did not find in him any determination. (20:115)***

And that according to some people Adam forgot the commands of Allah?
Imam said, “ How could Adam have forgotten when Satan himself said that
Allah has told them not to touch the tree for they might become angels
or immortals? Actually Adam followed Satan’s evil suggestion and
disregarded the command of Allah. Here forgetfulness denotes disregard.”

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has related from Prophet Muhammad that Prophet Musa
prayed to Allah to meet Prophet Adam. When they met he said, “Are you
the same whom Allah has created by His own hands? And when you became
alive, Allah asked the angels to make obeisance to you and decorated the
heaven for you and spoke to you. He forbade you to eat from the tree but
you were not patient and thus expelled you from the heaven. You could
not control yourself because of the Satan’s evil suggestion and obeyed
him and for this reason we are on the earth?”

Prophet Adam replied, “O Son! Be kind with your father and try to
understand about the tree. Satan was my enemy. He came to me and
deceived me and swore by Allah that he was my sincere advisor and that
he was one of my true friends and a well-wisher. He said that he was
very unhappy for me. When I asked him the reason he said it was due to
his attachment to me that he felt very sorry that I would be expelled to
the earth, which I did not like. I asked what I should do. Satan said
that, he would show me the eternal tree and said if anyone ate from it,
he will be immortal and his kingdom will never be destroyed. If I and
Hawwa’ ate from it, we both would remain in heaven with him. He swore
that he was my well-wisher. I never knew one could take a false oath and
considered his oath true.” Then he said, “Tell me, Has Allah, the
exalted, sent to you something (Torah)? Did you find a mention of my
creation and mistake revealed this book? Musa said, “Yes, the holy book
Torah had been written a long time ago.” The Holy Prophet said thrice:
The argument of Adam was exhausted on Musa.

According to an acceptable tradition of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq: Adam asked
Musa, “O Musa! How many years before my creation did you see my sin
mentioned in the Torah?” “Thirty years” replied Musa. “It is enough,”
said Adam. Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that Adam overcame Musa’s
argument.[^7]

According to a reliable tradition people asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq how
long did Adam and Hawwa’ remain in the heaven and when were they
expelled? Imam said, “It was Friday at sunset, Adam came to life and
Allah created his wife Hawwa’ from his last rib. Then Allah ordered His
angels to make obeisance to Adam They all did. By Allah, Prophet Adam
did not stay in heaven for more than six hours. And they both were
expelled at sunset. They passed their night out of heaven until morning.
Their heavenly clothes vanished and they became nude. They felt ashamed
and prayed to Allah with tearful eyes and asked for forgiveness and
said, “We are guilty. We confess our fault.” Allah ordered them to go
down from the heavens as guilty people cannot stay there with Him in the
heavens.” When Prophet Adam tasted the fruit from the tree he remembered
Allah’s prohibition and became very sad but when he tried to move away
from it, the tree caught his head and pulled him near by the permission
of Allah and asked why he had touched it? Imam has narrated that the
private parts of the body were concealed but when they ate from the tree
they became apparent.

In another tradition Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq states that the spirits were
created two thousand years before the bodies. Allah created the exalted
souls of Prophet Muhammad ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn and after
them the souls of all Imams. Then Allah sent all these souls on the
skies the lands and the mountains. All of them became ashamed by their
brightness. Allah told the heavens, earth and the mountains, “They are
My true friends and confidants and they are the leaders of all. I have
not created anyone like them. Paradise is for those who believe in them,
and the fire of hell is for those who disbelieve in my communications
and those who claim to be like them. I shall send a severe wrath upon
them and they will be sent to the bottom of the hell. Those who accept
their leadership and friendship, will be given a place in the Garden and
will get what they desire. I will make them stay with the righteous
ones. Their friendship is a security for life. Who shall volunteer to
accept their Wilayah as trust? The mountains, the skies and the land
feared Allah and declined to take the charge.

Almighty Allah told Adam and Hawwa’ to dwell in the Garden and eat
whatever and wherever they desire but not the wheat plant, otherwise
they would be of the unjust. Adam and Hawwa’ beheld the dignity of
Prophet Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn and other Imams. They
saw their great status in the heaven. They asked Allah when He had
bestowed them with such dignity. Allah said, “Raise your head towards my
empyrean (the Holy Throne) and see.” They raised their heads and saw the
names of Muhammad ‘Ali, Fatimah, hasan, husayn and other Imams on the
Holy Throne.

Adam asked, “O Allah! Why are these names so respectable to you?” Allah
said, “I have created you and the universe because of them. They are My
honest and faithful treasurers. Do not be jealous at them and do not vie
their great status otherwise you will be one the disbelievers and
unjust.” Adam asked Allah to show their condition in hell. Allah ordered
hell to show him the different kinds of chastisements and said that
their abode is in the depths of hell. If they try to come out the guards
push them back. When their skin is burnt, a new skin is created for
them, that they can taste the chastisement again. “O Adam and Hawwa’! Do
not be jealous of them otherwise you will be out from My vicinity and
will be sent to the earth; and there you will suffer a lot.” Satan put
them in doubt and they went to the tree.

Thus Allah expelled them. They ate some grains from that tree and their
heavenly clothes and jewels separated from their bodies leaving them
naked. They covered their private parts with leaves. Allah revealed to
him that He had forbidden them to eat from that tree and had said that
Satan was their open enemy. So they lamented,

***“Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves, and if Thou forgive us
not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers.”
(7:23)***

Allah ordered them to go away from His Presence. Those who disobey His
orders cannot stay in the heavens so Allah sent them to the earth. When
the Merciful Allah wanted to forgive him, He sent Archangel Gabriel to
them. He came and said, “Certainly, you are the losers by disobeying the
order. Now recite the names that are written on the Holy Throne for
forgiveness and pray to Allah to accept your repentance.” Adam prayed to
Allah, “For the sake of Muhammad ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn accept
my prayer and have mercy on me.” Allah forgave him as He is Kind and
Merciful. After that Adam memorized the names of the Holy Five and also
informed the people of his community.

Allah says in Qur’an,

***“Surely We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to be unfaithful to it and feared from it,
and man has turned unfaithful to it; surely he is unjust, ignorant.”
(32:72)***

According to a reliable tradition, people asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq why
the inheritance of a male is twice that of a female? Imam replied, “Adam
and Hawwa’ picked up eighteen grains. Adam ate twelve and Hawwa’ ate six
grains. Therefore the inheritance of a male is twice that of female.”  
 In another hadith, Imam ‘Ali has stated that there were three grains.
Adam ate two and Hawwa’ ate one. However the first tradition is more
reliable. It is possible that it may be a bunch of grapes and from the
bunch, Adam and Hawwa’ ate three grapes.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says, “If Adam had not committed that mistake the
believers would have been free from mistakes too. If Allah had not
accepted his repentance, He would not have accepted the repentance of
other people.”

According to reliable sources Abul-Salt al-Harawi asked Imam al-Ridha
about the tree that Adam and Hawwa’ had tasted, because there were
different views about it. According to another tradition, it was a wheat
pod and one more tradition indicates it was a malicious tree. Imam said,
“Both traditions are true.” “How can it be?” asked Abu’l-Salt. Imam
said, “The tree bore all kinds of fruits. It was a wheat pod. It was an
auspicious tree not an ordinary one. When Allah, the Almighty exalted
Adam and asked His angels to make obeisance, they obeyed. Then Adam
entered Paradise. He thought that Allah has not created anyone like him?
But Allah knew his thoughts, as He is Knowing and Hearing.

Allah revealed to him, ‘O Adam! Raise your head and look at My
empyrean.’ Adam raised his head and beheld some names on it. Adam asked,
‘Who are they?’ Allah said, ‘They are from your offspring and are much
better than others. I have not created the heavens, the earth, and the
hell, but only out of love for these five Honorable beings, I have
created you and all creatures for them. Do not be jealous of them
otherwise you will be deprived of My bounties.’ But due to Satan’s
instigation Adam desired for his high status and ate the fruit that was
forbidden by Allah. Satan overcame Hawwa’ and she desired to taste the
fruit and Adam also ate. So they were expelled from Paradise and sent to
the earth.”[^8]

Reliable sources mention that people asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq if the
Paradise of Adam was a part of this earth or a Paradise of the
Hereafter? Imam said, “It was from the gardens of the earth where the
Sun and Moon rise and set and the Paradise of the Hereafter is that from
which no one returns.”[^9]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir has related from the Holy Prophet that Adam and
Hawwa’ did not stay in heaven for more than two hours and they were
expelled on the same day.

According to reliable sources Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Satan
became worried and agitated four times: When Allah cursed him, when he
was expelled from the heavens, when Prophet Muhammad was commissioned by
Allah and when the Holy Qur’an was revealed. He cried out loudly on all
these occasions. But he became very happy when Adam tasted the fruit
from that special tree and was driven out from heaven.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim has quoted that Prophet Adam came to the earth but he
was not trained properly. It was impossible for him to understand what
is good and what is bad for him. He didn’t know the proper way of living
and having marital relationships. When Allah told him to stay in the
Garden, he passed by the tree innocently. Then Satan came and deceived
him. They tasted the fruit from the auspicious tree. Their clothes
separated from their body and they concealed the body with leaves
etc...[^10]

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has quoted that when Prophet Adam landed on the
Earth. Archangel Gabriel came to him and said, “Allah has created you by
His own hands, he put His soul in your body and ordered the angels to
make obeisance to you and bestowed you with all the bounties from heaven
and He forbade you to go to the tree but you disobeyed His orders.”
Prophet Adam said, “Whatever you say is true but the Satan swore that he
was my sincere advisor and I was not knowing that anyone could take a
false oath. He came to me and said, ‘If you eat from that tree, you will
become immortal like the Angels and stay in the heaven forever.’ He
swore that he was my true friend.” When they ate from the tree their
heavenly clothes were removed and they covered their bodies with
foliage.

Imam Al-Hasan al-Mujtaba has stated that some Jews came to the Messenger
of Allah and inquired many things. One of their questions was why
Muslims are obliged to pray five times a day? The Messenger of Allah
said, “Because when Adam ate from the forbidden tree it was the time of
Asr. Allah sent him to the earth and made the prayers of Asr compulsory
for Adam’s children until the Resurrection Day. And Allah ordered the
Muslim community to keep up this prayer. Thus it is my favorite prayer.
I have been ordered to establish it. When the repentance of Adam was
accepted it was Maghrib. At that time Adam recited three Rak’ahs
(units). One for his mistake, one for that of Hawwa’’s and the third for
the acceptance his apology. Allah made these Rak’ahs compulsory for my
people. There was a gap of 300 years (of Earth) from the time Adam
tasted the fruit and when Allah forgave him. A day of the Hereafter is
equal to one thousand years of the Earth.”[^11]

The Jews asked, “Why does Wudhu’ involve the particular four parts of
the body that are clean most of the time?” Prophet said, “When Satan
deceived Adam he went to the tree and became disgraced. He ate with his
hands and his heavenly dress separated from his body. He put his hands
on his head and wept. When Allah accepted his repentance He asked him to
wash the face because he had first looked towards the tree. Then to wash
his hands as he picked the fruit by them. Then He ordered him to anoint
his head as he had put them on the head and ordered him to anoint on the
feet because he used them first for disobeying His command. Thus we
perform Wudhu’ in this way.” They asked why Allah made thirty fasts
compulsory. Prophet answered, “Because the fruit remained in his stomach
for thirty days. Allah made thirty fasts incumbent on Adam and his
children. But it is His grace that He allowed them to eat before
sunrise. Fasting was obligatory on Adam, therefore it is compulsory for
my people too.” Allah says in Qur’an,

***O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you, so that you may guard (against evil).
(2:83)***

According to another tradition Al-Ma’mun asked Imam al-Ridha, “Are you
not convinced that Prophet of Allah was innocent?” Imam said, “It is
true.” Then he asked, “What is the meaning of the Qur’anic verse:

***“…and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so his life became evil (to him).”
(20:121)***

Imam said, “Allah said to Adam ‘O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the
garden and eat from it a plentiful (food) wherever you wish and do not
approach this tree for then you will be of the unjust.’  
 Allah indicated towards the wheat tree. Adam obeyed Allah and did not
go near that tree. They enjoyed the fruits of other trees. But the Satan
deceived him and said, ‘Allah has forbidden you this tree but not the
other trees of the garden. If you eat from this tree, you will become
immortal like the angels and will stay here forever.’ He took a false
oath that he was a true friend. Adam and his wife had never heard a
false oath and they trusted him. This was the first fault of Adam and it
was not a blunder. It was a *Tark al-Awla* that occurred even before he
was appointed a Prophet. And *Tark al-Awla* is condoned before
revelation. When Allah exalted him and appointed him a Prophet, he
became infallible and did not commit even a minor mistake. Allah says,

***‘…and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so his life became evil (to him). Then
his Lord chose him, so He turned to him and guided (him).’
(20:121-122)***

Also,  
***‘Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of ‘Imran above the nations.’” (3:33)***

An Account of the apology of Adam and Hawwa’ after their arrival on this
Earth:

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet that when Adam disobeyed Allah, a
caller called out from near the Holy Throne, “O Adam! Get out from My
vicinity of Mercy because whoever disobeys Me cannot stay here.” Adam
began to cry and even Angels cried. Then Allah sent Archangel Gabriel to
Adam who brought him to the Earth. At that moment the whole body of Adam
had become black. When Angels saw him in this condition they cried
bitterly asked for permission to help Adam until their voices rose to a
high pitch. All of them came to the realm of the Almighty and said, “O,
the One Who has given life to one of Your creatures and then put a
chosen soul in it and ordered the Angels to prostrate to it. And due to
just one sin You have changed his fair complexion to a dark one?.”

At that moment a caller called out from Heaven, “O Adam, today you shall
fast for your Creator.” It was 13th of the month. Adam kept a fast. One
third of the darkness disappeared. On the 14th the same voice ordered
him to keep a fast. Adam again fasted and two thirds of the blackness
disappeared. On the fifteenth the voice once more prompted Adam to fast.
Adam did and the remaining darkness disappeared. He became fair once
more. It was because of this that the three days were referred to as the
days of settling down. Then a caller called out from the sky, “O Adam! I
have appointed these three days for you and your children. If anybody
would fast on these three days of the month it would be as if he has
fasted for the whole year.

Adam was sitting with his head on the knee and very much dejected and
sorrowful. Allah sent Archangel Gabriel to Adam. He asked him why he was
so forlorn. He replied, “I will remain sorrowful like this until death
takes me.” Archangel Gabriel said, “I am the messenger of Allah. Allah
has sent salutations and said, *“Hayaak allaaho wa bayyaak allaah!”*
Adam, “I know the meaning of *‘hayaak allaah’*, it is ‘may Allah keep
you alive’, but what is the meaning of the phrase *‘bayaak allaah’*?”
Archangel Gabriel said, “It means, ‘may Allah keep you happy’.”

Hearing this Adam went into a prostration. Then he raised his head,
looked towards the sky and prayed, “O Allah! Increase my beauty and
elegance!” Next morning a black beard covered his face. Adam felt it and
asked Allah what it was. He was told that it was a beard and that Allah
has made it a sign of beauty for Adam and his sons.

According to a good chain of narrators Imam as-Sadiq said that when Adam
landed on the Earth his body from the head to toe became black. He
became very sad. Archangel Gabriel came and asked him the reason for his
sadness. He said that blackness had enveloped him. Archangel Gabriel
told him to get up and recite prayers as it was the best time for
prayers. Adam recited the prayers and the blackness vanished from head
to the chest. When it was time for the next prayer Archangel Gabriel
told him that it was time for second prayer. Adam prayed the second time
and the darkness vanished up to his navel.

Again after some time Archangel Gabriel reminded that it was time for
the third prayer. Adam prayed the third time and darkness vanished from
the navel to the thighs. Then again Archangel Gabriel said that it was
time for the fourth prayer. Adam completed his fourth prayer and the
darkness vanished until the legs. Then Archangel Gabriel told Adam to
pray the fifth time and all the darkness vanished from his body. Adam
praised Allah and thanked Him profusely. Archangel Gabriel said, “O
Adam! This is the model prayers for your children. It means that if they
pray five times a day all their sins shall be cleansed like the darkness
vanished from your body.”

A reliable tradition from Imam as-Sadiq states: During the
circumambulation a man approached my father, kept his hand on his
shoulder and said, “I want to ask you three questions and I know that no
one knows the answers except you.” Imam al-Baqir kept quiet and when he
completed the circumambulation he came to *hijr Isma‘il* and offered a
two-Rak‘ah prayer. After concluding the prayers he inquired about the
person who had questioned him. He came and sat down facing my father. He
asked, “How did the Angels regain Allah’s pleasure after they had
objected to His creation of Adam. Imam replied, “The Angels performed
the circumambulation of the Holy Throne for seven years and sought
divine forgiveness and only then did Allah forgive them.” “You have
spoken the truth,” said the man. “Then how did Allah become satisfied
with Adam ” Imam said, “When Adam came down to the Earth, he landed at
Hind (India). He prayed to Allah who is the Creator of the House. Allah
told him to come to His House, circumambulate seven times and perform
all the rituals of the hajj in ‘Arafat and Mina. From India, he came to
Makkah and wherever he placed his feet, the places became inhabited and
prosperous. And where he did not step the places became remained
deserted. Then he performed the circumambulation seven times and
completed all the hajj rituals as ordered by Allah. Due to this Allah
accepted his repentance and forgave him. Seven rounds of Adam were
equivalent to seven years’ circumambulation of the Holy Throne by
Angels. At that time Archangel Gabriel came to him and said,
“Congratulations! Allah has forgiven you. And I have also performed
circumambulation of this Holy House 300 years before you did.” Adam
said, “O Allah! Forgive me and my progeny.” Allah said, “I will forgive
those who believe in Me and My Prophet.” The man said, “You have said
the truth!” and left the assembly. My father said to me, “That was none
other than Archangel Gabriel. Your teacher in religion came to teach
you.”[^12]

It is narrated through a reliable chain of narrators that Imam as-Sadiq
said, “When Adam came down to the Earth. He performed the
circumambulation of Ka‘bah for a hundred years. During this period he
did not once glance at Hawwa’. Due to the expulsion from the Heaven he
was weeping and tears flowed freely from his eyes. Archangel Gabriel
came to him and said, *“Hayyaak allaaho wa bayyaak allaah!”*

When Archangel Gabriel said, *“Hayyaak allaaho”* Adam understood that
Allah had forgiven him, and when Archangel Gabriel said *“bayyaak
allaah”* he became extremely happy and stood at the door of the Ka‘bah
which had the covering of cow and camel skins and said, *“Allahumma
aqelni a’thrati waghfir li dhanbi wa aaedhoni ila addaar allati
akhrajtani minha.”* Allah said, “I have forgiven your sins and pardoned
your deviation and I will put you back in the heaven from where you were
expelled.”

The Sunnis have narrated through numerous chains from ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Abbas that he said, “I asked the Holy Prophet regarding the words that
Adam learnt from his Lord, through which his repentance was accepted.”
The Holy Prophet said, “He sought forgiveness through the right of
Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn and was forgiven.” There are
quite a few traditions on this subject that we shall discuss them in the
third volume of this book.

Through other chains of narrators the Shi‘ah and Sunni scholars narrate
from Ibn ‘Abbas that when the Almighty created Adam and put in him His
spirit, Adam sneezed all of a sudden. Allah sent to him a revelation and
Adam said, “Praise be to Allah.” Allah said, *“Yarhamaka rabboka”* (May
your Lord have mercy upon you.) When the Angels prostrated before him he
asked, “O my Lord have You created anything dearer than me?” There was
no reply. He asked the same question the second time, but still there
was no reply. He repeated the question the third time. This time Allah
said, “Indeed there are some creatures. And if they hadn’t been there I
wouldn’t have created even you, O Adam!”

Adam requested Allah to show him those exalted personalities. The
Almighty ordered the Angels of Hijab (coverings) to remove all the
coverings. The coverings were removed and five luminous personalities
became visible before the Holy Throne. “Who are these?” asked Adam.
Allah said, “O Adam! This is Muhammad, My Prophet, and this is ‘Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, this is Fatimah the daughter of My Prophet,
and these two are Hasan and Husayn, the children of ‘Ali and the sons of
My Prophet. And O Adam! They are from your progeny.” Adam was pleased to
hear it. And when he committed that grave error he repented and sought
forgiveness upon the rights of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and
Husayn. Allah forgave him. This is the meaning of the Qur’anic verse,

***Then Adam received (some) words from his Lord, so He turned to him
mercifully; (2:37)***

When Adam came to the Earth he made a finger ring and engraved upon it:
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and ‘Ali is the Commander of the
Faithful. The agnomen of Adam was Abu Muhammad.”

According to a authentic tradition Imam as-Sadiq said that Adam
requested, “O Allah! I implore You in the name of Muhammad, ‘Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, accept my repentance.” Allah asked him how he
knew Muhammad. Adam said, “When I was created and I raised up my head I
saw the following words written on the Holy Throne: Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah and ‘Ali is the Commander of the Faithful.”

According to a reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir that, “Adam sought forgiveness in the following words:

*Allahumma laa ilaha illa anta subhaanaka wa be hamdeka inni a’melto
sooo-an wa zalamto nafsi faghfirli innaka anta atawwaabuurraheem. Laa
ilaaha illa anta subhaanaka wa be hamdeka inni a’melto sooo-an wa
zalamto nafsi faghfirli innaka anta khairul ghaafereen*

According to a reliable tradition when a Mu’min gets up from sleep, he
should recite the sentence, which aHazratHazrat Adam (a.s.) lane from Ha
Adam learned from Allah! And the Dua is:

*Subboohun quddoos rabbul malaaekati warrooh. Sabaqat rahmatoka
ghadaboka. Laa ilaaha illa anta inni zalamto nafsi faghfirli war hamni
innaka anta atawwaabu arraheemul ghafoor*

According to a reliable chain of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq that on the day of covenant, Adam was presented to his
(Prophet’s) progeny. Muhammad al-Mustafa. ‘Ali was with him and was
passing with him. Fatimah was behind him and Imam Al-Hasan and Husayn
were behind her. Allah said, “O Adam! Do not look towards them with
jealousy. Otherwise I will take you out from My Vicinity of Mercy.” When
Allah put him (Adam) in heaven, Muhammad al-Mustafa, ‘Ali, Fatimah
Hasan, Husayn came before him. Adam saw them with jealousy.[^13] At that
moment the love and Wilayah of Ahl al-Bayt was presented to Adam, that
he have accepted, but he did not. Heaven showered its leaves.

When Adam repented and accepted the Wilayah of these personalities and
prayed by the rights of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatimah Hasan and Husayn, Allah
forgave him. These were the words that Adam had learnt from his Lord.

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from ‘Ali the
words that Adam uttered, “O Allah I ask You on account of Muhammad and
his progeny that you accept my repentance.” “How did you recognize
Muhammad?” asked Allah. Adam replied, “I saw their names on Your vast
curtain when I was in the Garden.”[^14]

According to a reliable hadith of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq: Five people are
famous for their extreme lamentations, Adam, Ya‘qub, Yusuf, Fatimah
al-Zahra’ and Imam Zayn al-‘abidin. Adam cried so much due to his
expulsion from heaven that two streams of tears flowed on his cheeks.  
 It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah that Adam came to this earth
on a Friday.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam as-Sadiq when Adam was sent
to Earth he brought with him 120 trees. 40 of them bore fruits whose
external as well as internal parts were edible. And the fruits of 40
others had inedible kernel. Adam brought with him a bag containing seeds
of every type.

According to reliable chains of narrators it is narrated that Ibn
Abu-Nasr asked Imam al-Ridha why the first fruit, which was sown on the
Earth grew to be a tasty one. Imam asked him what his co-religionists
thought. He said, “They say that when Adam came to India from heaven he
cried in nostalgia. His tears fell on the Earth and formed potholes
creating a sweet odor.” Imam said, “It is not so, rather Janabe Hawwa’
fragranced her hair with the leaves of Paradise. When she came down to
earth, after the calamity she menstruated and then performed Ghusl. When
she unfurled her hair, Allah sent a breeze that dispersed the heavenly
leaves in the places where Allah wished.”

According to reliable chain of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq that Safa Mountain is called Safa because Adam descended on it.
It was named after a derivation of Adam’s title ‘Mustafa’. As Allah
says, ***“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh…” (3:33)*** And Hawwa’ came
down on Marwa mountain and it is named thus because Marwa (woman)
descended on it.

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated that a Syrian
asked ‘Ali, “Which is the most famous valley on the Earth?” Imam replied
that it was Sarandeep. Adam came down to Earth in this same valley.[^15]

According to reliable chain of narrators, it is narrated from Bukayr
that Imam as-Sadiq asked him, “Do you know what the Black Stone was
originally?” “No,” said Bukayr. Imam said, “It was a Great Angel of
Allah. When Allah took the covenant from angels, it was the first to
believe and accepted Allah; the Black Stone is the same angel. Allah
made him His trustee over other creatures and made them perform hajj
near it every year.

When Adam committed the mistake and neglected the covenant that was
taken from him and his children, for Muhammad and his Legatee, he landed
on the Earth, puzzled and perplexed. When his repentance was accepted,
Allah sent this same angel in the form of a pure white shinning pearl to
Adam from heaven when he was in India. Adam saw the Angel and was
enchanted by him but he thought it was a pearl. Allah made it speak. It
said, ‘O Adam! Do you know me?’ He said, ‘No.’ It said, ‘You do know me
but Satan has overpowered you made your heart forget Allah.’ Saying this
he regained the form that Adam seen in heaven. Then he asked Adam of his
covenant with Allah. Adam moved towards him, then suddenly remembered
the covenant and began to weep. As a mark of respect to the covenant and
renewing of oath, he kissed the Angel.

Allah again made it into a white glowing pearl. Due to its importance,
Adam carried it on his shoulders. When he used to get tired, Archangel
Gabriel used to carried it, until they reached Makkah. Adam always
showed a great regard for it and renewed his oath day and night. When
Allah sent Archangel Gabriel to construct the Ka‘bah, he came down
between the Rukn, Hajar and door and appeared Adam when he was renewing
his covenant. Therefore, the covenant was entrusted to the Angel at this
very place. He fixed the Hajar to this pillar. Archangel Gabriel took
Adam from Ka‘bah to Mt. Safa and Hawwa’ to Mt. Marwa. Adam praised and
glorified Allah.

Therefore it is recommended for all to face the Hajar from Mt. Safa and
recite *Allahu Akbar*.”  
 From a reliable tradition it is narrated from Holy Prophet that Adam
was lowered to Safa from heaven and Hawwa’ on Marwa. In the heaven
Hawwa’ had made up her hair. When she came to the Earth she said, “How
can I hope for beauty and embellishments on this Earth when I am under
the wrath of Allah?” She unfurled her hair and the fragrance that she
had used in the heaven spread in the surroundings. The breeze spread the
fragrance all over and it reached India instantly once.  
 In another tradition he said, “When Hawwa’ loosened her hair Allah sent
a breeze that carried the fragrance from East to West.”

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from ‘Ali that
people asked Holy Prophet how Allah create the dog? He said, “From the
saliva of Satan.” When he was asked to explain the process he said,
“When Allah sent Adam and Hawwa’ to Earth they were lying down and
shivering like chickens. Iblis, the accursed, ran to the animals that
inhabited the Earth before Adam and said, “A couple of chickens have
fallen from sky; they are so big that no one has ever seen such huge
chickens before. Come and devour them.” The beasts were with Satan while
he continuously ushered them, “It is only a short distance and we are
about to reach them.” Due to this soft conversation, his saliva dripped
to the ground. Allah created a pair dogs from it, a male and a female.
The dog came to Adam and the bitch went to Hawwa’ and stood there. They
did not allow the beasts to come near them. From that day, wild animals
became avowed enemies of dogs.

According to a reliable chain of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir that in heaven the duration of Adam’s stay in the
Garden was seven minutes of this world until they ate from the
prohibited tree. Allah sent them down to earth on the same day. Adam
said, “O Allah! Did You destine for me the sin and whatever I will do in
the future before You created me? Or did the villainy overpower me?”
Allah said, “O Adam! I created you, taught you and placed you and your
wife in heaven. But due to My bounty and Power, which I have honored
you, you have become capable to disobey Me. Although you weren’t hidden
from My Eyes and My Knowledge had anticipated your action.” Adam said,
“O Allah! Your proof is complete on me.” Allah said, “I created you,
gave you a beautiful form, ordered angels to prostrate to you and raised
your name on the heavens and exalted you. Then I placed you in My
Garden. I did all this due to My satisfaction and to test you through
the bounties. Because all the bounties that I have bestowed on you were
without your efforts.” Adam said, “O My Lord, Goodness is from Your side
and evil from mine.” Allah said, “O Adam! I am the Generous One. I
created goodness before evil and also created Mercy before My wrath.
Created fame before disgrace. Before creating punishment, I appointed My
proofs as a necessity (who warned people against divine wrath). O Adam!
Did not I prohibit you from this tree and did not I say that Satan is
the enemy of you and your wife? And did I not make you two aware of
Satan before you entered heaven? Did not I say that if you eat from that
tree you will do injustice to yourself and will be My sinful servant? O
Adam! An unjust one or a sinner cannot reside near Me in heaven.” Adam
said, “O my Creator, Your Proof is complete for us. We did injustice to
our souls and we have disobeyed You. If You won’t forgive us nor have
Mercy on us we will be from among the losers.”

When they confessed their sins and accepted the completion of proof upon
themselves Allah, the Beneficent and the Mercy of the Merciful engulfed
them and He accepted their repentance. Allah said, “O Adam! “Go down to
earth with your wife. If you rectify your actions, I will condone you.
If you work for Me, I will bestow you power and strength. And if you
strive for My satisfaction, I will compensate. If you fear Me, I will
make you fearless from My wrath.” Adam and Hawwa’ heard this and wept.
They said, “O Allah! Help us to rectify ourselves and perform acts that
cause Your satisfaction.” Allah said, “Whenever you commit a mistake
repent for it immediately, so that I accept your repentance. And I am
the Acceptor of Repentance and (I am) the Beneficent.” Adam said, “O
Allah! By Your Mercy send us down to Your favorite land.” Allah asked
Archangel Gabriel to take them to the bountiful city of Makkah.
Archangel Gabriel placed Adam on Mt. Safa and Hawwa’ on Mt. Marwa. They
both stood there and looked towards the sky and started weeping and
lamenting. “Why are you crying when I am satisfied with you?” asked
Allah. They said, “O Allah! We are weeping for the sin that has
separated us from the presence of Your Mercy. Because of us the purity
and glory of Angels got veiled, our private parts became apparent. Our
sins have forced us the toil cultivation, eating and drinking. We are
terrified of the separation.”

Allah! The Beneficent and Merciful had Mercy on them and revealed to
Archangel Gabriel, “I have Mercy on Adam and Hawwa’. As they have
confessed to their sin and complained of their tribulations, take for
them a tent from heaven, console them and teach them patience. Unite
them in the tent because I had pity on them due to their weeping from
fear and loneliness. Pitch the tent on the raised ground between the
mountains of Makkah and the foundation that the angels have raised.
Archangel Gabriel brought the tent, which was equivalent to the height
of Ka‘bah, and placed it at that particular spot. Then he brought Adam
and Hawwa’ from Safa and Marwa to the tent. The centre pole of the tent
was of Red Ruby and due to its glow, the surroundings of Makkah and
nearby mountains lit up. The glow arose as high as the sanctuary. The
sanctity of the House increased due to the presence of the heavenly tent
in its vicinity. It is for this reason that good and bad actions attain
greater weight when performed in this area. Allah stretched the ropes of
the tent around the sanctuary. It’s pegs were fixed in the branches of
Paradise.

In another tradition, the pegs were of heaven’s pure gold. And its ropes
from heaven’s purple ropes. Allah revealed to Archangel Gabriel to take
70000 angels to earth to supervise and protect the tent from evil jinn
and befriend Adam and Hawwa’. They should show respect to the tent by
circling around it. Angels descended and settled near the tent. They
guarded it from the arrogant and evil Shaitans and circled Adam’s tent
and Ka‘bah day and night as they used to circle al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur in the
heavens. The Ka‘bah is exactly below al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur. Allah sent
Archangel Gabriel to Adam and Hawwa’ and take them away from the
foundation of Ka‘bah as He wanted to send a group of angels to the Earth
to build the Holy House for Angels and the progeny of Adam. Archangel
Gabriel brought Adam and Hawwa’ out of tent and took Adam to Mt. Safa
and Hawwa’ to Mt. Marwa and took the tent back to heaven. Adam and
Hawwa’ asked Archangel Gabriel “O Archangel Gabriel! Is it due Allah’s
wrath that you have separated us from the House and separated us or is
it due to some wisdom for the satisfaction of Allah?” Archangel Gabriel
said, “It is not because of divine wrath. But no one has the right to
question Allah’s actions. O Adam! The 70000 angels that were sent for
your company on earth and to do circumambulation around tent or the
foundation of House asked Allah to replace it with a House equivalent to
al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur so they can circle it as they circled al-Bayt
al-Ma‘mur in the heaven.

Thus Allah asked me to take you away from there and take the tent back.”
Adam said, “I am resigned to destiny and Divine order. It is for our
good.” Therefore Adam and Hawwa’ were staying at Safa and Marwa
respectively. Adam was pained at his separation from Hawwa’. He came
down from Mt. Safa and looked towards Mt. Marwa in passion. He saw
Hawwa’ on Mt. Marwa but when he reached the valley between Safa and
Marwa he could neither see Mt. Marwa not Hawwa’. Adam feared that he has
lost his way and began to run in the valley until he reached Marwa. He
stopped running and climbed the mountain to Hawwa’ and greeted her with
salaam. Both of them looked towards Ka‘bah that perhaps its foundations
have elevated by then. He prayed to Allah to return them to the House.
Adam came down and returned to Mt. Safa. Again he looked towards Ka‘bah
and prayed. Again he longed for Hawwa’. He came down from Safa the
second time and went towards Marwa. He did this three times and
returned. When he reached Safa and prayed to Allah to keep them together
and Hawwa’ also prayed. At that time, both of their prayers were
accepted. It was afternoon (Zawal).

Archangel Gabriel told Adam to come down from Safa and meet Hawwa’. Adam
came down from Safa and rushed towards Marwa, reached Hawwa’ and told
her what Archangel Gabriel had said to him. Both of them were delighted.
They thanked and praised Allah. It was due to this that the ritual of
Sa’y (running seven times between Safa to Marwa) became established.
Archangel Gabriel informed him that Allah has sent Angels to construct
the Ka‘bah with stones of Mount Sinai and Jabal as-Salaam, (Najaf).
Allah ordered Archangel Gabriel to build the Ka‘bah with the help of
these Angels. Archangel Gabriel dug up the four stones that Allah had
ordered and fixed them. Then he drew foundation of pillars as Allah had
chosen. Allah revealed to Archangel Gabriel to complete the house with
the stone that was kept as a trust on Mount Abu Qubays (the Black
Stone). He also opened two doors in the Ka‘bah one opening to the east
and other West. When Archangel Gabriel finished, the angels began to
circle the Ka‘bah. Adam and Hawwa’ saw the Angels performing
circumambulation so they also took seven rounds. Then they left the
sanctuary to find something to eat. All this happened on the day they
came down to Earth.

According to trustworthy chain of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq that Adam was in Sajdah for 40 days on Mt. Safa and was
lamenting the separation from Divine Mercy and heaven. Archangel Gabriel
came to him and inquired why he was weeping. He said, “Why should not I
cry? Allah has separated me from the vicinity of His Mercy and sent me
down to Earth.” Archangel Gabriel said, “O Adam! Ask forgiveness from
Allah.” “How should I repent,” he asked. Allah sent for him a dome of
light at the site of Ka‘bah. Its glow illuminated the mountains of
Makkah as high as the sanctuary. Allah ordered Archangel Gabriel to mark
the precincts of the sanctuary. On the 8th of Dhu’l-hijjah Archangel
Gabriel came to Adam and told him to arise. He took him out of the
sanctuary and instructed him to perform Ghusl and wear the Ihram. Then
he took him to the Mina and camped there overnight. Next morning they
went to the plains of ‘Arafat. On the day of ‘Arafat at the time of
Dhuhr prayers Adam was told to recite the Talbiya and perform Ghusl.
After he completed the prayers Archangel Gabriel told him to stand on
the plains of ‘Arafat and taught him the words that he had learnt from
his Lord:

*Subh’aanaka Allahumma wa be hamdeka laa ilaaha illa anta. A’melto sooan
wa zalamto nafsi wa’tarafto be dhanbi. Faghfirli innaka antal gafoorur
rah’eem. Subhaanaka Allahumma wa be hamdeka laa ilaaha illa anta.
A’melto soooan wa zalamto nafsi wa’tarafto be dhanbi. Faghfirli innaka
anta khairul ghaafereen. Subhaanaka Allahumma wa be hamdeka laa ilaaha
illa anta. A’melto soooan wa zalamto nafsi wa’tarafto be dhanbi.*
*Faghfirli innaka anta attawwaaburraheem.*

Adam kept standing, prayed to Allah with sincerity, and wept. At sunset,
Archangel Gabriel took Adam to *Mash’ar* and they stayed there for the
night. In the morning, Adam stood on Mountain of Mashar-il-haram and
prayed to Allah with the words that were taught to him. Allah forgave
his sins. Then Archangel Gabriel brought him to Mina and asked him shave
his head and again brought him to Makkah. Upon reaching al-Jamarah
al-Ula, the Satan came to him and said, “O Adam! Where are you going?”
Archangel Gabriel told Adam to say *Allahu Akbar* and hit him seven
times with pebbles. When Adam did this, the Satan fled. Again, he met
Adam at al-Jamarah al-Thaniyah. Archangel Gabriel again told him to toss
seven pebbles. Adam obeyed reciting Allahu Akbar simultaneously. Satan
ran away. At al-Jamarah al-Thalithah, Satan appeared once again and Adam
threw seven pebbles at him while repeating Allahu Akbar. Satan ran away.
Archangel Gabriel said, “You will not see him again.” Archangel Gabriel
brought Adam towards Ka‘bah and ordered him to do circumambulation seven
times. Archangel Gabriel said to Adam that Allah has accepted his
repentance and has made his wife halal (permissible) to him. When Adam
finished the hajj he met Angels at Abtali who said, “May Allah accept
your hajj. We have performed the hajj of this House 2000 years before
you.”

According to an authentic tradition Angels told him this when he was
going to ‘Arafat. And in another good tradition when Adam was doing
circumambulation of Ka‘bah and his Dua was about to be accepted and
Archangel Gabriel told him to confess his sins at that place. Adam said,
“O Allah every action carries a reward. What is the reward of my
action?” Allah revealed to him, “O Adam! I will forgive all those from
your progeny who visit this place and confess their sins.  
 A reliable chain of narrators has narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
that when Adam constructed the Ka‘bah and did circumambulation he said,
“Every doer of an action gets a reward. I also performed an act.” It was
revealed to him, “O Adam! Ask what you want.” Adam said, “O Allah!
Forgive my sins.” It was revealed to him, “O Adam! You are forgiven.”
Adam said, “O Allah forgive my progeny also.” A voice came, “O Adam!
Whoever performs this act and accepts his sins will be forgiven.”

In one of the traditions it is narrated that when Adam’s progeny
increased and some of them were sitting with him and talking among
themselves while Adam was silent. They asked him why he was so quite. He
said, “When Allah expelled me from the vicinity of His Mercy He made me
promise that I would talk less and that consequently He would accept me
back in His Presence.”

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Musa ibn
Ja‘far when Adam and Hawwa’ committed ‘*Tark al-Awla*’ Allah sent Adam
to Mt. Safa. It is called Safa because ‘Adam Mustafa’ (Adam the Chosen
one) descended on it. Hawwa’ was brought to Mt. Marwa. It is called
Marwa because it is ‘mar’a’ means one upon whom a woman descended. Adam
thought that he was separated from Hawwa’ because she was not lawful for
him. Therefore, Adam remained aloof from her. During the day he used to
be with Hawwa’ at Marwa and at night return to his place at Mt. Safa due
to the fear that desire does not overcome him. He had only the company
of Hawwa’ until Angels were sent by Allah. Women are called ‘Nisa’
because Hawwa’ was the cause of affection for Adam. Allah favored and
rewarded them by giving them Tawfiq for repentance and taught them some
words. When Adam repented with those words, Allah accepted his
repentance and sent Archangel Gabriel to him. Archangel Gabriel said,
“As-Salaamo A’laikum O Adam! Allah has sent me to teach you the rituals
of hajj, so that you get purified.”

Archangel Gabriel brought him to Ka‘bah. Allah sent a cloud over Ka‘bah
to shadow them and it was equal to al-Bayt al-Ma‘mur. Archangel Gabriel
said, “O Adam! Trace the boundaries of the Holy House around the shadow
of this cloud and a cubicle will appear. It shall be the Qiblah for you
and your children.” When Adam marked the boundary, a cubicle appeared
under the cloud. Allah also sent the Black Stone and it was whiter than
milk and brighter than Sun. As polytheists also touched it repeatedly,
it became black. Archangel Gabriel told Adam to perform hajj and seek
forgiveness for his sins at all the significant places. Then he said
that Allah has forgiven him and now he must pick up pebbles from Mash’ar
for stoning the Al-Jamarah. So he went near Al-Jamarah (as mentioned
before, and his three encounters with Satan).

When he finished stoning, he was ordered to present a sacrifice in the
way of Allah and shave his Allah as a mark of humility and respect. Then
he was commanded to circle the Ka‘bah seven times and do perform Sa’y
(act of trotting between Safa and Marwa) seven times. Again he was
obliged to perform the circumambulation of Ka‘bah. That was Tawaaf Al
Nisaa’ (Women Circumambulation) — a man cannot establish lawful
relationship with his wife unless he performs this circumambulation.
When Adam completed all the rituals Archangel Gabriel said that Allah
has forgiven all his sins, accepted his repentance and has made lawful
for him his wife.

In an authentic report Imam as-Sadiq performed circumambulation and
recited two Rak‘ah prayers between the Black Stone and the door of
Ka‘bah and said, “Adam’s repentance was accepted at this particular
place.”

In another reliable tradition, it is narrated that people asked Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir how (with what instrument) was the head of Adam shaved
after hajj. He said, “Archangel Gabriel brought a Ruby from Heaven and
it was rubbed on Adam’s head and all his hair fell off.”

According to a trustworthy chain of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq that when Adam came to Earth to India the Black Stone was
dropped towards him. It was like a red Ruby from the Holy Throne. When
Adam saw it, he recognized it. He kissed it and carried it to Makkah. On
the way when he used to be tired, Archangel Gabriel carried it.
Archangel Gabriel saw Adam often sad and dejected. Once he complained to
Archangel Gabriel. Archangel Gabriel said, “Whenever you are sorrowful
recite,

“*Laa Hawla walaa quwwata illaa billaahil a’liyyil a’zeem.*”

Shi‘ahs and Sunni sources have narrated from Wahab that Adam came down
to down to Earth on a mountain in the eastern part of India. It was
called Basim. Allah ordered him to proceed to Makkah. Earth rolled up
for him. Wherever he set his foot, the place became populated. Adam wept
for 200 years due to his expulsion from heaven. Allah sent a tent from
heaven for his consolation and placed it at the position of Ka‘bah. It
was of Red Ruby and had two golden doors. One towards the East and
another facing West. Two lanterns of gold shone brightly in it. The
Black Stone arrived and it was a white Ruby from heaven. A chair that
Adam used in the heaven also came down and was placed in tent. When Adam
died, the tent was lifted up to the sky and at that particular place the
sons of Adam constructed a house of mud that did not submerge in the
deluge of Nuh. It was intact until the time of Ibrahim.[^16]

According to a reliable chain of narrators, it is quoted from Imam
as-Sadiq that Adam had an Angel as a special companion. When Adam was
expelled to the Earth the Angel became uneasy. He complained to Allah
and asked permission to visit Adam on the Earth. He came and saw that
Adam was sitting alone in a desert. Adam saw him he kept his hand on his
head and raised such a loud cry that every creature heard it. The Angel
said, “O Adam! You disobeyed the Lord and undertook the burden you were
not capable of. Do you know what Allah had told us about you and we had
differed with him?” “No,” replied Adam. “Allah told us that He was going
to appoint His vicegerent on the Earth. We protested saying this would
create mischief and bloodshed. Thus Allah actually created you for the
Earth not that you remain in the heavens.” Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said
thrice, “I swear by Allah, these words comforted Adam.”

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet that Satan was the inventor of
singing and musical instruments. When Adam ate from the prohibited tree,
Satan started singing. When Allah sent Adam from heaven to earth, he
started singing songs of the camel driver. When he was himself expelled
to the Earth, he remembered the bounties of heaven and sang dirges.

In another reliable tradition it is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq
that no one has wept like Adam, Yusuf, and Dawud. People asked how much
they had wept. Imam said, “When Adam was sent from the heavens to Earth,
he raised his head towards the sky and due to his tall stature his head
reached a door of heaven. When he cried the inhabitants of heaven became
restless. They complained to Allah and Allah reduced his height. Dawud
cried so much that his tears caused grass to sprout up and he sighed so
deep that the grass withered. Being separated from his father Yusuf
cried so much that other inmates became uneasy and demanded that he
lament on alternate days only.”

It is narrated from ‘Ali ibn Husayn that whenever Adam had sexual desire
he used to take Hawwa’ out of the sanctuary and after performing the
ritual bath they returned.

According to correct chain of narrators it is mentioned that Safwan
asked Imam al-Ridha regarding the Holy Sanctuary and its signs. Imam
said that when Adam descended on Mt. Abu Qubays; and people say he came
down to India, he complained to Allah for the fear that he experienced
and the absence of incantations of divine praise that he used to hear in
the Heaven. Allah sent a red ruby that He kept at the location of
Ka‘bah. Adam used to do circumambulation around it. Adam marked the
boundaries as far as the glow of the ruby reached and Allah appointed it
as the Sanctuary.

A reliable chain of narrators mention Imam as-Sadiq was asked regarding
the origin of fragrance. He asked what people say? He was told that the
people say that Adam came from heaven and had a crown on his head. Imam
said, “I swear by Allah Adam was so much aggrieved that he could have a
crown on his head! Before eating the fruit Hawwa’ had fragranced her
hair with one of the heaven’s fragrance. When she came to earth, she
loosened her hair. Allah sent a breeze that spread the fragrance from
the East to the West. Every fragrance originated from that.”

In another reliable tradition, it is said that when Adam ate from the
prohibited tree the robe that he was wearing suddenly separated from his
body leaving him naked. He covered himself with leaves. When he came to
the Earth, the fragrance of the leaves got mingled with grass. The south
wind carried it to the west. When it halted in India, the fragrance
merged with the trees and grasses and the land of India became fragrant.
The first animal to feed on this grass was the Musk deer, the fragrance
was instrumental in development of its flesh and blood, and it
accumulated at its navel.  
 According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
al-Ridha that on 28th Dhu’l-Qa’dah Mercy of Allah spread wide, Earth was
stretched and it became vast, and on the same day Ka‘bah was constructed
and Adam came to earth.

It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq that Ka‘bah was at a raised plateau.
Its flooring was white and shone like the Sun and Moon. When Qabil
killed Habil the floor became black. When Adam came to earth, Allah
raised the land for him so that he could see everyone. It was revealed,
“All this is for you.” Adam asked, “O Allah! Is why the floor is so
white and shinning?” He was told, “It is for Me, and I have made it
incumbent upon you to do circumambulation 700 times everyday.”  
 In another reliable tradition, it is said the cirrus accompanied Adam
for one month from Sarandeep to Jeddah.

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam ‘Ali
that he asked Holy Prophet why some trees bore fruits and others did
not. The Holy Prophet said that when Adam glorified Allah by reciting
one Tasbih (saying: Subhanallah), fruit bearing tree grew. When Hawwa’
recited a Tasbih one non-fruit tree grew.” ‘Ali asked, “Through what did
Allah create barley?” Holy Prophet said, “Allah ordered Adam to do
cultivate land and Archangel Gabriel got a handful of wheat for him.
Adam took some of it and Hawwa’ some. Adam prohibited Hawwa’ to
undertake cultivation but she did not listen and sowed the wheat. So
that which Adam sowed gave wheat grown and that which Hawwa’ had sown
gave Barley.”

According to an authentic tradition from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir Adam
visited Ka‘bah a thousand times, and on foot. Seven hundred times for
hajj and three hundred times for Umrah.  
 Reliable hadith of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that when Adam came to the
Earth and had eaten the earthly food he felt a hardness in his stomach
and digestion. He mentioned it to Archangel Gabriel. Archangel Gabriel
told him to go and sit in a corner. He did so and subsequently passed
stool (for the first time)

Sunnis narrators quote the Holy Prophet to have said, “Your father Adam
was like a date palm, sixty yards tall.”  
 Some people asked Imam as-Sadiq, “how tall were Adam and Hawwa’ that
came to the Earth?” Imam replied, “I saw in the book of ‘Ali that when
Allah sent Adam and Hawwa’ to Earth their feet touched Mt. Safa and
heads were touching the sky. They complained of the severe heat of the
Sun. Allah revealed to Archangel Gabriel to reduce the body by seventy
hands for Adam and by thirty-five hands for Hawwa’.”[^17]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir quotes the Holy Prophet to have said that Allah
sent down Adam to Earth and ordered him to grow his own food. After
enjoying the bounties of heaven now, he should make his own effort to
acquire sustenance. Adam continued to weep for 200 years due to his
expulsion from heaven. He went into Sajdah and did not lift his head for
three days and nights. He said, “O Allah have You not created?” Allah
said, “Definitely, I have.” Again, he asked, “Have you not blown my soul
into my body?” He was told, “Surely I have.” He asked, “Did You not
settle me in heaven?” He was informed, “Yes I have.” He said, “Did you
not subdue Your Wrath by Your Mercy for me?” Allah said, “Yes I did, but
did you have patience and had thank Me?” Adam said, “There is no god
except You, You are glorified, I have been unjust to my soul, so forgive
me, surely You are all Forgiving all Merciful.”

It is narrated from Imam as-Sadiq that when Allah wanted to accept the
repentance of Adam, Archangel Gabriel was sent to him. Archangel Gabriel
came and said *Assalaamo A’laikum!* O! The one who is patient on his
calamities and repent of ones mistake. Adam, Allah has sent me to teach
you the rituals by which Allah would accept your repentance.” He took
Adam’s hand and went near Ka‘bah. A cloud hovered from sky and shaded
the precincts of Ka‘bah. Archangel Gabriel told him to mark the limit of
the Sanctuary. Then Archangel Gabriel took him to Mina and showed him
the site of the mosque. Adam marked the boundaries of the mosque.
Archangel Gabriel now took him to ‘Arafat and asked him to wait until
sunset and confess his sins seven times. Adam did as taught by Archangel
Gabriel and due to this; the place was named ‘Mo’taraf’ or Ma’raf. This
practice was established for Adam’s progeny.

Archangel Gabriel asked him to return from ‘Arafat. Adam passed the
seven mountains and Archangel Gabriel asked him to say four times
*“Allahu Akbar”* on each of the mountains. They reached Mashar-il-haram
after three fourth of the night had passed and recited evening prayers
and the Night Prayer. Due to this Mashar is called as Jama. Archangel
Gabriel asked Adam to rest at Mashar and he went to sleep. In the
morning, he was told to go upon Mashar and at sunrise confess for his
sins and repent seven times and seek forgiveness from Allah. Adam did as
commanded.

Thus, acceptance of sins became possible at these two places, ‘Arafat
and Mashar. For the descendants of Adam it became the ritual that if
they reach ‘Arafat it is as though they have completed the hajj. Adam
left from Mashar and reached Mina at mid-morning and upon the
instructions of Archangel Gabriel recited two Rak‘ah (units) prayers and
sacrificed (an animal) for Allah. Allah accepted his sacrifice and a
fire appeared from the sky and burnt the sacrificial animal. This was
also included in the hajj rituals for the children of Adam. Archangel
Gabriel said to Adam that Allah has favored him by teaching you the
rites of pilgrimage and because of these rites, his repentance was
accepted. And that his sacrifice was also accepted.

Therefore, he should shave his head as a mark of helplessness and
humility before Allah. Adam shaved his head and Archangel Gabriel took
him towards Ka‘bah. Satan met Adam near Jamarah Uqba and said, “O Adam
where are you going?” Archangel Gabriel said, “O Adam hit him seven
stones and with each one say *Allahu Akbar*. When Adam did, Satan fled.
The next day again Archangel Gabriel caught Adam’s hand and brought him
toward Al-Jamarah al-Ula. Again Satan appeared. Archangel Gabriel asked
Adam to throw seven stones on him and while throwing say *Allahu Akbar*.
When Adam did so, Satan ran away. Satan appeared at second Al-Jamarah
and said to Adam, “O Adam where are you going?” Archangel Gabriel asked
Adam to hit seven stones and every time say ‘*Allahu Akbar’.* Satan
disappeared.

Similarly, on the 3rd and 4th day, the Satan was chased away and
Archangel Gabriel said that he would not be seen again. Archangel
Gabriel took Adam to Ka‘bah and ordered him to do circumambulation seven
times. Adam did so, and then Archangel Gabriel said Allah has forgiven
his sin and accepted his repentance. Now his wife was also lawful for
him.

It is narrated from Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when Adam came to the Earth he
prayed to Allah for fruits of heaven. Allah sent two bunches of grapes.
Adam sowed it. Leaves sprouted, and then it bore fruit that was finally
ripe. Satan, the accursed, arrived and built a boundary wall around it.
Adam said, “O Accursed one! What you have got to do with it? Satan said,
“It is for me.” “You are a liar,” said Adam. Both of them went to The
Holy Spirit for arbitration. The Holy Spirit threw fire on the tree and
it began to burn. Flames rose up. Adam thought that the whole tree would
burn. Even Satan thought so. But when the flames calmed they saw that
2/3 of the tree was burnt and 1/3 remained. The Holy Spirit said that
the burnt portion constituted the share of Satan and what remained
belonged to Adam.

In another tradition narrated from Ja‘far as-Sadiq when Allah sent Adam
to Earth He ordered him to plant a tree start cultivation. Four plants
were sent for Adam from heaven i.e... date grapes, olive and
pomegranate. Adam sowed them for his children and they enjoyed the
fruits. Satan the accursed said, “O Adam, what is this tree that I have
never seen before on the Earth? Although I was here much before you.
Permit me so that I take few fruits from it.” Adam rebuked Satan and
refused to oblige him. When Adam was at his death bed Satan went to
Hawwa’ and said, “I am extremely hungry and thirsty.” Hawwa’ said that
Adam had put her under oath not to allow Satan any of the fruits since
they were from heaven and Satan did not have any right to eat the fruits
of heaven. Satan said, “All right, at least put a little bit on my
hand.” Still Hawwa’ refused. He said, “Give me a fruit. I will just suck
at it.” Hawwa’ gave him a bunch of grapes. He began to suck. When he
sucked one third Hawwa’ pulled it out from his mouth. Allah revealed to
Adam, “Satan who is My and your enemy has sucked the grapes. Therefore,
the juice, that becomes wine, is haram on you. If Satan had eaten them
completely I would have made grapes haram for humans.”

In the same way he deceived Hawwa’ and sucked dates also. Dates and
grapes both were more fragrant and sweeter than Musk but their fragrance
was lost and sweetness decreased after the enemy of Allah, Satan the
accursed had sucked them. Imam as-Sadiq said, “After the death of Adam
Satan the accursed urinated at the base of date and grape plants and the
water got mixed up with his urine. Due to this, the fermented juices of
these fruits have a foul smell and intoxicating quality. Allah made
unlawful all intoxicating liquids.” And in another reliable tradition
said that our dates were sent to Adam from heaven and are better than
all other dates.”

According to a correct chain of narrators Imam al-Ridha said that the
date palm of Maryam was Ajwa. Ajwa and Ateeq were sent for Adam and
through them, other kinds of dates evolved.  
 It is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when Adam came to Earth
he was in need of food. He complained to Archangel Gabriel. Archangel
Gabriel told him to start cultivation. He asked Archangel Gabriel to
teach him some Dua and he taught him the following,  
*Allahumma feni moonatadduniya wa kulla haulin doonal jannate wal besniy
al a’afiyata hatta tohneniyal mae’esha.*

An account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineageAn
account of the children of Adam and continuation of his lineage  
 According to Zurarah people asked Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq, “How did the
lineage of Adam come into being because those who live with us (Sunnis)
say that Allah commanded Adam to marry his sons to his daughters.

Thus, humanity has descended from brothers and sisters. Imam said,
“Allah is Purified and Highly Elevated from such kind of action. Those
who say this have blamed Allah for the unlawful origin of His exalted
creation like His friends, Prophets, Mu’mins and Muslims. This implies
that Allah was unable to create through lawful ways although He had
taken oath from them that they would be lawful, clean and purified. I
swear by Allah news reached me of some animal that did not recognize
their sisters and had intercourse with them. When later they came to
know they bit their own sexual organs and died. In the same way, a
person unknowingly committed incest with his mother. When later he
realized his mistake, he killed himself. So how could one accept it when
one is aware of the reality?

But there is a group, as you know, that has left the knowledge of
Prophet and his Ahl al-Bayt, and they learn from those who have not been
appointed by Allah, nor do have any divine knowledge. These people are
ignorant and have deviated. They have no idea of the initialization of
creation and subsequent developments. It is a pity they are ignorant of
something regarding which there is no difference of opinion between the
scholars of hijaz and Iraq.

Two thousand years before the creation of Adam Allah ordered the Pen
(Qalam) to inscribe on *al-Lawh al-Mahfu¨* (the protected tablet) all
that was going to occur until the Day of Judgment. It included all the
divine books. And in the books, Allah has made unlawful the sisters for
their brothers. And at present all the four books. We see in Torah,
Injeel, Zabur and Qur’an that were revealed by Allah to His Prophets
through *al-Lawh al-Mahfuz* that nowhere has Allah made the sisters
lawful for her brother. Whosoever says so supports the arguments of
Magians. What is basis of their argument? May Allah destroys them.

Adam had 70 twins. Every twin consisted of a boy and a girl. When Qabil
killed Habil, Adam was so much shocked that he cried for five hundred
years and did not touch his wife. When he overcame his sorrow he
cohabited and Allah gave him a son, Shith who was born a single child.
Shith was named Hibtullah. He was the first successor to whom a will was
made. After Shith, Yaafith was also born singly. When both grew up and
Allah wanted to multiply human beings and as the Qalam had made the
sisters unlawful for their brothers Allah on a Thursday after Asr sent a
huri, Nazala and ordered Adam to marry Shith to her.

Next day another huri, Mauzela was sent and Allah ordered that Yafith be
married to her. Adam did as was told. Shith got a son and Yafith a
daughter. When both attained maturity Allah ordered Adam to marry them
and Adam obeyed. Thus, the lineage of Prophets and Messengers of Allah
began. Allah forbids! It is not so as people say that human beings have
descended through brother and sister.”

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
al-Baqir that Allah sent a huri from heaven and Adam married her to one
of his sons. He also married a female jinni to another of his son.
Therefore beauty in creation due to the huri and ugliness due the Jinn.
Imam has emphatically denied that Adam married sons to daughters.

A reliable chain of narrators states that people asked Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir regarding the evolution of generations. Imam asked what people
said regarding the marriage of the sons of Adam. The narrator told him
they say that in every delivery, twins (a boy and a girl) were born to
Hawwa’. Adam used to marry a boy from one set of twins to a girl from
another set. Imam said it was not so. When Haibatullah was born and
attained maturity, Adam asked Allah to provide a wife for his son. Allah
sent a huri and Adam married her to his son. Through her, four sons were
born. Then Adam had another son. When he grew up he was married to a
Jinn woman and she gave birth to four girls. Later Shith’s sons were
married to the daughters of the Jinn woman. Therefore beauty from the
huri and forbearance is from Adam, while every bad quality, ugliness and
stupidity is due to the Jinn woman. After giving birth to sons, the huri
returned to the heavens.

In another reliable tradition, it is said that Adam had four sons. Allah
sent four houries for them. When children were born from them, Allah
recalled the houries. Then the same sons were married to jinn women and
in this way generations grew. Therefore, forbearance is from Adam and
every beauty and perfection is due to four houries. Whereas ugliness,
bad behavior and evil is from jinn.  
 According to reliable chain of narrators Sulayman ibn Khalid said to
Ja‘far as-Sadiq, “May I be sacrificed for you, people says that Adam
married his sons to his daughters?” Imam said, “Yes people do say that,
but O Sulayman, you might not know that Holy Prophet said, ‘If Adam had
married his daughters to his sons then certainly would have married
Zaynab to Qasim without having left the religion of Adam.’”

Sulayman said, “May I be sacrificed on you, they say that Qabil killed
Habil because Habil was ashamed that his sister was being given to
Habil. Imam said, “O Sulayman! You also attribute such filthy things to
Adam and do not feel ashamed?” He said, “May I be sacrificed on you.
What was the reason that Qabil killed Habil?” Imam replied, “Because
Adam had appointed Habil as his successor. Allah revealed to Adam to
hand over the successorship and the Grand Name to Habil while Qabil was
elder. When he knew this, he was angry and said that he was the rightful
heir to successorship and bounties. Under divine instructions, Adam
asked both of them to present a sacrifice to Allah. Allah accepted
Habil’s sacrifice and rejected Qabil’s. So he envied Habil and killed
him.”

Sulayman said, “May I be sacrificed on you how did the generations of
Adam continue? Was there was a woman other than Hawwa’ and a man other
than Adam?”

Imam said, “First Allah created Qabil and then Habil from the womb of
Hawwa’. When Qabil attained maturity Allah sent a Jinn woman for him and
revealed to Adam to marry both of them. Adam did so and Qabil was
satisfied. When Habil attained age Allah sent for him a huri and asked
Adam to marry them. Adam obeyed the divine command. When Habil was
murdered the huri was pregnant and gave birth to a son. Adam named him
Haibatullah. Allah ordered Adam to hand over the Grand Name and
successorship to him. Then Hawwa’ gave birth to a son whom Adam named
Shith. When he matured, Allah sent a huri and commanded Adam to marry
his son Shith to her. A daughter was born to that Hoor and Adam named
her Hoora. When she attained maturity Adam married her to Haibatullah
the son of Habil. And through them, the generation of Adam continued
established.

When Haibatullah died, Allah ordered Adam to transfer the Grand Name and
other things, which were taught to him as well as knowledge of Prophets
to Shith. O Sulayman this is the reality and the truth.”[^18]

According to a reliable tradition of Abu Hamza Thumali, Imam Zayn
al-‘abidin said, “When Adam’s repentance was accepted he had desire for
Hawwa’. From the time he was created until then, he hadn’t such desire.
But since Adam had great respect for Ka‘bah and its surrounding whenever
he had sexual desire he used to take Hawwa’ out of the Sanctuary. Then
perform Ghusl and return to Ka‘bah.

Adam and Hawwa’ had twenty sons and twenty daughters. In every delivery
Hawwa’ gave birth to a set of twins consisting of a boy and a girl.
First Habil was born with a girl who was named Aqleemiya. Then Qabil and
a girl, Luza were born. Luza was the best child of Adam. When they
attained maturity, Adam was worried they might be involved in
fornication. So he called them and said to Habil that he wanted him to
marry Luza and to Qabil that he wanted him to marry Aqleemiya. Qabil
said that he was not satisfied with the arrangement. He said, “You want
me to marry the ugly sister of and that my beautiful sister should marry
Habil?” Adam I will draw a lot between you two and accordingly marry
you. Both of them agreed. Adam drew a lot.

In Habil’s part came Luza and Qabil’s part came Aqleemiya. He married
them. After that, marriage between brother and sister became haram. At
that time a person from Quraysh was present he asked whether they had
any children after that. Imam said, “Yes.” Person said it was an act of
fire worshippers. Imam said, “After this the same act was performed by
fire worshipper, and Allah made it unlawful.” Then he said, “Do not deny
it. Did not Allah create Hawwa’ from the rib of Adam and made her lawful
for him? In his shari‘ah it was allowed in the beginning and later
prohibited.”

In another tradition it is narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that
Qabil disputed with Habil regarding Luza. Adam ordered them to offer a
sacrifice. Habil a shepherd, took out a healthy sheep and some milk for
sacrifice. Qabil who was a cultivator took a few ears of grain. Both of
them took their offerings and kept them at the mountain peak. A fire
appeared and burnt the offering of Habil whereas Qabil’s remained as it
was. Adam wasn’t present there. He had gone to visit Ka‘bah under divine
instructions. Qabil said, “I couldn’t live in this world with ease
because your sacrifice is accepted mine is not. And you want to marry my
beautiful sister and your ugly sister to marry me?” Habil replied, as
mentioned in Qur’an. Qabil hit a stone on the head of Habil and killed
him.

According to narrators people asked Imam al-Ridha how the generations of
Adam continued? Imam said, “Hawwa’ became pregnant with Habil and his
sister. Next time she bore Qabil and his sister. Both of them got
married to each other’s brothers and sisters and after that marriage of
one to his sister became unlawful.[^19]

It is narrated from ‘Ali that the Holy Prophet said, “When Allah sent
down Adam to Earth He sent his wife also. Whereas Satan and the serpent
came to Earth and had no one of the opposite to pair with. Therefore,
they began to practice sodomy and initiated their generation. The
generations of Adam grew through his wife.”

Allah informed Adam and Hawwa’ that both Satan and the serpent were
their enemies.  
 Martyrdom of HabilMartyrdom of HabilMartyrdom of HabilMartyrdom of
HabilMartyrdom of HabilMartyrdom of HabilMartyrdom of HabilMartyrdom of
HabilMartyrdom of Habil

Allah says,

***“And relate to them the story of the two sons of Adam with truth when
they both offered an offering, but it was accepted from one of them and
was not accepted from the other. He said, I would most certainly slay
you. (The other) said, Allah only accepts from those who guard (against
evil). If you will stretch forth your hand towards me to slay me, I am
not one to stretch forth my hand towards you to slay you. Surely I fear
Allah, the Lord of the worlds: Surely I wish that you should bear the
sin committed against me and your own sin, and so you would be of the
inmates of the fire, and this is the recompense of the unjust.”
(5:27-29)***

Thus the soul of Qabil instigated him to kill his brother. Allah sent a
crow to dig the earth and show him how to dispose body of his brother.
Qabil said, “It’s a pity. Am I so helpless that I cannot bury my
brother’s body like this crow?” Thus, he regretted his mistake.

Imam Zayn al-‘abidin says that when the sons of Adam presented their
offerings to Allah one of them took a healthy sheep and the second one
took a few ears of inferior quality wheat. Habil’s offering was accepted
and Qabil’s was not. Qabil became infuriated and told Habil, “I swear by
God I will kill you.” Habil said, “Allah accepts the deeds of forbearing
people. (ayah quoted above).” Qabil wanted to kill his brother did not
know how. Iblis advised him to crush the head of his brother between two
stones. When Habil died he did now not know what to do with the corpse.
A pair crows appeared and started fighting. One killed another and the
surviving crow dug the earth with his claws and buried the dead one.
Seeing this Qabil buried Habil and the practice of burying the dead
started.

When Qabil returned, Adam did not see Habil with him and asked where he
had left his son. Qabil said, “You did not appoint me as his body guard.
Adam realized what must have happened and asked Qabil to accompany him
to a place where they had made the offering. When Adam reached the place
he came to know that Habil was killed so he cursed the soil, which has
absorbed the blood of Habil. After that, the Earth lost the ability to
absorb blood. Allah ordered him to curse Qabil too. A voice from heavens
announced, “You are the accursed one.” Adam returned and wept for forty
days in Habil’s sorrow. When his sorrow reached a pitch, he complained
to Allah. Allah revealed to him, “I will grant you another son who in
lieu of Habil.” Hawwa’ gave birth to a blessed and pure son. On the
eighth day Allah said, “O Adam this child is a gift from Me. Name him
“Haibatullah.” Adam did as ordered by Allah.

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that Habil owned a big herd of sheep and Qabil
was a farmer. When they attained maturity Adam said, “I want both of you
to present an offering to Allah. For the sake of Allah’s desire or the
satisfaction of his father, Habil selected a healthy sheep whereas Qabil
took out a few ears of wheat that were was lying useless, and even the
cattle had refused it. He indented to neither fulfill Allah’s desire nor
satisfy his father. Allah accepted the sacrifice of Habil and rejected
Qabil’s offering. Satan came to Qabil and said, “When Habil has children
they will boast to your sons that their father’s sacrifice was accepted.
Therefore, you must kill him to avert such a situation.” Qabil followed
this advice and murdered Habil. Allah deputed Archangel Gabriel to bury
Habil. At that time Qabil said:

***He said, Woe me! Do I lack the strength that I should be like this
crow and cover the dead body of my brother? So he became of those who
regret. (5:31)***

Imam (AS) says that Habil meant to say, Had I been like this crow whom I
didn’t recognize came and buried my brother. And I had no idea how
should have buried him. A voice from the heavens told Qabil, “You are
accursed because you have killed your brother.” Adam wept for forty
days.  
 According to a good chain of narrator Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said when
Adam appointed Habil as his successor Qabil was envious and killed him.
Allah granted Adam another son, Haibatullah and asked Adam to appoint
him his successor and keep it confidential. Thereafter it became the
practice that every Prophet named a successor and kept it confidential.
Qabil said to Haibatullah, “I know your father has made you his
successor. So if you express it and talk like a Wasi I will kill you as
I killed your brother.”

In another reliable tradition it is said that when Qabil intended to
kill his brother he did not know how to accomplish it. Satan told him to
keep Qabil’s head between two boulders and crush it.  
 Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says that when the sons of Adam presented a
sacrifice each, Habil’s was accepted and Qabil became jealous. He used
to spy on Habil for a chance to find him alone. One day he saw that Adam
was not with him and killed him.

It is narrated from Imam al-Ridha that a Syrian asked ‘Ali regarding the
ayah,

***“The day on which a man shall fly from his brother.”*** ***(80:34)***

Imam said, “It is Qabil who will fly from his brother Habil.” The Syrian
asked about the inauspiciousness of Wednesday. Imam said, “It is the
last Wednesday of the month. This day Qabil killed Habil. Again, the
Syrian asked about the first person to recite a poem? Imam said, “It was
Adam.”

What kind of a poem was it? Imam said, “When he came down to Earth he
saw the vast land, and when Qabil killed Habil. Adam recited a couplet
poem that meant: ‘Everything in the cities is transformed and the
surroundings have become polluted and foul. Every color and taste has
changed, the charm and beauty of faces is cheerless.’ Iblis the accursed
said, ‘Then go away from the cities and its inhabitants. The vast abode
of heaven became straitened for you although you and your wife were safe
from worldly problems. At last, you fell to my deceit and lost the
bounties by your own actions. And if the Powerful Lord had not bestowed
His Mercy you would have got nothing from heaven except air, and no
other benefit would have accrued to you.’”

According to a trustworthy tradition from Imam Muhammad, al-Baqir there
is a person in India who stands in garments of sack cloth. Ten persons
are appointed on him and one of them dies another person from the
village is appointed in his place. People die and are replaced, but ten
caretakers continue to mind this person. When the Sun rises, they turn
the person’s face towards the Sun and keep it facing the Sun until
sunset. In winter, they pour cold water on him and in summer hot water.
He was in the same condition when a person passed by. He asked, “O
creature of Allah, who are you?” He said, “Either you are a stupid
person or an intellectual. I am standing here since creation and no one
inquired about asked me.” People say that he was Adam’s son Qabil, who
had killed his brother.

Another narration states that Imam himself visited the place, questioned
the man under punishment and composed couplets on it. The difference in
this narration is that fire was lighted around the person in summer and
water was poured on him in winter.

In another reliable tradition it is narrated from ‘Ali that a person
came to the Holy Prophet and said, “Messenger of Allah, I have seen an
amazing thing.” When the Prophet asked him about it he said, “One of my
relative was sick and people advised for him water of Ahqaf well that is
situated Wadiul Barhoot. I took a bucket and water bag and reached the
place. When I tried to draw water I saw a chain like thing coming from
sky with a man tied to it. He was saying give me water I am dying of
thirst. I raised the bowl towards him but the chain around his neck
tightened and took up to the sun. Again I drew out some water and the
same scene was enacted. This happened thrice. So I finally tied up the
water bag and did not try to give him any water.” The Holy Prophet said,
“He was Qabil the son of Adam; who had killed his brother. And the same
thing is mentioned in the Qur'an,

***“…and those whom they pray to besides Allah give them no answer, but
(they are) like one who stretches forth his two hands towards water that
it may reach his mouth, but it will not reach it; and the prayer of the
unbelievers is only in error.” (13:14)***

Through few chains of reporters, it is narrated that one day Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir was sitting in Holy Masjid. Tawus al-Yamani suggested
to his companion to go and ask Imam a few things and see what he says.
They came and Imam Tawus asked, “Do you know the day when one-third of
the world population perished?” “Not one-third,” corrected Imam, “You
have made a mistake. Actually you meant one-fourth.”

“How is that?” he asked. Imam said, “When the world population consisted
of Adam, Hawwa’, Habil and Qabil and Qabil killed Habil, one-fourth of
the population perished. Tawus said, “You have spoken truly.”

Imam then asked, “Do you know what was happened to Qabil?” “No,” he
replied. Imam said, “He is hanging from the Sun and hot water is
sprinkled on him. This will continue until the Resurrection Day.” Tawus
asked whether the progenitor of humanity was the murderer or the slain
one. Imam said that generations continued from Shith (another) son of
Adam.[^20]

According to reliable chain of narrators Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that
seven people would get the worst punishment on the day of judgment.
First of them being Qabil, the son of Adam who killed his own brother
(until the end of hadith).

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet that the following five are the
worst of the creatures: Satan, Qabil, the Pharaoh, the man who deviated
The Israelites from their religion and a person from this Ummah of to
whom the people will pledge allegiance in his Kufr (disbelief) –that is
Muawiyah.  
 In another reliable hadith it is said that when the offering of Habil
was burnt and that of Qabil rejected Satan lied that since Habil
worshipped fire his sacrifice was accepted. Qabil said, “If it were so
then I would also worship fire. But not the one that Habil worshipped.
And I will present my offering to it so that it is accepted. Then he
made a fire temple presented offerings therein and did not recognize his
Creator. He did not leave anything except fire worship as his heirloom.

In another authentic tradition, it is said that during the time of Adam
ferocious, birds and beasts all lived in harmony. But when the son of
Adam killed his own brother, they began to hate and fear each other. So
they segregated according to their genre and habits.

According to Imam al-Baqir the son of Adam, Qabil is strung by his hair
to the Sun and he rotates with it whether it is summer or winter. He
will do so until the Resurrection Day when Allah would throw him into
Hell.

In another tradition, it is narrated that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir was
asked regarding the condition of the son of Adam in Hell. Imam said,
“Glory be to Allah. Allah is more just to chastise him in the world and
hereafter.”[^21]

A reliable tradition of ‘Ali says that the son of Adam, who had killed
Habil, was born in heaven.[^22]  
 It is narrated in reliable books from Amir al-Mu’minin that the person
to rebel against Allah was Enaaq, the daughter of Adam. Allah has
created her with twenty fingers and each finger had two spade-like
nails. She was so huge she occupied about 60 square yards while sitting.
When she rebelled against Allah He sent a lion as big as an elephant, a
wolf the size of a camel and a donkey. These animals were like this at
that time. These animals overpowered and killed her.

And in some traditions it is mentioned that Ewaj the son of Enaaq was a
despot and an enemy of Allah and Islam. He was tall and huge. He used to
catch fish for his food and roast them by holding them near the Sun. He
lived for 3060 years. When Nuh was about to board his ark, Ewaj came and
asked him to take him also. Nuh said he was not permitted. The
floodwater did not rise above his thigh. He was alive until the time of
Musa and Musa finally killed him. Allah says,

***“He it is who created you from a single being, and of the same (Kind)
did he make his mate, that he might incline to her; so when he covers
her she bears a light burden, then moves about with it, but when it
grows heavy, they bath call upon Allah their Lord: If Thou givest us a
good one,*** ***we shall certainly be of the grateful ones. But when He
gives them a good one, they set up with Him associates in what He has
given them, but high is Allah above what they associate (with Him).”
(7:189-190)***

According to a good chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir that when Hawwa’ was pregnant and the child moved in her womb.
She said to Adam that something was moving in her womb. Adam said it was
his sperm, which has placed itself there. Allah shall create a creature
so that He tests us through him. Satan came to Hawwa’ and asked how she
felt. Hawwa’ said, “I have a child of Adam in my womb that moves.” The
accursed said, “If you make an intention to name it Abdul Haris it would
be a male child and would be born alive. And if you do not do so it will
die within six days.” Hawwa’ doubted the words of Satan and informed
Adam. Adam said, “The wretched Satan came to deceive you. Do not believe
him. I am hopeful of the Grace of Allah that our child shall live
against the prediction of Satan.”

But even Adam harbored a little doubt, which was inculcated by Satan.
So, a son was born but he died after six days. Hawwa’ said that whatever
Satan had said was correct. Both of them fell into doubts. After
sometime Hawwa’ conceived another child. Satan came and asked her
condition. Hawwa’ told him that previously a child was born who died in
six days. Satan said, “If you had made an intention to name him Abdul
Haris he wouldn’t have died. Now you shall beget an animal like camel,
cow, sheep or goat.” Hawwa’ decided to believe him and she mentioned it
to Adam. Adam also thought the same thing. When Hawwa’ was in labor they
prayed to Allah that if He grants them a good son they shall be thankful
to Him.

Allah bestowed them a courteous son, not an animal. Satan came to Hawwa’
before the delivery and asked about her condition. Hawwa’ said, “I am
about to deliver the child.” Satan said, “You shall be terrified when
you see an animal come out from your womb. Adam will hate you and your
child.” At last he convinced Hawwa’ and said, “If you decide to name him
Abdul Haris and dedicate him to me he would be normal and will remain
alive.” Hawwa’ said, “I have made an intention that a part of him shall
be yours.” Satan insisted that Adam should also say so. So Hawwa’
narrated the conversation to Adam. He was also frightened and somewhat
inclined towards it. Hawwa’ said, “If you do not name him Abdul Haris or
make an intention to dedicate a part of him to Satan I won’t allow you
to come near me, nor would I fulfill your desire. Our relationship would
be over.”

Adam said, “First of all you caused me to be expelled from heaven. Now,
again you have been deceived by Satan. All the same I agree to name the
child as Abdul Haris.” At last, a child was born safe and sound. Adam
was happy and less fearful. He thought that the child would survive. So
he named him Abdul Haris on the 7th day.

In another tradition it is narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
regarding the ayah,

***“But when He gives them a good one, they set up with Him associates
in what He has given them.” (7:90)***

It refers to Adam and Hawwa’. Their Shirk was of Shirk of obedience when
they obeyed Satan. They dedicated to Satan some part of the creature of
Allah and named it Abdul Haris. They did not commit Shirk in the worship
of Allah nor had they worshipped some other God.[^23]

It could also mean that Allah bestowed upon Adam and Hawwa’ a healthy
child and later some of his descendants committed Shirk. This
explanation is more plausible as mentioned in *Bihar al-Anwar*. It is
also supported by reliable traditions.

Al-Ma’mun asked Imam al-Ridha the tafsir of this ayah. Imam said,
“Hawwa’ had five hundred pregnancies and every time a boy and a girl was
born. Adam and Hawwa’ vowed to Allah that if He granted them a virtuous
son they would be thankful. So Allah gave them good and healthy twins.
From their progeny some became polytheist. And they (sons and daughters)
did not thank Allah as their parents (Adam and Hawwa’) did.”

Masoodi in his book *Muruj-uz-Zahab* narrates that when Habil was killed
Adam became was devastated with grief. Allah sent revelation that, “From
you a light will be born which I would continue in purified descendants
to culminate in the best of My creation. I will make him My last
messenger and I appoint for him the best successors and Imams in whose
reign the tenure of this world will end. I will inhabit the earth with
those who obey them. So be alert and prepare yourself. Perform ghusl and
remember Allah. Fulfill your desire with your wife she is also purified
with ghusl. Because My Trust will be transferred through this son.” Adam
was happy to know this. He came to Hawwa’ and she became pregnant. She
became more beautiful. A bright light illuminated her whole body. Shith
was born. He was handsome, healthy and a dignified child with an aura of
authority. The Noor was transferred from Hawwa’ to Shith and shone on
his forehead. Adam named him Shith. Some say he was named Haibatullah.
He reached the age of maturity and Adam made a bequest to him and made
him aware of the dignity of knowledge, which he was going to inherit,
and told him that he is going to be the proof of Allah and his successor
after him. He willed that he should fulfill the duties of successorship
granted by Allah. And that his successorship should continue on others
until it reaches the last Messenger and his heir, which will continue.
Shith accepted the legacy and kept it secret as was appropriate. On
Friday, in the 6th month of the year Adam left this temporal world. His
age was around 930 years.

According to a tradition, Adam left 40,000 children, grandchildren and
great grandchildren etc. Shith was the successor of Adam and he guided
with the Sahifah (divine book), that he had received from his father.
From Shith the light was transferred to Anoosh. When he was born, the
light was apparent on him. When he reached the last moments of his
tenure Shith transferred all the relics to him and made him the Wasi. He
inculcated an awareness of the high station of Successorship and also
told him to teach his children the importance of this legacy. This
continued until the Noor reached Abdul Muttalib and ‘Abdullah.

Anoosh expired on October 3 at the age of 960 years. Qinyan was his
legatee and Anoosh took oath of successorship from him. He attained the
age of 120 years. People say his death took place in July.

Mahlayel was the successor of Qinyan. He lived for 800 years. From him
came Lood and his age was 962 years. He passed away in the month of
Azar. He was succeeded by Idris and light of Muhammad and his progeny
were transferred to him. People say that Qabil and his sons had invented
many kinds of musical instruments.

### Revelations on Adam

Sayyid ibn Tawus says that it is mentioned in the Suhuf (book) of Idris
that on the 27th of Ramadhan, Thursday afternoon, Allah revealed on Adam
a twenty page book in Syriac and it was the first book that Allah sent
to the Earth. It contained all the languages and dictionaries.
Altogether there were 1000 languages and a person proficient in one
could not understand the others languages. It also contained proofs of
Allah’s existence, the obligatory acts, practical laws, recommended acts
and penal laws.

According to a reliable chain of narrators Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq and Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir said that Allah (SWT) revealed to Adam, “I present to
you truth and righteousness in four sentences: One concerns Mine, one is
for you, One is common between Me and you, and one is common between you
and other creatures. Whatever is in it with regard to Me is your
worship. You worship Me and do not associate anyone with Me. Whatever is
regarding you is the reward of your action will be bestowed when you
deserve it. The words common between you and Me is that it is necessary
for you to supplicate Me and it is My responsibility to accept it.
Whatever is common between you and creatures is that you should like for
others what you like for yourself.”

### Death of Adam; His age and his bequest to Shith

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq and Imam Muhammad al-Baqir state that Adam was
informed the names of all Prophets and their ages. When he learnt that
the age of Dawud was to be only 40 years he said, “O Allah! Why is the
age of Dawud so less while I had such a long life? O Allah would you
accept if I gift thirty years of my life to Dawud and increases his
age?” “Yes,” said Allah. So Adam requested Him to reduce his age by
thirty or sixty years and increase the age of Dawud. When the angel of
death came to take away his soul Adam said, “I have thirty to sixty
years remaining.” “Did you not gift it to Dawud?” the angel of death
reminded. “When the names of Prophets and their age were presented to
you in the valley of Jenaam?” Adam said he didn’t remember. The angel of
death said, “O Adam! Do not refuse it now. Did you not ask Allah that
your life should be reduced and given to Dawud? Allah established it in
Zabur and decreased your life.” Adam said, “Bring to me Zabur so that I
recall it.”

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says, “Adam was speaking the truth that he had
forgotten it. Therefore from that day onwards Allah ordered that all
transactions must be put in writing so that no one could deny later.”

A tradition of Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that initially Allah had told
Archangel Gabriel, Mika’il and the angel of death to write it because
Adam will forget. So it was written and the angels sealed it with the
Tinat of their arms. When Adam refused the angel of death showed him the
document.  
 Imam as-Sadiq said that is why the loaner gets embarrassed when the
promissory note is shown to the debtor.[^24]

According to a reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq that when Adam became sick, he called Shith and said, “O my
Son! I am going to die very soon. Whatever you see has been sent by
Allah from His kingdom, and He has taken the oath from me so I make a
bequest to you. I make you the legatee for whatever Allah given me. The
book of wasiyyah is under my head. It contains the heritage of knowledge
and the Grand Names of Allah. After I am dead, you take it in your
possession and do not let anyone know of it. Nor should you look at it
until the next year. It contains (Suhuf) everything that would need
regarding the affairs of this world.”

It was the scroll that Adam had brought from the heaven. Then he said,
“I wish to have fruit from heaven. Go to Mt. Hadeed and if you see any
Angel convey my regards and say that your father is sick and needs a
fruit of heaven.” Shith went to the mountain. He saw Archangel Gabriel
with a group of angels. Archangel Gabriel saluted him and asked where he
was going?” “Who are you, O servant of Allah?” Shith asked. “I am the
trustworthy spirit, Archangel Gabriel.” Archangel Gabriel said. Shith
conveyed the salaam of Adam. He said, “O Shith! Salutations upon your
father. He has departed from this world and that’s why we have descended
to the Earth. May Allah reward you and grant you patience in this great
calamity. Now go back to your father.” Shith returned. The Angels
brought with them whatever was required for the burial. When Shith
reached home he took the will from beneath the head of Adam and tied it
to his stomach.

Archangel Gabriel said, “Congratulation O Shith! Who can be compared to
you? Allah has honored you with His Generosities and clothed you in the
dress of salvation. By my life, Allah has selected you for a very
special affair. Then Shith bathed Adam’s body under instruction from
Archangel Gabriel. He also taught him to shroud and embalm the body.
When he finished Archangel Gabriel taught him to dig the grave. He made
him stand before the bier of Adam to recite the prayers of Mayyit
(dead). Archangel Gabriel told Shith to recite seventy *Takbirs* and
then taught him the method of *Salat al-Mayyit*. The Angels stood behind
Shith in a row for the prayers. Shith wanted Archangel Gabriel to lead
the prayers but he said that as the Angels were made to pay obedience to
Adam they could not lead them in prayers. Archangel Gabriel said, “You
might not know that when Allah created your father, He made him stand
before us and ordered us to prostrate to him. Therefore, Adam became the
Imam and this practice continued in his generations. Today he has left
this world and now you are his successor and the inheritor of his
knowledge. How we we replace you? You are our Imam!”

Shith recited *Salat al-Mayyit* for Adam as taught by Archangel Gabriel
who taught him how to bury his father. After the burial when Archangel
Gabriel and other Angels were about to leave Shith started weeping and
exclaimed, “O what a terror!” Archangel Gabriel said, “You should not
have any fear as Allah is with you. We will visit you by the permission
of Allah. Allah is your associate, so do not be sad and have faith in
your Lord because He is the Beneficent upon you.” Archangel Gabriel and
other Angel returned to the heavens. At that time Qabil who had ran away
fearing his father came down from the mountain. He met Shith and said,
“I killed my brother Habil because my sacrifice wasn’t accepted and I
suspected that he would get the position, which you have now got. I
didn’t want him to become the successor and legatee of his father as you
are today. So if you narrate even one sentence of whatever father has
taught you, I will kill you like I killed Habil.”

A similar tradition has been narrated from Imam Zayn al-‘abidin. It also
mentions that Shith recited seventy five *takbirs* on Adam. Seventy for
Adam and five for his children.  
 It is narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that when Adam learnt of the
murder of Habil he wept bitterly and complained to Allah regarding his
sorrow. Allah revealed, “I will give you another son like Habil.” A
child was born and on the 7th day, Allah revealed that since it was a
Gift from His side he should be named Hibtullah (Gift of Allah). When
time of his death approached Allah revealed on him, “Soon I am going to
summon you to the vicinity of My Mercy. Therefore, make a bequest to the
best of your sons, who is gifted by Me because I do not like that the
world should be devoid of one whom I have given knowledge and one who
executes My commands. I want him to be a proof upon My creatures.” Adam
gathered his clan and said, “My Children, I am about to depart from this
world and Allah has ordered me to appoint Haibatullah as my successor.
So listen to him and obey him, as he is my successor and caliph on you.”
All of them said, “We have heard you and we will obey him.”

The Ark of covenant trunk was prepared according to the order of Adam
and he placed in it the relics, will, and testament and gave it to
Haibatullah. He said, “After I am dead give me Ghusl and shroud, recite
prayers and bury me. And when your death is near you will know it. At
that time, you must also make a bequest to your son who is the best
among your children from the aspect of manners and helpfulness. And do
not ever leave the Earth devoid of a person from us (Ahl al-Bayt). O
Son! Allah has sent me to the Earth and appointed made me His vicegerent
and a proof over His creatures. After me, you shall be my proof. You
must also not leave the world without appointing your successor. Pass on
these relics to your successor as I am handing it to you. Also inform
him that a Prophet from my progeny is going to come whose name is Nuh
and his nation will be submerged in water. Make a bequest to your
legatee to protect whatever is in this Ark of covenant. Emphasize that
when *he* is about to depart he should also appoint his best son as the
legatee and this should continue until the time of Nuh. Then he should
board the ship and take with him the chest of relics. O Haibatullah! Of
all my sons, beware of Qabil the accursed.”

Thus, when the end of Adam was near the angel of death arrived. Adam
said, “I witness that Allah is One and has no partner. I witness that I
am the servant of Allah and His Caliph on this earth. He favored me by
creating me and asking the Angels to prostrate to me. And He taught me
all the names. He settled me in heaven although He had created me to
inhabit the Earth according to His Plan.” When Archangel Gabriel brought
Hanoot and wooden planks with the shroud from heaven, he was accompanied
by 70000 Angels. They gave Ghusl, shrouded him and anointed (Hanoot)
him. Archangel Gabriel told Haibatullah to go ahead and recite prayers
for his departed father with 75 Takbirs. Angels dug a grave and buried
Adam. Haibatullah assumed the leadership of Adam’s children as ordered
by Allah. When Haibatullah neared his end, he transferred the legacy to
his son Qinan and handed over the Ark of covenant to him. Qinan lived
among his clan and promoted obedience towards Allah. At his death bed he
appointed his son, Barra as the successor (wasi) and handed over the Ark
of covenant to him and also reminded him about the Prophethood of Nuh.
At the time of his death Barra made bequest in favor of his son, Akhnu‘
(Idris) and handed over the Ark of covenant to him. Idris completed his
tenure. When he was about to die Allah revealed to him, “I am going to
raise you to the heavens, so bequeath all the things to Khargaeel.”
Khargaeel stood thus became the wasi Idris. When Khargaeel’s death
approached he nominated his son Nuh and handed over the Ark of covenant.
It was always with him and he took it abroad the ship. When his death
was near, he gave the Ark of covenant to his son, Sam and did formally
appointed him the legatee.[^25]

It is mentioned from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that Adam sent his son to
Archangel Gabriel and said, “Ask Archangel Gabriel to get me some food
from near that particular tree of heaven.” When the son met Archangel
Gabriel he was informed that Adam has already expired.” We have been
commanded to meet him at his last moments and recite prayers for him,”
said Archangel Gabriel. After the Ghusl Archangel Gabriel asked
Haibatullah to lead the prayer of his father. Haibatullah stood up at
the front recited 75 takbirs. 70 takbirs for the excellence of Adam and
five takbirs to establish the Sunnah.

Imam says that Adam used to be engrossed in the worship of Allah at
Makkah. When Allah wanted to take his soul, He sent Angels from heaven,
with wooden plank, a shroud and anointments. When Hawwa’ saw the Angels
she tried to intervene but Adam told her to leave them alone. The Angels
captured his soul and bathed with lote-tree water. They made a grave for
him and said this practice shall continue in the generations of Adam.
Adam was 936 years old and was buried in Makkah. There was a gap of 1500
years between Adam and Nuh.

According to reliable chain of narrators from Imam, as-Sadiq when it was
time for the funeral prayers Haibatullah told Archangel Gabriel, “O
Messenger! Go ahead and recite prayers for the Prophet of Allah.”
Archangel Gabriel said, “Allah has ordered us to prostrate to your
father. So we cannot lead their children in prayers. And you are the
best of his children.”

Thus Haibatullah led the funeral prayers of his father with five takbirs
as prescribed by Allah for the followers of Muhammad. This practice was
to continue among the children of Adam until the Resurrection Day.

Another reliable tradition from the same Imam states that Adam requested
for a fruit. Haibatullah went out to bring him the fruit. Archangel
Gabriel met him and asked where he was going. He told him Adam wanted a
fruit as he was unwell. Archangel Gabriel said, “Go back as Allah has
taken away his soul.” When he returned, he saw that Adam was no more.
Angels gave him the Ghusl and asked to Haibatullah to recite the
prayers. Allah revealed upon him to recite five takbirs. Then he was
laid in his grave. Haibatullah was told to perform funeral rites in the
same way.

In another reliable tradition it is said that thirty takbirs were
recited for Adam. Twenty five were dropped later on and five remained.
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says that the grave of Adam is in the Holy
Sanctuary and according to Prophet Muhammad Adam expired on Friday.

Some great scholars have mentioned in *mursal* (without chains of
narrators) that when Allah sent Adam to Earth he was terrified due his
separation from heaven. He prayed to Allah to send him a tree of heaven.
Allah sent for him a date palm, which remained with him all his life.
When death was near, he told his sons, “This tree has been with all my
life and I hope after my death it will remain so. Therefore, you split a
branch of it and keep it in my shroud.” The sons did as bidden. After
him, other Prophets also followed the same way. It was discontinued in
the Jahiliyya (pre-Islamic period) but Prophet Muhammad restarted the
practice.

According to reliable chain of narrators, it is narrated from Imam
as-Sadiq when Adam died, Qabil and Satan rejoiced and played musical
instruments vain sports. Thus all the musical instruments and vain past
times of the world are derived from the invention of Satan.

Sunni and Shi‘ah scholars have narrated from Wahab ibn Munabbah that
Shith buried Adam in a cave of Mt. Abu Qubays known as *Ghaarul Kabeer*
(the big cave). He remained buried until the deluge of Nuh. During the
deluge Nuh exhumed him and placed him in a coffin abroad his ship.  
 Reliable chains of narrators narrate from Imam as-Sadiq that when Nuh
(as.) was abroad the Ark, Allah revealed him to perform the
circumambulation of the Holy Ka‘bah seven times. When he completed the
circumambulation and came down from the ship the water was up to his
thighs. He dug out a coffin from the earth containing the bones of Adam
and placed it on the ship and again did circumambulation of Ka‘bah. The
Ark reached al-Kufah and Allah ordered the Earth to absorb the water as
it has gushed out from the mosque. Nuh buried Adam at Najaf.[^26]  
 It is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that the Holy Prophet said,
“Adam was nine hundred and thirty years old.”

Sayyid ibn Tawus quotes from the book of Idris that Adam was ill for ten
days. He died on Friday the fifteenth of Muharram and was buried in a
cave of Mt. Abu Qubays facing Kiblah. And his age from the day the soul
entered his body and until the time it was taken out was 1030 years.
After one year and fifteen days Hawwa’ also fell sick and died. She was
buried next to Adam.

Sayyid says, “I have seen in Torah in 3rd Chapter that Adam’s age was
930 years and the same is narrated by Muhammad ibn Khalid Barqi in his
book ‘Beda’ from Ja‘far as-Sadiq.”[^27]

According to reliable chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
Al-Hasan that the successor of Adam was Shith. He lived for one thousand
years. In a tradition narrated by Abu-Dharr, as mentioned before, the
language of Shith was Syrian. Fifty scriptures were revealed on him.
Most of the historians have mentioned that Shith was born when Adam was
235 years old. Shith lived for 912 years. He is buried in Mt. Abu Qubays
next to his parents.

Sayyid ibn Tawus mentions, “I have seen in the *Sahifah* of Idris that
Allah revealed fifty books on Shith containing the proof of the
existence of Allah, Laws and practices and the prescribed penalties.
Shith lived in Makkah and preached the scriptures to the children of
Adam. He worshipped Allah at the Ka‘bah and performed hajj and Umrah
until was 912 years. When he fell sick, he appointed his son Ewas as his
Legatee and warned him to fear Allah and be humble and pious. When Shith
died, Ewas along with his son Qinan and grand son Mahkael (son of Qinan)
performed Ghusl and Ewas recited the prayers and buried Shith at the
right of his father in the cave of Mt. Abu Qubays.

[^1]: These difficult traditional reports require detailed analysis,
however it is beyond the scope of this book. Those who wish to pursue
the subject further may refer to my book, Behaarul Anwaar.

[^2]: This is the exegesis in Tafsir of Imam. The gist of this
interpretation is as follows: When the Angels tried to justify that they
glorified Allah’s praise whereas, the creation that was to come to the
Earth were going to be a corrupted lot. The Almighty Allah taught Adam
the names of his progeny and informed him of their exalted status. Then
Allah presented the Holy lights (Noor) of the Prophets and their
legatees to the Angels. He asked the Angels if they knew their names and
qualities. When the Angels confessed their ignorance Allah appointed
Adam to teach them the names and qualities of these benevolent
personalities. When Adam mentioned the names, the Angels realized that
there were definitely some personalities in the children of Adam who
were more deserving of Divine vicegerency than the Angels themselves
were. Almighty Allah exhausted the proof on them in two distinct ways:
firstly the Angels had said that all creatures that are going to be
created the Earth are corrupt, without any exceptions among them. Allah
proved their ignorance in the matter. It was only after Adam had
mentioned their names did they realize that among the progeny of Adam
were many personalities more deserving of Allah’s Caliphate. Secondly
the Almighty removed the misconception the Angels had harboured about
themselves. They thought they were unsurpassable in piety and praising
Allah. They could not even imagine that a person like Iblis was also one
of them. Hence another fact became clear for them. It must be clarified
that there is a difference of opinion between two schools of thoughts as
far as the absolute infallibility of Angels is concerned. According to
Shi‘ahs the infallibility of Angels is proved beyond any doubt according
to Qur’anic Ayats and traditions of Masoomeen Furthermore their
questioning Allah’s decision was not an act of arrogance and they knew
very well that Allah shall do whatever is best. Yet they questioned him
to know the wisdom it. Such a type of questioning falls under the
category of Tark al-Awla, therefore it didn’t harm the infallibility of
the Angels. There is also a difference of opinion among the Shi‘ah and
Sunni Commentators regarding the names taught to Adam. According to
some, Adam was taught the names of things in various languages. The
children of Adam learnt the various languages from him. When they
separated, each of them spoke the language he liked best. Due to the
passage of time each of the languages diverged from each other. Some
more traditions on this topic shall be quoted in the forthcoming
discussion. There is also a group that interprets ‘names’ to mean
rights, obligations and origins of different things. For example, the
creation of water, making of the earth, prescriptions of medicines and
diets, mining of metals, and all things concerned with life and
hereafter. The experts also think that both these meanings are general.
And the last interpretation is the summary of all varying traditions.
People may object that the superiority of Adam was due to the fact that
Allah taught him the names beforehand whereas He didn’t teach the
Angels. So it was an unequal match. The reply to this is that Allah
might have taught Adam in front of the Angels but they were unable to
grasp the meaning whereas Adam could. There are many aspects to this
problem and it is beyond the scope of this book to mention them all. The
interpretation of Imam is not in need of detailed explanations. (i.e..
It is self - explanatory.) This view is supported by two narrations of
Ja’far al-Sadiq wherein he says, “The Almighty Allah taught Adam the
names of all His Proofs that were in the spiritual form at that time.
Then He presented them to the Angels. Allah asked the Angels to name
them to support their claim of superiority over Adam in the matter of
Divine vicegerency. The Angels said, “They said: Glory be to Thee! we
have no knowledge but that which Thou hast taught us; surely Thou art
the Knowing, the Wise.” (Surah Baqarah 2:32) Allah told Adam to mention
the ‘names’ along with their status and characteristics. When Adam did
so, the Angels became aware of their names and their high station. Then
the realization dawned on the Angels that those personalities were
really more deserving of Allah’s Caliphate and to be Allah’s proof on
His creatures than the Angels were. Then their lights was hidden from
the eyes of the Angels. Allah Commanded the Angels to cultivate love and
devotion of these luminaries. Allah then said, “Did I not say that I was
having knowledge of whatever is hidden in the Earth and the heavens, and
whatever you manifest and hide?’

[^3]: The splendor of Allah could denote the light of recognition that
Allah deprived the Angels; that they had previously possessed. It could
mean the light of His Greatness and Glory that was manifested in the
Holy Throne and the curtains.

[^4]: All the Muslims agree that the Sajdah of Angels to Adam’s was not
a Sajdah of deification. Because Sajdah for anyone other than Allah is
Polytheism and Disbelief. There are three opinions regarding this
Sajdah. First: The Sajdah was for Almighty Allah and Adam was just a
Kiblah. Just as people face the Ka‘bah during prayers. The first
traditions proves this point. Second: The word ‘Sajdah’ indicates
honoring or paying respect and not the Sajdah in the literal sense.
Although the former is in consonance with the dictionary meaning but
most of the traditions disprove it. Third: The Sajdah to respect Adam
was actually the Sajdah of Allah’s worship. Because Allah had ordered
it. This point is also stated in the majority of tradition. Thus it
proves that doing Sajdah for anyone else other than Allah with the
intention of worship is infidelity. It is a sin if Allah had not
commanded it. Although there is a possibility that Sajdah of respect was
permitted in previous nations but it is emphatically stated to be haram
for this Ummah. A number of traditions to this effect have been recorded
and as mentioned below.

[^5]: There are different views regarding Iblis, some which are
erroneous. First of all they have considered greatness as the root.
Secondly Prophet Adam’s excellence is concerned with his soul because
‘noor’ is a basis of all things. And the ‘noor’ of Adam was imbued with
divine recognition and knowledge. Both these things are bestowed to
Allah’s beloved people. And the fire’s luminosity is imperfect. It
depends how much it is beneficial; if anyone goes near it, it destroys
him. Fire burns to ashes. In comparison, Adam’s brilliance is different.
Thirdly, Satan thought fire is better than dust and this was his
mistake. He thought all attributes of fire are beneficial. Allah granted
a temporary brightness to fire and it became proud, so Allah the
Supreme, disgraced it. Allah bestowed the dust with superiority. He grew
tasty fruits and vegetables from it. It became useful to all mankind and
was bestowed with natural power. Its inherent qualities were concealed
in the earth. The dust was taken to the Holy Throne and exalted. The
kings and ordinary persons all are ultimately buried in it.

[^6]: We should know that there are different views about how Satan
deceived Adam. He had already been expelled from heaven whereas Adam and
Hawwa’ resided. According to some scholars, Adam and Hawwa’ came up to
the entrance of heaven and the Satan also had access until there. And he
used to speak to them from outside. Some have stated that Satan wrote an
anonymous letter to them. According to another view when Satan tried to
enter the Garden he was prevented by the guards. So he approached in
turn all the animals of Paradise but they all refused to gain him entry.
At last he came to the serpent and said, “I swear, I will remove your
baneful effect from the son of Adam and you will remain in my
protection. Now take me inside the Garden.” The serpent asked him to sit
between his two fangs and smuggled him into Paradise. At that time the
body of the serpent was covered. He had four limbs and was much better
in appearance than other animals. He was as tall as a camel. When he
brought Satan into Paradise, Allah became angry and stripped him down
and cut off his hands and legs. From that day the serpents crawl on the
earth because they helped Satan to enter the Garden in contravention of
divine command.

[^7]: There are many different views about the administration of divine
justice. It is possible that Allah created Prophet Adam for the Earth
and not for the heaven.

[^8]: There are different views regarding the tree which was forbidden
by Allah. Some say it was a fig tree and for some it was a grapevine and
some others say it was a camphor tree. Shaykh al-Tusi has narrated from
Imam ‘Ali that it was a tree of secret knowledge and death and the same
Imam has mentioned that it was an eternal tree from which the angels eat
and acquire immortality. We have already proved that Prophets are
infallible. Jealousy is a sin and a Prophet can never commit a sin. Here
it must be clarified that jealousy implies a desire that the recipient
of bounty should lose it. Whereas it was obvious that Adam had already
learnt of the high status of the family of Muhammad and could never have
wished them to lose the Divine Bounty. Thus it was not exactly
‘jealousy’. Hence, at the most it could be said to be Makrooh
(detestable) or Tark al-Awla (Leaving the preferable option).

[^9]: There are some differences regarding the Paradise of Adam. Whether
it is on the earth or in the heavens? Is it the same that the virtuous
people will enter or some other? The writers of Qur’anic exegesis agree
that it was one of the gardens of heaven. The others say that it was a
garden of the earth and from the same tradition have stated that one who
enters once never comes out. Regarding this people say that due to the
good deeds a person will enter in the heaven and will not come out. But
it is a doubtful matter. For example, Prophet Muhammad al-Mustafa ’s
flight to the heavens and back. The angels also come and go. Besides
this, there are different opinions about it. In most traditions it is
stated that the Paradise of Adam was on the heavens.

[^10]: The text of this hadith is same as those quoted above so we
refrain from repetition.

[^11]: The other prayers are not mentioned in this hadith

[^12]: The third question is not mentioned in the narration.

[^13]: We have already discussed the meaning of Jealousy in the previous
section.

[^14]: There is no contradiction between these traditions. It is
possible that all this might have occurred and all these personalities
might have interceded for his repentance.

[^15]: There are differences in traditions regarding the site of descent
of Adam and Hawwa’. Many reliable traditions shows Adam came down to
Safa and Marwa. And some traditions say that they came down to India.
Commonly held opinion is that Adam came on one of the mountains of
Sarandeep which is called Nood or Navad. And Hawwa’ came down to Jeddah.
It is possible that India was mentioned due to Taqiyyah. And it is also
possible that initially they came down to India and later went to Makkah
and stayed at Safa and Marwa as we shall see in traditions later.

[^16]: This tradition is usually quoted from Sunni sources, and the
traditions discussed earlier are much more reliable.

[^17]: Adam felt the heat of the Sun because he could not take shelter
under a tree or cave. His height may have been reduced by 70 hands. That
is previously he was 70 hands and tall and subsequently reduced to one
unit it might refer to the unit ‘hand’ of that time or the unit that
which Adam fixed for measurement of things. Same is regarding Hawwa’. I
have explained this tradition in a number of ways in my book Behaarul
Anwaar.

[^18]: It is very difficult to establish unanimity in these traditions.
It is possible all this occurred and generations continued.

[^19]: As these traditions are in accordance with the view of Sunni they
have appeared due to taqiyyah. The traditions mentioned previously are
more reliable.

[^20]: It is possible that the sisters who were born with him died
before and Qabil hadn’t seen their burial, or the report of the birth of
twin brother-sisters is based on taqiyyah. It is narrated in another
tradition that according to Tawus the first blood to be shed was of
Habil and same day one-fourth of the people were killed. Imam Zayn
al-‘abidin said, “It is not so, first blood was the menstrual blood of
Hawwa’. When Qabil killed Habil it was one-sixth of humanity because
they were six: Adam, Hawwa’, Habil, Qabil and two sisters. Then he said,
“Allah has appointed two guards over Qabil. When the Sun rises they
bring him out. And they take him back at Sunset. They sprinkle hot water
on him and he will be punished like this until the day of judgment.

[^21]: This hadith contradicts other traditions. It might be referring
to the fact that the chastisement of world is less than the chastisement
of hereafter or that the punishment of killing Habil shall not be meted
out in the hereafter, rather he would go to hell due to his disbelief.

[^22]: This hadith is accepted by the Sunni but according to Shi‘ahs
Adam didn’t have any children in heaven.

[^23]: This hadith is against the Shi‘ahs belief but accepted by some
Sunni scholars. It might have entered hadith books due to taqiyyah.

[^24]: This tradition is against the Shi‘ah belief that Prophets are
infallible. According to most Ulama this has come in hadith books due to
taqiyyah.

[^25]: All these traditions shall be discussed in the volume of Imamate.

[^26]: This proves that Adam and Nuh are buried in Najaf. So the
tradition which say that Adam is buried in Makkah mean that initially he
was buried there but later his remains were exhumed by Nuh and buried at
al-Kufah.

[^27]: Commentators and narrators differ regarding age of Adam. Some say
it was a thousand years and he gave 60 years to Dawud but later he
denied so again it became 1000 years. Other maintain it was 936 years.
Some others claim it to be 930 years. The last two traditions show that
it was probably 936 years and it is usual to mention the figure in tens
(i.e. 930 instead of 936).


