An account of Irmiya (Jeremiah), Daniel and Uzair
=================================================

Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen
down upon its roofs...” (2:259)***

Some say that the one who passed by that town was Uzair, as said by Imam
Ja‘far as-Sadiq. Some say that he was the Prophet Irmiya. So Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir is reported to have said that, (according to some)
that town was Jerusalem which was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. Some say
that the township mentioned here was the one from where thousands fled
for fear of death and all of them died.  
 The Qur’anic Verse:

***“He said, when will Allah give it life, after its death?”***
***(2:259)***

These words of the Prophet did not indicate his disbelief but were
uttered by him only to express the Might of Allah. Or, like Ibrahim, he
said this just to know the details of the coming alive of the dead.
Since the words of the Ayat show some sort of apparent weakness of
faith, some commentators have said that the one who said this was not
the Prophet Irmiya or Uzair but was a denier. But this version is
against a number of hadiths.  
 “So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years then raised him to
life.”

***“He asked: How long have you tarried? and he replied, I have tarried
a day, or a part of a day.” (2:259)***

When he saw that the sun had not yet set and it was about the evening
time, he said, Rather I slept for less than a day. Some say that the one
who asked this question was Allah and that they heard a voice from the
heaven. Some say it was an angel or a Prophet or an old man who had
recognized them after becoming alive.

***“Said he: Nay! you have tarried a hundred years” (2:259)***

He said, “But you have remained dead here for a hundred years and have
become alive now.” “Then look at your food and drink, years have not
passed over it.” [^1]  
 Look at your food and drink, they have not changed at all. It is
reported that when they reached that place they had grapes and figs and
grape juice with them and despite having delicacy therein, they had not
decomposed at all and, by the power of Allah, had remained fresh for a
hundred years.

***“And look at your donkey” (2:259)***

Its bones have rotted and disintegrated.  
 And that We may make you a sign.  
 We have, after keeping you dead for such a long time, made you alive so
that you may likewise be an evidence/argument about the resurrection of
people in the Hereafter.

***“And look at the bones, how we set them together, then clothed them
with flesh” (2:259)***

Most of the commentators have said that Allah enlivened their ass before
their eyes so that they may see how Allah makes the dead alive. Some
have said that Allah first enlivened their eyes. They then saw their
disintegrated and dilapidated bones come together and join with one
another and flesh begin to cover them.

***“So when it became clear to him he said, I know that Allah has power
over all things.” (2:259)***

That is, I knew it earlier but now my knowledge has strengthened.  
 It is reported from reliable chains that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said that
when The Israelites became disobedient they ignored Allah’s commandments
totally and when Allah desired to impose someone on them who would kill
them and degrade them, he first sent a revelation to Prophet Irmiya that
he may ask The Israelites “Which was the city I selected from all other
cities and bettered it and planted many good trees therein and saved it
from every undesirable tree, then the condition of that city
deteriorated and now it has become full of the worst trees of carob in
place of good trees?” Irmiya put this question to the religious scholars
of The Israelites and they said, “We do not know. Please ask Allah and
let us know.”

So Irmiya fasted for seven days and prayed. Allah sent a revelation to
him that: that city is Jerusalem and that tree is The Israelites whom I
had planted (and made to live in) in that city. But since they disobeyed
Me and changed my religion and turned thankless to me, I swear by My
Holy self that I will put them to a test through so severe hardships
that wise people will be astonished and I will impose one of my slaves
on them who would be born of the worst sperm and whose food would be of
the worst kind and he will kill their males and would arrest their women
and he would destroy Jerusalem which is their holy house and of which
they are proud and he will throw down that stone on dunghills of which
(stone) they make tall talks throughout the world. This would continue
for a hundred years.

Irmiya made the Israelites aware of this. They again requested him to
ask Allah what was the sin of the poor and the powerless who would also
suffer the said calamities. So Irmiya passed the next seven days only on
one morsel of food and yet he did not receive any Revelation. So Irmiya
again fasted fully for the next seven days and took only one morsel
after that seven-day fast. Even then, no Revelation arrived. Therefore,
he fasted for another seven days. Allah revealed to him: ‘O Irmiya!
Refrain from such asking, otherwise I will turn your face back. Do you
intend to make a recommendation in a matter which has already been
resolved? Tell them that their sin was that they observed others
indulging in sins but did not stop them (they neither admonished them
nor got away from them). Then Irmiya prayed to Allah: O Lord! Just tell
me whom will you impose upon them so that I may approach him for asking
safety for myself and my family members. Allah said to him: Go to that
village. There you will find a boy suffering from the worst inflicted
chronic ailments. His birth is of the worst and the dirtiest kind. That
is, he is the outcome of adultery and his chastisement is worse than
all. Irmiya reached there and saw a boy in a caravanserai whom the
people had thrown on a dunghill. He was lying on ground. With him was
only his mother breaking dry bread in a bowl and brought it before him
along with swine milk. That boy ate the bread and drinks the milk.
Irmiya understood that this must be the boy hinted by Allah. He went to
the boy and asked him his name.  
 He answered: “Nebuchadnezzar.” After hearing his name, Irmiya became
sure that he was the one. He treated the boy who recovered. After his
recovery, Irmiya asked him: Do you know me? He said, No. I only know
that you are a virtuous gentleman. Told him: I am Irmiya, the messenger
for The Israelites. Allah has informed me that you will gain control
over The Israelites and kill their men and do such and such things.
Hearing this Nebuchadnezzar felt pride in his heart. Then Irmiya asked
him to give him a warrant of safety. He wrote it and handed it over to
Irmiya. He then began to pass his days by cutting wood from the forests
and selling it. At last, the people encouraged him to fight against The
Israelites. When he got the assistance of a group of people, he invaded
the residence and shelter of The Israelites, that is, Jerusalem.

At that time, innumerable people came from all around to join him. When
Irmiya came to know that he was advancing toward Jerusalem, he stood in
his path but could not approach him due to the huge army around him. So
he tied the said warrant of protection on a staff and raised it up.
Seeing it, Nebuchadnezzar asked: who are you? The messenger replied, “I
am Uremia, the Prophet, who had given you the tiding of overcoming The
Israelites and this is the warrant of safety written by you for me.”
Nebuchadnezzar said, “I assure protection to you but as regards your
family members, it depends upon the arrow that I shoot toward Jerusalem.
If this missile hits that place from this much distance, I will not give
protection to them. But if it does not reach there, then they are also
protected.” He released that arrow which (by the will of Allah) reached
Jerusalem. So he said, “I will not protect them.” He went on to conquer
Jerusalem.

On reaching there, he saw a hillock in the midst of the city. Fresh
blood was gushing out of it. The more earth the people threw on it the
more forceful became its gushing. He inquired as to what kind of blood
it was. They replied that it was the blood of a Divine Messenger whom
the kings of The Israelites had killed. Ever since that day, the blood
continued to boil. It did not stop despite throwing earth over it. It
was the blood of Yahya son of Zakariyya. In his time, there was a king
who used to indulge in adultery with the women of The Israelites.
Whenever Yahya passed by his residence he admonished the king telling
him: O King! Fear Allah. This deed is not lawful for you. One day when
the cursed fellow was out of his senses due to drinking of wine, one of
the adulteress women told him to kill Yahya. The condemned king at once
passed the order for cutting off the head of Yahya and to bring the head
to him. So Yahya was killed and his head was taken to the king. Yet the
decapitated head continued to admonish that cursed king to refrain from
his illegal deeds and to fear Allah. At that time, a drop of the blood
of the martyred Prophet fell on the ground and since then that blood
continued to boil until the time Nebuchadnezzar entered Jerusalem though
a hundred years had passed since the incident. However, after reaching
that place Nebuchadnezzar began to kill the men, women, children and
animals of The Israelites living in those cities. The pious blood of the
executed Prophet still continued to boil on the said hillock until all
were done to death. Then he asked: Is anyone from The Israelites still
alive?

He was informed that a very old lady of The Israelites was still alive
and living in a certain village. She was called and her head too was cut
off. Only then did the boiling blood of Yahya calm down. She was the
last person from The Israelites to be killed. From there Nebuchadnezzar
went to Babylon and resided there. There he dug a well and threw Daniel
along with a tigress. (The remaining part of this hadith will be
presented afterwards together with a full account of Daniel. That
tigress was living by eating the earth and Daniel was drinking her milk.
A long period passed in this way. Allah sent a Revelation to one of His
Messengers (living in Jerusalem then) and asked him to take food and
drink to Daniel and to convey His Salaam to him. The Messenger inquired:
‘My Lord! Where is he?’ “In such and such well and in such and such
village of Babylon” came the Divine reply. Hearing it, he reached there
and shouted: ‘O Daniel!” Daniel replied, “Labbaik (Here I am). I am
hearing a new voice!” The Messenger said, “Your Lord sends you Salaam.”
Lowering the eatables into the well he added, “Allah has sent these
things for you.”

Daniel exclaimed, “I praise Allah Who never forgets whosoever calls Him.
I praise the Lord Who never leaves the one (to the mercy of others) who
relies on Him. I praise the Allah who bestows good for good. I praise
the Allah who gives salvation from the chastisement of the grave and the
Hereafter to the one who bears patiently. Praise belongs to Allah who
removes our troubles and losses. Worthy of praise is Allah who is the
centre of our hopes when we miss all other avenues of salvation and
success. Praiseworthy is Allah on whom alone we depend hopefully after
committing misdeeds based on misunderstanding.”

Thereafter Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream that his head was made of
iron, his legs of copper and his chest of gold. He called astrologers
and inquired about the meaning behind his dream. They said we know
nothing; but if you describe to us what you saw in your vision then we
will explain the dream. Nebuchadnezzar retorted: I have been giving you
so much salary for such a long time and yet you cannot tell me what I
saw in my dream? Angrily he killed all of them. Then some of his
courtmen told him that what he wanted to know could be told to him by a
man whom he (king Nebuchadnezzar) had thrown into a well, as he was
still alive and living on the milk of a she tiger which was eating the
earth and had not at all harmed that man.

Nebuchadnezzar called Daniel and asked him to describe what he saw in
his vision?” Daniel described the king’s dream. The king said it was
correct and added: “now tell me its meaning.” Daniel replied, “Your
regime has come to an end. You will be killed after three days by a man
from Faaris.” Nebuchadnezzar said, “I have built seven concentric towns
and have fixed weathercocks made of copper at the gate of every city
which cry out at the sight of every stranger so that he may be caught.”
Daniel said, “What I have told you is sure to happen.” So Nebuchadnezzar
once again ordered his soldiers to continue their rounds and to kill
anyone moving towards him (whosoever he may be).” He detained Daniel
warning him that if he (Nebuchadnezzar) was not killed within three days
Daniel would be executed. As evening approached, his restlessness
increased so much he came out, gave his sword to one of the slaves who
belonged to Faaris and roared: “Kill anyone you see, even if it is I.”
The slave took the sword from his hand and decapitated him in one stroke
thus sending Nebuchadnezzar to Hell instantly.

After the mass massacre of The Israelites, Irmiya came out of Jerusalem,
rode his ass, took figs and grape-juice with him and reached a place
where the dead bodies of many people were scattered and animals of the
land, sea and air were devouring their corpses. Irmiya halted there for
a while. Then he uttered: “How will Allah enliven those, whose limbs
have been eaten up by beasts”! Allah immediately retrieved his soul and
made him alive after a hundred years. Allah showed His Mercy to The
Israelites and killed Nebuchadnezzar. The Israelites flourished in the
world and the Messenger who came to life after remaining dead for
hundred years was Prophet Irmiya.

As regards Uzair, when Nebuchadnezzar overpowered The Israelites and
became king, he (Uzair) escaped from his evil regime and disappeared in
a stream of water. The first portion of the corpse of Irmiya to be made
alive was his eyes. The pupil of his eye moved like the whiteness of an
egg and it could see. Allah sent a Revelation asking him for how many
days had he remained at that place. He said, for a day. Then when he
observed that the sun had gone up, he said, even less than a day. Allah
said, No, but a hundred years have passed since you were here. Look at
the figs and the fig juice. They have remained fresh for all this time.
And see your ass. It has turned into a heap of rotten bones. Now see,
how I make it alive. Uzair saw the broken bones drawing near one another
and joining until the entire body of himself and all the limbs of his
ass became alright and both of them arose. Irmiya said, I know that
Allah is Omnipotent and it is mentioned in a reliable tradition that two
Kafir (disbeliever) kings had ruled over the entire world. They were
Nimrod and Nebuchadnezzar.

According a reliable source Imam as-Sadiq said that when Irmiya saw the
destruction of Jerusalem and the people lying dead in that city he
exclaimed: “Will Allah ever make all of them alive?” Allah retrieved his
soul also. Then after a hundred years when he was made alive he saw how
various parts of his body joining one another, flesh was growing on them
and the joints and veins coming together. Finally when he became alright
he sat up said, “I know for sure that Allah is able to do everything.”

It is reported in a reliable tradition that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said
that a man who becomes gloomy concerning his sustenance has a sin listed
in his account. Verily Daniel had lived in the time of a heartless and
oppressor king who arrested him and had him thrown in a well. Allah sent
His Revelation to another Messenger of that time asking him to take food
(provision) to Daniel. He submitted: “O My Nourisher! Where is he
(Daniel)?” Then came a Divine indication: “When you get out of the city
a voice will come to you. Just follow that voice. It will take you to a
well wherein lies Daniel. When that Messenger approached Daniel and
dropped food and water in the well, Daniel recited the prayer which has
been quoted earlier. Thereafter Imam as-Sadiq said, “Almighty Allah
provides sustenance to the faithful (Mu’mineen) from unthinkable
sources.”

In another hadith, it is said by Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when the time
of Sulayman’s death came near, he made by the command of Allah Asif bin
Barkhiya his caliph (successor). His Shi‘ahs (companions) were always
going to Asif to learn about religious issues. Once, Asif absented
himself from them for quite a long time. Then he came back and lived
among them for a long period before he allowed them to go. The Shi‘ahs
asked him: Now when and where will we meet you? He replied, “Near Sirat
(the bridge in Hereafter).” Then he disappeared. The Israelites was
subjected to difficulties and pains. When Nebuchadnezzar got control
over them, he killed everyone who was caught and sent his men after
those who escaped from him. He arrested their children. Accordingly, he
picked up four persons of great personalities from The Israelites. One
of them was Daniel another was Uzair a progeny of Harun. They were quite
young. He arrested them. He tortured The Israelites severely and
subjected them to all sorts of disgrace and dishonor. At that time their
(Israelites’) guide and leader was Daniel who remained imprisoned in
Nebuchadnezzar’s jail for ninety years.

When Nebuchadnezzar came to know about Daniel’s greatness and when he
heard that The Israelites were awaiting Daniel for the removal of their
troubles he imprisoned Daniel in a very spacious and deep well and
released a tiger in it so that it would kill him. He also ordered that
nobody should offer food to Daniel. However, the tiger never approached
Daniel and Allah provided food and water to Daniel through one of His
Messengers. Daniel fasted during the day and broke his fasts in the
evening with that provision. During this period his Shi‘ahs (companions)
and friends were put to more and more troubles and tortures and all were
in await for his appearance. Many of them had, due to the lengthening of
the period of his occultation (absence), begun to doubt their religion.
Finally, when the calamities on the Prophet Daniel and his community
crossed all limits, Nebuchadnezzar had a dream. In that dream he saw
armies of angels descending from the heaven and proceeding to the well
in which Daniel was imprisoned; they were saluting Daniel and gave him
good tidings of the removal of all his calamities.

When Nebuchadnezzar woke up in the morning, he felt ashamed of his
misdeeds. He brought Daniel out of the well, begged his pardon and
entrusted all the affairs of his regime to him and made him the ruler of
his country. Then all the people of The Israelites who were in hiding
came out and gathered around Daniel. They drew a sigh of relief. Time
passed by peacefully. Eventually Daniel passed away into the Mercy of
His Lord leaving his vicegerency and caliphate to Uzair. Believers
joined and obeyed the latter and continued to obtain solutions to their
affairs from him. Allah made him also disappear for a hundred years.
After a hundred years, he was again reappointed over them. After him,
the hujjahs of Allah remained in hiding and calamities continued to fall
on The Israelites until the time Yahya arrived.  
 According to reliable sources Imam Muhammad al-Baqir in reply to
people’s query whether Daniel knew the science of explaining dramas and
whether he had taught it to others too, replied, “Yes, because Allah was
sending revelations to him. He was a Prophet and was one of those who
was given the knowledge about dreams or visions. He was very truthful
and wise and his heart was full of love for us Ahl al-Bayt.”

According to reliable narrations Imam al-Ridha said, In the time of
Daniel there was a king who had told Daniel that he wished to have a
child just like him (Daniel) of good character. Daniel asked the king
how much respect and value he had for him. The king replied, “I have
high regards and much respect for you.” Daniel told him: when you go to
your wife (for sexual intercourse) keep my thought in your mind
wholeheartedly. Complying with this advice the king got a son who was
the best of all others and resembled Daniel a lot.

According to authentic reports, the Holy Prophet said, Nebuchadnezzar
ruled for 187 years. After 47 years of his rule, Allah Almighty
appointed Uzair as a Messenger (Divine) for those city-dwellers who were
made alive after a hundred year old death. They were residents of
different townships who had fled for fear of death and had resided near
about Uzair. All of them were believers. Uzair talked pleasantly with
them and heard them with interest. He loved them due to their faith and
tied the knot of brotherhood-in-faith with them. One day he dad gone
away for them for some reason. When he returned the next day, he saw all
of them lying dead. He became very sorry and surprisingly exclaimed:
“When will Allah enliven them?” Allah retrieved his soul also then and
there. Thus, all of them remained there in the same state for one
hundred years. After a hundred years, Allah made Uzair alive along with
the others. They were warriors numbering 1,00,000. But Nebuchadnezzar
overpowered them and killed each and every one.

Thereafter Nebuchadnezzar died and his son Mehrooyah became king. After
ruling for 17 years and 20 days Mehrooyah dug a very big cavern and
threw Daniel and his Shi‘ahs in it and torched it. But nobody was
harmed. When Mehrooyah saw that the flames of fire did not touch them he
imprisoned all of them and released many beasts of prey therein and
tortured them in various methods until Allah Almighty released them from
his clutches. The group referred to as ‘Makers of the pit’ in the holy
Qur’an were these people. When Allah desired to call back Daniel to His
Mercy, He commanded him to turn over his Divine light of wisdom to his
son Yakja and to make him his caliph.

According to reliable chains, Imam as-Sadiq said, “Amir al-Mu’minin
said, Daniel was an orphan. Neither his father nor mother were living.
An old woman of The Israelites had nourished Daniel. The king of that
time had appointed two Qadis (judges). A very virtuous man was a friend
of both of them. He had a very beautiful, pious and God-worshipping
wife. That pious man used to meet the king also. Facing a problem the
king told the two judges that he required a reliable man to whom he
could entrust such and such work. The two judges recommended the name of
the aforesaid person. The king dispatched that pious man on that job.
While going away that pious man asked his two friends to look after his
wife during his absence. They went to his house to inquire about her
well-being. As she was extraordinarily beautiful both of them fell in
love with her at first sight and desired to have an illicit relationship
with her. But she did not agree. They threatened her as such “We will
give witness before the king that you have committed adultery and he
will stone you to death.” But she was adamant and retorted: “Do whatever
you can but I will not tolerate such a heinous misdeed.” Both those
dishonest men (helplessly) went to the king and gave a false statement
that she had committed adultery. The king was shocked to hear it because
he had heard a lot about her piety and chastity and was all praise for
it.

On the other hand he could not reject the witness given by the two
judges. At last after a lot of thinking he told them that he would
accept their witness but would give the punishment of stoning her after
three days. He announced in the city that there would be a stoning of a
Allah-fearing and virtuous woman of the town as she had committed
adultery according to the witness given by two judges and called upon
the people to gather at a certain place for the stoning. The people were
not prepared to agree with this allegation which they knew was false and
continued to argue with the king. The king consulted his vizier and
asked him whether he could show him a way by which the woman could be
saved? He said, “No.”

On the third day when that lady was to be stoned to death the vizier got
out of his home and proceeded toward the king’s court. On his way he saw
some children playing, among whom was also Daniel. The vizier did not
know Daniel. When the vizier approached them Daniel told the children:
“Let us stage a play. I will act as the king, this boy will act as the
pious lady and those two boys will take the role of the two judges.”
They made an earthen stage and Daniel sat on it. He took a sword made of
reed in his hand and ordered the rest of the boys to take one of the two
witnesses and make him stand afar and to make the other witness stand at
a distance on the other side. Then he called one of the witnesses near
him and said, “Tell the truth otherwise you will be decapitated
instantly.” The vizier was observing this game. The boy witness said
that the pious woman committed adultery.

Daniel asked: “When?” He said at such time and on such day. Then Daniel
asked: “With whom?” He replied, “With the son of such and such man.”
Daniel then asked: “At what place.” He replied, “At such and such
place.” Then Daniel called the other witness and asked him: “What is
your witnessing?” He said, “I give witness that this lady has committed
adultery.” He was asked: “when?” He replied, “At this time.” He asked:
“With whom?” He said, “With that person.” He asked: “At what place?” He
said, “At such and such place.” As there was contradiction in the
statements of the two, Daniel exclaimed: “Allahu Akbar” (Allah is the
Greatest). These two have given false witness. Then he ordered that an
announcement should be made that the people should gather to witness the
execution of the two persons who gave false testimony. Observing this
wonderful judgment of Daniel the vizier rushed to the king and described
it to him. The king called those two qadis, made them stand apart at an
out-of-hearing distance. Then he called one of the two and questioned
him about the pious woman as Daniel had done. Then he called the other
person and interrogated him likewise. As there was obvious difference
between their accounts the king called upon the people to come together
and witness the execution of the false witnesses and passed orders for
their killing.

It is reported authentically that Imam al-Baqir said, Allah Almighty
revealed to Messenger Dawud and ordered him to got to Daniel and to tell
him: “You disobeyed Me and I forgave you. Again you disregarded my
command and I pardoned you. Once more you did not comply with my orders
and I will not forgive you.” Dawud conveyed the Divine Commandment to
Daniel. Daniel said, “You have fulfilled your mission of the Divine
messenger-ship.” Then Daniel arose before next daybreak, wept profusely
and prayed earnestly to Almighty Allah saying: O My Nourisher! I
disobeyed you on three occasions and you were kind enough to forgive me.
Now that you are not to pardon me on the fourth occasion, I humbly
submit before you, swearing by you Honor and Grandeur. If you will not
continue to be kind to me and if you will not guide me, surely I will
err, I will err, I will err, I will err.”[^2]

According to an authentic narration Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “Once the
Holy Prophet said, Appreciate the value of bread, for its making. The
entire creation of Allah situated between His Throne.”

According to an authentic narration Imam as-Sadiq the Holy Prophet once
said, “Appreciate the value of bread, because for its making the entire
creation of Allah situated between His throne and the earth have
toiled.” Then he told the people around him: “Do you want me to tell you
something?” They replied, “Surely, O Prophet of Allah! may our parents
be sacrificed for you! Do enlighten us.” The holy Prophet said, “Before
your time, there was a Divine Messenger named Daniel.

Once upon a time he gave a bread (loaf) to a ship-fairer and requested
him to take him across the river. That fellow threw away the bread
retorting: What shall I do with this bread? A number of it is being
wasted all around us all the time. Shocked by the behavior of that man
Daniel raised his hands towards the heavens and exclaimed: O Nourisher
of the universe! You have already seen what this man has done to this
loaf, and what he said about it.

Almighty Allah ordered the sky to stop raining and commanded the earth
to become as hard as baked bricks so that even grass may not sprout
therefrom. Consequently there was a famine which became so severe that
people began to kill and eat one another. The intensity of famine
reached the extent willed by Allah so as to make the people disciplined.
One woman who had a baby son told another woman who also had a baby son:
Today I will slaughter my son so that both of us may eat his flesh;
tomorrow you should do likewise with your son. Then she killed her son
and both ate his flesh.

The next day when both became hungry the other woman refused to kill her
son. Quarrelling with one another they approached Daniel for judgment.
He exclaimed: Has the condition worsened so much that you are prepared
to eat up your own offspring’s? They said, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah!
The situation is even worse than that.” So Daniel raised his hands to
pray to Allah and said, O Provident of sustenance to all! Resume Your
Mercy upon us and please do not chastise the poor and their children
because of the sins of proud men like the ship-fairer and other
thankless people. So Allah commanded the sky to shower rain and ordered
the earth to grow grains and said, Compensate the loss of My creation
which they suffered until now. I have shown My Mercy to them due to the
young children.

According to a reliable tradition, Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali said, “Whenever
you see a beast of prey recite:  
 I come into the protection of the Lord of Daniel and of the well in
which he was thrown from the harm of the tiger and of every animal.”

It is recorded that Imam Zayn al-‘abidin said, “Almighty Allah told
Daniel through a revelation: “In My View the most inimical and most
ignorant and unwise among My creation is he who underestimates the
rights of the knowledgeable and does not follow him and most dear to me
is a pious person who is eager to gain My Reward and who serves the
learned and does not go away from him and who follows the patient and
takes lessons from the wise.”

Through authentic chains, al-Qutb al-Rawandi and Ibn-Babawayh have
narrated from Wahab bin Munabbah that when Nebuchadnezzar became king he
was expecting only sinfulness from The Israelites because he knew that
he would not be able to overcome them until they became unworthy of
Allah’s help. Hence he was constantly spying on them to ascertain their
condition until all their virtues turned into vices and evils. When they
began to kill their Prophets Nebuchadnezzar arrived with his armies and
encircled The Israelites. As the Holy Qur’an describes:

***“And We have made known to the children of Israel in the Book: most
certainly you will make mischief in the land twice, and most certainly
you will behave with great insolence.” (15:4)***

***“So when the promise of the first of the two came true, we sent over
to you our servants of mighty prowess. So they went to and from among
the houses, and it was a promise to be accomplished.” (15:5)***

Accordingly they arrested and killed many according to Allah’s word.
Wahab bin Munabbah has said that the said group was that of
Nebuchadnezzar and his army men. Commentators have said that their first
haughtiness was opposing the commandments of the Torah and the second
misdeed of corruption was the murder of Sohyaa or Irmiya or Zakariyya or
Yahya and their intention to kill ‘Isa. Some commentators have written
that those mischief-makers were Nebuchadnezzar and his fellow-travelers
and some have said they were Jalut. Some say they were Sakhaadeeb who
were residents of Nineveh. Then the Qur’an goes on to mention:

***“Then we gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided
you with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.” (15:6)***

Commentators describe that from the side of the king of Babylon,
Lahraasf, Nebuchadnezzar finished them off and when his son Gustaf came
to throne he showed mercy towards The Israelites, released their
captives and sent them towards Syria and made Daniel their king. Then
The Israelites overpowered the companions of Nebuchadnezzar. According
to another wording this indicates the killing of Jalut by Dawud. Wahab
has narrated that when Nebuchadnezzar surrounded The Israelites and the
latter could not stand against the former they turned toward Allah and
wept and did good deeds and also prevented ignorant from doing evils
beside enjoining them to do good. So Allah made them overpower
Nebuchadnezzar even though they had been defeated and their cities
conquered. Nebuchadnezzar returned left because an arrow hit the
forehead of his horse which ran and carried him out of the city.
Thereafter The Israelites became rebellious and corrupt. As they once
more drowned themselves into the sea of sins, Nebuchadnezzar intended to
invade them as says Almighty:

***“So when the second promise came true (we raised another people) that
they may bring you to grief and that they may enter the mosque as they
entered it the first time, and that they might destroy whatever they
gained ascendancy over with utter destruction.” (15:7)***

The commentators have commented that the king of Babylon came again to
fight with them and Wahab has narrated that when The Israelites reverted
to evildoing and corruption Irmiya informed them that Nebuchadnezzar was
coming to fight them and that Allah had become very angry with them and
that He (Allah) says: if you repent I will be kind to you due to your
previous ancestors and asks “Have you ever seen someone rebel against Me
and become successful or someone obey Me and become unlucky or a loser
lose because of (My) obedience? But your priests and (insincere)
worshippers have enslaved my servants and they are issuing orders in
contravention of My Book and your kings and wealthy people have become
rebellious due to My bounties and the world has made them proud and the
readers of Torah and your clergymen (religious jurisprudents) have all
become subservient and loyal to the kings and are giving them oaths of
allegiance on innovations and they are disobeying Me for obeying them
and their sons are indulging in the wrong and ignorance with others.
Despite all this rebellion and waywardness, I continued to protect them.
Now I swear to turn their honor into disgrace and tranquility into
troublesome danger. I will not answer when they make supplications to
Me.”

When their Prophet conveyed this command of their Lord to them, they
denied it and said “You are attributing untruths to Allah and are
claiming that Allah will suspend worship in His prayer houses.” So they
arrested and jailed the Prophet. At last, Nebuchadnezzar invaded their
cities and surrounded them for seven months until they were obliged to
devour their wastes due to hunger. He overpowered them completely and
massacred them like furious oppressors. He executed many and cut off the
tongues of many, broke down their teeth and imprisoned their womenfolk
disgracefully. People told Nebuchadnezzar that among these people was
one who had warned them about all that they are facing now but they
denied him and jailed him. Nebuchadnezzar ordered that he should be
brought to him from jail. People brought Irmiya to Nebuchadnezzar. He
asked him whether he had warned the people about what would happen to
them. Irmiya replied, “Yes because I knew it all; Allah had informed me
about it and He appointed me as a messenger for them.”

Nebuchadnezzar asked: “Did they beat you up and jail you?” Irmiya
replied, “Yes.” Nebuchadnezzar said, “These are bad people and also evil
as they beat up their Prophet and they deny their Lord’s Message. If you
please, you may live with me, I will keep you with honor or if you wish,
you may live in the cities. I give you security.” Irmiya said, “Ever
since I have awakened I have remained in the shelter of Allah and have
never been out of His protection. Had The Israelites too not been out of
His asylum they also would not have feared you.” However, Irmiya
remained in the land of Elia where he was. At that time, that city had
been destroyed and a part of it had been totally ruined. When the
remaining people of The Israelites heard this, they collected near him
and said, “O Messenger of Allah! We have recognized that you are our
Prophet. Please give us admonition. We are obedient to you.” He asked
them to remain with him. They said, “We will live in the protection of
the king and ask for his asylum.” told them “The protection of Allah is
the best protection. You should not go out of His protection and enter
the asylum of others.” But they left Irmiya and went to Egypt and asked
the king for his asylum. He gave them asylum.

When Nebuchadnezzar came to know this, he wrote a letter to the king of
Egypt stating: “Arrest them and send them to me otherwise be prepared
for a war.” When Irmiya came to know this, he showed mercy on them and
went to Egypt so that he may relieve them from the evil of
Nebuchadnezzar. He told The Israelites that Allah Almighty had revealed
to him that he will make Nebuchadnezzar overpower that king and a sign
of it is that “He has shown me the place where Nebuchadnezzar will
ascend the throne after conquering Egypt.” Then he fixed four stones at
the place of the throne. When Nebuchadnezzar invaded and conquered
Egypt, he gained control of them, and arrested them. He intended to
distribute the booty. He thought to kill some of the captives and to set
some free. When he saw Irmiya among them, he said to him: “I respect
you, but you have joined my enemies.” He replied, “I had come here to
inform these people that you will win over them and I warned them of
your power and might even while you were in Babylon. Yet I have shown
them the place of your throne and even fixed stones at the place of each
leg of your throne. They have seen all this.”

As ordered by Nebuchadnezzar, the throne was moved aside and the ground
beneath every leg of the throne was dug. When the said stones were seen
he was convinced that the words of were true. He said, “Now I will kill
these people because they did not believe in your words and denied you.”
At last, all of them were killed. Thereafter Nebuchadnezzar returned to
Babylon. Irmiya stayed in Egypt for some time. Allah commanded him to go
to the city of Elia. On his way back to Irmiya when approached Jerusalem
and saw its destruction, he exclaimed: “When will Allah make this city
flourish?” Then he camped on the outskirts of the city and fell asleep.
Allah retrieved his soul and kept him hidden from the sight of people.
He remained dead there for one hundred years. Allah had promised him
that that city would be inhabited. When seventy years passed by after
his death, He permitted the settlement of the city of Elia. Allah then
sent an angel to the king of Faaris called Gong with the message: “Allah
orders you to proceed to Elia with your army and men and treasure and
rebuild that city.” The king of Faaris appointed 30 thousand persons and
gave each one of them one thousand helpers and provided all the material
required for building that city. The city of Elia began to flourish
after thirty years. Allah made Irmiya alive as has been mentioned in the
holy Qur’an.

Again, it is reported from the same Wahab bin Munabbah that when
Nebuchadnezzar arrested The Israelites and took them with him, Daniel
and Uzair were also among them. Nebuchadnezzar enslaved The Israelites
after reaching Babylon. After sever years he saw a dream which
frightened him but forgot about it entirely when he woke up the next
morning. He collected his people and asked if anyone could tell him what
he had seen in his dream. He also warned them that if they did not tell
him the details of his dream within three days he would kill all of
them. Daniel was then in jail. When he heard about Nebuchadnezzar’s
dream, he told the jailer: “You have done much good for me. Can you do a
little more for me? Please intimate to the king that I know his dream as
well as its meaning.” The jailer came to Nebuchadnezzar and conveyed
Daniel’s message. The king called Daniel. Every one arriving in his
court used to prostrate before him first but Daniel did not do so. He
stood silent for quite a long time but the king did not speak to him.
Then he asked the watchmen to go out of his presence and asked Daniel:
“Why did you not prostrate before me?” He replied, “My Lord Who has
given me the knowledge about dreams has prohibited me from prostrating
before anyone except Him. If I bow before anyone except Him this
knowledge of mine will vanish from me then you will not get its benefit.
Hence I did not prostrate before you.” Nebuchadnezzar said, “Since you
have fulfilled you Lord’s condition you are saved from my harm. Now tell
me about what I dreamed.” Daniel said, “You saw a very huge idol. Its
foot was on earth and its head touched the sky. Its upper part was made
of gold, the middle of silver and the lover of copper. The shin of its
legs was of iron and feet of bricks. You were observing its grandeur and
strength and the difference in the various limbs of its body. Suddenly
an angel threw a stone on that idol which hit its head and made it small
in such a way that all the parts of its body which were made up of gold
and silver and copper and iron and brick mixed with one another and you
thought that even if all the men of the world joined together and tried
to disintegrate those parts they would not be able to do so. Then you
thought that a little breeze of wind could also sweep off all of them.
Then you had a vision that the stone thrown by the angel began to
enlarge until it covered the entire earth. Then, despite all efforts you
could not see anything except the sky and that stone.”

Nebuchadnezzar said, “You are quite correct. I had seen the same things.
Now please tell me what it all means.” Daniel said, “The example of the
idol seen by you is like the communities of people who will appear like
that of the past, medieval times and the last ages. The golden part
resembles your community and your regime, silver is like that of your
son who will rise after you and copper indicates the people of Room
(Byzantine), iron hints at the Iranians and the kings of non-Arabs and
the brick is that of the kingdom of two communities. Their king will
have two wives, one in the east of Yemen and the other in the west of
Syria. The stone which came from the sky and belittled the idol
indicates the religion which will cover the people of the last age. It
will defeat all other religions (and falsify them). The Lord of the
world will send an unlettered Prophet in the Arab land and through him
subjugate all other people and religions. As you have seen in your
vision that that stone enlarged until it encircled the entire world.”

Hearing this Nebuchadnezzar said, “The extent of your kindness to me is
unprecedented and I want to reward you for it. If you intend to go to
your cities I will send you there, and will rebuild those cities for
you. If you would prefer to live with me I will keep you with me with
full honor and respect.” Daniel said, “Until Allah so desires our cities
will continue to ruin as destined by Him and He will rebuild them when
He wants to do so. I prefer to live with you.” Nebuchadnezzar gathered
his sons and servants and tribesmen and told them: “This gentleman is
very wise and knowledgeable. It was because of him that Allah relieved
me from a calamity regarding which you could not help. So now I have
entrusted all my affairs as well as that of yours to him. O my sons!
Earn knowledge from this great man and obey him. If you get orders from
me and from him simultaneously, then first comply with his commandment.”
Thereafter, he did not do any work without consulting Daniel.

When the people of Nebuchadnezzar’s community saw this they became
jealous of Daniel. They went to him (Nebuchadnezzar) and told him: “You
are the owner of the entire world then how is it that you have made even
yourself subject to his orders? Our enemies think you have lost your
senses and hence you have given up your kingship.” Nebuchadnezzar said I
obtain help from this gentleman who belongs to The Israelites for
reforming your affairs because his Lord makes him aware of good things.”
They told him: “We are making a god for you who will help you in your
affairs and then you will have no more need of Daniel.”

Nebuchadnezzar said, “It is up to you.” Hearing this all of them went
away and constructed a very huge idol and fixed a day of festival on
which all were invited to attend a sacrificial ceremony wherein many
animals were to be slaughtered and offered to the gigantic idol. A big
fire was lit in front of the idol like the fire of Nimrod. Anybody who
refused to prostrate before that idol was thrown into that fire pit.
Daniel had four youth friends named Yushaal, Yooheen, Eswwaa and Marsoos
all belonging to The Israelites. They were both faithful and sincere.
They were caught and brought there and ordered to bow before the idol.

They said, “This idol is not Allah. It is a log of wood having no sense,
carved up by men. We can prostrate before the only one Allah who created
this idol.” Angered by this reply they tied up all the four and threw
them into the blazing fire. Next morning Nebuchadnezzar saw from the
balcony of his palace that all of them were alive and another aged
personality was sitting near them. He also saw that the fire has cooled
down. On seeing this he got frightened and called Daniel and enquired
about them. Daniel said, “All those four youths belong to my faith. They
worship only my Allah. Therefore He protected them from your evil. The
person sitting near them is an angel who is in charge of heat and cold.
Allah has sent him to help those youths.”

Nebuchadnezzar ordered them out of the fire pit and asked them: “How did
you pass the night?” They replied, “Ever since we were born we have not
passed a night which was not better than the previous one.” Hearing this
Nebuchadnezzar respected them and allowed them to live with Daniel.
Thirty years passed by. Then Nebuchadnezzar saw another dream which was
more frightening than the previous one and again he forgot the whole of
it. He called scholars of his country and told them that he had seen a
dream which, he was afraid would indicate his death and asked them to
enlighten him on its meaning. They told him that they did not know its
meaning. He turned out all of them and called Daniel and consulted him
about his dream. Daniel, describing his dream, said, In your dream you
have seen many green trees with their branches reaching up to the sky.
Birds of the sky were sitting on that tree. Under it were wild animals
of the land. You were looking at that tree and its freshness and
greenery astonished you.

Suddenly an angel descended from the heavens with an axe-like iron
instrument hanging round his neck. That angel asked another angel
standing at the gate of the heavens in what way Allah had ordered him to
cut off the tree, that is, down right from its roots or to leave it
standing on a shortened trunk? The angel replied that that Allah had
commanded him to cut off some part of the tree and to leave some part of
it intact. Then you saw that when the angel hit the tree with that axe
it fell down crashing and all the birds flew away and all the animals
scattered from under its shade. Only the trunk of that tree stood on the
ground. Its greenness and freshness vanished.” Nebuchadnezzar said that
was exactly what he had seen in his dream. Then he requested for its
meaning.

Daniel said, “The tree was you yourself, the birds on it were your
family members and the beasts under it were your servants and slaves
etc. You made Allah angry because of your idol worship.” Nebuchadnezzar
asked: “What will your Lord do now?” Daniel replied, “He will involve
you in the matter of your body. Your body will be metamorphosed for
seven years. Then you will revert to the shape of man as you are now.”
Nebuchadnezzar was severely shocked. He kept weeping for seven days.
After seven days he went to the top floor of his palace where Allah
turned him into an eagle and he flew away. Daniel ordered his sons not
to make any changes in his regime until their father’s return. Finally
he was metamorphosed in the shape of a mosquito and returned to his
palace flying.  
 Allah turned him into a human being again. He took a bath, wore jute
clothing, collected his people and said, “You and I worshipped, instead
of only one Allah, a thing which cannot either give us any benefit or
any loss. Verily, in the matter of my own self I am convinced Allah’s
Might has become manifest and I have understood that there is no Allah
except the Allah of The Israelites. So whosoever will follow me is from
me and will have equal status and whosoever opposes me I will cut off
his head, until Allah makes a final decision between me and him. I give
you respite until next morning. Return all of you next morning.” Then he
went inside his palace and reclined on his bed. Allah retrieved his soul
then and there. Wahab says he heard the whole of this story from Ibn
‘Abbas.

Then al-Qutb al-Rawandi relates, when Nebuchadnezzar died, people obeyed
his son who consulted Daniel regarding his vessels (containers) which
were made by Shaitans and jinn for Sulayman from pearls and rubies etc.
fetched out from rivers which could not be crossed by ships.
Nebuchadnezzar had obtained them as booty from Jerusalem and Babylon.
Daniel said, “These vessels are clean and pure they have been made by a
Prophet and his son so that they might become means of worship of the
Lord. So do not make them impure with pork and other dirty things
because their inheritor is someone else to whom Allah will send them
very soon.” But he did not act according to the instruction of Daniel
and drove him out and freed him.

He had a very intelligent wife who was educated by Daniel. She tried her
best to advise him saying that: “Your father consulted Daniel in every
difficult problem and obtained his help.” But he did not heed her advice
and indulged in every vice until because of his innumerable sins, the
earth complained to Allah. Finally one day when he was in the festival
ground he saw a hand come out of the heavens and inscribe three words on
the wall and then both the hand the pen disappeared. He called Daniel
and asked for its meaning.

He said, “The first word means your intelligence was weighed in balance
and it was found very light. The second word means you had promised that
after becoming a king you would do good deeds but you did not keep that
promise. And the third word means Allah Almighty gave you and your
father a very great kingdom but you destroyed it with your misdeeds. Now
until the Last Day of the Resurrection Day no one from your dynasty will
ever become a king.” He asked: “What would happen after our deprivation
from the kingship?” He said, “You will fall prey to Allah’s
chastisement.” In the meanwhile Allah sent a mosquito which entered into
his nose and began to eat his brain. (It stopped biting only when his
head was hit). As a result he loved most the man who would hit his head
with an iron club.’ After passing 40 days like this he entered hell
(died).[^3]  
 It is reported by Ibn ‘Abbas: One day Uzair prayed to Allah: “O Lord
Nourisher! I have pondered over all of Your affairs and orders and am
convinced that Your Justice is Perfect. Of course, there is one thing
which my mind could not understand. It is that when You become angry
with a community and send Your punishment on them it sweeps even sinless
(innocent) children.” “Get out of the city and go to the desert” came
the Divine Voice. He complied with it and went to the forest. When the
heat increased he took shelter under a tree and fell asleep. While
asleep an ant bit his leg. Bothered by it he hit the ground with his leg
killing hundreds of ants at that spot. He understood then that Allah had
taught him a lesson through this example. Allah told him through
revelation that: “O Uzair! Whenever a group becomes liable to My
punishment I fix a time for their chastisement in such a manner that the
children who had lived for their appointed terms of life die at that
hour and the sinners are destroyed by way of My chastisement.”

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said,
“Allah appointed a Prophet called Irmiya for The Israelites. Allah
revealed to him: Ask The Israelites what is the name of the city which I
selected and honored, wherein I grew nice quality trees everyone of them
being different and better that the other and I purified it. Then it
became a dirty city which was then spoiled where from trees with good
fruits vanished and in their place grew up carob. When Irmiya asked this
question to The Israelites they laughed and made a mockery of him.
complained to Allah. Allah asked him to tell them that that city is
Jerusalem and that tree is The Israelites whom I had spared from the
control of every king but still they spread corruption and disobey Me,
so now I will impose upon them such an oppressor that he will shed their
blood and plunder their wealth and properties. They will complain much
but I will not hear them or have mercy on them. They will make
supplications before Me but I will not accept it. This will continue for
a hundred years. Then after a hundred years I will make them flourish.”

When Irmiya narrated this foretelling to The Israelites their religious
scholars began to cry: “O Prophet of Allah! where is our fault in it?
Our deeds are different from those of the sinners. So please pray to
Allah.” Irmiya fasted for seven days. But he did not get any revelation.
He continued his fast for another seven days and again for further seven
days. On the twenty-first day it was revealed to him: “Refrain from your
intention. Do you want to intercede with me in a thing which has already
been decided finally by Me? If you say anything again about it I will
turn your face toward your back. Tell the Ulama (religious scholars of
The Israelites that your sin is that you continued to see them sinning,
you connived at their sins, you did not prevent them from sinning. Allah
imposed Nebuchadnezzar on you. You have already heard what he did with
them. At last Nebuchadnezzar called Irmiya and said, I have heard that
you had already informed them what was going to happen to them by me but
they did not care. Well, now if you please you may stay with me.
otherwise you can go wherever you please. preferred to remain separate
and took with him, as provision, grape and figs. According to anther
narration he took grapes and garlic, and went away from the city as far
as an eye could see.

Then he turned around and looked at the city and exclaimed: “How will
Allah make these people alive” So Allah retrieved his soul and kept him
dead for a hundred years. He had died in the morning hours but when
Allah made him alive it was evening and the sun was about to set. The
first part of his body which was made alive was his eye. He was asked:
“How long did you stay here?” He replied “For one day.” But when he
looked at the sun which had not yet gone down he said, “Rather less than
a day.” He was told: “No, you have been here for one hundred years. Just
look at your ass. How disintegrated it has become.” Then, before his
eyes, Allah joined parts of his body as well as that of his animal with
one another and recreated veins and flesh and skin etc and he became
alright. Then he arose and said, “I know that Allah is able to do
everything.” Imam as-Sadiq has said, “Nebuchadnezzar’s name is like that
because he was fed with the milk of a bitch. Bakht was the name of a she
dog and Nassar was the name of her owner. Nebuchadnezzar was a fire
worshipper. He invaded Jerusalem and entered the city with six hundred
thousand flags and did what he did.”

It is related from Amir al-Mu’minin that Jerusalem was destroyed on the
last Wednesday of the month and on the same day Masjid Sulayman was
burnt in Iran.  
 According to authentic narration Ibn Kuwaa asked Amir al-Mu’minin:
“People narrate from you that you had said that there had been a boy
(apparently) much older than his own father, though my mind does not
accept (believe) it.” ‘Ali said, “When Uzair went out of his home his
wife was pregnant and then she delivered a son. The age of Uzair was 50
years when Allah retrieved his soul. Then after a hundred years when he
was made alive, Allah raised him up in the same condition in which he
was at the age of 50 years. Thus when he returned home his age was fifty
but his son was much older than him in age.”

It is recorded in reliable sources that when Husham bin Abdul Malik took
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir with him a great Christian religious scholar then
living in Syria, asked some questions to the . Hearing his replies, he
became a Muslim. One of his questions was: “Enlighten me about a man who
went into his wife and she got pregnant with two sons both of whom were
born at the same time. Both died at the same time and both were interned
in the same grave and yet the age of one of them was 150 years and that
of the other only 50.” ‘Ali said, “Those two brothers were Uzair and
Ezra who were born twins. When they were thirty years old Allah Almighty
turned Uzair dead for one hundred years. After Allah made him alive he
lived with Ezra for another twenty years and thereafter both of them
entered the Mercy of Allah (expired) at the same time. Thus the age of
Uzair was 50 years and that of Ezra 150 years.”[^4]

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:259

[^2]: The meeting of Dawud with Daniel is indeed strange in view of the
earlier hadiths according to which there was a vast distance of time
between the two. Perhaps Daniel had become very aged or maybe this was
another person named Daniel though it too is quite strange.

[^3]: These stories which have been narrated by Wahab have spread
through common people and hence are not authentic. Reliable traditions
do not indicate that Nebuchadnezzar had become a Muslim. Since Ibn
Babawayh and Rawandi had noted this narration I also quoted it. In
‘Tawhid Mufa¤¤al’ there is a hint of the metamorphosing of
Nebuchadnezzar but without specification.

[^4]: Since the hadiths which indicate that the man whom Allah had kept
dead for a hundred years was Irmiya are more correct and numerous in
number it is possible that the hadiths mentioning Uzair might have been
by way of Taqiyyah and that the might have spoken in favor of Ahl
al-Kitab to guide them to the true path and so that they might not be
able to deny them. It is also likely that the event might have occurred
to both the gentlemen. What has come in this verse relates to Irmiya. It
should be remembered that this story also provides proof of Raj‘ah
(Resurrection) like the recurring traditions mentioned by us earlier and
that what happened to The Israelites would happen to this Ummah also.


