An account of Yunus ibn Matta and his respected father
======================================================

Says Almighty in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And wherefore was there not a town which should believe so that
their belief should have profited them but the people of Yunus? When
they believed, We removed from them the chastisement of disgrace in this
world’s life and We gave them provision until a time. (10:98)***

He asserts at another place:  
 And Yunus when he went away in wrath, he thought that We would not
straiten him, so he called out among afflictions: “There is no Allah but
Thou, glory be to Thee; surely I am of those who make themselves to
suffer loss.”

***So We responded to him and delivered him from his grief and thus do
We deliver the believers. (21:87-88)***

Imam al-Ridha is reported to have said that: He (Yunus As, the
fish-related Prophet) was convinced that We (Allah Almighty) would not
narrow down his provision. Some have said that he had imagined that, on
his error of leaving the preferable (*Tark al-Awla*), We (Allah) would
not take him to task. Hence it is related from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
that he (Yunus) cried out in the darkness and Imam al-Ridha has said
that he cried out in the (triple) darkness of the night, the sea and the
inside of the fish (which had swallowed him up): “O My Lord! There is no
Allah except You, I glorify You, clear You from all things which are not
becoming You (you are absolutely faultless). Doubtlessly I have erred in
walking away from the people while it was better to remain among them.”
Or he uttered these words by way of humility without having indulged in
any sin or undesirable deed. Imam al-Ridha is reported to have said that
when Yunus remembered Allah with so much peace of mind in the belly of
the fish and said that “I have never worshipped Allah like this before’
then (Allah said) “We accepted his prayer and delivered him from grief
and sorrow and We relieve Believers like this from grief and sorrow
whenever they seek Our shelter uttering these words.” As reliably and
authentically said by Imam as-Sadiq.  
 And Allah says at another place:  
 “And Yunus was most surely of the apostles.”  
 “When he ran away (from the midst of his people) to a ship completely
laden (with passengers and their goods).”  
 “So he shared (with them), but was of those who are cast off. (So lots
were drawn between the voyagers when a fish blocked their way and he
became among the defeated as his name came out in the lots).”  
 “So the fish swallowed him while he did that for which he blamed
himself.”  
 “But had it not been that he was of those who glorify (Us), he would
certainly have tarried in its belly to the day when they are raised.”  
 “Then we cast him on to the vacant surface of the earth (where there
was neither tree nor greenery) while he was sick” (It is said that his
body had become as soft and weak like that of a newborn baby).  
 “And We caused to grow up for him a gourd plant (which cast its shadow
on him) and we sent him to a hundred thousand rather they exceeded”
(that is, in the land of Nineveh, which is one of the cities of Mosul.
Some say, in this verse, the word (AV) means (VA) meaning ‘and’,
indicating one lakh and more. Some say it means we sent him toward many
groups, and that if anybody would see them they would say they were
one-lakh men or more. About this ‘more’ some are of the opinion that it
meant twenty thousand and according to some thirty thousand, and in the
opinion of some even seventy thousand.  
 “And they believed, so we gave them provision until a time” (that is,
until they completed their ages of life we deferred our chastisement
from them).  
 And at another place He says:  
 “Were it not that favor from his Lord had overtaken him, he would
certainly have been cast down upon the naked ground while he was blamed.
Then his Lord chose him, and He made him of the Good.”

According to reliable narrations Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq is reported to
have said that Allah has never deferred from any people His chastisement
after its signs had become apparent except in the case of the community
of Yunus. Yunus went on inviting his people toward Islam and they
continued to deny. Finally he intended to curse them. There were two
men. One of them was a worshipper and the other was scholar. The name of
the worshipper was Tahoka and that of the scholar Roobeel.  
 The worshipper said “do curse” but the scholar insisted that they
should not be cursed. He said to Yunus “Though Allah will not turn down
your curse He would also not like to annihilate His slaves.” Yunus
accepted the talk of the worshipper and cursed his community.

Allah revealed to him that His chastisement would come down on them on
such and such day of such and such month of such and such year. When the
day drew near Yunus went out of the community with the worshipper. But
the scholar remained among the people. Seeing the signs of the Divine
punishment he advised his people: “Cry and pray to Allah. Perhaps He
will defer His anger. Maybe He will shed His Mercy on you.” People asked
him how they should appeal to Allah. He said, “Leave your homes and go
to the forest. Make children separate from their mothers also separate
the little ones of sheep and goats and cows from their mothers and weep
earnestly with humility before Allah.” All did likewise. They went to
the jungle and cried and wept and lamented profusely. Allah became kind
to them and deferred His chastisement, even though its time had almost
arrived. Then Yunus came there to see how they were destroyed. But what
he saw was a farmer was ploughing his field. He asked him “What happened
to the people of Yunus?” They did not recognize Yunus and replied that:
“He (Yunus had cursed his community. Allah accepted his curse and His
chastisement almost arrived on their heads, but then the people gathered
and cried and wept and repented in the presence of their Lord. He became
kind to them, showed His mercy and sidetracked the chastisement from
them and made it scatter over the mountains.

Now the people were searching for Yunus so that they could put faith in
him.” Hearing this Yunus became angry and walked towards the seashore
frowning. He saw a ship which was loaded and was about to sail. He got
into it with the permission of the ship owners. In mid sea Allah sent a
huge fish which blocked the way of the ship. Seeing the fish Yunus
became fearful and others who were also frightened exclaimed: “Surely a
sinner has got into our ship. Let us see who he is.” They drew lots
which revealed the name of Yunus, so they threw him into the mouth of
the fish which went away into the seawater.

A Rabbi once asked Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali: “Which prison went around the
world with its inmate.” He replied, “The fish in which Allah had
imprisoned Yunus.” That fish went in the Red Sea or the Arabian Sea;
from there it went to the river of Egypt. Therefrom it reached Tiberius,
and then entered the river Tigris in Baghdad. Then it dived under the
earth until it reached Qarun (Korah). Discussion of Yunus with Qarun
have already been mentioned in the events of Qarun. Allah ordered an
angel in charge of Qarun to withhold chastisement from him during his
worldly days. Anyhow, Yunus cried out in the belly of the fish.

Allah responded to his prayer and ordered the fish to disgorge him onto
the shore. His flesh and skin had dissolved. So Allah caused a gourd
tree to grow near him which cast its shadow on him so as to protect him
from the heat of the Sun. Then He moved the tree away from him. When the
heat of the sun caused him pain, Yunus became restless and complained.
Allah revealed to him saying: “O Yunus! you did not feel pity for over a
lakh of people yet you have started complaining within a short painful
time.” Yunus submitted: “O My Lord! Forgive me and pardon my error.”
Finally Allah gave him health and he came back to his people. All put
faith in him. Yunus has remained in the belly of the fish for nine
hours.

According to another narration attributed to Imam al-Baqir, Yunus
remained in the belly of the fish for three days, and all that time,
continued to invocate. Allah responded to his supplication. The fish
disgorged him and Allah provided a gourd tree as shade for his weak
body. Yunus sucked it like a mother’s breast and lived under its shade.
Hair on his body had fallen down. He glorified Allah and kept
remembering Him throughout the day and night. When he got his strength
back and his body became vigorous Allah created an insect which ate out
the root of the gourd tree which then dried up. This made Yunus restless
and sorrowful.

Allah asked him: “O Yunus! Why are you grief-stricken?” He replied, “My
Lord! This tree was benefiting me. You imposed an insect on it and it
made it dry.” Allah asserted: “O Yunus! You are grieving for this tree
though you had neither sown it nor watered it. You had neither attended
to it nor worked for it. Yet you are concerned why it dried up though
you are no more in need of it. But you did not worry for over a lakh
people of Nineveh and wanted that chastisement should fall on them
though all of them had become faithful and had given up sins. So now go
to them.” Hearing this, Yunus went back to his community. When he
arrived near Nineveh, he felt ashamed of entering the city. He saw a
shepherd and asked him: “Go into the city and announce that Yunus has
arrived here.” The shepherd said, “You are lying. Are you not ashamed of
speaking such an untruth? Yunus has drowned in the sea and vanished.”
Yunus said, “This sheep will testify that I am Yunus.” Then as commanded
by Allah, the sheep said, “This is Yunus.” The shepherd took that sheep
in his arms and ran toward the town. When he cried out that Yunus had
arrived, people took him to be a joker and rushed forward to beat him
up. But the shepherd boy said, “This sheep testifies that Yunus has
indeed come.” Then that sheep spoke up: “This shepherd tells the truth;
Almighty Allah has indeed sent Yunus to you.” The people rushed toward
Yunus and brought him to town and proclaimed their faith in him. Their
faith was better and fruitful. Allah kept them alive until He had
destined and protected them from his punishment.

According to another hadith, when Allah instructed Yunus emphatically to
intimate his community contrary to what he had told them (about the
arrival of Divine chastisement), he left them in their own condition. He
imagined that even if he did not convey this latter message Allah would
not question him. (The Imam) said Archangel Gabriel had made an
exception regarding the chastisement and had not finished but Yunus did
not hear the exception.

It is reported through reliable chains that Imam as-Sadiq said, “One day
Umm-Salamah heard the holy Prophet praying in these words: ‘My Lord!
Never leave me on my own for a split second’, Umm-Salamah asked: ‘O
Messenger of Allah! You too are asking like this?’ The Holy Prophet
replied, ‘How can I rest assured when Yunus bin Matta did what he did
when he was left to himself just for a split second’!”

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that Abu-Basir asked Imam
as-Sadiq what made Allah to defer His chastisement from the community of
Yunus even when it was hovering on their heads? Such thing had never
happened in the case of any other people? (Imam replied): The Divine
knowledge had got it that He would defer the chastisement due to their
repentance. Yunus did not know this. So He desired that he (Yunus)
should be spared in the belly of the fish so that he may qualify for His
Reward.

According to an authentic tradition the same Imam is reported to have
asserted that when Allah had sent His chastisement upon any people He
never deferred it except in the case of the people of Yunus. The
audience asked: “Had the chastisement come down near their heads?” He
said, “Yes, it had been so near that a hand could reach it.” They asked:
“Then why did Allah defer it? Why did He not cause it to rain down on
them suddenly as had been done in the case of other defiant
communities?” Imam said, “Because it had occurred in the secret (hidden)
knowledge of Allah that He would spare them due to their repentance and
this thing (would happen) was not made known to anyone.”

It is mentioned that when Yunus went toward the hilly land of Rohaa he
was reciting: “My Lord! I have come running to you and have accepted
Your call, O Reliever of all sorrows and hardships!”  
 In a reliable tradition it is mentioned that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
said, “The first person for whom a lot was drawn was Maryam. Thereafter
it was for Yunus when he entered a ship with a group and when that ship
was stalled in midstream. Lots were drawn thrice then and on every
occasion it came out in the name of Yunus. So Yunus came to the middle
portion of the ship and saw a giant fish was facing them with its mouth
wide open. He jumped off into its mouth.”

It is recorded through Ya’foor that once Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq raised his
hand toward the heavens and said, “My Lord! Do not leave me on my own
even for the twinkling of an eye, neither a little more than that nor a
little less” and tears ran down his cheeks and rolled on his beard. Then
he turned toward me and said, “O Son, Abi Ya’foor! Allah had left Yunus
for much less than a split second when he left the better option). Had
he died in the same condition (without Divine care) his status would
have gone down very much.”

Ibn Babawayh has said, “Yunus is called Yunus because when he became
angry with his people he went out of them and took up ‘uns’ (liking) for
his Lord and thereafter when he returned to his community he became
their ‘moonis’ (admirer).”

It is recorded from reliable chains that Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali said,
“Allah presented my Wilayah (obedience) to all the residents of the
heavens and the earth. Those who wanted to accept it accepted it and
those who did not want to did not. Yunus too did not accept it as it
deserved to be accepted. Allah imprisoned him in the belly of a fish.
Thereafter he accepted it as rightly as it deserved.”  
 Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq has according to reliable sources, said that when
Yunus observed the misdeeds of his community he admonished them, but
they did not heed him. Becoming angry he went away from them, reached
the seashore and entered a ship with a group of men. A fish blocked the
way of that ship to overthrow it. Yunus said, “This fish wants me. So
throw me out.” Those in the ship hesitated and said, “You are better
than all of us. Why should the fish want you?” Then they drew lots.
Yunus ’s name appeared in the lot thrice. Then they threw him out into
the sea and the fish swallowed him. Allah revealed to the fish that
Yunus was not its food and that it should neither eat his flesh nor
break his bones. The fish took him around the high seas and Yunus
continued to pray to Allah in the darkness. When the fish reached the
river containing Qarun he heard a voice which he had never heard before
and asked the angel overseeing him about it.

The angel told him: “It is the voice of the Prophet Yunus who is
remembering Allah in the belly of a fish.” Qarun asked: “Do you permit
me to talk with him?” The angel agreed. So Qarun asked: “O Yunus! What
has happened to Harun?” Yunus said, “He has died.” When Qarun inquired
about Musa Yunus replied, “He too has expired.” Qarun wept. So Allah
commanded (through a revelation) the angel in charge of Qarun to reduce
his punishment as he had mourned his near relatives. According to other
narrations, Allah revealed to that angel to withhold punishment until
this world lasted. Imam as-Sadiq said, the holy Prophet used to say that
it is not befitting for anybody to say that due to my ascension to the
heavens I have become nearer to Allah than Yunus who has remained in sea
because in view of Allah the heavens and the sea are same. Allah had
taken me to the heavens to show me His marvels there and He took Yunus
into the sea to show him the marvels of the under water world.

It is narrated that Imam al-Baqir said, “It is written in some of the
books of Amir al-Mu’minin that “‘The holy Prophet told me that Allah had
informed him (Muhammad) through Archangel Gabriel that He had appointed
Yunus son of Matta over his community when he was thirty years old. He
was very strong but did not possess much patience and did not care much
for the people. He did not engage himself in bearing the burden of
Messengership rather he wanted to remain away just as a young camel runs
away from carrying a load. Anyway he remained among his community for 33
years and continued to invite them toward his Messengership and
obedience but they did not believe, nor follow him.

The only exception was that of two persons one was Roobeel and another
Tanookhaa. Roobeel belonged to a family having knowledge and Prophethood
and wisdom and had lived with Yunus since long before he became a
Prophet. Tanookhaa was a constant worshipper and a devout ascetic. He
prayed a lot but was lacking in intelligence and wisdom. Roobeel used to
graze sheep for a living. Tanookhaa used to fetch wood from the forest
and sell it. Yunus held Roobeel in higher esteem than Tanookhaa because
he had wisdom and intelligence and was living in his service since long.
When Yunus saw that his community did not obey him and did not put faith
in him, he became very sorry. His heart was restless and he complained
to Allah about this state and said, O Lord! You made me a Messenger for
this community when I was thirty years old. I lived among them for 33
years and conveyed to them Your Message and invited them toward Your
oneness (Tawhid) and requested them to testify my Prophethood. I warned
and threatened them of Your Punishment and anger but they denied me, did
not believe in me and made a mockery of me. They continued to threaten
me. I am afraid they may kill me.

So send Your chastisement on them as these are people who will not
believe. Allah sent a revelation to him saying there are pregnant women,
minor children, weak men and women and unintelligent persons among them
and I am Just Sovereign Ruler. My Mercy surpasses my Anger. I do not
punish the young due to the sins of the elders. O Yunus! All of them are
My slaves. They have been made and created by Me. They live in My city
and they eat My provisions. I want to delay their punishment and
continue to be kind to them and wait for maybe they will repent. I have
appointed you over them so that you may watch over them, protect them
and be kind to them due to the relation you have with them and to deal
smoothly with them with the patience of a Prophet and treat them kindly
like a sympathizing doctor. But you became harsh toward them and did not
treat them kindly and did not behave with them like a merciful
messenger. Now when you are no more able to keep your patience you have
become angry and straightaway ask for their chastisement.

The patience of My slave Noah was more than yours. His behavior with his
people was much better, his tolerance was much higher and his excuse for
chastisement was perfect. Hence I chastised his community for his sake
when he became angry with them. I accepted his prayer when he prayed.
Yunus said, “My Lord! I became angry with them only because they opposed
You and I cursed them only when they defied Your commands. So, by Your
Grandeur and Honor, I cannot be kind to them now nor will I admonish
them kindly, now that during this period, they have become unbelievers
and are denying Your oneness and are denying my Prophethood. So now send
Your punishment on them as they will never believe.” Allah said, “O
Yunus! they numbering over one lakh are My creation.... They flourish My
cities and will cause more of My slaves to come into the world. I prefer
to wait and be lenient with them as certain things have come to My
knowledge and as My Planning and Resolution is different from your
planning and resolution and as you are a message conveying Prophet and I
am the Wise Lord, My knowledge regarding them is secret and hidden. The
Unseen things known to Me are such that no one else knows its limits and
your knowledge and awareness is limited to the apparent, you do not know
the beginning and its end. So, O Yunus! I accept your prayer regarding
them and will send chastisement to them but the acceptance of your
prayer will not add to the Reward from My side, nor will it raise your
status and nearness to Me. The chastisement will fall on them on a
Wednesday of the month of Shawwal after sunrise. So inform them of this.
Hearing this Yunus became very glad. He did not become sorry nor did he
what would be its end result. Then he came to the worshipper Tanookhaa
and informed him about the chastisement to fall on his community. He
asked him to accompany him for informing the people. Tanookhaa said,
“Leave it. Where is the need of warning them. It is better if the
chastisement rains on them while they are unaware because of their
sinfulness and Kufr (denial).” Yunus said, “Let us go to Roobeel and
obtain his opinion.” So they went to Roobeel. Yunus told Roobeel: “Allah
has informed me that He will send his chastisement on my people at such
and such time. What is your opinion about my going and informing them of
this?” Roobeel said, “Go back and like a tolerant Prophet and a merciful
messenger request your Lord to forgive and pardon them. Recommend to
your Lord to withhold the Divine punishment because the Lord is surely
not in need of punishing them. He prefers to remain kind and merciful
toward them. This will be more beneficial to you too as it will make you
nearer to Him and raise your status in His view. Perhaps your community
will give up denial and Kufr (faithlessness). They may put faith in you.
So be patient and wait.”

Then Tanookhaa retorted: “Woe unto you, O Roobeel! What contingency is
there that makes you think that it is in favor of Yunus? How do you
imagine it is beneficial to recommend in favor of those persons who
denied Allah and opposed the Prophethood/Messengership of Yunus and
drove him out and who wanted to stone him to death?” Roobeel said, “Keep
silent, you are merely a worshipper and do not have wisdom.” Then
turning toward Yunus he asked: “Tell me, if Allah sends his punishment
will it kill all or only some?” Yunus said, “It will kill all and I have
asked for the same from Allah, as I do not feel any pity for them so
that I may recommend the deferring of punishment to them.” Roobeel said,
“O Yunus! It is possible that when the chastisement comes upon them and
they see its signs and seek forgiveness of Allah and repent maybe Allah
will be kind to them as He is the Kindest of the Kind. He may defer the
chastisement from them and then all may think that you were a liar.”

Tanookhaa said, “Woe unto you, O Roobeel! How do you utter such things
to a divine messenger who has received a Revelation that chastisement
will fall on his people. Rather you have rejected the Word of Allah. You
have doubted in both the Divine and the Prophetic Words. Go away. Your
deeds have become fruitless.” Roobeel said, “O Tanookhaa! Your opinion
is weak.” Then he told Yunus: “Is it not possible that, when the
chastisement falls on your people and all are annihilated, Allah will
remove your name from the list of His messengers and your Prophethood
will vanish and you will become like any ordinary person because nearly
a lakh of people would have been killed due to you?” Finally, Yunus did
not accept the advice of Roobeel and went away from the city along with
Tanookhaa.

Then Yunus came back and warned his people that Divine chastisement
would fall on them on such and such day after sunrise. Hearing this, the
people denied him and insulted him and drove him out of the city. So
Yunus and Tanookhaa went far away from the population and waited for the
Divine chastisement. Roobeel continued to live with the people. When the
first of Shawwal arrived, Roobeel climbed up a high hill and called the
people and cried: “I am Roobeel. I pity you. I am kind to you. The month
of Shawwal has begun and your Prophet, the messenger of Allah, that is,
Yunus has already informed you that Allah has revealed to him that after
sunrise on the middle Wednesday of this month Divine punishment would
befall you. Allah never does contrary to what He says to His Prophets.
So now think seriously about what you should do?”

Hearing these words of Roobeel the people became frightened and then
were convinced that Allah” wrath would fall on them. So they rushed to
Roobeel and requested for his opinion concerning them. They said, “You
are a wise and intelligent man and you have always been kind to us. We
heard that you had made many recommendations in our favor to Yunus. So
now we are prepared to do whatever you ask.” Roobeel said, “My opinion
is that at the appointed time (for Divine chastisement), i.e.. at
daybreak on the mid-month Wednesday, separate women and suckling babies
and non-suckling children from one another. Keep the women in wait in
the valley of the mountain, stall the children in the way of the
flooding river, and also separate the offspring of animals from their
mothers and all this should be done before daybreak. Then when you see a
yellowish dust coming from the east, cry out all of you elders and
youngsters in supplication to Almighty Allah, weeping and praying and
repenting. Raise your heads toward the heavens and say: “O Our Lord! We
have oppressed our own selves. We denied Your Messenger. We repent over
our sins wholeheartedly. If you will not pardon us and if You will not
be kind to us we shall surely be caught in Your chastisement and we will
be the losers. O Lord! accept our repentance and shed Your Mercy on us,
O the Most Merciful One!” You must not be meanwhile crying and weeping
and repenting and persist in so doing until either the sunsets or the
punishment is warded off from you.  
 All agreed with Roobeel. On the appointed day, Yunus went out of the
city and stood at a place wherefrom he could hear the sounds of all, and
when chastisement fell he could see it. The people too, did as advised
by Roobeel. When the sun rose and a strong, harsh, yellowish and
blackish wind began to blow with a frightening noise, all cried and wept
together and engaged themselves in constant prayers and repentance.
Babies began to cry for their mothers, young ones of animals also began
to shriek for their mothers’ milk. Cattle moved to get grass. Yunus and
Tanookhaa hearing these noises and voices were cursing that Allah may
punish them even more harshly.

On the other hand Roobeel heard their cries and prayed to Allah for the
withdrawal of His chastisement. At the time of Zuhr (midday) the gates
of the heavens were opened up. Allah’s anger subsided. Allah showed His
Mercy to them and pardoned them all. He had responded to their prayers.
Allah accepted their repentance and forgave them their sins. He revealed
to the Israfil: “Since the community of Yunus has wept and repented and
begged My Pardon I have pardoned them as I am the Greatest Accepter of
repentance and I am very kind to my slaves. I accept soon the repentance
of those who become ashamed of their misdeeds. As my slave Yunus had
wished chastisement for his people and as he did not ask for their
actual killing, I ordered a punishment on them. Now, you go and turn
away the chastisement.”

Israfil said, “My lord! the chastisement has already reached their
shoulders and it is about to kill them. By the time I go there they
would have been killed.” Allah Almighty said, “I have commanded the
concerned angels to keep the punishment hanging over their heads until
they get my final Word. So, O Israfil you go there and turn the
chastisement from over their heads and rain it down on the mountains
adjoining that city’s rivers and springs as they (mountains) have become
proud of their height which is more than the other surroundings and so
make them mild and disgraced; turn them into iron.” Israfil came down,
opened his wings and removed the chastisement from the city and made it
fall on the mountains as commanded by Allah. All those mountains are in
the vicinity of Mosul and they have become like iron until Dooms Day
(the Resurrection Day).  
 When the community of Yunus saw that the chastisement had been removed
from them, they came down from the hills and entered their homes and
brought back their families and property. The next Saturday when Yunus
and Tanookhaa did not hear their voices they understood for sure that
chastisement had befallen them and they wished to see their condition as
to how they were killed. When they came near the city they saw that
woodcutters and shepherds were arriving and that the city folk were busy
in their work us usual.

Yunus told Tanookhaa: “What has happened actually is contrary to what
was revealed (about punishment) to me. Now the city folk will call me a
liar and henceforth will not give me any respect.” So he turned back
from that spot angrily and went toward the sea in such a way that nobody
would recognize him. He was trying to hide himself from the people of
his community who would call him a liar. However, Tanookhaa entered the
city. Then Roobeel asked him: “Whose opinion was more sound, yours or
mine?” Tanookhaa said, “Your opinion was better and whatever you said
was the opinion of the wise and the learned intelligentsia. I always
thought that I was better than you as my worship and prayer rituals were
more than yours. Now your grace has come to my notice because of the
knowledge given to you by Allah and I have now understood that wisdom
with god’s fear is better than piety and that worship which is not
complete without knowledge.” Then they became one-another’s companions
and began to live with their community. Yunus reached the seashore on
Thursday and remained under the gourd tree for seven days. A week after
that he returned to his community. People put their faith in him and
testified to his Messengership and obeyed him.

According to another hadith, “The community of Yunus harassed him. He
cursed them. Allah promised that He would send chastisement on them. So,
on the first day their faces turned yellow, next day black and
chastisement came so near to them that their spears could approach it.
They separated babies from their mothers. They also separated animal
kids from their mothers. They wore rough and thick clothes, put ropes
around their necks, threw dust on their heads and started weeping all
together simultaneously before the Lord and announced: “Our Lord! we put
faith in the Allah of Yunus.” So Allah turned the chastisement toward
the mountains. Next morning Yunus thought that all had been annihilated.
But when he saw that all were well he became angry and turned towards
the sea. He got into a ship. Two more persons were with him in that
ship. The ship began to swing in mid sea. The boatman said a renegade
has boarded the ship. Yunus said, “I am that fugitive; I have run away
from my Lord.” He stood up and prepared to jump into the sea when he saw
that a giant size fish was facing him with its mouth wide open. Seeing
this all were frightened and the two men clung to Yunus saying: “Perhaps
one of us is the cause of this trouble to the ship.” So they drew a lot.
It came in the name of Yunus. Thence the practice of drawing lots came
into vogue with a guess that if the lot has three arrows it never fails.
Anyhow, Yunus threw himself into the sea and the fish swallowed him and
carried him under water for seven days. Finally it entered river Masjoor
where Qarun was being punished (by Allah). When he heard the voice of
Yunus praising and sanctifying Allah he asked the angel who was
punishing him: “Whose voice is it?” He said, “It is the voice of Yunus
who has been imprisoned in the belly of a fish.” Qarun asked could he
talk with him. The angel permitted. So Qarun asked Yunus: “O Yunus! what
has happened to Musa?” Yunus said, “He has died.” Then Qarun asked:
“What about Harun?” Yunus said, “He too has expired.” Hearing this Qarun
wept much and complained to Allah. So Allah ordered that the angel
should defer his chastisement until the world existed because Qarun had
mourned his near and dear ones.

It is recorded from authentic chains that Imam al-Ridha said, “When
Allah ordered Yunus to inform his people about the impending
chastisement, and when the chastisement came upon them they created
separation between women and children and animals and began to weep.
When their cries reached heaven Allah deferred the punishment from them
and Yunus angrily went towards the sea where a fish swallowed him. The
fish carried him for three days and ferried him in the seven seas.
Finally when he came out of the belly of the fish his flesh and skin had
faded. Allah caused a gourd tree to grow for him. It provided shade to
him. When his body became strong, the tree began to dry up. Yunus (as.)
complained O Allah! the tree which was giving me shade has dried up!
Divine Revelation said, O Yunus! you are becoming restless for a tree
which was providing you shade but you are not feeling sorry for over a
lakh of people and want them to be chastised.[^1]

Abu Hamza Thumali has narrated that one day ‘Abdullah bin Umar
approached Imam Zayn al-‘abidin and said, “You say that “My grandfather
‘Ali ’s Wilayah was presented to Yunus but he was reluctant so Allah
dropped him in the belly of a fish.” Imam said, No doubt. I did say so.
May your mother sit in mourning for you.” ‘Abdullah said, “If what you
say is true, then show me some sign supporting it.” (Abu Hamza says:)
Imam put a band on his (‘Abdullah’s) and my eyes and after a few moments
asked us to open the bands. When we untied the bands what we had a
vision was that we were on seashore. Its waves were rising high.
‘Abdullah bin Umar said, “O my leader! My blood (responsibility of my
death) will be upon you.” Yunus said, “Do not become restless. I want to
show you the sign of my truthfulness.” Then he called upon the fish.

A giant fish like a big mountain raised its head out of water saying:
“Labbaik, O Wali of Allah!” Imam asked it: “Who are you?” It replied, “I
am the fish of Yunus.” Imam said, “Narrate the story of Yunus to us.” It
said, O my leader! Right from Adam up to your grandfather Muhammad Allah
had not appointed any Prophet to whom the Wilayah of you, Ahl al-Bayt
was not presented. The one who accepted it remained protected and the
one who denied it was involved in trouble until Allah sent Yunus with
His Message and asked him through revelation to accept the Wilayah of
Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali and thereafter of the rightly-guided Imams born of
‘Ali ’s lineage along with other matters revealed to him. Yunus said,
How can I accept the Wilayah of those whom I have not yet seen nor know!
Then he came to the shore of the sea. Allah revealed to me to swallow
him but without damaging his bones. Yunus remained in my belly for forty
days. I ferried him in rivers and oceans and darkness and he was crying:
*laa illaah anta subhaanaka innee kuntu minaz zscholareen* (and
continued to pray to Allah Almighty) that I have accepted the Wilayah of
Amir al-Mu’minin and of the rightly guided Imams from his progeny. When
he put faith on the Wilayah of you gentlemen, Allah ordered me to throw
Yunus out so I disgorged him on the shore. Hearing this Imam said, “O
fish! Go back to your abode.” So it went away. The waves settled down
and the water became calm. [^2]

According to a reliable tradition Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said, “The
Prophet Dawud prayed to Allah: O My Lord! In Heaven, who will be like me
and equal to my status? It was revealed to him: He will be Matta, the
father of Yunus. Dawud sought permission to visit him. Allah allowed
him. So he, along with his son Sulayman went to his house. They saw that
the house was made of the leaves of a date tree. On inquiry they were
told that he had gone to the bazaar. The people in the bazaar said he
must be coming now. So they sat there waiting for him. Soon he arrived
with a load of wood on his head. People arose to give him respect and
they welcomed him. Matta put down the load and thanked Allah and asked:
Is there anyone who would purchase a pure thing with pure money? Hearing
this one person offered a price. Another said somewhat more than that.
Finally he sold his wood to some body. Then Dawud and Sulayman came
forward to meet him and saluted him and said, *Salaamun alaikum*. He
responded to the salaam and took both of them to his house. He bought
wheat or barley from what he had earned. He reduced it to flour himself,
made a fire and prepared loaves. Then he sat down to talk. He broke the
loaves into pieces and put them in a vessel and put some salt on them.
He kept a bowl of water with him and sat down on hams uttering
*‘bismillaahirrehmaanirraheem’* (In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Most Merciful) and put a morsel of bread in his mouth and ate it
chewing thoroughly and said, *alhamdu lillaah* (Praise be to Allah),
then he took another morsel and did the same thing. Next he took up
water saying *‘bismillaah’* (in the name of Allah), drank it and said
*‘alhamdu lillaah’*. Then he said, “O My Lord! To whom else have you
given so much bounty. You have given me a healthy body, eyes and ears.
You gave me enough strength to go to the tree which I did not plant nor
took any trouble in protecting it. You made it my provision. It is you
who sends me a purchaser for the wood who buys it and then I purchase my
food from it which also I did not sow. You made the fire subservient to
me in which I baked my loaves. You made it so nice that I ate it
willfully so that I may get enough strength to worship you. So praise
belongs only to you. Then he wept. Dawud said to Sulayman: Get up, O my
son! We have never seen a slave who is more thankful than this person.

[^1]: It is difficult to collect different traditions regarding the stay
of Yunus in the belly of a fish. Perhaps some of the common among them
might have been narrated by way of Taqiyyah (hiding of facts to avoid
trouble). The error of Yunus was that of ‘Tark al-Awla’ (giving up the
preferable) and an undesirable deed, because Allah had permitted him to
stop preaching and had promised that chastisement would overtake them.
Then it was not obligatory for him to return to his people until Allah
ordered him to preach to them again. A better course was to be kind to
the community despite all of its evils and to recommend their case
before the Lord and await the Divine decision. But he did not do that.
So Allah, by way of discipline, raised his status by showing the marvels
of the underwater world and made it like a Me’raj (ascension). His anger
was against the misdeeds of the community. He was not displeased with
Allah Almighty. He believed that the Merciful and kind Allah would not
frown on him. Other reasons have also been recorded in various
traditions and commentaries.

[^2]: Possibly Allah might not have made it absolutely compulsory for
the Messengers to accept the Wilayah of the pure Imams so that ignoring
it might become a sin. Or, perhaps all accepted it and some did not.
Allah knows better. Shaykh al-Tusi has recorded in ‘Misbaah’ that Allah
brought Yunus out of the fish on the ninth of Muharram and this is
contrary to some traditions.


