An account of Jirjis
====================

Ibn Babawayh and al-Qutb al-Rawandi have with documentation, narrated
from Ibn ‘Abbas that Allah appointed Jirjis as his Messenger and sent
him to the king of Syria called Kooraazaanaa and who was worshipping an
idol. Jirjis told him: O king! Accept my counsel. It is unbecoming for
us to worship anything or anyone except only one Allah and to ask any of
our needs from others except Almighty Allah.

The king asked: Where are you from? He replied, “I am from Rome
(Byzantine) and live in Palestine. Then the king retorted: You are under
arrest. He had his holy body scorched with an iron comb so much so that
his entire flesh was torn out, then vinegar was poured on his body and
his body was rubbed with a harsh cloth. Then the king ordered that his
body should be burnt (stamped) with red hot iron bars. When the Prophet
still remained alive despite all this torture, large iron nails were
prepared and hammered in his holy head so that his brain drained out.
Thereafter molten lead was poured on him. There was an iron pillar in
his prison which required eighteen men to shift from one place to
another. That pillar was put on the belly of that holy person.

When night fell and everyone went away to their homes, the people of the
prison saw an angel come to Jirjis and say: O Jirjis! Your Lord asks you
to be patient and happy and not to fear as He is with you and will
surely relieve you from the clutches of the king. They will kill you
four times but I will remove your pains. The next day that oppressor
took him from the prison to have him lashed. He was hit innumerable
times on his belly and back. Then he was sent back to jail. The
oppressor king then ordered his court men to collect all the magicians
living in their cities. One of them was an expert sorcerer but none of
his works affected the Prophet. Finally, the oppressor king fed Jirjis
with a deadly poison. When the Prophet prayed: ‘Bismillah............’
the poison failed to have any effect on him.

Magician said, “Had I given this poison to all those living on earth
everyone would have definitely become blind and worthless in every way.
It would have totally altered their physique and all their joints would
have been disbanded. So, O Jirjis! You surely are the light of Divine
Guidance and a lamp in the dark world of ignorance. I testify that your
Allah is the only True Allah and all others are false deities. I believe
in your Allah and treat all of His Prophets as truth tellers and I
repent for all of my past sins.” The king had the magician killed. Then
he sent Jirjis back to prison and continued to torture him in various
ways. His body was cut into pieces and thrown into a well. Then the king
engaged in feasting and drinking. Allah ordered the air to raise up a
black cloud. Lightning began to flash. Earth and mountains began to
tremble and the people were frightened that they would die.

Allah ordered Mika’il to go to that well. At the well, the angel called
out Jirjis to get up by the order of Allah. The angel then took him out
of the well and asked him to be patient and gave him good tidings of
Allah’s pleasure. Jirjis again went to the king and told him that Allah
had sent him to conclude His evidence through him. Hearing this, the
commander-in-chief of the royal army spoke up saying: I put faith in
your Lord Who raised you alive after you were dead and I bear witness
that He is True and all deities besides Him are false Gods. Along with
him another four thousand men also became Muslims (believers) who
testified to the Prophethood of Jirjis. The king became furious and
killed all of them. He made a huge plate of copper, turned it red hot,
laid Jirjis on it and threw molten lead in his mouth. He dug big steel
nails in the eyes and head of Jirjis, took them out and filled the gaps
with molten lead. Jirjis did not die even after all this.

Then he ordered that fire should be ignited on his body and his body
turned into ashes, then he blew that ash into the air. Again, by the
order of Allah, Mika’il called out to Jirjis to get up and he became
alive and again approached the king. He preached Islam to the king in
the assembly of his court men. One of the king’s misguided companions
rose up and said, We have fourteen pulpits and a big tray of wood made
from various kinds of trees. Some of the trees bear fruit and some do
not. He asked Jirjis to pray to his Allah so that He may turn that wood
into original trees with branches and leaves and fruits to make him
believe in him. Hearing this Jirjis sat up on his knees and prayed to
Almighty Allah. Instantly the wood turned into trees bearing branches,
leaves and fruits. Seeing all this the angered king sandwiched Jirjis
between two wooden planks and cut him vertically with a saw, brought a
big cooking pot, filled it with oil, sulphur and molten lead, flung the
body of Jirjis in that boiling pot and fanned the fire beneath it.

The holy body melted completely and mixed with other elements in the
pot. The earth became totally dark due to this dark black deed of the
king. Allah sent Israfil who raised a terrific shriek between them and
all fell down faced. Israfil turned the pot upside down and said, O
Jirjis! Get up by the order of thy Lord. He arose hale and healthy and
again went to the misguided king and tried to give him guidance. The
people were extremely surprised. a woman approached Jirjis and said, O
dear slave of Allah! I had a cow. We were being maintained by her milk.
Now she has died and I request you to make her alive.

Jirjis gave her his staff and asked her to put it on the corpse of that
cow and to say: O cow! Jirjis asks you to arise by the order of Allah.
The woman did so and the cow became alive. That woman became Muslim. The
cursed king then said, If I let this magician go away alive he will
surely destroy my kingdom. His people agreed with him and decided to
kill Jirjis once again. The king told them to take Jirjis out of the
city and decapitate him. When they took him out Jirjis prayed to Allah:
My Lord! If you have decided to destroy this community, then pray make
me and my memory a cause and means of patience and tolerance for those
who want to please you in every hardship. In short, they decapitated
Jirjis. When they came back to the city, they were hit by Divine
chastisement and got killed en masse.


