Stories of the sages and pious personalities of The Israelites
==============================================================

Shaykh Tabarsi and other commentators have narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas that
there was a worshipper named Barseesa among The Israelites who
worshipped his deity so much that whatever he asked for was granted.
People used to bring to him the ill and the lunatic and they became
healthy through his prayers. By chance the wife of a nobleman became mad
and she was brought to him. She had a number of brothers. They left her
for treatment with the worshipper. The devil misguided the worshipper
and he indulged in adultery with that mad woman. When she became
pregnant he killed her for fear of being caught.

On the other hand the devil approached the brothers of that woman and
told them everything and also showed them where the worshipper buried
her body. They consulted among themselves and the news reached the king
who along with the others went to the place of that worshipper
(worshipper). He confessed to his crime. The king ordered his execution.
When the people brought him for being crucified Satan appeared before
him in the form of a man and informed him that he had brought this
trouble onto him. Satan said, I have disgraced you but if you are
prepared to obey me I can relieve you from this sentence.

The worshipper asked in what matter he should obey him The Satan said,
Prostrate before me (make Sajdah for me). The worshipper said, How I can
bow while I am bound in chains. The devil said, Just make Sajdah by
bowing your head a little. I will accept it. The worshipper did so but
the Satan left him and ran away. The worshipper was killed. Allah
Almighty says in the holy Qur’an: But when he disbelieves he says: I am
surely clear of you; surely I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
(59:16)

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam al-Baqir that there was a
worshipper in the Israelites named Juraih. He was always in the worship
hall busy in worshipping Allah. Once his mother came to the worship hall
and called out to him but as he was busy in his prayer she went back.
She came a second time and a third time and called out to him but he did
not respond. Finally she said, I request the Allah of The Israelites not
to help you. The very next day an adulteress woman came to him. She
developed labor pains and delivered a child then and there and announced
that the child was the son of the worshipper Juraish. The news spread to
the people of The Israelites. They said this is the man who used to
scold others for adultery but has himself indulged in it. The king
ordered him to be executed. Hearing this, his mother came to him weeping
and crying.

Juraih said, “My mother! Why are you crying now? Keep quiet. This
trouble has been brought on by you through your cursing.” When the
people heard this conversation they made inquiries. After knowing more
they asked Juraih how could they rely on what he said, Juraih said,
Bring that child to me. He himself will speak out the truth. So the
child was brought to him. Juraih took the child in his arms and prayed
to Allah. Then he asked him: Who is your father? The child began to
speak by the order of Allah and said, Such and such shepherd is my
father who belongs to such and such tribe. In short, Allah exposed their
plan and Juraih was saved from execution. Then Juraih swore not to be
away from his mother in future and to always serve her.

The same Imam is reported to have said in other traditions: A king of
The Israelites expressed his desire to build a city which would not have
any kind of defect that could be detected by any observer. So it was
built and the people said it was so perfect that no such city was ever
built by anyone in the past. But one man said if I am given protection I
will point out its defect. The king said, You are sage. Tell us what is
its defect. He said, There are two defects. The first is that you the
king of this city will die one day and it will pass into the hands of
others and secondly after you this city will be ruined. The king said
what can be worse than these two defects. Now tell us how these defects
can be avoided. That man said, Build such a house which will remain
intact forever and which will never be ruined and you too may live in it
forever in youth, without growing old. After hearing this when the king
narrated it to his daughter she said no one in your domain has ever said
any thing truer than what this man has told you.

In a good tradition it is narrated from the same Imam that there was a
man in The Israelites who had two daughters. He gave one of them in
marriage to a farmer and another to a potter. One day he left home with
an intention to visit both of them. First he went to the farmer’s house
and inquired with his daughter as to how she was doing. She said that:
This year my husband has sown much grain, if there is good rain our
condition will be better than all of The Israelites. Then he went to the
house of his daughter married to a potter. On inquiry she said that: My
husband had molded many earthen pots and if there is no rain then all
our merchandise will remain safe and we will be better than all of The
Israelites. That man returned therefrom saying: My Lord! you alone know
what is best for both of them so please do so accordingly.

It is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq authentically that he said
there was a worshipper in the Israelites who always recited these words:
meaning all praise is for the Lord of the worlds and good end is for the
pious. Iblis was very hurt with this recitation of Truth so he sent one
of his followers to him in the form of a man to tell the worshipper that
good end is for the rich and the wealthy. That cursed creature came to
the worshipper and tried hard to convince him of his misguidance but the
worshipper did not believe him. After a confrontation it was decided
that they should seek a decision from whoever met them first. The party
in whose favor the arbitrator would decide would cut off one hand of the
other party.

They went to a man who decided that of course lucky are those who are
rich. Hearing this, the Satan cut off one hand of the worshipper. They
returned back but the worshipper continued to recite the same words of
wisdom. The Satan argued with him and again they went to another person
for arbitration who too gave the same decision as before. The Satan cut
off another hand of the worshipper. Still the latter continued his
recitation whereupon the Satan insisted on going to a third person for
his decision. The party against whom he decided would lose his head.
Agreeing with this proposal they went further. Allah sent an angel in
the form of man. When the two narrated their matter before him the angel
put his hand on the cut off hands of the worshipper at the proper places
and scanned them and the worshipper was healed at once. Then he
decapitated Satan and said, Such is the good end for the pious people.

It is mentioned in a reliable tradition that Imam al-Baqir said there
was a Qadi (judge) in The Israelites who would always pass Judgments
truthfully. When the time of his death drew near he told his wife: When
I die do bathe me but do not put a coffin cloth on me. Then put my
corpse on a board. Allah willing, no undesirable deed will be committed
by me. After his death the Qadi’s wife did as he had said and waited for
the result. One day she looked at the head of the corpse and found a
worm eating the dead man’s brain. She was frightened to see it. Next
night she saw her husband in her dream who said to her: Were you
frightened to see this? She said, Yes. He said, By Allah! this happened
due to a wish that I had entertained in my mind regarding your brother
who had quarreled with somebody and both had come to me for judgment.
Then I had wished the case should go in your brother’s favor. When I
heard both the parties it was proved that your brother was right. Yet I
am suffering this fate only because of my undesirable wish (longing).

It is authentically narrated from Imam as-Sadiq that a group from The
Israelites came to their Prophet and requested him to pray to Allah that
He may send rain whenever they wished. The Prophet prayed and Allah
accepted his supplications. Consequently it used to rain whenever and to
whatever extent they desired for. So their growth was better than past
years but when they began to harvest (cut) they got nothing except grass
(no grain at all). The people rushed to the Prophet to complain that
they had desired rain for their benefit but what we got is only loss
because not a grain has grown. Allah revealed to the Prophet that: They
were not pleased with My planning. This is the outcome of their
planning.

The same Imam says, “A dove built a nest on a tree. But when its chicken
grew a man used to catch them and take them away. The dove complained to
Allah. Allah revealed to it that: I will save you from the evil of that
man. The dove produced eggs and little birdies hatched from it. The man
came as usual to take away the birds. He had two loaves of bread with
him. On the way a beggar asked him for a loaf and he gave him one. Then
he climbed up the tree and took away the birdies. Allah saved him due to
his charity.

There was another man in The Israelites who prayed for thirty-three
years to get a son but to no avail. Finally he said in his supplication:
My Lord! Are You too far away to hear me or despite being near are not
answering my prayer? Finally one night he saw a man in his dream who
said to him: You are praying to Allah but with a shameless tongue and a
dirty materialistic heart and mind. Your intention is not pure. First of
all make your soul clean by avoiding undesirable and indecent thoughts
and words. Then only will your prayer will be answered by Allah. He did
so accordingly and Allah gave him a son.”

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam as-Sadiq that there was a
wise man in The Israelites who was very wealthy. He had a very
good-natured (like himself) son from a chaste woman. When the time of
his death drew near he told his sons: All of my wealth is only for one
of you. After his death his eldest son said that he was the one of his
father’s choice. The middle one said it was him and the youngest said
that their father had willed only in his favor. So all three went to a
Qadi for a decision. He said, I do not know your affair. Go to the three
brothers who are sons of Ghanaam. They went to one of the sons who was
aged and narrated their case to him. He told them to go to his elder
brother whom they found to be a middle-aged man. When they told him
their case he asked them to go his eldest brother whom the found quite
young.

Surprisingly they first asked him to explain ass to how he was looking
more youthful than his two younger brothers and how his middle brother
appeared more youthful than the youngest brother and how the youngest
brother appeared more aged than both of them? He explained that: The one
whom you saw first is younger than both of us but his wife is
bad-natured and is always bothering him. Yet he bears all with patience
so that something more unbearable might not occur and that has made him
old. My second brother who looks like a middle-aged man has a wife who
sometimes makes him happy and sometimes gloomy and sorrowful. So he
looks between the young and old age. But I have a wife who always keeps
me happy and who until today has never bothered me and therefore I am
still youthful. Then after listening to their story, said that for
deciding your case you should first go and dig out the bones of your
father from his grave and burn them down in the fire. Thereafter you may
return to me to hear my judgment.

So the two sons who were born of an unchaste woman went to dig their
father’s grave but the youngest boy who was from the pious lady said
holding his sword: I can forgo my share of inheritance but will never
allow my father’s grave to be dug up. Finally all the three brothers
went to that man and told him what had happened. He said, It is enough.
Bring all of your property here. It was brought and the arbitrator gave
all of it to the youngest brother and told the other two that: Had you
been real sons of the deceased you too would have become restless like
the youngest and you would have never agreed to burn the bones of your
dead father.

It is narrated from Imam Musa al-Ka¨im through reliable sources that
there was a pious man in The Israelites. His wife was also good-natured.
Once in his dream a person told him that Allah has decided to give you
this much life. From that half of will be spent in ease and satisfaction
and the other half in poverty and restlessness. Now you yourself decide
which part you want first and which the next. Allah has given you a
choice in this matter. That pious man said let me first consult my
good-hearted wife because she is my life partner. The next morning he
narrated his dream to his wife. She advised him to ask for a prosperous
life first and to make haste in obtaining safety as perhaps Allah may be
kind to them and conclude His bounties on them.

The next night he saw the same person in his dream who asked him about
his choice. He said he desired a satisfactory life first. So all sorts
of comforts and bounties were showered on them from all sides. His wife
again advised him to spend the money bestowed on him by Allah on his
poor relatives, needy persons, neighbors and such and such persons. She
continued to give him good counsel about spending his wealth and Allah’s
bounties for good causes. Finally the first half of his life passed and
the other part began which was to pass in poverty. Again the same person
appeared in his dream to inform him that the Kind and Merciful Allah had
made the other part of his life also restful and comfortable as a reward
of his good and generous deeds of the earlier half.

According to another narration Imam as-Sadiq said a man was very
restless in The Israelites. His wife told him very emphatically to look
for means to earn money. He earnestly and tearfully prayed to Allah for
maintenance. In his dream he saw a man asking him whether he preferred
two dirhams of lawful earning or two thousand dirhams of unlawful
earning. He said, I want two lawful coins. He was informed to take up
the two dirhams lying beneath his bed. When he woke up the next morning
he found two coins on his bed. He picked them up, bought a fish with one
dirham and gave it to his wife. She began to condemn him and said she
would not even touch it. So he began to cut the fish himself and found
two big pearls in it which he sold for forty thousand dirhams.

It is related from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that a scholar from the
Israelites died. After burial the angels put his soul in his body, made
him sit up in his grave and told him that they would give him a
punishment of a hundred lashes. He said he did not have the strength to
bear that much punishment. The angels said, All right! We will reduce it
by one lash. (in this way the matter came down to only one lash). Yet
the scholar said he could not tolerate even that. The angels said it was
unavoidable. The scholar asked about the sin which drew this punishment.
The angels replied, “One day you offered prayers without making ablution
and on another occasion while you were out on a walk you saw one person
being oppressed by others but you did not care to relieve him from them.
Then he was given a lash which filled his grave with fire.”

It is narrated by Wahab bin Munabbah that a man from The Israelites
built a grand and solid palace and invited the rich and wealthy people
for a feast. He denied entrance to the poor in that party telling them
that the costly foods were not prepared for worthless people. Allah sent
two angels in the form of two poor beggars. That man prevented them from
entering his palace and scolded them too. Then the angels were asked by
Allah to go there in the form of wealthy and fabulous men. Then the
angels in the guise of wealthy men were escorted with much respect and
honor and were give a high seat at the party. Allah ordered the angels
to press down that city along with all its residents into the earth. The
angels complied with the Divine order. It is mentioned in another
narration that thereafter the people of The Israelites carried small and
big sticks so that they may not walk with pride and arrogance on Allah’s
earth.

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam al-Baqir said there was a
scholar among the Israelites who always suffered a loss in whatever he
did. He could not undertake any worldly affairs. His wife was
maintaining him until whatever she had too was spent. One day they were
very restless due to hunger. The woman did not have anything except a
rope which she had woven by herself. She gave it to her husband and
asked him to sell it and bring something to eat. When he reached the
market all the shops were closed and all the merchants had gone home.

Returning empty-handed from there he went towards the seashore to make
ablution and to pour some water on himself. There he saw a fisherman who
had cast his net in the sea to catch fish. But when he took out the net
there was nothing in it except a rotten fish. The poor scholar requested
the fisherman to sell the fish to him in exchange for the rope. The
fisherman thought it worthwhile and gave him the fish. The scholar took
that fish to his wife and narrated what happened. When his wife cut the
fish she found a big pearl in its belly. She showed it to her husband
who sold it for twenty thousand dirhams and kept the money in his home.
In the meanwhile a beggar came to his door and asked for alms. He called
the needy beggar into his house and gave him half the amount. Seeing
this, his wife exclaimed: Wonderful! You have spent half your earnings
in one go. After some days the beggar came back and returned the bag of
money to the scholar saying: Keep it for yourself. He clarified that he
was an angel sent by Allah to test him in order to see whether the
scholar was thankful to Allah or not. Allah is pleased with you said the
angel.

According to authentic sources Hamraan asked Imam al-Baqir when his
kingdom and regime was to appear? He replied, “O Hamraan! You too have
your friends and relatives and can understand what kind of people they
are and can also recognize what kind of people they are in the matter of
faith. This is not that time when Imam can appear.” In those days there
was a scholar who had a son who was not inclined toward learning nor was
he ready to learn anything from his father. But one of his neighbors
always used to question the scholar and in this way learned much from
the scholar so that in due course he also became a scholar. When the
original scholar reached the time of his death he called his son and
told him: You did not learn anything from me but our such and such
neighbor has learnt a lot from me. So whenever you are in need of my
knowledge you should obtain it from him after introducing yourself to
him. After making this will he died.

Thereafter the king of that time had a vision and called for that
scholar to learn its meaning. He was informed that that scholar had
passed away. He asked them whether he had a son? When they told him that
he had a son the king immediately called for him. The son of the scholar
thought to himself: I will not understand what the king ask of me. I
will not be able to give him a satisfactory answer as I am without
knowledge. Then he remembered his late father’s will and went to that
neighbor who had acquired knowledge from his late father. He told him
that the king had called him but that he did not know why and what he
would ask? Then he told his neighbor that his late father had advised
him to approach him whenever need be regarding his knowledge. The
neighbor told him: I know why the king has called you. I can tell you
that but on condition that you should give me half of whatever you get
from the king. The son of the scholar replied that he would surely do
so. Then the neighbor made him swear and give the promise in writhing.
Then he informed him that the king had a vision and has called you to
tell him what kind of time (period) is this. So tell him that this time
is like a wolf. The boy (son of the late learned man) went to the king’s
court. The king asked him: Can you tell me why I have called you? He
replied, “It is because you had a dream and you want to know what kind
of time is this.” The king said, “You are right. Now tell me what kind
of time is this?” He informed the king that the time was like a wolf.
Hearing it the king rewarded him. He took that reward and returned home
but did not give anything from it to his neighbor thinking that this
wealth will fulfill the needs of my entire life and I will never require
the neighbor’s assistance again.

After sometime the king had another vision and again called that boy.
The boy was perplexed thinking that as he had not kept his promise given
to his neighbor how could he approach him again for the required
knowledge. Anyway he thought let me go to him. I will swear again and
promise that this time I will keep my word. Perhaps he will give me the
answers to the king’s questions. So he went to his neighbor and said, I
broke my promise because whatever I had got from the king had been
expended and nothing of it was left with me. But I am in need of your
help once again and request you not to deprive me of your knowledge for
the sake of Allah. I swear and promise to give half of what I get from
the king. He has again called for me and I do not know what he will ask
me. The scholar said, He (the king) has seen another dream and he will
ask you what kind of time is it now. You should reply that this time
(age or period) is like the sheep (example). So the boy went to the
king’s court and like earlier the king asked him: Tell me why have I
summoned you? The boy replied, “You have dreamed again and want to know
what kind of time is this.” The king said, Yes that is correct. So tell
me what kind of age is this? The boy said, This age is like the sheep.
Hearing this, the king rewarded him even more. The boy brought all of it
home and began to think whether he should give a part of it to his
scholar neighbor or not. At last he decided not to give him anything
thinking that if he kept the reward for himself henceforth he would
never be in need again.

After some time the king had a third vision and again called for him.
The boy felt very ashamed of himself thinking that he had cheated his
neighbor twice by not keeping his word. Now how could he go to him a
third time for getting the answers to the king’s questions. Finally he
decided that he must approach him a third time. So he went to him and
promised in the name of Allah that this time he would most definitely
keep his promise and give him half of what he got from the king and
appealed to him to tell him the answer to the king’s question. The
scholar again responded to his earnest requests, took it in writing
about his oath and told him that the king had called him again because
of yet another vision and to ask what today’s time is like. So tell him
that the allegorical name of this time is ‘balance’. The boy went to the
king’s court and answered as taught by the neighbor. The king became
much pleased and rewarded him more.

This time the boy took all the reward money to the scholar neighbor and
told him: I have brought to you the entire reward. Please divide it
yourself between us. The learned neighbor replied, “The earliest time
was like a wolf you too had a wolf-like nature and hence you decided not
to keep your promise. The period following it was like the sheep. Sheep
are always in hesitation whether to do something or not. Hence you also
acted like that. Now this age is that of balance meaning justice and
equity. So you have behaved justly and kept your word. Now you may take
away all this wealth. I am in no need of it at all.”[^1]

It is narrated with authentic chains that Imam al-Ridha said, “A man
from The Israelites worshipped Allah for forty years and then brought
forth a sacrifice before Him so as to know whether or not his worship
was acceptable to Him. But his sacrifice was not accepted so he
understood that he must have committed some sin or misdeed and imagined
himself responsible for it. Allah revealed to him that: Your
condemnation and criticism of yourself is better than your worshipping
of me for forty years.”

According to another tradition there was a king in The Israelites who
founded a city the like of which was never seen by anybody before. He
arranged a general feast and invited all. He also appointed a person at
the gate to ask every person as he was leaving as to what defects he saw
in that city. Nobody pointed out any shortcomings except three
worshippers (worshipper) who wore thick clothing.

They said we saw two defects: One, it will be ruined one day and
secondly, its king will also die one day. The king asked if they knew of
any place not having those defects? They replied, “Yes, the house in the
Hereafter will never be ruined nor will its owner ever die.” Their
admonition affected the king’s heart who left his kingship to join them
and remained busy in worshipping with them for quite a long time. Then
when he intended to part from them, they asked him whether he saw any
evil or any indiscipline in them due to which he wanted to separate from
them? The king replied in the negative and said, You know me and
therefore respect to me. Now I want to live with those who do not know
me.

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that some persons from the
progeny of olden day kings had engaged themselves in Allah’s worship and
were touring the world to get admonition from the events and the
conditions of people all around. Once they passed by a grave on which
the people had dumped much earth leaving only a little sign of it. They
consulted among themselves and decided to pray to Allah and ask him to
make the man in the grave alive so that they could find out from him how
death tasted. Then they prayed: O Lord! You alone are our Lord and
Nourisher. There is no Allah except You. You are the Creator of
everything and you alone are to last forever and will never perish. You
are aware of everything. You are ever Alive and will never die. You are
continuously engaged in planning the affairs of Your creations and know
everything without being taught by anyone. Please make this corpse alive
for us. Instantly a man with white hair on his head and beard came out
of that grave. He was shaking off the dust from his head and was looking
toward the heavens fearfully. Then he asked them: Why are you standing
on my grave? They said, We have troubled you so that you may tell us how
death tastes? The man said, I have been buried in this grave for
ninety-nine years and yet the pain of death has not been removed from me
and the bitterness of death has not yet left my throat. They asked him:
Whether his hair was white like this when he died? He said, No, but now
when I heard a sudden call to get up all my bones joined with one
another and I became alive. I frighteningly imagined that the Day of
Judgment has arrived. This fear turned my hair white and my eyes wide
open.

It is recorded in reliable sources that there was a man in The
Israelites who had no son. Allah gave him one. One day he dreamed that
his son would die at the time of his marriage. At last the marriage of
his son was fixed. On the night of his marriage that boy saw an old and
weak man. He helped him and gave him food. That old man said, You have
given me life so Allah may give you life. That night the father of that
boy dreamed that someone told him: Ask your son what kind of good deed
he did on the night of his marriage? The next morning he asked his son
and came to know how his son helped the old man. At night again that
same person appeared in his dream and told him: Allah kept your son
alive as a reward of that good deed which he did to the old man.  
 It is authentically narrated that Imam as-Sadiq said, “There was a man
in The Israelites who spent most of his time in worship. Once while he
was busy praying he saw two boys holding a bird and pulling out its
feathers. As he was busy in prayer he did not stop those boys from that
misdeed. Allah ordered the earth to swallow that worshipper who at once
went down in the earth and who will continue to go down until the Day of
Judgment.”

It is mentioned in another reliable tradition that Allah sent two angels
to destroy the residents of a city. In the dark of the night they heard
the voice of a man standing worshipping and praying earnestly. One of
the two angels said, Let us return and report about this man to our
Lord, perhaps the Most Merciful may forgive him or due to him will
forgive all the residents of this city. The other angel said, No, we
must carry out whatever order we have been given. It does not befit us
to go back. But that angel went back to the court of Allah and narrated
the event of the worshipper. Allah did not pay attention to the angel
and ordered the other angel to destroy all the residents of that city
along with the worshipper who had angered Allah as he did not condemn
those people who indulged in sins in front of his eyes. Allah also
became angry with the angel who had come to plead the case of the
residents of that city and threw him in an island where he is still
undergoing Allah’s punishment.”

It is recorded in reliable sources from Imam al-Ridha that in The
Israelites nobody was recognized as a worshipper until and unless he did
not worship continuously for ten years without speaking. Another
narration says that only after fully performing extreme worship among
The Israelites was he was called saalik (trader of the true path) and
mujtahid as only then he would be able to help and reform people
attentively.

It is recorded in reliable sources from ‘Ali bin husayn that a man rode
on a ship with some other people. The ship broke up and all drowned
except the wife of a person. She reached an island floating on a wooden
board. There was a person of bad character on that island who used to
indulge in every evil and who would never refrain from committing any
sin. Seeing that woman all alone he asked her whether she was a human
being or a jinn? She replied that she was a human being. He at once
caught her and tried to seduce her. The women began to shiver and
tremble restlessly. He asked her the reason whereupon she said pointing
towards the heavens: I fear Allah. he asked her whether she had ever
indulged in such thing? She swore by the Honor of Almighty Allah and
said, Never. That evil man said, You fear so much despite having never
done such a thing and even though saving yourself now is beyond your
power whereas I indulge in it willfully and sometimes through force.
Instead of you it should be me who should fear Allah and he arose
discarding his bad intention. Then he went away to his home without
saying anything to that woman thinking that he would perform repentance
as he was regretful. On his way he met a monk who joined him. After
walking for some time it became very hot. The monk told his companion:
Pray to Allah so that He may send a cloud to give us its shade. The
other man said, I have never done a good deed and hence I dare not ask
anything from Allah. Then the monk said, All right, I will pray and you
just go on saying ‘Amen’. So the monk said a prayer and after a few
moments a cloud came above them and they continued their walk under its
shade. Then they came to a cross road. The youth went on one side and
the monk on another. The cloud went with the youth. The monk told him:
You are better than me. Really speaking not mine but your prayer was
answered by Allah. Now tell me what good work did you perform which
earned Divine Mercy for you? The youth related to the monk what happened
on that island. Then the monk said, You left committing a sin fearing
Allah so now He has forgiven you all of your past sins.

According to an authentic narration from Imam, as-Sadiq there was a king
in The Israelites. His Qadi (judge) had a brother who was very pious and
honest. His brother’s wife also belonged to the family of Prophets. She
too was very pious. Once the king needed a man trustworthy enough to
send out on a job. He told his Qadi to provide him with a reliable and
trustworthy man. The Qadi said in my view nobody is more reliable than
my brother. So he called his brother and informed him about the king’s
wish. But he refused the offer telling him that he could not leave his
wife alone.  
 The Qadi insisted saying that the king was in urgent need of his
services. His brother said, I have nothing to do with anybody except my
wife. So you will have to take care of my wife, see to her needs and
take care of any job that needs to be done until my return. The Qadi
agreed and his brother left on the king’s job even though his wife was
not happy over his departure. Thereafter as desired by his brother the
Qadi used to go to his house and do the jobs required by his wife until
he fell in love with her to such an extent that he desired that she
should indulge in adultery with him. But she rejected.

The passion-blinded Qadi threatened to complain to the king if she did
not agree saying that he would tell the king on oath that she had
indulged in adultery with him. But she retorted: Do whatever you want
but I will not spoil my honor and chastity. The Qadi despaired for fear
of what would happen once his brother got to know of his intention so he
himself went to the king and informed him that the wife of his brother
had indulged in adultery an on making inquiries he had found the
allegation to be correct. The king said, Then stone her to death.

The Qadi went and told her that he had complained to the king who had
ordered her to be stoned to death and that if she did not fulfill his
desire he would see that she was stoned to death. But the woman still
said, Do whatever you wish but I cannot fulfill your evil desire. At
last the Qadi gathered the people and took her to a forest where he made
her sit in a pit and stones were rained on her until he was sure she had
died. Then only did they return home. After nightfall, as some life
still remained in that woman she removed the stones from all around her,
got out of the pit and with much difficulty reached a monastery and fell
asleep at its door. The next morning the monk of that monastery opened
the door to find a weak and wounded woman lying there. He inquired with
her as to what had happened. Hearing her story the monk felt pity on her
and took her into the monastery.  
 The monk was very wealthy. He treated the lady and soon all her wounds
healed. This monk had a young son and he entrusted his son to that lady
for training. The monk also had a slave in his service who fell in love
with that chaste woman and asked her to satisfy his passion. He also
threatened to kill her if she did not fall in line with his wishes. The
oppressed lady replied that he could do whatever he wanted but she would
never commit a sin like that. So the salve killed the son of the monk
and told him the monk that in response to his kindness the woman had
killed his son whom he had entrusted to her for training. The monk
called the chaste and faithful lady and asked her about the murder of
his son. She told him the full truth about the slave but the monk did
not believe her. He told her that now he would not allow her to stay
there. He gave her twenty dirhams as traveling expenses and drove her
out of the monastery.

The poor lady walked the whole night and reached a village the next
morning. There she saw a man hanging on the gallows but still alive. She
inquired with him and the half dead man told her that he was indebted to
the extent of twenty dirhams and that according to the rules of that
place those who were indebted to that extent were to be hung and not
released until they paid up their debt. Hearing this, the kind lady gave
him her twenty dirhams and he was then released. That man told her: O
kind lady! You have been merciful to me and have saved me from sure
death. Now I will remain in your service. Walking together they reached
seashore where they saw some ships. The man told the lady: Wait here. I
am going to do some job for the ship owners to buy us something to eat.
Then he went to the shipmen and asked them what goods did they have in
their ships. They replied that one of the ships was loaded with very
valuable materials like jewels and that the other ship was vacant for
their own voyaging. He asked them what was the total value of their
goods? They replied that it was so valuable that they could not evaluate
it fully.

Then that person said, I have a thing which is even costlier than your
valuables. They asked: What is it? He said, A very beautiful slave girl.
So beautiful that you might never have seen anyone like her before. They
said, Sell her to us. He proposed: First someone must go to see her but
in such a manner that she does not know the intention behind it. Then
return and pay me her price. Then when I go away you may take her in
your control. The seafarers agreed and one of them went to see that
lady. He came back to report that he had never seen a more beautiful
woman before. So the wicked man sold that chaste woman for ten thousand
dirhams and went away with the money. When he disappeared the shipmen
came to the lady and said, O slave girl! Come with us on this ship. She
asked: Why? They said, We have bought you from your owner. She said, He
is not my owner or Lord. They said, Do not make excuses and come along.
Otherwise we ill take you forcibly. So she had to accompany them up to
the seashore. However each and everyone of them vied for that lady so
much so that to settle the dispute they mad her sit in the ship which
was full of jewelry and all of them rode in the other vessel.

When the ships reached mid sea Allah sent a storm which overturned the
ship which carried the men and all of then drowned. The stormy winds
carried the ship in which the lady was sitting to an island. She came
out of the ship, tied it on the shore and began to walk on the island.
She saw a beautiful house near a water spring. All around were trees
bearing fruits. She told herself: I will stay here, eat these fruits and
drink this fresh water and pass the rest of my life in worshipping only
one Allah. Allah sent a revelation to one of the Prophets of that time
to go to the king (by whose order the Qadi had stoned the lady) and tell
him: On such and such island is a pious slave girl. Go to her along with
all of your people, confess all your past sins and request her to pardon
you. If she forgives you I will also forgive you. Otherwise I will
chastise all of you severely. On getting this message from the Divine
Messenger the king went to that island along with his people where they
saw the woman. He approached her respectfully and said, “This Qadi had
complained to me that the wife of his brother had committed adultery. I
ordered her to be stoned to death without making proper inquiries and
without calling for appropriate witnesses. I am afraid I have behaved
unjustly in this matter. Kindly pray to Allah to pardon me.” She said,
Sit down. Allah will forgive you. Then her husband came before her (she
recognized him) and said, I had a very pious wife. I had to leave town
on a job for the king and so had to leave my wife on her own even though
she did not wish me to do so. I had asked my brother to look after her
and to see to her needs. After returning I came to know that my brother
had her stoned to death as she had indulged in the misdeed of adultery.
I am afraid I was at fault in this matter. So kindly pray that I may be
pardoned by Allah.

She said, “May Allah pardon you too. Sit down.” She made him sit by the
side of the king. Then came the Qadi who also narrated his mistakes and
begged her to pray to Allah for his pardoning. She told him also to sit
down and said, May Allah forgive you too. Then she turned toward her
husband and said, Listen. Then that monk also submitted his misdeed and
she told him too to sit down and told him that Allah will forgive him.
Then the slave of the monk appeared before her and narrated his excesses
and oppressions and pleaded for her prayers so that he may also get
salvation. She said, Sit down. May Allah pardon you also. Thereafter she
asked the monk to listen. Last of all came the man who had been freed
from the gallows by her. He also confessed his crimes and prayed for
pardon for his thanklessness. Then the chaste lady turned toward her
husband and said, I am your wife. All that you have heard is related to
me. Now I am in no need of a husband. I wish this ship which is full of
jewelry to be taken away by you for your requirements and let me remain
here only for worship of Allah. You have seen how much torture I have
received from the hands of men. Her husband agreed to her wish of
staying on that island. He then took charge of the ship and returned
with the king and all the people back to the capital.

Ibn Babawayh has narrated from ‘Ali bin husayn that there was a thief
among The Israelites. His habit was to open freshly dug graves and steal
the coffin cloth from their dead body. One day his neighbor fell ill and
feared that he might steal his coffin cloth also. So he called that
thief and asked him how did he find his behavior toward him? The other
person said he was a very good neighbor indeed. Thereafter he said, I am
in need of something. The thief asked: What? He put two pieces of coffin
cloth before him and asked him to take up the one of his choice and to
let the other remain for his corpse. He asked him not to dig his grave
after his death and make him naked by stealing the cloth from his body.

The neighbor agreed and told him to rest assured that he would not
behave like that. The ill man insisted on giving him the better cloth.
When he died and was buried the thief thought, how will the corpse know
whether I steal his cloth or not. So he went to dig his grave. As he was
digging he suddenly heard a voice as if someone was telling him not to
dig the grave. He became frightened and went back home, gathered his
sons and asked them what kind of a father was he to them? They said he
was very kind to them. Then he told them: I wish something from you.
They said, Do tell us so that we may carry it out. Then he said, When I
die burn my body down to ashes, then crush my bones and when a strong
wind blows scatter the ash away throwing half towards the mountains and
the other half towards the sea. The sons said, All right, we will do as
you wish. So when he died his sons did as he wanted.

Allah commanded the forest to collect whatever of the bones had fallen
there. Similarly He ordered the sea to collect whatever was thrown into
it. Allah made him alive and asked him as to why he had made such a
will. He replied, “It was due to my fear of Thee.” Allah said, “All
right if it was only for the sake of My fear then, I swear by My Honor I
will please your debtors on the Day of Judgment and will turn your fear
into satisfaction and peace and will pardon your sins.”

It is recorded in reliable sources that Imam al-Baqir said, “There was a
prostitute in The Israelites who used to lure youths toward her. Once a
man told her: If such and such worshipper (worshipper) sees you he will
surly fall in love with you. She said, By Allah, I will got to his house
and bring him on the true path. She reached his house the same night,
knocked on his door and said, O Worshipper! Give me shelter for one
night. He denied her shelter. She said, Some youths from The Israelites
are following me with the intention of adultery. I have run away from
them and require shelter. If you do not open your door they will catch
me and rape me. Hearing this, the worshipper opened his house. The woman
entered the house and took off her veil. When the worshipper saw her
beauty he lost his sense and felt passionate towards her. When he came
to sense he saw his hand on the body of that woman. He felt a shock and
pulled his hand off her. There was a water vessel in his room beneath
which a fire used to burn constantly. He ran to that fire and put his
hand in that fire. The woman asked him what he was doing? He replied, “I
am burning my hand in the worldly fire, perhaps I will be saved from the
Hell fire in the Hereafter.” The woman ran away from there and asked the
people of The Israelites to take care of the worshipper as he was
burning his own hand. The people rushed there but by that time his hand
was burnt.”

It is reliably related from Imam as-Sadiq that a worshipper from The
Israelites had kept himself totally away from women and had become
fearless of the evils of the devil. One night a devil in the guise of a
woman came to his house as a guest and began to make evil suggestions to
his heart. With every evil suggestion made by that woman the worshipper
pushed one of his fingers into the fire so that he be reminded of
Hellfire. This happened repeatedly until morning and in this way he
suppressed his evil passions by burning his fingers one after the other.
In the morning he said to the lady: You have proved to be a bad guest
for me. Please leave this place now.

It is recorded in reliable sources that a man went to Imam as-Sadiq and
began to praise someone’s worshipping and religiousness. Imam asked: How
much intelligence does he have? He said he did know that. Then Imam
said, “Reward is in proportion to the intelligence (wisdom) of a person.
There was a great worshipper in The Israelites. He spent all his time
worshipping on an island. It was a very fertile island with clean water
springs and fruitful trees. Once an angel passed by that man. The angel
was very pleased with his worship and he prayed to Allah: My Lord!
Please let me know the reward of this man’s worshipping. Allah told the
angel what he thought was that man’s reward. The angel felt that the
reward was much less compared to his worship. So Allah asked that angel
to go and live with that worshipper for a while. The angel went to that
person in the form of a man. The worshipper asked him: Who are you? He
replied, “I am also a worshipper like you. When I learned about this
place and heard your praise I thought of coming here and worshipping
along with you.”

Next morning the angel said to the man, “Your house is very spacious and
very suitable for worship.” He said, “There is a defect in it.” “What is
it?” the angel asked. He replied, “My Allah does not have a donkey of
His own. Had He one He would have made it graze here so that this grass
might not go to waste.” The angel told him that Allah does not require
an ass. The worshipper replied, “Had He a donkey this grass would not
have wasted.” Allah revealed to the angel, “I have fixed the reward of
this man’s deed proportionate to his wisdom.”

It is reliably reported by Hafas bin al Bakhtari that, “Once I was late
in attending Imam as-Sadiq. He asked the reason for my delay. I said,
May I be sacrificed for you. I had stood surety for a person who did not
keep his promise and did not pay up his debt and so it was demanded from
me and that is why I could not come for hajj (in advance). Imam said,
Why did you stand as surety for others. Do not you know that in the past
people were destroyed for standing as surety for others! Then he
narrated: A group committed many sins and then became very fearful
because of it. Another group (as a gesture of sympathy) told them: We
undertake the responsibility of all your sins. Allah chastised the
latter group telling them: They feared My Anger but you dared so much
(became fearless of Me).”

It is reported in authentic traditions from Hamza Thumali that in the
distant past there was a very rich man in the progeny of Prophets. He
would spend his wealth on the needy and the poor. After his demise his
wife also continued to spend like him. Soon all of the wealth was spent.
Now that man had a son who would always hear people (Wherever he went)
praying for peace upon his late father and benefaction for him. He asked
his mother the reason for such prayers being made by people wherever he
went. His mother told him that: Your father was very pious. He was a
benefactor of the poor. Being rich he would spend his money on
fulfilling the needs of the poor people. After his departure I also
continued to spend his wealth on the needy. Finally all the wealth is
spent. The son said, My dear mother! My late father is getting the
reward for whatever he did but you did not have the right to do what you
did and hence you have earned Allah’s displeasure. The mother asked him
what he meant.

The son said, “My father was spending his own wealth but you spent away
the wealth of others (meaning his).” The mother replied, “My son! You
are correct. But I did not think that you would object to what I did and
would declare that wealth lawful for me.” The son said, “I do so now and
declare it lawful for you. But is there anything left so that I may make
it a means of earning and may seek Allah’s Grace. Maybe He will make us
rich again.” The mother said, “I have a hundred Dinars.” The sons said,
“If Allah wills He will provide abundance in it even if the capital is
little.” Then he went out for earning their livelihood.

On his way he found the dead body of a man whose face showed signs of
being a pious and virtuous person. He thought what can be better than
spending my money on bathing, covering and coffining this corpse and
praying for him and burying him. So he spent twenty dirhams for this
good deed. Now he had only twenty dirhams. He walked further for finding
Allah’s graceful provision. Along the way a man met him and asked him
where he was going. He said, For finding livelihood and Allah’s Grace.
He asked how much capital he had. He replied, “Twenty dirhams.” The man
said, “Of what use can this little amount be?” The boy replied, “When
Allah wishes He gives abundance in little capital too.” “You are right
of course,” said the man. Then he asked, “You must do exactly what I
say? But I will tell you what to do only on condition that you give me
half of the earnings.”

The boy agreed. That man told him, “On the path on which you are
proceeding you will find a house. The residents of that house will
invite you as a guest. Do accept their invitation. When their servant
brings food for you he will be accompanied by a black cat. You should
ask that man to sell that cat to you. He will refuse. But you must go on
asking. Finally he will agree to sell it for twenty dirhams. You must
pay him the amount and obtain that cat. Thereafter you should slaughter
that cat, burn its head and remove its brain and go to a certain city.
The king of that place has become blind. Tell those people that you can
treat their king. Be not afraid on seeing the dead bodies of people whom
the king had killed earlier for having failed to cure him. You may ask
any amount you like as your price for his treatment. On the first day
sting the king’s eyes with the brain of that cat. He will find it
effective and will ask for more medicine. Do not do so but apply only
one needle on the second and third day too.” So that boy went on his
way, became a guest of the residents of that house, bought the cat,
reached the king of the said city and engaged in treating him. On the
first day he applied only one needle to sting his eyes. It proved
effective and the king could see a little on the following day. He felt
even better on the second day and was completely healed on the third
day. The king was now able to see everything like before.

He told the boy: You have done me a great favor. You have earned a right
on me. You have returned my kingdom to me. As a reward I give you my
daughter in marriage. The boy replied, “My mother is alive whom I cannot
separate from.” The king married his daughter with that boy and told him
that he could live there as long as he desired and could go to his
mother’s place along with the princess whenever he wished. The boy lived
with the king with honor and respect for one year and then prepared to
go. The king gave him much wealth and goods and cows and camels and
sheep. The boy departed with all that along with his wife. First he went
to the place where he had met the man who showed him how to cure the
king. He found that man sitting there. Seeing the boy he asked: Boy: Why
did you not keep your promise? The boy replied, “Whatever I got and
enjoyed while I was with the king may please be declared lawful for me.
Whatever is with me now is this. You may take half of it.”

He divided his wealth equally and asked that man to take the part of his
choice. The man said, “You have not acted with justice.” “How is that?”
the boy asked. The man said, “The woman also is a part of your earning.”
The boy said, “You are right. Take away all the wealth and leave the
woman for me.” He said, “No, I want half of that woman too.” The boy
called for a saw and put it on the head of the woman to give half of her
to that man.” The man said, “Now you have kept your promise and word.
This woman and all this wealth is yours. Take them away. I need nothing
of it. I am an angel. Allah sent me only to give the reward of that good
which you had done to the dead body on your path.”

It is related reliably from Imam as-Sadiq that there was a worshipper in
The Israelites who never indulged in worldly affairs. This hurt Iblis
(the big Satan) very much. So he whistled through his nose hearing which
his entire army came around him. Then he asked who from them would be
able to mislead that worshipper? One of them said he would. Iblis asked:
How? He said, Through women. Iblis said, It will not work as the
worshipper is neither inclined towards women nor is he aware of their
taste. Another Satan stood up and said he would mislead him through
wine, drinking etc. Iblis said, You cannot deviate him in that way also.
Then a third one arose and claimed that he would mislead him by
pretending to be pious and a worshipper of Allah. Iblis said, You can
win. So that Satan entered the house of the worshipper in the form of a
man and went to the area where the worshipper used to pray. He stood
beside him and began praying.

The worshipper after worshipping for a long time would stop to take some
rest but the Satan never rested. Seeing this the worshipper considered
himself very inferior to the newcomer and with much humility asked him
what gave him this much strength in worshipping Allah tirelessly? The
cursed one did not give any reply. The worshipper approached him again
and tried to make him talk and explain how he could worship so long at a
stretch. He asked the Satan what gave him such a high status. Then the
agent of Satan said, O slave of Allah! I had committed a sin. I repented
over it but always keep that sin mind. This thing has given me the power
for praying tirelessly. The worshipper asked what was that sin so that
he may also commit it. The Satan told him to go to a certain city and
enter the house of a certain prostitute and give her two dirhams. The
worshipper said I do not even know what a dirham is? The Satan took out
two dirhams from beneath his foot and gave it to the worshipper.

The worshipper turned towards that city in his prayer (holy) clothes and
inquired about the residence of that prostitute. The People thought he
had come there to give guidance to that prostitute and so they showed
him her brothel. When the worshipper entered her place he threw those
two dirhams and asked the woman to get up. The woman rose and took him
into her room and told him: O gentleman! You have come to me in attire
in which nobody comes. So first please tell me why and how you became
inclined to come to me of all people. The worshipper narrated his whole
story. The woman said, O slave of Allah! Giving up a sin is much more
easier than repenting after committing it. It is not possible for anyone
to deliberately commit a sin and then repent and attain higher status as
said by you. Surely one who sent you is a Satan in disguise who has come
to deviate you. Go back and you will surely not find him there. The
worshipper returned home. That woman died the same night. Next morning
the people saw writing on her door saying that all the residents of the
town should gather for her funeral prayer because she is from those who
will enter paradise. The people were confused and did not bury her for
three days. Allah revealed everything to the Messenger of that time.
According to the narrator Imam said that he (the Messenger) was Musa.

(Allah commanded): Go and pray in the funeral of such and such woman
because I have pardoned her and reserved paradise for her because she
prevented my servant from disobeying Me.

[^1]: The purpose of Imam behind describing this story was to make you
understand that times are similar to the above description. When you
observe that your own friends are conspiring against you how can the
Imam rely on their promises and how can he rise against the enemy. So
when the time comes when people will keep their words, and Allah knows
that they will remain loyal to the Imam, then will He make the Imam
appear and lead the uprising and thus bestow the reformed society as a
mediator gift to Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, grant this award
to them as a grand fortune.


