An Account of Harut and Marut
=============================

Allah says: And they followed what the Shaitans chanted of sorcery in
the reign of Sulayman, and Sulayman was not an unbeliever, but the
Shaitans disbelieved, they taught men sorcery and that was sent down to
the two angels at Babel, Harut and Marut, yet these two taught no man
until they had said, “Surely we are only a trial, therefore do not be a
disbeliever.” Even then men learned from these two, magic by which they
might cause a separation between a man and his wife; and they cannot
hurt with it any one except with Allah’s permission, and they learned
what harmed them and did not profit them, and certainly they know that
he who bought it should have no share of good in the hereafter and evil
was the price for which they sold their souls, had they but known this.
2:102  
 (In explanation of this holy verse it is said that) Shaitans used to
teach magic that was sent down on two angels Harut and Marut in Babylon
and these two taught no man until they had said, “Surely we are at
trial, therefore do not be a disbeliever.” Even then, men learned from
these two, magic by which they might cause a separation between a man
and his wife.

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim and Ayyashi have in their tafsirs, narrated from Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir that every day and every night, angels used to descend
for taking up deeds of the middle men (of the residents of the earth).
On seeing these deeds, the residents of the heavens began to find fault
in the sins being committed by the dwellers of the earth like disobeying
Allah and making false allegations against Him. They used to say that
Allah is high and above what the dwellers of the world say about Him. At
last, a group of angels requested Allah: O Nourisher! Do You not frown
upon Your creations who make false allegations against You and who
disobey You even though You have prohibited them from doing such things?
O Lord! You tolerate them even though all of them are in Your control
and are living a life of ease due to Your bounties. So Allah willed to
show to the angels what is His perfect Power and how He issues His
commandments in the world of His creation, and to make the angels aware
of His blessings as they have been created sinless and He has made them
distinct among His creations and has made them ever obedient and has not
given them the power of sinning.  
 So He said to the angels: Select two beings from your community so that
I may send them to the earth and give them the nature of human beings
and put in them desire for eating, drinking, etc. and introduce
yearnings in their minds like the children of Adam. Then I will take a
test of them in the matter of My obedience and worship. The angels
selected Harut and Marut from among them as they were foremost in
finding faults in humans and in asking for Allah’s chastisement for the
humans. Allah told them: Now I have put all those desires and needs in
you which I have created in men. Do not include anyone (do not make any
partner) in worshipping Me, do not commit adultery and do not drink
wine.

Then He removed all curtains of the skies so that He may make His power
visible to the angels. He sent those two angels on earth in the form of
two handsome men and made them camp in Babylon. When they came to earth,
they saw a very beautiful woman advancing towards them. She was fully
adorned and perfumed and her face was unveiled. Now the two angels had a
thought about the woman that they were prohibited from. They discussed
it between themselves and decided to walk away from the temptation.
After walking a few steps, passion overpowered them. They returned to
that woman and asked her to allow them to have sex with her. That woman
said, My religion does not allow me to lie with you until you adopt my
religion.

They inquired her religion. She said, I can only fulfill the desire of
the one who worships my Allah and who prostrates before my Allah and she
pointed towards an idol saying, this is my Allah. The angels looked at
one another and exclaimed: Now two sins (instead of one) confront us
viz., one of Polytheism and another adultery. Then they consulted again
but desire overtook them. So they said to the woman: We are agreeable.
Then she said, As you are prepared to bow before the idol you must first
drink wine because prostration without taking wine is not recognized.
The angels consulted again and said, Now three sins confront us-drinking
wine, having illegal sex and prostrating before an idol. They said to
that woman: Verily you have proved a big trouble for us. Still we are
ready to do whatever you say. So they drank the wine and bowed before
the idol and they readied to lie with that woman when suddenly a beggar
entered the place. They asked him: Who are you and why have you come
here? He replied, “Your condition makes me doubt your intention. You are
fearful and frightened and yet you have brought this woman to a solitary
place. Surely you are evil fellows.” Saying this he went away.  
 Then that woman told the two, “I swear by my Allah that this man knows
you and is aware of your place and has gone to disgrace both you and me.
So I will not draw near to you. You must first kill him so that he may
not be able to disgrace us and then come back to me and do whatever you
wish.” At once, the two ran after that man and killed him. When they
returned they did not find the woman there and found that suddenly their
clothes had fallen down and they had become naked. They began to bite
their fingers with an intense felling of shame and sorrow.

Allah revealed, “I sent you only for a while on earth to live with My
creation, but in this little time you committed all the sins from which
I had prohibited you from. You did not feel ashamed before Me, though it
was you who were more than all others against the dwellers of the earth
due to their disobedience and wanted that they should be punished. It
was due to this fact that I had given you such a nature which did not
entertain any wish to commit sin and it was I who had protected you from
disobeying Me. Now when I lifted my protection from you and left you to
your own you behaved like this. Now it is up to you to select for
yourself either a worldly punishment or the other worldly chastisement.”
One of the angels said, “Since we have come to the world we might as
well enjoy our desires fully until we get the punishment of the
Hereafter.” Another said, “The worldly punishment is limited which will
end some day. But the chastisement of the Hereafter is everlasting. It
is much harsher which we do not prefer.” So they opted for this world’s
punishment and continued to teach magic to the people. They did so for a
long time and when they perfected that teaching they were hung upside
down in the air and will remain like that until the Day of the
Resurrection Day.

Ayyashi has reported with another chain that once Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali
was giving a sermon from the pulpit of the mosque of al-Kufah when one
‘Abdullah bin Al Kawaa said, Enlighten us about the red star that is
Venus. said, Once Allah Almighty made the angels see the condition of
human beings who were busy in disobeying Allah. The angels named Harut
and Marut said, These are the people whose great grandfather Adam was
the one whom You had created with your hand and it was he to whom you
had asked the angels to bow before. Now they are disobeying you like
this! Allah replied, “If I send you to in the earth with awareness of
passions and desires you also will sin like them and disobey Me.” They
claimed, “By Your Honor! We will never disobey You.”

Allah entangled them in passions and desires like humans and sent them
down on the earth with the order that they should never make anyone His
partner (shirk), never kill anybody wrongfully, never indulge in
adultery and never drink wine. Then they began to guide and direct
people on the earth.  
 This star (Venus) was a very beautiful woman. She had gone to one of
those two angels for obtaining some kind of decision. At the very first
sight of her that angel fell in love with her and told her that truth is
with you (and my judgment will be in your favor) but only when you give
me control over you. The woman promised to do so and fixed a time for
them to meet. Then she went to the other angel. The same thing happened
with him too and she gave him also the same promise and fixed a time for
them to meet. When both the angels reached the venue at the appointed
time and saw one another their heads bowed in shame. But soon decency
went away from them they said to one another: I have come here for the
same purpose for which you have come. Both asked the woman to allow them
to have sex with her. She made them prostrate before her idol, made them
drink wine, got a beggar killed by them and finally told them that she
will not be pleased with them until they teach her the way of going up
to the heaven. Now these two angels used to decide people’s disputes
during the day and go up to the heaven at night. They refused to teach
the woman how to go to the heaven and she in return did not fulfill
their desire. At last the angels agreed to the last wish of the woman
also and taught her how to go up in the heavens. In order to experiment
she uttered the words taught by them and at once reached the heavens
while the two stood wide-eyed. Allah turned the woman into the form of a
star.[^1]

While explaining this verse Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari has said that Imam
as-Sadiq said that, after the time of Nuh, many people began to deceive
others through magic (sorcery etc). Allah sent two angels to the
Messenger of that time so that they may show the people what was magic
and to explain to them why Allah had prohibited its use. It was like a
doctor (physician) telling somebody that such and such thing is
poisonous and therefore fatal and that its effect can be removed through
such and such medicine. As Allah Almighty says: (Meaning: that Prophet
asked those angels to appear like men and teach the people what Allah
had shown them. So those two angels were teaching the people magic and
the ways of making it ineffective. But before that they would inform the
people that: We are a means of test and trial for the slaves of Allah so
that they may obey Allah and nullify magic by what they learn, but not
indulge in magic themselves and not become ‘Kafir’ (unbelievers) by
harming others through magic. You are encouraging people by creating an
impression that you are equal to Allah by killing or enlivening through
magic. These things are Kufr (blasphemy-unbelief). (Even the men learned
from these two, magic by which they might cause a separation between a
man and his wife).

Said that the desirers of magic learned the magic of Satan which they
had buried beneath the throne of Solomon (Sulayman) and attributed its
magic to Sulayman. By doing this they were obtaining benefits from both
the charms (enchantments) and from what was in possession of Harut and
Marut. Through it they started making conspiracies and mischief, and
causing conflicts and separations between people. They also indulged in
backbiting. They would write things about a certain thing or person and
then burn it at different places so that it would result in enmity or
amity between the two parties. (And they cannot hurt anyone with it
except with Allah’s permission). Allah says here that those who learn
that thing cannot harm anyone except by Allah’s will and those whom
Allah left on his own and had He wished He would have debarred him from
His Mercy due to that person’s evil deeds or if He willed He would have
stopped them per force. (And they learned what harmed them and did not
profit them). said, After learning chants or magic they used to harm
others through it. Thus they were learning only that which was
destroying their religion and which did not give them any benefit in the
Hereafter. Rather they were getting out of the religion of Allah due to
that. (And certainly they know that he who bought it should have no
share of good in the Hereafter). (And evil was the price for which they
sold their souls; had they but known this 2:102). Thus they gave up
their share from Paradise because they believed that there was no Allah,
nor Hereafter, nor any life after death.

Narrators of traditions said to Imam Al-Hasan al-’Askari that some
people say that Harut and Marut were two angels whom Allah had selected
when men indulged in extreme rebellion; that Allah sent those two angels
with other angels and that those two angels fell in love with Venus and
desired to commit adultery with her. They drank wine, killed a man
unlawfully and therefore Allah has kept them chastised in Babylon. That
magicians were learning magic from those two angels. That Allah
metamorphosed that woman into a star (Venus). (Imam said, I seek
protection of Allah from such words because angels are sinless and have
been saved from disbelief and evils by the Grace of Allah, as Allah has
said about them: (They do not disobey Allah in what he commands them,
and do as they are commanded. 66: 6) At another place He says that those
who are near Allah, that is, angels, do not feel proud in the matter of
worshipping Allah, nor do they tire but remain engaged in hallowing and
praising Him day and night without fatigue.

Again He says: There are some of My precious slaves who make no excess
in talking about Allah and do whatever Allah asks them to do. Had it
been as people say then Allah would have appointed those angels as His
caliphs on earth and they would have been Prophets and Imams in the
world. Is it possible for any Prophet or Imam to kill anybody illegally
and to indulge in adultery? Do you not know that Allah has never left
the children of Adam any time anywhere in the world without a Prophet or
an Imam? Have you not heard that Allah says that: We, before you, did
not send towards them anyone but one from among the residents of the
city on whom We sent revelation. So this is an evidence to prove that
angels have never been sent on earth as leaders and rulers of men.
Rather Allah has sent His (human) Prophets. The narrator said, Then on
this ground of argument, Satan should also not have been an angel.
replied, “He was also not an angel but was a jinn (genie) as He says,
Verily he was from the jinn and at another place He says, And the jinn
we created before from intensely hot fire. (15:27) Surely my great
grandfather has, through my elders, narrated to us that the holy Prophet
said, ‘Allah Almighty selected Muhammad and his progeny from the worlds
and did not appoint angels who were near Him to do jobs about which he
knew that they would not be able to perform, but who would, due to that,
get away from Allah’s friendship and love and would also lose inerrancy
and would enter a group which has earned Allah’s anger.’”

Narrators have said that some people asked Imam if it was true that when
the holy Prophet specifically declared the Imamate (leadership) of Amir
al-Mu’minin and Allah presented his Imamate to the angels many of them
did not accept it? And Allah turned many of them into frogs? Imam said,
“May Allah protect us, they have made a false allegation against them.
Angels are the Messenger of Allah. Just as the Messengers can never
disbelieve, the angels too cannot. Their grace is very high. They are
pure of such things.”

Inshallah, we will describe all the events of angels and their inerrancy
in another book *‘Ruh al-Arwah’*. Thus, we conclude this volume here.

[^1]: Sunnis have also written this in their commentaries and that many
Sunni and Shi‘ah scholars have denied this story because what is said in
this story is against the nature of angels (the nature as mentioned in
authentic hadiths). Rather they say there were two angels whom Allah had
sent on the earth for taking a test of men so that they may teach them
the difference between magic and miracle and so that they may keep away
from the former. They told the people that: We are not teaching this to
you so that you can make it a means of earning in your world and become
disbeliever by adopting magic. The angels did not commit any sin. They
remained on earth for a long time and then went back to the heavens. And
some say that the two were not angels but were two residents of Babylon
who were famous for their virtues and hence were called angles. Some
others say that this behavior is not contrary to the nature of angels
because they have an angelic nature only up to the time they are in
their original status of inerrancy and that they were no more angels
after Allah turned them into the form of men. It is possible that their
inerrancy had vanished. Though these statements do have weight yet many
hadiths contradict them. Thus they conform with the common peoples and
the Jewish traditions but against the belief of Shi‘ahs. Hence it is
better to remain noncommittal in this matter. Therefore the explanation
of this verse is mentioned in the commentary of Imam al-Hasan al-’Askari
(to be seen in the text in the following pages.


