An Account of Idris
===================

Allah says in the Holy Qur’an

***“And mention Idris in the Book, surely he was a truthful man, a
Prophet. And We raised him high in heaven. (19:57-58)***

From authentic books, it is narrated from Wahab that Idris was a
well-built man with a broad chest. He had less hair on his body and more
on his head. His one ear was bigger than the other. He had scanty hair
on his chest and spoke in a low voice. While walking his feet used to
come close to one another. He is known as Idris because he used to teach
about the magnanimity of Allah and the excellence of Islam. He pondered
about the majesty, grandiose and glory of Allah - that the sky, the
earth, the sun, the moon, the stars and clouds and all other creations
have a creator who by His power has created them, formed and arranged
them.

Guilty is the one who does not worship Him Who has the right to be
worshipped. With this in mind, he formed a private conference among his
nation and advised, them remember Allah. He also warned them about His
chastisement. He invited them towards His worship. Due to this
propagation, the people started to join him. At first, they numbered
seven, then reached seventy, then seven hundred, then one thousand
people became his followers. Then he (Idris) said to them, “Let us
select a hundred pious people.” So from the one thousand, seventy were
selected, then from the seventy, ten were selected and from the ten,
seven people were finally chosen.

Then he said, “Come, let the seven of us pray and all the others shall
say ‘Amen’. Perhaps our Creator may guide us due to our prayers.” They
placed their hands on the earth and prayed, but nothing happened. They
raised their hands towards the sky and prayed. Allah revealed upon Idris
and selected him as His Messenger. Allah guided him and his companions
towards His Worship. So they were involved in the worship of Allah and
did not associate with anyone so much so that Allah raised Idris to
heaven. Except for a few, most of those who had believed in Idris
deviated and there were disputes and differences among them. Nuh was
appointed over them.

According to a hadith from Abu-Dharr, it is narrated that thirty books
were revealed on Idris and other traditions state that he was the first
person who had initiated writing with a pen. He also used to stitch
clothes and wear them. Before this, the people used to cover their
private parts with leaves. Idris used to stitch clothes and worship and
praise Allah.

From reliable traditions it is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that
Masjid as-Sahlah was the residence of Idris where he used to stitch
clothes and worship Allah. Allah fulfills the desire of one who
supplicates at that place and will elevate his status on the Day of
Judgment as it was the place of Idris.

It is narrated from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that at the early part of the
Prophethood of Idris there lived a tyrant king. Once when he went out
for a stroll and passed through a land rich in greenery, which belonged
to a pious believer. This believer had abandoned all false religions and
was disgusted with transgressors. He kept aloof from them. The king
liked that piece of land for himself, so he inquired from his vizier
regarding its owner it. The vizier replied that it belonged to a certain
believer from their kingdom. The king called the believer and said that
he wanted his piece of land. The believer replied that his family needed
the plot of land more than the king. The king asked him to sell it to
him but the believer was adamant which the angry and his facial
expressions changed. In that very condition, he returned to his kingdom.
The king had a wife from Iraq (Barak) whom he loved very much and whom
he consulted frequently. On reaching his kingdom, he called her. She saw
that he was in a very angry mood and inquired as to what had aroused his
temper. He narrated the incident of the believer’s land.

She replied that only he gets angry who does not have the power to take
revenge. “If you don’t want to execute or behead him without any excuse
then I will show you a way to kill him by which the land will be yours
and even his family members will not blame you for his death.” The king
asked her what plan she had in mind. She replied that one of her group
(from Azarak) will be sent to arrest him and he would testify that the
person has turned away from the king’s religion. “In this way you can
kill him and seize his land.” The king agreed to her suggestion. So
groups from Iraq, who followed the queen’s religion and who considered
lawful the slaughtering of a believer were called. They testified before
the king that that man had turned away from the state religion. On
hearing this, the king ordered his execution and captured his land.

Allah was angry at the believer’s murder and He revealed to Idris to go
and tell the tyrant ruler, “Was he not content with killing the believer
that he also usurped his land impoverishing family? I swear by My
majesty and power that I will avenge his murder in the Resurrection Day
and in this world, I will abolish your rulership. I will change your
honor and status into humiliation and disgrace. And dogs will devour the
flesh of your wife. Has My tolerance and endurance, which was supposed
test you, made you arrogant?”

Idris addressed the king, “O tyrant ruler! I am the messenger of Allah!”
and then narrated to him the divine message. The king ordered Idris to
leave his court and warned him that he would not be able to save
himself. The king told his wife about his discussion with Idris. She
said, “Do not to fear the Messengership of Idris’s God. I will send
someone to kill Idris so that the messengership of his God is
nullified.” The king agreed to her suggestion and gave his consent.

Among the friends of Idris there were some who used to attend the royal
court. Idris had informed them of the revelation to him and of his
conveying the message to the king. They were fearful that Idris would be
killed. The queen sent forty Iraqi men to kill Idris. They reached the
place where Idris used to sit with his companions but did not find him
there, so they returned. When his friends saw that they had come to kill
Idris they dispersed and then met Idris. They informed him that forty
men had come to kill him, so he should be cautious.

Idris prayed to Allah, “O my Sustainer! You sent me to that tyrant to
deliver Your message to him. He threatened me and is after my blood.
Allah revealed to Idris to keep away from the king. “I swear by My honor
that I will enforce My law on him and prove your word and My
messengership to be true.” Idris said, “O my Nourisher, I have a wish.”
Allah said, “Ask me and I shall fulfill it.” Idris said, “Till such time
as I allow, there should be no rains.” Allah said, “The country will be
ruined and people will starve to death.” Idris said, “Whatever may
happen, this is my wish.” Allah replied, “All right. I accept it, and
until the time you pray I will not send rain. I am the most truthful to
My promise.” Hearing this Idris briefed his companions about his
discussion with Allah and said, “O my friends leave this country and go
to some other place.” There were twenty of them and they spread out to
different areas. The people came to know about the prayers of Idris.

Idris himself sought refuge on a hill. Allah appointed an Angel who used
to bring food to him every evening. Idris fasted during the day and
broke his fast in the evening when the Angel brought food to him. Allah
destroyed the kingdom of the tyrant king. The king was killed, his
kingdom destroyed and the flesh of his wife was eaten by dogs due to
their transgression against a believer.

Another unjust tyrant oppressor occupied the throne. Twenty years passed
without a drop of rain. The people were in severe hardships and
difficulties and their condition deteriorated. They used to bring food
supplies from far off countries. When their condition turned from bad to
worse they discussed among themselves that this calamity was due to the
prayer of Idris who had asked Allah that until the time he allowed there
should be no rains. “We are not aware of his whereabouts because he has
concealed himself from us.” They decided that as Allah is more Merciful
than Idris prays to Him and repents so that it rains on their land and
in the neighboring areas. So they wore coarse clothes and applied mud on
their head and standing on the earth they wailed, cried and repented to
Allah. Allah felt pity on them and revealed upon Idris that, “Your
people are repenting, wailing and weeping and I am God the Beneficent
and Merciful and the one who accepts repentance and forgive sins. I have
mercy on them and wish to fulfill their desire for rains. I have no
obstruction save that you had requested me not to send rains until you
pray for it. Therefore, O Idris you pray to me that I may send rains for
them.”

Idris said, “O my Nourisher, I will not pray for rains.” Allah once
again revealed on Idris to pray for rains. Idris again refused. So Allah
recalled the Angel who was appointed to bring food for Idris. When it
was evening and the food did not arrive Idris became restless but waited
patiently. The second day when again the food did not arrive his
restlessness increased. On the third day he lost his patience and
appealed to Allah, “O my Nourisher before taking my soul, you have
discontinued my sustenance?” Allah revealed, “O Idris! You are
complaining in three days but you are not concerned about your nation
that has suffered for twenty years? I informed you that they were
suffering, and I was merciful on them and I wished that you pray for
rain so that I send rain. But you abstained from it, so I wanted you to
know what hunger is and you lost your patience and complained. Now come
out of the cave and search for your sustenance. I have left you on your
own.”

Hearing this Idris came down from the hill to procure food. When he came
near the town he saw smoke coming out from a house. An old lady had made
two chapattis and was roasting them on the fire. He requested her to
give him something to eat, as he was very weak and restless due to
hunger. She said that due to the curse of Idris, Allah has not given
left them anything that they can feed anyone, and swore that except for
the two chapattis there was nothing in the house. She told him to leave
the city and go somewhere else for food. Idris requested that at least
give me one chapatti so that I can save my life and can start walking.
She said I have only these two chapattis, one for me and the other for
my son. If I give you my chapatti, I will die and if I give you my
child’s he would die. I don’t have anything else to give you.”

Idris said, “Your son is young, half a chapatti will suffice him and
half will help me to live.” The woman ate her share and distributed the
other one between Idris and her son. When the child saw Idris eating
from his share of the chapatti, he started crying and was so disturbed
that he died. The woman shouted out, “Stranger! you have killed my
child.” Idris said, “Do not fear, by the order of Allah I will make him
alive.” Saying this he kept his hands on the shoulder of the boy and
said, “O soul who has left the body of this child, by the order of Allah
return to his body again. I am Idris the Messenger of Allah.” The boy
was alive once more. The woman saw this and said, “I witness that you
are Prophet Idris.” And she ran out shouting, “O people! Congratulations
to you and glad tidings that we will be relieved of our troubles and
sufferings as Idris has returned to our city.” Idris came out and
reached the palace of the first tyrant king, which was on a hill. A
group of people came and complained, “O Idris! In these twenty years,
you did not have any mercy on us. We were involved in such difficulties
and miseries and many of us starved to death. We request you now pray to
Allah for rains.” Idris replied, “I will not pray until the time this
tyrant king and the people of your city come to me walking, barefoot and
request me.” When the king heard this, he sent forty people to kill
Idris. When they reached near Idris, he cursed them and they all died.
When the king heard this, he sent 500 people to arrest him. They came to
Idris and said, “We have come to take you to the king.” Idris replied,
“Look at these forty men (who had come before you to take me); see how
they are lying dead. If you all do not go back you too will meet the
same fate.”

They said, “O Idris, you have involved us in hunger for twenty years and
now you are cursing us. Is there no mercy in your heart?” Idris replied,
“I will not go to that tyrant nor will I pray for the rains until that
tyrant and all the people don’t come to me walking barefoot.” Hearing
this, the people returned to the king and repeated the statement of
Idris. So the King together with the people came to Idris and all stood
helplessly before him and requested him to pray for rain. Idris prayed.
That very same moment clouds gathered in the sky, there was thunder and
lightening and it started raining. It rained so much that they feared
they would drown. Finally, they all returned home.[^1]

It is related from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that an angel was under the
wrath of Allah and his hair and wings were cut off and he was lying on
an island for a long time. When Allah appointed Idris, that angel came
to Idris and requested him to pray from him so that Allah may be pleased
with him and return his hair and wings. Prophet Idris prayed for him and
Allah restored his hair and wings. The angel asked Idris, “Do you wish
anything from me?” Idris said, “Yes, I wish that you take me up to the
heavens so that I can see the Angel of Death. Because thinking of him I
cannot live without fear. The angel took the Prophet to the 4th heaven
on his wings. There he saw the Angel of Death sitting, moving his head
in a peculiar way. Idris saluted him and asked him the cause for turning
his head in that manner. The Angel of Death replied, “Allah has ordered
me to take your soul between the 4th and 5th heaven.” Idris pleaded, “O
Allah! How is it possible when the distance up to the 4th heaven is 500
years of travel and the distance between the 4th and 5th heaven is
another 500 years of travel? “This is the distance between one heaven
and another.” saying this, the Angel of Death took away his soul. These
are the words of Allah, which means

***“And we raised him high in heaven” (19:57)***

Imam as-Sadiq narrates that he is known as Idris because he used to give
excessive teachings from the book of Allah.  
 In a tradition from Amir al-Mu’minin it is narrated that after the
death of Idris Allah raised him to an elevated position and sustained
him with the bounties of heaven.

In a reliable tradition, it is narrated by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that
the Holy Prophet said, “An angel was very near to Allah. Due to some
laxity or laziness, Allah sent him down to earth. He came to Idris and
requested him to intercede with Allah on his behalf. Idris agreed and
fasted for three days without breaking the fast and spent three nights
in worship due to which he was exhausted and weak. Then he prayed to
Allah and interceded for this angel. Allah gave the permission to that
angel to ascend to the skies. At that time that angel said, “I wish that
you would ask from me something in return.” Idris said, “I wish to meet
the Angel of Death so that I can befriend him, because due to his
remembrance no bounty is worth rejoicing.” The angel seated him on his
wings and took him up to the 1st heaven. Then he took him higher until
they reached between the 4th and the 5th skies where he met the Angel of
Death. They saw the Angel of Death weeping and asked him the reason of
his grief. The Angel of Death replied, “Just now when I was beneath the
skies there was an order from Allah to take the soul of Idris between
the 4th and 5th heaven.” When Idris heard this he fell down from the
wings of the angel and immediately his soul was taken away. As Allah
says, “We have mentioned in the Book.”

In another tradition it is narrated from ‘Abdullah Ibn Suhas that Idris
used to travel from city to city and used to fast. When it was night, he
used to halt and he was provided his sustenance at that very place. The
angels used to take his good deeds to the skies like other people’s
deeds. The Angel of Death wished to meet Idris and after getting
permission he came to Idris and said, “I wish to be in your company.”
Idris agreed. They became friends and were together for a long time. He
would fast during the day and at night when he used to get sustenance,
he used to eat. He used to invite the Angel of Death to eat with him but
he said, “I don’t require food,” and remained busy in prayers. Idris
used to sleep due to fatigue but the Angel of Death was neither lazy nor
tired; neither did he sleep. In this manner some days passed until one
day they passed by an orchard. The grapes were ripe. The Angel of Death
asked Idris whether they should take some of the grapes and break their
fast. Idris replied, “Glory be to Allah, I invited you to eat from my
share of sustenance and you refused. You are now inviting me to eat
other people’s grapes without their permission. You have recompensed my
companionship in a nice way. Tell me who are you?” He replied, “I am the
Angel of Death.” Idris said, “I have one request from you.” The Angel of
Death asked him what it was. Idris said, “I wish you to take me up to
the skies.” The Angel of Death took Allah’s permission, seated him on
his wings and took him up to the skies.

Idris said, “I have one more desire. I have heard that death is very
difficult so I wish to taste it so as to verify that it tastes as I have
heard it.” The Angel of Death took Allah’s permission. Then he held the
breath of Idris for sometime then removed his hand and asked Idris how
found it? Idris replied, “Very severe, more severe than what I have
heard.” Then Idris said, “I have one more desire. I want to see the fire
of Hell.” The Angel of Death ordered the keeper of Hell to open the
door. When Idris saw it, he swooned. When he regained consciousness he
said, “I have one more request. I would like to see heaven.” The Angel
of Death asked the permission of the keepers of Heaven and Idris entered
it and said, “O Angel of Death now I will not come out of it. Allah has
said every soul will have to taste death which I have tasted and Allah
has said there is no one from you who will not come near Hell and I have
seen it and about the heavens it is said that the people of heavens will
remain in it forever.”[^2]

[^1]: Previously we have mentioned the proofs for the messengers to be
infallible thus the wish from Allah to Idris for sending rains will have
to be taken up as an order on his own and due to his love. And the delay
in supplicating was not due to giving up worldly perfection or name or
fame or for avenging the anger of the soul but anger to the
transgressors for not accepting the words of the Almighty. And often it
happens that due to excessive love of the Creator they are more angry on
the transgressors, more than Allah is as they don’t posses the mercy and
kindness which is with Allah and they can’t tolerate to see a person
disobeying Allah and this becomes a source of proximity with Allah and a
bounty from Allah that they are warned and should never revolt or
transgress against Allah and are not included in the wrath of Allah.

[^2]: This tradition is the same as other traditions and the first
tradition can be relied upon. In other books it is mentioned that Idris
lived on this earth for 300 years. Some have narrated more. When he went
to the skies he was appointed as the Caliph and lived for 919 years. He
made his son Enamakh his Legatee who was the father of Nuh. Sayyid Ibn
Tawus has narrated in the book Saad-us-Saood that I have seen in the
scriptures of Idris that: O Careless people its near that death befall
upon you and your complaints are severe. Sweat may be flowing from your
forehead, your lips are tightened and your tongue is sealed, your mouth
is dry and the whiteness of your eyes covers the black pupil and froth
flows from your mouth and your whole body shivers and you are involved
in the severe pangs of death. Everywhere people call you but you don’t
listen and you are lying dead among your dear ones. At that time you
will stand as a warning for others. Thus before death, take a lesson
from it as certainly death will fall upon you. You may have a long life
but in the end you will be destroyed because whoever is created has to
die. And understand that death is easier than the fear of the Day of
Judgment, which is after it. At another place it is written that that he
said, “Understand with certainty that abstaining from disobedience of
Allah is the highest wisdom and a great bounty and is one of the cause
for inviting towards goodness which amounts to opening of the door to
goodness and understanding because when Allah befriends any of His
creatures He bestows on them intellect and wisdom and. His Prophets and
His friends were guided by The Holy Spirit. For others the curtains on
this world and the truth are opened so that they abstain from ignorance
and follow the guidance and counsel by which it becomes ingrained in
their souls. At another place it is mentioned that Remember your Lord
excessively because if Allah sees that you are a helper and assistant of
one another, He will accept your prayers and will fulfill your desires
and will make your wishes come true and will send bounties on you from
His treasure, which will never be destroyed. At another place it is said
that remember your Lord at all times because when He sees that you are a
supporter and helper of one another then He will accept your prayers,
your wishes will be fulfilled, you will gain what you desire and He will
send bounties on you from His treasure which will never be exhausted. At
another place it is mentioned that when you fast, abstain your soul from
every evil and impure things and fast with a pure and sincere intention
only for Allah. Clean your intention with every filth because Allah will
segregate people with pure hearts and pure intentions. For fasting and
abstaining your mouth from food it is necessary that you be away from
sins because Allah is not pleased if one just abstains from food but it
is expected that you abstain from all evil when you worship. Then his
heart and his thoughts should be directed towards prayers and to
establishing a link with Allah and supplicate and ask your hearts’
desire which will be your gain and should be expedient with humility and
helplessness. And when you prostrate be away from worldly tensions, evil
thoughts and bad or unexpected actions and pray the five obligatory
prayers daily which has eight Surahs to be recited. Every morning three
chapters and in every chapter there are three prostrations with three
rosaries. At mid-day there are five chapters and another five chapters
at the time of sunset. These are to be recited with prostrations. These
are obligatory prayers and one who prays in addition to it, his reward
is only with Allah.


