An Account of Nuh
=================

Birth of Nuh - Death and life-span of Nuh

al-Qutb al-Rawandi and others have stated that Nuh was the son of Malik
son of Matushalakh who was the son of Akhnookh also known by the name of
Idris.  
 From reliable source it is related from Imam al-Ridha that a Syrian
asked Amir al-Mu’minin the name of Nuh. He replied that his name was
Sakar but because he mourned over his people for nine hundred years, he
has been named as Nuh.

It is related from Imam as-Sadiq that the name of Nuh was Abdul Gaffar
but he was known as Nuh because he used to mourn on his own self.  
 The Holy Prophet said that the name of Nuh was Abdul Malik, but since
he wept for five hundred years, he was called Nuh. In another reliable
tradition, he mentioned that his name was Abul-a-haa.  
 Imam al-Ridha is reported to have said that when Nuh boarded the ship,
the Almighty revealed to him. “When you fear that the ship is to sink,
recite *La Ilaha-ilallah* a thousand times and then pray to Me, that I
may save you and those whom you have brought with yourself. Nuh and
those along with him sat safely on the ship and raised the sails of the
ship high, a strong wind struck them and Nuh feared that the ship would
sink. But in no time the wind became more aggressive and there was no
time for reciting *La-ilaha ilallah* a thousand time, so he said in
Syrian *“Halooleya alfan alfan, ya mareyya utgin”* as a result the
swinging movement of the ship abated and it began to sail in a normal
way. Nuh said that the words through which God saved him from drowning
were such worthy words that they should not get separated from him.
Hence he engraved *“La-Ilaha-Illallaho* *alfa marratin Ya Rabbe
aslehnee”* on his ring which is the Arabic translation of the Syrian
expression and the meaning of which is *“I recite La-Ilaha-Illallah a
thousand time*, *oh God give me salvation.”*

In authentic books, it is reported from Wahab that Nuh was a carpenter.
He was of wheatish complexion, a thin face, elongated head, big eyes,
thin legs but well fleshy thighs, big navel and with a long thick beard.
He was of tall stature, heavy built and had a very hot temperament. He
was appointed as a Prophet at the age of eight hundred years. For nine
hundred years, he invited the people towards Allah, but their obstinacy
kept on increasing. Three centuries passed in this manner. The people of
his tribe would become aged and die leaving children. And everyone
amongst them would take his sons in their childhood to Nuh and would say
to them that “If you happen to live after me do no submit to this insane
person.”

Imam as-Sadiq says that Nuh lived for two thousand five hundred years,
eight hundred years before attaining Prophethood, nine hundred years of
guidance to the people, then two hundred years were spent in making the
ship and he lived for five hundred years after the deluge.

When the water receded, he laid the foundation of cities and settled his
there. When two thousand five hundred years of his life had passed, the
Angel of Death came to him while he was sitting in the sunshine and said
“Peace be on you.” Nuh replied to his salaam and inquired for the
purpose of his visit. He replied, “I have come to take away your soul.”
Nuh asked, “Could you give me respite that I may go beneath shade?” He
said, “Yes.” Thereafter, Nuh went into shade and said, “Oh Angel of the
Death the entire span of my life in this world was just like the coming
from under the sunshine into a shade. Now you can execute the divine
command.” The Angel of Death captured the holy soul of Nuh.

By authentic traditions, it is related from ‘Abd al-‘Azim that Imam ‘Ali
al-Naqi said that Nuh lived for two thousand five hundred years. One day
while he was sleeping on the Ark, a strong wind blew and uncovered him.
Ham and Yafith saw this and started laughing. Sam scolded them and
covered Nuh. Nuh woke up and saw the two of them laughing and inquired
the reason for that. Sam narrated what had happened. Nuh raised his
hands towards the heavens and said, “O God, change the seed of Ham and
al-Yasa‘ so that they beget dark-skinned children.” Nuh told them: “God
has made your children the slaves of the children of Sam because he did
good to me. You both are disinherited and your disinheritance will
manifest itself in your children and the signs of notoriety will remain
distinguishable in the progeny of Sam until the time the world will
last. Therefore, all dark-skinned people are children of Ham and all the
Turks, Saqaleyeh, Gog and Magog are the descendants of Yafith.

Apart from this, those who are reddish and fair, are the children of
Sam.  
 The Almighty revealed to Nuh, “I have appointed the rainbow as My bow
and it an amnesty for My slaves and cities; and I have concluded a
treaty between myself and My creation that they shall have no fear of
drowning until the day of resurrection. And who can be greater fulfiller
of promises than Me?”

After knowing this Nuh because happy and gave glad tiding to the people.
Till that time, along with the rainbow, these used to be the bowstring
and the arrow. But after that, the bowstring and the arrow were removed.

After the deluge, Satan came to Nuh and said, “You have done a great
favor to me ask from me any advice, I shall not do any treachery with
you.” Nuh remained quite and did not ask any questions. Almighty Allah
revealed to Nuh to ask him questions that will bring out from his own
tongue, proofs and arguments against himself. So Nuh said, “So, what you
want to say?” Satan said, “Whenever we find a child of Adam to be a
miser or greedy, or jealous, or an oppressor, or hasty, we pick him like
a person picks up a drinking cup. And whenever these characteristics are
found together in a person, I call him an obstinate Satan.”

Nuh asked him what that favor was that he thinks that Nuh has done to
him. He replied, “You cursed the people on the earth and sent them all
into the hell immediately and I was relieved from (working upon) them.
If you had not cursed them, I would have had to occupy myself with them
for a long time.”

Reliable tradition of Imam as-Sadiq mentions that after embarking from
the ship, Nuh lived for five hundred years. When he had lived his
(destined) age, Archangel Gabriel came to him and said, “O Nuh, your
Prophethood is now over. So pass on “The Greatest Name” of Allah, the
heritage of knowledge and the relics of Prophethood to your son Sam,
because Allah says that He would never keep the earth devoid of His
representative. “There will always be a learned one on it because of
whom the slaves would regard Me worthy of worship, so that after passing
away of one Prophet to the appointment of another Prophet, he may be the
source of their salvation. I will never ever leave the world without a
proof who will call people towards Me and who would know My commands.
This is My order. And I have destined this for every group of people
that I will establish a guide through whom I will guide the obedient
people and thereby My argument would be exhausted on the wretched
people.” Accordingly Nuh handed over “The Greatest Name”, and the
Prophetic relics to his son Sam. Ham and Yusuf had no knowledge from
which they could benefit themselves.  
 Nuh gave the glad tidings of Hud to his legatee and ordered the people
to obey him. He also urged them to see the will at least once every
year. That day would be a festive day for them just like Adam had
commanded them. After some time oppression and deviation found roots in
the children of Ham. Sam went into hiding with the relics. After Nuh Sam
got the wealth of Ham and Yafith and they became dominant over them. It
is for this that Allah says: “And We perpetuated to him (praise) among
the later generations.”

That we gave the wealth of the oppressors to Nuh and Allah will make
Muhammad dominant with it. The inhabitant of Sind, India, and Ethiopia
are the children of Ham and the inhabitants of Iran and Sind are the
children of Yafith and their wealth reached the followers of Muhammad
and thereafter according to tradition that (wealth) passed from one
A’alim (learned religious scholar) to another until Almighty Allah
appointed Prophet Hud.

In another reliable tradition it is mentioned that the life-span of
Nuh’s people was three hundred years. In another traditions it is
reported that the age of Nuh was two thousand four hundred and
fifty.[^1]

Imam Zayn al-‘abidin said that people have adopted three things from
three persons; patience from Ayyub, thankfulness from Nuh and jealousy
from the children of Ya‘qub.  
 It has come in authentic traditions from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and
Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq, concerning the explanation verses where the
Almighty has praised Nuh,

***“Indeed Nuh was a very grateful slave”, (17:3)***

Imams have said that he was named thankful servant (of God) for every
morning and evening he used to recite this invocation: “*Allahhumma
innee ashadoka unnahoo ma usbaha au umsa bee nematin all aafeyaten fee
deenin au dunya feminka vahedaka la sharuka laka al humdobelia alayya
valakashskra beha allayya hatta tarza va badrrezaa*”[^2]

It is related in authentic tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when
after the deluge, Nuh was given the assignment of planting trees, the
Satan arrived. When Nuh was about to plant the grape tree, the Satan
said that it belonged to him. Nuh said, “You are a liar.” Satan said,
“You allot a share to me in this. Nuh said, “All right, two-third is
your share. It is for this reason that when grape juice reduces by two
third in boiling, it becomes haram. In another authentic tradition he
said that Satan quarreled with Nuh in respect of the grape-tree. At that
time, Archangel Gabriel came and said he has right, and it should be
given to him.

Hence, one-third went to Satan but he was not satisfied, then he was
given half, he even then he did not agree. Archangel Gabriel set the
tree on fire until two-thirds of the tree was burnt and one third
remained. he (Archangel Gabriel) said, “Whatever got burnt was the share
of Satan and whatever is left is your share and is permissible (halal)
on you.”

It is related from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir from authentic sources that
when Nuh came down from the ship he planted many trees and amongst them
he had also planted the date palm. Iblis (Satan) may Allah curse him,
came and uprooted the tree and took it along with him. When Nuh came
back, he did not find the date palm and saw the Satan standing near. At
this moment Archangel Gabriel came and informed Nuh that Satan has taken
away the date palm. Nuh asked him as to why he had taken that tree, “By
Allah amongst all the trees none I consider more dear to me than this
tree and by Allah, until I do not plant this tree I will not rest.”
Iblis said, “Whenever you plant it I will uproot it. So, you fix a share
in it for me.”

Nuh agreed to set aside one-third for him but he did not agree, then he
set aside half, yet he did not agree. Nuh did not increase his share any
more. Archangel Gabriel said to him, “You are a Prophet of Allah, you do
a favor, because goodness is from your side. Nuh understood that Allah
has given the place right to him and for this reason he agreed to give
two-third share. And for this reason it was prescribed that its juice be
boiled until its two third, which is the share of the accursed Satan. If
is not burnt away, it will not become permissible.

It is related from Wahab, both by Shi‘ah as well as Sunni
traditionalists, that when Nuh came down from the Ark, he planted the
trees that he had brought with him. The same moment trees bore fruits,
but the grape vine was missing. It was taken away by Iblis and he had
hidden it. When Nuh thought of looking for it on the ship, an angel
said, “Wait, right now that tree will come for you at this very place.”
And said, “In the juice of grape you have a partner with Iblis .” Nuh
said that he would give one-seventh to him and that six shares will
remain for him. The angel said, “You do a good deed, because you are a
doer of good.” Nuh said that he would give one-sixth to him. The angel
said, “You do a good deed, because you are a doer of good.” Nuh said
that he would give one-fifth him. The angel said, “You do a good deed,
because you are a doer of good.” This continued until Nuh offered
two-thirds while keeping one-third for himself. The angel agreed. Thus
two-thirds, the share of the Satan remains forbidden and one-third, the
share of Nuh remains permissible.

In another tradition, it is related from ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas that Satan
told Nuh, “You have a right and a favor upon me and in return I will
teach you some virtues. Nuh asked, “What is my right upon you?” He said
that by the curse that you laid upon your people by whom they all
perished saved me the labor of making them go astray. Hence, always
abstain from pride and jealousy because pride induced me not to bow
towards Adam and I became an infidel and was declared as the accursed
Satan. And greed induced Adam to eat from the forbidden tree in spite of
the fact that all of the trees of Paradise were permissible for him
except the forbidden tree. He ate from that tree and was asked to leave
the Garden. And jealousy became the cause for the son of Adam to kill
his own brother.”

Nuh asked him as to when he had the greatest control on the children of
Adam. He replied, “When they are angry.”  
 Proclamation of Nuh - Propagation- Disobedience of the people and an
account of their circumstances until the DelugeProclamation of Nuh -
Propagation- Disobedience of the people and an account of their
circumstances until the DelugeProclamation of Nuh - Propagation-
Disobedience of the people and an account of their circumstances until
the DelugeProclamation of Nuh - Propagation- Disobedience of the people
and an account of their circumstances until the DelugeProclamation of
Nuh - Propagation- Disobedience of the people and an account of their
circumstances until the DelugeProclamation of Nuh - Propagation-
Disobedience of the people and an account of their circumstances until
the DelugeProclamation of Nuh - Propagation- Disobedience of the people
and an account of their circumstances until the DelugeProclamation of
Nuh - Propagation- Disobedience of the people and an account of their
circumstances until the DelugeProclamation of Nuh - Propagation-
Disobedience of the people and an account of their circumstances until
the Deluge

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim relates from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when Nuh began
his mission and invited people towards Allah, they rejected his
invitation. This situation lasted for 300 years when Nuh decided to
invoke Divine curse. It was early dawn and a group of 2000 great angels
arrived from the first heaven. Nuh inquired from them who they were?
They replied they were angels of the first heaven whose width is
equivalent to 500 years’ journey and from the first heaven to the Earth;
the distance is of 500 years. “We started near dawn and have reached
here now to recommend to you not to invoke curse on your people.” Nuh
said, “I agree. I will allow a grace period of 300 years.” Another 300
years passed but the people did not bring faith. Once again, he thought
of invoking Divine curse on them. Again, a 2000-strong group of angels
came from the second heaven. Nuh asked, “Who are you?”

They replied, “We are 2000 tribes among the tribes of angels from the
second heaven. The width of the second heaven is equivalent to 500
years’ journey and likewise from the second heaven to the first heaven
and from the first heaven to the Earth is a distance of 500 years. We
started near dawn and have arrived here. (i.e.. we have undertaken a
long journey). We have come to request you not to curse your people.’

Nuh said that another 300 years respite was granted. And when 300 years
had passed and the people still did not bring faith, he thought of
cursing them. At that time Allah said,

***“None of your people will believe except those who have already
believed, therefore do not grieve at what they do.” (11:36)***

Nuh said,  
***“My Lord! Leave not upon the land any dweller from among the
unbelievers:***  
***For surely if Thou leave them they will lead astray Thy servants, and
will not beget any but immoral, ungrateful (children).” (72:26-27)***

Allah ordered Nuh to plant palm trees and Nuh planted them. The people
saw this and were amused that Nuh has lived for 900 years and was now
keen on planting palm trees. They ridiculed him and even began to throw
stones at him. Fifty years passed in this way while the trees grew tall
and strong. Then the command of Allah came to cut down the trees. Seeing
this the people again ridiculed Nuh saying, “Now that the trees have
grown so big this old man was cutting them down. He has lost his wits
and old age has affected his wisdom.”

As the Almighty says,

***“And he began to make the ark; and whenever the chiefs from among his
people passed by him they laughed at him. He said, If you laugh at us,
surely we too laugh at you as you laugh (at us).***  
***So shall you know who it is on whom will come a chastisement which
will disgrace him, and on whom will lasting chastisement come down?”
(11:38-39)***

Imam said that the Almighty had ordered him to build a ship and
delegated Archangel Gabriel to teach him the technique. Nuh began to
construct the ship. Its length was twelve hundred hands, width 800 hands
and height 80. Nuh inquired, “Who will assist me in building this ship.”

Allah revealed to him to announce among his people that whosoever would
help him in making the ship and scrape a log, the shavings will turn
into gold and silver. When Nuh announced this, the people came along to
help him in building the ship. But at the same time, they mocked him
saying that he was building a ship in the middle of a desert.

It is related through acceptable chains from the same Imam that when
Allah decided to destroy the people of Nuh he made their women barren 40
years prior to that. When Nuh completed the construction of the ship, he
called out in Syrian language and the beasts rushed to him in response.
From each of the species he took a pair. There were in all 80 people who
had accepted faith. Allah revealed to him,

***“Until when Our command came and water came forth from the valley, We
said, Carry in it two of all things, a pair, and your own family —except
those against whom the word has already gone forth, and those who
believe. And there believed not with him but a few.” (11:40)***

The ship was built at the al-Kufah Mosque. When that day arrived on
which the Almighty had intended to destroy them, the wife of Nuh was
making bread in the famous oven of al-Kufah Mosque. And Nuh was setting
up things pertaining to the animals in their part of the ship. During
all this the wife of Nuh called out to him that water was gushing out
from the oven. Nuh came and poured some soil on the oven and sealed the
openings so that water may not come out. Then he went and collected all
the animals in the ship and finally broke the seal of the oven. The Sun
disappeared and instead of rain, water came down suddenly and the
springs started gushing out. As Allah says,The ship was built at the
al-Kufah Mosque. When that day arrived on which the Almighty had
intended to destroy them, the wife of Nuh was making bread in the famous
oven of al-Kufah Mosque. And Nuh was setting up things pertaining to the
animals in their part of the ship. During all this the wife of Nuh
called out to him that water was gushing out from the oven. Nuh came and
poured some soil on the oven and sealed the openings so that water may
not come out. Then he went and collected all the animals in the ship and
finally broke the seal of the oven. The Sun disappeared and instead of
rain, water came down suddenly and the springs started gushing out. As
Allah says,The ship was built at the al-Kufah Mosque. When that day
arrived on which the Almighty had intended to destroy them, the wife of
Nuh was making bread in the famous oven of al-Kufah Mosque. And Nuh was
setting up things pertaining to the animals in their part of the ship.
During all this the wife of Nuh called out to him that water was gushing
out from the oven. Nuh came and poured some soil on the oven and sealed
the openings so that water may not come out. Then he went and collected
all the animals in the ship and finally broke the seal of the oven. The
Sun disappeared and instead of rain, water came down suddenly and the
springs started gushing out. As Allah says,The ship was built at the
al-Kufah Mosque. When that day arrived on which the Almighty had
intended to destroy them, the wife of Nuh was making bread in the famous
oven of al-Kufah Mosque. And Nuh was setting up things pertaining to the
animals in their part of the ship. During all this the wife of Nuh
called out to him that water was gushing out from the oven. Nuh came and
poured some soil on the oven and sealed the openings so that water may
not come out. Then he went and collected all the animals in the ship and
finally broke the seal of the oven. The Sun disappeared and instead of
rain, water came down suddenly and the springs started gushing out. As
Allah says,The ship was built at the al-Kufah Mosque. When that day
arrived on which the Almighty had intended to destroy them, the wife of
Nuh was making bread in the famous oven of al-Kufah Mosque. And Nuh was
setting up things pertaining to the animals in their part of the ship.
During all this the wife of Nuh called out to him that water was gushing
out from the oven. Nuh came and poured some soil on the oven and sealed
the openings so that water may not come out. Then he went and collected
all the animals in the ship and finally broke the seal of the oven. The
Sun disappeared and instead of rain, water came down suddenly and the
springs started gushing out. As Allah says,The ship was built at the
al-Kufah Mosque. When that day arrived on which the Almighty had
intended to destroy them, the wife of Nuh was making bread in the famous
oven of al-Kufah Mosque. And Nuh was setting up things pertaining to the
animals in their part of the ship. During all this the wife of Nuh
called out to him that water was gushing out from the oven. Nuh came and
poured some soil on the oven and sealed the openings so that water may
not come out. Then he went and collected all the animals in the ship and
finally broke the seal of the oven. The Sun disappeared and instead of
rain, water came down suddenly and the springs started gushing out. As
Allah says,

***“So We opened the gates of the cloud with water pouring***  
***And We made water to flow forth in the land in springs, so the water
gathered together according to a measure already ordained.***  
***And We bore him on that which was made of planks and nails.”
(54:11-13)***

Allah commanded Nuh to pray for the safety of the ship in the name of
Allah or keep reciting *‘Bismillah’* as the sailing and the halting of
the ship depends on the name of Allah.  
 And when the ship came into motion, Nuh saw his infidel son standing in
the water and falling again and again. He said, “O, my son, get on to
the ship along with us and do not be with infidels.”

***“He said, I will betake myself for refuge to a mountain that shall
protect me from the water. Nuh said, There is no protector today from
Allah’s punishment but He Who has mercy; and a wave intervened between
them, so he was of the drowned.” (11:43)***

***“And Nuh cried out to his Lord and said, My Lord! Surely, my son is
of my family, and Thy promise is surely true, and Thou art the most just
of the judges.***  
***He said, O Nuh! Surely he is not of your family; surely he is (the
doer of) other than good deeds, therefore ask not of Me that of which
you have no knowledge; surely I admonish you lest you may be of the
ignorant***  
***He said, My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from asking Thee that of
which I have no knowledge; and if Thou shouldst not forgive me and have
mercy on me, I should be of the losers.” (11:45-47)***

And so Nuh became silent upon the Lord’s command. During the same time,
a wave came between them and the son of Nuh drowned. Imam says, “The
ship took a turn and the waves carried it towards Makkah. It began to
circle the Holy Ka‘bah because except for the holy house everything was
submerged. The Ka‘bah is also referred to as *al-Bayt al-‘Atiq* because
it did not submerge.”  
 The rains and the gushing springs continued for forty days. The level
of water arose so much that it lifted the ship towards heaven.

At this Nuh raised his hands and prayed, “O my Lord, have mercy!”

***“And it was said, O earth, swallow your water, and O cloud, clear
away; and the water was made to abate and the affair was decided, and
the ark rested on the Judi.” (11: 44)***

The water was absorbed into the earth and the verdict of Allah in
respect of the punishment of infidels and salvation of the faithful came
into effect. The ship finally berthed at Mount Judi.  
 Imam said, “The earth only absorbed the water that had gushed from it’s
springs. It refused to accept the water that had descended as rain
because it said that Allah has commanded it only to absorb the water
that had come out of it. As a result the water from the heaven spread
all over the Earth and the ship halted at Mount Judi which is a great
mountain in Mosul.”  
 Allah sent Archangel Gabriel who transferred that water which was left
over to the seas, which are created round the earth. Allah revealed to
Nuh,

***“O Nuh! Descend with peace from Us and blessings on you and on the
people from among those who are with you, and there shall be nations
whom We will afford provisions, then a painful punishment from Us shall
afflict them.” (11:48)***

Imam said, “Then Nuh with eighty believers who were with him embarked
from the ship at Mosul and laid the foundation of Madinatus Samaaneen. A
daughter of Nuh was with him. The human generation continued from her.
For this reason the Holy Prophet has said that Nuh is one of the two
fathers of humanity. That is after Adam, the father of humanity is Nuh.”

From reliable sources, it is related from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that
people asked him, “How Nuh came to know that no one of his people will
bring faith while he cursed his own people by saying that may their
children be lewd and sensuous.”  
 Imam replied, “Have you not heard that Allah told Nuh that except for
those who have brought faith (by now), no one else from your people will
bring faith?”

In reliable traditions, it is related from Imam as-Sadiq that when the
Almighty declared Prophethood of Nuh, Nuh and his Shi‘ahs (friends) who
were suffering persecution and injury at the hands of the infidels
became sure that the time of peace and rest is near. Whereas the
calamities became severe and mental torture kept on increasing and
getting tough and reached to this limit that the infidels started
throwing stones at Nuh. Sometimes, it so happened that Nuh remained
unconscious for three days at a stretch, bleeding all the time. After
three hundred years of guidance, he began getting such treatment. Then
he started inviting them towards Allah, day and night, but they did not
bring faith. He would preach and they would turn their back on him.
After three hundred years, one day, after the morning prayers, he
thought of cursing them. Three angels from the seventh heaven came to
him and said, “O Prophet of Allah, we have a request for you.”  
 “What is that?” asked Nuh.  
 They replied, “Postpone the act of cursing the people, because this
would be the first punishment and wrath to descend to the earth.”  
 Nuh replied, “I postpone it for three hundred years.”

He returned to his people and again continued to invite them towards
Allah. But the people continued to torment him. This went on for another
three hundred years and at last Nuh lost hope of them ever coming
towards faith. One evening he decided to curse them. Suddenly a group of
angel from the sixth heaven came down and after salaam said,  
 “We started from the sixth heaven in the morning and have reached you
at this time and we desire that at present you set aside the curse that
you intend to invoke upon your people.”

Again Nuh promised to abstain from cursing them for three hundred years
and returned to his people and began preaching among them. But it had no
effect until the second respite of three hundred years expired. In all
nine hundred years of propagation passes in this manner. His followers
came to him and complained to him about all they had suffered at the
hands of the cruel kings and infidels and requested him to pray so that
Allah may relieve them from the persecution. Nuh accepted the request
and prayed to the Lord. Archangel Gabriel descended and said that the
Almighty has accepted his supplication and commands him to tell his
followers to consume date and plant its seeds and to take care of the
trees until they bear fruit.  
 “When the trees bear fruits. We will provide them salvation.”

Hearing this Nuh praised Allah and gave glad tidings to his followers.
They also became happy and waited until the trees bore fruits. They
brought the fruits to Nuh and requested him to fulfill his promise. Nuh
prayed to the Almighty and the Almighty said,  
 “Tell these people to eat these dates too and sow their seeds. And when
those trees bear fruits I will bestow give them salvation.” When the
people heard this, they thought that the promise has not been fulfilled
and two-third of them renounced faith. Only a third of them remained
firm on the faith of Nuh. They ate the dates and sowed the seeds.

When they bore fruits they came to Nuh and said,  
 “Very few of us have remained on religion and if there is a delay in
repelling our hardships, all of us might turn away from religion.
Hearing this Nuh offered his prayers and supplicated fervently,  
 “O Lord, very few followers are left and if they do not receive
salvation, I fear that they might also perish.”

It was revealed to him that his prayer has been accepted and that he
should start building the Ark.  
 Between the acceptance of his prayers and the deluge, there was a
period of fifty years.  
 It has come in reliable traditions that when Nuh prayed for divine
punishment on the people, Allah sent Archangel Gabriel with seven seeds
of dates. He said, “O Prophet of Allah, the Almighty says, ‘These people
have been created by Me and are My servants. I will not destroy them
with My wrath until they are not emphatically invited towards Me and
until all the arguments have been exhausted for them. Therefore make
intense efforts to guide the people, bearing every type of hardship that
may be necessary and the same shall be recompensed. Plant these date
seeds and when their trees bear fruit there shall be salvation and
freedom for you and your people. Make the obedient believers aware of
this fact.”

Thus after some time when the trees bore fruits Nuh prayed to Allah to
fulfill His promise. Allah commanded him to plant the seeds of these
trees once again and continue preaching to the people with sincerity and
bear hardships if necessary. When Nuh conveyed this to the believers,
three hundred of them apostatized and said,  
 “O, Nuh whatever you proclaim, if it had been the truth the promise of
your Lord would not have proved to be false.”

Every time the trees bore fruits the Almighty would order them to plant
the seeds again; and this happened several times and every time a group
apostatized. In the end only seventy odd followers remained. The
Almighty revealed to Nuh,  
 “Now the enlightened dawn of righteousness will appear from the
darkened night of falsehood and pure truth will remain and the dust of
blasphemy, infidelity and ingratitude due to the apostasy of the people
will disappear. If I had destroyed the infidels, leaving alone the
apostates My promise to the believers that I would cause them to inherit
the earth would have applied to them too. And if I had granted them
kingdom and caliphate the hidden hypocrisy and infidelity would have
caused untold dissension among the people and instead of true faith the
earth would have been in chaos.”  
 After this the Almighty ordered Nuh to build the Ark.

In another reliable tradition related from the same Imam it is mentioned
that Nuh was commanded ten times to plant the seeds of dates and every
time when the fruits ripened, his companions would come and demand the
fulfillment of the promise and when they were told to plant the seeds
again the companions would divide into three groups. One group would
become apostate; another hypocrite and only one would remain firm on
faith. So much so that when the people came to Nuh for the tenth time
and said,  
 “O Prophet of Allah. You may delay the fulfillment of the promise as
much as you wish. We believe that you have been sent by Allah and are
the true Prophet. We do not doubt your Prophethood.”

At this Allah, saved them through the Ark and the rest were
destroyed.[^3]  
 According to an authentic tradition it is related from Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq that Nuh accepted all the waters except the sulphur.[^4]

It is related from Imam Al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn that Nuh invited
all; the springs that did not accept his command were cursed. As a
result, they became bitter and salty.

From an authentic report it is related from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that
Nuh boarded the ship on the first day of the month of Rajab and he
ordered all those who were with him to fast on that day.  
 An authentic tradition mentions that a Syrian asked the explanation of
the verse of Qur’an,  
***The day on which a man shall fly from his brother, And his mother and
his father, And his spouse and his son (80:34-36)*** —from the Commander
of the faithful. He replied,  
 “On the Day of resurrection, one who will avoid his own son will be Nuh
and Canaan.” The man inquired about the dimensions of Nuh’s Ark.

Imam said that the length of the ship was 800 hands, breath, 500 hands
and height 80.[^5]  
 It is mentioned in reliable tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that
the length of the ship was 1200 hands, breadth 800 hands and height 80
hands. It circled the Holy Ka‘bah seven times. Trotted between the Safa
and Marwa and then halted at mount Judi.

In another tradition, it is quoted from Ibn ‘Abbas that the Messenger of
Allah said that ninety rooms were built for animals on the Ark.  
 It is quoted from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that except for the Holy House
of Ka‘bah the Almighty had submerged the whole earth in the deluge, and
for this reason, it is named ‘*al-Bayt al-’Atiq*’, because it remained
unsubmerged during the Great Deluge.

The narrator asked if it was lifted to the heaven. Imam replied, “No it
did not come in contact with water. It rose around it.”  
 It is quoted from reliable sources that people asked Imam al-Ridha why
the Almighty had submerged all the world in water while there were many
innocent people, like children and insane men, upon it?

Imam replied, “There were no children because for forty years the women
had been barren. Allah would never cause innocent people to perish by
His wrath. He destroyed the people of Nuh because they had continuously
refused to bring faith. The other remaining people perished because they
were content with the denial of the disbelievers. One who is satisfied
with some action, even though he may himself not perform it, is an
accomplice.”

In another reliable tradition he says that the Almighty told Nuh that
his son was not from his household. Like He said, Innahu amalun ghairu
salih.[^6]  
 It is mentioned from reliable sources that when Nuh descended from the
ship Satan came and said, “You have done the greatest favor for me. You
cursed the people and they all perished, thus you saved me the trouble
of deviating them from the right path. In appreciation of your favor I
inform you of two attributes, one is that you should never be jealous of
anyone because whatever harm has come to me is due to jealousy.
Secondly, never be greedy because whatever harm came to Adam was due to
his greed.”

Reliable reporters state from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that when Nuh cursed
his people and they were destroyed, the Satan came to him and said, “You
have done me a favor, I want to repay it.” Nuh said, “I hated to do you
a favor, what was it?” Satan said, “You have done me a favor by cursing
your people. Now there is no one left for me to deviate from the right
path. I can rest in ease until the next century.”

Nuh asked him in what way he wished to repay the favor. Satan said,
“Remember there are three situations when I find it very easy to gain
control over a person, one: when he is angry, secondly, when there is
arbitration between two parties and thirdly when a servant is alone with
a woman.”  
 From reliable documents it is narrated from the Commander of the
Faithful that when Nuh was loading the animals, the goat disobeyed and
was thrashed. As a result, its tail came away and the private parts were
exposed. The lamb took precedence in boarding the ship and Nuh patted
its back and tail; therefore its tail grew long and covered its private
parts.

Again from a reliable channel Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq is reported to have
said that Najaf was the tallest of all the mountains of the world and
the son of Nuh had referred to it when he said that he would take refuge
upon it from the deluge. At that very moment Allah revealed to that
mountain that some evil people are about to take refuge upon it. It was
so frightened that it crashed and pulverized into soft sand. In its
place, a river came into existence. This river was called Nae. Later
that river dried and got the name of Nae- Jaf. Due to frequent usage, it
changed to “Najaf”.

According to reliable narrators Imam al-Ridha said that when Nuh landed,
his followers numbered eighty. He laid the foundation of a village and
named it “the village of *Thamaaneen”,* that is the village of eighty
people. Ibn Babawayh has related from Wahab that when Nuh boarded the
ship the Almighty revealed to all the creatures, including animals, a
state of calmness. At this they all became peaceful and did not harm
each other. The lamb stayed with the wolf, cow with the lion, the
sparrow would sit in the mouth of the snake. There was no quarrelling or
screams for help. Neither abuses nor curses. Everyone was thoughtful of
ones own soul. Allah had expelled the poison from every poisonous being
until they disembarked from the ship. In the ship, there were a lot of
rats. Allah revealed to Nuh to pat the lion. The lion sneezed and two
cats, a male and a female emerged from its nasal openings. They attacked
the rats and reduced their number. Then Nuh patted that elephant with
his blessed hand. It sneezed and at these two pigs, a male and a female
came out of the two nasal openings because of which the facial matter
was eliminated.

A reliable tradition related from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that the
people of Nuh complained to him about the pestilence of rats. Allah
ordered the tiger and it sneezed. A cat fell out of its nose. When the
people complained about waste matter Allah ordered the elephant. It
sneezed, and pigs dropped out from its nose.

In another tradition he said that when Nuh wanted to board the wild ass
onto the ship. It stopped because Satan was lodged between its two legs.
Nuh said, ‘O Satan, enter!’ and hit the wild ass with a stick from the
palm tree. The wild ass entered and so also the Satan. And he said, “I
am teaching you two qualities. Nuh said, “I don’t want to speak to you.”
Satan said, “Abstain from greed which forced out Adam from the Paradise
and avoid jealousy which drove me out of the Paradise.” At this moment
Allah revealed unto Nuh that even though he was accursed, what he said
was true.”  
 From reliable chains of narrators it is related from Imam Ja‘far
as-Sadiq that during the deluge of Nuh the water was fifteen hands high
over every mountain and plain.

Another authentic tradition from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq says that when Nuh
invited his people the children of Shith verified his call from the
knowledge they had inherited from their ancestors. However, the
descendants of Qabil refuted the claim of Nuh. They said, “We have heard
whatever you say about your forefathers. Should we bring faith on you
whn people lower than us have followed you?” By this they meant the
descendants of Shith.

In a reliable tradition it is quoted from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that
according to the religious law of Nuh the worship of Allah should be
with sincerity and with the belief in the unity of Godhead. And one
should abandon the traditions of those who attributed likeness and
partners to Allah. This is the nature on which Allah has created
everyone. Allah took promise from Nuh and from all the Prophets to
worship Him alone. He taught and made them aware of ritual prayers,
prohibitions and obligations, exhorting people to do good and refrain
from evil, permissible and unlawful acts. But there were no jurists and
jurisdiction with regard to inheritance. Nuh was among them for nine
hundred and fifty years and continued to preach the truth, but they
continued to deny and rebel.

Upon this Nuh said, “O Allah! I give up! You take my revenge!”  
 Allah revealed to him that now no more people would bring faith. Hence,
he should not feel offended because of their deeds. For this reason
while cursing them, Nuh declared that the children born to them will be
lewd and infidels.

Reliable chains of narrators quote Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq that Nuh and his
people lived on the western part al-Kufah along the banks of Euphrates.
Nuh was a carpenter by profession. Then Almighty Allah exalted him and
made him a Prophet. He was instrumental in constructing the ship and set
it afloat. He invited his people towards the religion of truth for nine
hundred and fifty years, and they continued to laugh and mock him. When
he was sure, they would never accept guidance he cursed them. Allah
revealed to him to make a spacious boat soon. Nuh brought wood from the
forest and started to build the boat in the mosque of al-Kufah. In the
same mosque, the idols by the name of Yaoob, Yaooq and Tasrak were
installed by the people.

A narrator enquired, “May I be sacrificed for you, in how many days did
Nuh accomplish the task of building the ship?” He replied, “In two
periods of time totaling eighty years.” The person further asked, “The
Sunnis say that it was built in five hundred years?” He said, “It is not
like this and how can it be like this while Allah said ‘wa Wahaina’ and
‘Wahee’ means ‘quick’.”

Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali said that the ship was covered from the top due to
which one could not see the sun and the moon. Nuh had a couple of seeds.
One of them shone during daytime and the other during the night. And
from this, the prayer times were determined. Nuh had brought with him
the blessed body of Adam. When he landed from the ship, he buried him in
the basement of the minaret of the Mosque of Manaa.[^7]

According to reliable traditions it is related from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq
that Nuh’s Ark was built in thirty years and in another tradition quoted
from the same Imam it was built in 100 years.[^8]  
 It is related from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that menstruation is an
impurity affecting women. During the time of Nuh women menstruated once
a year. At that time, seven hundred women gave up veils and roamed the
cities in make up, gaudy dresses and jewelry. They attended mixed
gatherings and intermingled freely with men. Hence, Allah afflicted
these evil women with menstruation every month. As a result, men drove
them out of their houses. But after some time the sexual urge of men got
the better of them and they took back the women. Other women, however,
continued to have normal periods, once a year. The children of women of
both types married with each other they became a homogenous group. Women
who menstruated every month had cleaner blood and few male children. For
this reason women menstruating once a year became rare.[^9]

From reliable chains, it is quoted from Imam as-Sadiq that when Nuh
disembarked, the water dried up and even dehydrated the bones of
infidels. When Nuh saw the bones of his people he was distressed beyond
limit. Allah revealed to him to eat black grapes to expel the grief.  
 In another tradition, it is quoted from the same Imam that Nuh stayed
in the ship for seven days, and the ship circled the Ka‘bah and halted
at Judi, in al-Kufah on the bank of Euphrates.[^10]  
 It has come in authentic traditions that an illegitimate child is the
worst of all creation. Nuh took dogs, pigs and all the animals on the
ship, but he did not take any illegitimate born.

In reliable traditions the explanation of Allah’s saying: (They) did not
bring faith on Nuh but a very few.” it is quoted from Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir that only eight people brought faith.[^11]  
 In authentic traditions, it is quoted from Imam as-Sadiq that the oven
was inside the Mosque of al-Kufah, to the left side and faced the
Kiblah. One day while he was busy building the ship, the wife of Nuh
came to him and said that water is gushing out of the oven. Nuh came
running and sealed it with a baked brick. The water stopped. When he
completed the ship and placed everything, he removed the seal. Water
gushed out. The river Euphrates and other springs also gushed in fury.  
 In a few authentic traditions it is quoted that when all the infidels
were drowned Allah revealed to the earth, “O Earth, absorb your water.”
The earth absorbed the water that had gushed out, but whatever had
descended from the heavens remained on the Earth in form of oceans.

From authentic traditions it is quoted from Imam Musa Ibn Ja‘far that
when Nuh boarded the ship and started sailing by the order of Allah,
Allah revealed to the mountains, “I want to make my servant, Nuh stay on
one of you.” Hearing this all the mountains raised their heads except
for Mount Judi in Mosul. It remained humble and modest and said, “I am
not worthy enough that Nuh’s Ark may berth upon me.” Allah appreciated
the humility and designated the ship to halt on Mount Judi. Hence, when
the ship touched, Mount Judi trembled, The people thought the ship might
wreak and sink. Nuh looked out from a small window of the ship and said,
“My Lord! Steady the boat!” And in some traditions it has come that he
said, “O Sustainer do us a favor!”

In another reliable tradition it has come that Nuh took resort of the
Holy right of Messenger of Allah, Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali, Fatimah
al-Zahra’, Imam Al-Hasan, Imam al-Husayn and all the Imams and took them
as his intercessors.  
 There is no controversy in all this. It is possible that all of this
might have happened.  
 In an authentic tradition, it is quoted from Imam as-Sadiq that Nuh’s
Ark touched Judi on the day of Navroz (21st March)

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has narrated from Muhammad Ibn Jarir Tabari that Allah
exalted Nuh with Prophethood because he used to worship Allah in excess
and used to seclude himself from the general public, and his height was
three hundred and eight hands according to the standards of his times.
His dress was woolen, whereas prior to him, the dress of Idris was made
of deer skin. Nuh lived in the mountains. His staple diet consisted of
grass. When he reached the age of four hundred and sixty years,
Archangel Gabriel brought him the robe of Prophethood and said, “Why
have you secluded yourself from the people?” He replied, “My people do
not recognize Allah, therefore I have become aloof from them.” Archangel
Gabriel said, “Wage holy war against them.” He replied, “I do not
possess the might to confront them. And if they come to know that I am
not on their religion, they would surely kill me.” Archangel Gabriel
said, “If you get that might, will you wage a holy war against them?” He
replied, “With much pleasure, I wish I had that might.” He inquired,
“Who are you?” Archangel Gabriel raised a loud cry, and the mountains
almost shattered. In response (to that cry), the angels and all the
creatures of the earth replied, “Here we are! Here we are! O Messenger
of Allah.” Nuh was filled with terror.

Archangel Gabriel said,” I am that person who lived with your two
forefathers, Adam and Idris. The ever-forgiving Allah is sends His
salutations and I have brought good tidings for you. Take this dress of
patience and garment of staunch faith and the honorable robe of
Prophethood and Messengership. And Allah orders that you marry Amoora
daughter of Himran son of Idris because she would be the foremost to
have faith in you. Nuh came to his people on the day of Aashoora. He
used to carry a white (walking) stick, which informed him about the
secret affairs of his people. This was a festive day and all of them had
gathered before their idols. Nuh went to them and said, *“Laa ilaaha
illallaah* (Meaning that there is no god but Allah.), and Adam was
chosen by Allah, Idris is one exalted by Him. Ibrahim is His friend and
Musa is one who spoke with Allah, and that ‘Isa was created by the means
of the Holy Spirit and Muhammad al-Mustafa is the last of the Prophets
and they are my witness on you that I have preached the divine message
to you.” Hearing this, the idols trembled, fires in the fire temples
were extinguished, and everyone was terrified. The leaders and
oppressors asked him who he was. Nuh replied, “I am a servant of Allah
and a son of His servant. He has sent me to you after appointing me His
Prophet.” Saying this, he began to weep.

Then he said, “I warn you about the wrath of Allah.” When Amoora heard
the words of Nuh, she immediately brought faith. Her father became angry
and said, “A sentence of Nuh had such effect on you? I fear when the
king comes to know about this he will kill you.” Amoora replied,
“Father, where is your reason and intelligence? Nuh is a lonely, weak
person and without being designated by Allah how can he raise a voice
that has frightened you so much?” This had no effect on the father. He
imprisoned Amoora for a year and starved her. Throughout the year people
heard of her distress. When they released her, the people observed a
great light in her and found her condition better than before. Everyone
was surprised as to how she could remain alive for a year without any
food and water. They inquired from her and she said that she had
appealed to the Sustainer of Nuh and hence Nuh used to bring food for
her miraculously.” Then Nuh married her and Sam was born. Nuh had two
wives. One was infidel named Rabia, who perished in the storm; the other
was faithful who remained with him on the Ark. Some traditionists have
stated that the name of the faithful wife was Haikel.

In reliable traditions Amir al-Mu’minin wrote in his will to Imam
Al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn, “After my demise when you bath and shroud
me, raise my bier from rear; do not hold it from front, because from the
angels will lift and at whatever place my bier is lowered you put it
down. Then strike a pick-axe on the ground and a grave will appear which
my father Nuh had made for me near his chest. The two sons acted
according to the will and a tablet was found with an inscription in
Syriac, *“Bismillah hir Rahmaanir Raheem. This is grave was prepared by
Nuh for the Successor of Muhammad al-Mustafa i.e... ‘Ali seven hundred
years before the deluge.*” There are many traditions indicating that
Adam and Nuh are buried near the tomb of ‘Ali and that after reciting
the Ziyarah of ‘Ali, the Ziyarahs of these Prophets should also be
recited.” There are many traditions indicating that Adam and Nuh are
buried near the tomb of ‘Ali and that after reciting the Ziyarah of
‘Ali, the Ziyarahs of these Prophets should also be recited.

[^1]: All these stated traditions are compatible with each other and it
is possible that in accounting the age of Nuh the time period during
when he was not attending to the religions affairs was not considered.

[^2]: There is slight difference in the words of this invocation, which
I have mentioned in the book of invocation of Behaarul-Anwaar (the
author)

[^3]: It is very difficult to reconcile the conflicting traditions. It
is possible that some were mistaken or some traditions may have been
registered because of Taqiyyah in accordance with the general
traditions. Some of the events have been mentioned repeatedly. Likewise,
it is possible that in respect to the arrival of the angels from the
second or sixth heaven, both events have occurred. Similarly about the
number of seventy odd followers it is possible that the children of Nuh
have been taken into consideration. And that the delay in the
fulfillment of promise may be because the promise was not an absolute
one but that it was subject to some conditions. Or in fact, the delay
was in the wrath of Allah and not in the promise. And that if someone
promises punishment of someone and does not execute, it is not
considered immoral. Rather it is a praiseworthy quality. And in these
traditions, there may be signs in favor of the occultation of the 12th
Imam and for the delay in the reappearance of that Imam, for the people
of reason.

[^4]: Sulphur water here means hot water that smells like sulphur.)
water and bitter water.

[^5]: The tradition quoted previously is more reliable. The difference
in the breadth could be due to the hand as a unit.

[^6]: There is difference of opinion between commentators, historians
and the religious scholars whether he was actually the son of Nuh or
that of his wife from her previous marriage, legitimate or illegitimate.
It is well known amongst the Shi‘ah tradition that he was the son of Nuh
and was legitimate. According to the first recitation, some have said
that he had performed the indecent act and some have said that that he
himself was the result of an indecent act and was not legitimate. The
Shi‘ahs do not accept this meaning. From Imam al-Ri¤a and all the Imams
there are many traditions quoting that what the Sunni say is wrong. He
was Nuh’s son. It was due to the fact that he was an infidel and an
evildoer that the Almighty had said that he was not from the household
of Nuh And those who had obeyed Nuh were said to be from his household.
Just as Prophet has said, “Whosoever follows me is from my household.”

[^7]: In fact, after the deluge the body of Adam was buried in the city
of Najaf as stated earlier. Perhaps this tradition is based on
dissimulation.

[^8]: The various traditions could be reconciled that some of them were
stated in dissimulation to support the Sunni view. It is also possible
that in some traditions the time taken for smoothing the wood is also
included. In some, this period is excluded (period spent in acquiring
wood, nails and other materials.) At that time Allah ordered him to take
on the ship from every pairs that Adam had brought from the Paradise so
that the children of Nuh after disembarking from the ship may live in
comfort on the land just like the Almighty has said in the Holy Qur’an
that “We sent descended eight pairs of quadruped for your two pairs of
lambs, two pairs of goats, two pairs of camels and two pairs of cows.
One pair each was domestic and the other was wild. Their hunting was
permissible. Similarly, one pair of goats was domestic and the other
wild. One pair of cows was domestic and the other wild. One pair of cows
was domestic and the other from mountains. One pair of camels was
Khurasani and the other Arabian. Likewise, birds were also from wild and
domestic.

[^9]: This characteristic (of becoming rare) appears to belong to women
who have menstruation once a year, who do not exist any more. Their
numbers kept on reducing and at last became non-existent. It is possible
that the traditionalist has committed an error.

[^10]: There is difference of opinion in respect of the time period that
Nuh stayed in the ship. Some accept this tradition because it is the
most reliable. Some however state that he stayed on the ship for one
hundred and fifty days. A few have also stated the period to be six and
five months respectively.

[^11]: Perhaps apart from his sons and daughters only eight people
brought faith and all together were eighty in number or one of these
traditions is based on Taqiyyah.


