Salih, his she-camel and his people
===================================

The Almighty has mentioned this incident in a number of places in the
Holy Qur’an; to warn the heedless and ignorant people of the community.
First, we quote the relevant verses to be followed by appropriate
traditions. The Almighty says,

***“And to Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said, O my people!
Serve Allah, you have no god other than Him; clear proof indeed has come
to you from your Lord; this is Allah’s she-camel for you — a sign,
therefore leave her alone to pasture on Allah’s earth, and do not touch
her with any harm, otherwise painful chastisement will overtake you. And
remember when He made you successors after ‘ad and settled you in the
land — you make mansions on its plains and hew out houses in the
mountains — remember therefore Allah’s benefits and do not act corruptly
in the land, making mischief. The chief of those who behaved proudly
among his people said to those who were considered weak, to those who
believed from among them: Do you know that Salih is sent by his Lord?
They said, surely we are believers in what he has been sent with. Those
who were haughty said, surely we are deniers of what you believe in. So
they slew the*** ***she-camel and revolted against their Lord’s
commandment, and they said, O Salih! Bring us what you threatened us
with, if you are one of the apostles. Then the earthquake overtook them,
so they became motionless bodies in their abode. Then he turned away
from them and said, O my people I did certainly deliver to you the
message of my Lord, and I gave you good advice, but you do not love
those who give good advice. (7:73-79)”***

***“And to Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said, O my people!
Serve Allah, you have no god other than He; He brought you into being
from the earth, and made you dwell in it, therefore ask forgiveness of
Him, then turn to Him; surely my Lord is Nigh, Answering. They said, O
Salih! Surely you were one amongst us in whom great expectations were
placed before this; do you (now) forbid us from worshipping what our
fathers worshipped? And as to that which you call us to, most surely we
are in disquieting doubt. He said, O my people! Tell me if I have clear
proof from my Lord and He has granted to me mercy from Himself — who
will then help me against Allah if I disobey Him? Therefore you do not
add to me other than loss: And, O my people! This will be (as) Allah’s
she-camel for you, a sign; therefore leave her to pasture on Allah’s
earth and do not touch her with evil, for then a near chastisement will
overtake you. But they slew her, so he said, enjoy yourselves in your
abode for three days that is a promise not to be belied. So when Our
decree came to pass, We delivered Salih and those who believed with him
by mercy from Us, and (We saved them) from the disgrace of that day;
surely your Lord is the Strong, the Mighty. And the rumbling overtook
those who were unjust, so they became motionless bodies in their abodes,
As though they had never dwelt in them; now surely did Thamud disbelieve
in their Lord; now surely, away with Thamud. (11:61-68)”***

“And the dwellers of the Rock certainly rejected the messengers; And We
gave them Our communications, but they turned aside from them; And they
hewed houses in the mountains in security. So the rumbling overtook them
in the morning; (15:80-83)”

According to al-Qutb al-Rawandi, Salih was the son of Thamud, son of
Aatir, son of Iran, son of Sam son of Nuh. Some believe that Salih was
the son of Abeed, son of Asif, son of Masikh, son of Abeed, son of
Hawar, son of Thamud, son of Aatir son of Iran, son of Sam son of Nuh.  
 According to authentic chains of narrators from Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq in
the tafsir of the ayahs:

***Thamud rejected the warning. So they said, What? A single mortal from
among us! Shall we follow him? Most surely, we shall in that case be in
sure error and distress: Has the reminder been made to light upon him
from among us? Nay! He is an insolent liar! (54:23-25)***

That he said,  
 “It occurred when the people of Thamud belied Salih, for it never
happened that Allah destroyed a community before He sent a warner who
exhausted the argument upon them. Thus, the Almighty sent Salih to them
and he invited them towards Allah, but they did not accept, rather they
opposed vehemently and were stubborn in disobedience. They said, ‘We
shall not believe in you until you bring out from this rock a she-camel,
ten months pregnant.”

These people used to worship that particular rock, and offered numerous
sacrifices to it every year and they congregated around it. They told
Salih, “If you are truly a Prophet and a Messenger as you claim to be,
pray to Allah that He may cause a she-camel ten months pregnant to
emerge from this rock.”

The Almighty acceded to their request and a she-camel appeared from the
rock. Allah revealed upon Salih to inform the people that the she-camel
should be allowed exclusive access to drinking water on alternate days.
So the she-camel consumed all the water on alternate days. She was
milked and all the people relished her milk on those days. On other
days, the people and other animals drank water, and the she-camel did
not come near the pond. This continued as long as the Almighty desired.
The people began to deviate and hatched a plot to slaughter the
she-camel. “We are not prepared to continue with the existing
arrangement,” they said, “the she-camel consumes all the water on
alternate days. Whoever kills this camel shall be rewarded according to
his wish.”

Upon hearing this, a red-complexioned, red-haired man with blue eyes
approached the people. He was of illegitimate birth. His name was Qedar
and was a vile and an evil person. The people determined his reward. On
her day, the she-camel was on its way back after having a drink from the
pond, when this man stroked her with a sword. The stroke did not have
any effect. He hit her the second time and she fell down on her side and
her young one ran to the mountain. It raised its head thrice towards the
sky and pleaded. The people gathered and each of them hit the she-camel
and participated in the outrageous crime. They divided the meat among
themselves and none remained without partaking of it. Salih was
dismayed. He said, “O people you have committed a serious transgression
and disobeyed the Almighty.” The Almighty revealed to Salih, “Your
people have rebelled, transgressed and killed the she-camel that I had
sent for them as the final proof. They were not inconvenienced due to
the she-camel. It was a great boon, rather. So tell them that I will
send chastisement within three days. And if they do not repent and forgo
sinfulness I will surely send down the punishment for them.” Salih came
to his people and said,  
 “People, I am the Messenger of your lord. He says that if you repent,
forgo sinfulness and seek forgiveness, He will condone your sins and
accept your repentance.”

When Salih said this, their obstinacy and transgression increased. They
said, “Salih! If what you say is true, bring the punishment upon us.”  
 Salih said, “Indeed tomorrow morning your faces shall turn yellow, the
next day red and then black on the third day.”

Thus, next morning all their faces turned yellow. Some of them told
others, “What Salih had predicted was true and the chastisement has come
to you.” The renegades and the transgressors said, “We shall not accept
the word of Salih and would not believe him even if what he says is
true.”

On the second day, their faces turned red. Again, some of them said,
“What Salih had predicted has come true. Obstinate transgressors said,
“Even though we perish, we shall still not believe in Salih. We shall
not forgo worshipping the deities of our forefathers.” They did not
repent and neither did they stop sinning. On the third day, their faces
turned black. Again some people went to them and repeated that whatever
Salih had predicted was true but the arrogant ones said, “Indeed
whatever Salih predicted has come to pass.”

At last, when at midnight, Archangel Gabriel descended and raised a loud
call that shattered their eardrums. Their hearts exploded and livers
disintegrated. On the third day, they anointed and shrouded themselves,
convinced of the imminent punishment. The Almighty killed all of them.
By the morning, all of them lay dead in their houses and their bedrooms.
Then Almighty Allah caused a loud noise with a fire that descended from
the sky and burnt all of them. This is an account of the people of
Thamud.

A good, rather an authentic tradition, from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says
that the Messenger of Allah asked Archangel Gabriel why the people of
Thamud were destroyed. Archangel Gabriel said,  
 “O Muhammad! Salih was sent to his people when he was sixteen years
old. He remained among them until he was a hundred and twenty years. But
they were having seventy idols, whom they worshipped. When Salih saw
this he said, “O people! Indeed, I was sixteen years old when I was sent
for your guidance. Today I have reached my 120th year. I give you two
alternatives. Either of us makes a request to your gods and sees if they
respond. After that if still you do not agree I will go away, for I am
very distressed and hopeless regarding you.”

“Fair enough,” said the people, promised that one they shall go to the
wilderness and performed the test. On the appointed day, the misguided
people took their idols to a desert. They ate and drank to satiation.
After this, they invited Salih to present his demand. Salih came to
largest idol and asked its name. The people told him and Salih addressed
the idol by its own name. It did not reply. “Why doesn’t it reply?”
asked Salih The people suggested that he question another idol. It also
did not respond. One by one Salih called each and every idol but none of
them uttered a reply. Salih said, “People! You have seen that I called
each of your gods but not one of them responded. Now you present your
demand and if you are not able to achieve it, I shall pray to Allah and
He will surely grant it.”

The people addressed their idols and asked them as to why they had not
responded to the call of Salih. Still they did not get a reply. Then the
people told Salih to leave them alone with their idols. Salih obliged
them. The people threw away the carpets and utensils and began to roll
in the sand and said, “If you do not reply to Salih today, we shall be
insulted.”

They called back Salih and told him to inquire again. Once more Salih
addressed each of the idols, but there was no response. Salih said, “The
whole day has passed in this, these idols do not respond. Now you
express your demand so that I can pray to the Almighty. He will accept
the prayers at this very moment.”

The people selected seventy senior leaders. They told Salih that they
were prepared to present their demand. Salih asked the people if they
agree. “Yes!” replied the people. “If this group accepts your word, we
too shall follow it,” assured the people.

The group of seventy said, “O Salih! We present a request to you. If
your Lord accepts it, we shall obey you and follow your commands. And
the rest of the people will also follow suit.”  
 Salih told them to ask whatever they wished. They indicated towards a
nearby mountain and said, “Come, let us go to this mountain and we shall
express our wish there.” When they reached the mountain they said, “O
Salih! Pray to your God that at this very moment, He may cause a
red-haired she-camel ten months pregnant and three parasang long to
appear from this mountain side.”  
 Salih said, “You have made such a request that it is impossible for me
but it’s easy for my Lord.”  
 He prayed to the Almighty and at that very moment, the mountainside
cracked with such a loud noise that the people nearly lost their senses.
The mountain felt a terrible pain like a woman during childbirth.
Suddenly the head had not yet emerged when the she-camel began to speak.
Then the remaining portion came out and it stood erect. When the people
beheld the astonishing scene they exclaimed, “How quickly your Lord
responded to your supplication! Now pray that she should deliver a young
one too.”

Salih prayed and the young emerged from its mother and ambled around
it.  
 “Anything else?” asked Salih. “No!” admitted the people, “Let us go
back to and relate all this to our people that they may also believe in
you.”

They turned and had not yet reached their people when sixty four of the
seventy men reneged and said that Salih had performed magic. However,
six of them remained steadfast. The situation turned serious and those
who belied Salih deserted him. From the six steadfast people one fell
into doubt. He remained among them until the time they slew the
she-camel.  
 The narrator says that I have seen the mountain with a mile-long
aperture. The sides of the she-camel have left their impression on both
sides of the mountain.

According to a reliable chain of narrators Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq said
that Salih was in occultation for a long time. He was middle-aged at
that time. He had a handsome body and a flourishing beard and was of
medium stature. When he reappeared, the people failed to recognize him.
Prior to his return, there were three groups among the people. One group
used to reject and said that Salih was no more alive and that he could
never return. The second group was in doubt. The third group was sure
that he would come back. When Salih returned, he first went to the group
that was in doubt and said, “I am Salih.” They rejected him saying that
he did not resemble him. Then Salih came to those were his deniers. They
also did not accept him and expressed extreme dislike for him. Finally,
he came to the group steadfast in faith and said, “I am Salih.”

“Show us a sign to remove all doubts,” they demanded. “We know that
Allah is the creator and He can change the appearance of whomsoever He
likes. We are aware of the special characteristics of Salih. We have
also found in the books that he will return.”  
 “I am the one who had brought for you the she-camel,” said Salih.  
 “You speak the truth,” accepted the people, “We have read this in our
books. Tell us the sign of the she-camel.”  
 “One day is allotted for the she-camel to drink water and the next for
you.”  
 They said, “We believe in Allah and in all things that you have brought
from Him.”  
 The arrogant group who were harboring doubts said, “We do not accept
what you believe.”  
 The narrator says that I asked, “O son of the Messenger! Was there no
Scholar among them?”  
 Imam said, “Allah is more just that he will leave the earth without a
scholar. When Salih reappeared all the scholars came to him. And in this
Ummah the example of ‘Ali and the Awaited al-Qa’im (Peace of Allah be on
both) is like that of Salih - Both of them will reappear towards the end
of time and at that time also people will divide into three groups. Some
of them will accept them and others reject them.

According to authentic reports Musa Ibn Ja‘far said, the People of Ras
were two different groups. One of them have been mentioned by Allah in
the Qur’an. Another group inhabited the desert and owned sheep and goat.
Salih the Prophet sent one of his representatives to them. They killed
him. Salih sent a second one. He too was murdered. The third messenger
was sent with an assistant to help him. They killed the Prophet again.
The assistant (wali) tried his best and exhausted the argument. They
used to say, “Our god is in the sea,” as they lived by the seashore.
Every year they had a day of feast. On this day, a huge fish used to
emerge from the sea. The people prostrated before it. The Wali of Salih
assured them that he was not desirous of being accepted as their god.
“But if the fish that you worship obeys me, would you accept my word and
hearken to what I invite?”

“Yes”, agreed the people and took an oath for the same.  
 Thus, the fish emerged, riding on four other fishes. When the people
saw it, they fell down in prostration. Then the Wali of Salih came
towards the fish and commanded,  
 “Come to me by the name of the Almighty, willingly or unwillingly.”  
 The fish heard the command and alighted. Wali said, “Climb astride the
fishes again and come! So that there remains doubt among these people
regarding me.”

The fish climbed upon the four fishes and they all came out of the water
near the Wali. Despite witnessing such a spectacle, the people continued
to belie the Wali. The Almighty sent a wind towards them and along with
their animals, they were tossed into the sea. The Wali received a divine
revelation to go to a well by the name of Ras. He reached the well and
extracted the hidden treasures and distributed it equally among the
young old of his followers. It is possible it might be the same well;
popularly known as Ras that one passes on way to Makkah.  
 Both Shi‘ah and Sunni traditionalists have quoted from reliable chains
that the Messenger of Allah asked Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali! Who
are the most evil among the ancient people?”  
 “The killer of Salih’s she-camel.” replied ‘Ali. “You are right,” said
the Holy Prophet and then asked, “Who is the most evil of the people of
the later age?”

When ‘Ali did not reply the Messenger of Allah said, “It is the person
who will strike your head.”  
 ‘Ammar bin Yasir says that I and ‘Ali Ibn Abi-Talib were asleep on the
sand during the battle of Ashira when all of a sudden the Messenger of
Allah awoke us. When we awoke he asked, “Do you want me to tell you who
is the most evil of the people?”  
 Both of us said, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah. The red-complexioned one
of the people of Thamud. Who cut off the legs of the she-camel of
Salih.” “And next is one who will strike the head of ‘Ali and smear his
beard in blood.”

A number of chains quote the tradition that once the Messenger of Allah
emerged holding the hand of ‘Ali and called out, “O Ansar, O sons of
Hashim! O sons of Abdul Muttalib! I am Muhammad the Messenger of Allah.
Indeed, I am the recipient of divine mercy. I live with three orphans,
‘Ali, Hamza and Ja‘far. Just now, a person told me, ‘O Messenger of
Allah! These people will be astride you in the Resurrection Day’. May
your parents may mourn you! On that day none will be astride except me,
‘Ali, Fatimah and Prophet Salih. I would be astride the lightning. My
daughter will be astride my she-camel named Gaza; Salih will be upon
Allah’s she-camel that was slain. And ‘Ali will be upon a camel of
Paradise. Its bridle will be of rubies. ‘Ali would be wearing two
garments and standing between Paradise and Hell. It would be a situation
when the people undergo extreme difficulties and would be sweating
profusely. A breeze will blow from the Holy Throne drying up their
perspiration. The angels, Prophet and the truthful ones will say that it
cannot be anyone except the closest angel and a Messenger who has been
sent by Allah. At this occasion a voice shall call out, “This is not a
proximate angel, nor a Messenger, it is the brother of the Messenger of
Allah, in the world and hereafter, it is ‘Ali Ibn Abi-Talib.”

According to authentic tradition, people asked Imam Al-Hasan about the
seven creatures that did not come through the womb.  
 Imam Al-Hasan said, “They are Adam, Hawwa’, the ram of Ibrahim, the
she-camel of Salih, serpent of the Garden of Eden, the crow that was
sent by Allah to teach Habil the method of burial and Iblis (Curse of
Allah be upon him.).”

It is recorded in some traditions that when they had cut off the legs of
she-camel the same nine persons said, “Come, let us kill Salih too. For
if he had given a correct prediction of chastisement, we would have
killed him beforehand. If he is wrong we would have sent him where we
sent the she-camel.” After hatching the plot, they came to the house of
Salih in the dark of the night. The Almighty had sent the angels for
guarding Salih and they stoned to death the attackers of Salih.  
 According to Ka’b bin Ahbaar the cause of the killing of she-camel was
a woman named Malka. She was the queen of Thamud. When the people
aligned with Salih she became jealous. There was another woman, Qatam,
the beloved of Qedar bin Salif. Another woman, Iqbal was the beloved of
Masda’. Qedar and Masdah drank together every evening. Malka told Qatam
and Iqbal that when Qedar and Masdah approach you at night you should
feign grief and say that you are sorrowful due to the she-camel of
Salih. “We shall not be happy with you until you slay it.” When Qedar
and Masda’ came to them that night and were told of their desires they
agreed to slay the she-camel. They mobilized seven more people for their
mission and slew the she-camel. As mentioned by the Almighty, there were
nine people in the town who spread corruption in the land and did not
allow peace to be established.

According to authentic traditions it was Wednesday when the chastisement
struck the people of Salih. Other reliable narrations state that the
she-camel was killed on a Wednesday. There is agreement between these
two traditions.


