Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 121-129
=========================================

And when you did go forth early in the morning from your family to
lodge the believers in encampments for war; and Allah is Hearing,
Knowing (212). When two parties from among you had determined that they
should show cowardice and Allah was the guardian of them both, and in
Allah should the believers trust (122). And Allah did certainly assist
you at Badr when you were weak; fear Allah then that you may give thanks
(123). When you said to the believers: "Does it not suffice you that
your Lord should assist you with three thousand of the angels sent down?
(124). Yea! if you remain patient and are on your guard (against evil),
and they come upon you in a headlong manner, your Lord will assist you
with five thousand of the havoc-making angels" (125). And Allah did not
make it but as good news for you, and that your hearts might be at ease
thereby, and help is only from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise (126). That
He may cut off a portion from among those who disbelieve, or abase them
so that they should return disappointed of attaining what they desired
(127). You have no concern in the affair whether He turns to them
(mercifully) or chastises them, for surely they are unjust (128). And
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is Allah's; He
forgives whom He pleases and chastises whom He pleases; and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful (129).

**COMMENTARY**

Now the discourse turns back to what the chapter had begun with:
Warning the believers of the serious situation they were in; reminding
them of Allah's favors bestowed on them, that is, true belief, divine
help and the fact that Allah is sufficient for them; teaching them what
would lead them to their noble goal; and guiding them to what would make
them happy in this life and the hereafter. It describes the battle of
Uhud. There are some verses referring to the battle of Badr, but they
are like supplement inserted here for cross-reference, and as we shall
explain later, they are not meant as main topic here.

QUR'AN: And when you did go forth early in the morning from your family
to lodge the believers in encampments for war:

"When" in Arabic is adverb of time related to a deleted verb e.g.
"Remember" or similar verbs; "ghadawta" translated here as "you did go
forth early in the morning" is derived from al-ghadw (to come out early
in the morning); attabwi'ah means to prepare a place for someone, or to
put him in a place; ma-qa'id is plural (of seat; translated here as
encampment). Ahl of a man, according to ar-Raghib, are those who are
joined to him in genealogy or house or other such things like religion,
town or handicraft.

Thus ahl of a man refers to his wife and all those who are in his
house, like wife, child, servant, etc.; also it denotes all who are
related to him like his family or clan; residents of a town or followers
of a religion are called ahl of that town or religion; artisans and
masters of a handicraft are called ahl of that art or handicraft. The
word "ahl” is used for masculine and feminine both; also for singular
and plural alike. Its use is exclusively reserved for human beings; ahl
of a thing are the people related to it exclusively.

"Ahl" of the Messenger of Allah are therefore the people exclusively
related to him. Here it refers to a group—not to a single person. It may
be understood from the expression, "you did go forth early in the
morning from your family", because it may be said, "You went forth from
your relatives and your group "; but it cannot be said, "You went forth
from your wife " or "from your mother". An exegete mistakenly has
thought that ahl refers to singular only, and therefore has had to say
that there was some word deleted (but understood) from the verse;
according to him the verse means, "did go forth . . . from the house of
your family" . But as you have seen nothing in this verse demands such
interpretation.

The preceding and following verses are addressed to the believers as a
group. But the verses under discussion turn from plural to singular;
they are addressed not to the believers but to the Messenger of Allah
alone. Apparently this diversion has some connection with the shade of
displeasure found in the verses dealing with this battle: there is an
undercurrent of reproach, censure and stricture running throughout for
what the Muslims had done (in the battle of Uhud) where they had shown
cowardice and lack of will-power and courage. Therefore, whenever a
topic comes which exclusively concerns the Prophet, Allah ignores and
disregards the believers and speaks to the Prophet alone. Thus Allah
says: And when you did go forth early in the morning from your family;
When you said to the believers: "Does it not suffice you that your Lord
should assist you. . . "; You have no concern in the affair; Say:
"Surely the affair is wholly (in the hands) of Allah " (3:154); Thus it
is due to the mercy from Allah that you deal with them gently, and had
you been rough, hardhearted, they would certainly have dispersed from
around you (3:159); And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way
as dead (3:169).

In all the above verses plural verbs and pronouns have been changed to
singular. It seems as though the speaker is not in a mood to continue
the preceding style (of speaking to the whole community) because he is
very much annoyed and displeased with them.

It is unlike some other verses coming in between where effectiveness
and sharpness of admonition depended on direct talk with the believers
and therefore the plural was used. For example: And Muhammad is no more
than a messenger, the messengers have already passed away before him; if
then he dies or is killed, will you turn back upon your heals? (3:144);
When you ran off precipitately and did not turn towards any one, and the
Messenger was calling you from your rear (3:153) .

Also it is unlike another intervening verse, that is: Certainly Allah
conferred a benefit upon the believers when He raised among them a
Messenger from among themselves, reciting to them His communications
(3:164). Here Allah describes His favor on the believers of sending the
Prophet to them; and it could be effective and more impressive only if
it was supposed as if the Prophet himself were not present there. Ponder
on all these verses and you will appreciate the relevance of what we
have written.

The verse under discussion means as follows: O Prophet, remember when
you did go forth early in the morning from your family in order that you
should place the believers in their sectors for war; and Allah is
Hearing (He had heard what was said there) and Knowing (He had known
what was hidden in their hearts). The expression, "you did go forth
early in the morning from your family", indicates that the battleground
was nearer to the Prophet's house. It clearly shows that the two verses
refer to the battle of Uhud, and in this way they are related to other
verses, which would follow later, and which describe the battle of Uhud.
All these verses fit the events, which had taken place in Uhud.

This shows the weakness of the claim that these two verses were
revealed about the battle of Badr, or, as someone else said, about the
battle of the Confederates. And it is obvious (from the context).

QUR'AN: and Allah is Hearing, Knowing:

He is Hearing, He had heard what was spoken there; and Knowing, He knew
what was hidden in their hearts. It indicates that some Muslims had
spoken there some (undesirable) things, and there were other things,
which they had not disclosed to others. Apparently the next clause,
"When two parties from among you had determined that they should show
cowardice", is related to these two attributes, (i.e., Allah heard and
knew the conspiracy and intention of the two parties when they had
determined to show cowardice). QUR'AN: When two parties from among you
had determined that they should show cowardice, and Allah was the
guardian of them both:

"al-Hamm" what you determine in your heart; intention); al-fashl
(weakness with cowardice).

"and Allah was the guardian of them both": This is a circumstantial
clause, related to the verb, "had determined ". It is meant as an
admonition and reproof, as is the concluding sentence, "and in Allah
should the believers trust". The connotation is as follows: The two
parties had determined to show cowardice although Allah was their
guardian—and a believer should not show weakness and cowardice when he
believes that Allah is his guardian and when he is supposed to entrust
all his affairs to Allah, and whoever trusts in Allah then He is
sufficient for him.

This explanation shows the weakness of an interpretation offered by an
exegete who says: This intention of the two parties was merely a
thought, a notion, not a determination, because Allah has praised them
and said that He was their guardian. Had it been a firm determination
and intention, they should have been blamed rather than praised.

But I do not understand what he means when he says that it was merely a
thought, a notion. Does he mean merely a passing thought, a knowledge
what cowardice means? If so, then everyone present there knew the
meaning of cowardice, and it makes no sense to mention it in this
context; nor is it called "determination" in Arabic language. Or, does
he mean knowledge of cowardice coupled with some intention; a notion
with determination to act upon it? (If so, then it was not merely a
thought or a notion.) Also, the verse shows that the condition of the
two parties was obvious to the others; had it been merely a passing
thought without showing any effect on their behavior, others would not
have known that they had determined to show weakness and cowardice.
Moreover, the reminder that Allah was their guardian and that the
believers must put their trust in Allah, dovetails with firm
determination, not with a passing thought. And in any case, we have
explained that in the present context, the clause, "and Allah was the
guardian of them both", is not intended as a praise, it is a reproof, an
admonition.

Perhaps this misunderstanding has sprung up from a tradition attributed
to Jabir ibn 'Abdillah al-Ansar; in which he says: "(This verse) was
revealed about us; and I would not prefer if it were not revealed,
because Allah has said, and Allah was the guardian of them both." The
said exegete probably thought that Jabir had taken the clause as a
praise.

Even if the said tradition were accepted as correct, Jabir's theme is
different from what that exegete has thought. Jabir means that Allah
then accepted their belief and confirmed that they were believers,
because He counted Himself as their guardian, and Allah is the guardian
of those who believe, a d as for that this clause implies any praise,
when it has been put in this contact of clear reprimand and censure.
QUR'AN: And Allah did certainly assist you at Badr when you were weak;
fear Allah then, that you may give thanks: The context obviously shows
that this verse has been revealed here as a supporting evidence to
emphasize the stricture, to complete the reproof. If so, then this too
would be a circumstantial clause, like the preceding one, "and Allah was
the guardian of them both." Its connotation then would be as follows:
You should not have determined to show cowardice while Allah had
certainly assisted you at Badr when you were weak. On the other-hand, it
might be an independent sentence revealed here to remind them of the
wonderful assistance provided to them at Badr, when Allah had sent down
the angels to help them when they were weak.

Allah mentions here the help sent by Him to them at Badr, and compares
their present condition with that; and it is known that whoever becomes
strong, does so only with Allah's help and His assistance, because man,
per se, has nothing except neediness and weakness. That is why Allah
says: "when you were weak".

It many be understood from the above that the statement, "when you were
weak", does not disagree with such other divine words as, and to Allah
belongs the might and to His Messenger and to the believers 163:8),
because the believers' might springs from the might of Allah, as He
says: Then surely all might is for Allah (4:139); and it proceeds from
the divine help given to the believers, as Allah says: And certainly We
sent before you messengers to their people, so they came to them with
clear arguments, then We gave the punishment to those who were guilty;
and helping the believers is ever incumbent upon Us (30:47). In this
situation if we look at the condition of the believers, per se, they
have got nothing except weakness.

Apart from that, if we look at the believers' condition in Badr, we
shall have to admit that they were certainly weaker in comparison to the
strength, might and élan the polytheists had had. And there is no
difficulty in ascribing a relative weakness to otherwise mighty ones.
Allah has ascribed it to a people whom He has praised very extensively,
when He says: . . . then soon Allah will bring a people that He shall
love them and they shall love Him, humble (adhillah, lit: weak) before
the believers, mighty against the unbelievers. . . (5:54).

QUR'AN: When you said to the believers: "Does it not suffice you that
your Lord should assist you ....

"al-Imdad " is derived from al-madd and signifies giving al-madad
(help) continuously. QUR'AN: "Yea! if you remain patient and are on your
guard (against evil), and they come upon you in a headlong manner. . ":
"Bala" (Yea) is used for affirmation; al-fawr and al-fawran means to
boil; they say, fara 'l-qidr (the cooking-pot boiled up); then the word
was used to denote hurry and haste. Thus the phrase, min fawrihim hadha
( - translated here as, in a headlong manner) means, ' at once ',
'immediately '. Obviously, the promise refers to the battle of Badr. It
is a conditional promise, and the conditions are given in these clauses,
"if you remain patient and are on your guard and they come upon you in a
headlong manner".

An exegete has written that it is a promise to send down the angels if
they came upon the believers (not "immediately", i.e. not on the day of
Badr, but) after the immediate time, i.e. after the battle of Badr.
Another one has written that it is a promise to send down the angels in
all the battles after the Badr, like Uhud, Hunayn and the Confederates.
But the wording of the verse does not agree with it.

As for Uhud, there is obviously nothing in the verses that might allude
to coming of the angels on that day. So far as the battles of the
Confederates and Hunayn are concerned, the Qur'an, of course, says (in
other places) that the angels were sent on those days: It says about the
battle of the Confederates: . . . when there came down upon you hosts,
so We sent against them a strong wind and hosts that you saw not . .
(33:9). And it says about the day of Hunayn: … and on the day of Hunayn
…and sent down hosts which you did not see. .. (9:25-26). Nevertheless,
the wording of the verse under discussions, "Yea! if you remain patient
and are on your guard (against evil) and they come upon you in a
headlong manner", does not show any general promise.

There is no conflict between this verse which speaks of three thousand
angels being sent down at Badr, and the statement of the chapter of
al-Anfal, which says: . . . so He answered you: "I will assist you with
a thousand of angels following (after others) " (8:9) . The word,
"following", indicates that they would follow others—the "others"
referring to the remaining two thousand who would complete the number
promised in this verse. QUR'AN: And Allah did not make it but as good
news for you, . . . and help is only form Allah, the Mighty, the Wise:

The pronoun "it" refers to the help. 'Ind (near) is an adverb of place,
indicating presence. Initially it was used for nearness and presence in
place; obviously it was reserved for physical things. Then its circle
widened and it was used for nearness in time. Finally it was used for
general, and even spiritual, nearness. The Qur'an has used it in various
connotations.

The theme of the statement, "and help is only from Allah, the Mighty,
the Wise", when seen in conjunction with the preceding words, "And Allah
did not make it but as good news for you, and that your hearts might be
at ease thereby ", implies that the phrase, min 'indi 'llah (= lit: from
near Allah) refers to that "station" of Lordship which every affair and
every order emanates from; and without which nothing can suffice, nor
can any cause be independent of it. The meaning therefore is as follows:
The helper angels have in fact no concern with the promised help; they
are merely apparent causes — they bring to you good news and
satisfaction of heart. The reality of help is from Allah, nothing can
suffice from Him; He is Allah, the final destination of every thing; the
Mighty Who cannot be subdued, the Wise Who is not unaware of any
thing.

QUR'AN: That He may cut off a portion from among those who disbelieve,
or abase them . . . and chastises whom He pleases; and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful:

"That" is related to the verb, "And Allah did certainly assist you at
Badr". (He assisted you so that He may cut off...). 'Cutting off a
portion' metaphorically means decreasing their number and debilitating
them with slaying and imprisoning, as had happened at Badr where seventy
idol worshippers were killed and seventy arrested. al-Kabt (to abase, to
exasperate).

The clause, "You have no concern in the affair", is a parenthetic one.
It emphasizes the proposition that the authority of cutting off a
portion from, or abasing them, is entirely in the hand of Allah; the
Prophet has no concern in this matter — that they should praise and
acclaim him if they vanquished and defeated their enemy, and should
blame him and remonstrate with him if things went against them; they
should not be infirm and grieving, as they had done on the day of Uhud —
as Allah has narrated.

The next clause, "whether He turns to them (mercifully) or chastises
them", is in conjunction with the preceding, "That He may cut off . .
.", and the sentence is continuing. The next verse, "And whatever is in
the heavens and whatever is in the earth is Allah's", is explicative
clause describing why the matter of repentance and forgiveness rests
exclusively in the hand of Allah. The meaning is as follows: The sound
arrangement (at Badr) were made by Allah in order that He might cut off
a portion of the polytheists through slaughter and imprisonment, or
abase them and disappoint them of attaining what they had desired, or
that He might turn to them mercifully or chastise them. As for the
cutting off a portion of them and abasing them, it is because all
affairs are in His hands, you have no concern in it, (so they should
neither praise nor blame you in this affair); and as for repentance and
forgiveness, it is because Allah is the Owner of everything, He forgives
whom He pleases and chastises whom He pleases. Even then, His
forgiveness and mercy surpasses His chastisement and anger, because He
is Forgiving, Merciful.

We have treated the sentence, "And whatever is in the heaven and
whatever is in the earth is Allah's", as explaining the reason for the
preceding two clauses (whether He turns to them (mercifully) or
chastises them), because the concluding clauses specifically explain
this matter: "He forgives whom He pleases and chastises whom He
pleases."

The exegetes have described other ways to show the connection of the
words, "That He may cut off a portion . . . ", and the significance of
conjunction in the words, "whether He turns to them or chastises them";
also, they have given other justifications for the words, "You have no
concern in the affair", and for the sentence, "And whatever is in the
heavens and whatever is in the earth is Allah's ". We have ignored them,
as there was no use of commenting upon them, because they go against the
apparent meanings and the context of the verses. Anyone wanting to see
them should consult other bigger commentaries.

**TRADITIONS**

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "The cause of the battle of Uhud was as follows:
When the Quraysh returned from Badr to Mecca - and it had befallen to
them from slaughter and imprisonment what had befallen, because seventy
of them were killed and seventy imprisoned - Abu Sufyan said: 'O people
of Quraysh! Do not let your women weep on your dead, because if tear is
shed it would remove the grief and (lessen) the hatred of Muhammad.' And
when they fought the Messenger of Allah on the day of Uhud, they allowed
their women to weep and lament; and they proceeded from Mecca with three
thousand horse and two thousand-foot and brought their women with
them.

"When the news reached the Messenger of Allah, he gathered his
companions and exhorted them to fight. 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
said: 'O Messenger of Allah! Do not go out of Medina, so that we fight
in its alleys; thus even a weak man, a woman, a slave-boy and a
slave-girl would fight on the entrances of the lanes and on the roofs;
because never did any people (who attacked us) defeat us when we were
within our fortresses and homes; and never did we go out to meet an
enemy of ours but they vanquished us.'

"Then Sa'd ibn Mu'adh and others from the tribe of Aws stood up and
said: 'O Messenger of Allah! Never did anyone from the Arabs have any
ambition against us while we were polytheist worshipping idols; how can
they then be emboldened against us and you are among us? No: (we shall
not rest) until we go out to them and fight them; whoever then among us
will be killed shall be a martyr, and whoever among us is saved will
have fought in the way of Allah.'

"So, the Messenger of Allah accepted his advice and came out with a
group of his companions, fixing their places at the battle-ground; as
Allah says: And when you did go forth early in the morning from your
family . . . But 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul and a group of Khazraj
who followed his opinion, held back from lthe Prophet).

"The Quraysh appeared at Uhud. The Messenger of Allah had positioned
his companions—they were seven hundred men— and lodged 'Abdullah ibn
Jubayr with fifty archers at the mouth of the mountain-pass; (the
Prophet) was worried that the (enemy) might ambush from that side.
Therefore, he said to 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr and his companions: 'If you
see that we have defeated them until we have pushed them inside Mecca,
you should not leave this place; and if you see that they have overcome
us until they have pushed us into Medina, you should not leave (here),
but stick to your posts.

"Abu Sufyan hid Khalid ibn Walid with two hundred horse with this (very
idea of) ambush, and said to him: 'When you see that we (two forces)
have mixed together, you come over to them from this mountain-pass, so
that you will be (attacking them from) behind them.'

"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) mobilized his companions; and gave
the standard to the Commander of the faithful ('Ali a.s.). The Helpers
attacked the polytheists of the Quraysh, and (the enemy) suffered an
ignominious defeat. The companions of the Messenger of Allah laid hold
of the masses of the (Quraysh). Khalid ibn Walid came with his two
hundred horse over 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr; but they confronted them with
arrows, and Khalid retreated. The group of 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr saw the
companions of the Messenger of Allah looting the masses of the enemy;
they said to 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr: 'Our companions are taking away (all)
the booty; should we remain without any booty?' 'Abdullah told them:
'Fear Allah, because the Messenger of Allah had indeed directed us not
to leave our post.' But they did not listen to him, and began slinking
away one by one, until they left their station unattended, and 'Abdullah
ibn Jubayr was left there with (only) twelve men.

"The standard of the Quraysh was in the hand of Talhah ibn Abi Talhah
al-'Abdi (from Banu 'Abdu 'd-Dar); 'Ali- (a.s.) killed him; then Abu
Sa'id ibn Abi Talhah took the standard and 'Ali killed him. The standard
fell down. Then Musafi' ibn Abi Talhah took it but 'Ali killed him too
until he killed nine people from Banu 'Abdu 'd-Dar. Finally their
standard was taken up by a black-slave of theirs, Sawfib by name. 'All
reached him and cut off his right hand; he took the standard in his left
hand; 'All struck at it and cut it off too, but he embraced it to his
chest with his two amputated hands. Then he turned towards Abu Sufyfin
and said: 'Have I absolved Banu 'Abdu 'd-Dar from blame? ' Then 'Ali
struck at his head and killed him. The standard fell down; then Ghamrah
bint 'Alqamah al-Kinaniyyah took and raised it.

"Khalid ibn Walid came down to 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr — and his
companions had fled leaving him with a few persons. (Khalid) killed (all
of) them at the mouth of the pass, and then attacked the Muslims from
behind. Quraysh were fleeing away when they saw their standard raised
again, and they gathered around it, and the companions of the Messenger
of Allah suffered utter defeat. They started climbing the mountains
helter-skelter.

"When the Messenger of Allah saw the rout, he removed the helmet from
his head and called (them, saying): 'Come to me; I am the Messenger of
Allah; come to me; where are you running away from Allah and His
Apostle?' Hind bint 'Utbah was in the middle of the (Quraysh's) army;
whenever any Qurayshite fled, she offered him a kohl-stick and a
kohl-container, telling him: 'You are but a woman, better use this
kohl.'

"Hamzah ibn 'Abdi 'I-Muttalib was attacking the enemy. When they saw
him, they fled; none stood against him. Hind had promised Wahshi that if
he killed Muhammad or 'Ali or Hamzah, she would give him so-and-so much.
(Wahshi was an Ethiopian slave of Jubayr ibn Mut'im). Wahshi said: 'As
for Muhammad, I was unable (to harm) him; and as for 'Ali, I found him
on his guard, always looking (all around him), so there was no hope of
getting at him; therefore, I decided to ambush Hamzah. I saw him
knocking the people down, destroying them. Then he passed by me, stepped
on an undercut bank of a stream and fell down; I took my spear, shook it
(taking aim) and threw it to him; it pierced his waist and came out
between his legs (pubic region); then I went to him, ripped his stomach
open, took out his liver and brought it to Hind; I said to her, "This is
Hamzah's liver." She put it into her mouth trying to chew it. But Allah
made it in her mouth like a knee-cap, so she took it out and threw it.'
(The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said: 'Allah sent an angel who took
it and returned it to its place.') Wahshi said: 'Then I came (back) to
him, and I cut his genitals, removed his ears and amputated his hands
and legs.'

"There remained no one with the Messenger of Allah except Abu Dujanah
Simfik ibn Kharashah and 'Ali. Whenever any group attacked the Messenger
of Allah, 'Ali faced them and repulsed them; (it continued) until his
sword was broken; then the Messenger of Allah gave him his sword, Dhu
'l-Fiqar. The Messenger of Allah retired to a side of Uhud and stood
there; and 'Ali continued fighting them so (valiantly) that he had got
seventy wounds on his head, face, body, belly and legs—as narrated by
'Ali ibn Ibrahim in his at-Tafsir. Thereupon, Jibrial said: 'Verily,
this is indeed the support, O Muhammad!' Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) replied;
'Surely he is from me and I am from him.' Jibril said: 'And I am from
you two.' "

Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) said: "The Messenger of Allah looked at Jibrial
(sitting) on a golden chair between the heaven and the earth, and he was
saying: 'There is no sword except Dhul 'l-Fiqar, and there is no hero
except 'Ali. ' " (Majma'u 'I-bayan )

al-Qummi narrates: "There (also) remained with the Messenger of Allah
Nasibah bint Ka'b al-Maziniyyah — and she used to go with the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in his battles to treat the wounded—and her son was
with her. He wanted to retreat and go back (to Medina); but she attacked
him and said: 'O my son, where are you fleeing from Allah and His
Messenger?' Thus she made him come back. Then a man attacked and killed
him. Thereupon, she took her son's sword and attacked that man, and
striking at his thigh she killed him. The Messenger of Allah said (to
her): 'May Allah bless you, O Nasibah.' She was protecting the Messenger
of Allah with her chest and breasts until she was extensively wounded.

"Ibn Qami'ah attacked the Messenger of Allah; and he had said: 'Show me
Muhammad. May I be damned if he gets away (from me).' Then he hit (the
Messenger of Allah) on his shoulder and cried: l have killed Muhammad,
by al-Lat and al-'Uzza.' " (at- Talsir )

The author say: There are some other traditions about the events of
Uhud, some of them disagree with this one in some details. For example:
a) This tradition gives the number of the polytheists as five thousand,
while most of the traditions say three thousand. b) It says that it was
'Ali (a.s.) who killed all the nine standard-bearers of the enemy. Other
traditions support it; and Ibnu 'l-Athir has narrated it in his history,
al-kenil, from Abu Rafi'. But another group of narrations attributes
slaying of some of them to some others. But meditation on these events
supports what the present tradition says.

c) It says that it was Hind who made a covenant with Wahshi regarding
the murder of Hamzah. Some Sunni narrations say that' it was not Hind
but Wahshi's master, Jubayr ibn Mut'im, who had entrusted this task to
Wahshi, promising to emancipate him on his slaying Hamzah. But the fact
that Wahshi had taken Hamzah's liver, not to Jubayr, but to Hind,
supports the present tradition.

d) This tradition says that all Muslims had fled away, except 'Ali and
Abu Dujanah. It is agreed upon by almost all traditions. But some other
narrations add some more names, and if you add all the names it would
appear that there had remained about thirty persons with the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.). But those traditions cancel each other. If you
ponder on the events and the circumstantial evidence, the truth will
become clear to you. You should not forget that these stories and
traditions are a sort of witness for various tendencies — for and
against — and have passed through many bright and dark strata before
reaching us.

e) This tradition says that Allah sent an angel who returned Hamzah's
liver to its place. This statement is not found in most of the
traditions. A different version is found in some other narrations. For
example, (the author of) ad-Durru'l-manthur, narrates from Ibn Abi
Shaybah, Ahmad and Ibn al-Mundhir from Ibn Mas'ud, inter alia, in a
hadith that he said: "Then Abu Sufyan said: 'There was some mutilation
of the people (i.e.- of Muslim martyrs), although it was not done by the
majority of us. Neither I ordered it nor forbade it; neither I liked it
nor disliked it; neither it pleased me nor displeased me.' " (Ibn
Mas'ud) said: "Then they looked, and there was Hamzah with his belly
ripped open. Hind took his liver and chewed it, but she could not eat
it. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) asked: 'Did she eat any part of
it?' They said: 'No.' (The Messenger of Allah) said: 'Allah could not
allow any part of Hamzah to enter the Fire.' "

Traditions, both ours and others', say that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) was seriously wounded that day; there was skull fracture in
his forehead, and his incisors were broken and middle incisor damaged. .
.

Ibn Ishaq, 'Abd ibn Hamid, Ibn Jarir and Ibn al-Mundhir narrate from
Ibn Shahab, Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Hayyan, 'Asim ibn 'Amr ibn Qatadah
and al-Hasin ibn 'Abdi 'r-Rahman ibn 'Amr ibn Sa'd ibn Mu'adh and others
— all have narrated some of the events of the battle of Uhud: They have
said: "When Quraysh suffered on the day of Badr, and the scattered
remnants of their army reached Mecca, and Abu Sufyan too returned with
his trade - caravan, then 'Abdullah ibn Abi Rabi 'ah, 'Ikrimah ibn Abi
Jahl and Safwan ibn Umayyah together with some other Qurayshites (whose
fathers, sons and/or brothers were killed in Badr), went to him. They
talked with Abu Sufyan and all those who had any trade-goods in that
caravan and suggested (as follows): 'O people of Quraysh, surely
Muhammad has aggrieved you and killed your best personalities.
Therefore, help us with this wealth to fight against him, in order that
we may take revenge of our casualties from him.' They did so. Then the
Quraysh resolved to fight the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), and came
out with the flower of their army. They also took their women with them
for their protection and also in order that they would not flee (from
the battle-ground). Abu Sufyan came out at the head of the army. They
proceeded until they came down at 'Aynayn—a mountain in the depth of
as-Sanjah on a canal in the valley adjoining Medina.

"When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the Muslims heard about the
polytheists that they had come down where they did, the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) said: 'I have seen (in dream) a cow slaughtered, and
saw the tip of my sword jagged, and saw that I had put my hand in an
invulnerable coat of mail, and I interpreted it (to mean) Medina.
Therefore, if you think (it advisable), you should stay inside Medina
and leave them where they have come down; then if they stayed (there)
they would be staying in the worst place, and if they entered (our City)
we should fight them in it.'

"The Quraysh occupied their position at Uhud on Wednesday, and stayed
there on Thursday and Friday. The Messenger of Allah proceeded after
praying the Friday-prayer and reached the mountain-pass of the Uhud. The
two (forces) met on Saturday, 15th Shawwal, the third year (of
hijrah).

" 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy agreed with the opinion of the Messenger of Allah
that they should not go out to meet the enemy; and the Messenger of
Allah disliked going out of Medina. But some Muslims — some from among
those whom Allah later honoured with martyrdom in Uhud, and some others
who had missed the battle of Badr and were not present on that occasion
— said: 'O Messenger of Allah, come out with us against our enemies, so
that they should not think that we were afraid of them or felt weaker.'
'Abdullah ibn Ubayy said: 'O Messenger of Allah, stay inside Medina and
do not go out to meet them. Because, by God, we never went out of it to
meet an enemy of us but he bested us, and never did an enemy enter
Medina to fight us but we vanquished them. Therefore, let them be, O
Messenger of Allah; then if they stayed they would stay with difficulty;
and if they entered (the City) even the women, children and men would
fight them with stones from above (the roofs); and if they returned,
they would return disappointed as they had come.'

"But the people were still urging the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) (to
proceed out of Medina) — these were the people who wanted to fight
against the enemy. (This continued) until the Messenger of Allah entered
(his house) and wore his cuirasses — and it was on Friday after the
prayer — then he came out to (the companions). In the meantime the
people regretted (their persistence) and said (to the Prophet): ' We
have compelled the Messenger of Allah and it was not good of us.
Therefore you may sit back if you wish.' The Messenger of Allah said: '
It is not proper for a prophet — once he has put on his cuirasses — to
remove them without waging the war.'

"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) came out with one thousand of his
companions. When they were proceeding between Medina and Uhud, 'Abdullah
ibn Ubayy went back with one-third of the people, (leaving the Prophet).
The Messenger of Allah proceeded on. When he was passing through the
story field of Banu Harithah, a horse whisked its tail which caught the
sword-tip (of the rider) and pulled it out. The Messenger of Allah (who
liked good omens but did not believe in bad ones) said to the owner of
the sword:: 'Gather your sword, because I find that swords will surely
be drawn today.' The Messenger of Allah went on until he came down at
the mountain-pass of the Uhud from the run of the valley to the
mountain. He kept Uhud at his back, and took position for the battle —
and there were seven hundred persons with him.

"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) gave the command of the archers —
and they were fifty in number—to 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr, and said to him:
'Protect us from the mountain (side) by arrow, so that they do not come
to us from our behind; you stay at your place, no matter the battle goes
against us or for us; (because) we shall be attached from your side.'
The Messenger of Allah was wearing two coats of mail." (ad-Durru
'I-manthur)

Ibn Jarir narrates from as-Suddi in a hadith, enter alia: "The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) proceeded to Uhud with one thousand men.
He had promised them victory if they would remain patient. Then
'Abdullah ibn Ubayy returned back with three hundred persons. Abu Jabir
as-Salami persued them to call them back; but they thwarted his efforts
and said to him: 'We do not know how to fight; and if you listen to us
you too should come back (to Medina) with us.' " (ibid.)

as-Suddi said about the words: When two parties from among you had
determined that they should show cowardice: "They were Banu Salmah and
Banu Harithah who wanted to return when 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy went back,
but Allah protected them; and the Messenger of Allah remained with seven
hundred men." ( ibid.)

The author says: These were two clans from among the Helpers: Banu
Salmah from the Khazraj and Banu Harithah from the Aws.

Ibn Abi Ishaq, as-Suddi, al-Waqidi, Ibn Jarir and others have narrated:
"The polytheists reached Uhud on Wednesday in Shawwal, 3 A.H., and the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) proceeded to meet them on Friday; and the
battle took place on Saturday, 15th Shawwal. The incisors of the
Messenger of Allah were broken and his face was wounded. Then the
Emigrants and the Helpers returned after fleeing away; and seventy of
the Muslims were martyred. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) stood firm
accompanied by those who had remained with him until he removed (the
enemies). The polytheists had mutilated a group (of martyrs), but Hamzah
was mutilated worst of all." (Majma 'u 'l-bayan)

The author says: There is a great number of traditions about the events
of Uhud. We have narrated, and shall narrate later, only a few of them,
on which depends understanding of the verses revealed on this subject.
These verses throw light on its various aspects:

Some deal with the cowardice of those who retreated or disagreed with
each other or wanted to return to Medina cowardly. Others admonish and
censure those who had fled leaving the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in
the thick of the battle - although Allah had forbidden them to do so.

Still others praise those who were martyred before the others had fled,
and those who bravely stood firm and did not leave the Prophet, and
continued to fight till their last breath. Lastly, there are verses
extolling those who steadfastly continued to fight till the end of the
battle but were not martyred.


