Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 190-199
=========================================

Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men of
understanding (190). Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and
lying on their sides and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the
earth: "Our Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain! Glory be to Thee;
save us then from the chastisement of the Fire (191). Our Lord! surely
whomsoever Thou makest enter the Fire, him Thou hast indeed brought to
disgrace, and there shall be no helpers for the unjust (192). Our Lord!
surely we heard a crier calling to the faith, saying: 'Believe in your
Lord '; so we did believe; Our Lord! forgive us therefore our faults,
and cover our evil deeds and make us die with the righteous (193).

Our Lord! and grant us what Thou hast promised us by Thy messengers and
disgrace us not on the Day of Resurrection; surely Thou cost not break
the promise" (194). So their Lord accepted their prayer: "That I will
not waste the work of a worker among you, whether male or female, the
one of you being from the other; they, therefore, who emigrated, and
were turned out of their homes, and were persecuted in My way, and
fought, and were slain, I will most certainly cover their evil deeds,
and I will most certainly make them enter gardens beneath which rivers
flow"; a reward from Allah, and with Allah is yet better reward (195).
Let it not deceive you that those who disbelieve go to and from in the
cities (fearlessly) (196). A brief enjoyment! then their abode is hell,
and evil is the resting-place (197). But as to those who fear (the wrath
of) their Lord, they shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow,
abiding in them; and entertainment from their Lord, and that which is
with Allah is best for the righteous (198). And most surely of the
followers of the Book there are those who believe in Allah and (in) that
which has been revealed to you and (in) that which has been revealed to
them, humbling themselves before Allah; they do not sell the signs of
Allah for a small price; these it is that have their reward with their
Lord; surely Allah is quick in reckoning (199).

**COMMENTARY**

The verses give the resume of the conditions of the believers; the
polytheists and the People of the Book as represented in this chapter.
They explain the characteristics of the righteous believers that they
always remember Allah and reflect on His signs; they seek Allah's
protection from His chastisement and beseech for His forgiveness and the
Garden; and that Allah has accepted their prayers and will surely give
them what they have asked for. This is the general condition of the
believers. As for the unbelievers, although they fearlessly roam the
earth, but it is a brief enjoyment; and soon they will abide in the
Hell-fire. One should not compare the believers with them. The only
exception is of those People of the Book who have left their evil ways
to follow the truth - they are with the believers.

QUR'AN: Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and
the alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men of
understanding:

Most probably, the word, "creation", here has a comprehensive
connotation, denoting as to how these things came into being, what are
their characteristics, properties and other concomitants like movement
and stillness, changes and variations. In that case, the creation of the
heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day would
encompass all the great phenomena of creation. Its explanation has been
given in the chapter of The Cowl; so has also the meaning of the "men of
understanding"

QUR'AN: Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on
their sides and reflect on the creation of the. heavens and the earth:

That is, they remember Allah in every condition - whether they are
standing, sitting or lying down. We have earlier explained the meaning
of "remembrance" and "reflection". The gist of the two verses is as
follows:

Observation of the signs of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day has made them remember Allah
continuously and at all times; they never forget Him in any situation.
Also that observation has led them to reflection and meditation on the
creation of the heavens and the earth; through it they remember that
Allah will surely raise them again for awarding the recompense;
therefore, they ask from Allah His mercy and beseech Him to fulfill His
promise.

QUR'AN: "Our Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain! . .:

The demonstrative pronoun used here is "hadha" (this) which is singular
and masculine, although the things referred to are plural and feminine.
It is because the speakers are not concerned with particular names or
distinct identification of each and every item; they look at the whole
as a single creation.

It is the same style that has been used in 6:78, where Ibrahim (a.s.)
is quoted as saying: Then when he saw the sun rising, he said: "This is
my Lord; this is greater!" (In this verse, where Allah describes the
rising and setting of the sun, the feminine words have been used — as is
normally done. But Ibrahim is reported to use masculine pronouns and
words for it. Ibrahim did so) because at that time he was completely
unaware of its name or its characteristics—except that it was a "thing",
(and "thing" in Arabic is masculine).

"al-Batil " (untrue, futile, vain) is that which has no purpose, no
aim. Allah says: then as for the scum, it passes away as a worthless
thing; and as for that which profits the people it remains in the earth
(13:17). That is why when they realized that the creation was not in
vain, they understood that Allah would surely gather the people for
recompense; and that at that time Allah would mete out to the unjust
people a disgraceful punishment, i.e., the Hell. They also knew that
there was none who could ward off the underlying principle of
chastisement; otherwise, the creation would be in vain. It is the
connotation of their prayer:

"save us then from the chastisement of the Fire: Our Lord! surely
whosoever Thou makest to enter the Fire, him Thou hast indeed brought to
disgrace; and there shall be no helpers for the unjust".

QUR'AN: "Our Lord! surely we heard a crier calling to the faith,
saying:

'Believe in your Lord '. . . ": The crier or caller refers to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). The clause, "saying: Believe", describes
the cry or call; "an " (translated here as, saying) is explicative. They
affirm before Allah that they have believed in the crier, i.e., the
Messenger. He has brought to them news of many things from Allah; some
of which he has warned them against, e.g., sins, faults, death in
infidelity and transgression; and some others he has exhorted them to do
or seek, e.g., forgiveness, mercy, details of the Garden (which Allah
has promised his believing and righteous servants).

Therefore, they pray to their Lord to forgive them, to cover their
faults, and to make them die with His righteous servants. Also, they ask
Him to fulfill His promise to them — the Garden and the mercy —which the
messengers have guaranteed to them by Allah's permission. Thus they
said: "forgive us therefore our faults..."; 'ala rusulika (translated
here as, by Thy messengers) literally means, 'on Thy messengers'; i.e.,
the promise which Thou didst give to Thy messengers, and they guaranteed
it to us on Thy behalf; "and disgrace us not", i.e., by not fulfilling
the promise; it is because of this implication that the verse ends on,
"surely Thou cost not break the promise".

These verses clearly show that those believers acquired the belief in
Allah and the hereafter and believed that Allah had been sending His
messengers - they got these beliefs by reflecting on the signs of Allah.
As for the details of that which the Prophet had brought, they learned
them by believing in the Prophet. They, thus, follow the nature in that
which may be known by reflecting on the nature and creation; and in
other matters they accept and obey what they are told by the Prophet.

QUR'AN: So their Lord accepted their prayer. . .:

Using the word, 'Lord', and relating it to them ("their Lord") points
to the quickening intensity of the divine mercy. Also the unrestricted
sentence, "I will not waste the work of a worker among you ", points to
this reality. There is no discrimination between one work and the other,
nor between one worker and another.

The next sentence (that branches out from the above), i.e., "they,
therefore, who emigrated, and were turned out of their homes, and were
persecuted in My way, and fought, and were slain . . . ", aims at
describing some good deeds for the description of their reward. The
conjunctive ("and") have been used for enumeration only, not for
combination; otherwise the described reward would be reserved for only
those Emigrants who were martyred and combined all these attributes.

Even then, the verse mentions only those virtues and deeds which this
chapter exhorts the believers to acquire and do, which it puts utmost
emphasis on, i.e., giving preference to religion over one's home town or
country, patiently bearing the troubles in the way of Allah and fighting
in the cause of religion.

Apparently, emigration encompasses all types of fleeing, be it from
polytheism, or family, or home. This may be inferred from three factors:
1) The word used, "emigrated", is unrestricted and unqualified; 2) it is
followed by the phrase, "and were turned out of their homes", which
denotes a particular type of emigration and it shows that the former
refers to all types of "going out"; and 3) it is followed later by the
clause,

"I will most certainly cover their evil deeds"; in the Qur'anic
language the word, as-sayyi 'at (evils; evil deeds) is apparently used
for small and minor sins; it means that they have already fled from
major sins earlier through abstaining or repenting from them. All this
shows that the emigration or fleeing mentioned here is more
comprehensive. (Try to understand it.)

QUR'AN: "Let it not deceive you. . . in the cities (fearlessly):

It purports to remove a possible misunderstanding. The meaning: This is
the condition and reward of the righteous believers. But as for the
unbelievers, you should not be deceived by their affluence and opulence,
their luxurious life and abundant riches (the pronoun, being singular,
addresses the Prophet, but the talk is actually meant for the ears of
the other people); after all, it is but a brief enjoyment which has no
permanence.

QUR'AN: But as to those who fear (the wrath of) Allah. . . is best for
the righteous:

"an-Nuzul" (food, drink and other things served to a guest; here it has
been translated as "entertainment"). The phrase, "those who fear (the
wrath of) Allah", refers to the righteous, as may be understood from the
last clause of the verse. It supports what we have written above that
the verse, "Let it not deceive you... the resting place", aim at
removing an unspoken but possible misunderstanding.

QUR'AN: And most surely of the followers of the Book. . . quick in
reckoning:

It means that they, like other believers, will get the better reward.
It purports to affirm that the next life's happiness is not reserved to
any particular nation or tribe - so that the People of the Book would be
debarred from it even if they believed. Rather, it depends on believing
in Allah and His messengers. Therefore if they accept true belief, they
will become eligible to the hereafter's reward like other believers.

This verse praises these People of the Book in a special manner. It
removes from them all those evil traits for which the preceding verses
had been condemning other Jews and Christians - differentiating between
the messengers of Allah, hiding what they had made a covenant with Allah
to make known, and selling Allah's signs and communications for a small
price.


