Volume 7: Surah An-nisaa, Verses 2-6
====================================

And give to the orphans their property, and do not substitute worthless
9things) for (their) good (ones), and do not devour their property (as
an addition) to your own property; this is surely a great crime (2). And
if you fear that you can not act equitable towards orphans, then marry
such (other) women as seem good to you, two and three and four; but if
you fear that you will not do justice (between them), then (marry) only
one or what your right hands possess; this is nearer that you may not
deviate from the right course (3). And give women their dowries as free
gift but if they of themselves be pleased to give up to you a portion of
it, then eat it with enjoyment (and with) wholesome (result) (4). And do
not give away your property which Allah has made for you a (means of)
support to the weak of understanding, and maintain them out of it, and
clothe them and speak to them with kind words (5). And test the orphans
until they reach (age of) marriage, then if you find in them maturity of
intellect, make over to them their property, and do not consume it
extravagantly and hastily, lest they attain to full age; and whoever is
rich, let him abstain altogether, and whoever is poor, let him eat
reasonably; then when you make over to them their property, call
witnesses in their presence; and Allah is enough as a Reckoned (6).

**GENERAL COMMENT**

The verses are part of the prologue, which began with the first verse.
The aim is to pave the way for the laws of inheritance and basic rules
of marriage like the number of wives allowed and the women within
prohibited degree. These two are among the greatest and most important
laws governing human society; and they have profound effect on its
formation and continuation. Matrimony controls affinity and genealogy of
society members, and deeply affects other constituent factors.
Inheritance regulates the distribution of wealth existing in the world -
the factor on which a society depends for its life and continuity.

As a sine qua non the chapter prohibits fornication and illicit sexual
relations, and forbids devouring others' property unlawfully - except
that it is a trade deal with the parties' consent. In this way two
fundamental principles have been established for regulating the two most
important aspects of society, i.e., the subjects of affinity and
property.

We may now understand why it was necessary to prepare the minds before
promulgating the laws for these subjects which concerned the whole
society and which were enmeshed with the roots of the social system. It
is really not an easy thing to divert the people from the social norms
which they are accustomed to and which have nurtured their ideas and
ideals; to make them discard the systems which they grew up believing
in, and which the generations of ancestors had sanctified by faithful
adherence; to cast off the customs and traditions which had molded their
character and outlook.

It was in this difficult situation that the laws revealed at the
beginning of this chapter were promulgated. It may easily be appreciated
if we look just briefly at the world's situation at that time, and
particularly at the condition of Arabia - the place of the revelation of
the Qur'an and rise of Islam. Also, it will make it clear why the Qur'an
was sent down piecemeal, and why the Islamic laws were promulgated
gradually.

**COMMENTARY**

QUR'AN: And give to the orphans their property . . . a great crime:

It is an order to return to the orphans their property, and it paves
the way for the next two sentences (and do not substitute. . .. and do
not devour. . .); or the latter two serve as explanation of the former.
But as the reason given at the end (this is surely a great crime) refers
to the latter two or the last one sentence, it supports the view that
the first sentence is put here as a prologue to the next two.

The main prohibition that one should not use an orphan's property in a
manner detrimental to his interest, in itself prepares the ground for
the soon-coming laws of inheritance, and of the marriage described in
the next verse.

The words, "and do not substitute worthless for good", mean: Do not
substitute your worthless things for their good ones; if there is any
good property belonging to them, you should not keep it for yourself
returning to them some worthless property of yours in exchange. Some
people have explained it as follows: Do not substitute unlawful things
for lawful ones. But the former meaning is more obvious, because
apparently the two sentences (do not substitute. . ., and do not devour.
. .) describe a particular type of unlawful management, and the first
sentence (And give the orphans. . .) paves the way for both. In the last
clause, "this is surely a great crime ", al-hub (sin; crime) is
infinitive verb and also verbal noun.

QUR'AN: And if you fear that you cannot act equitably towards orphans,
then marry such (other) women as seem good to you:

We have mentioned previously that there was always a great number of
orphans among the Arabs of the era of ignorance— who were seldom free
from war, fighting, murder and forays, and among whom death by killing
was a very common occurrence. Usually, the leaders of tribes and people
of power and influence took the orphan girls (with properties) as wives;
they devoured their (i.e., the orphans') properties with their own and
then behaved with them unjustly. Often they turned them out after
swallowing their property; the helpless girls became poverty stricken
destitute; neither they had any money to live on, nor was there anyone
willing to marry and maintain them. The Qur'an has reproached them very
severely for this evil habit and disgusting injustice, and prohibited
very strongly doing any injustice to orphans or devouring their
property. For example, Allah says:

(As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly, surely
they only swallow fire into their bellies and soon they shall enter
burning fire (4:10).

And give to the orphans their property, and do not substitute worthless
(things) for (their) good (ones), and do not devour their property (as
an addition) to your own property; this is surely a great crime (4:2).

As a result, the Muslims reportedly became afraid for their own souls
and were so panic-stricken that they turned out the orphans from their
own homes in apprehension, lest they inadvertently do something wrong
with those orphans' property or fail to give them their just dues. If
someone kept an orphan with him, he set apart the orphan's share in food
and drink; if the orphan could not finish it, nobody else would touch it
— it remained as it was until it was spoiled.

It caused difficulties for the people; and they complained to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) asking for his guidance. Then Allah
revealed: And they ask you concerning the orphans. Say: "To set right
for them (their affairs) is good; and if you mingle with them, they are
your brethren; and Allah knows the mischief-maker from the well doer;
and if Allah had willed, He would certainly have made it harder for you;
surely Allah is Mighty, Wise" (2:220). Thus, Allah allowed them to give
shelter to orphans and to keep them with themselves for looking after
their affairs, and to mingle with them because they were their brethren.
In this way, their difficulties were removed and their worries
dispelled.

When you ponder on this fact, and then look at the verse under
discussion (And if you fear that you cannot act equitably towards
orphans, then marry such (other) women as seem good to you. . .) - and
remember that it comes after the verse, "And give to the orphans their
property. . . " - it will be clear to you that the verse raises the
prohibition a degree higher. Its connotation will be as follows - and
Allah knows better: Be careful regarding the orphans and do not
substitute your bad or worthless property with their good ones; nor
should you devour their property with your own; so much so that if you
are afraid that you would not be able to treat the orphan girls
equitably and therefore you do not like to take them as your wives, then
better do not marry them; instead you should marry other such women as
seem good to you - two, three or four.

The conditional sentence (And if you fear that you cannot act equitably
towards orphans, then marry such (other) women as seem good to you. .
.), actually means: If you do not like to marry the orphan girls because
you fear that you cannot act equitably towards them, then do not marry
them, and marry such women as seem good to you. Obviously the clause,
"then marry . . . " is substitute of the real al-jaza' (second construct
of the conditional sentence), (i.e., then do not marry the orphans);

the clause, "such women as seem good to you ", makes further
description (i.e., women other than the orphans) unnecessary. The verse
does not say, those women who seem good to you; instead it says: such
women as seem good to you; it is because it points to the number
mentioned later: two and three and four. The verse begins with the
clause, "if you fear that you cannot act equitably ", while it actually
means, if you do not like to marry the orphans because of fear; thus it
has allegorically put the cause in place of the effect, pointing to the
deleted effect later where it says: "as seem good to you".

Many other things have been written in explanation of this verse, as
may be seen in bigger exegeses. They are in short as follows:

1.The Arabs used to marry four, five or more wives; their thinking was
as follows: Why should I not marry as has Mr. X done? When his own
property was finished, he spent the property of orphans under his care.
Therefore, Allah forbade them to marry more than four wives, so that
they should not be compelled by circumstances to unjustly use the
orphans' property.

2.They were strictly honest in matters affecting the orphans, but did
not observe the same standard in affairs of women; so they married
numerous wives without maintaining equity and justice. Therefore, Allah
said: If you are afraid about orphans, you should likewise be careful
about women; you should marry only one or up to four.

3.They were reluctant to accept guardianship of orphans or to eat their
property. So Allah said: If you are reluctant of these things, you
should also desist from fornication; instead you should marry such women
as seem good to you.

4.If you fear that you cannot act equitably towards the orphans brought
up under your care, then marry other lawful women from the orphans among
your relatives, two and three and four.

5.If you are reluctant of eating together with orphans, then likewise
avoid marrying more than one wife; if you are afraid of not acting
equitably with them, do not marry except her whom you can treat with
justice and equity.

These were the explanations given by them. But it is clear that none of
them properly fits the wordings of the verse. Therefore the only
interpretation is the one we have written.

QUR'AN: two and three and four:

the paradigms, maf'al and fu'al , when applied to numbers, signify
repetition of the root word; thus the clause, mathna wa thulatha wa
ruba'a, means, two two and three three and four four (or twos, threes
and fours). The verse is addressed to all individuals, and the numbers
have been separated by "and " which implies choice; these factors
together show that every believer has a right to marry two wives, or
three, or four. When looked at together, they would be grouped as twos,
threes and fours.

The above explanation, coupled with the next clause, but if you fear
that you will not do justice (between them) then (marry) only one or
what your right hands posses, together with the following verse, And all
married women. . .(4:247), disproves the idea that the verse allows to
marry two, three or four wives in one contract of marriage; or that it
permits to marry two together, then two together and so on, and likewise
three or four together, then other three or four together; or that it
approves polyandry — marriage of several men with one woman. These are
ideas, which the verse does not tolerate at all.

Apart from that, it is a self-evident truth that Islam does not allow a
man to gather more than four wives at a time, or a woman to have more
than one husband at a time.

Likewise, there is no room for the hypothesis that the word, "and",
between the numbers, is for conjunction, and that the verse accordingly
allows marrying nine (i.e., 2 + 3 + 4) wives at a time. Majma'u'l-bayan
says as follows: Using the total in this manner is not a possibility at
all. If someone says, "The people entered the town in twos, threes and
fours", does not mean the total of these numbers — in other words, it
does not imply that they entered in-groups of nine. Moreover, there is a
proper word, "nine", to denote that number; so leaving the correct word
and changing it to 'two and three and four', shows an incapability of
proper expression — Too exalted and sanctified is His speech from such
defects.

QUR'AN: but if you fear that you will not do justice (between them)
then (marry) only one:

That is, marry only one, not more. Allah has made this order
conditional on fear, not on knowledge, because knowledge in such matters
is usually difficult to achieve, especially when thought is clouded by
temptation; the underlying benefit would be lost if the rule were made
dependent on knowledge.

QUR'AN: or what your right hands possess:

That is, slave-girls. If a man is afraid that he will not do justice
between many wives, then he should marry only one; and if he wants more,
then he should take slave-girls, because they are not entitled to
division of nights.

Obviously, the provision of the alternative — taking the slave girls —
does not mean that one may misbehave with, or do injustice to them;
Allah does not like the unjust, nor is He unjust to His servants. It
only means that it is easier to maintain justice with them because they
are not included in the rule of division of nights. This very reason
shows that this clause refers to taking, and living with them by virtue
of possession, not by marriage; the matter of marrying them has been
described later in the verse: And whoever among you has not within his
power ampleness of means to marry free believing women, then (he may
marry) of those whom your right hands possess from among your believing
maidens. . . (4:25).

QUR'AN: this is nearer, that you may not deviate from the right
course:

"al-Awl" (to deviate from the right course). The law as ordained above
brings you nearer to the point whence you shall not deviate from justice
or transgress the women's rights.

Someone has written that al-'awl means burden; but it is a far-fetched
interpretation, both in word and in meaning. This sentence — which
mentions the underlying reason of this legislation - proves that the
foundation of the marriage laws is laid on justice and equity as well as
on rejection of oppression and usurpation of rights.

QUR'AN: And give women their dowries as a free gift. . . with enjoyment
(and with) wholesome (result):

as-Saduqah, as-sadaqah, as-sadaq and as-sidaq, all mean dowry;
an-nihlah (gift, a thing given freely without bargaining). The
possessive construction, "their dowries", shows that the order to give
dowry to woman is based on the usage prevalent among the people: it was
customary in marriage to reserve for the wife some property or anything
of value as her dowry. Seemingly it has the same position vis-à-vis the
conjugal relationship as the price does vis-à-vis the commodity sold;
and as we shall describe in the forthcoming Academic discourse,
customarily it is the man who proposes and asks for marriage as a buyer
brings the price to the seller and receives the purchased item. In any
case, the verse endorses this prevalent custom.

It was possible to think that the husband was not allowed to use the
dowry at all — even if the wife was pleased with it. Probably it was to
remove that possible misunderstanding that the conditional clause was
added: "but if they of themselves be pleased to give up to you a portion
of it, then eat it with enjoyment (and with) wholesome (result)." The
imperative, "eat it", is qualified with the words, 'with enjoyment and
with wholesome result.' It puts emphasis on the previous sentence
containing basic rule and also shows that the order is elective, not
compulsory.

al-Hana' (being easily digested, being agreeable); it is used for food.
al-Mari, is derived from ar-riyy (quenching of thirst); it has some
connotation regarding drinks as al-hand' does about food, but with one
difference: al-Hana' may be used for food and drink both; but when the
combined phrase, han\`'an mari 'an is used, the former word refers
exclusively to food and the latter to drink.

QUR'AN: And do not give away your property which Allah has made for you
a (means of) support to the weak of understanding:

"as-Safah " (feeble-mindedness; weakness or slightness of
understanding). Probably, its basic meaning was lightness of a thing
which by nature should not be light; thus they say: az-Zamamu 's-saf'ih
(a rein or halter that shakes too much); thawb safih (a badly-woven
cloth); now it is mostly used for lightness of soul, and its implication
varies with context; in worldly affairs, as-safih means feeble-minded,
weak of understanding; in religious context, it means a dissolute
person, one who does not follow religious commandments; and so on.

It is obvious from the verse that one should not spend too much of
feeble-minded persons, should not give them more than is needed for
their necessary expenses. But the context — the verse is among the ones
dealing with orphans' property which is managed and looked after by
guardians — provides a definite association that "the weak of
understanding" refers to the orphans of immature mind; and that "your
property " actually means the orphans' property, although it has been
ascribed to the guardians because of a certain consideration; this
explanation is further supported by the clause, "and maintain them out
of it, and clothe them." If one insists on interpreting the word, "the
weak of understanding", in general terms, then it should be generalized
to include orphans and non-orphans both. Yet the former meaning carries
more weight.

In any case, if the word refers to the orphans of feeble understanding,
then "your property" means the orphans' property; it has been ascribed
to the guardians — whom the verse addresses — keeping in view the fact
that all the property and riches found in the world are for the whole
mankind. Some individuals keep some portions of these riches, and others
some other portions; it is done for general good, on which is based the
principle of ownership and exclusive possessive relationship.

Accordingly, it is necessary for people to grasp this reality and
appreciate that they are all members of a single society, and the whole
property belongs to the whole society. Consequently, it is each one's
responsibility to protect and preserve it, one should not let it be
wasted or squandered by people of weak understanding, nor should it be
left under the management of such persons (like minor children or insane
people) as are not capable of administering it properly. So this is the
significance of the possessive case here; it is not unlike the verse:
And whoever among you has not within his power ampleness of means to
marry free believing women, then (he may marry) of those whom your right
hands possess from among your believing maidens (4:25), as it is known
that the phrase, "your believing maidens", does not refer to the
slave-girls owned by the one who wants to marry them.

The verse contains a general rule ordained for the whole society. The
society is a single entity — or let us say a (legal) personality — that
owns all the riches which Allah has given it for its livelihood, and
with which He has strengthened it. Accordingly, it is the society's
responsibility to manage it and to keep it in good order; it should
invest it in profitable ventures and use the profit for one's sustenance
on a medium scale; it is also obliged to protect it from waste and
loss.

This basic principle gives rise to the rule that the guardians are
obliged to look after, and manage, the affairs of the people of weak
understanding; they should not hand over their wards' property to them,
lest they waste it through mismanagement. The guardians must hold back
the property, manage it profitably and let it grow through earning,
trades and profit-sharing; they should maintain those feeble-minded
wards with its profit and growth - not with its capital. This law has
been laid down, so that the capital is not decreased little by little
until a time comes when the ward is left in wretched poverty without any
means of livelihood.

It appears from the above explanation that the clause, "and maintain
them out of it and clothe them", implies that a feebleminded ward should
be maintained from the growth and profit of the capital, not from the
capital itself. He should not be allowed to start eating from the
capital, keeping it idle without circulation, lest it is eaten up
completely. As az-Zamakhshari has said, it was to show this fine point
that Allah has said, "out of it", and not, 'from it'.

Also it is not unreasonable to infer from the verse the principle of
general guardianship of the wards, that is, Allah is not pleased that
the affairs of such wards be neglected; nay! the Islamic society is
obliged to look after their affairs: If there is any guardian in the
family, like the father and paternal grandfather, he will be his
guardian and will manage his affairs; otherwise the responsibility falls
on the Islamic government, and lastly on other believers, to look after
his affairs - detailed rules of which are given in the books of
jurisprudence.

QUR'AN: and maintain them out of it, and clothe them and speak to them
with kind words:

We have fully explained the meaning of sustenance or maintenance under
the verse: and Thou givest sustenance to whom Thou pleases", without
measure (3:27).

The clause, "and maintain them out of it and clothe them", has the same
significance here as does the one in 2:233: and their maintenance and
their clothing must be borne by the father. The maintenance refers to
the food that nourishes man; and clothing is the dress that protects him
from heat and cold. But the phrase, "maintenance and clothing", as used
in the Qur'anic language (as in our own) metaphorically points to all
the things that together fulfill man's material needs in life; it thus
covers all necessities of life including house and other such things.

It is not unlike the word, eating, which has a particular meaning, yet
metaphorically refers to the use (in general), as the Qur'an says: "but
if they of themselves be pleased to give up to you a portion of it, then
eat it with enjoyment (and with) wholesome (result). "

QUR'AN: and speak to them with kind words:

It is an ethical guidance for improving the standard of guardianship.
The wards may be weak of understanding who are prevented from managing
their own properties, yet they are neither dumb animals nor grazing
cattle; they are human beings, and they should be treated as such; they
should be spoken to in good manner, not harshly or insultingly; and
dealt with, dignity.

Apparently it is possible to take this clause as a metaphorical
expression for good dealing and commendable social intercourse — not
objectionable one, as was explained under the verse: . . . and speak to
men good (words) . . . (2:83).

QUR'AN: And test the orphans until they reach (age of) marriage; then
if you find in them maturity of intellect, make over to them their
property: "al-Ibtila' " (to test); reaching age of marriage, thus it
contains a rational allegory; al-'inas (to see, to find); the word has a
connotation of "friendliness" and "geniality" because its root is al-uns
(friendly atmosphere); ar-rushd (translated here as maturity of
intellect) is opposite of al-ghayy and means to find way to the goals of
life. Handing over to the orphans their property means to give it back
to them, into their possession; (the verb used is ad-daf (to repulse, to
push away); it is as though the guardian pushes the property away from
himself; thus it is in spite of its triteness, a very fine metaphor.

The clause, "until they reach (age of) marriage", is related to the
verb, "test"; it thus shows that the testing should be a continuous
exercise. The guardian should start testing the orphan as soon as he
shows some discretion and appears ready for such tests, it should
continue until he reaches marriageable age and becomes a "man". The
order by nature demands this continual process, because one cannot find
out whether the child has attained maturity of intellect just by testing
him once or twice; the test must be repeated again and again until the
guardian finds out the orphan's maturity of mind and it becomes a part
of his nature until he reaches puberty and then the marriageable age.

The words, "then if you find in them maturity of intellect", branches
from the imperative verb, "And test"; and the meaning is as follows:
Test them, and if you find in them maturity of intellect, hand over
their property to them. The wording shows that the orphan's reaching the
age of marriage is the basis of returning his property to him and of
bestowing on him the power to manage his estate independently. Maturity
of intellect is the necessary condition for bestowal of authority of
independent management.

Islam has laid down two different standards regarding al-bulugh
(majority, adulthood) for two different sets of responsibilities: As for
the acts of worship and matters like penal code the majority begins on
reaching a prescribed age, but for financial affairs, acknowledgements
and other such dealings (details of which are given in the books of
jurisprudence) mere attainment of age is not enough, he must also
achieve maturity of intellect.

This differentiation throws light on the highest refinement and
sophistication, which Islam has maintained in its legislative programs.
Had it disregarded the maturity of intellect in financial and similar
dealings, the social life would have suffered disorder and chaos—as far
as orphans and other wards were concerned. Had they been given power
(just on reaching a certain age) to independently manage their finance
or to make agreements or acknowledgments, etc.; it would have given a
chance to mischief-makers to mislead and deceive them. Cunning hoaxes
could have defrauded them of all their means l of livelihood, with their
smooth talks, false promises and swindling deals.

Therefore, it was essential to impose the condition of maturity of
intellect in such matters. But obviously there was no need to put this
condition in the things like acts of worship, etc.; also it was not
necessary in such affairs as penal code. One does not need sharp mind or
maturity of intellect to understand and perceive the evil of these
crimes and sins or to realize that one should desist from them. Man
understands such things long before attaining maturity of intellect, and
one finds no difference, in these matters, between the perception gained
before maturity of intellect and that achieved afterwards.

QUR'AN: and do not consume it extravagantly and hastily, lest they
attain to full age . . . and Allah is enough as a Reckoned:

"al-Israf" (extravagance, immoderateness) is exceeding the medium
course of action. al-Badar (hurry, haste). The clause, "and hastily,
lest they attain to full age ", means: and hastily fearing that they
would grow up and then would not allow you to consume their property.
(The phrase, "lest they attain", begins in Arabic with an (that) and has
no particle of negation; thus it may also be translated, 'that they
attain'). Omission of particle of negation before an or in (that) is
consistent with norms of language, as grammarians have said: Allah says:
Allah makes clear to you, lest you err (4:176), i.e., fearing that you
would err.

The two phrases, "extravagantly" and "hastily; lest they attain. . .",
have been put parallel to each other. This setting points to their
difference.

Consuming the orphans' property extravagantly refers to the situation
when the guardian eats it without needing or deserving it, unjustly and
carelessly. Consuming it hastily, to the condition where the guardian
takes from the estate only the normal and usual fee for his services,
but with an eye on the possibility that the orphan might stop it when he
grows up.

All such consumption's are forbidden, except when the guardian is poor
and in such a position that either he earns his livelihood somewhere
else or looks after the orphan's affairs and meets his necessities of
life from his ward's estate. It would be just like a worker in trade or
construction, etc. taking his wages from his employer. It is this aspect
which Allah mentions in the sentence: "and whoever is rich" (i.e., is
not in need of taking from the orphan's property for his livelihood).
"let him abstain altogether" (i.e., he should follow and adhere to the
path of abstinence and continence, and should not take anything from the
orphan), "and whoever is poor, let him eat reasonably".

An exegete has opined that it means that the poor guardian should eat
as usual from his own property, not from that of the orphan. But if that
was what Allah had intended to say, then why did He bring in the
difference between rich and poor?

The words, "then when you make over to them their property, call
witnesses in their presence; and Allah is enough as a Reckoned", ordain
the law to call witnesses at the time of handing over the estate to the
wards. It is done to affect the transition in proper way and to remove
the danger of dispute and controversy (in future); lest the orphan —
after attaining maturity and receiving the property — makes claims
against the guardian. The verse ends on the words, "and Allah is enough
as a Reckoned"; and it relates the order to its original and basic
source —the fountainhead of every rule from Allah's names and
attributes.

Allah is the Reckoned; He would not leave His servants' affairs without
meticulously accurate reckoning — and that is His clear legislation.
Also the clause completes the Islamic training, because Islam aims at
training the people on the basis of monotheism. Although calling the
witnesses removes strife and difference in most of the cases, yet
sometimes it fails to do so, either because the witnesses deviate from
justice or because of other factors. Islam reminds the parties that the
spiritual reason (of this law), which is also higher and stronger, is
the fear of Allah Who is enough as a Reckoned. There would never be any
discord and difference, if the guardian, the witnesses and the orphan
(who is receiving the property) keep this reality before their eyes.

Look at these two verses and see how singularly and marvelously they
explain the subject in such a lovely style:

First, they give basic rules of guardianship over orphans' and other
wards' properties; then they explain other important factors: how the
property should be taken in trust and protected, how it should be
managed to let it grow and bring in profits, how it should be returned
to the ward; when the orphans or other wards should be put under
guardianship and when should they be given independent authority to
manage their affairs.

All this has been reinforced by describing its underlying common
benefit, i.e.; all property belongs to Allah Who has made it a means of
support for mankind — as we have explained above.

Second, they point to the basic ethical value which man is expected to
attain through these laws; it is given by Allah in these words: "and
speak to them with kind words".

Third, they show that all these rules are based on the foundation of
monotheism. This factor affects and governs all practical laws and
ethical values; and its good influence remains effective always and
everywhere — even when practical laws and ethical values are enfeebled
and their hold on minds and hearts loosened. This reality is described
in the last clause, "and Allah is enough as a Reckoned"

**TRADITIONS**

Ibn Abi Hatim has narrated from Sa'id ibn Jubayr (about the verse, And
give to the orphans their. . .) that he said: "A man from (the tribe of)
Ghatfan had with him a great wealth of an orphan nephew of his. When the
orphan attained majority, he demanded his property, but (the uncle) held
it back from him. So he (the orphan) sued him before the Prophet; then
the verse was revealed: And give to the orphans their property. . ."
(ad-Durru 'I-manthur)

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "It is not lawful for man's water to flow into
more than four wombs of free women." (at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi ) The same
Imam said: "When a man has gathered four (wives) and divorces one of
them, then he should not marry the fifth until the waiting period of the
woman he has divorced comes to an end." (al-Kafi ) The author says:
There are many traditions on this subject.

It is narrated from Muhammad ibn Sinan that ar-Rida (a.s.) wrote to him
inter alia in reply to his questions: "The reason, why man has right to
marry four women and why woman is forbidden to marry more than one, is
that when a man marries four women, the child would be affiliated to
him; but if a woman had two or more husbands, it would not be known to
whom the child belonged, because all of them (i.e., the husbands) would
be sharing her marriage, and this would lead to perversion in
relationship, inheritance and identification." Muhammad ibn Sinan said:
"One of the reasons of free women (sic) and permission of four women to
one man is that they are more (in number) than men. So when (Allah) saw
it — and Allah knows more — He said: 'then marry such (other) women as
seem good to you, two and three and four.' So this is the determination
which Allah has done, to give amplitude to rich and poor, so that man
may marry according to his ability. . . " ( 'ilalu 'sh-shara 'i')

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said inter alia in a hadith: "And jealousy is (a
characteristic) of men; and for this reason a woman is forbidden (all
men) except her husband, and man is allowed four (wives); because Allah
is too gracious to afflict them with jealousy and then allow the man to
have three (other wives) with her." (al-kafi)

The author says: It may be explained as follows: Jealousy, in the
meaning of sense of honor, is a commendable characteristic and noble
instinct; it changes equilibrium of man's nature, and it is this
emotional agitation that exhorts him to defend what he reveres or holds
dear, be it religion, honor or dignity, and provokes him to take revenge
on anybody who violates its sanctity. This trait is found — more or less
— in every human being, because it is a part of human nature.

Now, Islam is a natural religion. It looks at all the natural instincts
and traits and moderates them, restricting them to what is good for
human life, and omitting that which is not necessary, e.g., the
defective and imperfect ways of obtaining or hoarding the wealth, or
matters connected with food and drink, clothes and spouses, and so on.

Now suppose that Allah allowed man to marry three more wives in
addition to the one he had before — and we know that this religion pays
full attention to the dictates of nature. It follows that what is seen
of a woman's reaction when her husband brings another wife, and the
change that occurs in her attitude towards her husband, is in fact envy,
not jealousy. Further explanation will be given in the forthcoming
discourse on polygamy, to show that this reaction of theirs is not a
part of their nature, it is an extraneous accident.

Zurarah narrates from as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: "The man shall not
take back whatever he gives in gift to his wife, nor shall she do so
regarding whatever she gifts to her husband—whether she was compensated
for it or not. Does not Allah, the Blessed, the High, say: 'and it is
not lawful for you to take any part of what you have given them' (2:
229)? Again He says: 'but if they of themselves be pleased to give up to
you a portion of it, then eat it with enjoyment (and with) wholesome
(result)'; and it is applicable to dowry and gift (both)." (al-Kafi)

'Abdullah ibn al-Qaddah narrates from Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) who narrates
from his Father (a.s.) that he said: "A man came to the Leader of the
faithful (a.s.) and said: 'O Commander of the faithful! I have got
stomach pain.' The Commander of the faithful (a.s.) asked him: 'Do you
have a wife? He said: 'Yes.' He said: 'Ask her to give you in gift
something from her property which she be pleased to give you; then buy
with it some honey; then pour on it some rainwater and drink it.

Because I have heard Allah saying in His Book: "And We send down from
the cloud water abounding in good. . ." (50:9); and He has said: "There
comes forth from within it (i.e., the bee) a beverage of many colors, in
which there is healing for men" (16:69); and He says: "but if they of
themselves be pleased to give up to you a portion of it, then eat it
with enjoyment (and with) wholesome (result)". You will be cured, God
willing."' (The Imam, a.s.) said: "So he did it and was cured."
(at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: Also as-Suyuti has narrated it in ad-Durru 'I-manthur
from 'Abd ibn Humayd, Ibn al-Mundhir and Ibn Abi Hatim from the Imam
(a.s.). It is a fine inference, and is based on extension of meaning.
There are many traditions, based on the same principle, narrated from
the Imams of Ahlu 'I-bayts (a.s.), some of which shall be quoted in
appropriate places.

al-Baqir (a.s.) said: "When I tell you something, ask me (where it is)
in the Book of Allah." Then he said in one of his talks: "Verily the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has forbidden idle talk, spoiling of
property and asking too many questions." He was asked: "Where is it in
the Book of Allah? O Son of the Messenger of Allah!" He said: "Verily
Allah, the Mighty, the Great, says: 'There is no good in most of their
secret talks except (in his) who enjoins charity or goodness or
reconciliation between people (14:114); and He has said: 'And do not
give away your property which Allah has made for you a (means of)
support to the weak of understanding'; and He has said: 'do not put
questions about things which if declared to you, may trouble you'
(5:101)." (al-Kafi)

Yunus ibn Ya'qub said that he asked Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.) about the
words of Allah, And do not give away your property . . . to the weak of
understanding'; he said: "Whom you do not trust." (at-Tafsir,
al-'Ayyashi)

Ibrahim ibn 'Abdu 'I-Hamid said that he asked the same Imam (a.s.)
about the same verse, and he said: "Anyone who drinks intoxicant is weak
of understanding." (ibid).

'Ali ibn Ab; Hamzah narrates from Abu 'Abdillah (a.s.). He says: "I
asked him about the verse, And do not give your property... He replied:
'They are the orphans; do not give them their property until you
recognize maturity of intellect in them.' So I said: 'Then how will
their property become our property? ' He said: 'If you are their heirs.'
" (ibid).

al-Baqlr (a.s.) said about this verse: "So the weak of understanding
are the woman and child. When a man knows that his woman is foolish and
spoils (the property), and his child is foolish and spoils (the
property), he should not give any of them control of his property which
Allah has made for him a support - i.e., a means of livelihood . . . "
(at-Talsir, al-Qummi).

The author says: There are may traditions on this subject, and they
support what we have described earlier that as-safah has a wide range of
meaning, having different grades, like the weak of understanding who is
prevented by law to administer his estate, a child before attaining
maturity of intellect, a woman who is fond of amusement and fantasy, one
who drinks intoxicants, and generally the one whom you do not trust. The
implications of giving the property will change with change of context,
and so will do the possessive case of "your property"; you should apply
the meanings accordingly.

The Imam's words in the tradition of Ibn Abi Hamzah, "If you are their
heirs ", point to the reality we had mentioned earlier that all the
property primarily belongs to the whole society, and then it comes to
individuals and particular interests secondarily; it is because the
whole society primarily shares the property that it is transferred from
one person to another.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "Orphan-hood of an orphan ends with nocturnal
discharge and that is his maturity; and if he got nocturnal discharge,
but no maturity of intellect was found in him — he was foolish or weak —
then his guardian should hold back his property from him. " (Man la
yahduruh 'I -faqih )

The same book narrates from the same Imam (a.s.) about the verse, And
test the orphans. . ., that he said: "To find the maturity of intellect
is protection of property."

The author says: We have described earlier how the verse points to this
meaning.

The same Imam (a.s.) said about the verse, and whoever is poor, let him
eat reasonably: "He is the man who holds back himself from (earning his)
livelihood; there is no harm (for him) in eating (from his ward's
property) reasonably, if he makes (things) better for them (i.e., the
wards); but if the property is small then he should not eat anything
from it." (Tahdhibu 'l-ahkam )

Ahmad, Abu Dawud, an-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah, Ibn Abi Hatim and an-Nahhas (in
his an-Nasikh) have narrated from Ibn 'Umar that he said: "A man asked
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and said: 'I do not have any property,
and I have an orphan (under my guardianship).' (The Prophet) said: 'Eat
from the property of your orphan, (but) not extravagantly nor
wastefully; neither consolidating (your) property, nor protecting your
property with his property.' " (ad-Durru 'I -manthur )

The author says: There are numerous traditions of this theme from the
Ahlu 'I-bayts (a.s.) and others. There are relevant laws of
jurisprudence, and also traditions related to them. Anyone, who wants
them, should look in the collections of traditions and books of
jurisprudence. Rifa'ah narrates from the Imam (a.s.) about the verse, .
.. Iet him eat reasonably, that he said: "My father used to say that it
was abrogated." (at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi)

Abu Dawud and an-Nahhas (both in an-Naisikh ) and Ibn al-Mundhir have
narrated through the chain of 'Ata' from Ibn 'Abbas about the verse, and
whoever is poor, let him eat reasonably, that he said: "It has been
abrogated by (the verse), (As for) those who swallow the property of the
orphans unjustly, surely they only swallow fire into their bellies."
(ad-Durru 'l-manthur)

The author says: The claim that this verse was abrogated does not agree
with the criteria of abrogation. No verse in the Qur'an could stand
vis-à-vis this verse in the way an abrogating verse does with the
abrogated one. The verse, (As for) those who swallow the property of the
orphans unjustly, surely they only swallow fire into their bellies, does
not go against the theme of this verse, because the eating allowed in
this verse is conditional to being "reasonable", while the eating
forbidden in the other verse is conditional to being unjust; and there
is no contradiction between permission to eat reasonably and prohibition
to eat unjustly. Therefore, the truth is that the verse is not
abrogated, and the two above-mentioned traditions are not in agreement
with the Qur'an - it is apart from their weakness.

'Abdullah ibn al-Mughirah narrates from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (peace be
on them both) about the words of Allah, then if you find in them
maturity of intellect, make over to them their property, that he said:
"If you see them loving the progeny of Muhammad, then raise them up in
grade." (at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: It is based on the flow of the Qur'an, of the esoteric
meaning of the Book. The Imams of the religion are the fathers of the
believers; and the believers, when they are unable to reach the Imams,
are orphans of the knowledge. Therefore, if their affiliation to the
Ahlu 'l- bayt is established by their love, they should be raised in
status and degree by teaching them true knowledge - which is the
inheritance of their fathers.


