Volume 7: Surah An-nisaa, Verses 7-10
=====================================

Men shall have a share of what the parents and the near relatives
leave, and women shall have a share of what the parents and the near
relatives leave, whether there is little or much of it; a decreed share
(7). When there are present at the division the relatives and the
orphans and the needy, give them (something) out of it and speak to them
kind words (8). And let those fear who, should they leave behind them
weakly offspring, would fear on their account; so let them fear Allah,
and let them speak right words (9). (As for) those who swallow the
property of the orphans unjustly, surely they only swallow fire into
their bellies and soon they shall enter burning fire (10).

**COMMENTARY**

Now begins the legislation of inheritance laws, after paving the way
for it. These verses give a précis of the said laws in its basic form,
to let the people know that nobody can be deprived of inheritance after
the proof of his birth or relation, as they used to debar minor heirs
and women. Further it warns them against depriving the orphans from
inheritance, as it would result in swallowing by others heirs of the
orphans' share unjustly, and Allah has very severely prohibited it. The
verses also recommend giving something from the estate to relatives,
orphans and poor who, although not included among the heirs, might be
present at the time of dividing the property.

QUR'AN: Men shall have a share. . . a decreed share:

"an-Nasib" (share, portion) is derived from an-nasb (to make something
stand, to lift up, to raise); this name points to the fact that at the
time of division, every share is put separately to prevent its mixing
with the others'. at-Tarikah (the heritage, the property left by the
deceased); it is as though he goes away leaving it; thus initially it
was an allegorical usage, then became common. al-Aqrabun (the nearer
ones) refers to nearer relatives;

choice of this word (of comparative degree) in preference to al-aqriba
(the near ones) and ulu 'l-qurba (relatives), etc., gives an indication
that it is the essential pre-requisite of inheritance that the deceased
should be nearer to the heir, as will be explained under the verse, your
parents and your children, you know not which of them is nearer to you
in usefulness (4:11). al-Fard originally meant to cut a hard thing and
to detach its parts from one another; that is why it is used for
obligatory rules, because to follow and obey it is "determined" without
any doubt; "a decreed share" means a determined and fixed portion or
ratio.

The verse ordains a comprehensive law and legislates a new system,
which was unfamiliar to the people. The people had never known any
system similar to this inheritance law, as ordained in Islam.
Traditionally they used to deprive many heirs of inheritance, and it had
become a second nature to them; so much so that if anything was said
against it, the minds were agitated and feelings hurt.

Islam paved the way for this new system, first by strengthening the
"love in Allah" and giving preference to religion among the believers.
Thus it established "brotherhood" between the believers and then made
one "brother" inherit the other. This wiped out the previous succession
rules, and the believers abandoned the old pride and prejudice. When the
religion became strong and could stand on its feet, this final system of
inheritance between the relatives was introduced - at a time when they
were enough believers to accept this law with open arms.

The above discussion shows that these verse aims at clear description,
and removal of all possible misunderstandings, by giving a fundamental
and comprehensive basis of the law. Thus it says: "Men shall have a
share of what the parents and the near relatives leave." The rule is
general and unrestricted; it is not qualified by any condition,
attribute or other such things. Likewise the subject, i.e., "men", is
general and not qualified in any way; therefore the minors shall inherit
like the adults.

Then it says: "and women shall have a share of what the parents and the
near relatives leave." Like the preceding sentence it is a general
statement, without any shade of restriction; thus it covers all women
without any qualification or condition. The clause, "of what the parents
and the near relatives leave" has been repeated, although it could be
replaced by a pronoun,

the reason is to make the topic as clear as possible. It is followed by
the clause, "whether there is little or much of it"; it makes the matter
even more clear, and shows that there is no room for any indulgence or
negligence in this matter thinking that the deceased's estate was very
small or the value negligible. The verse ends on words, "a decreed
share"; it is a circumstantial clause, related to the preceding word, "a
share", as it contains a connotation of masdar; it gives a double
emphasis and makes the declaration even more clear that the shares are
definitely fixed, and there is no room for any confusion or ambiguity.

It has been proved with this verse that the general law of inheritance
covers the estate of the Prophet as well as of other Muslims, and that
the doctrine of at-ta'sib (giving preference of agnates) is invalid.

QUR'AN: And when there are present. . . kind words:

Apparently the verse refers to these people's presence at the time when
the heirs are dividing the estate among themselves, and not to their
presence near the dying person when he is bequeathing his estate - as
someone has written.

Accordingly, "the relatives ", would refer to the poor among them; it
is also proved from the fact that they have been mentioned with the
orphans and the needy. The tone of the clauses, "give them (something)
out of it and speak to them kind words," obviously exhorts the hearers
to mercy and kindness, and therefore it is addressed to the heirs and
executors of the will.

There is a difference of opinion whether the order given in this verse
(to give those people something from the estate) is obligatory or only a
desirable act. It is a matter of jurisprudence beyond the scope of this
book. Also there is disagreement whether the verse is decisive or has
been abrogated by the verse of inheritance. But the relation between the
two verses is not that of contradiction, because the verse of
inheritance fixes the shares of the heirs, and this verse speaks about
the non-heirs - either as obligation or recommendation - without fixing
any share; therefore there is no ground for saying that it was
abrogated, and especially if the described "giving" is only a
recommendation - as the verse somewhat apparently shows.

QUR'AN: And let those fear. . . speak right words:

Fear is a psychological effect caused by nearness of a somewhat great
danger or evil; as-sadad and as-sadad of a talk means its being right,
correct, straight, relevant.

Probably the verse has a sort of connection with the previous one, "Men
shall have. . .", because that verse with its generality contains the
laws of the orphans' inheritance; now this one in a way is a warning and
a threat to him who wants to follow the old system of depriving small
heirs of inheritance. In that case, the clause, "and let them speak
right words", will be an adverse and unfavorable allusion to their habit
as they did not give any share to, and swallowed the rights of, the
minor orphans.

The allegorical use of "word" for "deed" is very common because of
their mutual association. Allah has said: . . . and speak to men good
(words). . . (2:83). This idea is also supported by the use of the
adjective, "right " for "words " instead of "kind" or "gentle ";
apparently a word may be called right when it can be believed and acted
upon - not when it can only preserve people's dignity and honor.

In any case, the clause, "And let those fear who, should they leave
behind them weakly offspring, would fear on their account", is obviously
a simile to animate and stimulate mercy and compassion for small weakly
children who have lost their guardian and protector (who could have
looked after their welfare and saved them from humiliation and
disgrace).

The implied threat and warning is not directed to only him who may at
the material time be actually having some weakly offspring, it uses the
conjunction law (which as a rule introduces hypothetical conditional
clauses), and does not say, 'should they leave behind their weakly
offspring'. It is rather a simile to present a clear image of the
situation. The connotation therefore would be as follows: Let those fear
who have in their hearts mercy for humanity and compassion and sympathy
for those weakly small children who have lost their fathers and are
orphaned — only such people are real Muslims who are imbued with divine
characteristics and graced with Allah's manners.

In other words: Let those people fear and be afraid of Allah in matters
of the orphans, because they are like their own orphans, small and weak;
the people must fear for them and care for their welfare; these helpless
children should not be oppressed nor their rights usurped. The style is
the same as we say: "Let him who fears dishonor and humiliation, try his
level best to earn his livelihood" — and who does not fear it?

People have not been ordered here to show mercy and compassion, etc.;
they have been told to fear and be afraid of Allah. It is a threat that
whatever they do to other people's orphans by usurping their rights and
swallowing their property unjustly, would befall their own orphans after
them; whatever misfortunes and miseries they cause to others' orphans
would return to their own orphans after their passing away.

As for the clause, 'so let them fear Allah and let them speak right
words", we have already explained that apparently the "words" connotes
practical behavior; also possibly it may mean views ideas and advice.

QUR'AN: (As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans
unjustly, surely they only swallow fire into their bellies and soon they
shall enter burning fire:

The sentences, 'He swallowed it', and, 'He swallowed it into his
belly', both have the same meaning, but the latter is clearer and more
emphatic. This verse too, like the preceding one, is related in theme
with the opening sentence, "Men shall have a share. . ." It threatens
people and deters them from swallowing the orphans' shares of
inheritance.

The verse is one of those which prove embodiment of deeds, as was
explained in the first volume\*, under the verse: Surely Allah is not
ashamed to set forth any parable . . . (2:26) . Perhaps it is this idea
which an exegete had in mind when he wrote that the words, "surely they
only swallow fire into their bellies", have been used in their literal,
not metaphorical, sense.

Another exegete has unjustifiably taken exception to this statement. He
has said: The verb, "they only swallow", is used here as a present, not
future, tense, because the future is described by the subsequent clause,
"and soon they shall enter burning fire". (Note the word, "soon".) Now
if swallowing the fire is taken in its literal meaning — and it is to
happen on the Day of Resurrection — then this sentence too should have
contained the word, "soon". Therefore, the clause is, in fact, used in
allegorical sense and means that in swallowing the orphans' properly
they resemble someone whom swallows fire into his belly.

This is the gist of his objection; but it shows that the objector was
oblivious of the import of embodiment of deeds.

The end clause, "and soon they shall enter burning fire", points to the
chastisement in the hereafter. "as-Sa'ir" (burning fire) is one of the
names of the fire of the hereafter; (yaslawna, translated here as "they
shall enter", is derived from) saliya 'n-nar, yasla, salyan (i.e., he
broiled and burned into fire; he underwent ordeal of fire).

**TRADITIONS**

Majma'u 'I-bayan says about the verse, Men shall have a share of what
the parents and the near relatives leave: "People have two views about
this verse; one is that it is decisive and not abrogated; and this has
been narrated from al-Baqir (a.s.)."

The author says: It is narrated from at-Tafsir of al-Qummi that this
verse was abrogated by the verse, Allah enjoins you concerning your
children . . . But there is no justification for this view. We have
explained in the above Commentary that this verse gives a precis of the
coming inheritance laws; and there is no contradiction at all between
this and the other decisive verses of inheritance, so that it could be
said to have been abrogated.

Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir and Ibn Abi Hatim have narrated from Ikrimah
about this verse: "It was revealed about Umm Kulthum and daughter of Umm
Kuhlah or Umm Kuhhah herself and Tha'labah ibn Aws and Suwayd (all of
them from the Ansar). One was her husband and the other the paternal
uncle of her child. She said: 'O Messenger of Allah! My husband died
leaving me and his daughter, but we were not given anything from his
inheritance.' The uncle of her child said: 'O Messenger of Allah! (How
can she get his inheritance when) she neither rides a horse nor attacks
an enemy, and while she needs others to earn for her and she does not
earn? Then the verse was revealed: Men shall have a share . . . "
(ad-Durru 'I-manthur )

The author says: Some other traditions say that it was revealed about a
man from the Ansar who died leaving two daughters. Then his two cousins
came and they were his agnates (to take his inheritance) . His wife told
them: "Marry these two (girls)" - and they were not beautiful. So they
refused. Then she brought the matter before the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.); then the verses of inheritance were revealed. As we have
repeatedly said, there could be more than one reason for revelation of a
verse.

Majma'u 'I-bayan says about the verse, And when there are present....
"People have two different opinions about this verse; one is that it is
decisive, not abrogated, and it is narrated from al-Baqir (a.s.)."

ash-Shaybani says that the above is narrated from both al-Baqir and
as.-Sadiq (peace be on them ). (Nahju 'I-bayan ) The author says: Some
traditions say that it is abrogated by the verses of inheritance; but we
have mentioned earlier that it is not repealable. Abu 'Abdillah and Abu
'l-Hasan (peace be on them) have said: "Allah has threatened two
punishments concerning the orphan's property: One is the punishment of
the hereafter, (and that is) the fire; and as for the other, it is the
punishment of this world, (and it is) His words: And let those fear who,
should they leave behind them weakly offspring, would fear on their
account; so let them fear Allah and let them speak right words. " (Then)
he said: "He means that he should fear that Allah would requite him in
his offspring as he had done with these orphans. " (at-Tafsir,
al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: A similar tradition is narrated in al-Kafi from
as.-Sadiq (a.s.), and in Ma'ani 'l-akhbar from al-Baqir (a.s.).

'Abdu'l-A'la, mawha (freed-slave) of Al-Sam, says: "Abu 'Abdillah
(a.s.) said (without anybody asking him): 'Whoever does injustice, Allah
shall give someone power over him, who will oppress him; or over his
children or over his grandchildren.' So I thought and said in my heart:
'Injustice is committed by him and someone is imposed on his children
and grandchildren?!'

The Imam then said to me before I could speak: 'Surely Allah says: "And
let those fear who, should they leave behind them weakly offspring,
would fear on their account; so let them fear Allah, and let them speak
right words. " ' " (at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi)

'Abd ibn Hamid has narrated from Qatadah that he said: "We have been
told that the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said: 'Fear Allah regarding to
weaklings: the orphan and the woman; (Allah) made him orphan, then urged
(people) to take care of him; and put him to test, and put (others) to
test through him.' " (ad-Durru 'l-manthur)

The author says: There are a lot of almost mutawatir traditions
narrated through the chains of both sects, in condemnation of swallowing
the orphan's property, showing that it is a major and mortal sin.


