Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 130-138
=========================================

O you who believe! Do not devour interest making it double and
redouble, and fear Allah, that you may be successful (130). And guard
yourself against the fire which ahs been prepared for the unbeliever
(131). And obey Allah and the Messenger, that you may be shown mercy
(132). And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden, the
extensiveness of which is (as) the heavens and the earth; it is prepared
for the pious ones (133). Those who spend (benevolently) in ease as well
as in straitness, and those who restrain (their) anger and forgive men;
and Allah loves the doers of good (to others) (134). And those who when
they commit an indecency or do injustice to their souls remember Allah
and ask forgiveness for their faults and who forgives the faults but
Allah? and (who) do not knowingly persist in what they have done (135).
(As for), these their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and gardens
beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them, and excellent is the reward
of those who act (righteously) (136). Indeed there have been examples
before you; therefore travel in the earth and see what was the end of
the rejecters (137). This is a clear statement for men, and a guidance
and an admonition for the pious ones (138).

**COMMENTARY**

The verses call to the good and restrain from the vice and evil. Yet
they are not without some connection with the preceding and following
verses dealing with the battle of Uhud. They describe some undesirable
conditions and reprehensible traits which were found in the believers at
that time and which Allah was not pleased with. It were such things
which had made them vulnerable to weakness and infirmity and led them to
disobedience of Allah and His Messenger. The verses thus focus on the
events of Uhud from another angle.

Also, the verses guide the believers as to how they can protect
themselves from these devastating entanglements and ruinous obstacles;
they invite them to piety, fear of Allah and trust in Him and exhort
them to be firm in obedience of the Allah's Messenger. These nine verses
therefore contain exhortation and warning: they awaken in the believers
longing to hasten towards good, that is, spending in the way of Allah in
ease as well as in straitness, restraining their anger and forgiving the
people's faults; all is joined together under the heading of spreading
good in the society, patience in face of grievance and injury, and
refraining from repaying evil with evil. It is the only way of
preserving the society and making it strong and energetic.

Refraining from interest is a very important concomitant of this
spending benevolently and doing good to others. That is why the verses
begin with it; it paves the way for exhortation to good-doing and
spending. We have already explained — under the verses of spending and
interest in the chapter of The Cow — that spending in all its aspects is
the cornerstone of society; it is the virtue that vitalizes the human
society with the spirit of unity; it channels its scattered resources to
achieve happiness and felicity in this life, and strengthens it to ward
off every pernicious perversion. Interest is diametrically opposed to
benevolent spending in this respect.

Allah exhorts them to these virtues. Then He encourages them to return
to their Lord again and again even if they have committed sins and
errors; they should not lose hope of His mercy even if they have done
something which is not liked by Him; they must repent and seek pardon
from Him repeatedly without indolence or negligence.

By doing good to others and returning to Allah in time and again, they
would proceed on the straight path of happy life; they will never go
astray nor will they stop at any dangerous point.

This Qur'anic description is the best way for guiding man to perfect
himself when he finds some defects in his life; the finest means of
curing spiritual ailments which sometimes creep into otherwise good
souls and threaten man with downfall and ruin. QUR'AN: O you who
believe! do not devour interest . . . that you may be shown mercy:

We have explained how "devouring" is used for "taking ". The phrase,
"making it double and redouble ", points to overriding characteristic of
interests; interest, per se, multiplies and increases the lender's
wealth many-fold by depleting debtor's money adding it to the creditor's
capital. The sentence, "And guard yourselves against the fire, which has
been prepared for the unbelievers", indicates that the interest-taker is
unbeliever, as has been explained under the verses of interest in the
chapter of The Cow: And Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner
(2:276).

QUR'AN: And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden ....

"al-Musara 'ah" (to rush, to make haste); it is commendable in good
deeds and reprehensible in bad ones.

The Qur'an, in most of the places, joins forgiveness with the Garden.
It is because the Garden is a place of purity and cleanliness; the
impurities of sins and filth of vices cannot enter it, nor can a person
tarnished by them except after forgiveness and removal of that filth.
The forgiveness and the Garden described in this verse run parallel to
what is mentioned in the following two verses. The forgiveness
corresponds with the verse, "And those who when they commit an indecency
or do injustice to their souls . . . "; and the Garden stands face to
face with the verse, "Those who spend (benevolently) in ease as well as
in straitness..."

The clause, "and a Garden, the extensiveness of which is (as) the
heavens and the earth ". "al-Ard " (lit: width) denotes here
spaciousness, extensiveness; it is a common usage; the expression
metaphorically implies that it is spacious to the utmost, or to an
extent that human imagination cannot reach it. Also, it has another
meaning, which we shall explain under the "Traditions ".

The clause, "it is prepared for the pious ones", paves the way for
description of the characteristics of the pious ones which is given in
the coming verses. The main idea is to describe those characteristics of
the believers which are relevant to the present situation, i.e., after
the battle of Uhud (when they had displayed, and suffered from, weakness
and disobedience), because they were expected to participate in other
similar battles and undergo similar situations, where they would be in
great need of unity, harmony and solidarity.

QUR'AN: Those who spend (benevolently) in ease as well as in
straitness, and those who restrain (their) anger, and forgive men; and
Allah loves the doers of good (to others):

as-Sarra' and addarra (that which pleases man or displeases him) i.e.,
ease and difficulty. al-Kazm literally means to tie the mouth of
water-skin after filling it; then it was metaphorically extended to a
man filled with anger or sorrow who restrains or suppresses his
emotions. al-Ghayz (translated here as "anger") denotes stirring of
feeling of revenge, when one faces many unpleasant things; it is
different from al-ghadab (generally translated as "wrath") which refers
to the intention of revenge or punishment. That is why we say "Allah
afflicted them with His wrath", but do not say, "Allah was angry with
them".

The sentence, "and Allah loves the doers of good (to others)",
indicates that the preceding characteristics define "the doers of good",
i.e., to other people. As for doing good in relation to Allah is
concerned, it is defined in the following verse: . . . and as good news
for the doers of good. Surely those who say, Our Lord is Allah, then
they continue on the right way, they shall have no fear nor shall they
grieve. These are the dwellers of the Garden, abiding therein: a reward
for what they did (46:12-14).

The doing of good, mentioned in the verse under discussion, is
delineated by the preceding words, "Those who spend (benevolently) in
ease as well as in straitness . . . "; these good characteristics have
no value in the eyes of Allah if they were not done "for Him", as has
been described in many preceding verses, e.g.: The likeness of what they
spend in this life of the world is as the likeness of wind . . .
(3:117).

The above reality may also be inferred from ch. 29, vr. 69: And (as
for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly guide them
onto Our way; and Allah is most surely with the doers of good. One may
be said to be striving hard only if one does something against one's
desires and natural instincts. It may happen only when a man firmly
believes in matters, which demand such sacrifice and steadfastness in
face of natural desires and longings. It requires firm faith and true
belief they must say, Our Lord is Allah, and then continue steadfastly
on it and demands relevant action, i.e., they must strengthen this
belief by striving in sincere worship of Allah, spending benevolently in
His way and living in the society with good conduct and irreproachable
behavior. It appears from it that doing good, means performing all
actions in proper way by remaining firm and steadfast in the divine
faith, in the belief in Allah.

QUR'AN: And those who when they commit an indecency. . . and excellent
is the reward of those who act (righteously):

"al Fahishah" (indecent, shameful action) it is generally used for
fornication. As the word, az-zulm (injustice) has been used parallel to
indecency, it should denote all other big or small sins. Alternatively,
if "indecency" is taken to mean big sins, then "injustice" would mean
small sins only. The clause, "remember Allah and ask forgiveness for
their faults", indicates that the plea for forgiveness should emanate
from remembrance of Allah — it should not be just a verbal repetition,
based on habit. The sentence, "and who forgives the faults but Allah?",
encourages man to return to Allah, and reminds him to take refuge, and
seek shelter, in Him. The proviso, "and (who) do not knowingly persist
in what they have done", is an essential part of asking forgiveness from
Allah.

Persistence in sins distorts the psyche to such an extent that
remembrance of Allah does not bring any benefit to it; such behavior
shows that the person concerned gives no importance to divine command,
dishonors the sanctity of religion and behaves arrogantly against Allah;
in such a situation neither servitude can survive nor remembrance can be
of any use. For the same reason was added another proviso, i.e.,
"knowingly". This phrase indicates that "injustice" (in the preceding
clause) includes small sins too; persistence in sins — whether big or
small — shows disregard to the divine command, indifference towards His
authority. The phrase, "what they have done", therefore covers big as
well as small sins, and refers to the indecency and injustice mentioned
in the beginning of the verse: but small sin is not included in
indecency, therefore it is injustice to one's soul indeed.

Their great reward is described in the next verse, "(As for) these
their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and gardens . . ." It is
the same things which the believers are exhorted to hasten to: "And
hasten to forgiveness from your Lord and a Garden. . ." Looking at this
beginning and end, it may be seen clearly that they have been enjoined
to hasten to spending benevolently, restraining their anger, forgiving
the people and asking forgiveness for their faults.

QUR'AN: Indeed there have been examples before you; therefore travel in
the earth and see what was the end of the rejecters:

"as-Sunan" is plural of as-sunnah (the way or tradition followed by the
society). The believers have been told to travel in the earth, in order
that they could learn lessons from archeological remains of ancient
people and bygone generations. They should ponder about those pharaohs
and nimrods, those kings and emperors - where did all of them go to?
Their towering palaces, their accumulated treasures, their gilded
thrones and their fully-equipped armies - nothing could avail them in
the least; now they are just a few names to serve as examples and lesson
for those who meditate, and as tourist attraction for the carefree and
oblivious persons.

As for protecting their monuments, preserving their statues and
endeavoring to find out how great they were in their times and how
magnificent their splendor was in that era, it is a matter which the
Qur'an does not care about. It is nothing but idolatry in a new
disguise. We shall explain this topic, God willing, in a separate
discourse in which we shall analyze the meaning of idolatry.

QUR'AN: This is a clear statement. . . for the pious ones:

The classification looks at the degrees of its effect. It is just a
clear statement, a faithfully transmitted message for some people, while
for others it is an admonition and guidance.

**TRADITIONS**

The Prophet was asked about the words, a Garden, the extensiveness of
which is (as) the heavens and the earth: "If the extensiveness of the
Garden is as the heavens and the earth. then where will the Fire be?" He
(s.a.w.a.) said: "Glory be to Allah! When the day comes, where does the
night go?" (Majma'u 'I-bayan)

The author says: as-Suyuti has narrated in, ad-Durru 'I-manthur, from
at-Tanukhi that (the Byzantine Emperor) Heraclius had written to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) a letter in which, inter alia, he had
asked about this verse, and the Prophet had replied it as described
above. He has also narrated through another chain from Abu Hurayrah that
someone asked the Prophet this question and he replied as above.

The above reply has been interpreted as follows: The Fire is in the
Knowledge of Allah as night remains in the Knowledge of Allah when day
comes. COMMENT: If it means that the Fire is not away from the Divine
Knowledge, then it does not solve the problem, because the question was
about the place of the Fire, not about the Knowledge of Allah. If, on
the other hand, it means that possibly there could be another place for
the Fire beyond the heavens and the earth, then it might be tenable, but
then the comparison of the Garden and the Fire with day and night would
be out of place — because the night does not go out of the heavens and
the earth when the day comes. Obviously this interpretation does not
offer an acceptable explanation of the hadith.

I believe that the tradition points to another theme: The hereafter
(with all its felicity and infelicity) is similar to this world with all
its happiness and sorrow. Likewise, the man in the hereafter will be the
same man who was in this world — as appears from the Qur'an and
traditions. Nevertheless, the system governing the hereafter will be
different from the ones permeating this world. The hereafter is the
place of eternity and infinity, while this world is transitory and
evanescent.

That is why man would eat and drink, marry and enjoy all comforts of
the Garden but would not undergo the consequences attendant to those
enjoyments in this world. In the same way, man would burn in the fire of
the Hell and suffer pain and agony in food and drink, abode and
companions, yet would not be affected by it in the way he would have
been in this life. In the hereafter, he would live eternal life without
being affected by middle or old age or becoming senile or decrepit. It
is because these effects and concomitants are products of the system of
this world; they are not essential parts of every system - they would
not be found in the next world's system. It is this world, not the
hereafter, which is the place of conflict and struggle, contrast and
contradiction.

Now ponder on our own observation of the events. When we look at
current happenings, we cannot see the previous events; if we see the
night, then the day is absent from us. But nothing is absent from Allah;
past, present and future - all is present before Allah, and there is no
contrast or contradiction between them on that level. It means that the
day and the night and their concomitant events contradict and cancel
each other when they are governed by material system and movement. But
when the same day and night and their concomitants are put under another
system, there remains no contrast and contradiction among them. It may
be inferred from the words of Allah: Have you not considered (the work
of) your Lord, how He extends the shade? And if He had pleased He would
certainly have made it stationary; then We have made the sun an
indication of it; Then We take it to Ourselves, taking little by little
(25:45-46).

If it is possible in contradictory things like day and night, it may
equally be possible for the heavens and the earth to house the Garden
equal in size to themselves and then accommodate another thing like the
Hell of the same size; it will be possible, not under this worldly
system, but according to the system prevailing in the hereafter. There
may be found similar expressions in traditions. For example: "Verily
grave is an orchard from the orchards of the Garden, or a pit from the
pits of the Fire." Or, "The grave of a believer is widened for him to
the extent of his sight."

In the same way should be explained these words of the Prophet.
Otherwise, if it is taken to mean that Allah is not oblivious of the
night when He knows the day, it would not dovetail with the question.
Likewise, if it were to mean that the night exists somewhere else when
the day comes, it would invite another objection: The night cannot
co-exist with the day at any place; and if we look at its reality then
the night is a conic shade of the earth resulting from the sunlight —
the light and shade rotating around the earth. Thus the day and the
night are continuously revolving around the earth without one merging
into, or canceling, the other.

There are other traditions of similar style. For example, it has been
narrated about the Qur'anic words: That Allah may separate the impure
from the pure. . . (8:37): "When the sun sets, where does this light,
spread on the earth, go?" We shall explain it later on.

It has been narrated in, ad-Durru'l-manthur, about the words: and those
who restrain (their) anger and forgive men: al-Bayhaqi has narrated from
'Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) that a slave girl was pouring water on him in
preparation for prayer. The pitcher fell from her hand on his face
contusing it. He raised his head (looking) at her. She said: "Verily
Allah says: 'and those who restrain (their) anger.' " He said: "I have
restrained my anger. " She recited: "and forgive men." He said: "Allah
has forgiven you." She recited: "and Allah loves doers of good (to
others)." He said: "Go, you are free."

The author says: It is narrated also from the Shi'i chains. The
tradition obviously shows that the Imam (a.s.) interprets "good-doing"
as something more than the preceding two virtues, and in fact it is so
in its general terms, although the above virtues are concomitants of
good-doing, and possibly they may be used for defining the
"good-doing".

There are very numerous traditions on good manners and virtuous
conduct, i.e., spending benevolently, restraining anger and forgiving
faults, narrated from the Prophet and the Imams of the Ahlu 'l-bayt
(a.s.); we shall quote them later in a more appropriate place.

It is narrated from 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn Ghanm ad-Dawsi that the verse,
And those who when they commit an indecency . . ., was revealed about
Bahlul, the grave-digger. He used to dig graves (to steal shrouds). Once
he dug the grave of a girl from the Ansar, took out her body and removed
her shroud. She was beautiful and of fair complexion; so the Satan
tempted him and he committed fornication with her. Then he felt remorse
and came to the Prophet, but he turned him out. Then the people
dissociated from him; and he too secluded himself from others, spending
his time in worship and repentance in some mountains of Medina - until
Allah accepted his repentance and revealed this verse about him.
(al-Majalis, as.-Saduq)

The author says: It is a detailed tradition, which we have abridged
here. If it is a correct hadith, and then it would be a separate cause
for the verse's revelation apart from the general reason, which covers
all the verses of the story of Uhud.

al-Baqir (a.s.) said concerning the words, and (who) do not knowingly
persist in what they have done: "Persistence is that a sinner commits a
sin and does not ask Allah for forgiveness nor does he make up his mind
to repent - so that is persistence." (at- Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi )

Ahmad has narrated from the Prophet that he said: "Iblis said: 'O Lord,
by Thy Honor! I shall not cease leading children of Adam astray as long
as their souls shall remain within their bodies.' Allah then said: 'By
My Honor! I shall go on forgiving them as long as they ask Me for
forgiveness.' " (ad-Durru 'I-manthur )

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "There is no small (sin) with persistence, and
there is no big (sin) after seeking (Allah's) forgiveness." (al-Kafi)

The same Imam (a.s.) said, inter alia, in a hadith: " . . . and there
is in the Book of Allah a deliverance from ruin, an insight from
blindness, and a healing for what is in the breasts; (found) in what
Allah has enjoined you to seek (His) forgiveness and to repent. Allah
says: 'And those who when they commit an indecency or do injustice to
their souls remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their faults - and
who forgives the faults but Allah? — and (who) do not knowingly persist
in what they have done.' And He says: 'And whoever does evil or acts
unjustly to his soul, then asks forgiveness of Allah, he shall find
Allah Forgiving, Merciful' (4:110). So this is what Allah has enjoined
about asking (His) forgiveness, and has put with it the condition of
repentance and refraining from what Allah has forbidden. (It is) because
He says: 'To Him do ascend the good words and the good deed lifts them
up' (35:10). This verse implies that the plea of forgiveness is not
lifted up to Allah except by good deed and repentance. " (at-Tafsir,
al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: The Imam (a.s.) has inferred abstinence from sin and
not repeating it after repentance from the word, do not knowingly
persist; likewise the fact, that repentance and plea of forgiveness
require good deed afterwards, has been inferred from the generality of
"good words" in the verse, To Him do ascend the good words.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "When the verse, And those who when they commit
an indecency..., was revealed, Iblis ascended a mountain in Mecca, Thawr
by name, and screamed very loudly to his afreets. They all gathered near
him and said: 'O our leader, why have you called us?' He said: 'This
verse has been revealed; now who would deal with it?' An afreet from
among the satans stood up and said: 'I will see to it with such and such
means.' (The Iblis) said: 'You cannot do it.' Then another (afreet)
stood up and said something similar (to the first one) and (Iblis)
said:

'You are not for it.' Then the Whispering Slinking (satan) said: 'I
shall deal with it. (Iblis) said: 'By what means?' He said: 'I shall
promise them and tempt them until they would commit a sin; and when they
have committed it, I would make them oblivious of asking for
forgiveness.' (Iblis) said: 'You are (fit) for it.' Then he entrusted
this task to him up to the Day of Resurrection." (al-Majalis, as-Saduq)
The author says: This tradition has also been narrated through Sunni
chains.


