Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 139-148
=========================================

And be not infirm, and be not grieving, and you shall have the upper
hand if you are believers (139). If a wound has afflicted you (at Uhud),
a wound like it has also afflicted the (unbelieving) people; and We
bring these days to men by turns, and that Allah may know those who
believe and take witnesses from among you; and Allah loves not the
unjust (140). And that Allah may purge those who believe and eradicate
the unbelievers (141). Do you think that you will enter the Garden while
Allah has not yet known those who strive hard from among you, and (He
has not) known the patient? (142). And certainly you desired death
before you met it; so indeed you have seen it (even) while you look (at
it) (143). And Muhammad is no more than a messenger, the messengers have
already passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed, will you
turn back upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he
will by no means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward
the grateful (144). And it is not for a soul to die but with the
permission of Allah (according to) the term that is fixed; and whoever
desires the reward of this world, We shall give him of it, and whoever
desires the reward of the hereafter, We shall give him of it, and We
will reward the grateful (145). And how many a prophet has fought with
whom were myriads of Godly men; so they did not lose heart on account f
what befell them in Allah's way, nor did they weaken, nor did they abase
themselves; and Allah loves the patient (146). And their saying was no
other than that they said: "Our Lord! forgive us our faults and our
extravagance in our affair, and make firm our feet and help us against
the unbelieving people" (147). So Allah gave them the reward of this
world and an excellent reward of the hereafter and Allah loves those who
do good (to others) (148).

**COMMENTARY**

The verses, as you see, complete the talk which had begun with the
words, O you who believe!. . . (3:130), while those verses with their
orders and prohibitions had paved the way for these which contain the
main purpose including command, prohibition, praise and stricture.
QUR'AN: And be not infirm, and be not grieving, and you shall have the
upper hand if you are believers:

"al-Wahn", according to ar-Raghib (in mufradaatul Qur'an), is infirmity
and weakness in body or character. Here it refers to their weakness of
will-power, carelessness in establishing the religion and lack of
courage in face of its enemies. al-Huzn (grief ) is opposite of al-farh
(joy, happiness); it afflicts a man when he loses a favorite possession,
or something which he thinks belongs to him.

The words, "and you shall have the upper hand if you are believers". If
a wound has afflicted you (at Uhud), a wound like it has also afflicted
the (unbelieving) people;', indicate that the believers had felt
infirmity and grief because they had seen themselves afflicted by wounds
and found the unbelievers gaining upper hand. Although the polytheists
could not get total victory over the believers, nor the battle
ultimately ended with the believers' decisive defeat, yet what had
afflicted them was really hard and painful - martyrdom of seventy of
their brave warriors. Add to it the humiliation that they had been
overwhelmed on their own ground. All these factors together had caused
extreme dejection and pessimism. The clause, "and you shall have the
upper hand if you are believers" (which stands as the reason of these
two prohibitions), shows that the prohibition was related to actual
infirmity and grief, not to some expected behavior in future.

The promise, "you shall have the upper hand", is general and
unrestricted, but it is followed by the proviso, "if you are believers".
It therefore gives the following meaning: You should not be weak in your
will-power, nor should you grieve for the lost victory, if you are true
believers. It is because belief - is bound to give you upper hand over
your enemies - belief is accompanied by piety and patience, and these
two are the basis of victory and triumph. As for the wound, which has
afflicted you in this battle, you are not alone in it; the unbelievers
too had suffered similar casualties. If you think it over, they have not
gained over you in any way. Therefore, you should not feel depressed or
grieved.

The address had started with the words, O you who believe; yet their
gaining upper hand has been made conditional on their being believers.
It implies that although the masses were not devoid of faith and belief,
they had not adhered to the concomitants and requirements of that
belief, like patience and piety; otherwise it would have brought out the
desired effects.

This phenomenon is found in every group which is composed of people
having different grades of belief; while there are some true believers,
there are some of weak faith and yet others of sick hearts. This type of
talk creates enthusiasm in believing souls, admonishes and revives the
weak ones and censures and reprimands the hearts ailing with
hypocrisy.

QUR'AN: If a wound has afflicted you (at Uhud), a wound like it has
also afflicted the (unbelieving) people:

"al-Qarh" is used for effect of an external wound, while al-qurh
denotes the effect of an internal wound like pimple or pustule. This
difference has been given by ar-Raghib. The word metaphorically refers
to all the calamities that had befallen the Muslims on the day of Uhud;
it looks at the whole Muslim community as a single body which had
received a wound inflicted by the enemy - the wound referring to the
martyrdom of the martyrs and injuries of the injured, and the tragedy
that victory slipped through their fingers.

The sentence, "If a wound had afflicted you . . . and destroy the
unbelievers", gives the reason of the command, "And be not infirm, and
be not grieving"; as does the sentence, "and you shall have the upper
hand if you are believers "

The difference between the two sets of reasons is as follows: The
sentence, "and you shall have the upper hand if you are believers",
corrects their misconception. They had become disheartened and
pessimistic because they thought that the polytheists had gained upper
hand. Allah points out to them that it is they, not the polytheists, who
have got the essential prerequisite of victory 'if they are believers';
and Allah had already declared: and helping the believers is ever
incumbent on Us (30:47).

The second reason describes the condition of the two parties â€” the
believers and the polytheists - or explains the underlying rationale,
that is, the inverting Divine practice to turn the fortunes among men.

QUR'AN: and We bring these days to men by turns:

"al-Yawm" (day) is a considerable span of time that is necessary for an
occurrence - thus its duration would differ from occurrence to
occurrence. Generally it is used for the period between sunrise and
sunset. Often it is used for kingdom, reign, power, etc., putting the
time in place of the thing covered by it. They say, 'day of this group',
'day of such and such dynasty', i.e., their precedence and rule over
others; sometimes it denotes the period itself. It is this connotation
which is meant in this verse al-Mudawalah (taking of a thing by many
people one after another).

The sentence thus means: It is an invariable practice of Allah that He
rotates these days among men by turns; these are not restricted to any
one group nor prevented from another people; this system is based on
common benefits only a part of which may be comprehended by your
minds.

QUR'AN: and that Allah may know those who believe and take witnesses
from among you...eradicate the unbelievers:

The conjunction "and" joins it to a deleted clause; it was deleted to
imply that human understanding cannot comprehend all of its aspects, it
may know only a few features of it. What the believers would benefit
from is mentioned in these two verses: "that Allah may know those who
believe and take witnesses from among you; . . . that Allah may purge
those who believe and eradicate the unbelievers."

As for the words, "that Allah may know those who believe ", they imply
manifestation of their belief after its being hidden. Allah's knowledge
of events and things is the same as their existence. The things are
known to Allah by their very existence. His knowledge is not like ours -
because our knowledge and perception come through a form abstracted from
the thing concerned. To say that Allah wills to know a thing, is the
same as saying that Allah wills to bring it into being. In the verse
under discussion, Allah says, "that Allah may know those who believe";
the clause shows that there were believers already in existence;
therefore, it would mean that He wished to make their belief manifest.
As every thing in this world is governed by the system of cause and
effect, it was necessary that some things should happen which would make
the belief of the believers manifest after it was hidden. (Try to
understand it.)

It is followed by the clause, "and take witnesses from among you "
ash-Shuhada' refers to the witnesses of deeds. The Qur'an has never used
this word for "martyrs". Its use in the meaning of "those who are killed
while fighting in the way of Allah" is a later usage, as we had
explained under the verse, And thus We have made you a medium nation
that you may be witnesses for the people . . . (2:143) . Moreover, the
word "take " which has been used here, is not very appropriate for the
martyrs of the battlefield; it is not said' 'Allah has taken Zayd as a
martyr in His way'. But it is said: 'Allah has taken Ibrahim as a
friend'; or 'Allah has taken Musa as one spoken to; or 'Allah has taken
the Prophet as a witness for giving evidence for his ummah on the Day of
Resurrection'.

Significantly, Allah has said, "and take witnesses from among you ",
instead of saying, take you as witnesses. Although verse 143 of the
chapter of The Cow ascribes witnessing to the ummah (And thus We have
made you a medium nation that you may be witnesses for the people...),
but as we explained under that verse? it is a metaphorical use,
ascribing to the whole nation what in fact belongs to a particular group
of the nationâ€”it is not the whole ummah but only a few of them who will
bear witness for the nation. This interpretation may possibly be
supported by the ending clause, "and Allah loves not the unjust. "

Then comes the verse, "And that Allah may purge those who believe and
eradicate the unbelievers. "at-Tamhis" (to purge) denotes purifying
something from extraneous pollutions. al-Mahq (to eradicate, to efface)
signifies gradual depletion of a thing, eradicating it bit by bit. The
said purification is one of the benefits of rotating the days among the
people. It is separate from the above-mentioned benefit that Allah may
know the believers. Distinguishing a believer from an unbeliever is one
thing, and purifying his belief from pollutions of disbelief, hypocrisy
and immorality is another. That is why it has been put side by side with
eradication of the unbelievers. Allah removes the ingredients of
disbelief from a believer's character little by little until nothing
remains there but the belief, pure and unsullied; and likewise He
eradicates ingredients of disbelief, polytheism and deceit from the
unbeliever bit by bit, until all is destroyed.

These are some of the reasons why Allah brings the days to men by turn,
and why power does not remain confined to a particular group forever;
and all affairs belong exclusively to Allah, He does whatever He
pleases; and He does not do except that which is most suitable and most
beneficial (to His creatures); as He says: ...thus does Allah compare
truth and falsehood; then as for the scum, it passes away as a worthless
thing; and as for that which profits the people, it remains in the earth
(13:17). Also, He has said shortly before the verses under discussion:
That He may cut off a portion from among those who disbelieve, or abase
them so that they should return disappointed of attaining what they
desired. You have no concern in the affair whether He turns to them
(mercifully) or chastises them, for surely they are unjust (3:127-8).
Allah has denied here that His Prophet had any authority in the affair,
reserving that power exclusively to Himself; He decides about His
creatures as He pleases.

Look at the matters described in these verses: The days rotate among
the people; it is done for the purpose of test and trial, in order that
believers may be separated from unbelievers; believers may be purged and
purified and unbelievers obliterated gradually. Add to it the
declaration that the Prophet had no authority in this matter. All this
together shows that a majority of the believers was under the impression
that there being on the true religion was the complete cause of their
victory â€” wherever they happened to fight. They thought that just
because they were on truth, they must overpower the falsehood, no matter
what their own condition; to them belonged all affairs, and they could
not be deprived of it. They were further encouraged in this
miscalculation when angels were sent to help them in Badr and they found
themselves quite unexpectedly victorious over unbelievers.

But that was a misunderstanding, which could nullify the system of test
and purification; and that in its turn would negate the underlying
rationale of command and prohibition, reward and punishment. That would
lead to destruction of the foundation of religion. After all, divine
religion is a religion of nature; it is not based on nullification of
the customary procedure or of divine practice permeating the universe â€”
the system that victory and defeat result from their normal causes.

After explaining that the days rotate among the people for their test
and trial, Allah now begins admonishing them for this serious
misunderstanding of theirs, and explaining the real position to them.

QUR'AN: Do you think that you win enter the Garden . . . while you look
(at it):

The misconception that they would enter the Garden without being
tested, was an inseparable concomitant of the previously mentioned
misunderstanding. They thought that because they were on truth and truth
is not overwhelmed, they would always be victorious; that they would
never be defeated, would never be vanquished. Obviously, if it were
true, then every one who believed in the Prophet and entered into the
believers' society, would find' felicity in this world through victory
and booty, and felicity in the hereafter in the form of forgiveness and
the Garden. Then there would be no difference between the felicity in
the hereafter in the form of forgiveness and the Garden. Then there
would be no difference between the appearance of belief and its reality,
no distinction between various ranks (of belief and piety); the belief
of a fighter and that of a patient fighter would be of the same value; a
man who intended to do a good deed and actually did it when its time
came, would be equal to him who intended but turned on his heels when
faced with it.

Accordingly, the words, "Do you think that you will enter . . .", have
metaphorically put the effect in place of the cause. The complete
meaning therefore is as follows: You thought that power is reserved for
you; you would not be put to test, rather you would enter the Garden
without going through a trial to separate the deserving from
undeserving, to distinguish believers of higher ranks from those of
lower grades.

The next verse demonstrates that that thinking was wrong. The words,
"And certainly you desired death before you met it, so indeed you have
seen it (even) while you look (at it) ", show that they had desired
death before arriving at the battlefield; but when the desired death
came to them and they looked at it, they did not come forward to get
what they longed for; instead they showed cowardice and fled away. How
can it be possible for them to enter into the Garden merely because of
that expressed desire without being tested, without any procedure of
purification? Was it not necessary to test them (to separate the truth
from the falsehood)?

It shows that there is a deleted clause near the end of the verse. The
complete sentence would be as follows: So indeed you have seen it, yet
you did not come forward to get it even while you looked at it. Another
possible interpretation: You just looked at the death, i.e. without
doing any thing to meet it.

Thus "looking" would metaphorically imply not grappling with the death.
It is a reproach and censure.

**A Discourse on Test and its Realities (click here)**

QUR'AN: And Muhammad is no more than a messenger; the messengers have
already passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed, will you
turn back upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he
will by no means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward
the grateful:

Death is passing away, end of the body's life. Slaying or killing
denotes death arising from extraneous cause - intentional or otherwise.
When the words, 'death' and 'killing', are used separately, the 'death'
signifies a general meaning which includes killing too; but when they
are used side by side, then 'death' means natural death as opposed to
killing. Turning back upon one's heels means returning. ar-Raghib has
said: "They say, He turned back upon his heels, when he returns, 'he
turns back upon his heels' is synonymous to 'it turns on its hooves';
also it is like the (Qur'anic) words: so they returned retracing their
footsteps (18:64), or the idiom, 'he went back to his origin'."

Turning back on one's heels is dependent on the conditional clause, "if
then he dies or is killed"; it implies their apostasy - going out of
religion - not merely retreating from the fight; because fleeing from
battle-ground has no connection with death or martyrdom of the Prophet,
while there is a clear relation between his death or martyrdom and
people's renouncement of Islam for disbelief. Moreover, it was not only
in Uhud that they had fled away from the battlefield; they had done so
in some other battles too like, Hunayn, Khaybar, etc.; but Allah did not
address them in such a severe tone, nor did He use such expression for
their retreat. For example, He says regarding the battle of Hunayn:
...and on the day of Hunayn, when your great numbers made you vain, but
they availed you nothing and the earth became strait to you
notwithstanding its spaciousness, then you turned back retreating
(9:25). Therefore, it is clear that 'turning back upon your heels' in
this verse means 'returning to your previous disbelief '

The meaning of the verse - in its context of censure and stricture is
as follows: Muhammad is but a messenger of God, like other messengers
sent earlier by Him; his task is to convey the message of His Lord; he
has no authority in the affairs; all the affairs are in the hand of
Allah, and the religion is His religion; it will continue with Allah's
authority because Allah is to preserve it. Why should then your belief
depend on Muhammad' s life? Why should you behave as if your religion
would not survive the Prophet? Why do you give rise to the assumption
that if Muhammad were to die or be killed you would run away from
Allah's religion, would return back on your heels to your previous
disbelief? Will you go back to misguidance after finding the guidance?

This context provides a very strong proof that when the fighting became
fierce on the day of Uhud, the Muslims thought that the Prophet was
killed, and they fled away from the battlefield. It confirms the reports
of the traditions and history. For example, Ibn Hisham narrates in his
as-Sirah that Anas ibn an-Nadr (uncle of Anas ibn Malik) reached where
'Umar ibn al-Khattab and Talhah ibn 'Ubaydillah had gathered with other
persons of the Emigrants and the Helpers â€” and they had given themselves
up. He asked: "What is holding you back?"

They said: "The Messenger of Allah has been killed." He said: "Then
what will you do with life after him? Die on what the Messenger of Allah
has died on." Then he faced the (unbelieving) people, and fought them
until he was martyred.

This retreat, this surrender, this giving themselves up, had only one
meaning: Their belief depended on the Prophet; it would continue as long
as he lived, and would disappear the moment he died. In other words,
they wanted reward of this world for their belief, and it was this
matter for which they were reprimanded by Allah. This connotation is
supported by the concluding clause, "and Allah will reward the grateful
". Note that the same clause has been repeated in the next verse, after
the words, "and whoever desires the reward of this world. We shall give
him of it and whoever desires the reward of the hereafter, We shall give
him of it." (Ponder on its significance.)

The clause, "and Allah will reward the grateful", is a sort of
exception as the context shows; and it proves that among them there were
a few who were grateful, who did not turn back on their heels nor did
they retreat.

What is the reality of gratefulness? It is manifestation of the favor,
display of the bounty. Its opposite is ungratefulness, which means
hiding the bounty. How does one display a favor? It is done by using it
in the place the donor had intended, in the way he would be pleased
with, and to remember and mention the donor by tongue (and it is called
praise) and heart (without forgetting him). For thanking Allah for any
of His favors and bounties, you should remember Him at the time of using
it, and should use it in the way He is pleased with without
transgressing the limits. There is nothing in this world but it is a
bounty from the bounties of Allah; and He does not want us to use any of
His bounties but in the way of His worship, in His obedience. He says:
And He gives you of all that you ask Him; and if you count Allah's
bounties, you will not be able to compute them; most surely man is very
unjust, very ungrateful (14:34).

Accordingly, His absolute thank â€” without any restriction â€” means to
remember Him without forgetting Him, and to obey Him without disobeying
Him. Allah says: . . . and be thankful to Me, and do not be ungrateful
to Me (2:152). It means as follows: Remember Me without polluting the
remembrance with forgetfulness; and obey My command without spoiling it
with disobedience. (The reader should not listen to him who says that it
would oblige us to do something beyond our power. Such comment arises
from not paying attention to these divine realities, from being distant
from the plane of servitude.)

We have explained in previous volumes the difference between verb and
adjective. The verb shows the active agent (the doer) doing the work -
no matter how temporary, how transitory, his relation with that work may
be. But an adjective shows permanent relation between the agent and the
attribute; it implies that the attribute has become an inseparable
characteristic of the man. There is a word of difference between the
phrases, 'those who worshipped idols', 'those who were patient', 'those
who did injustice', and 'those who transgressed', on one hand, and the
adjectives, 'the idol-worshippers', 'the patient ones', 'the unjust',
and 'the transgressors', on the other.

Herein the verse under discussion, Allah has used the adjective, "the
grateful"; it refers to those in whom the attribute of gratefulness is
firmly rooted, who have inseparable connection with this virtue. Also,
we have described that absolute gratitude demands that man should never
remember any thing â€” as every thing is a divine bounty without
remembering Allah; and should not use anything the divine bounty except
in His obedience. It is now clear that gratitude and thank cannot be
complete except with total sincerity towards Allah, with purification in
knowledge and action. The grateful ones are those who are purified,
sincere servants of Allahâ€”those in whom the Satan can have no hope, who
are beyond the Satanic designs and plans.

This fact is clear from the words of the Satan quoted in the Qur'an: He
(Satan) said: "Then by Thy Might I will surely beguile them all, except
Thy servants from among them, the purified one" (38:82-83);He said: "My
Lord! because Thou hast left me to stray, I will certainly make (evil)
fair-seeming to them on earth, and I will certainly cause them all to go
astray, except Thy servants from among them, the freed (purified) ones"
(15:39-40). Note that Allah did not refute this claim of the Satan.
Again Allah quotes him as saying: "He said: 'As Thou hast caused me to
go astray, I will certainly lie in wait for them in Thy straight path.

Then I will certainly come to them from before them and from behind
them, and from their right-hand side and from their left-hand side; and
Thou shalt not find most of them thankful'" (7:16-17). The last clause
is an implied exception that some of them shall be thankful. Here the
adjective, "purified " has been changed to "thankful". It can only mean
that it is the purified ones who shall be grateful, and on whom the
Satan has got no hold. The Satan's design is to make man forget his Lord
and to call him to sin and disobedience; (but he cannot ensnare the
purified and grateful servants in this trap).

This explanation is further supported by a verse, coming later, which
was revealed about this very battle: (As for) those of you who turned
back on the day when the two armies met only the Satan sought to cause
them to make a slip on account of some deeds they had done, and
certainly Allah has pardoned them; surely Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
(3:155). Read it in conjunction with the end of the verse under
discussion, "and Allah win reward the grateful", and the end clause of
the next verse, "and We will reward the grateful"; and keep in mind that
these clauses are a sort of exceptions. Think over these verses together
and you will discover sublime realities.

But someone has given a really astonishing explanation. He thinks that
the verse just quoted, ((As for) those of you who turned back. . . only
the Satan sought to cause them to slip . . .) refers to the story which
says that the Satan cried aloud on the day of Uhud that Muhammad was
killed; and this cry made the believers lose their hearts and flee from
the battle ground. Looking at this explanation, in light of the one
given by us, one is amazed as to how trivially they have treated the
Book of Allah, bringing it down from that height of reality and
knowledge to such a lowly level.

The verse shows that there were a few believers on the day of Uhud who
did not show any weakness nor did they lose courage; nor did they give
up the cause of Allah. It is they whom Allah calls "the grateful ones",
and has confirmed that the Satan has got no power over them, nor has he
any hope of ensnaring them. They have remained steadfast, grateful, not
only in this battle; it is an inseparable characteristic of theirs, a
deeply-rooted attribute. The Qur'an has nowhere used the adjective "the
grateful" in appreciation except in these two verses, that is, "And
Muhammad is no more than a messenger. . . and Allah will reward the
grateful. And it is not for a soul to die. . . and We will reward the
grateful." Yet, He has not mentioned in either place what their reward
will be; this silence speaks a lot about its greatness and value.

QUR'AN: And it is not for a soul to die but with the permission of
Allah (according to) the term that is fixed; . . . and We will reward
the grateful:

It is an adverse allusion to their talk about their slain brethren
which is referred to in a forthcoming verse: O you who believe! be not
like those who disbelieve and say of their brethren when they travel in
the earth or engage in fighting: Had they been with us, they would not
have died and they would not have been slain . . . (3:156); also it
refers to the talk of a group among them: "Had we any hand in the
affair, we would not have been slain here " (3:154) . It should be noted
here that these people were from among the believers, not the hypocrites
who had already left the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and had not
participated in the fighting at all.

This talk of theirs implies that a person's death was not dependent on
Allah's permission, nor was it a decisive process emanating from firm
divine decree. If such an idea were correct then it would negate the
Kingdom of Allah, nullify the precise divine arrangements. (We shall
explain, God willing, in the beginning of the chapter of The Cattle,
what fixation of the term means.)

It necessarily follows that those who had spoken such words, had
accepted Islam because they thought that all affairs were in the hands
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the believers. In other words
when they accepted Islam, their aim was to who desisted from such
thoughts; their goal was the hereafter. That is why Allah says: "and
whoever desires the reward of this world, We shall give him of it, and
whoever desires the reward of the hereafter, We shall give him of it."
Here Allah has said, "We shall give him of it", instead of saying, "We
shall give him it." It points to a fine distinction: Often man has some
desires, but fails to provide total causes leading to the total desires,
and consequently is not given all that he had desired. Therefore, if the
causes conform with all the desires, he shall be given all desires; and
if the causes agree with some of the desires, he will get only some of
it.

Allah says: Whoever desires this present life, We hasten to him therein
what We please for whomsoever We desire, then We assign to him the hell;
he shall enter it despised, driven away And whoever desires the
hereafter and strives for it as he ought to strive and he is a believer;
(as for) these their striving shall surely be thanked (17:18-19). Also
He says: And that there is not for man (aught) except what he strives
for (53:39).

Thereafter, He has specially mentioned the grateful ones, excluding
them from both groups; saying, "and We will reward the grateful". It is
because they work only for the sake of Allah, without looking at any
thing of this world or the hereafter - as we have explained earlier.

QUR'AN: And how many a prophet has fought. . . and Allah loves those
who do good (to others):

"Ka-ayyin " (how many), indicates great number; min (from), here is an
explicative particle. ar-Ribbiyyun, plural of ar-ribbi, like ar-rabbani,
denotes a divine person, someone who is exclusively attached to God.
Also it is said that it is plural of raba (thousand) and thus means,
thousands. al-Istikanah (to submit, to abase oneself).

The verse contains advice, sermon and lesson with a shade of
admonition, together with some encouragement to the believers to follow
in those Godly men's footsteps, so that Allah should give them the
reward of this world and an excellent reward of the hereafter (as he had
given those Godly men) and should love them for their good-doing, as He
had loved them for it.

Allah has described some of their words and deeds in order that the
believers may learn lessons from it, and adopt it as their motto. Then
they would not be afflicted with what had afflicted them on the day of
Uhud (where they were involved in undesirable words and deeds, which
Allah was not pleased with). If they followed those Godly men, then
Allah would join for them the rewards of both worlds and He had done for
those Godly men. Allah has characterized the rewards of the hereafter as
"excellent"; it point to its sublimity and high prestige in comparison
to this world' reward.


