Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 149-155
=========================================

O you who believe! if you obey those who disbelieve, they will turn you
back upon your heels, so you will turn back losers (149). Nay! Allah is
your Guardian and He is the best of the helpers (150). We will cast
terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve, because they set up with
Allah that for which He has sent down no authority, and their abode is
the fire; and evil is the abode of the unjust (151). And certainly Allah
made good to you His promise, when you were extirpating them by His
permission, until when you became weak-willed and disputed about the
affair and disobeyed after He had shown you that which you loved; of you
were some who desired this world and of you were some who desired the
hereafter; then He turned you away from them that He might try you; and
He has certainly pardoned you, and Allah is Gracious to the believers
(152). When you ran off precipitately and did not turn towards any one,
and the Messenger was calling you from your rear, so He gave you another
sorrow instead of (your) sorrow, so that you might not grieve at what
had escaped you, nor (at) what befell you; and Allah is aware of what
you do (153). Then after sorrow He sent down security upon you, a
slumber coming upon a party of you, and (there was) another party who
cared only for their own selves; they entertained about Allah thoughts
of ignorance quite unjustly. They say: "Do we have any hand in the
affair?" Say: "Surely the affair is wholly (in the hands) of Allah."
They conceal within their souls what they would not reveal to you. They
say: "Had we any hand in the affair, we would not have been slain here.
" Say: "Had you remained in your houses, those for whom slaughter was
ordained would certainly have gone forth to the places where they (now)
lie;" and that Allah might test what was in your breasts and that He
might purge what was in your hearts; and Allah knows what is in the
breasts (154). (As for) those of you who turned back on the day when the
two armies met, only the Satan sought to cause them to make a slip on
account of some deeds they had done, and certainly Allah has pardoned
them; surely Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing (155).

**COMMENTARY**

It is the continuation of the verses revealed about the battle of Uhud.
These verses exhort and encourage the believers to obey none except
their Lord, because He alone is their Guardian and Helper; it calls them
as witness that Allah had fulfilled His promise to them, and the debacle
and disaster which they suffered on that day was brought upon them by
their own hands, because they had transgressed the limits of what Allah
had told them and His Messenger had invited them to; in spite of that
Allah has forgiven them of their sins because He is Forgiving,
Forbearing.

QUR'AN: O you who believe! if you obey those who disbelieve . . . He is
the best of the helpers:

It may possibly be inferred from the context that the unbelievers -
after the battle of Uhud, when these verses were revealed - were putting
ideas in the believers' minds (just as "friendly" advice!) to hold them
back from fighting and to incite strife and disunity among them, in
order to create rift and division in the camp of Islam. This implication
might probably get support from the verses 173-175 coming later: Those
to whom the people said: "Surely men have gathered against you,
therefore fear them". . . It is only the Satan that frightens his
friends; so do not fear them, and fear Me if you are believers.

It has also been said that the verse alludes to the shouting by the
Jews and the hypocrites on the day of Uhud, "Muhammad has been killed;
you should return to Your families." But this explanation is nothing.

The verse first made it clear to the Muslims that if they obeyed the
unbelievers and were inclined towards their friendship seeking their
help, they would suffer a great loss, that is, they would turn back to
infidelity, would become unbelievers themselves. Then it strikes at this
idea by showing them the bright reality that "Allah is your Guardian and
He is the best of the helpers."

QUR'AN: We will cast terror into the hearts. . . and evil is the abode
of the unjust:

It is a beautiful promise to the believers that Allah will help them
through terror and scare. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) used to
mention "scare" among the special bounties which Allah had reserved for
him - not giving it to any other prophet. Such traditions have been
narrated by both sects.

The clause, "because they set up with Allah that for which He has sent
down no authority", points to the fact that the polytheists set up such
things as partners or colleagues for Allah, which have got no authority,
no proof for it. The Qur'an repeatedly says that there is no authority,
no proof, which could prove any partner or colleague for Allah. Among
many types of polytheism is the rejection of the Creator by saying that
some thing other than Allah - like time or matter - has caused the
creation and goes on managing it.

QUR'AN: And certainly Allah made good to you His promise, . . . and
Allah is Gracious to the believers:

"al-Hass" (to extirpate by slaying). The traditions unanimously say,
and history records, that on the day of Uhud, at first the believers
overpowered the enemy and defeated them; they started slaughtering them
and plundering their goods. But then most of the archers left their
position at the mountain-pass, and Khalid ibn Walid with his group
attacked and slaughtered 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr and the few archers who
had remained with him. Now the way was clear for them to attack the
believers from the rear — which they did. Seeing this, the fleeing
seventy of the companions and bringing utter defeat upon them.

Accordingly, the words, "And certainly Allah made good to you His
promise", affirms that Allah's promise of help — on the condition that
they should remain on guard and be patient — was certainly fulfilled;
the, clause, "when you were extirpating them by His permission ", is
applicable to the victory which Allah gave to them to begin with on the
day of Uhud; and the next clause, "until when you became weak-willed and
disputed about the affair and disobeyed after He had shown you that
which you loved ", may be pointing to what the archers had done; they
disputed one with the other, an overwhelming majority of them left their
position and ran away to join those companions who were busy in
gathering the booty.

In this way they showed their lack of will-power; they differed among
themselves end' disobeyed the Prophet's order not to leave their place
no matter what happened to the others. Accordingly, al-fashal (generally
translated as 'to lose heart', 'to be weak-hearted'), would imply here,
weakness or lack of will-power; obviously the meaning of
weak-heartedness or cowardice would not be appropriate in this context,
because they had not left their position because of any fear; rather it
was because of the avarice of war-booty. If we take al-fashal for
cowardice, then it would apply to the whole 'army'; and in that case,
the adverb, "then", in the clause, "then He turned you away from them",
would denote ordinal sequel, not sequence of time. The word, "disputed",
proves that not all of them were united in that weak-willedness and
disobedience; some of them were determined to carry on the order, and to
continue in the obedience. That is why Allah follows it with the
comment: "of you were some who desired this world, and of you were some
who desired the hereafter"

QUR'AN: then He turned you away from them that He might try you;. .
.:

Allah stopped you from entangling with the idol-worshippers, after you
manifested your lack of will-power, disputed one with the other and
disobeyed the Prophet — in short, after you became disunited. He did so
in order that He might examine you and test your faith and patience in
His cause. When the hearts and minds are disunited, it provides the
strongest reason to conduct an examination, so that a believer may be
distinguished from a hypocrite; such a test would also separate a
believer who is firmly-rooted in belief and steadfast in conviction from
the one who is inconsistent and fickle. Nevertheless, Allah has forgiven
them by His grace, as He says, "and He has certainly pardoned you".

QUR'AN: When you ran off precipitately and did not turn towards any one
and the Messenger was calling you from your rear:

"al Is'ad" (to go far away on the ground) is different from as-su'ud
which means to rise up, to ascend. They say, As'ada fi janibi 'I -barr
(he went far in the land), and Sa'ada fi 's-sullam (he climbed up the
ladder). It is said that al-is'ad is, sometimes, used in the meaning of
as-su'ud. The adverb, "when", is related to an implied verb, "remember"
(i.e. remember when you ran off . . .); or to the verb in the preceding
verse, "He turned you away "; or to the one after that, "He might try
you", according to various explantions. al-Layy (to turn towards, to
incline). According to Majma'u 'l -bayan, it is always used in negative
(and never in affirmative), i.e. they do not say, Lawaytu 'ala kadha (I
turned towards so-and-so).

The clause, "and the Messenger was calling you from your rear", the
word, "rear" here is opposite of front. The fact that the Prophet was
calling them from their rear, shows that they had fled away en masse
from around him in such a way that the mob in forefront was far off from
the Prophet and the rear group was nearer; he was calling them but
nobody was turning towards him — neither those in the front nor those in
the rear. They ran off precipitately to save their own skins, leaving
the Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be on him and his progeny),
almost alone surrounded by the hordes of the bloodthirsty enemies.

Of course, the words in the verse 144, and Allah will a few among them
whose determination was not shaken; they did never retreat — neither in
the beginning nor after the rumor spread that the Prophet was martyred,
as is clear from the words, "if then he dies or is killed, will you turn
back upon your heels?"

The words under discussion, "and did not turn towards any one, and the
Messenger was calling you from your rear", clearly show that the rumor
of the Prophet's martyrdom spread among them after they had retreated
and run away from him.

QUR'AN: so He gave you and other sorrow instead of (your) sorrow,. . .
of what you do:

He changed their sorrow to another sorrow in order to divert their
attention from this grief. This "another sorrow" that afflicted them
was, in any case, a divine grace; because Allah says: "so that you might
not grieve at what had escaped you, nor (at) what befell you;" and He
has condemned such grief in His Book where He says: So that you may not
grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant at what He has given
you (57:23). Obviously, this another sorrow that would prevent them from
that disliked grieving would be a grace and bounty. Accordingly, this
"another sorrow" should refer to the remorse that overwhelmed them for
what they had done, to the distress they felt for the victory that had
slipped from their hands because of their weak will-power. Consequently
the second sorrow mentioned in the clause, "instead of (your) sorrow",
would refer to that undesirable grieving; the preposition "bi" in
"bi-ghammin" (instead of sorrow) indicates exchange. The meaning is
therefore as follows: you were grieving at what had escaped you and what
had befallen you; Allah changed it to the remorse and distress for the
lost victory.

Another alternative: "athabakum" (translated here as "He gave you") may
contain the connotation of change. The meaning in this case will be as
follows: He changed your remorse and distress to the grief, entitling
you for its reward. The meanings of the two "sorrows" will interchange,
vis-à-vis, the preceding explanation.

In either case the sentence "so He gave you another sorrow", branches
out from the clause, "and He has certainly pardoned you"; and the next
verse, "Then after sorrow He sent down security upon you. . .", is
closely related to it. The meaning: He pardoned you, then changed your
sorrow to another sorrow to prevent you from that grief of yours which
He was not pleased with, then He sent down upon you security in the form
of slumber which overtook you.

A third alternative is apparently supported by the context, in that the
sentence, "so He gave you another sorrow. . .",would branch from the
immediately preceding clause, "When you ran off precipitately..."; in
this case, "another sorrow" would refer to their running off and
retreating from the battlefield; and the next phrase, bi-ghammin would
be translated "because of the sorrow " (taking the preposition bi for
the cause); it would then refer to the polytheists' attack on them from
the rear which in its turn was the direct result of their disputation
and disobedience.

It is a good meaning. In this case, the clause, "so that you might not
grieve. . .", would mean as follows: We explain these facts to you so
that you might not grieve. Thus, it would fall into line with the words
of Allah: No misfortunate befalls you on the earth nor in your own
souls, but it is in a book before We bring it into existence; surely
that is easy to Allah: So that you may not grieve for what has escaped
you, nor be exultant at what He has given you; and Allah does not love
any arrogant boaster (57:22-23).

(The meaning: He gave you another sorrow that you ran away from the
battle-ground, because the polytheists attacked you from the rear when
you disputed among yourselves and disobeyed the Prophet. We explain it
to you so that you might not grieve at what had escaped you, nor at what
befell you.)

These three possible grammatical structures maintain the order of the
verse and keep the sentences well-connected to each other. The exegetes
have written many other possibilities. For example, to which sentence
does the conjunctive, "so", join the words, "so He gave you another
sorrow". What are the connotations of the first and the second "sorrow"?
What is the import of the preposition "bi" in "bi-hammin" (translated
here as "instead of ")? What is the significance of "so that you might
not"? But they are not tenable in the least, and there is no use of
quoting and commenting on them.

In the light of the first two meanings given by us, "what had escaped
you", (in the clause, "so that you might not grieve at what had escaped
you, nor (at) what befell you") would refer to victory and war booty;
and "what befell you " to their slaughter and injuries.

QUR'AN: Then after sorrow He sent down security upon you, a slumber
coming upon a party of you:

al-Amanah" (security); an-nu'as (lethargy before sleep; light sleep;
slumber); "slumber" is appositional substantive standing for "security".
It is also possible to take al-amanah as plural of al-'amin (peaceful)
like at-talib and at-talabah; in that case it will be circumstantial
clause related to "you" in "upon you"; and "slumber" will become object
of the verb, "sent down ". al-Ghashayan (to cover, to envelop).

The verse shows that this slumber had overtaken only some, and not all,
of the believers, as the clause, "a party of you", clearly says. These
were the people, who had come back to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
after retreating and running off precipitately, and felt remorse and
sorrow for what they had done. Far be it from Allah to pardon them
mercifully while they were still fleeing away from the jihad, and were
thus engaged in one of the greatest sins. Allah says about them, "and He
has certainly pardoned you, and Allah is Gracious to the believers", and
it is unthinkable that Allah's grace would cover a sinner when he was
actively engaged in open defiance and sin — until and unless he
repented. But as explained above, Allah looked on them graciously when
He changed their sorrow to another sorrow in order that they might not
grieve, lest their hearts be polluted with something disliked by Allah;
(and it proves that they had come back and repented before that).

So, these were some of the believers; they were those who felt remorse
for what they had done, and returned to the Prophet gathering around
him. Probably it was at the time when the Prophet separated himself from
the hordes of the polytheists and reached the mountain-pass — although
they returned to him gradually, one by one, when it was known that the
Prophet was not slain.

The other group is referred to in the next sentence, "and (there was)
another party who cared only for their own selves"

QUR'AN: and (there was) another party who cared only for their own
selves:

This was another group of the believers. The word "believer" is used
here only to distinguish them from the hypocrites who have been
mentioned later on (in 3:167-168): And that He might know the hypocrites
and it was said to them: "Come, fight in Allah's way, or defend
yourselves." The said: "If we knew fighting, we would certainly have
followed you" . . . Allah did not give this second group (that cared
only for itself) the honor accorded to the first one (who were pardoned,
then given another sorrow and lastly provided security and slumber).
This second party, on the other hand, was left on their own; they were
wholly engrossed in their own selves, oblivious of every thing else.

Allah mentioned here their two characteristics although one was a
concomitant or branch of the other. First, that they cared only for
themselves. It does not mean that they wanted for their own selves the
happiness — in its real sense. After all, even the believers want the
same thing — the happiness for themselves. Not only the man, every
creature that has a little bit of will and volition thinks only about
itself. What this clause connotes is that their whole attention was
riveted to save their own skins — lest they lose their lives and be
slain. In other words, their only aim in accepting the religion — or
doing any other work — was to let their own selves have the usufruct of
this world. They had professed Islam only because they thought that it
was an unconquerable factor, and that Allah would not like it to be
overwhelmed by His enemies—even if the enemies had all the factors in
their favor. These people sought to gain benefits from the religion as
long as it went on giving them something to their advantage. But if the
situation changed and the tables were turned against them, they would
turn back on their heels, retreating into disbelief.

QUR'AN: they entertained about Allah thoughts of ignorance . . . the
affair is wholly (in the hands) of Allah:

They entertained about Allah a thought that was not correct, was
actually a thought of ignorance. They ascribed to Him a characteristic
that was not true, and was like that which the people of ignorance used
to ascribe to Him. Whatever that thought, it was related to their words,
"Do we have any hand in the affair?". It may also be inferred from the
reply Allah taught His Prophet, i.e., "Say: 'Surely the affair is wholly
(in the hands) of Allah.' " This reply evidently shows that according to
their thinking some affairs were in their own hands. That is why as soon
as they were defeated and massacred, they started having doubts about
religion, and said to each other, "Do we have any hand in the affair?"

It is clear from the above that they thought that outright victory and
triumph was their right. Why? Because they were Muslims! They believed
that the true religion cannot be vanquished, and consequently the
followers of that religion cannot be defeated — because, according to
them, it was incumbent on Allah to help it unconditionally, without any
restriction, because He had promised to help.

So that was the unjust thought, the thought of ignorance. The
idol-worshippers of the days of ignorance believed that Allah was the
Creator of every thing; that at the same time there was a separate Lord
for every phenomenon, like sustenance, life, death, love, war, etc.
Also, every species and every part of creation like man, earth, river,
etc., had a Lord of its own; each Lord managed the affair of his
subjects and none could overpower him within his jurisdiction. They
worshipped those lords so that they would provide them with sustenance,
give them happiness, and protect them from evil and misfortune; and
Allah was like an overlord, allotting each group of His subjects and
each part of His Kingdom to a lord who had full authority to do whatever
he liked within his jurisdiction and in his domain.

If someone thinks that the true religion could not be over powered in
its advancement, and that the Prophet — being the first to receive it
from his Lord and be responsible for it—could not be defeated in his
mission or could not die or be killed, then surely such a man entertains
about Allah thoughts of ignorance. He has taken a partner for Allah, and
idolized the Prophet as a deity who has been given domain over victory
and war booty — while in fact Allah is One Who has no partner, and in
Whose hand lies every power and every authority; and none else besides
Him has any authority at all.

That is why when Allah said in a preceding section, "That He may cut
off a portion from among those who disbelieve, or abase them so that
they should return disappointed of attaining what they desired", He cut
short the speech, turning towards His Prophet to tell him, "You have no
concern in the affair". He did so, lest someone thought the Prophet had
any concern or authority in that cutting off a portion of unbelievers or
abasing them. It is Allah Himself Who has established the system of
cause and effect. The stronger the cause the surer the appearance of its
effect, no matter whether that effect is right or wrong, virtue or vice,
good or bad, guidance or misguidance, justice or injustice. Also, it
makes no difference whether the person involved is believer or
unbeliever, beloved or hated, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) or Abu Sufyan.

Of course, Allah has special providence for His religion and for His
friends. It is because of that concern that the system in the creation
is run in such a way that it would finally lead to the victory of
religion, and prepare the earth for His friends — and the end is for the
pious ones (7:128).

It is a universal law and no exception has been made for prophet-hood
and divine mission. That is why we find that when the normal factors and
causes were present for the advancement of the religion and victory of
the believers (as was the case in some battles of the Prophet), the
believers triumphed; and when there was any weak link in the chain (for
example, hypocrisy raised its head, or they disobeyed the Prophet, or
became weak-hearted or nervous) the polytheists got the upper hand,
defeating the believers. The same was true in case of other prophets,
vis-à-vis, their people. The enemies were men of the world, whose only
aim was to gain benefits of this life; they had overwhelming powers and
gathered strength upon strength, and mobilized army after army.
Naturally, they got upper hand and crushed the prophets — some were
slain like Zakariyya, others were beheaded like Yahya, yet, others had
to leave their place like 'Isa and so on.

Nevertheless, if the truth of the religion could not be established
without disturbing the normal casualty — in other words when it was a
question of life or death for the truth — then it was necessary for
Allah to strengthen the religion in an extraordinary and supernatural
way, lest evidence of its truth be destroyed. Some details of this
subject were given in the discourses on Miracle in volume one, and on
Deeds in volume three.

However, to return to our topic: When these people (who did not care
except for their own selves) asked each other whether they really had
any authority in the affair, it showed that they entertained doubts
about the truth of the religion, and as we have explained above, their
religion had the spirit of idolatry in its body. Therefore, Allah told
His Prophet to reply them in these words: "Surely the affair is wholly
(in the hands) of Allah". Before that He had told the Prophet himself
that he had no concern, no authority, in the affair. All this made it
clear that the religion of nature, the religion of monotheism, is the
one. In which all authority is reserved for Allah; the rest of the
things — including the Prophet — have got no authority at all; rather
they are links in the chain of cause and effect, governed by the divine
system that leads to the law of test and trial.

QUR'AN: They conceal within their souls what they would not reveal to
you. . . and Allah knows what is in the breasts:

It exposes their lack of belief in a much more harsher light than their
words, "Do we have any hand in the affair? ", had shown. Those words had
expressed their doubt in the form of a question. But the idea hidden in
their hearts ("Had we any hand in the affair, we would not have been
slain here"), is an argument to prove according to their thinking
untruth of the religion! That is why although they had dared to utter
the former question before the Prophet, they kept the later words
concealed in their hearts, as it would have clearly shown that they gave
preponderance to disbelief over belief.

Allah therefore told His Prophet to reply their undisclosed thought in
these words: "Say: 'Had you remained in your houses, those for whom
slaughter was ordained would certainly have gone forth to the places
where they (now) lie;' and that Allah might test what was in your
breasts and that He might purge what was in your hearts. " These words
made it clear to them that:

First: When the martyrs were slain in the battlefield, it was not
because you were not on truth nor because the authority was not in your
hands — as you think. Rather, it had happened because the divine decree
— which is enforced without fail — had ordained that those martyrs would
lie in this place. If you had remained behind, those for whom martyrdom
was ordained would surely have gone ahead to the place of their
martyrdom. There is no way of escaping from the appointed time of death;
when it comes nobody can delay it an hour nor can he bring it on before
its times.

Second: It is a divinely established system that test and purge would
encompass each and every human being; it would inevitably cover one and
all, you as well as them. Neither you could avoid coming out of your
homes nor the battle could be put off. All this was necessary in order
that the martyrs might arrive at their right positions and achieve their
high ranks, and you might reach your due places. In this way, everyone
would be placed in his proper place —either felicity or infelicity,
happiness or unhappiness — after the testing of the thoughts and ideas
hidden in your breasts, and the separation of belief and polytheism
concealed in your hearts.

It is amazing to see a number of exegetes writing that the group
mentioned in this verse refers to the hypocrites — when the context
clearly shows that it describes the condition of some believers. As for
the hypocrites (i.e., the group of 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy that had
withdrawn from the battle in the very beginning even before the battle
had started), their condition has been described much later. Of course,
that explanation might be in place if they use the word, "hypocrites",
for those of weak faith, who were so confused in their belief that it
ultimately boi1ed down to rejection of faith (in reality) although they
professed Islam (in words). It is they whom Allah describes as 'those in
whose hearts was disease'.

He says: When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was disease
said: "Their religion has deceived them" (8:49); and among you there are
those who hearken for their sake (9:47). Or may be they want to say that
all hypocrites had not gone back to Madina with 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy.

Even more amazing is some others' assertion that these people were good
believers. They say that these people thought that the affair of divine
help and victory was in their hands because they were on the true
religion, and they had seen how in the battle of Badr they were given
victory and how angels were sent to help them. According to these
exegetes, when they said, "Do we have any hand in the affair?", and
thought, "Had we any hand in the affair, we would not have been slain
here", it was actually their way of confessing that the affair was in
the hands of Allah, not theirs, otherwise they would not have been
massacred.

If we accept this interpretation then the replies (Say: "Surely the
affair is wholly (in the hands) of Allah", and, Say: "Had you remained
in your houses, those for whom slaughter was ordained would certainly
have gone forth to the places where they (now) lie "), would be totally
irrelevant. Some people have realized this defect and then have tried to
explain it away in a way that has compounded the confusion. In any case,
we have already explained its true meaning to you.

QUR'AN: (As for) those of you who turned back on the day when the two
armies met, only the Satan sought to cause them to make slip on account
of some deeds they had done:

"Istazalahumu 'sh-shaytain" (the Satan wanted them to slip); he wanted
so only because they had acquired some evil traits in their psyches, and
done some bad deeds; one evil leads to another, because it emanates from
following the heart's desires —and the heart desires only that which has
some affinity to it.

Someone has taken the preposition "bi" (on account of) as indicative of
instrument, and said that "some deeds " refers to their fuming back on
the day of fighting. But this interpretation is far fetched; because
"some deeds they had done" manifestly shows that their deeds had
preceded there turning back; the two cannot refer to the same thing.

In any case, the verse shows that some sins and evil deeds done by them
had given the Satan power to mislead them by making them retreat and
flee from the jihad. Consequently, there is no ground to suppose that
the verse points to the Satanic cry on the day of Uhud that the Prophet
was killed (as has been narrated in some traditions), because such
interpretation is not supported by the wordings of the verse in any
way.

QUR'AN: and certainly Allah has pardoned them; surely Allah is
Forgiving, Forbearing:

This pardon was granted to those who turned back on the day of battle,
as mentioned in the beginning of the verse. The verse is unrestricted,
and therefore covers all those who fled on that day. In other words it
includes both groups: those on whom slumber was sent down and those who
cared only for their own selves. But there is a difference between the
two, as the former has been honored by Allah, but not the latter.
Because of that difference, this general pardon (which; covers both
groups) does not mention the aspects of honor) related to the formers
pardon (as mentioned earlier).

It also shows that the pardon mentioned in this verse is not the same
as the one described (in 3:152) above, "and He has certainly pardoned
you". That the two pardons are different may be gathered from different
tones used in the two verses. Look first at the former where Allah says,
"and He has certainly pardoned you, and Allah is Gracious to the
believers". It clearly, shows Allah's grace and mercy on them, and
mentions them as "believers"; thereafter it goes on saying that He
changed their sorrow to another sorrow in order that they might not
grieve then tells them that He sent down security on them in the form of
slumber. How different is that tone from the one employed in this verse
where it merely says: "and certainly Allah has pardoned them; surely
Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing". Note that it speaks only about the
pardon, but is silent about all the above-mentioned aspects of honor;
then it ends with the adjective, "Forbearing" - focusing the attention
on the fact that Allah does not make haste in giving punishment. A
pardon accompanied by forbearance indicates that although the Master has
overlooked the sin but still He is not pleased with the sinner.

Suggestion: Those who think that both groups are equal in rank do so
because both have been granted pardon.

Reply: The former pardon is different from the latter in its
connotation, although both denote pardoning. There is no proof to show
that pardon, forgiveness and things like that have the same connotation
everywhere; and we have explained how the two differ in these verses.


