Volume 7: Ale-imran, Verses 156-164
===================================

O you who believe! be not like those who disbelieve and say of their
brethren when they travel in the earth or engage in fighting. "Had they
been with us, they would not have died and they would not have been
slain;" so Allah makes this to be an intense regret in their hearts; and
Allah gives life and causes death; and Allah sees what you do (156). And
if you are slain in the way of Allah or you die, certainly forgiveness
from Allah and mercy is better than what they amass (157). And if indeed
you die or you are slain, certainly to Allah shall you be gathered
together (158). Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that you are lenient
to them, and had you been rough, hard-hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask forgiveness for
them, and take counsel with them in the affair; but when you have
decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah loves those who
trust (in him) (159). If Allah assists you, then there is none that can
overcome you, and if He forsakes you, who is there then that can assist
you after Him? And on Allah should the believers rely (160). And it is
not attributable to a prophet that he should defraud; and he who
defrauds shall bring (with him) that which he has defrauded, on the Day
of Resurrection; then shall every soul be paid back fully what it has
earned, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly (161). Is then he who
follows the pleasure of Allah like him who has brought upon himself the
wrath from Allah, and whose abode is hell? And it is an evil destination
(162). They are of (diverse) grades with Allah, and Allah sees what they
do (163). Certainly Allah conferred (His) favor upon the believers when
He raised among them a Messenger from among themselves, reciting to them
His signs and purifying them, and teaching them the Book and wisdom,
although before that they were surely in manifest error (164).

**COMMENTARY**

It is the continuation of the verses revealed especially about the
battle of Uhud. It deals with another affair affecting them, i.e., the
grief and sorrow that had overwhelmed them because so many of their
braves and notables had been slaughtered. The overwhelming majority of
the martyrs was from the Helpers; as reportedly no more than four of the
Emigrants were martyred. It gives rise to the surmise that most of the
resistance was from the Helpers' side and that the Emigrants had left
the battleground long before them.

In short, these verses explain the error and mistake in sorrowing and
grieving; then turn to another matter resulting from that grief, that
is, their critical attitude towards the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a),
thinking that it was he who had brought them to that disaster and put
them into that perdition. It may be inferred from their talk alluded to
herein: "Had they been with us, they would not have died and they would
not have been slain." In other words, if they had listened to them and
not obeyed the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a) they would have been alive
today. It means that it was he who had led them to the slaughter.

The verses make it clear that it was not meet for the Prophet that he
should deceive anyone; he is Allah's Messenger, noble of heart, sublime
in character; he is lenient to them by mercy of Allah, pardons them and
seeks Allah's forgiveness for them and takes their counsel by permission
of Allah; and Allah has conferred His favor on them by sending him to
them in order that he may take them out of error bringing them to the
guidance.

QUR'AN: O you who believe! be not like those who disbelieve . . . and
Allah sees what you do:

The word, "those who disbelieve", refers to the unbelievers not to the
hypocrites, as some people think. It is not the hypocrisy, per se, which
incites such talks — although the hypocrites had uttered these words.
Such talk, in reality, is a product of disbelief. Thus it was necessary
to ascribe it to the unbelievers.

ad-Darb fil-ard (lit., striking in the earth) metaphorically means
travelling. Al-Ghuzza is plural of al-ghaizi (fighter) like at-talib and
at-tullab or ad-darib and ad-durrab "so Allah makes this to be an
intense regret in their hearts", i.e., so that Allah may punish them
through this intense regret; it has thus put the means in place of the
end. The words, "Allah gives life and causes death", explain the reality
about which the unbelievers had gone astray, and had said, "Had they
been with us, they would not have died and they would not have been
slain.

" The words, "death", as used here, covers natural death as well as
slaughter - we have explained earlier that when used alone, this word
covers every type of death. The clause, "and Allah sees what you do",
explains the reason for the prohibition contained in the words, "be not
like those who disbelieve".

In the clause, "they would not have died and they would not have been
slain", death is mentioned before slaying; the sequence follows that of
the preceding clause, "when they travel . . . or engage in fighting".
Also, unlike slaying (which is an abnormal happening) death is a natural
and normal phenomenon; therefore the normal was mentioned before the
abnormal.

The verse, in short, admonishes the believers not to be like the
unbelievers; they should not say about someone who dies outside his home
town or among strangers, or is slain when engaged in jihad, that if he
had been with them he would not have died or been killed. This type of
talk throws one into mental agony and divine punishment - it is the
intense grief put in their hearts. Moreover, it emanates from sheer
ignorance: Being near them or away from them neither gives life nor
causes death. Giving life and death is among the affairs exclusively
reserved for Allah - the One Who has no partner or colleague. Therefore,
the believers should fear Allah and not be like the unbelievers; and
Allah sees what they do.

QUR'AN: And if you are slain in the way of Allah or you die, certainly
forgiveness from Allah and mercy is better than what they amass:

Obviously, "what they amass", refers to property and wealth as well as
to its concomitants, as these are the best objects of desire in this
life.

This verse mentions martyrdom before normal death, because being slain
in the way of Allah is nearer to divine forgiveness compared to other
deaths. This fine point has caused this change of sequence. Thereafter,
the next verse, "And if indeed you die or you are slain. ..", reverts to
the normal pattern, putting death before slaughter, because there is no
such fine point there to justify any change.

QUR'AN: Thus it is due to mercy from Allah. . . should the believers
rely:

"al-Fazz" (rude, rough); hard-heartedness metaphorically means
unkindness, ill-nature and intolerance; al-infidad (to disperse).

The verse turns away from the believers, addressing the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) directly, although the real import is as follows: It is
due to Our mercy that Our Messenger is lenient to you; that is why We
have ordered him to pardon you, ask forgiveness for you and take counsel
with you in the affair, and to place his trust in Us when he has taken
any decision.

In spite of that meaning, the mode of address was changed (and we have
explained this reason in the beginning of this topic of Uhud) because
there is a current of censure, admonition and stricture running
throughout the narrative, and the Qur'an turns its face from the
believers whenever a chance occurs. This situation is one of them,
because it touches a condition of theirs, which tends to put blame on
the Prophet.

Their grieving for the slaughter of their martyrs might sometimes lead
them to find fault with the Prophet's actions and to accuse him of
bringing them to the hazardous eventuality where they were killed and
extirpated. That is why Allah turned away from them and addressed His
Prophet directly: "Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that you are
lenient to them. . ."

This talk is based on another implied one which may be understood from
the context: "If they are entangled, as you see, in such undesirable
condition that they resemble the unbelievers and intensely grieve for
their martyrs, then it is only due to Our mercy that you are lenient to
them, otherwise, they would have dispersed from around you." (And Allah
knows better).

The clauses, "pardon them therefore and ask forgiveness for them, and
take counsel with them in the affair", endorse the precedent established
by the Prophet, as he was doing all this from the beginning, and he had
taken their counsel shortly before the battle of Uhud. The verse points
to the fact that the Prophet does what he is told by Allah to do, and
Allah is pleased with his performance.

Allah told His Prophet to pardon them (i.e., he should not mete out to
them the consequences of their disobedience), and to ask Allah to
forgive them (and in that case He would certainly do so). The word,
although general and unrestricted, does not include the shari'ah's penal
code and things like that; otherwise it would result in discarding the
whole shari'ah. Moreover, the next clause, "and take counsel with them
in the affair", implies that the preceding two orders too are related to
the matters of government and public affairs — in which he is required
to take counsel with them.

Now we have reached the last sentences: "but when you have decided,
then place your trust in Allah, surely Allah loves those who trust (in
Him)." When He loves, He will be your Guardian and Helper; and will
never forsake you. The next verse makes it clear and even invites the
believers to have trust in Him:

"If Allah assists you, then there is none that can overcome you, and if
He forsakes you, who is there then that can assist you after Him?" Then
He orders the believers to have trust in Him and says: "and on Allah
should the believers rely." The sentence metaphorically puts the effect
in place of the cause. They should rely on Allah because they believe in
Him, and there is no helper or supporter except Him.

QUR'AN: And it is not attributable to a prophet that he should defraud
. . . and Allah sees what they do:

"al-Ghill " (to defraud, to act faithlessly). We have mentioned in
verse 3:79 (It is not meet for a man that Allah should give him the Book
and the wisdom and prophethood, then he should say to men: "Be my
servants rather than Allah's") that this mode of speech is intended to
declare the purity and blamelessness of the Prophet showing that he was
far removed from evil and indecency. This verse means as follows: Far be
it from a prophet to defraud or be faithless to his Lord or the people
(and defrauding the people too is another form of defrauding Allah); it
is because he who defrauds will have to meet his Lord with that which he
has defrauded and shall be paid back fully what he has earned.

Then He declares that accusing the Prophet of defrauding is an unjust
and untenable idea, because he follows the pleasure of Allah, he never
goes beyond His pleasure; and the man who defrauds, brings upon himself
severe wrath of Allah and his abode is the hell, and it is an evil
destination. The verse, "Is then he who follows the pleasure of Allah .
. . ", gives the above connotation.

Then He says that the various groups (i.e., those who follow the
pleasure of Allah and those who bring wrath of Allah upon themselves)
are of diverse grades; and Allah sees what they do. The people should
not think that Allah loses sight of even an iota of good or evil done by
them; they should not be careless in following His pleasure or avoiding
His wrath.

QUR'AN: Certainly Allah conferred (His) favor. . . they were surely in
manifest error:

Again the mode of address has changed, taking the believers as absent.
The general reason of such changes has already been explained. As for
this particular verse, the reason is as follows: The verse intends to
describe Allah's favor upon the believers - because of their belief.
That is why it has used the adjective, "the believers", and not the
verb, "those who believe", because only an adjective shows inseparable
relationship, and only the adjective could show the causality (as has
been said) or could show it more perfectly. The verse's meaning is
clear.

There are other matters worth explaining in this verse; and, God
willing, some will be given in appropriate places.


