Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 176-180
=========================================

And let not those grieve you who fall into unbelief hastily; surely
they can do no harm to Allah at all; Allah intends that He should not
give them any portion on the hereafter, and they shall have a great
chastisement (176). Surely those who have bought unbelief at the price
of faith shall do no harm at all to Allah, and they shall have a painful
chastisement (177).

And let not those who disbelieve think that Our granting them respite
is good for their souls; We grant them respite only that they may
increase in sins; and they shall have a disgraceful chastisement (178).
On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition which you
are in until He separates the evil from the good; nor is Allah going to
make you acquainted with the unseen, but Allah chooses of His messengers
whom He pleases; therefore believe in Allah and His messengers; and if
you believe and guard (against evil), then you shall have a great reward
(179). And let not those deem, who are niggardly in giving away that
which Allah has granted them out of His grace, that it is good for them;
nay, it is worse for them; they shall have that whereof they were
niggardly made to encircle their necks on the Resurrection Day; and
Allah's is the heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is aware
of what you do (180).

**COMMENTARY**

The verses have some connection with those revealed about the battle of
Uhud. These and especially the first four of them are probably a sort of
epilogue to the preceding ones. The most important theme of the
preceding talk was the principle of test and trial, which Allah makes
His servants to undergo. Therefore, these are like the sum total of the
verses of Uhud.

Allah describes here that the test and trial is an established and
continual system from which no one - neither a believer nor an
unbeliever - can escape; Allah will certainly test both in order to
expose and unveil the hidden realities of their souls; in this way the
unbeliever will become totally fit for the Fire, and the evil will
become separated from the good in the believer.

QUR'AN: And let not those grieve you . . . and they shall have a
painful chastisement:

The verse consoles the Prophet and removes sorrow by describing the
reality of the whole affair. The unbelievers compete with each other in
rushing towards disbelief; they help one another to extinguish the light
of Allah and sometimes even succeed in overpowering the believers. It
sometimes grieves the believers, as it seems as if they (the
unbelievers) have scored against Allah by thwarting His plan to make the
word of truth triumphant. But if the believer ponders on the system of
general and all-encompassing test, he will become sure that it is Allah
Who is victorious; and that all persons are relentlessly proceeding to
their destination in order that their creative and legislative guidance
to their goals may be completed.

The unbeliever is driven to that goal by the health and strength,
bounty and comfort that he is provided with - Allah in this way draws
him nearer to his destruction in degrees and unfolds His plan against
him - enabling him to go to the furthest possible limit of transgression
and disobedience. The believer on the other hand is continuously scraped
through test and trial until his belief and faith is cleansed from all
rust and pollution, and he becomes absolutely pure for Allah; while the
unbeliever's polytheistic tendencies are purged of every shade of belief
and he falls down where other friends of false deities and leaders of
infidelity have gone.

The verse therefore means as follows: You should not grieve on account
of those who proceed with increasing haste towards disbelief. Why should
you grieve? Do you think as if they can do any harm to Allah? Certainly
you cannot think so, because they cannot do any harm to Allah; they are
under complete control of Allah, and He is driving them in their lives'
journey to their goal where they will be left with no portion, no share,
in the hereafter (and it is the final limit of their infidelity); and
they shall have a painful chastisement. The prohibition, therefore, in
the clause, "And let not those grieve you", is of advisory nature; the
clause, "surely they can do no harm to Allah", describes the reason of
that prohibition; and the next words, "Allah intends that He should not
give them . . .", explains why they are unable to do any harm to
Allah.

Thereafter Allah makes it clear that no unbeliever - whether he hastens
to fall into disbelief or not - can do any harm to Him. The next verse
thus states the general principle after mentioning a particular case.
This may serve as the reason for the preceding prohibition, "And let not
those grieve you", or it may be treated as the reason of the preceding
reason, "surely they can do no harm "—because it has a general import
which may explain the reason of a particular reason. The meaning thus
will be as follows: We have said that those who fall into disbelief
hastily can do no harm to Allah, because no unbeliever can do any harm
to Him.

QUR'AN: And let not those who disbelieve think. . . a disgraceful
chastisement:

After putting the Prophet's mind at rest regarding the unbelievers'
falling into unbelief hastily, and explaining that in all this they are
in fact subsequent to Allah's plan, Who is driving them to a stage where
they shall have no share in the hereafter, Allah now turns to the
unbelievers themselves. He tells them that they should not be happy with
the respite granted to them by Allah, because Allah through this respite
is giving them a chance to pile up sins over sins, and behind it all
there is a disgraceful chastisement waiting for them — there is nothing
for them except shame and ignominy in the hereafter. This all is based
on the divinely established system of completion that every creature
should bring his potentials to fruition, according to his own choice.

QUR'AN: On no account will Allah leave the believers then you shall
have a great reward:

Now the Speaker turns to the believers. He explains to them that the
system of test and trial covers them too, in order that they too should
reach the stage of completion; and the purified believer may be
distinguished from the impure, and evil and wicked ones may be separated
from the good and virtuous ones.

The next sentence aims at removing a possible misconception. It could
be assumed that there was another way of distinguishing evil from good;
that is, Allah could let the believers know who was wicked and evil so
that they could avoid him. Thus, they could easily be saved all these
troubles and turmoil which they had to suffer because of their
commingling with hypocrites and those whose hearts were diseased.

Allah erases such erroneous impression by pointing out that He has
exclusively reserved the knowledge of unseen to Himself, He does not
reveal it to anyone except to some chosen messengers whom He might
acquaint with it. This is the import of the sentence, "nor is Allah
going to make you acquainted with the unseen, but, Allah chooses of His
messengers whom He pleases".

Thereafter, Allah says to them: As there is no escape from test and
trial, nor from turning the potentials into accomplishments, it is in
your interest that you should believe in Allah and His messengers, so
that you should be counted among the good ones - and not among the evil
ones. But mere belief is not sufficient to preserve the blessedness of
the life, it is also necessary to support it with good deeds that would
raise the belief up to Allah and preserve its blessings - it is then
that the reward would be complete. It was with this connotation in view
that the Qur'an first said, "therefore believe in Allah and His
messengers", and then completed it with the next clause, "and if you
believe and guard (against evil), then you shall have a great reward".

It is evident from this verse that: -

First: Every soul has to reach its perfection, has to be brought to its
goal and destination — be it felicity and happiness or infelicity and
unhappiness. It is an issue, which cannot be avoided, a proposition from
which there is no escape.

Second: The good and the evil are attributed to the "self" or "soul" of
the persons, but at the same time and in the same context they depend on
the belief and the disbelief respectively - and these two are within
man's power and emanate from his will and choice. This is among the
finest Qur'anic realities which opens the door to many secrets of
monotheism. It may be understood from the words of Allah: And every one
has a direction to which he would turn; therefore hasten to (do) good
works (2:148), when read in conjunction with the words:

but that He might try you in what He gave you, therefore strive with
one another to hasten to virtuous deeds (5:48). We shall write on this
topic in full detail under the verse: That Allah may separate the impure
from the pure, and put the impure, some of it upon the other, and pile
it up together, then cast it into hell (8:37).

Third: The belief in Allah and His messengers is the essence of the
goodness of life, i.e., goodness of "person" or "soul". So far as reward
is concerned it depends upon piety and good deeds. That is why Allah has
first mentioned the subject of separating the good from the evil; then
basing on that, has given the order to believe in Allah and His
messengers; thereafter when He wanted to mention the reward, He added
piety (guarding against evil) to the belief; and said: "and if you
believe and guard (against evil), then you shall have a great reward
".

From the above, you may easily understand the connotation of the verse
97 of chapter 16: Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a
believer, We will most certainly make him live a happy life, and We will
most certainly give them their reward for the best of what they did.
Evidently his happy life is the result of his belief, and emanates from
it; but the reward is the result of the good deeds. Therefore, belief is
the soul of the good life. But its continuity - so that it may produce
the desired effects - requires good deeds. It is like the natural life
which depends on a soul for its coming into being but its continuity
depends on the use of its powers and organs - if all become still, all
will die and life will end.

The name, Allah, has been repeated several (i.e. four) times in this
verse. There was a possibility of using pronouns in place of the latter
three, but the proper Divine Name was used so that it might clearly
guide to the Source of all greatness and beauty, because the verses were
related to those affairs which are exclusively reserved to Him in His
divinity, that is, test of the creatures, knowledge of the unseen,
selection of the messengers and man's ability to believe in Him.

QUR'AN: And let not those deem, . . . and Allah is aware of what you
do:

The preceding verse has described how Allah gives respite to the
unbelievers. The case of niggardliness, of not spending the wealth in
the way of Allah, is not different from that; a niggardly person
rejoices in, and boasts of, the riches he has amassed. Therefore Allah
now addresses them and shows that what they are proud of, is actually
worse for them. The wealth is described as, "that which Allah has
granted them out of His grace"; it shows how mean they are and how much
they should be condemned.

The description, that the wealth, which they are so niggardly about,
shall become like iron collar around their necks, shows why their
niggardliness is worse for them. The clause, "and Allah's is the
heritage of the heavens and the earth", is apparently a circumstantial
one related to "the Resurrection Day", that is, on the Resurrection Day
when to Allah will belong the said heritage The same is the position of
the last clause, "and Allah is aware of what you do".

As a remote possibility, the words, "and Allah's is the heritage...,
may be treated as the circumstantial clause of the verb, "are
niggardly"; while the next clause, "and Allah is aware of what you do",
may have the same position (i.e. circumstantial clause of, "are
niggardly "), or may be treated as an independent sentence.

**TRADITIONS**

al-Baqir (a.s.) was asked about the unbeliever whether death was better
for him or life. He said: "Death is better for the believer and the
unbeliever (both); because Allah says, and that which is with Allah is
best for the righteous (3:198), and He (also) says: 'And let not those
who disbelieve think that Our granting them respite is good for their
souls. . ." (at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: The argument given in this tradition does not fully
conform with the style of the Imams of the Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.), because
the word, "righteous", refers to only a particular group of the
believers, not to all of them. Although it may be said that the word
covers all the believers because each of them has got some portion of
righteousness in him.
A tradition of the above meaning has been narrated in ad-Durru
'I-manthur, from Ibn Mas'ud.


