Volume 7: Surah Ale-imran, Verses 181-189
=========================================

Allah has certainly heard the saying of those who said: "Surely Allah
is poor and we are rich." We shall certainly write what they say, and
their killing the prophets unjustly, and We shall say: "Taste the
chastisement of burning (181). This is for what your (own) hands have
sent before and because Allah is not in the least unjust to the
servants." (182). (Those are they) who said: "Surely Allah has enjoined
us that we should not believe in any messenger until he brings us an
offering, which the fire consumes." Say: "Indeed, there came to you
messengers before me with clear evidences and with that which you said;
why did you kill them if you are truthful?" (183). But if they reject
you, so indeed were rejected before you messengers who came with clear
evidences and scriptures and the illuminating Book (184).

Every soul shall taste of death, and you shall only be paid fully your
reward on the Resurrection Day; then whoever is removed far away from
the Fire and is made to enter the Garden, he indeed has attained the
object; and the life of this world is nothing but a provision of
vanities (185). You shall certainly be tried respecting your wealth and
your souls, and you shall certainly hear from those who have been given
the Book before you and from those who are polytheists much annoying
(talk); and if you are patient and guard (against evil), surely this is
one of the matters of (great) resolve (186). And when Allah made a
covenant with those who were given the Book: "You shall certainly make
it known to men and you shall not hide it"; but they cast it behind
their backs and took a small price for it; so evil is that which they
buy (187). Do not think those who rejoice for what they have brought
about and love that they should be praised for what they have not done â€”
so by no means think them to be safe from the chastisement, and they
shall have a painful chastisement (188). And Allah's is the Kingdom of
the heavens and the earth, and Allah has power above all things (189).

**COMMENTARY**

The verses are connected with the preceding ones. The general import of
the preceding verses was to invigorate the believers and inspire them to
fight in the way of Allah with their properties and their lives, as well
as to warn them against weak-heartedness, cowardice and niggardliness.
This connects it to the Jews' talk that "Allah is poor and we are rich",
together with their upsetting the Muslims' affairs, rejecting the
evidence of messenger-ship and hiding what they had been enjoined to
make known. These are the very topics, which these verses deal with. In
addition, they strengthen the believers' hearts to remain firm and
steadfast; urge them to be patient and courageous; and exhort them to
spend in the way of Allah.

QUR'AN: Allah has certainly heard the saying of those who said: "Surely
Allah is poor and we are rich":

The saying was of the Jews, as may be understood from the next clause
which mentions their slaying of the prophets, apart from other
indications.

They said it after they had heard such divine words as, Who is it that
will lend to Allah a goodly loan . . . (2:245). This view is somewhat
strengthened when it is noted that this verse comes immediately after
the one, which condemns niggardly person: "And let not those deem, who
are niggardly in giving away. . . ". Or may be they said it when they
saw the poverty and starvation of most of the believers. They taunted
them saying that had their Lord been rich, He would have taken care of
them and made them rich; therefore He is but poor while we are rich.

QUR'AN: We shall certainly write . . . the chastisement of burning:

Writing here means preservation and recording; or it may refer to the
writing in the scroll of their deeds - the net result is the same in
both cases. Their killing the prophets unjustly means that they had
killed them knowingly and intentionally - not by mistake, ignorance or
misunderstanding. Allah has joined this utterance of theirs to their
slaying of the prophets because this was a very grievous word;
"al-hariq" (translated here as burning) refers to the Hell-fire; or
flame; it has been said that it has a transitive sense, that is, that
which burns something.

QUR'AN: "This is for what your (own) hands . . . to the servants":

This clause, "what your (own) hands have sent before", means 'whatever
deeds you have sent before'; hands have been mentioned because usually
they are instrumental in sending a thing somewhere. The clause, "and
because Allah is not in the least unjust to the servants", is in
conjunction with the words, "what your (own) hands have sent", and they
explain the reason for writing and punishment.

If Allah had not recorded their deeds and not rewarded or punished them
accordingly, it would have been tantamount to neglecting the system of
the deeds; and this in its turn would have been a gross and enormous
injustice because huge number of deeds would be involved - in this way
Allah would become most unjust to the servants; far above is He from
such things.

QUR'AN: (Those are they) who said: "Surely Allah has enjoined us. . .
if you are truthful":

It is related to the preceding, "those who said". "al-Ahd" (enjoining;
order); al-qurban (that which is offered, is sacrificed like sheep,
etc.); "fire consumes" means the fire burns it. The clause, "indeed,
there came to you messengers before me", refers to such prophets as
Zakariyya and Yahya - those Israelite prophets who were slain by the
Jews.

QUR'AN: But if they reject you, so indeed were rejected before you
messengers. . .:

It aims at consoling the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) when they belied him.
"az-Zubur" is plural of az-zabur (a book of wisdom and sermons). The
phrase, "scriptures and the illuminating book", refers to such
revelations as the book of Nuh, scriptures of Ibrahim, the Torah and the
Injil.

QUR'AN: Every soul shall taste of death . . . a provision of
vanities:

The verse contains a good promise for the believer and a threat to the
rejecter. It begins with a general rule that encompasses every living
being. "at-Tawfiyah" (full payment). Someone has proved the existence of
al-Barzakh from this verse, because it implies some partial recompense
before the Resurrection Day, when the full payment will be made. It is a
good argument.

"az-Zahzahah" (to remove far), it in fact implies repeated pulling with
haste; al-fawz (to attain the desired object); al-ghurur is either
infinitive of gharra (he deceived; he deluded), or plural of al-gharr
(deceiver).

QUR'AN: You shall certainly be tried respecting your wealth and your
souls. . .:

"al-lbla' " (to test; to try). Allah first described the tests and
trials that had afflicted the believers; then He mentioned the
utterances of the Jews, which could weaken the believers' will. Now He
informs them that such divine tests and such annoying talks of the
People of the Book and the polytheists will repeatedly affect the
believers; that they will have to face such things and bear such talks.
They should remain patient and pious, should guard themselves against
evil, in order that Allah may protect them from mistakes and
weak-heartedness; so that they should emerge as people of strong and
firm determination.

This prophecy gives them advance news of what they would have to suffer
in future; it aims at preparing them mentally for it before hand, so
that they may reconcile themselves to it. "Adhan kathiran" (much
annoyance) has been used for "annoying talk"; it is a metaphorical use
of effect in place of cause.

QUR'AN: And when Allah made a covenant. . . evil is that which they
buy:

"an-Nabdh" (to cast away; to throw away); "they cast it behind their
backs" is an idiom meaning 'they left it', 'they neglected it'. Its
opposite idiom, 'he put it before his eyes', means 'he directed his
attention to it'. QUR'AN: Do not think those who rejoice . . . Allah has
power over all things:

The phrase, "for what they have brought about ", means the wealth that
Allah has bestowed upon them\*, which is accompanied by love of riches
and niggardliness. "al-Mafazah" (deliverance; safety). These people were
destroyed because their hearts were attached to the falsehood, and
consequently they removed themselves from the protection of the truth.

At the end Allah mentions His Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and
His power over every thing. These two attributes may explain the reason
of all things described in the preceding verses.

**TRADITIONS**

Ibn Jarir and Ibn al-Mundhir have narrated from Qatadah about the
verse, Allah has certainly heard the saying of those .... that he said:
"It has been reported to us that it was revealed about Huyayy ibn
Akhtab; when the verse (2:245) was revealed that: Who is it that will
lend to Allah, a goodly loan, so He will multiply it for him manifold,
he said: 'Our Lord asks loan from us! Surely a poor (man) asks loan from
a rich one.' " (ad-Durru 'I-manthur )

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said regarding this verse: "By Allah, they had not seen
Allah so that they could know He was poor. But they saw the friends of
Allah (who were) poor. So they said: 'Had He (Allah) been rich He would
have made His friends rich. Thus, they boasted against Allah of (their)
riches." (at-Tafsir, al-'Ayyashi )

al-Baqir (a.s.) said: "They are those who think that the Imam is in
need of what they bring to him." (al-Manaqib)

The author says: As described in the Commentary, the first two meanings
correspond to the verse. The third tradition is based on the "flow" of
the Qur'an.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "There was, between those who uttered (this word)
and those who killed (the prophets), a gap of five hundred years; but
Allah attached to them the (crime of) murder because they were pleased
with what they (i.e., their ancestors) had done. " (al-Kafi) The author
says: The gap mentioned in it does not agree with the current Christian
Era. See the historical discourse given earlier.

It is reported in ad-Durru 'l-manthour under the verse: Every soul
shall taste of death: "Bin Abu Haiti has narrated from 'Ali bins Abu
Tali (as.) that he said: 'When the Prophet died and the condolence
began, there came to them a comer - they heard his voice but did not see
his person - and he said: "Peace be upon you, O People of the House! and
mercy of Allah and His blessings. Every soul is to taste of the death,
and you shall only be paid fully your reward on the Resurrection Day.
Indeed, there is in Allah consolation for every misfortune, and
successor of everyone who dies, and overtaking everything that is lost.
Therefore, in Allah put your trust, and to Him attach your hope; because
afflicted is he who is deprived of reward." ' Then 'Ali (a.s.) said: 'He
was al-Khidr.' "

Ibn Marduway has narrated from Sahl ibn Sa'd that he said: "The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said: 'Verily, a place in the Garden (just
sufficient) to put a whip of one of you in, is better than the world and
all that is in it.' Then he recited this verse: then whoever is removed
far away from the fire and is made to enter the Garden, he indeed has
attained the object. " (ad-Durru 'I-manthur)

The author says: (as-Suyuti) has narrated this meaning in that book
through other chains from other Companions. It should be noted here that
there are numerous traditions purporting to give the reason of
revelation of these verses; but we have left them out because evidently
they are merely people's attempts to apply the verses to various events;
they are not real reasons of revelation.

\* Evidently it is a slip of pen. The meaning given by the author could
be in place if the verb had been in passive voice, that is, utu (they
were given; they were brought). But it is in active voice, that is, ataw
(they brought; they gave). (tr.)


