Hadith 31 to 40
===============

Hadīth No. 31
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن أبي يزيد الأودي عن أبيه، قال: دخل أبو هريرة رضي الله عنه المسجد،
فاجتمع إليه الناس، فقام إليه شاب، فقال: أنشدك بالله! أسمعت رسول الله صلى
الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول: من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه، اللهم! وال من والاه،
وعاد من عاداه؟ قال: فقال: أشهد أني سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم يقول: من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه، اللهم! وال من والاه، وعاد من عاداه.
</p>

“Abū Yazīd al-Awdī has related it on the authority of his father that
(once) Abū Hurayrah (RA) entered the mosque. The people gathered round
him. One young man (from among them) stood up and said: I make you swear
by Allāh and ask you: Have you heard the Messenger of Allāh (SAW) say
that one who has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master. O Allāh!
Befriend him who befriends him (‘Alī), and be his enemy who is his
enemy. At this he said: I bear witness that I have heard the Messenger
of Allāh (SAW) say this: One who has me as his master has ‘Alī as his
master. O Allāh! Befriend him who befriends him and be his enemy who is
his enemy.”[34]

Hadīth No. 32
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن أبي إسحاق، قال: سمعت سعيد بن وهب رضي الله عنه، قال: نشد علي الناس،
فقام خمسة أو ستة من أصحاب النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، فشهدوا أن رسول
الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم قال: من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه.
</p>

“Abū Ishāq narrated that he heard Sa‘īd bin Wahb say: ‘Alī (RA) took
oath from the people, at which five or six Companions (RA) stood up and
bore witness that Allāh’s Messenger (SAW) had said: One who has me as
his master has ‘Alī as his master.”[35]

Hadīth No. 33
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن عميرة بن سعد رضي الله عنهما، أنه سمع عليا رضي الله عنه وهو ينشد في
الرحبة: من سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول: من كنت مولاه فعلي
مولاه؟ فقام ستة نفر فشهدوا.
</p>

“‘Amīrah bin Sa‘d رضي الله عنهما)) has narrated that he heard ‘Alī (RA)
make people swear in an open plain and asked them who had heard the
Prophet (SAW) say that who has him as his master has ‘Alī as him master.
At this six persons stood up and bore witness to it.”[36]

Hadīth No. 34
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن أبي الطفيل، عن زيد بن أرقم رضي الله عنه، قال: نشد علي الناس: من سمع
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول يوم غدير خم: ألستم تعلمون أني
أولى بالمؤمنين من أنفسهم؟ قالوا: بلى. قال: فمن كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه،
اللهم! وال من والاه، وعاد من عاداه؟ فقام أثنا عشر رجلا فشهدوا بذلك.
</p>

“Abū Tufayl narrated it on the authority of Zayd bin Arqam (RA) that
‘Alī (RA) asked people on oath who among them had heard the Messenger of
Allāh (SAW) say on the day of Ghadīr Khum: Don’t you know that I am
nearer than the lives of the believers? They said: Why not! He said: One
who has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master. O Allāh! Befriend him
who befriends him (‘Alī) and be his enemy who is his (‘Alī’s) enemy. (At
Ali’s conversation,) twelve persons stood up and bore witness to this
incident.”[37]

Hadīth No. 35
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن سعيد بن وهب وعن زيد بن يثيع رضي الله عنهما، قالا: نشد علي رضي الله
عنه الناس في الرحبة من سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول يوم
غدير خم إلا قام. قال: فقام من قبل سعيد ستة ومن قبل زيد ستة، فشهدوا أنهم
سمعوا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول لعلي رضي الله عنه يوم غدير
خم: أليس الله أولى بالمؤمنين؟ قالوا: بلى. قال: اللهم! من كنت مولاه فعلي
مولاه، اللهم! وال من والاه، وعاد من عاداه.
</p>

‘Sa‘īd bin Wahb and Zayd bin Yuthay‘ رضي الله عنهما)) narrate that ‘Alī
(RA) made people swear in an open plain and asked anyone to stand up who
had heard the Prophet (SAW) say something on the day of Ghadīr Khum. The
narrator says: Six (men) from Sa‘īd’s side and six from Zayd’s side
stood up and bore witness that they had heard the Prophet (SAW) say
about ‘Alī (RA) on the day of Ghadīr Khum: Is Allāh not nearer than the
lives of the believers? The people said: Why not! Then he said: O Allāh!
One who has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master. O Allāh! Be you his
friend who befriends him (‘Alī), and be his enemy who is his (‘Alī’s)
enemy.”[38]

Hadīth No. 36
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى، قال: شهدت عليا رضي الله عنه في الرحبة ينشد
الناس: أنشد الله! من سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول يوم غدير
خم: من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه؟ لما قام فشهد. قال عبد الرحمن: فقام أثنا عشر
بدريا كأني أنظر إلى أحدهم، فقالوا: نشهد أنا سمعنا رسول الله صلى الله
عليه وآله وسلم يقول يوم غدير خم: ألست أولى بالمؤمنين من أنفسهم، وأزواجي
أمهاتهم؟ فقلنا: بلى، يا رسول الله! قال: فمن كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه، اللهم!
وال من والاه، وعاد من عاداه.
</p>

“‘Abd-ur-Rahmān bin Abī Laylā narrates that I saw ‘Alī (RA) in a vast
plain. At that time he was asking people on oath that anyone who had
heard the Messenger of Allāh (SAW) say on the day of Ghadīr Khum - one
who has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master - should stand up and
bear witness. ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān said: At this twelve Badrī[39] Companions
(RA) stood up as I am looking at one of them. Those (Badrī Companions)
said: We bear witness that we heard the Messenger of Allāh (SAW) say on
the day of Ghadīr Khum: Am I not nearer than the lives of the believers
and are not my wives their mothers? All of them said: Why not, O
Messenger of Allāh! At this he said: One who has me as his master has
‘Alī as his master. O Allāh! Befriend him who befriends him (‘Alī) and
be his enemy who is his (‘Alī’s) enemy.”[40]

Hadīth No. 37
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن عمرو بن ذي مر، وسعيد بن وهب، وعن زيد بن يثيع، قالوا: سمعنا عليا رضي
الله عنه يقول: نشدت الله رجلا سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول
يوم غدير خم، لما قام، فقام ثلاثة عشر رجلا فشهدوا أن رسول الله صلى الله
عليه وآله وسلم قال: ألست أولى بالمؤمنين من أنفسهم؟ قالوا: بلى، يا رسول
الله! قال: فأخذ بيد علي، فقال: من كنت مولاه فهذا مولاه، اللهم! وال من
والاه، وعاد من عاداه، وأحب من أحبه، وأبغض من يبغضه، وانصر من نصره، واخذل
من خذله.
</p>

“Amr bin Dhī Mur, Sa‘īd bin Wahb and Zayd bin Yuthay‘(RA) narrate that
we heard ‘Alī (RA) say: I want to ask every man on oath who may have
heard the Prophet (SAW) say this on the day of Ghadīr Khum. At this
thirteen men stood up and bore witness that the Messenger of Allāh (SAW)
said: Am I not nearer than the lives of the believers? All of them said:
Why not! O Messenger of Allāh. The narrator says that he then caught
hold of ‘Alī’s hand and said: One who has me as his master has ‘Alī as
his master. O Allāh! Befriend him who befriends him, and be his enemy
who is his (‘Alī’s) enemy, love him who loves him (‘Alī), bear malice
towards him who bears malice towards him (‘Alī), help him who helps him
(‘Alī) and degrade him who (tries to) degrade him (‘Alī).”[41]

Hadīth No. 38
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن زاذان بن عمر، قال: سمعت عليا رضي الله عنه في الرحبة، وهو ينشد الناس
من شهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يوم غدير خم وهو يقول ما قال،
فقام ثلاثة عشر رجلا فشهدوا أنهم سمعوا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم
وهو يقول: من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه.
</p>

“Zādhān bin ‘Umar has narrated: I heard ‘Alī (RA) in a meeting ask
people on oath: Who has heard the Messenger of Allāh (SAW) say something
on the day of Gadhīr Khum? At this, thirteen men stood up and they
confirmed that they had heard the Messenger of Allāh (SAW) say this: One
who has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master.”[42]

Hadīth No. 39
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى، قال: خطب علي رضي الله عنه، فقال: أنشد الله
امرأ نشدة الإسلام سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يوم غدير خم أخذ
بيدي، يقول: ألست أولى بكم يا معشر المسلمين من أنفسكم؟ قالوا: بلى، يا
رسول الله! قال: من كنت مولاه فعلي مولاه، اللهم! وال من والاه، وعاد من
عاداه، وانصر من نصره، واخذل من خذله. إلا قام فشهد، فقام بضعة عشر رجلا
فشهدوا، وكتم قوم، فما فنوا من الدنيا إلا عموا وبرصوا.
</p>

“It is related by ‘Abd-ur-Rahmān bin Abī Laylā that ‘Alī (RA) addressed
(the people) and said: I make the person swear by Allāh (SWT) and Islam
to come forward who may have heard the Prophet (SAW) say on the day of
Ghadīr Khum while holding my hand: O Muslims! Am I not nearer than your
lives? All of them said: Why not! O Messenger of Allāh. He said: One who
has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master. O Allāh! Befriend him who
befriends him and be his enemy who is his (‘Alī’s) enemy, assist him who
assists him, help him who helps him and disgrace him who (wishes to)
disgrace him (‘Alī). At this, more than thirteen persons stood up and
bore witness and those who concealed these facts turned blind or died of
leprosy.”[43]

Hadīth No. 40
-------------

<p dir="rtl">
عن الأصبغ بن نباتة، قال: نشد علي رضي الله عنه الناس في الرحبة: من سمع
النبي صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يوم غدير خم، ما قال إلا قام، ولا يقوم إلا
من سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول، فقام بضعة عشر رجلا، فيهم:
أبو أيوب الأنصاري، وأبو عمرة بن عمرو بن محصن، وأبو زينب، وسهل بن حنيف،
وخزيمة بن ثابت، وعبد الله بن ثابت الأنصاري، وحبشى بن جنادة السلولي،
وعبيد بن عازب الأنصاري، والنعمان بن عجلان الأنصاري، وثابت بن وديعة
الأنصاري، وأبو فضالة الأنصاري، وعبد الرحمان بن عبد رب الأنصاري رضي الله
عنهم، فقالوا: نشهد أنا سمعنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم يقول:
ألا! إن الله عز وجل وليي وأنا ولي المؤمنين، ألا! فمن كنت مولاه فعلي
مولاه، اللهم! وال من والاه، وعاد من عاداه، وأحب من أحبه، وأبغض من أبغضه،
وأعن من أعانه.
</p>

“Asbagh bin Nubātah has narrated that ‘Alī (RA) made people swear in an
open plain and asked anyone who had heard the Prophet (SAW) say this to
stand up. At this more than thirteen persons stood up including Abū
Ayyūb al-Ansārī, Abū ‘Amrah bin ‘Amr bin Muhsan, Abū Zaynab, Sahl bin
Hunayf, Khuzaymah bin Thābit, ‘Abdullāh bin Thābit al-Ansārī, Hubshā bin
Junādah as-Salūlī, ‘Ubayd bin ‘Āzib al-Ansārī, Nu‘mān bin ‘Ajlān
al-Ansārī, Thābit bin Wadī‘ah al-Ansārī, Abū Fadālah al-Ansārī and
‘Abd-ur

Rahmān bin ‘Abd Rab al-Ansārī (RA). All of them said: We bear witness
that we heard from the Messenger of Allāh (SAW): Beware! Allāh (SWT) is
my Guardian and I am the guardian of the believers. I warn you! One who
has me as his master has ‘Alī as his master. O Allāh! Befriend him who
befriends him (‘Alī) and be his enemy who is his (‘Alī’s) enemy, love
him who loves him (‘Alī), bear malice towards him who bears malice
towards him and help him who helps him (‘Alī).”[44]


