Publisher's Preface
===================

**In The Name of Allāh, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful**

Ansariyan Publications, publishers of quality Islamic literature in
various languages, is pleased to present this book to you which is one
of the translated works of our brother, Yasin T. al-Jibouri. We have
already published a number of books written or translated by al-Jibouri
and are pleased to add this one, too, to the list. The first book
written by al-Jibouri which Ansariyan published in 1421 A.H./2000 A.D.
was *Fast of the Month of Ramadān: Philosophy and Ahkām* followed by
*Allāh: The Concept of God in Islam* and *Kerbala and Beyond*. This book
is one of his numerous translations.

Our readers often ask us to introduce the authors or translators to
them; therefore, instead of repeating ourselves, we would like to refer
them to our Publisher's Preface in Uswat al-Arifeen if they wish to read
full details about the translator. Here, we would like to give you just
a brief idea about him:

Al-Jibouri was born in Baghdad, Iraq, in 1946 and lived most of his life
in holy al-Kadhimiyya city. He obtained his B.A. in English on June 30,
1969 from the College of Arts, Baghdad University, and his M.A. in
English from (then) Atlanta University (now Clark-Atlanta University),
Atlanta, Georgia, on December 20, 1978, and in March of 1988 a
Certificate with Honors in Microprocessors and Microcomputers from
N.R.I. of Washington, D.C. in addition to three certificates in
electronics and programming, including advanced programming, writing
more than 100 programs.

He taught English as a second language at high schools in Iraq, a
vocational institute in Saudi Arabia, and a University in the U.S. He
edited and revised three English translations of the Holy Qur’ān: 1) by
S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali, 2) by A. Yusuf Ali, and 3) by M.H. Shakir. He also
edited several newsletters and magazines, including *Middle East
Business Magazine*, a high quality business magazine headquartered in
Arlington, Virginia, U.S.A., of which he became Senior Editor. Among the
books he edited are: *Socio-Economic Justice with Particular Reference
to Nahjul-Balagha, A Biography of Leaders of Islam* and *Your Kalima and
the Savior.*

He is the first person ever to translate works of the martyred economist
Imam Ayatullāh Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr such as: *Contemporary Man and the
Social Problem, A General Outlook at Rituals, The General Bases of
Banking in the Muslim Society,* and *What Do You Know About Islamic
Economics?* The second title only is available with the U.S. Library of
Congress in Washington, D.C., U.S.A. He also translated and/or published
numerous titles; among them are:

*A Biography of Muhammad B*ā*qir al-Sadr, The Form of Islamic Government
and Wil*ā*yat al-Faqeeh, About the World Political Situation From a
Muslim’s Viewpoint, Our Faith* and *A Biography of Imam al-Rida* by the
late Shaikh Muhammad Jawad Fadlallah, in addition to a large number of
political tracts, pamphlets, translations, and newsletters.

His translated works include the following:

1) The first four volumes of the series titled *Al-Islam Risālatuna,*  
*2) Al-Muraja\`āt: A Shi\`i-Sunni Dialogue*, the first authentic English
translation of *Al-Muraja’at* by Imam Sayyid Sharafuddeen Sadrud-Deen
al-Musawi,  
 3) *Al-Shi\`a hum Ahl al-Sunnah* by Dr. Muhammad al-Tijani al-Samawi,  
 4) *Al-Maqtal* (the martyrdom epic of Imam Husain) by Abd al-Razzaq
al-Muqarram's book*.*

He also translated the following titles originally authored in Arabic by
Rachad el-Moussaoui: *Best Month, Best Night; The Book of Istikhāra;*
*Weapon of the Prophets; Miracles of the Holy Qur’ān;* and *The Great
Names of Allāh (Asmā’ Allāh al-Husna).* These titles do not carry the
Translator's name, however.

He translated 2 books by the late Grand Ayatullāh Muhammed al-Shirazi:
1) *Canon: A Glimpse at the Islamic Law* and 2) *The Pathway to an
Islamic Revival*.

He wrote several articles for *Islamic Monitor*, bulletin of the Islamic
Research & Information Center.

He has written eight books:

1) Volume One of his autobiography titled *Memoirs of a Shi\`a
Missionary in America: Two Decades of Da\`wah,*  
*2) Fast of the Month of Ramadān: Philosophy and Ahkām,*  
 3) *The Ninety-Nine Attributes of Allāh,*  
 4) *Mary and Jesus in Islam,*  
 5) *Allāh: The Concept of God in* Islam,  
 6) *Muhammed: The Prophet and Messenger of Allāh*,  
 7) *Ghadir Khumm: Where Islam was Perfected*, and  
 8) *Kerbala and Beyond*

He was quite active in Islamic Da'wa work in the United States. He
founded the Islamic Society of Georgia, Inc. (Atlanta, Georgia) in 1973,
the Islamic Revival Movement in 1980, the International Islamic Society
of Virginia, Inc. in 1982, and the *Iraq News Monitor* in 1992. Edited
*Islamic Affairs* newsletter from January 1974 – June 1989.

On September 3, 2003, he returned to his homeland and resumed living in
al-Kadhimiyya where he has so far translated five books one of which is
this title in addition to *Kashf al-Reeba an Ahkam al-Gheeba* by Sheikh
Taqi ad-Dīn Ibraim son of Ali al-\`Āmili, *Al-Sirāj: The Lantern*
(towards the Path of Allāh) by Sheikh Hussain bin Ali bin Sadiq
al-Bahrāni and *The Truth about the Shi'ah Ithna-Asheri Faith* by As'ad
Wahid al-Qasim. All these books are available with Ansariyan.

We solicit your comments about these and other books which we publish,
and surely your opinion counts with us.

***Ansariyan Publications***


