Explanation By Imam Al-khomeini
===============================

Imam al-Khomeini, may his shade prolong, has a viewpoint about this
definition. He says the following :

"The explanation of conceit according to what is mentioned by the
greatest mentor Bah ad-Deen is correct, but the deed has to be examined
more generally than just inwardly and outwardly, more generally than a
good or an ugly deed, because conceit, just as it is ascertained by the
acts of the senses, it also is compared with the side actions, running
them. Just as the person who has a commendable merit feels conceited,
admiring his merit, so is the case with the one who has the bad
characteristic, too, for he may also feel proud of himself or of his
characteristic. It is as has been indicated in the sacred tradition
which we mentioned as narrated by Ali son of Suwaid quoting the father
of al-Hassan (a.s) in which the Imam (a.s) says, "... And among them is
that the had deed of a servant of Allah is decorated for him, so he sees
it good, and he feels proud of it, thinking that he is doing well. And
among them is that a servant believes in his Lord, so he thinks he is
thus doing Allah a favor. The reason why he mentioned these two is
because they are hidden from the sight of most people, and so that
people may also get to know that the good feeling and elation, which the
Baha'i mentor excludes from conceit and regards as good, is according to
the type of one's attitude."

The gist of the viewpoint of imam al-Khomeini with regard to the
statement of the mentor indicates three matters:

FIRST : The mentor, may Allah have mercy on him, has specifically
talked about conceit when someone feels conceited about his physical
deeds, such as -fasting during the time and praying during the night,
and the like, and apparently his objective from doing so is not the same
as he had mentioned of the deeds of adoration, benevolence, etc., not
looking at the inward deeds. Conceit, as we have already stated, is
found in the innate, the inwardly, deeds such as one feeling proud of
his belief, which is an action relevant to the heart, an internal
submission, feeling proud of his belief in the Messenger as though he
feels he is doing Allah and His Messenger a favor, as stated in the
tradition quoted above. Thus, conceit is found in the inward
characteristics and faculties such as conceit about knowledge, courage,
generosity, etc.

SECOND : The mentor, may he be sanctified, specifically discussed
conceit about side deeds, with regard to the good deeds, too, saying,
"There is no doubt that one who does good deeds feels elated." The case
is that conceit is not confined to the good deeds but it may also take
place in the bad ones. Quite many unbelievers and hypocrites feel proud
of their unbelief and hypocrisy. Those whose faculties are mean are
dragged into feeling proud of their bad characteristics as we, God
willing, will mention. We have pointed out to all of this in the
tradition cited above, which is the statement of the imam in which he
says that a servant's bad deed is decorated for him, so he sees it as
being good, and he likes it. Such is the result of Satan, the evil one,
confusing him, and such is the bad nafs decorated for man.

THIRD : According to the imam's viewpoint with regard to the statement
of the mentor, that is, the feeling of happiness and elation that
happens to man upon doing some righteous deed, if it is according to
what the mentor says, that is, with regard to such deeds being a boon
from Allah ..., etc., such elation is not conceit. This pursuit, with
regard to most people, is according to its kind and is not applicable to
all persons. There arc individuals among people who arc among the
sincere worshippers of Allah. They have gotten rid of the nafs and of
its desires. Their eyes are too blinded to see their nafs in its
entirety, so they do not see any deed for themselves except that they
feel happy and pleased about it. They see their souls being owned by
their real Owner; they have neither power nor might of their own. Their
will is fused into the will of Allah. They are described by this verse:
"Allah sets forth the parable (of two men: one) a slave in the service
of another; he has no power of any sort, whHe (the other) a man on whom
We have bestowed goodly favors from Us, and he spends (freely) of it,
privately and publicly: Are the two equal? (By no means:) praise be to
Allah. But most of them do not understand" (Qur'an, 16:75). They are the
testimony to this verse of the Almighty: "They are (but) servants [whose
status is] raised to honor [and distinction!" (Qur'an, 21:26). These are
the sincere ones who, when being heedless about Allah and cast a look at
their good deed, they find happiness and pleasure, whereupon they seek
forgiveness of Allah for such a sentiment despite their lofty status
with Allah, for the good deeds of the kind ones are the bad deeds of
those close to Him.

**DEGREES AND LEVELS OF CONCEIT**

As we have quoted from the imam, may his blessings endure, about
pretension, that is, it has three levels, and each level has two degrees
the explanation of which has already been indicated, so is the case with
conceit: it, too, has the same levels and degrees,

The first level is conceit about beliefs. The second is conceit about
the faculties. The third level is conceit about deeds. The first level
has two degrees: the first is conceit about belief and true branches of
knowledge. The second degree, in contrast, is conceit about disbelief,
apostasy and inward beliefs. The second level, too, has two degrees: The
first is conceit about good faculties and commendable merits. The
second, in contrast, is conceit about bad manners and ugly faculties.
The third level, too, has two degrees: conceit about the good deeds.
Contrasting the second degree is conceit about ugly deeds and
wrongdoings.


**LEVELS OF CONCEIT
CONSEQUENCES OF CONCEIT
LEVELS OF CONCEIT**

A scholar of the hereafter has divided conceit into two levels. The
conclusion of what he says, with some explanation from our part, is
this: Conceit exists in man for a merit the owner of which sees it as a
mark of perfection, there is no doubt about it, and everyone considers
himself, in his innermost, as being complete, whether in his knowledge,
or wealth, or all other forms of perfection. He, hence, goes through
conditions, including fear of losing these perfections, fear of being
robbed of that perfection as a whole or in part, or a shortcoming
happens to him which spoils his purity. This condition is not described
as making anyone wonder.

Also among them is that he does not fear its disappearance, but he
feels elated about this perfection, so much so that he sees it as a
blessing from Allah Almighty; he renders it to the Almighty, not to
himself; such elation and pleasure about perfection is not conceit,
either.

But man has a third status which is labeled as conceit. He is not
concerned about the disappearance of perfection but feels elated about
its existence, and he feels glad about it. At the same time, his heart
becomes attached to it, and he is happy because it is perfection and
eminence, not due to its attribution to the Truthful One, the Almighty,
not one of His boons, and he has neither independence nor a principle
for this perfection. If he believes in his heart that this perfection is
a blessing from Allah, that the Almighty can take it away from him
whenever I le wishes, such a feeling leaves no room for conceit to find
its way to his heart. If we suppose there is conceit in him, such a
belief, the remembrance that Allah, the most Praised One, can take it
away from him whenever He wills, removes conceit from his heart. Based
on all of this, conceit is that one looks with magnifying glasses at a
blessing and perfection for his own self, and his heart becomes attached
to it, forgetting to attribute it to the True Giver of Boons. Such a
condition is the first level of conceit. If he rises from this condition
and sees it in his heart as though Allah Almighty owes him a favor, that
he has a status and nearness to [lint, he expects Allah Almighty to
grant him eminence in the life of this world as a reward for his
[righteous] deed. And if something wrong happens to him, he goes further
in his attitude to the extent that if this wrong happens to a debauchee,
it would not have been far-fetched in his view in this goal; this status
is called flirtation and coquetry.

For example, it may coincide that he gives someone something. He
magnifies this giving in his view and considers himself as having done
that someone a favor. This person admires his giving. If he employs the
same person to whom he gave something, and if he rests his hopes on
getting something out of him, thinking it far-fetched that this person
would disagree with him, this condition is called flirtation and
coquetry, and it is a higher level than conceit. In every case of
flirtation, conceit exists, and not the contrary. Conceit can exist
through the sentiment of flirtation because the balance and the
criterion in conceit is over-estimating a deed and forgetting the
blessing without expecting a reward. As regarding flirtation, it
accompanies the expectation for the greatest reward. If one expects
Allah, Praise to Him, to definitely respond to his supplication, having
no inner thoughts of being rejected, he will he surprised if his
supplication is not honored. He does not ask himself why his
supplication is not honored. Or he is not surprised when the
supplication of a debauchee is not honored, but he is surprised when his
own supplication is not honored! This poor person, in addition to his
conceit, is flirting with Allah Almighty, too. 1

Be informed that conceit, in each of tlle previous levels, has [sub]
levels some of which are obvious: One goes in its direction without
being aware of it, without noticing, And some of them are minute, quite
thin to the extent that unless one fully examines, he will not know
accurately nor realize properly. Also, some of its levels are more
intense and causing more perdition than others.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
There is a reference to this in the "Opening Supplication" (du'a
al-iftitah. It states the following: "... so I became supplicating to
You feeling secure, asking You, feeling close to You, neither afraid nor
being apprehensive, flirting with that for which I seek You; so, if Your
response is slow, I remonstrate with You due to my own ignorance ...,
etc."

**FIRST LEVEL :**

It is the highest of all, and it does the most harm. It is a condition
found in man because of intense conceit, so intense it is that he
considers himself as doing a favor to the One Who bestows His favors on
him, the King of Kings, on account of his belief or other merits. He
claims his merits have created, through his conviction, an expansion in
the domain of the Truthful One, the most Exalted One, creating
dissemination of His creed, that he, because of promoting the Shari'a,
or due to his instruction and guidance, or his enjoining what is right
and forbidding what is wrong, or by his safeguarding His limits, or
because of his prayer niche and pulpit..., he created in Allah's creed
freshness. Or it is because of his attendance at the congregations of
the Muslims, or his holding mourning congregations for Abu Abdullah,
Imam al-Hussain (a.s), that the creed has enjoyed promotion which he
feels he thus has done the Almighty, His Honored Messenger and the
Master of Martyrs a favor, even if such a thought did not surface, he
thinks it in his mind, inwardly. From this door comes the attitude of
someone doing a favor to the servants of Allah in the religious matters
such as one offering obligatory and commendable charities, his
assistance to the weak and the poor. So he feels he has done them a
favor, and this attitude may be hidden even from his own self, too. (An
explanation of people having done no favor to the Almighty, but that
Allah does them favors, has already been made before in the discussion
of pretension).

**SECOND LEVEL :**

It is when one flirts with Allah Almighty through the intensity of
conceit in his heart. This flirtation is different from the feeling of
having obliged, although some scholars do not differentiate between
them. A person filling this category claims he is loved by Allah
Almighty, considering such love to be extended to those who are close to
him and to those who preceded him. When one of the friends of Allah is
mentioned by name, or when a talk goes on about those who are loved by
Allah or who love Allah or the one on such a path who attracts others to
Him, one of them feels in his heart that he is one of them. Pretension
may humble itself and appears to be different from that. Or, in order
one may confirm such a station for himself, one may deny it in a way
when the denial is akin to confirming! If Allah afflicts him with an
affliction, he will then beat the drum of "only friends [of Allah] are
afflicted".

Those who claim that they offer guidance to others, the men of
knowledge, the Sufis, the men who study behavior and mathematics, are
all closer to this danger than all others.

**THIRD LEVEL :**

This is the level of one who sees himself as demanding his right from
Allah on account of his conviction, or merits, or deeds which he sees as
worthy of rewards, obligating Alm Almighty to strengthen him in the life
of this world and get him to reach the stations in the Hereafter. He
believes he is a sincere believer. When the believers are reminded of
the unknown, he sticks his head out among others, imagining he is worthy
of rewards even if Allah, Praise to Him, treats him with justice.
Rather, he increases the ugliness of his rudeness, so he speaks out this
false statement. If he is afflicted and something wrong happens to him,
he objects to Allah in his heart, wondering about the actions of the
Just Almighty, how He afflicts the pure believer and sustains the
hypocritical sinner. He, hence, is angry at heart with the Truthful One,
the Almighty, because of his own estimates. He feigns acceptance,
demonstrating [in reality] his anger with the One Who bestows the
blessings on him, pretending to others that he accepts destiny. If he
hears that Allah, Praise to Him, afflicts the believers in the life of
this world, he solaces his heart with such a thought, not knowing that
the hypocrites who arc tested in this life are numerous, and not
everyone who is afflicted is a believer.

**FOURTH LEVEL :**

Here, one sees himself as being distinguished from all others, better
than all other believers on account of the basis of his belief, by the
good characteristics, than those who do not have them, by doing what is
obligatory and abandoning what is prohibitive compared to the contrary.
He sees himself as being more perfect than all other people, that he
performs what is commendable, regularly attending Friday services, the
congregational prayer services and all other rituals, abandoning all
contemptible acts. He attributes to himself a distinction, depending on
his own self, belief and deeds, looking at all other beings as nothing,
as incomplete, looking at people askance. He inwardly or outwardly
taunts the servants of Allah, keeping away everyone from the gate of the
mercy of Allah through some means, keeping His mercy just to himself and
to groups similar to him. The individual who occupies this station
reaches a degree where he discusses the good deeds of people, no matter
how high they may be, belittling their deeds in his heart or in some
other way, raising the standard of his own deeds above such belittling,
purifying them from such discussion.

The good deeds of people he sees as nothing. If he does the same deeds,
he magnifies them. He realizes the tiny faults in people very well whHe
not realizing his own fault, overlooking it.

these are the marks of conceit even when one is indifferent to them.
Conceit has other degrees which I have not stated, and I am certainly
unaware of some of them.

Here, his speech, may Allah prolong his shade, ends.

**COMMENT :**

What the imam, may his shade prolong, has said about conceit according
to the beliefs, the faculties and the deeds, is not confined to the good
beliefs. Rather, conceit is found in false beliefs, in ugly faculties,
in wrong deeds, too. Perhaps this is far-fetched according to some, for
how can one become conceited about his disbelief, hypocrisy, bad
faculties and disobedience of Allah, Praise to Him?! But let him be
informed that Allah, the Praised One, created the human nature as it is:
containing the status of being accustomed to something. If it undertakes
a deed more than once, whether this deed belongs to those of the live
senses or of the innermost, it likes it and becomes used to it. This
status in the soul is one of Allah's major paths and important factors
for uplifting and heading towards perfection. This is so because a good
deed, likewise, in earning the stations and virtuous beliefs, may seem
to be a problem for the individuals in the beginning, and they require
tolerance for hardships and exercises. But if they are followed by a
period of time during which they become accustomed to them, the hardship
and difficulty will be removed from it. (Doing something good is a
habit, and also a habit is doing evil things). From the standpoint of
this status found in the soul, some great men who delved into the
meaning of verses referring to torment and to eternity in the fire
determined by Allah, Praise to Him, to the unbelievers and polytheists,
is derived from some principles of knowledge and philosophy which we arc
not here to discuss. Those who remain tortured for some time reach a
state when they feel accustomed to their environment: they become used
to it: they are not bored by it. Perhaps this sacred verse is useful to
cite in this regard: "As often as their skins are roasted through, We
shall change them for fresh skins (so) that they may taste the penalty"
(Qur'an, 4:56). This verse supports our argument about the people of the
fire particularly if we pay attention to the phrase "... (so) that they
may taste the penalty...". Anyway, we have no knowledge of the facts
relevant to the conditions of the world of the hereafter and its
horrors, and we must not measure the conditions of that world according
to our own: this one. But it is taken for granted that the soul has the
ability to get used to something in this world, that it feels
comfortable with any action which it does repeatedly and which the heart
likes and gets attached to. If one loves something, this love becomes a
barrier between him and seeing the faults of that thing just as this
verse of poetry says:

The pleased eyes are too tired to reach a fault. But the eve of wrath
reveals all the faults.

Based on what we have stated when we quoted the may Allah prolong his
shade, that is, the unbelievers, the hypocrites, the unbelievers, those
whose manners are contemptible, those whose desires are low, and those
who commit transgressions and sins, may all be dragged to admire their
disbelief, sins, bad manners and ugly deeds. They may even feel good
about them, seeing themselves as having free spirits, revolting against
tradition, not believing in whims. They think that they have the
manliness and courage, that belief in the Almighty is a whim, that
adherence to the legislated religious laws is an indication of
shortsightedness, that the good manners and virtuous wishes stem from
weak souls, considering adherence to obligations mid forms of worship as
signs of weak comprehension and a shortcoming of feelings. They see
themselves from a standpoint as bearing free spirits that are not
complicated by whims, not caring about the religious laws but worthy of,
praise and lauding. All of this is due to the low characteristics
setting deep roots within them, and they have become comfortable with
them. They [their faults and sins] look good in their own eyes, so they
consider them as signs of perfection as referred to in a sacred
tradition in Ai-Kafi from Ali ibn Suwaid From Abul-Hassan, peace be with
him, who has said, "Conceit comes in degrees. Among them is the servant
of the Almighty sees his bad deed decorated, so he sees it as good, and
he admires it, thinking he is doing something good. The Almighty has
said, 'Say: Shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their
deeds, those whose efforts have been wasted in this life, while they
think that they are acquiring good by their deeds? They are those who
deny their Lord's Signs and the fact of their having to meet Him (in the
hereafter): Their deeds will be in vain, nor shall We grant them any
weight on the Day of udgment (Qur'an, 18:103-5 ).

The imam, may his shade endure, says the following about those who
admire their false beliefs, low desires and ugly deeds: "This group of
people includes those who consider themselves as men of knowledge whHe
they are ignorant and the most poor and wretch of all. Doctors of
psychology are unable to treat them. Advising and admonishing them have
no effect on them; rather, the effect may reflect contrarily on them.
These do not listen to proofs; they close their ears and visions against
the guidance of the prophets, the evidence of the wise, the admonishment
of the scholars. One, therefore, has to seek refuge with Allah, Praise
to Him, against the evil of the nafs and its schemes: It drags man from
transgression to apostasy, and from apostasy to admiration of apostasy.
The nafs and Satan\_ because of underestimating some transgression in
the sight of man, afflict him with such transgression. Once the
transgression sets root in the heart, and once it is taken lightly, one
is afflicted with a greater transgression by one degree. After its
repetition, this, too, falls down in his sight, He underestimates it and
commits one greater than it, and so on he progresses in committing
transgressions: one step after another. The major transgressions get
minimized in his eyes gradually till all the transgressions become
unimportant to him. The religious laws, the divine and the prophetic way
shrink in his view, so he is dragged into apostasy, disbelief and
admiration of them both." Here ends the speech of the imam.

I say that this precious statement and practical piece of wisdom, which
we have just cited from the great teacher of manners, may his shade
prolong, is one of the unique practical pieces of wisdom and lessons of
moral cultivation. The magnanimity of a transgression and sin may fall
in the sight of one who commits it as a result of repetition. If
transgression, from which we seek refuge with Alm, becomes something
ordinary and not ugly, nobody can imagine there will be a limit for it
where one will stop.

Someone whom I trust from among my believing brethren told me once that
he was in the presence of one of those who use usury and who trade in
it, and that man's hand was shaking, uncontrollable. But this person, as
a result of repeating his prohibitive deed, became the first person to
take usury in the market of Kermanshah (now Bakhtaran). The greatest
calamity is that this state of being "daring" about transgression causes
darkness in the heart that gradually puts out the 11001 of conviction,
so one will find in himself doubt and hesitation with regard to true
beliefs. If he does not properly repent and treat this detrimental
ailment, he may be dragged as he draws his last breath from life and in
the stupor that happens to him at the time of death to putting, out the
noor of conviction in his heart in its entirety. He goes from this world
in a state of disbelief in Allah Almighty. If his condition becomes like
that, there will be no hope at all for his salvation. The gates of
happiness will be closed from all sides. A reference has been made to
this in verses and traditions. The Almighty has said, "In the long run,
the end of those who do evil will be extremely evil because they
rejected God's Signs and held them with ridicule" (Qur'an, 83:14). In
the books of tradition, the effect of sinning in the heart is described
as the black spot that keeps getting larger as one keeps repeatedly
sinning till it completely encircles it. Abu Ja'far (a.a) is also cited
in traditions as having said, "Every servant of Allah has a white spot
in his heart. When he commits a sin, a block spot comes out of it.

When he repents, that blackness disappears. If he gets deeper into
sinning, that blackness increases till it over-covers the whiteness, and
the person will never return to anything good." This is the meaning of
this verse: "By no means! But the stain of the (ill) that they do is on
their hearts on account of what they used to earn" (Qur'an, 83:14).


