The Ugliest Degree of Pretension
================================

Imām al-Khomeini, may Allāh prolong his shade, has said, "Be informed
that the most serious degree of pretension and the most detrimental,
according to the principles of beliefs and theological branches of
knowledge, and the one the darkness to the heart of which is the most
intense of all other types of showing off is this: If the pretender does
not believe in what he shows off, he is still among the hypocrites whom
Allāh forewarned of being kept in hell forever. His is perdition and
eternal loss, and his torment is the most severe.

And if he believes in that matter, but he does so seeking a status and
distinction in the hearts of people, although he is not a hypocrite,
such a conduct requires the light of conviction to abandon his heart so
it would be replaced by the darkness of disbelief. This is so because
this person, although he was initially committing hidden *shirk*,
demonstrated to people the divine branches of knowledge and the true
beliefs that have to be purely for seeking the pleasure of Allāh, their
owner is the true Holy One, the most Glorious, but he let someone else
be a partner in them: He let Satan have a hand in dealing with them.

Such an action comes from the heart[^1] seeking to please someone else
other than Allāh. He (ع) says in a sacred tradition recorded in
*Al-Kāfi*, "Every type of pretension is *kufr* (apostasy)." But both
this dark inner-self and bad trend drag one to have a heart dedicated to
anyone except Allāh. The darkness of this vice becomes a means to
gradually get one out of this life having no sound conviction (*imān*).
The erroneous conviction becomes an image without a meaning, a body
without a soul, a peal with a pith, and it does not qualify it to be
accepted by the most Exalted One as referred to in a sacred tradition in
*Al-Kāfi* where Ali ibn Sālim is quoted as having said that he heard Abū
Abdullāh (ع) saying that the Almighty said, "I am the best partner;
whoever brings another partner besides Me in an action, I shall not
accept it. I accept what is purely done for My sake."

It is well known that if the inner actions are not purely for the sake
of pleasing Allāh, the Almighty does not accept them; He does not look
at them; rather, He refers them to the other partner, the one/ones for
whom the action was done in order to show off to him/them. Thus, the
inner actions will be dedicated to that person, and they get the
pretender out of the limit of *shirk* into mere apostasy (*kufr*).

Actually, it can be said that this person, too, is among the group of
hypocrites. Just as *shirk* was hidden, so was his hypocrisy. The poor
pretender fooled himself into thinking that he is a believer, but he
started as a *mushrik* and ended up as a hypocrite, and he has to taste
the torment tasted by the hypocrites. Woe unto one who is dragged into
hypocrisy!

[^1]: We will explain, by the Will of Allah, how conviction is an act of
the heart [of the innermost].


