Explaning how Conviction is not Knowledge
=========================================

Then Imām al-Khomeini, may Allāh prolong his shade, explained that
conviction is not synonymous with knowledge. He said, “Be informed that
conviction is not the same as knowledge about Allāh, knowledge about His
Unity, about the rest of His fixed attributes of perfection and great
negative ones, knowledge about the angels, the books, the messengers and
the Last Day, for perhaps one may be knowledgeable about all these
matters without being a believer. Satan, too, knows about these levels
of knowledge as much as I know, and as much as you know, yet he is
*kāfir*.

He also believes in the principle and knows that Allāh is the Creator
because he says, "You created me of fire and created him of dust." And
he knows about the Hereafter, too, because he says, "Grant me a respite
till the Day that they are brought back to life." Yet, despite all these
qualities, he is *kāfir* according to the clear Qur'ānic verse that
says, "… and he was among the unbelievers." The secret in this is that
conviction is an act of the heart. If it is not brought into being,
there is no presence for conviction.

If anyone gets to know something according to the dictates of the
rational evidence, or according to the judgment necessitated by the
creed, the heart has to surrender to such knowledge, so the action comes
from the heart as a manifestation of such surrendering and submission, a
sort of acceptance, so he may be a believer. One's perfection is feeling
comfortable [with such surrendering] as referred to by this sacred
verse: *"**'Then do you not believe?' He said, 'Yes, I do! But so that
my own understanding may be satisfied'" (Qur'ān, 2:260).***

When the light of conviction in the heart is strong, it is followed by
feeling comfortable with it. All of this is different from knowledge.
Our minds can realize something through evidence, but our hearts did not
surrender to it. Thus, knowledge becomes useless. For example, if you
realize through your mind that a dead person cannot harm anyone, even if
all the dead in the world get together, they collectively have neither
sense nor motion in as much as a mosquito, and that all the physical and
spiritual forces have already departed.

But since this meaning does not transcend the limit of knowledge, and
since it is not acceptable by the heart, and the heart did not surrender
to reason, you cannot spend one night with a dead person in a dark
night, and you will be afraid of his corpse. But if the heart surrenders
to reason and accepts such a judgment from reason, you will have no
problem sleeping in the company of a dead person. Also, if you do that,
and you repeat spending the night with a dead person, the heart will
then surrender to reason and will not be afraid of the dead.

It will then be known that surrendering is the line of the heart, and it
is different from knowing, which is the line of reason. It is then that
man can prove, through rational evidence, the presence of the Maker, the
Exalted One, that He is One and Only, that there is an afterlife, in
addition to other true beliefs. But conviction is not a description of
these beliefs, nor is one who believes in them is counted among the
believers; rather, he is in the company of the unbelievers, the
hypocrites or the polytheists.

The point is that this day, a covering has been placed on the eye of his
heart, and he does not have the angelic vision and the kingly eye, so he
does not realize this meaning. But if the innermost is revealed, the
truly divine power comes up, nature is rendered into ruin, and the truth
stands tall, it is then that you feel you were not a believer in Allāh.
The said judgment for reason was not related to conviction[^1]. So, Dear
One, unless you write down the blessed statement saying "There is no god
except Allāh" with the pen of reason on the tablet of the pure heart,
you are not a [truly] believer in the Unity of Allāh Almighty.

If this good divine word enters one's heart, the heart's submission will
be directly to Allāh Almighty. The one who has such a heart does not
then see any other human being as bearing any impact on the domain of
the Truthful One, nor does he expect any favor or distinction from
anyone else. He will not then seek a station and fame among people. The
heart will not be pretentious or deceptive. When you see pretension in
the heart, be informed that your heart has not submitted to reason, nor
has the light of conviction shone in it. You will see someone else other
than Allāh Almighty as the influential god; you will then be in the
company of the polytheists, or hypocrites, or apostates.”

Having explained the levels and basic origin of pretension, the Imām,
may his shade endure, states a terse admonishment in which he brings to
memory the awful outcome of pretension. In it, there is a reminding for
one who has a heart, or who does listen and stands as a witness.

The master of divine sciences, Imām Khomeini, may his shade be
prolonged, says the following: “O pretender who has submitted the true
beliefs and divine branches of knowledge to the enemy of Allāh, namely
Satan, thus giving the matters that are exclusively related to Allāh,
Praise to Him, to someone else. You have taken out the celestial lights
that used to shine in the soul and the heart and were the capital of
salvation, eternal happiness, the fountainhead of the divine communion,
the seeds for the company of the Loved One in the desolate darkness.

You have permitted yourself to suffer eternal perdition, the capital of
the distance from the holy place of the Loved One. You have shunned the
meeting with the Almighty, the Truth…. So, be prepared for darkness
beyond which there is no light at all, for hardship beyond which there
is no ease, for ailments that have no cure, for death that has no life
and for a fire that springs out of the depth of the heart and the domain
of the soul, burning the domain of the body in a way which neither my
heart nor yours can ever imagine, as Allāh Almighty has already informed
us in His Revealed Book and which He described in this sacred verse:
*"**(It is) the Fire of (the Wrath of) Allāh kindled (to a blaze) which
mounts (right) to the hearts" (Qur'ān, 104:7-8).***

The Fire of Allāh overwhelms the hearts and burns them. No fire can burn
a heart other than Allāh's Fire. So, if someone's Unity instinct, which
is instilled by Allāh, departs from someone and is replaced by
polytheism and apostasy, he will have none to intercede on his behalf
with the Almighty, and he will be lodged into torment forever. And what
a torment it is! It is a torment that originates from the Almighty's
subduing and divine wrath.

O dear one! Do not expose yourself to the wrath of the Almighty on
account of a false whim and a limited popularity among His weak
servants. Such whim has neither any impact nor fruit save regrets and
sighs. When your ties are cut off from this world, which is like a shop
and a place for gain, and when your deeds come to an end, regrets and
sighs will not avail you, and you will not be able to return and
retract.

[^1]: It must also be known that committing a group of acts of
disobedience to Allah is not in sync with belief in the Hereafter and in
the Judgment Day; rather, doing them is not in harmony with the belief
that one is in the company of the Truth, the most Exalted One, as
referred to often in the cherished supplications. One of the latter
exists in the supplication of Abū Hamzah al-Thumali: "If anyone today
looks at my sins other than You, I would not have done it. Had I feared
the speedy penalty, I would have avoided it." The solution for this
confusion is sought in the statement of the imām, may his shade be
prolonged, in this regard.


