Statement in Point By Imam Komeini
==================================

The imam, may his shade endure, says the following :

"What has to be pointed out is that some of those with weak souls,
those whose souls are not at ease, cast doubt about many rewards
received for partial matters, being indifferent to the fact that if
something seems small in our eyes in the life of this world, it does not
mean that its image in the world of the unknown and in the angelic world
is also small and insignificant. Perhaps a small being may have in its
domain and inwardly the perfection of greatness and glory. The sacred
physique and the bodily form of the Honored Prophet, the seal of
prophets, the revered Prophet and the great one, peace of Allah be with
him and his progeny, was one of the small existents in this world, hut
his holy soul surrounded the domain and the angelic kingdom and was the
cause for the existence of the heavens and the earth. Passing a judgment
about the "insignificance" and the small size of something according to
its hidden and angelic image is a branch of knowledge of the angelic
world and Of the hidden and people like us have no right to make such a
judgment. We have to open our eyes and ears to the words of the scholars
of the hereafter world. I mean the prophets and friends of Allah, peace
be with them all. Moreover, that world is based on the Almighty
bestowing His favors and infinite mercy, while there is neither an end
nor a limit to Allah's favors. Absolute exclusion from the favor of the
most Generous One Who has the infinite mercy originates from extreme
ignorance, for all these blessings which He has bestowed upon His
servants and which the minds are too incapable of and are too puzzled to
count, all came into being without anyone asking for or being worthy of.
So, what is the objection if He bestows many times as many as these
boons unto His servants without precedence? Is this too much to expect
in a world that was built on the influence of the human will and about
which the following verse was revealed: "There will he all that the
souls could desire there, all that the eves could delight in" (Qur'an,
43:71), despite man's desires having neither an end nor a measure?!
Allah, the most Blessed and Exalted One, determined that world and the
human will so as man would exist according to His mere will.

"So, my dear one, the narratives and the sacred traditions for these
boons arc not just one or two or ten so one may have room to deny them.
Rather, they are beyond the limit of being consecutively reported, and
all the reliable books of traditions are filled with such quotations.
These are similar to one hearing with his own ears from the Infallible
Ones, peace be with them, and they allow no room for interpretation.
Such a requirement is in total agreement with the consecutively reported
texts and not in collision with the evidence, but in agreement with it,
backed by evidence. Denying it is a proof for the weakness of one's
conviction and an indication of his extreme ignorance. One has to
unhesitatingly accept the statements of the prophets and friends of
Allah, peace be with them, and there is nothing better than man
submitting to the masters of the truth, especially in the matters where
reason cannot reveal, nor is there a way to comprehend them except
through the venue of inspiration and message.

If man wants to insert his small mind, his whims and thoughts, in the
unknown and the worship matters of the Shari'a, he will end up denying
what is generally accepted and what is necessary. He will gradually be
dragged from what is few to what is many, from what is low to what is
high. If we suppose that you cast doubts about these narratives and
their ism-0, although there is no room in them for denial, you will be
casting doubt about the Glorious Divine Book, the heavenly sacred
Qur'an, for it has many such rewards. An example is this verse: "The
night of power is better than a thousand months" (Qur'an, 97:3), and
like this verse: "The parable of those who spend their substance in the
way of Allah is that of a kernel of corn: It grows seven ears, and each
ear has a hundred kernels. Allah gives manifold increase to whomsoever
He pleases" (Qur'an, 2:261). In my opinion, I the writer, one of the
reasons for these exclusions and denials is conceit and the magnifying
of deeds. For example, if someone fasts for one day or spends the entire
night in adoration, then he hears that there are great rewards for his
deed, he will not think it as being far-fetched. Also, this by itself
exists had the deed had its own reward, but he magnifies his deed,
admires it, so he believes there is such a reward.

"My dear one :

"If we suppose that we, in all our lifespan, say fifty or sixty years,
undertook all the obligations stated in the Shari'a, then we moved from
this life with a sound belief, with good deeds and sound repentance,
what is the measure of the reward for our righteous deeds and
conviction? According to the Book and the Sunnah as well as the
consensus of all sects, such an individual receives the mercy of the
Truthful One, the most Exalted, and he enters Paradise with which he is
promised, a garden in which he will remain eternally in bliss and ease,
in everlasting mercy, tranquility and fragrance" Is there room in this
for denial, had the basis been the reward for the good deed? Let us
erroneously suppose that our righteous deeds are worthy of being
rewarded, the reward of this person will be hardly imaginable in
quantity and quality. It is understood from this that the matter is
based on another premise and revolves on another axis: so, there is no
room for exclusion, and there is no venue opening for denial."

Here ends his statement, may his shade prolong.

Among the other harms of conceit is that it forces the conceited person
to be pretentious. This is so because demonstrating what is beautiful of
the human instincts and stopping to show off one's beauty is very
difficult, just as difficult as it is for a hungry and thirsty person
not to eat and drink. The men of knowledge, those who are giants in this
field, have very interesting situations and made very precise
statements, but it is not suitable to quote them here. This sense does
not distinguish between true beauty and an imagined, fake one. One who
admires his deeds, since they look good in his eyes, and since the deeds
which he does must be shown to others, finds it very difficult to
withstand this psychological inclination. Had he had this will, he would
not have been afflicted with conceit in the first place. This is the
opposite of one who does not admire his deeds. He does not see them as
being anything but as nothing, seeing his manners dismal and his
conviction as being unworthy of being demonstrated to others; so, he
does not admire himself, his attributes or deeds. Rather, he sees
himself as not beautiful at all. Such a person is in no position to make
a show of himself and present his deeds to others. He is just as imam
Khomeini, may his shade endure, has said, "The rotten and ugly
merchandise is never displayed at the wholesale market." But if he sees
himself and his deeds as presentable, he will be in a position to show
off his beautiful deeds in their imagined beauty. Therefore, all the
harms mentioned in these sheets are definitely counted among the harms
of conceit as well. In the field of the harms of conceit, the greatest
mentor of manners and spirituality, imam Khomeini, may his blessings
last forever, has made a statement, and here is a translation of its
text :

**WISE ADMONISHMENT BY IMAM KHOMEINI :**

"Let the conceited person know that this abomination is the seed of all
other abominations and the cause of many matters each one of which
independently causes eternal annihilation and lodgment in torment. If he
gets to know these harms properly, reviewing them carefully, studying
the reports and legacies of the greatest Prophet and his Ahl al-Bayt,
blessings of Allah be with them all, he will surely see for himself that
he must reform them and purge himself of this abomination, must uproot
it from his inner self so he may not leave this world, God forbid, and
go to the next carrying this abomination with him. This is because once
the worldly eye is closed, when one sees the power of the barzakh and
.judgment, he will see that the condition of those who committed great
transgression is better than his own, for Allah Almighty permitted them
to dive in oceans of His mercy on account of their repentance, or due to
their reliance on the favor of Allah Almighty, whHe this poor-person who
saw himself as being independent, seeing inwardly that he had no need
for the favor of Allah Almighty, Allah, praise to Him, held him to
account through the scales of His justice, just as he wanted: Now 1-le
informs him that he never intended to truly worship the Truthful One,
that all his acts of worship distanced him from the side of the Truthful
One, all his deeds and conviction were not only nil and nothing but
necessitated his perdition. They were seeds for painful torment, a cause
for being lodged into hell forever. God forbid that Allah, praise to I
Jim, should deal with anyone through His justice, for had this tablet
been opened, none from the first generations and the last would have had
a way to salvation. The imams of guidance, peace be with them, and the
great prophets used to hope, in their silent supplications to Allah, for
His favor, the most Praised One, and they were terrified by His justice
and judgment.

"The silent supplication by the elite ones to the Truthful One and to
the Infallible Imams (peace be with them) are full of admission of
dereliction, of incapacitation to truly adore. In one place, the one who
is the very best of everything in existence declares the following: "We
never knew You as You ought to be known, nor did we adore You as You
ought to be adored." The condition of the rest of people is well known.
Yes, they realized the greatness of the Truthful One, the Almighty,
knowledgeable of the ratio of what is possible to what is mandatory.
They knew that had they spent their entire lifespan in the life of this
world adoring, being obedient, praising and glorifying Him, they would
never have thanked Allah for His blessings: so, how could they fully
meet the requirements for praising Him and His attributes? They knew
that nothing exists by itself, on its own, that life, ability,
knowledge, power and all the other perfections are but the shadow of His
perfection, the Almighty that lie is. What can he is poor, rather,
purely poor, living in His shade, never being independent. How can there
be any perfection for one by himself so he may display his perfection
for sale? What power does he have so he may bargain over his work? The
ones who are knowledgeable of Allah, of the beauty of the Truthful One,
of His Greatness, witnessed through vision and sight how imperfect they
are, how incapable, how weighty their obligation is, while we, poor
souls, are surrounded by the barrier of ignorance, indifference and
conceit! The barrier of inwardly and outwardly transgressions has veiled
from our eyes, ears, minds, senses and the rest of faculties, so much so
that we display our existence in contrast with the overwhelming
authority of the Truthful One, the Almighty, claiming independence,
saying we are something.

"So, poor being who has no knowledge about his own self and about his
ratio to the Creator! 0 poor wretch who is unaware of his function
compared to the One Who owns the kings! Such ignorance, such lack of
knowledge, is the cause of these sufferings. We have been afflicted by
them because of the darkness and impurity. The destruction starts from
its origin: the water is impure from its source; our eyes are too blind
to see the deep knowledge. Our hearts are dead. Such is the reason for
all the calamities. Yet we are not in the process to reform them, either
...

"Lord! We plead to You to grant us success, acquaint us with our
functions, grant us a share of the lights of deep knowledge with which
You tilled the hearts of those who know and those of Your friends! Show
us how Your power and authority overwhelm, how faulty we are, and enable
us to understand the meaning of praising Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
We are the poor ones, the unaware, who attribute all the praiseworthy
attributes to the beings; do inform our hearts that not a single good
attribute belongs initially to any being, and show us the truth of tins
verse: "Anything good (0 man!) that happens to you is from Allah, but
whatever evil happens to you is from your (own) nafs (soul)" (Qur'an,
4:79), and instill in our cruel hearts, the impure one, the blessed
statement of Tawhid, for we are the people of the barrier, of the dark,
of shirk and hypocrisy. We love ourselves, we admire them, so help us
take the love for the nuts and for this world out of our hearts. Do make
us loving Alin, worshipping I surely YOU can do anything at all."

This is the conclusion of the wise admonishment of imam Khomeini, may
his blessings last.


