The First Degree
================

It is the most intense and the most serious: One's goal is to commit a
transgression against the will of Allāh and to reach what is
prohibitive, such as he makes a show of his acts of adoration, or feigns
piety and godliness through many supererogatory acts of adoration. He
avoids anything that may bring about people's doubt in his regard. His
goal is so that people may recognize his trustworthiness, hence
positions in the judicial system, or religious trusts, or wills, or
whatever belongs to orphans. He will then take them and keep to himself
whatever he can.

Or he may be trusted with items, so he takes them and denies having done
so, thus reaching his corrupt goals in committing transgressions. One
may appear in the attire of the righteous, articulating pieces of
wisdom, admonishment, and reminding. Yet his goal is to look good in the
eyes of a beautiful woman. Some people may attend meetings of knowledge
and remembrance of the Almighty, or even of the Qur'ān, pretending they
wish to listen to knowledge and to the Qur'ān while their goal is to
look at women, and these pretenders are hated the most by Allāh Almighty
because they made obedience to their Lord a ladder to reaching their
transgression, using it as a tool, a shop, a merchandise in their
sinning.

Close to these, though less in degree, is one who commits a crime of
which he is accused, yet he insists on it and wants to keep the charge
away from himself, so he feigns piety in order to deny the charge, such
as one who denied a trust with him of which people charged him, so he
offers charity with the money in order that it will be said he gives
away from his money to the poor, so how can it be possible that he
seizes the funds belonging to others?

The likes of such folks are many among the Muslims. Individuals may
gather funds that belong to the Muslims by the millions through usury or
other illegitimate transactions. One may see that instead of returning
people's money to them, he offers charity with some of his money, or
builds a mosque or a hospital, so that people may see that he is one who
builds mosques or hospitals; therefore, how can it be possible that he
stretches his hands to people's money and possessions?

Or one may be charged with having committed a sin with a woman, and
Allāh, the most Exalted One, removed the covering from him and exposed
him among the people. Instead of resorting to a covering from Allāh,
Praise to Him, regretting and pleading to Allāh, Who sways the hearts,
to change people's attitude about him, he seeks a means through
pretension, trying to cover his sin with pretension.


