Great Benefit Provided By Khomeini in Treating Conseit
======================================================

We would like to conclude this research with something useful provided
to us by our greatest mentor, imam Khomeini, may his blessings last, in
the field of treating the conceit sickness. It is hoped that those who
seek it will arrive at the anticipated result with precision according
to the useful statement of our mentor and of those stated by great
scholars of ethics, and surely Allah grants success and helps.

Imam Khomeini, may his shade last, says the following :

"Be informed that the contemptible sin of conceit is created by loving
the nafs. This is so because man by nature loves it, and loving the nafs
is the source of every human sin and the origin of all moral vices.
Because of this love, man sees his insignificant deeds as looking great
in his eyes, seeing himself as a benevolent person when doing these
deeds and one of those who enjoy a special status with the Truthful One,
the Almighty. He sees himself because of these insignificant deeds,
worthy of praise and lauding. His ugly deeds may be decorated for him.
When he sees others doing better and greater deeds than his own, he is
not concerned about them. He often interprets people's good deeds in a
bad way whHe interpreting his ugly deeds and wrongdoings as good
according to a level of interpretation. He thus thinks ill of Allah's
manner whHe thinking well of his own self. He, through this love, sees
himself as crediting the Truthful One, the Almighty, obligating Him to
be merciful to him through an insignificant deed which is mixed with a
thousand filths and with everything that distances one from his Lord. We
ought to think for a short whHe of the good deeds and the acts of
adoration which come out of us in order to see if we deserve to be
praised and lauded on their account and be worthy of rewards and mercy,
or should we be blamed, penalized and receive the wrath on their
account? If the Truthful One burnt us with the lire of His subduing and
wrath because of these deeds which we consider to be good, it would have
been truthful and just.

"I now would like to seek your own judgment, reader, with regard to the
question which I am going to submit to you and ask you to confirm, after
thinking and considering with the eyes of fairness: the question is :

"Had the glorious Prophet, peace of Allah be with him and his progeny,
who is truthful and trustworthy, informed you that if you worshipped
Allah Almighty and obeyed His commandments as long as you live,
abandoning illicit desires and wishes throughout your life, or if you
disobeyed His commandments all your life and acted according to the
dictates of your own self and illicit desires, it will not make a
difference in the degrees of your hereafter and you will be saved anyhow
and enter Paradise and be secure against the torment without a
difference between your performance of the prayers or your committing
adultery, but the pleasure of Allah Almighty is in keeping yourself busy
worshipping Him, praising and lauding Him, abandoning your illicit
desires and inclinations in this world, and that Allah, Praised is He,
does not grant you rewards in exchange for this action in the first
place..., will you be in this supposition among the sinners, or would
you be among those who adore? Would you abandon the illicit desires and
deprive yourself of pleasures in order to earn His Pleasure, the most
Praised One, and out of your love for Him, or would you not? Would you
be regular in doing what is commendable, in observing Friday
congregational prayers, mass acts of worship, or would you immerse
yourself in illicit desires, merriment, play, singing, etc.? Answer whHe
eying equity and without pretending.

"As for me, I can tell you about myself and about those who are like
me. We used to be in that condition, among the people -of transgression,
leaving acts of obedience behind our backs, following our illicit
desires, and the result of all of our deeds was for the sake of personal
pleasures and to look after the stomach and private part! We were those
with bellies.

worshippers of their desires. But we abandoned such pleasures for the
sake of a much greater pleasure. Our full attention and hopes rested on
making the desires easily accessible to us. The prayers, which are the
ascending ladder to nearness to AlPah, we prayed so we could be close to
the women of Paradise and not connected to nearness to the Truly
Almighty nor connected to obedience to the command of Allah: The prayer
was distant by thousands of parasangs from Allah, Praise to Him.

"O poor soul ignorant of the divine knowledge who knows nothing but
taking care of your desire and anger! And you, holy man, who is regular
in performing his rituals and optional acts of worship as well as
obligations, who abandons what is hated and prohibitive, who is adorned
with good manners and who avoids bad conduct! Weigh your deeds with the
scales of equity so you may see that all these deeds to reach the
selfish desires, to sit on a bench of emeralds, to sleep with the hurls
having large lovely eyes, to wear silk and brocade, to live in high
mansions and to achieve the wishes! Can all these deeds, which are all
for the sake of worshipping and loving the self, he attributed to Allah
and to the worship of the Truthful One? What is the difference between
you and the one who works for a wage? If the worker tells his boss that
he has done his job purely for his own sake, you will call him a liar.
Are yon not a liar when you say that your prayers are for seeking
nearness to Allah or to be close to the women of Paradise and achieve
what you desire? Let me say the following frankly: All our acts of
worship, in the eyes of those who know Allah and who are friends of
Allah, are themselves major transgressions.

"So, poor soul, you act before the Truthful One, the most Great, and
before His angels who are close to Him contrarily to the pleasure of the
Almighty, whHe adoration is the ascension ladder for nearness to Him
which is performed by the nafs that quite often commands the doing of
wrongdoing and by Satan while, at the same time, you have no shame but
lie in every act of worship many times before the Almighty and the
angels close to Him! You invent claims, thinking you are doing Him a
favor, feeling proud of what you are doing, acting like a spoiled child,
having no shame! What is the difference between my worship and yours
coupled with die transgressions of the transgressors the strongest of
which is pretension, for pretension is shirk; its ugliness and
seriousness are due to worship not done for the sake of the Almighty.
All our acts of worship are shirk, and there is no tint of loyalty and
sincerity in them. Rather, the pleasure of Allah Almighty does not find
its way to them due also to shirk. Rather, they are for the sake of
attaining pleasures, for satisfying the stomach and the private part.
So, dear one, a prayer service aiming at achieving the love of a woman,
be she one of the women of this life or of the hereafter, is not for the
sake of Allah. A prayer service undertaken for the sake of reaching the
hopes of this life or the aspirations of the hereafter is not connected
with Allah:

so, why such flirtation and indulgence?! You look down at the servants
of Allah, thinking that you are one of those chosen by the Truthful One!
0 poor soul! You, through such a prayer service deserves to be tormented
and are worthy of a chain the length of which is seventy yards. So, why
do you see yourself as having credit with Allah, preparing for yourself
through this flirtation and conceit an additional torment? You are
supposed to perform the deeds which you are ordered to perform and pay
attention to their being for the sake of Allah. Be informed that Allah
Almighty permits you to enter Paradise through His favor and mercy. The
most Praised One has lightened some shirk for His servants due to their
weakness, throwing on them the covering veil through His forgiveness. Do
not violate the sanctity of this covering, and leave the covering of
forgiveness of the Truthful One placed on the bad deeds which we called
"acts of worship" for. God forbid, if the pages are turned and the pages
of justice are brought, the stink of our worship will be no less than
that of our transgressions, the sins of transgressors.

"Thiqatul-Islam [the one trusted by the Muslims], al-Kulaini, has
narrated in throughisnad to Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) who cites the Messenger
of Allah (a.s) saving, "Allah, the most Exalted and Great, said to Dawud
[David]: 'Give the glad tidings to the sinners and warn the truthful
ones.' Dawud said, 'How do I give glad tidings to the sinners and warn
the truthful ones?' Almighty said, 'O Dawud! Give the glad tiding to the
sinners that i accept the repentance and forgive tHe sin, and warn the
truthful ones against admiring their deeds, for I do not let a servant
of Mine stand for judgment except that he perishes."' So, since the
truthful ones perish in the process of the judgment, although they are
pure of sins and transgressions, what I can say, and what can you?!

"All this is as such if our deeds and yours are indicative of purely
worldly pretension which is one of the abominations and prohibitions,
and seldom does it coincide that we do a good deed which is free of
pretension and hypocrisy. Leave this subject alone; we shall not talk
about it.

"Now, if there is room for conceit, flirtation and indulgence, do it.
And if fairness places one in a position where he feels ashamed,
lowering his head, admitting his shortcoming, then seek forgiveness and
repent to Him with seriousness. In all reality clear each act of worship
which you undertake from the lies which you pronounced in the presence
of the Truthful One, the most Exalted, and about the titles which you
bestowed upon yourself without any right. Should you not repent about
saying, whHe facing the Truthful One, the most Exalted One,

prior to performing your prayer, "I have directed my face towards the
One Who created the heavens and the earth, submissive, believing, and I
am not among the polytheist: surely my prayers, asceticism, life and
death are for the sake of Allah, Lord of the Worlds"? Did you really
submit your heart to the One Who created the heavens and the earth? Are
you really a Muslim'? Are you pure of shirk? Are your prayers,
adoration, life and death for the sake of Allah? Should you not feel
ashamed when you say in your prayer. "Praise to Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds"? Do you really see all praise being due to the Truthful One, the
Almighty, or do you see it fitting His servants, even praise due for the
enemies of Allah? Is this not lying when you say, "Praise to Allah, the
Lord of the Worlds", although you fix lordship in this world for others?
Is repentance not required when you say, "Thee do we worship, and from
Thee do we seek help"?

Do you worship Allah, or do you really worship your appetite for food
and lust for sex? Do you seek Allah or do you want the hurls with large
lovely eyes? Do you really seek help only from Allah, and does every
matter in your eves seem to be rendered to only Allah? Is your pursuit
and goal is Allah when you go to visit the House Allah? Is your pursuit
and goal the Owner of the House? And does your heart act upon the
statement of the poet who says, "It is not love for the abodes that
occupies my heart [but1 it is the love for those that live therein]"? Do
you seek Allah'? Do you seek the manifestations of the Greatness and
Beauty of the Truthful One'? Do you hold commemorative gatherings for
the sake of the master of the oppressed? Do you beat your chest and head
for his sake, or is it to reach your wealth and wishes, and the catalyst
for your holding commemorative gatherings is the craving of the stomach?
What pushes you towards the congregational prayers is the craving for
the sexual intercourse with the hurls of Paradise], and what prompts you
to keep you busy with the rituals and acts of adoration is love for your
own self.

"Brother! Discern the traps of the nut's- and of Satan, and be informed
that Satan does not let you undertake a single sincere act [of worship],
and these insincere deeds which were accepted by Allah, Glory to Him,
only out of His favor, Satan does not let you get them to reach home;
so, he fares with you, and with them, rendering them as nil through
conceit and indulgence. Thus, this gain, too, passes you by, for you
have distanced yourself from Allah and from His Pleasure, and you did
not reach Paradise or the harts with large lovely eyes. This is not all.
You became eternally lodged in the torment, tortured in the subduing
fire of Allah. Did you claim that through these worn out deeds, the
stinking and shaky ones, the ones mixed with pretension and desire for
fame, with a thousand calamities each one of which bans the acceptance
of your deeds, that you indeed have done Allah Almighty a favor, or you
joined the company of those who love or who are loved? O poor soul!

Who is unaware of the condition of those who [truly] love, and the
wretch who is ignorant of the hearts of the lovers wherein fire burns,
the poor soul that is unaware of the burning of the sincere ones, of the
poor of their deeds..., did you think that their deeds, too, were like
my deeds and ours? Did you imagine the prayers of the Commander of the
Faithful (a.s) as having distinguished itself from our prayers because a
phrase in it was recited with prolongation or the recitation was more
accurate than ours, or the bowing and prostrating were longer, or the
praises and pleas were more numerous than ours, or that he, peace be
with him, distinguished himself from us by praying during every night
many prostrations, or that the silent supplication [munajat] of the
master of those who prostrate was like mine and yours, and that he shed
his tears and cried for the sake of the hurls with large lovely eyes and
for the plums and pomegranates of Paradise?!

"By their lives, and it surely is a great oath, if all humans pretended
and wanted to utter a single "La ilaha illa Allah!" [There is no god
except Allah] a single time just it was uttered by the Commander of the
Faithful (a.s), they would never he able to do that. So, woe unto me for
thus knowing the status of the authority of Ali, peace be with him! I
swear by the status of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s) that had the angels close
to Allah and the messengers, aside from the Seal of Messengers, who is
the master of Ali and of everyone else, that had they wanted to make a
single takbir like that of Ali, they would never be able to do it: the
condition of their hearts is known only by themselves.

"So, dear one! Lessen your claim that you love Allah.

"O you man of knowledge, the ascetic one, the judge, the one who
performs jihad, who subjects his heart to exercise, the faqih, the
believer, the holy one! 0 poor souls, the wretches who are afflicted by
the traps and desires of the nafs! O helpless folks who are afflicted by
the hopes, wishes and love for their own selves! Since we all are
incapable, and we all worship whHe being distant by many parasangs from
sincerity and from loving Allah ..., do not think well of yourselves,
and do not act like the spoiled ones, and ask your hearts if they truly
seek Allah or seek their own selves. Does the heart believe in the Unity
of Allah and seek the One and Only God, or is it polytheistic? What is
this conceit, and what is the meaning of such pointing out to the deeds?
If the value of a good deed, taking for granted it is complete in all
its parts and conditions and is free of pretension, shirk, conceit and
all destructive elements, is to reach the satisfying of the craving of
the stomach and of the private part, what value is attached to it, since
all these deeds are shown to the angels of Allah'? So, they have to be
hidden from the visions [of humans]. These deeds arc among the ugly and
calamitous ones. One must be ashamed of them and must cover them up.
Lord! We seek refuge with You, we the poor ones, from the mischief of
Satan, the evil of Satan and the evil-insinuating self [nafs]. Do
protect us, Lord, from their traps by the status with You reserved for
Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad, Allah blesses him and his
Progeny."

This is the end of his statement, may his shadow prolong, about those
who are conceited and who brag about their good deeds.

**INCLUSIVE STATEMENT BY IMAM AL-SADIQ (a.s)
**
We would like to beautify this dissertation with an inclusive statement
by imam al-Sadiq (a.s) so its seal may he musk :

In Misbah al-Shari'a, Imam al-Sadiq (a.s) is quoted as having said the
following :

"I am surprised, utterly surprised, about one who admires his deed whHe
not knowing how it will be sealed for him. One who admires himself and
his deed strays from the path of guidance and claims what does not
belong to him. One who makes a false claim is a liar even if his claim
is hidden [not articulated], even if he lives long, for the first that a
conceited person undergoes is being stripped of that which he admired so
he would know that he is helplessly poor, so he may testify against his
own self, so the argument against him will be stronger, just as it was
done to Eblis. Conceit is a seed loving which is apostasy; its ground is
hypocrisy, its water is oppression, its branches are ignorance, its
leaves are misguidance, its fruit is a curse and an everlasting abode in
the Fire. So, One who opts to be conceited sows the seeds of disbelief,
plants hypocrisy, and it has to bear fruit."

Surely the servant of Allah has said the truth.

All Praise belongs to Allah in the beginning and in the end; His is the
favor manifestly and innately.

These pages have been written by the one who is in need of the mercy of
Allah: Sayyid Ahmed al-Fahri.

[Translation from the original Arabic of this text and its editing were
completed, by the Grace of Allah, on a Tuesday, Jumada II 26, 1429
AH/July 1, 2008 in holy al-Kadhimiyya, Baghdad, Iraq.]


