Introduction
============

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the most Mercifitl

Praise to Allah Who knows the inner thoughts, Who tests the conscience,
Who encompasses everything; ilk is the power and dominance over
everything; blessings and salutations to the one who brought the glad
tidings, the warner, the shining light, Muhammad, the master of
messengers, and upon his progeny, the good ones, the pure.

The human heart, whereby man is granted distinction over all creation,
is like a mirror: It is affected by what it receives of contemptible
effects of ugly norms of conduct and wrongdoings. If the effects arc
praiseworthy, the heart's mirror becomes clearer, shinier, more
illuminating, so much so that in it the reality of the truth becomes
glittering, the truth about what is hidden from the beings becomes
revealed, and the truth of the matter sought in the creed becomes
obvious. It is to such an intellect that the Master of the Faithful,
peace be with him, refers when he says the following: "0 servants of
Allah! The one who is the most loved by Allah from among His servants is
one who is assisted by Allah against his own self (nab), so he is
somber, outfitted with fear, the light of guidance shining in his
heart," till he says, "So he, with regard to conviction (iman), is like
sun rays." This is the heart that, upon the mention of Allah, the most
Exalted, the most Great, becomes fearful, and when His verses are
recited, they increase its conviction and in it remembrance settles,
Allah Almighty has said, ... Indeed, in the remembrance of Allah do
hearts find rest" (Qur'an, 13:28).

If the effects are contemptible, they are like a dark smoke that rises
to the heart's mirror, and it keeps piling up time and over again till
the entire page of the heart is blackened. So it is totally dark. It
becomes stamped with predomination, veiled From Allah Almighty. The most
Praised One has said, "But the stain of the (ill) that they do is on
their hearts! Truly they will he veiled from (the light of) their Lord
that Day" (Qur'an, 83:14-15). The Almighty has also said, "Is it not a
guiding (lesson) to those who inherit the earth alter its (previous)
residents, that, if We so willed. We could punish them (too) for their
sins, and seal up their hearts so that they could not hear'?" (Qur'an,
7:100), Thus, lle makes a connection between hearing and stamping on the
hearts, stamping with the sins.

Al-Kulaini, may Allah be pleased with him, cites on p. 273, Vol. 2, No.
20, of his work al-Kafi Zurarah citing Abu Ja'far peace be with him,
saying, "Every servant of Allah has a white spot in his heart. When he
commits a sin, blackness will enter into the white spot. If he repents,
the blackness disappears, but if he keeps committing sins, the blackness
keeps spreading till it covers the entire whiteness. Once it covers the
whiteness, this individual will never go hack to righteousness." It is
the meaning of this verse: "But the [black] stain of the (ill) that they
do is on their hearts" (Qur'an, 83:14), and perhaps the meaning of this
narrative may bring to 'memory this verse: "Thus does Allah seal up the
heart of every arrogant and obstinate transgressor" (Qur'an, 40:35). So,
think about it and ponder.

He, peace be with him, is also quoted as haying said, "Hearts are of
three types: a heart that is turned upside down, knowing no good: It is
the heart of an apostate (kafir), a heart that has a black spot,
goodness and evil in it wrestle with each other: whichever wins
overtakes him, and an open heart; in it there is a lamp that shines; its
light never goes out till the Day of Judgment: It is the heart of a
believer." I is says "till the Day of Judgment" because this heart does
not disintegrate when the body disintegrates; obedience to Allah
polishes the heart, whHe disobeying Him blackens it."

So, if the deeds are righteous and the rituals accepted, they have to
hear an impact on the clarity of the heart, its 1700r and shine, The
soundness of deeds, especially the rituals, has to meet the condition of
being complete in their Parts and meeting their conditions as well as
undertaken exclusively for the sake of seeking nearness to Allah
Almighty. If the deed lacks these conditions, when it lacks some of its
parts or conditions, or if it is insincere, it may not instill noor into
the heart, nor does it bear any impact on the heart's clarity and shine.
When we see in ourselves and in our hearts that performing the rituals
is not having any effect on our hearts, when we sense no noor for them
within nor any effect without, although .most or all of our worship
meets the first condition, being inclusive of the parts and outwardly
conditions, i.e. outwardly sound..., vet they lack the noor..., it is so
on account of their lacking sincerity for Allah Almighty; otherwise, why
do not we put an end to committing what is abominable and detested? Why
do the springs of wisdom not flow from our hearts although the sacred
tradition determines that they must flow in forty days according to his
statement, peace be with him, "One who is sincere to Allah for forty
mornings, the springs of wisdom flow from his heart to his tongue"'? And
why is Satan playing games with us, interfering in all our affairs,
although he had made a pledge to Allah Almighty not to tempt the sincere
ones: "Then, by Your might, I will put them all in the wrong, except
Your servants among them, the sincere and purified ones" (Qur'an,
38:82-83)?

This is only the outcome of our deeds being conjoined with insincerity.
And I do not mean, when 1 mention sincerity being absent from our deeds,
the high levels of sincerity that are among the characteristics of the
friends of Allah, those who arc near to Him, for we have no share of
such sincerity..., but I mean the lowest of its levels, that is, it
contains no pretension which nullifies the deeds. If we sift through our
deeds and rituals, we will find out that Satan has penetrated most of
them and spoiled our deeds, as we will, God willing, explain. Any deed
undertaken in order to make a show is null and void according to the
Shari'a and has no bearing, no impact, no effect. We have to correct our
deeds from this side and rid them of pretension for it is shirk in Allah
Almighty in adoration according to his statement, peace be With him,
"Every form of pretension is shirk (polytheism)."

Since shirk has many branches, and since Satan and the nafs in this
regard have hidden traps which nobody except a discerning critic can
detect, this summary is written to seek benefit from statements by
scholars of the hereafter and professors of ethics, especially the
greatest professor, Imam al-Khomeini, may Allah preserve his shade,
pleading to the Master, the most Great, to make it exclusively for the
sake of pleasing Him and not to let Satan has any share in it so it may
be a means for salvation and a tool for forgiveness; surely Allah grants
success: surely He provides help.

**Pretension**

In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful

Praise to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, greetings unto Muhammad and his
Progeny and the sincere servants of Allah.

PRETENSION ACCORDING TO THE QUR'AN:

1. So, woe unto the worshippers, who are neglectful of their prayers,
those who (want only) to be seen (by men), but they refuse (to supply
even) neighborly needs. (Qur'an, 107:4-7)

2. And they have been commanded no more than this: To worship Allah,
offering Him sincere devotion, being true (in faith). (Qur'an, 98:5)

3. Is it not to Allah that sincere devotion is due'? (Qur'an, 39:3)

4. Whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him do righteous deeds, and in
the worship of his Lord, admit no one as (His) partner. (Qur'an,
18:110)

PRETENSION IN TRADITIONS:

1. In his book according to isnad to Yazid ibn Khalifah, the author
cites the narrator saying that Abu Abdullah, peace be with him, said to
him, "Every form of pretension is shirk. One who works for the sake of
pleasing people is to be rewarded by them, and one who works for Allah
will be rewarded by Allah."

2. In his book al-Saduq says that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was once
asked, "What will bring us salvation in the life to come'?" [le (a.s)
said, "Salvation then will be in not attempting to deceive Allah so lie
lets you he deceived, for anyone who tries to deceive .Allah will
himself he deceived, Conviction will be extracted out or him, and he
actually deceives none but his own self." He was asked, "How can anyone
try to deceive Allah'?!" The Prophet (a.s) said, "I le acts upon what
Allah has enjoined, then by the same action he tries to impress others.
So, fear Allah and avoid pretension, for it is shirk against Allah. A
pretender will be called upon the Day of .Judgment with four names: 0
Kafir (apostate)! 0 Fajir (debauchee)! 0 Ghadir (deceiver)! 0 Khasir
(loser)! Your deeds are void, your reward is cancelled, and there is
nothing good for you this Day: so, seek your rewards from those for whom
you used to work!"

3. In Wassail al-Shi'ah by al-Hurr al-Amili quoting Qurb al-Isnad,,
through isnad traced to the Commander of the Faithful (a.s) , the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) has said, "One who makes himself look good by
doing what Allah loves then in secrecy defies Allah by doing what Allah
hates will find Allah angry with him in the Hereafter, holding him in
contempt." This sacred tradition will later be explained, so wait. There
are many such traditions, and what we have stated must suffice and serve
the memory.


