Third Level of Pretension
=========================

This is the pretension that is known to be found among jurists, may
Allāh be pleased with them, and it, too, has two degrees:

The **first** degree is that one carries out his action and whatever
worship is legislated for him, or through what he deems as rationally
commendable, intending thereby to show his acts of adoration to the
people and win their hearts, intending to be pretentious through that
act of worship or through its method, or condition, or a part thereof,
as described by our fellows in their books of jurisprudence.

The **second** degree is that he abandons a deed in order to reach the
same result. The greatest professor of theology, imām al-Khomeini, says
the following: "Be informed that pretension in this level is more
frequent and common than all other levels because most of us are not
qualified for both above-stated levels. In this aspect, Satan does not
intercept our way from that highway.

But, since most people are worshippers, upholding the rituals and formal
manifestations of adoration, Satan is active here more than anywhere
else, and the plots of the *nafs* in this level are many more. In other
words, since most people, according to their quality, live in a physical
Paradise, earning stations in the Hereafter through doing good deeds and
abandoning bad ones, Satan, too, enters upon them from this door,
instilling in their hearts the roots of pretension and deception in
their deeds, so much so that branches grow out of them and leaves,
substituting their good deeds with bad ones, hurling them into hell and
the lower stations through these same rituals and acts of adoration,
rendering the means whereby the abode of the Hereafter are built
requiring their very destruction, introducing into an act what is
supposed to get one in the 'Illiyyeen station to be turned by the
angels, according to the command of the Almighty, into one qualifying
the individual to be hurled into the inferno. The persons who fit in
this level, who have neither rations nor a conveyance for the trip [to
the Hereafter], must persist in cultivating themselves fully, and they
must not neglect this matter, too, God forbid, lest they should be among
the fellows of hell: They lose track of the path to happiness, and the
gates of Paradise will be closed before them while those of the fires
will be opened." Thus the imām, may his shade endure, ends his
statement.


