Levels of Pretension from the Aspect of what is Hidden and what is Manifest, a Precise Research in the Issue of
===============================================================================================================

Be informed that pretension, in as far as being manifest or hidden, has
several levels. Some levels are obvious, some are more obvious, whereas
some others are hidden, and some are more so.

The **first** level: It is the most obvious level: Someone undertakes an
action in order to show off in a way so as if the need to pretend is not
there, he will not do it. It is the most obvious of its levels and needs
no explanation.

The **second** level: It is a little bit more hidden: The pretending
side is not initially prompted to undertake the action; rather, the side
that urges the origin of the action is the Divine side, the nearness to
the Almighty, but the non-divine side intrudes into it, so much so that
the act, despite the care of this side, becomes easier to undertake
without it, such as one whose habit is to perform the *tahajjud* and to
perform the night prayer (*qiyam*).

He performs it every night, but while feeling lazy and drowsy. But when
he has a guest, he stands up from his bed with agility and ease. Had he
not hoped for rewards from Allāh, he would not have abandoned the
pleasure of sleep not only due to the presence of the guest but this
presence had an impact on him, making it easier for him to pray and to
offer *tahajjud*, and the prayer will then be easier than it would have
been if he had been by himself.

The **third** level: In it, the pretension is more hidden than it is in
the second level: The non-divine side has nothing to do with the
original intention to undertake the action, nor in the ease of doing it.
But, at the same time, the substance of pretension is present in the
heart. It is known that such pretension cannot be identified except
through the precise experiment such as suspected terminal physical
ailments since these, after medical analyses, indicate the presence of a
disease which the doctor starts treating.

So is the case with this spiritual disease: Precision is a must in
diagnosing it. If some traces of the ailment are found, its substance
will be known to be present. Its indication is that one must test
himself at a time when people accidentally get to see his adoration.
Will he then feel happy and elated on account of their seeing him or
not?

An individual may undertake an action with a sincere intention, desiring
no pretension in it; rather, he even avoids pretending and hating it.
But, at the same time, if he realizes that someone accidentally gets to
know about it, he becomes happy, as if he feels restful when he gets to
know that the individual saw how that act exhausted him. Such happiness
and elation form the mark of pretension which is hidden within him,
inside him, from which elation drips.

Had he directed his attention towards anyone other than Allāh, and had
he paid no attention to people, there is no sense in this elation when
he knows that others came to know about his [righteous] deed. Happiness
[in such a case] is like a fire that is hidden inside a stone. It
becomes evident when the stone hits iron and the hidden fire comes out
to the open and becomes obvious when the stone hits a stone. People who
are acquainted with and knowledgeable about the stone hitting the iron
expose the hidden pretension.

At that time, if this person does not react to this pleasure, that is,
when happiness appears in his heart, and if he does not rebuke himself
for it, reprimand it and meet it with hatred, this pleasure will be like
nutrition for the disease's substance. It grows undetected, and the
effect of that growth gradually creates in him the need to find a reason
for people having to be familiar with his work. It is like talking about
a subject and saying something casually. For example, if he is one of
those who offer *tahajjud*, he talks about how the weather is cold or
hot at the end of the night, or about something like that, so that
others will understand that he was awake at that time [for *tahajjud*].

It may even be more hidden than that, too, such as one does not say
anything to suggest to others familiarity with them, with his actions,
neither explicitly nor implicitly. But people can get to know it from
the way he dresses himself, his appearance or general conditions, such
as drowsiness, the low tone of his voice, how his lips are withered…,
etc. Or he may not watch himself during his prostration in order to
avoid hitting the ground so prostrating will bear an impact on his
forehead. Deep inside his conscience he will be elated about it, that
is, that he has a visible mark of adoration.

Or he may be at a mourning commemoration for Imām al-Hussain (ع) or a
gathering for supplication. At the end of the gathering, he does not
remove the tears from his eyes fully. There are marks like these, and
even more hidden than that, which show no such indications: This means
that he may perform a [righteous] deed sincerely without desiring anyone
to notice it, nor does he like it to show, yet he expects people to
start greeting him, to be generous to him, to meet him with a smile,
with respect, to praise him, to be energetic in carrying out his
errands, to be tolerant as they trade with him, etc. If he goes to a
meeting place, they make room for him.

If anyone falls short of doing any of these things, he will find it in
his heart to be too heavy, and he will find it unsuitable for his
status. It is as if he is rewarded by people for the worship which he
hides, so much so that had he not performed such worship, he would not
have demanded all of this, nor would he have found it unacceptable when
people treat him any less than that. In my view, this has roots which
also extend to conceit. In reality, he demands that from Allāh, the most
Glorified One, and even wonders why the Almighty did not cast love for
him in the hearts of people so they may respect him although he did
perform that "sincere" act of worship!

As a whole, unless the presence of worship is similar to its absence
with regard to everything relevant to people, and had one not contended
himself with the fact that Allāh knows about what he does, such an
individual will not be free of pretension, even as low as the sound of
ants' tracks, nor is he free of conceit either which we, by the will of
Allāh, will discuss.

It is possible this much pretension voids one's rewards. Nobody is
spared such type of pretension except Allāh's sincere worshippers, for
Satan can have no way of reaching them. Perhaps a reference to this lies
in a statement by the Commander of the Faithful Ali (ع) who is quoted as
having said, "Allāh, the most Great, the most Exalted, will say to those
who recite [the Holy Qur'ān in public] on the Judgment Day: 'Did people
not sell to you cheap? Did people not start greeting you? Were your
needs not taken care of by people?' According to tradition, [the
Almighty adds saying] 'There are no wages for you here; you were paid
your wages in full.'"

Abdullāh Mubarak is quoted as having said that it is narrated about
Wahab son of Muneer saying that a man from among the travelers said to
his fellows, "We left behind the wealth and the sons fearing oppression,
now we fear lest more oppression has afflicted us than that with which
people who have wealth have been afflicted!

If one of us is met, he likes to be respected because of the station of
his piety. If he asks for something, he likes to be given on account of
his faith. And if he buys something, he likes the seller to sell it to
him cheaper because of his faith!" This reached the knowledge of their
king who rode among a crowd of people. The valley and the mountain
became full of people. That traveler inquired about it and was told that
the king was coming.

He asked his servant to bring him food. He was brought beans and oil
which he kept stuffing in his mouth, eating violently. The king asked
the travelers, "Where is your fellow?" They pointed to him, whereupon
the king asked him, "How are you?" The man said, "Like anyone else," but
according to another way of telling this incident, "I am fine." The king
said, "There is nothing good with this man," leaving him. The traveler
said, "Praise be to Allāh Who sent you away from me, thinking ill of
me!"

Yes, my dear one, the sincere ones were apprehensive of hidden
pretension, trying hard to mislead people about their righteous deeds
out of their concern about hiding them more so than people's concern
about hiding their bad deeds and sins, all of this in the hope their
good deeds will be sincere, so Allāh will reward them on the Judgment
Day by hiding these bad deeds and sins from people. These sincere folks
knew and became convinced that Allāh Almighty does not accept anything
but what is purely for His sake, for He has said,

*"**And they have been commanded no more than this: To worship Allāh,
offering Him sincere devotion, being true (in faith): To establish
regular prayers, and to practice regular charity: such is the right and
straight religion" (Qur'ān, 98:5).***

The Judgment Day is the Day of their want and need for righteous deeds;
it is the Day when neither wealth nor offspring will be of any benefit
save for one who reaches Allāh with a sound heart.

A scholar has provided this example: The desert travelers go there with
the best currency in circulation because they know that the need for it
is the greatest in the desert, and that the desert people accept only
the best currency. The same applies to those who have hearts. They
witness the Day of Judgment and the rations whereby they supply
themselves: piety, knowing that the best of rations is piety. They bring
about deeds that are free of pretension, protecting themselves against
all levels of pretension.


