Unique Qur’anic Jewel
=====================

While narrating the story of Yousuf (Joseph) and his brothers, the
Qur'ān states that after the latter having come to Egypt and asked
Yousuf to provide them with provisions and rations, the Qur'ān states
the following:

*"**At length, once he had furnished them with provisions (suitable) for
them, he put the drinking cup in his brother's saddle-bag. Then a crier
shouted out, 'O you (in) the caravan! Behold! You are thieves, without
doubt!'" (Qur'ān, 12:70).***

One of the men of knowledge says, "It is not right to think that Yousuf
accused his brother of theft so he would take him and keep him in his
company because if Yousuf's purpose was to keep his brother with him, he
did not have to accuse him in this ugly way, embarrassing him and
letting him fall in the public's esteem as a thief although he is the
son of the prophet of Allāh. Rather, he could have found another excuse
to do that without scratching his dignity.

If he had to, he could have done so secretly, say, in a confidential
personal meeting rather than before the public, so much so that a crier
had to cry out to the caravan, charging it of theft. So, what prompted
this announcement to the caravan which contained Canaanites who would
return to the land of Canaan and the robbery committed by a prophet of
Allāh would be the core of the talk in all meeting places and
gatherings? Men will talk about it and so will the women, and the
reputation of a house about which people know nothing but honor and
spirituality will be ruined. There has to be something hidden in this
matter."

The man of knowledge goes on to say, "The hidden matter is that reaching
truly divine dignity is not easy except through public humiliation. We
tie dignity to the truth because posts and stations among the public are
not truly dignifying. True dignity is in reaching nearness to Allāh. In
other words, it is neighborliness of Allāh, the company of the Lord of
the Worlds, a station of the truth near an Able King. The company of
Allāh's servants is the company of Allāh. Whoever loves you loves Allāh,
and whoever hates you hates Allāh. Whoever Allāh chooses, He starts with
you. Whoever visits his brother in Allāh, the Almighty says, 'You have
visited Me'.

This dignity does not become available except when conditions are met
the greatest of which is humiliation by the people. If you wish, you can
say that the greatest obstacle in the path towards Allāh and towards
reaching Allāh's courtyard is love for prominence and eminence among the
people. So long as the heart remains attached to such love, the owner of
this heart cannot reach his destination as this narrative tells us: Two
ferocious wolves, one of which attacks a herd of cattle from its
beginning and the other from its end, are as detrimental to one's creed
as loving distinction and a high station.

Therefore, the worldly mastership is rejected in the eyes of Allāh's
friends who hate it as the Master of the Pious has said, 'By the One Who
split the seed and created the breeze, had it not been for the presence
of what is present…, you would have found this world of yours less
important in my esteem than a goat's sneeze.' One who treads this path
must take this love out of his heart, even if it means dropping his
esteem from public eyes if he does not feel secure regarding the ills
and detriments of his own *nafs*, just as severing a part of the body is
permissible, even obligatory, when there is concern about the health of
the rest of the bodily parts.

Therefore, the virtuous al-Naraqi has narrated in his book *Mi'rāj
al-Sa'āda* about a scholar reciting the Qur'ān in front of their
students and sincere ones deliberately in a way about which they claim
he has no knowledge and that he is illiterate. Committing a small harm
in order to attain a great deal of goodness is rational and according to
the Sharī\`a permissible. This concept has many testimonials from those
who tread the path towards Allāh, and many refer to it in their poems.

One of the men of knowledge says, "I saw once in a vision someone whom I
did not know. He handed me a piece of paper and ordered me to sign it. I
signed it without knowing what is written in it or be familiar with its
contents. Once I have signed it, the person who gave it to me said, 'Our
narrative is quite hard; it is not tolerated except by an angel who is
near to Allah, or a sent prophet, or a servant whose heart Allāh tested
with conviction.'

He read this tradition and said, 'I undoubtedly choose humiliation.' So,
I woke up from my sleep and came to know that I had signed the document
of my humiliation among the people so I may win through such humiliation
the ability to bear the difficult traditions and the secrets of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be with them." This topic has a lengthy continuation, so
we shall leave it for its place and people.

Generally, the impurities of hidden pretension are numerous, countless.
As much as one realizes on his own about how a human being or an animal
becomes acquainted with his adoration, he still has a branch of
pretension. Since he has no hope set on animals and infants being thus
acquainted with his adoration, he does not care whether they are present
[when he is involved in an act of adoration] or if they are absent,
whether they notice his adoration or not.

If one is sincere, having no desire about anyone [with regard to his
acts of adoration], he will think very lowly of their knowledge of his
acts of adoration because he knows that they, too, are like children:
They cannot bring him sustenance, nor can they bear any impact on his
destiny, nor increase his rewards. Rather, they cannot bring their own
selves any good, or any harm, or death, or life, or resurrection…, etc.

At this point, in order to explain what we are driving at, we have to
submit a question because the matter is very important: We see most
people feeling glad when their good deeds are recognized; so, is such
feeling of happiness lauded by the Sharī\`a, or is it held as
contemptible?

The answer is that it is not lauded at all, nor is it held as
contemptible either. Instead, it is praised in some cases and held with
contempt in others. Here are the details:

The lauded one falls into four categories:

The **first** is that one's intention is to hide the acts of obedience
and sincerity to Allāh, but when people noticed what he was doing, he
has to remember that Allāh, the most Praised One, by virtue of His
Attribute expressed in this supplication: "O One Who manifests what is
beautiful!" has manifested something beautiful, so he is led to think
that Allāh has fared well with him: The perfection of His munificence is
that He hides obedience and disobedience. But Allāh, due to the beauty
of His care, hides the man's acts disobedience while manifesting those
of his obedience. This is a great act of kindness from the part of Allāh
Almighty in his regard, hence the man is very happy on account of Allāh
having done such a nice thing for him, not because people praise what he
has done or the status in their hearts which he now occupies. It is as
though he sees through it that Allāh, due to His favor and mercy, has
accepted his deed, so he is happy about it.

***"Say: 'In the bounty of Allāh, and in His mercy, let them rejoice!'”
(Qur'ān, 10:58).***

The **second** is that his happiness stems from [his conviction that]
since Allāh Almighty manifests what is beautiful in him while covering
up what is ugly in this life, He will do likewise in the Hereafter as
well, for Allāh is the Lord of the Hereafter and of this life. Actually,
His mercy in the Hereafter is broader than it is in the life of this
world as referred to in the traditions.

It is as though he is repeating what Imām Zayn al-\`Ābidin (ع) has said
in one of his supplications thus: "Lord! Just as You have covered up
sins that I have committed in this life, I have a greater need that You
will veil them in the Hereafter." His elation in the first case is due
to accepting what is in the present time without considering the future,
while in the second his mind is set about the future. One tradition
states the following: "When Allāh covers up the sin of one of His
servants in the life of this world, He covers it up for him in the
Hereafter as well."

The **third** is that his elation stems from his belief that hopefully
those who see his act of adoration will emulate him, hence he will have
an increase in the rewards. Even if he undertakes the action publicly
with this same intention, he will not be violating the spirit of
sincerity: He will have the reward, due to his intention, as though he
undertook that deed privately firstly, and secondly due to Allāh
Almighty manifesting his deed and letting others emulate his act of
obedience to Him, and one who thus feels elated is quite justified. The
manifestation of indications of benefit is sweet and undoubtedly prompts
one to be happy bout it.

The **fourth** is this: When he sees how those who noticed his act of
adoration praise him for being obedient to his Lord, he will feel happy
and glad that they, too, obey Allāh and love to see people obeying Him
as well; their hearts incline towards the good deeds.

There are some people who see obedient people and hold them in contempt,
or feel envious, or speak ill of them, or ridicule them, or charge them
with pretension rather than praise them for their act of adoration. This
elation is due to seeing how good the belief of Allāh's servants is, how
good their souls are. The sign of sincerity in this type is that one
feels happy when people praise someone else just as he feels happy when
they praise him, perhaps even more so, as it is quite obvious.

As regarding what is contemptible, it is when one feels happy for having
earned a status in the hearts of people, so people may now praise and
magnify him: This is hated and is contemptible, and surely Allāh knows
best.


