Practical Treatment for Pretension
==================================

Contemplating upon and making plans for the issues which we have stated,
though it has a strong effect in treating this disease, ought not
suffice to scientifically treat this dangerous ailment. Rather, the
disease has also to be practically monitored. The practical medication
is that one must accustom himself to hiding his acts of adoration and
closing the doors while doing them just as the doors are closed when
sins are committed, till his heart is convinced that Allāh knows about
and is familiar with his acts of adoration, and his soul does not stop
him from seeking anyone to know about them save Allāh.

It has been narrated that a companion of Abū Hafs, the blacksmith, spoke
ill of this life and of its people, whereupon Abū Hafs said to him, "You
have manifested what you should have hidden. From this day on, do not
keep us company." He did not even permit showing this much because in
speaking ill of this life there is a sort of invitation to asceticism,
and such an invitation often stems out of pretension; therefore, this
student made him the object of his teacher's reprimanding

There is no cure for pretension like hiding. This is so even though it,
in the beginning, is very difficult to do, but if one perseveres about
it by forcing himself, he will be aided by divine acts of kindness, and
good success will be his; it will then be easier for him and his burden
will fall through support and help from the Almighty.

Let me cite for you, kind reader, some of what has been narrated about
the biographies of the Imāms of Guidance who are the doctors of the
souls:

Al-Qummi, the narrator of traditions, may Allāh be pleased with him, has
narrated saying that Imām Ali son of Imām al-Hussain (peace be with them
both) used to come out during the pitch dark of the night carrying a
sack on his back in which he placed small bundles containing [gold]
dinars and [silver] dirhams, and he might also have carried on his back
food or firewood.

He would come to a house door and knock it then hand over something to
whoever comes out to open it, covering his face meanwhile so the poor
recipient may not know who he is. When his corpse was placed down for
the burial bath, his back showed marks of swellings as large as camel
humps. He used to sustain a hundred families from among the poor of
Medīna.

The son of Aisha is quoted as having said, "I heard the residents of
Medīna saying, 'We have now lost the secret charity when Ali son of
al-Hussain (ع) died.' When he died and was stripped for the funeral
burial, they kept looking at the marks on his back. They said that he
used to carry flour sacks on his back during the night in order to get
them to reach the poor of Medīna stealthily, and he used to say that
secret charities put out the wrath of the Lord."

The Prophet (ص) has said, "The greatest rewards for an act of worship
are for one who hides them."[^1]

The Commander of the Faithful, peace be with him, has said, "One of the
treasures of Paradise are: hiding a good deed, persevering while facing
calamities, and hiding hardships."[^2]

The Imāms, peace be with them, are also cited as having said, "The
distinction of a good deed done in secrecy over one done openly is that
the first will be rewarded seventy times as much."[^3]

There are many other such narratives.

[^1]: Safeenat al-Bihar. Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 15.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: I say that the professor, may my soul be his sacrifice, has
transmitted this statement from his own great mentor Shah-Abadi (may
Allah be pleased with him). But I saw it recorded in the book titled
Mirsad al-Ibad by Sheikh Najm ad-Deen, and favor belongs to the one who
does a good deed first.


