Ares where Showing Acts of Worship is Permissible
=================================================

There is no doubt in the requirement of sincerity in the act of
adoration and obedience to win the pleasure of Allāh Almighty. This is
taken for granted as one of the principles that have to be taken into
consideration in all conditions and circumstances. No other rational or
legislated incentive advances an act for the Divine One more than it.
Sometimes what the *nafs* insinuates is not even considered: A deed has
a great benefit; therefore, it must be undertaken in order to show
people. A pretentious deed gives the person who undertakes it nothing in
return as the Holy Qur'ān clearly states:

***"… like those who spend their substance (just) to be seen by men but
do not believe in Allāh or the Last Day. They are in parable like a
hard, barren rock on which there is a little soil; a heavy rain falls on
it, leaving it (just) a bare stone. They will be able to do nothing with
whatever they had earned" (Qur'ān, 2:264).***

Besides adhering to this accepted principle of the Sharī\`a, we say that
hiding a righteous deed, although it contains the benefit of sincerity
and the absence of pretension, yet, on the other hand, if it is done
openly, it may also produce a benefit which is: making it desirable to
people. Thus, people may emulate the one who does it even if the deed
may be threatened with pretension. The deed in both cases is raised in
the Holy Qur'ān:

***"If you disclose (acts of) charity, even so it is well, but if you
conceal them and make them reach those (who are really) in need, that is
best for you: It will remove some of your (stains of) evil from you. And
Allāh is well acquainted with all what you do" (Qur'ān, 2:271).***

Disclosing them is of two types: One is disclosing the act itself
publicly, and the other is talking about it after it has been secretly
done.

As regarding the first, it in fact has preference over what can be done
secretly and what can be done publicly. If the act cannot be hidden,
such as performing the pilgrimage, going for a holy war, attending the
congregational prayer service, and the like, it ought to be undertaken
and not to let the insinuation have room in it. Doing such deeds openly
has nothing to do with making a show or with pretension. Rather, the
benefit of taking the initiative in such deeds is to let people desire
them, but the condition in them, as we stated, is that they must not be
done just to show off. They are to be done publicly.

Rather, perhaps the catalyst to hide such forms of worship is pretension
as we pointed out before. It is this: Some souls covet to have a status
in the hearts of people, so people may think well of them. In such case,
what is also known is this: One who knows that they cannot be hidden,
that they will eventually be known, he tries to hide doing them. This is
so because if people see the action later on, and they will have to,
they will think that this person does what he does for the sake of
Allāh, praise belongs to Him, and he does not like people to get to know
his deeds.

For example, if someone wants to perform the pilgrimage, he knows that
this action cannot be hidden from people because later he will have to
be seen in Mecca and Mina and perform the rounds and other rituals which
will be seen by a huge number of people. And he, once back from the
pilgrimage, will be visited by the brethren; so, this deed will
imminently be known. But if people come to know about it, they will
state that he was hiding the preparations for it, so they will consider
him as being sincere in his action and will think well of him. Such an
individual is either a fool or a deceiving pretender who wants to hide
his pretension from people.

But if the deed can and cannot be hidden, such as offering charity and
prayers, it has to be manifested so long as there is no pretension in
such manifesting, that there will be no harm in it such as showing the
act of offering charity while harming the one receiving it. In such a
case, it has to be hidden. But if it has no other harm, it is better to
manifest it because it contains a public invitation to others to do
likewise. This is proven by the tradition of the prophets and friends of
Allāh (ص) who has said the following about such a person: "… He will
have the reward of doing it as well as that of anyone else who emulates
it."

Tradition narrates that doing a deed secretly equals doing it publicly
seventy times. There are manifold rewards for doing a good deed
secretly, as many as seventy times, if it follows the custom of doing it
secretly. As long as the heart separates itself from the impurities of
pretension, and sincerity is complete in both cases, there is no doubt
that anything good which is emulated by others is surely better. The
concern is only about pretension being unveiled. When the impurity of
pretension takes place, emulation of others will not avail the doer, and
he will perish by it; secrecy in such a case is better.

But one who manifests the deed must take two matters into consideration:

**First**, he must manifest it while knowing or thinking it will be
emulated, such as a man doing something good for his family, or a mentor
in his quarter, or a scholar in his country, regardless of the variation
of individuals' stations. In other words, the emulation intention is
sound in one who is apt to be emulated; otherwise, there is no benefit
in manifesting it, and he will miss out on the benefit of doing it
secretly.

**Second**, one must monitor his heart; it may have hidden pretension,
so it invites him to manifest in the excuse of emulation. It, in
reality, covets that undertaking the effort to win a station of
emulation, and this is a hurdle that cannot be transcended except by the
strong ones, the sincere. Others, the weaklings, must not deceive
themselves, so they will perish and cause others to perish unknowingly.

The similitude of the weakling in this dilemma is one who does not know
how to swim well. He looks at a group of drowning persons, so he feels
pity for them and goes to them to cling to him so he may save them from
drowning. They cling to him, whereupon this weakling perishes just as
they perish. Thus do the feet of the servants of Allāh and of the
scholars slip away. Some of them hold on to the strong in their
manifestation, but their hearts are not strong enough for sincerity, so
their rewards are cancelled by pretension.

Notice that this is shrouded with ambiguity. One who wants to know the
treachery of his soul and whether his aim in manifesting the good deed
is to propagate it and advocate it, or if he has already fallen into
Satan's trap, he must subject himself to a test. The test is: He must
ask himself if a man of truth, the one who works for Allāh Almighty,
tells him to hide the deed so people may emulate another scholar or
worshipper from among his peers, and he will have the same reward of
doing the good deed publicly…, and if his heart inclines to be the one
to be emulated, so he manifests the deed, let him know that the
incentive of pretension is there rather than the desire for divine
rewards. It is the desire for people's goodness because they aspired to
achieve goodness through the action of some other worshipper who
received his reward.

He obtained it despite his secrecy. So, what is wrong with his heart
inclining towards manifesting it other than the eyes of people noticing
it, making a pretense for their sake? Let the servant of Allāh beware of
the soul's deception, for it often deceives, while Satan ever lies in
ambush. Love for a public status subdues one's heart. Seldom are
manifested deeds safe from perils; so, he must not substitute safety for
anything else, the safety in hiding and in manifesting, perils that our
likes cannot bear; therefore, we and all other weaklings ought to be
cautious.

A scholar who was propagating the creed was seen in a vision and was
asked what was done to him. He said, "When I arrived at the *barzakh*
[perhaps equivalent in Catholic theology to the purgatory], I was called
upon by my name and was asked what I had done in my lifetime. I said,
'Lord! I wrote many books to promote the faith.' I was asked, 'While
propagating the creed, did you intend that the faith was to be promoted,
or did you want your own self to be widely known?' I was too puzzled to
answer." This is why the tradition states the following: "Be sincere in
doing your good deed, for the critic is quite observing."

As regarding the second type, it is one talking about the deed and
announcing it after having secretly done it. Like the first, this, too,
is dangerous. It is even much more so: The tongue is easy to articulate
and move about narrating the tale with ease, and it may increase,
decrease or exaggerate. The *nafs* enjoys manifesting claims supportive
of love for itself; so, one whose heart is strong, sincere, in whose
eyes people look small, it is equal with him whether they speak well or
ill of him. If mentioning it to those whom he hopes will emulate it,
thus seeking goodness because of it…, it is permissible to talk about
the deed.

He will even be required to do so if his intention is pure and free of
all perils because it is an invitation to others to do (similar) acts of
righteousness, an invitation to do good which is good by itself,
especially if one's nature is molded on loving to emulate others and
being emulated, feeling the weight of its burdens. Talking plays a
strong role in bearing an impact on people's hearts, on their emulating
the speaker.

Perhaps a pretender manifesting an act of worship, when people do not
know that it is pretension, has a great deal of good in it for people,
yet it is evil against the pretender; so, how many sincere people have
been the reason behind their sincerity is to emulate one who in the eyes
of Allāh is a pretender! A narrated tradition states this: "Allāh
strengthens this religion through the sinning man, and through people
who do not ponder on consequences"; it refers to that. Talking about a
good deed, if one is sincere without any pretension, is good, although
there is something quite interesting which we noticed about great men
and which we would like to state here:

The men of divinity, those who rid themselves of desires, used to
discourage others from narrating visions while attributing them to their
own selves. They used to say instead, "I know someone who does
such-and-such" or "Such-and-such happened the following to him by way of
self-disclosure," for example, because the objective is achieved through
the action or disclosure itself, and it is not needed to get to know who
did it except if knowing so also plays a role in impressing, in
emulating. It is only then that they used to identify themselves.


