A Seal of Musk,  Sublime Tradition & an Explanation by Imām Al-Khomeini, May his Shade Prolong
==============================================================================================

As we conclude these sheets, we would like to cite a sacred tradition
narrated by al-Kulaini (may Allāh be pleased with him) in his sacred
book *Al-Kāfi* from the Master of those who believe in the Unity of
Allāh, namely the Commander of the Faithful (ع). Sheikh al-Sadūq (may
Allāh be pleased with him) has narrated a similar one from Imām Abū
Abdullāh al-Sādiq (ع). It is one of the pieces of advice by the Prophet
(ص) to Ali (ع).

The tradition is thus rendered through *isnād* to Abū Abdullāh (ع) who
said that the Commander of the Faithful (ع) had said, "There are three
distinctive marks of a pretender: He is energetic [in feigning acts of
adoration] when he sees people, is lazy when alone, and loves to be
praised in all his affairs."

Imām al-Khomeini, may his shade prolong, has said the following:

Since this disgusting sin may be hidden, not known by even the person
with which he is afflicted: He claims his deed is sincere, whereas in
his innermost, he is among the pretenders. For this reason, they have
stated a mark of identification so one may thereby identify his
innermost, and he may thus start curing himself of it:

One sees himself, when alone, as having no desire to undertake acts of
obedience to Allāh. When he forces himself to perform an act of worship,
as he is accustomed to doing, he does so without energy or desire.
Rather, he performs it as incomplete, impure. But if he is present in
mosques or congregations, he keeps himself busy with an act or adoration
as he is seen by the public. So he does it with energy, with connection,
with pleasure, and with an attentive heart. He loves to prolong his
bowing and prostrating during his prayer, performs what is commendable,
well carries out its parts and requirements.

If his mind wakes up to such doing, and if he asks himself about the
reason for doing that, the *nafs* will then place its trap on the
principles of adoration and, in order to deceive one, says, "Your energy
with regard to worship in mosques is more rewarding," or that prayers
with a congregation is such and such. Or he may be in a congregation
other than the mosques, so it says to him, "It is highly commendable for
one to undertake a well done job so others may emulate him, follow his
example, or have the desire for the creed." It thus deceives one through
any means it can.

The truth is that this happiness and energy are not prompted except by a
heart disease with which this poor man is afflicted, while he considers
his *nafs* as being sound, not sick. There is no hope that he will be
healed. This wretch, in his innermost, in his pith, in his conscience,
loves to show people his deed while he is being unaware of it. Rather,
he is demonstrating disobedience in the form of adoration, turning
pretension into propagation for the creed. Although it is commendable
that one performs what is recommended when he is by himself, why does
the *nafs* always love to undertake it in public? It weeps for fear of
Allāh in public congregations with energy and gladly, but when alone, no
matter how it tries, it cannot squeeze a drop out of the eye.

Why does fear of Allāh take place only in congregations? One weeps and
supplicates in the presence of thousands of people during the nights of
Qadr, offering a hundred prostrations during his prayers, reciting the
Greater Jawshan supplication and the smaller one as well as chapters
from the Holy Qur'ān without feeling lazy, nor is he tired doing all of
that. But if he prays ten *rek'at* in his solitude, he feels a back
pain, and he is in such a bad shape! If the deeds that come up of an
individual are prompted solely to win the Pleasure of Allāh Almighty, or
to attain His mercy, or out of fear of His fire, or out of eagerness for
Paradise, why should this individual love people to praise him for them?

Why should he listen to their praise, directing his heart towards them
so he may hear someone lauding him or saying that so-and-so is a man of
adoration, a worshipper who is keen to be in the forefront when the time
of prayers comes, is mindful of what is commendable?! Or so he does so
in order that he may hear someone saying that so-and-so, who performed
the pilgrimage, is a trustworthy man, a man who can be reliable upon
with regard to his transactions, etc.

If one looks forward to Allāh Almighty with anticipation, why should he
care for all this profuse love [for public praise]? If [love for]
paradise and [fear of] the fire are your catalyst to undertake this
deed, why do you care for such love? So, be mindful lest this love
should come from the branches of that bad tree, pretension, and try your
best to repair what you can repair, and rid yourself of such love.

There is no harm in attracting attention to something in this regard
which is: For each of these psychological conditions that are more than
the good and the bad aspects, there are many levels. To be characterized
by one of the good attributes while being dissociated from a level of
bad attributes may be the specialty of those who know Allāh, who are
friends of Allāh. As regarding the rest of people, they are as they are
in their levels.

To be characterized by what is a shortcoming in the sight of the men of
knowledge, of the friends of Allāh, does not seem to them [to these
faulty persons] to be a shortcoming. Rather, it may be perfection of a
sort. Also, the merits of these individuals seem to be bad to the men of
knowledge, to the friends of Allāh. Pretension, which we are discussing,
is actually one of these attributes. Salvation from all its levels is
the privilege of the friends of Allāh. Others do not share them in it.

The general public of people being characterized by one of its levels is
not a shortcoming based on the station in which they are. It does not
harm their conviction or sincerity. For example, the hearts of the
general public, according to their nature, incline towards showing
people what is good about them, even if they do not do so with the
intention of showing off. But their souls by nature are inclined to such
love, and this does not necessitate rendering the deed as void or
describing them as unbelievers, hypocrites and polytheist, although this
is surely a shortcoming in the sight of the friends of Allāh, a shirk, a
hypocrisy in the view of a friend of Allāh, or one who knows Allāh.

To be totally free of absolute shirk, to be redeemed of all its levels,
is the first station of the friends of Allāh who have other stations not
suitable for elaboration here. The Infallible Ones, peace be with them,
have said that their adoration is one of freemen's, that is, solely out
of love for Allāh Almighty, neither coveting Paradise nor fearing hell.
It is one of their ordinary stations and the first degree of their
mastership. There are for them, peace be with them, in their adoration
conditions which are beyond our comprehension.

Based on what we have stated, a combination can be made of the tradition
cited above transmitted from the Messenger of Allāh (ص) and the
Commander of the Faithful (peace be with both of them), and the other
tradition by Zurarah who cites Abū Ja'fer, peace be with him, as
narrated by Muhammad ibn Yacoub who traces it back to Abū Ja'fer, peace
be with him, saying, "I asked him about a man who does something good.
Another sees it and is pleased with it. He said that there is no harm in
it, that everyone loves to look in the eyes of people as a man of
goodness unless he does something solely for this purpose."

If one loves to be praised, he is regarded in one of the traditions as
manifesting pretension, while in the other tradition the harm is removed
when someone is pleased with something good coming out of his deed. The
common denominator in the combination is the difference of opinion
according to the status of the individuals. There is another way to look
at the combination of both traditions which we have overlooked.

Here the speech of our professor [al-Khomeini], may Allāh prolong his
shade, ends.

I say, perhaps the other way in combining both traditions is that the
first tradition examines the love for praise at the time when a good
deed is being done, and it is a mark of pretension. The other tradition
examines love for praise after a deed is already done.

Or the love for praise in the first tradition is made as a mark of
pretension, arranged by the other two marks, as is linguistically clear,
especially since paying attention to the first marks (energy when people
see a doer of good deed and laziness when he is by himself), and they
must be observed together or separately so they may comprise a mark for
pretension; otherwise, if one of them is supposed, say the energy when
people see him and also when alone or laziness in both cases, it is
definitely not a mark of pretension. If it is added to love for praise,
it will definitely be a mark for pretension, a sure revelation of it,
and this is contrary to praise alone, for it is not a mark of pretension
as the second tradition says.

Or we may say that the first tradition means the pretender, because of
being afflicted with the disease of pretension, loves people to praise
him in all his affairs, as the tradition states. As for the second
tradition, it is similar to partial obligation; it points out to the
appearance of goodness from one when pleased; there is no harm so long
as he did not do the deed for solely this purpose. Surely Allāh is the
One Who knows best, and the last of our supplication is: Praise to
Allāh, the Lord of the Worlds.

These sheets have been written down by the indigent, the one needs the
mercy of his Lord, Sayyid Ahmed al-Fahri, on the twentieth day of the
blessed Month of Ramadan in the city of Damascus in the year 1404 A.H.;
with the one who undertook the migration may be prayers and peace.


