Meaning of "pretension"
=======================

The word "riya" (pretension) is derived from "ru'ya" ( vision,
eyesight), just as the word "sum'a" (reputation) is derived from "sam'"
(hearing), in essence, the meaning of pretension is that one seeks,
through the medium of his good deeds, distinction and prominence in the
hearts of people, even if this can be achieved through good deeds. But
the term, according to the Shari'a, requires this intention to
materialize in the, rituals and in the deeds intended for seeking
nearness to Allah as a condition for their acceptance according to the
Shari'a. Thereupon, the meaning of pretension is what is supposed to be
a deed for the sake of nearness to Allah with the intention to seek a
status among the people". The leading imam, al-Khomeini, may Allah
prolong his shade, has made a statement in this regard. Its gist is that
pretension, according to him, is not exclusively relevant to an act of
worship but is broader than that. He says, "Be informed that pretension
is showing people some good deeds, or commendable attributes, or true
beliefs in order to achieve a status in their hearts and fame among them
that he is kind, sound of belief, trustworthy and pious without truly
seeking to please the Almighty. This materializes in certain levels:

**FIRST LEVEL :**

It has two degrees: In the FIRST degree, one shows off the true beliefs
and divine branches of knowledge so he will be famous for being pious
and will have a status in people's hearts such as he may say, "1 see
none effective in existence save Allah," or he may say, "1 rely on none
save Allah". Or he may identify himself as being associated with true
belief's by either affiliation or reference. This type of pretension is
the most widely circulated, For example\_ when either reliance on Allah
or accepting Ills decree is discussed at a gathering, the pretender will
then sigh or move his head to beckon that he is on the path of those who
rely on or who accept the decree of Allah.

In the SECOND degree, he clears himself of or puts it above false
beliefs, seeking distinction and prominence in the hearts whether
explicitly or implicitly.

**SECOND LEVEL :**

It, too, has two degrees: In the FIRST degree, one demonstrates the
commendable attributes and the virtuous faculties seeking distinction
and prominence. In the SECOND degree, he holds himself as being above
contradictions, clearing himself of contemptible attributes and foul
faculties for this same purpose.

**THIRD LEVEL :**

It is the pretension known to exist among the faqihs, may Allah be
pleased with them. It, too, has these two degrees: ONE OF THEM is doing
what is required by the Shari'a or legislated adoration, or doing what
is rationally commendable seeking showing them off to people and winning
their hearts in a wider sense than doing so through what is meant by
pretension when doing the same, or in the way he does it, or in meeting
its condition or a portion thereof according to what they have stated in
the books of fiqh (jurisprudence). The second is leaving a \_job for the
same." This is what the imam, may Allah prolong his shade, describes
whHe classifying norms of pretension.

A scholar of the hereafter has mentioned another classification tor
pretension after having defined pretension, saving it is what

the servants of Allah fare with obedience to Him, dividing it into five
types :

1. pretension about the faith with the use of the body
2. pretension about the faith through the norms of clothing, outfitting
form and attire
3. pretension in speech
4. pretension in action
5. pretension in companionship and in friendliness with the public

This division, though not logical, is backed by examples for each
explaining the deceptions of the wily. They benefit those who wish to
purify their souls and reform them so they may be guided against the
ways of the soul's deceptions. We, therefore, would like to mention some
of them here with our own editing :

The first type, that is, the pretension about the faith with the use of
bodily parts, means showing thinness, weakness and yellowish facial
complexion so one is thus deceived about the extent of exertion, the
deep concern about the creed and the overwhelming fear of the Hereafter.
He wants to give the impression that he is eating very little, his face
is yellow because of spending the night vigilant, greatly exerting
himself and feeling depressed out of concern for the religion. He also
makes a pretense by leaving his hair untidy so he may give the
impression that his mouth is deeply involved in religious uttering
[rather than in eating and drinking]; he has no time to tidy his hair.
These causes, no matter how they appear, give the people the impression
about these matters, so the pretender's soul is at ease when he gives
such an impression; so, his soul prompts him to demonstrate them so that
it may be restful. You may see this pretender lowering his voice when he
speaks so that the listener may be duped into believing that lowering
the voice is due to abundance of adoration, or his lips are withered
because of continuous last. It is for this reason that Christ, peace he
with him, said, "When one of you fasts, let him oil his head, tidy his
hair and use kohl (arras) for his eyes," The reason why he, peace be
with him, said so was out of fear of Satan insinuating pretension.

As regarding pretension coming from clothing and appearance, it is when
one does not tidy his hair, lowers his head when he walks more than what
is required by modesty and dignity, when he is quiet in movement,
keeping the mark of prostration on the forehead and perhaps wearing an
outfit that is not clean so he may be counted among the sincere
worshippers of Allah.

Clothing pretenders are various classes: Some of them seek a status
among the people of righteousness and piety by showing off asceticism.
One May wear a worn out garment so he may be regarded by them as an
ascetic and lives in the society in this attribute. The mark of his
pretension is that if he is asked to wear an average clean garment like
that worn by the righteous predecessors, it will be very hard for him to
do so, and it will he as if lie is being led to his slaughter because he
is afraid people will say that lie is tired of being an ascetic and
returned to his old self, desiring the life of this world. Another class
seeks acceptance among the people of righteousness and the people of the
world such as businessmen and the elite. These poor folks feel
embarrassed and alarmed because if they wear luxurious clothes, the
ascetics and the servants of Allah will reject them. And if they wear
old worn out clothes, they will perhaps fall in the eyes of the people
of this world and in the ayes of the rich. They want to combine between
the acceptance of the people of faith and that the people of this world;
therefore, they choose clothes the weaving and the fabric of which arc
valuable, hence the value of their clothes is similar to that of a rich
man's clothing, but its form and color give the impression that it is
worn by the righteous. With this trick they seek acceptance by both
groups. The mark of pretension of this group is that if they are asked
to wear old clothes that are in good shape, it will be very hard for
them to do so out of their tear the righteous people will tell them that
they desired the life of this world. And if they are asked to wear what
is coarse or worn out, it will be a harsh undertaking due to their fear
of losing lace among the rich. Each of these classes sees its status
represented in a particular way of dressing; it is hard for him to move
to something less or something more or to anything else, even if it is
permissible or preferred by the Shari'a.

As for pretension in speech, it is when a pretender keeps repeating
pieces of wisdom: He keeps reminding others in order to win people's
hearts. He memorizes words of wisdom, traditions and biographies in
order to use them in his debates to show the richness of his knowledge
and to point out to his extreme care about the conditions of the pious
ancestors. He chooses statements containing vocal letters, or at least
verbal ones, so he may move his tongue in a gathering of the people. If
the statement contains both types of letters, it will be preferred by
him. During a public meeting, he busies himself with repeating holy
statements although if he sits alone for hours, his lips do not utter
anything of the mention of Allah. His denunciation of what is detestable
is intense before the public: he expresses sorrow for people committing
transgressions, and he is amazed at how they dare to disobey .Allah.
Thus, people may get the impression that he does not commit a
transgression, nor does he have the courage to undertake it. The
branches of speech pretension exhaust a great deal to mention.

As regarding pretension in action, such as a praying person showing off
how he prolongs his standing during the prayers reciting lengthy
chapters, especially if he is an imam of a group, so that people may
recognize his distinction and that he has memorized many chapters of the
Holy Qur'an, and they envy him fur standing so long during his
adoration. If he prays at home or outside it, where he is not seen by
anyone, lie will be satisfied with reciting the shortest chapters. His
condition is the same during solemnity and submission as well as lengthy
prostration during the prayers. When he is seen by the public, he does
so more than during his solitude especially if he is the imam of a
group. He goes overboard in showing off his deep adoration, prolonging
his prostration especially during the "sajdat al-shukr", thanksgiving
prostration, after the prayer ritual. He may remain prostrating till all
those praying behind him disperse. The same applies to the rest of his
acts of adoration such as fast, charity and pilgrimage. Even when he
Walks to take care of a need, he may hurry, but if one of the men of
religion sees him, he immediately reverts to solemnity, to lowering his
head for fear of being accused of haste and of being less solemn. When
the man of religion is out of sight, the pretender resumes his pace. A
pretender may pray by himself without full concentration, but if someone
sees him, he goes back to his full concentration. When he is in a place
of public worship, he states that full attention must be allotted to the
Almighty. He wants people to hear him say so in order that he may be
counted among the true servants of AIM, the righteous ones.

Among them is one who is immersed in pretension: When lie catches
himself off-guard, he feels so shy that his gait, when alone, is similar
to that when he is seen by people, fearing people may get to notice the
variation in his gait, so he forces himself to walk properly, humbly,
when alone so he may get used to it and it will be the same when he is
alone and when in public, and he will not need to shift from one to the
other when seen by people. He thus thinks that he gets rid of
pretension, being unmindful of the fact that his pretension has
intensified, his scheme has doubled, and his pretension has crept into
his solitude as well. When he walks properly when alone, so he will do
likewise before people, he does not do that out of fear of Allah, nor
feeling shy of Him.

Since the source of what is hidden about pretension can be explained
through another example, let us do so to the believing brothers. A
pretender may agree that his reason, the hidden messenger or the angel
in charge of good deeds according to the traditions, inspires him that
prayers, for example, which are performed in public are more profound
and contain more remembrance of Allah than in the prayer ritual
performed at home distantly from the public eyes, and there is no doubt
that such a prayer is null due to pretension creeping into it, it is
then that Satan or the nafs may interfere in the subject and set up a
hidden trap of which a praying person is rarely aware, which is: The
nafs and Satan oblige the believer to pray in solitude, too, with full
devotion and mentioning lengthy supplications so this will be regarded
as the answer for reason or for the angel that "My prayer in public is
the same as I perform it in solitude; so, what evidence do you have
against me that my prayer is that of a pretender? Is not my prayer
before people the same as it is in my home? Actually, the prayer which I
perform in solitude may be more profound and containing more lengthy
praises than it is outside the house and before the public eyes." But
the poor man is heedless of Satan, and the nafs has not left a sound
prayer for him, not even in solitude or in the depth of the night. In
other words, among the signs of an action not being pretentious is that
the action witnessed by people is similar to it in solitude, not the
action in solitude being similar to that performed publicly: so, think
about it.

As for pretension in socializing, it is when someone makes arrangements
so that scholars may visit him, and so that it will be said that
so-and-so is visited by so-and-so, or that he is respected by scholars.
It will be said that the theologians seek the blessings of God by
visiting him. And if he can find a way so businessmen and the elite,
too, visit him, let it be so in order that people may say that so-and-so
is respected by all classes of scholars worshipers and the folks of the
life of this world. If he cannot attract them to visit him, he himself
goes to visit the scholars and worshippers so it will be seen that he
met many scholars and worshippers from whom he benefited, so he brags
about them. If the kind ones and the righteous are mentioned, he sighs
and says, "Yes! How often I have met these kind ones, served them and
was glad to be at their service!" so the listeners may get to know that
serving the friends of Allah and the righteous does not go unrewarded by
them, that they must definitely have overwhelmed him with their
goodness.

Among the pretenders is one who is satisfied with people thinking well
of him. Many a worshipper isolates himself from the public and stays at
home, feeling elated that people think well of him. Although he no
longer covets their wealth, he likes prominence and people thinking well
of him: this has a sweet taste, as stated in its right place: it is the
sort of power and perfection, though it quickly vanishes, and nobody is
deceived by it save the ignorant ones, but most people are! Had people
come to know the truth, they would have thought ill of him, their belief
in him would have departed, and they thought that he committed something
ugly by thus sitting at home due to his mind being confused. He was not
satisfied with Allah's knowledge of his innocence and the purity of his
heart; rather, he is deeply grieved. He may abandon isolation and
adoration and comes out to the society. This poor man, though having no
desire for people's funds nor for their companionship, looked forward to
their good thoughts of him, their praise of him, so the love for
prominence set its roots in his heart, and his poor soul felt satisfied
with this much pleasure.

This is a collection of the things that entertain pretenders' minds.
They all seek prominence and recognition in the hearts of people.
Pretension has other sources the mention of which is lengthy, and one
who is loved by Allah may feel alert about them, for if Allah loves a
servant of His. He enables him to see his own faults.

**THE UGLIEST DEGREE OF PRETENSION**

Imam al-Khomeini, may Allah prolong his shade, has said, "Be informed
that the most serious degree of pretension and the most detrimental,
according to the principles of beliefs and theological branches of
knowledge, and the one the darkness to the heart of which is the most
intense of all other types of showing off is this: if the pretender does
not believe in what he shows off, he is still among the hypocrites whom
Allah forewarned of being kept in hell forever. His is perdition and
eternal loss, and his torment is the most severe. And if he believes in
that matter, but he does so seeking a status and distinction in the
hearts of people, although he is not a hypocrite, such a conduct
requires the light of conviction to abandon his heart so it would be
replaced by the darkness of disbelief. This is so because this person,
although he was initially committing hidden shirk, demonstrated to
people the divine branches of knowledge and the true beliefs that have
to be purely for seeking the pleasure of Allah, their owner is the true
I holy One, the most Glorious, but he let someone else be a partner in
them: He let Satan have a hand in dealing with them.

Such an action comes from the heart 1 seeking to please someone else
other than Allah. lie (a.s) says in a sacred tradition recorded in
Al-Kafi, "Every type of pretension is kith, (apostasy)," But both this
dark inner-self and bad trend drag, one to have a heart dedicated to
anyone except Allah. The darkness of this vice becomes a means to
gradually get one out of this life having no sound conviction (iman).
The erroneous conviction becomes an image without a meaning, a body
without a soul, a peal with a pith, and it does not qualify it to he
accepted by the most Exalted One as referred to in a sacred tradition in
Al-Kafi where Ali ibn Salim is quoted as having said that he heard Abu
Abdullah (a.s) saying that the Almighty said, "I am the best partner:
whoever brings another partner besides Me in an action, I shall not
accept it. I accept what is purely done for My sake." It is well known
that if the inner actions are not purely for the sake of pleasing Allah,
the Almighty does not accept them; He does not look at them: rather. He
refers them to the other partner, the one/ones for whom the action was
done in order to show off to him/them. Thus, the inner actions will be
dedicated to that person, and they get the pretender out of the limit of
shirk into mere apostasy (kufr). Actually, it can be said that this
person, too, is among the group of hypocrites. Just as shirk was hidden,
so was his hypocrisy. The poor pretender fooled himself into thinking
that he is a believer, but he started as a mushrik and ended up as a
hypocrite, and he has to taste the torment tasted by the hypocrites, Woe
unto one who is dragged into hypocrisy!

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 We will explain, by the Wilf of Aflah, how conviction is an act of
the heart [of the innermost].


