Meaning of Conceit
==================

Conceit means one sees and admires himself and his actions. It is a
psychological condition which we *sometimes* find in ourselves. The
meanings given to it, that have been mentioned in language books, mostly
explain its requirements or consequences such as elation, arrogance, and
denying what others hold against you as objectionable, according to
*Al-Munjid*.

These meanings, as you can see, are among the requirements of the state
which we mentioned in one's *nafs*. As regarding the idiomatic meaning
for conceit, according to the definition of the scholars of mannerism,
it is, according to some scholars of the hereafter, magnifying the
blessing, taking it for granted while forgetting to attribute it to the
One Who bestowed it.

*\`Allama* al-Majlisi, may Allāh sanctify his soul, has said that
conceit is magnifying the good deed, seeing it as plentiful. As
regarding feeling pleased with it while feeling humble to the most
Exalted One and thanking Him for enabling its doing, it is good,
commendable.

I say that what this great traditionist has said, that is, conceited is
"one who sees himself as not having fallen short of undertaking the
deed", a reference to a particular conduct to which narrations have
referred. Among such traditions is one recorded in the sacred book
*Al-Kāfi* from the father of al-Hassan, namely Imām Mousa son of Ja'fer,
peace be with both of them, who said once to one of his sons, "O son!
You have to maintain your endeavor.

Do not ever think of yourself as having transcended the stage of falling
short of perfecting your worship of Allāh, the most Exalted, the most
Great, and are obeying Him, for Allāh is never adored as He should be."
It is also as the Messenger of Allāh (ص) had said, being the best of all
descendants of Adam, the one who is the best of them in his knowledge of
Allāh, and the one who adored Him the best, addressing Him thus: "We did
not know You as You ought to be known, nor did we adore You as You
should rightly be adored." *Al-Kāfi*, too, cites Jābir [son of Abdullāh
al-Ansāri] saying that the father of Imām Ja'fer (ع) said to him, "O
Jābir! May Allāh never get you out of the feeling of being neglectful
and of being derelict in worshipping Allāh."

The great traditionist, *'allama* al-Majlisi, has quoted the
knowledgeable critic, the great scholar, and the most revered mentor
Bahā ad-Deen al-\`Āmili, may Allāh be pleased with him, saying, "There
is no doubt that if one does a righteous deed, such as fasting on
certain days, spending the night praying and the like, feels happy about
it. If he feels like that on account of these deeds being a boon from
Allāh, a blessing from Him, the most Exalted One, upon him, while being
afraid of their disappearance, pleading to Allāh to grant him more of
them…, such feeling is not conceit. But if he thinks that they represent
his own characteristic, that they are done by his person, being
attributed to him, thinking much of them and feeling reliant upon them,
seeing himself as being outside the limit of dereliction, having the
attitude as if he is doing Allāh, Praise to Him, a favor because of
them, such is conceit."


