Explanation by Imām Al-Khomeini
===============================

Imām al-Khomeini, may his shade prolong, has a viewpoint about this
definition. He says the following:

"The explanation of conceit according to what is mentioned by the
greatest mentor Bahā ad-Deen is correct, but the deed has to be examined
more generally than just inwardly and outwardly, more generally than a
good or an ugly deed, because conceit, just as it is ascertained by the
acts of the senses, it also is compared with the side actions, running
them.

Just as the person who has a commendable merit feels conceited, admiring
his merit, so is the case with the one who has the bad characteristic,
too, for he may also feel proud of himself or of his characteristic. It
is as has been indicated in the sacred tradition which we mentioned as
narrated by Ali son of Suwaid quoting the father of al-Hassan (ع) in
which the Imām (ع) says, "… And among them is that the bad deed of a
servant of Allāh is decorated for him, so he sees it good, and he feels
proud of it, thinking that he is doing well. And among them is that a
servant believes in his Lord, so he thinks he is thus doing Allāh a
favor.

The reason why he mentioned these two is because they are hidden from
the sight of most people, and so that people may also get to know that
the good feeling and elation, which the Bahā'i mentor excludes from
conceit and regards as good, is according to the type of one's
attitude."

The gist of the viewpoint of imām al-Khomeini with regard to the
statement of the mentor indicates three matters:

**First:** The mentor, may Allāh have mercy on him, has specifically
talked about conceit when someone feels conceited about his physical
deeds, such as fasting during the time and praying during the night, and
the like, and apparently his objective from doing so is not the same as
he had mentioned of the deeds of adoration, benevolence, etc., not
looking at the inward deeds.

Conceit, as we have already stated, is found in the innate, the
inwardly, deeds such as one feeling proud of his belief, which is an
action relevant to the heart, an internal submission, feeling proud of
his belief in the Messenger as though he feels he is doing Allāh and His
Messenger a favor, as stated in the tradition quoted above. Thus,
conceit is found in the inward characteristics and faculties such as
conceit about knowledge, courage, generosity, etc.

**Second:** The mentor, may he be sanctified, specifically discussed
conceit about side deeds, with regard to the good deeds, too, saying,
"There is no doubt that one who does good deeds feels elated." The case
is that conceit is not confined to the good deeds but it may also take
place in the bad ones. Quite many unbelievers and hypocrites feel proud
of their unbelief and hypocrisy.

Those whose faculties are mean are dragged into feeling proud of their
bad characteristics as we, God willing, will mention. We have pointed
out to all of this in the tradition cited above, which is the statement
of the imām in which he says that a servant's bad deed is decorated for
him, so he sees it as being good, and he likes it. Such is the result of
Satan, the evil one, confusing him, and such is the bad *nafs* decorated
for man.

**Third:** According to the imām's viewpoint with regard to the
statement of the mentor, that is, the feeling of happiness and elation
that happens to man upon doing some righteous deed, if it is according
to what the mentor says, that is, with regard to such deeds being a boon
from Allāh…, etc., such elation is not conceit. This pursuit, with
regard to most people, is according to its kind and is not applicable to
all persons.

There are individuals among people who are among the sincere worshippers
of Allāh. They have gotten rid of the *nafs* and of its desires. Their
eyes are too blinded to see their *nafs* in its entirety, so they do not
see any deed for themselves except that they feel happy and pleased
about it. They see their souls being owned by their real Owner; they
have neither power nor might of their own. Their will is fused into the
will of Allāh. They are described by this verse:

*"**Allāh sets forth the parable (of two men: one) a slave in the
service of another; he has no power of any sort, while (the other) a man
on whom We have bestowed goodly favors from Us, and he spends (freely)
of it, privately and publicly: Are the two equal? (By no means;) praise
be to Allāh. But most of them do not understand**"* ***(Qur'ān,
16:75).***

They are the testimony to this verse of the Almighty:

***"They are (but) servants [whose status is] raised to honor [and
distinction]" (Qur'ān, 21:26).***

These are the sincere ones who, when being heedless about Allāh and cast
a look at their good deed, they find happiness and pleasure, whereupon
they seek forgiveness of Allāh for such a sentiment despite their lofty
status with Allāh, for the good deeds of the kind ones are the bad deeds
of those close to Him.


