First Level:
============

It is the highest of all, and it does the most harm. It is a condition
found in man because of intense conceit, so intense it is that he
considers himself as doing a favor to the One Who bestows His favors on
him, the King of Kings, on account of his belief or other merits. He
claims his merits have created, through his conviction, an expansion in
the domain of the Truthful One, the most Exalted One, creating
dissemination of His creed, that he, because of promoting the Sharī\`a,
or due to his instruction and guidance, or his enjoining what is right
and forbidding what is wrong, or by his safeguarding His limits, or
because of his prayer niche and pulpit…, he created in Allāh's creed
freshness.

Or it is because of his attendance at the congregations of the Muslims,
or his holding mourning congregations for Abū Abdullāh, Imām al-Hussain
(ع), that the creed has enjoyed promotion which he feels he thus has
done the Almighty, His Honored Messenger and the Master of Martyrs a
favor, even if such a thought did not surface, he thinks it in his mind,
inwardly.

From this door comes the attitude of someone doing a favor to the
servants of Allāh in the religious matters such as one offering
obligatory and commendable charities, his assistance to the weak and the
poor. So he feels he has done them a favor, and this attitude may be
hidden even from his own self, too. (An explanation of people having
done no favor to the Almighty, but that Allāh does them favors, has
already been made before in the discussion of pretension).


