Fourth Level:
=============

Here, one sees himself as being distinguished from all others, better
than all other believers on account of the basis of his belief, by the
good characteristics, than those who do not have them, by doing what is
obligatory and abandoning what is prohibitive compared to the contrary.
He sees himself as being more perfect than all other people, that he
performs what is commendable, regularly attending Friday services, the
congregational prayer services and all other rituals, abandoning all
contemptible acts.

He attributes to himself a distinction, depending on his own self,
belief and deeds, looking at all other beings as nothing, as incomplete,
looking at people askance. He inwardly or outwardly taunts the servants
of Allāh, keeping away everyone from the gate of the mercy of Allāh
through some means, keeping His mercy just to himself and to groups
similar to him. The individual who occupies this station reaches a
degree where he discusses the good deeds of people, no matter how high
they may be, belittling their deeds in his heart or in some other way,
raising the standard of his own deeds above such belittling, purifying
them from such discussion.

The good deeds of people he sees as nothing. If he does the same deeds,
he magnifies them. He realizes the tiny faults in people very well while
not realizing his own fault, overlooking it.

These are the marks of conceit even when one is indifferent to them.
Conceit has other degrees which I have not stated, and I am certainly
unaware of some of them.

Here, his speech, may Allāh prolong his shade, ends.


