Explaning How Conviction Is Not Knowledge
=========================================

Then Imam al-Khomeini, may Allah prolong his shade, explained that
conviction is not synonymous with knowledge. He said:

Be informed that conviction is not the same as knowfedge about Allah,
knowfedge about His Unity, about the rest of His fixed attributes of
perfection and great negative ones, knowledge about the angefs, the
books, the messengers and the Last Day, for perhaps one may be
knowledgeable about aif these matters without being a befiever. Satan,
too, knows about these levels of knowledge as much as I know, and as
much as you know, yet he is He also believes in the principle and knows
that Alfah is the Creator because he says, "You created me of fire and
created him of dust." And he knows about the Hereafter, too, because he
says, "Grant me a respite till the Day that they are brought back to
fife." Yet, despite all these qualities, he is kafir according to the
clear Qur'anic verse that says, "... and he was among the unbefievers."
The secret in this is that conviction is an act of the heart.

If it is not brought into being, there is no presence for conviction.
If anyone gets to know something according to the dictates of the
rational evidence, or according to the judgment necessitated by the
creed, the heart has to surrender to such knowledge, so the action
conies from the heart as a manifestation of such surrendering and
submission, a sort of acceptance, so he may be a befiever. One's
perfection is feeling comfortable (with such surrendering) as referred
to by this sacred verse: "'Then do You not befieve?' He said, 'Yes, I
do! But so that my own understanding may be satisfied" (Qur'an, 2:260).
When the light of conviction in the heart is strong, it is followed by
feeling comfortable with it. All of this is different from knowledge.
Our minds can reafize something through evidence, but our hearts did not
surrender to it. Thus, know ledge becomes useless. For example if you
realize through your mind that a dead person cannot harm anyone, even if
all the dead in the world get together, they coflectively have neither
sense nor motion in as much as a mosquito, and that alf the physical and
spiritual forces have already departed. But since this meaning does not
transcend the limit ()I knowledge, and since it is not acceptable by the
heart, and the heart did not surrender to reason, you cannot spend one
night with a dead person in a dark night, and you will he afraid of his
corpse. But if the heart surrenders to reason and accepts such a
judgement from reason, you wiff have no problem sleeping in the company
of a dead person. Also, if you do that, and you repeat spending the
night with a dead person, the heart will then surrender to reason and
wilf not be afraid of the dead. It will then be known that surrendering
is the line of the heart, and it is different from knowing, which is the
fine of reason. It is then that man can prove, through rational
evidence, the presence of the Maker, the Exalted One, that lie is One
and Only, that there is an afterlife, in addition to other true
beliefs.

But conviction is not a description of these beliefs, nor is one who
believes in them is counted among the believers; rather, he is in the
company of the unbelievers, the hypocrites or the polytheists. The point
is that this day, a covering has been pfaced on the eye of his heart,
and he does not have the angelic vision and the kingfy eye, so he does
not reafize this meaning. But if the innermost is revealed, the truly
divine power comes up, nature is rendered into ruin, and the truth
stands tall, it is then that you feef you were not a believer in Affah.
The said judgment for reason was not related to conviction 1. So, Dear
One, unless you write down the

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
It must afso be known that committing, a group of acts of disobedience
to Allah is not in sync with befief- in the Hereafter and in the
Judgment Day; rather, doing them is not in harmony with the befief that
one is in the company of the Truth, the most Exafted One, as referred to
often in the cherished suppfications. One of the latter exists in the
supplication of Abu Hamzah al-Thumali: "If anyone today fooks at my sins
other than You, I would not have done it. Had I feared the speedy
penalty, I would have avoided it." The solution for this confusion is
sought in the statement of the imam, may his shade be prolonged, in this
regard.

blessed statement saying "There is no god except Allah" with the pen of
reason on the tabfet of the pure heart, you are not a trufy] believer in
the Unity of Aflah Almighty.

If this good divine word enters one's heart, the heart's submission
will be directly to Affah Afmighty. The one who has such a heart does
not then see any other human being as bearing any impact on the domain
of the Truthful One, nor does he expect any favor or distinction from
anyone else. He will not then seek a station and fame among people. The
heart will not be pretentious or deceptive. When you see pretension in
the heart, he informed that your heart has not submitted to reason, nor
has the light of conviction shone in it. You will see someone efse other
than Allah Afmighty as the influentiaf god; you wifl then be in the
company of the pofytheists, or hypocrites, or apostates.

Having explained the levels and basic origin of pretension, the Imam,
may his shade endure, states a terse admonishment in which he brings to
memory the awful outcome of pretension. In it, there is a reminding for
one who has a heart, or who does listen and stands as a witness. The
master of divine sciences, Imam Khomeini, may his shade be prolonged,
says the following :

O pretender who has submitted the true beliefs and divine branches of
knowledge to the enemy of Allah, namely Satan, thus giving the matters
that are exclusively related to Allah, Praise to Him, to someone else.
You have taken out the celestial lights that used to shine in the soul
and the heart and were the capital of salvation, eternal happiness, the
fountainhead of the divine communion, the seeds for the company of the
Loved One in the desolate darkness. You have permitted yourself to
suffer eternal perdition, the capital of the distance from the holy
place of the Loved One. You have shunned the meeting with the Almighty,
the Truth.... So, be prepared for darkness beyond which there is no
light at all, for hardship beyond which there is no ease, for ailments
that have no cure, for death that has no life and for a fire that
springs out of the depth of the heart and the domain of the soul,
burning the domain of the body in a way which neither my heart nor yours
can ever imagine, as Allah Almighty has already informed us in His
Revealed Book and which He described in this sacred verse: "(It is) the
Fire of (the Wrath of) Allah kindled (to a blaze) which mounts (right)
to the hearts" (Qur'an, 104:7-8). The Fire of Allah overwhelms the
hearts and burns them. No fire can burn a heart other than Allah's Fire.
So, if someone's Unity instinct, which is instilled by Allah, departs
from someone and is replaced by polytheism and apostasy, he will have
none to intercede on his behalf with the Almighty, and he will be lodged
into torment forever.

And what a torment it is! It is a torment that originates from the
Almighty's subduing and divine wrath. 0 dear one! Do not expose yourself
to the wrath of the Almighty on account of a false whim and a limited
popularity among His weak servants. Such whim has neither any impact nor
fruit save regrets and sighs. When your ties are cut off from this
world, which is like a shop and a place for gain, and when your deeds
come to an end, regrets and sighs will not avail you, and you will not
be able to return and retract.

**DEGREES OF PRETENSION'S OBJECTIVES**

Some scholars of the hereafter have said that pretension, with regard
to one's goals behind pretending, for surely the pretender has goals, is
of three degrees :

THE FIRST DEGREE : It is the most intense and the most serious: One's
goal is to commit a transgression against the will of Allah and to reach
what is prohibitive, such as he makes a show of his acts of adoration,
or feigns piety and godliness through many supererogatory acts of
adoration. He avoids anything that may bring about people's doubt in his
regard. His goal is so that people may recognize his trustworthiness,
hence positions in the judicial system, or religious trusts, or wills,
or whatever belongs to orphans. He will then take them and keep to
himself whatever he can. Or he may be trusted with items, so he takes
them and denies having done so, thus reaching his corrupt goals in
committing transgressions. One may appear in the attire of the
righteous, articulating pieces of wisdom, admonishment, and reminding.

Yet his goal is to look good in the eyes of a beautiful woman. Some
people may attend meetings of knowledge and remembrance of the Almighty,
or even of the Qur'an, pretending they wish to listen to knowledge and
to the Qur'an whHe their goal is to look at women, and these pretenders
are hated the most by Allah Almighty because they made obedience to
their Lord a ladder to reaching their transgression, using it as a tool,
a shop, a merchandise in their sinning. Close to these, though less in
degree, is one who commits a crime of which he is accused, yet he
insists on it and wants to keep the charge away from himself, so he
feigns piety in order to deny the charge, such as one who denied a trust
with him of which people charged him, so he offers charity with the
money in order that it will be said he gives away from his money to the
poor, so how can it be possible that he seizes the funds belonging to
others? The likes of such folks are many among the Muslims. Individuals
may gather funds that belong to the Muslims by the millions through
usury or other illegitimate transactions. One may see that instead of
returning people's money to them, he offers charity with some of his
money, or builds a mosque or a hospital, so that people may see that he
is one who builds mosques or hospitals; therefore, how can it be
possible that he stretches his hands to people's money and possessions?
Or one may be charged with having committed a sin with a woman, and
Allah, the most Exalted One, removed the covering from him and exposed
him among the people. Instead of resorting to a covering from Allah,
Praise to Him, regretting and pleading to Allah, Who sways the hearts,
to change people's attitude about him, he seeks a means through
pretension, trying to cover his sin with pretension.

THE SECOND DEGREE: It is when his goal is to obtain a permissible
worldly gain such as wealth or marriage to a beautiful or distinguished
woman, etc., so he feigns grief and keeps himself busy with admonishing
and reminding others so that funds may be spent on him. He will then
sell more of his merchandise if he is a merchant, a businessman, or
among money making folks. Or if he wishes to marry a distinguished
woman, such as the daughter of a righteous scholar, he pretends to her
father to be a man of knowledge and adoration so that he may marry him
to his daughter. This sort of pretension is prohibitive because it seeks
through the means of obedience to Allah the wares of this lowly life,
but it is of a lesser degree than the first. What is sought through this
pretension is by itself permissible but it is contemptible, and its
reality is shirk; the absolute authority is the privilege of the True
One, the Almighty, when it comes to dealing with His servants.

THIRD DEGREE: The pretender does not seek fortune, wealth, or marriage,
but he shows off his adoration for fear people may look at him as if he
lacks something; therefore, he is not considered to be among the elite
and the ascetics, and he is regarded to be among the commoners, such as
one who walks to the congregational prayer services, to mosques, in a
hurry, and when people see him, he adjusts his walk and abandons haste
although it, at that time, was legitimate. But he abandons it so he may
not be labeled as one of those who love distraction or negligence and
not one of the men of eminence. Also, if he is the first to burst
laughing or demonstrates merriment, so he is afraid he will be looked
down upon with eyes of contempt, he follows it by seeking Allah's
forgiveness and pretends to be sad on its account and says, "How
unmindful a human being is! But Allah knows that if such an individual
is left to himself, he would not consider doing so as being too much;
rather, he fears he will he looked clown upon with contempt and not with
respect.

He is like one who sees a group of worshippers offering supererogatory
prayers, or making tahajjud, or fasting each Thursday and Monday, as is
transmitted about the imam of the nation who ordered the youths (of
Hizbollah) to fast both these days, so the man goes along with them for
fear he will be described as lazy and thus is not attributed to the
party of Allah. If he is left alone, he does no such things. And he is
like one who endures the thirst on the Day of Arafa, or in clays during
which fast is highly recommended, so he does not drink water for fear
people may get to know that he is not fasting.

So, if they think that he is, he abstains from eating as well, Or he
may be invited to partake of food, so he abstains in order that he will
be perceived as observing the fast. He may openly state that he is
fasting or says he has an excuse. Such a pretender combines two
contemptible acts: He is seen by others as fasting, then he is seen as a
sincere one and not as a pretender. He is cautious lest he should
mention his act of adoration to people for fear he will be seen as a
pretender. He, hence, wants to give the impression that he is continuing
his act of adoration. If he is obligated to drink, he rushes to remind
himself that he has an excuse, either explicitly or implicitly, such as
seeking an excuse because of an ailment that causes him to have an acute
need to drink water and stops him from fasting. Or he may say, "Today, I
visited so-and-so who pressured me to eat, so I ate." He may not then
say that in connection with his drinking water so that he will not be
regarded as seeking an excuse as a pretender, but he perseveres then
mentions his excuse casually in his narrative of an incident such as his
saving, "So-and-so loves his brethren. He so much loves them to partake
of his food. Today, he insisted that I should do that, and I had no
choice except to cool his heart." Or he may say, "My mother is
weak-hearted, compassionate in my regard. She thinks if I fast one day,
I will fall sick, so she does not let me fast." Such is the doing of the
ills of pretension. It does not jump to articulation except due to the
deeply rooted pretension in one's innermost. Similar to this is
something which I have seen more than once. Someone says, "I spent the
night over the house of so-and-so. During the sahar [pre-dawn] time, I
wanted to rise for the tahajjud. But I was concerned the owner of the
house might think I was a pretender, so I did not stand for the
prayers." Or he may say, "I did not worship during a particular time for
fear I would be regarded as a pretender." This poor person sees himself,
when he does not pray or worship his Lord, as being sincere to Allah
Almighty, fleeing from pretension whereas in fact he has already fallen
into it; both his nafs and Satan have taken control of him. In other
words, man in such situations has two states: The first is his fear when
he prays in someone's house or in the company of a crowd of people that
his prayers may be pretension, yet he knows himself best and his
weakness, and that he cannot safeguard his sincerity in public as he
used to do in private; in this case, the prayer is abandoned so one may
not fall into pretension.

The second is that he is concerned about people considering him as
being a pretender, although he feels comfortable that he is not praying
pretentiously but purely for seeking nearness to Allah. In this case, if
he abandons a ritual, he will prove that he is a pretender who does not
like people to think anything about him except being sincere. Abandoning
the worship in the first case was for the sake of Allah and in the
second for the sake of the nafs and its desires, for the nafs, loves its
reputation to be good among the people. Such is love for life and
eminence. If one who is sincere to Allah sees in himself a desire to
perform a commendable fast, for example, let him do so; he must not pay
attention to what others say about or think of him. And if he does not
find in himself such a desire, he must not fast, and he must not pay
attention to what is said about him. Rely on Allah and forget about them
all. A sincere worshipper does not care about how people look at him or
think of him. If he has no desire to fast, and Allah knows about it, he
must not want others to believe something different from what Allah
knows about him, thus confusing them. And if he wishes to fast for the
sake of seeking nearness to Allah, he should contend himself with
Allah's knowledge, associating none with Him.

**SCIENTIFIC POINT TO ERADICATE PRETENSION
FROM THE THEOLOGICAL IMAM AL-KHOMEINI
MAY ALLAH PROLONG HIS SHADE :**

He, may Allah prolong his shade, has said,

We would like to state m this regard something that may be effective in
treating this heart disease. According to evidence, revelation and
observation, as Well as the traditions of the infallible Ones, peace be
with them, and the Book of Allah, the Great, according to His dominance
over all beings. His maintenance of all what needs to be maintained...,
the hearts of all the servants are under His control and in the grip of
His power. Nobody can fare with the servants' hearts without the
permission of the Maintaining One and His evolving authorization. It can
never be, Even those who have hearts, too, cannot fare with their hearts
without His permission, the most Exalted One, and His dealing. The Holy
Qur'an informs us of this fact, and so do the narratives about Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be with them, who stated so by reference, explicitly and
implicitly. Allah, Praise to Him, is the One Who owns the heart and Who
fares with it, whHe you are a weak servant incapable of faring with
hearts without the dealing of the Truthful One, the most High. Rather,
His will subdues yours as well as that of everything in existence. So,
if your pretension is to attract the servants' hearts and attention, to
gain respect and status in the hearts, to earn a good reputation..., all
these are outside your control: they are under the control of the
Truthful One, the most Exalted. The Lord of Hearts, the One Who owns
them, permits them to incline to whoever He wants. And your behavior may
result in the opposite of what you want. We nave heard about and seen
pretenders with two laces, haying impure hearts, those whose affair Was
exposed and who gained the contrary of what they had desired. There is a
reference to this in a sacred tradition recorded in Al-Kafi as
transmitted by Jarrah al-Madaini who quotes Abu Abdullah.

peace be with him, saying the following in his explanation of this
verse: "Whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him do righteous deeds and
in the worship of his Lord admit no one as (His) partner" (Qur'an,
18:110): "Someone does some good deed not for the sake of Allah but so
people may hold him in high esteem. He loves people to hear about what
he does. Such person is one who associates a partner in the worship of
his Lord." Then he said, "No servant does an act of righteousness then
time passes by except that Allah will bring something good out of it.
And no servant does something wrong in secrecy and time passes by except
that Allah will bring out something bad out of it for him."

You, my dear one, ought to seek good reputation with Allah. Plead to
the One Who owns the hearts to let the hearts incline towards you. Work
for Allah, and let your deed be purely for His sake, for the most
Exalted One will then make you loved by people in this world plus
rewards you with good things and eternal blessings in the world of the
hereafter. He will then enhance the impression which you leave on
people's hearts and make you honored in both this life and in the one to
come. But if you are able, through practices and struggles, to rid
yourself of this love, too, do so in order that your heart may be pure,
your deed in this direction will be sound, your heart will direct itself
towards Allah, your soul will be cleansed and the impurity of the self
(nafs) will disappear, What benefit do you reap from the love of
weaklings or from their hatred, or from fame among poor servants of
Allah? Even if we suppose there is a benefit, it will last for only few
days, whereas the outcome of this love could drag you to pretension; so,
God forbid, you will then become a polytheist, a hypocrite, or an
apostate.

And if we suppose that one's [prohibitive] matter in this life will be
veiled from the eyes of the people, but in the presence of the divine
justice, and in the audience of the righteous servants of Allah, His
great Prophets, those who are close to Him and His angels, he will be
exposed, and he will surely bear the impact of shame, finding none to
help him. You have no idea what a scandal in that Day it will be and
what shame and darkness which none knows save Allah. It is the Day when
the unbeliever will say, "Woe unto me! If only I were (mere) dust!"
(Qur'an, 78:40). But it will be of no avail to him. You, poor soul, for
the sake of partial love and fame, which are of no benefit, among the
servants of the Almighty, turned away from these blessings, lost the
Pleasure of Allah, Glory to Him. You made yourself an object of His
wrath. You substituted the deeds whereby you can achieve the abode of
honor, the eternal life, the everlasting happiness, life in the highest
stations of Paradise.., with the darkness of shirk and hypocrisy, and
you prepared for yourself the sighs, the regret, the intense torment,
becoming a prisoner in Sijjeen as described in a sacred narrative in
(Al-Kafi and cited from Abu Abdullah, peace be upon him. In it, the
Prophet (a.s) says, "An angel gleefully ascends with the news about a
deed of a servant. If he ascends carrying reports about the servant's
Mood deed. Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, says, Deposit it in
Sijjeen, for he did not seek My pleasure when he did it.'" I and you, in
our condition, cannot imagine Sijjeen, nor can we understand the record
of the deeds of the sinners or see the picture of these deeds that are
in Sijjeen, but we see their reality when we are incapacitated and have
lost touch with any remedy.

So, wake up, my dear one, from your sleep, do awy with heedlessness and
laziness, weigh your deeds with the scales of reason before they are
weighed in that world. Hold yourself to account before you are held, and
rid the mirror of your heart of shirk and hypocrisy and of having two
faces. Do not permit your heart to rust with shirk and apostasy lest it
should be afflicted with the fire of the Hereafter. Do not let the light
of nature be replaced with the darkness of disbelief. Do not render to
loss the nature whereby Allah created people, do not betray this trust
of Allah, cleanse the heart's mirror so the light of the beauty of the
True One shine in it, thus it will be more precious to you than this
whole world and everything in it, and the fire of divine love will then
burn in the heart, burning every love that you have in your heart for
anything else, and you will not accept to replace one moment of it with
the whole world, and you will enjoy the pleasure of remembrance of Allah
compared to which all animal pleasures will be nothing at all. If you
are not worthy of this station, if these images appear in your eyes to
be strange, do not abandon the divine blessings in the world of the
Hereafter about which the Holy Qur'an has informed you as well as the
traditions of the Infallible Ones in exchange for attracting the hearts
of the beings. Do not lose these rewards, do not deprive yourself of
such blissful things for the sake of an imagined fame that lasts few
days, and do not trade eternal happiness for continuous pain ...


