Comment:
========

What the imām, may his shade prolong, has said about conceit according
to the beliefs, the faculties and the deeds, is not confined to the good
beliefs. Rather, conceit is found in false beliefs, in ugly faculties,
in wrong deeds, too. Perhaps this is far-fetched according to some, for
how can one become conceited about his disbelief, hypocrisy, bad
faculties and disobedience of Allāh, Praise to Him?! But let him be
informed that Allāh, the Praised One, created the human nature as it is:
containing the status of being accustomed to something.

If it undertakes a deed more than once, whether this deed belongs to
those of the five senses or of the innermost, it likes it and becomes
used to it. This status in the soul is one of Allāh’s major paths and
important factors for uplifting and heading towards perfection. This is
so because a good deed, likewise, in earning the stations and virtuous
beliefs, may seem to be a problem for the individuals in the beginning,
and they require tolerance for hardships and exercises.

But if they are followed by a period of time during which they become
accustomed to them, the hardship and difficulty will be removed from it.
(Doing something good is a habit, and also a habit is doing evil
things). From the standpoint of this status found in the soul, some
great men who delved into the meaning of verses referring to torment and
to eternity in the fire determined by Allāh, Praise to Him, to the
unbelievers and polytheists, is derived from some principles of
knowledge and philosophy which we are not here to discuss.

Those who remain tortured for some time reach a state when they feel
accustomed to their environment; they become used to it; they are not
bored by it. Perhaps this sacred verse is useful to cite in this regard:

***“As often as their skins are roasted through, We shall change them
for fresh skins (so) that they may taste the penalty” (Qur'ān, 4:56).***

This verse supports our argument about the people of the fire
particularly if we pay attention to the phrase “… (so) that they may
taste the penalty…". Anyway, we have no knowledge of the facts relevant
to the conditions of the world of the hereafter and its horrors, and we
must not measure the conditions of that world according to our own: this
one.

But it is taken for granted that the soul has the ability to get used to
something in this world, that it feels comfortable with any action which
it does repeatedly and which the heart likes and gets attached to. If
one loves something, this love becomes a barrier between him and seeing
the faults of that thing just as this verse of poetry says:

*The pleased eyes are too tired to reach a fault,*

*But the eye of wrath reveals all the faults.*

Based on what we have stated when we quoted the imām, may Allāh prolong
his shade, that is, the unbelievers, the hypocrites, the unbelievers,
those whose manners are contemptible, those whose desires are low, and
those who commit transgressions and sins, may all be dragged to admire
their disbelief, sins, bad manners and ugly deeds. They may even feel
good about them, seeing themselves as having free spirits, revolting
against tradition, not believing in whims.

They think that they have the manliness and courage, that belief in the
Almighty is a whim, that adherence to the legislated religious laws is
an indication of shortsightedness, that the good manners and virtuous
wishes stem from weak souls, considering adherence to obligations and
forms of worship as signs of weak comprehension and a shortcoming of
feelings.

They see themselves from a standpoint as bearing free spirits that are
not complicated by whims, not caring about the religious laws but worthy
of praise and lauding. All of this is due to the low characteristics
setting deep roots within them, and they have become comfortable with
them.

They [their faults and sins] look good in their own eyes, so they
consider them as signs of perfection as referred to in a sacred
tradition in Al-Kāfi from Ali ibn Suwaid from Abul-Hassan, peace be with
him, who has said, "Conceit comes in degrees. Among them is the servant
of the Almighty sees his bad deed decorated, so he sees it as good, and
he admires it, thinking he is doing something good. The Almighty has
said,

***'Say: Shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their
deeds, those whose efforts have been wasted in this life, while they
think that they are acquiring good by their deeds? They are those who
deny their Lord's Signs and the fact of their having to meet Him (in the
hereafter): Their deeds will be in vain, nor shall We grant them any
weight on the Day of Judgment'" (Qur'ān, 18:103-5).***

The imām, may his shade endure, says the following about those who
admire their false beliefs, low desires and ugly deeds: "This group of
people includes those who consider themselves as men of knowledge while
they are ignorant and the most poor and wretch of all. Doctors of
psychology are unable to treat them. Advising and admonishing them have
no effect on them; rather, the effect may reflect contrarily on them.
These do not listen to proofs; they close their ears and visions against
the guidance of the prophets, the evidence of the wise, the admonishment
of the scholars.

One, therefore, has to seek refuge with Allāh, Praise to Him, against
the evil of the nafs and its schemes: It drags man from transgression to
apostasy, and from apostasy to admiration of apostasy. The nafs and
Satan, because of underestimating some transgression in the sight of
man, afflict him with such transgression.

Once the transgression sets root in the heart, and once it is taken
lightly, one is afflicted with a greater transgression by one degree.
After its repetition, this, too, falls down in his sight. He
underestimates it and commits one greater than it, and so on he
progresses in committing transgressions: one step after another. The
major transgressions get minimized in his eyes gradually till all the
transgressions become unimportant to him. The religious laws, the divine
and the prophetic way shrink in his view, so he is dragged into
apostasy, disbelief and admiration of them both." Here ends the speech
of the imām.

I say that this precious statement and practical piece of wisdom, which
we have just cited from the great teacher of manners, may his shade
prolong, is one of the unique practical pieces of wisdom and lessons of
moral cultivation. The magnanimity of a transgression and sin may fall
in the sight of one who commits it as a result of repetition. If
transgression, from which we seek refuge with Allāh, becomes something
ordinary and not ugly, nobody can imagine there will be a limit for it
where one will stop.

Someone whom I trust from among my believing brethren told me once that
he was in the presence of one of those who use usury and who trade in
it, and that man's hand was shaking, uncontrollable. But this person, as
a result of repeating his prohibitive deed, became the first person to
take usury in the market of Kermanshah (now Bakhtaran).

The greatest calamity is that this state of being "daring" about
transgression causes darkness in the heart that gradually puts out the
noor of conviction, so one will find in himself doubt and hesitation
with regard to true beliefs. If he does not properly repent and treat
this detrimental ailment, he may be dragged as he draws his last breath
from life and in the stupor that happens to him at the time of death to
putting out the noor of conviction in his heart in its entirety.

He goes from this world in a state of disbelief in Allāh Almighty. If
his condition becomes like that, there will be no hope at all for his
salvation. The gates of happiness will be closed from all sides. A
reference has been made to this in verses and traditions. The Almighty
has said,

***"In the long run, the end of those who do evil will be extremely evil
because they rejected God's Signs and held them with ridicule" (Qur'ān,
83:14).***

In the books of tradition, the effect of sinning in the heart is
described as the black spot that keeps getting larger as one keeps
repeatedly sinning till it completely encircles it. Abū Ja'far (ﻉ) is
also cited in traditions as having said, "Every servant of Allāh has a
white spot in his heart. When he commits a sin, a block spot comes out
of it. When he repents, that blackness disappears. If he gets deeper
into sinning, that blackness increases till it over-covers the
whiteness, and the person will never return to anything good." This is
the meaning of this verse:

***"By no means! But the stain of the (ill) that they do is on their
hearts on account of what they used to earn" (Qur'ān, 83:14).***


