Forgetting about and Underestimating Sins
=========================================

Conceit causes one to forget many sins which he committed in the claim
that he does not need to reform himself, so he does not mend what he had
broken. As a result for this heedlessness, he forgets many sins, and he
is not concerned about the sins which he still remembers. This condition
may drag one into committing new sins.

Perhaps this is the meaning referred to in a tradition quoted in *Wasāil
al-Shī'a* from Imām al-Sādiq (ع) who cites the Messenger of Allāh (ص) in
a tradition in which Mousa (Moses) son of Imran (Amram) asks Satan,
"Tell me about the sin which, when a son of Adam commits, you overtake
him." Satan said, "It is when he is proud of himself, thinks too much of
his good deeds and his sin looks small in his eyes."

It is known that when Satan overtakes someone, the result will be more
sinning, in addition to underestimating the sin, for this by itself is
an insult to the status of the divine greatness which is one of the
greatest sins, and it may stop one from being included in the divine
mercy, as some traditions point out. In the sacred book *Al-Kāfi* where
Zaid the cooking oil seller cites Imām al-Sādiq (ع) saying that Abū
Abdullāh said that he had heard Abū Muhammad (ع) saying, "One of the
sins which are not forgiven is when a man says, 'Blessed am I had I only
not done anything other than this [deed]!" Abū Hashim al-Ja\`fari quotes
Imām al-Hassan al-\`Askari (ع) saying that he heard Abū Muhammad (ع)
saying, "Among the sins that are not forgiven is one saying, 'I wish I
would not be held accountable except for only this [deed]!"

Imām al-Khomeini, the mentor, may I be his sacrifice, has explained that
conceit obliterates belief and ruins the rewards for the good deeds,
according to a tradition narrated by Ali ibn Suwaid. The imām was asked
about the conceit that spoils good deeds, so the imām explained some of
its degrees, citing other traditions as well, in this regard. He said
the following:

"The conceit tree is bad; its fruit is many major sins and abominations.
When its root rests in the heart, one's affair is dragged into disbelief
and *shirk* and more than both of these. One of its consequences is
underestimating sins; rather, one who is conceited is not in the process
of reforming himself claims it is pure and purified. He does not care at
any time to purge himself of the filth of committing offenses. The thick
curtain of conceit blocks him from seeing his own ills. This catastrophe
stops one from achieving perfections, afflicts him with all sorts of
shortcomings, brings about eternal perdition, and the doctors of the
psyche can find no cure for him."


