Deprivation from benefits of Admonition and Guidance
====================================================

One of the problems with conceit with which one is afflicted as a result
of this psychological disease, and as a result of one believing in his
own superiority over others and the status which he has with All훮h, he
regards others as ignorant, seeing no value for their viewpoint. As a
result for this condition, he accepts neither advice from any adviser
nor any admonishment from any preacher. One who is deprived of the
abundant benefits of admonishment, both the *nafs* and Satan have a free
hand in tempting him.

There is a great deal of emphasis in traditions, statements of great
men, poets and wise men, on the company of the folks of righteousness
and on being in contact with scholars, so much so that even looking at
the face of a scholar is adoration, and looking at his house door is
adoration, according to traditions. On one hand, the *nafs* and Satan
find no room to tempt him because, as a result of keeping the scholars
and the wise company, he becomes keenly aware of his faults, seeing
himself as being derelict on the path towards All훮h.

But if he stops keeping them company, he will be surrounded with
detriments, and he becomes unaware of his faults, so he stops seeking
his pursuit, claiming he has already achieved his pursuit and no longer
needs to exert any effort. One whose condition is like that is
definitely going to perish and will imminently fall.

Im훮m al-Khomeini, may his blessings endure, says that among the harms of
conceit is that one looks askance at All훮h's servants, seeing their good
deeds as nothing even if they may be better than his own; this, too, is
one of the paths towards the annihilation of man and thorns on his path.


