Statement in Point by Imam Khomeini
===================================

The imām, may his shade endure, says the following:

"What has to be pointed out is that some of those with weak souls, those
whose souls are not at ease, cast doubt about many rewards received for
partial matters, being indifferent to the fact that if something seems
small in our eyes in the life of this world, it does not mean that its
image in the world of the unknown and in the angelic world is also small
and insignificant. Perhaps a small being may have in its domain and
inwardly the perfection of greatness and glory.

The sacred physique and the bodily form of the Honored Prophet, the seal
of prophets, the revered Prophet and the great one, peace of Allāh be
with him and his progeny, was one of the small existents in this world,
but his holy soul surrounded the domain and the angelic kingdom and was
the cause for the existence of the heavens and the earth. Passing a
judgment about the "insignificance" and the small size of something
according to its hidden and angelic image is a branch of knowledge of
the angelic world and of the hidden things, and people like us have no
right to make such a judgment.

We have to open our eyes and ears to the words of the scholars of the
hereafter world, I mean the prophets and friends of Allāh, peace be with
them all. Moreover, that world is based on the Almighty bestowing His
favors and infinite mercy, while there is neither an end nor a limit to
Allāh's favors. Absolute exclusion from the favor of the most Generous
One Who has the infinite mercy originates from extreme ignorance, for
all these blessings which He has bestowed upon His servants and which
the minds are too incapable of and are too puzzled to count, all came
into being without anyone asking for or being worthy of.

So, what is the objection if He bestows many times as many as these
boons unto His servants without precedence? Is this too much to expect
in a world that was built on the influence of the human will and about
which the following verse was revealed:

*"**There will be all that the souls could desire there, all that the
eyes could delight in" (Qur'ān, 43:71),***

despite man's desires having neither an end nor a measure?! Allāh, the
most Blessed and Exalted One, determined that world and the human will
so as man would exist according to His mere will.

"So, my dear one, the narratives and the sacred traditions for these
boons are not just one or two or ten so one may have room to deny them.
Rather, they are beyond the limit of being consecutively reported, and
all the reliable books of traditions are filled with such quotations.
These are similar to one hearing with his own ears from the Infallible
Ones, peace be with them, and they allow no room for interpretation.

Such a requirement is in total agreement with the consecutively reported
texts and not in collision with the evidence, but in agreement with it,
backed by evidence. Denying it is a proof for the weakness of one's
conviction and an indication of his extreme ignorance. One has to
unhesitatingly accept the statements of the prophets and friends of
Allāh, peace be with them, and there is nothing better than man
submitting to the masters of the truth, especially in the matters where
reason cannot reveal, nor is there a way to comprehend them except
through the venue of inspiration and message.

If man wants to insert his small mind, his whims and thoughts, in the
unknown and the worship matters of the Sharī\`a, he will end up denying
what is generally accepted and what is necessary. He will gradually be
dragged from what is few to what is many, from what is low to what is
high. If we suppose that you cast doubts about these narratives and
their *isnād*, although there is no room in them for denial, you will be
casting doubt about the Glorious Divine Book, the heavenly sacred
Qur'ān, for it has many such rewards. An example is this verse:

*"**The night of power is better than a thousand months**"* ***(Qur'ān,
97:3),***

and like this verse:

*"**The parable of those who spend their substance in the way of Allāh
is that of a kernel of corn: It grows seven ears, and each ear has a
hundred kernels. Allāh gives manifold increase to whomsoever He pleases"
(Qur'ān, 2:261).***

In my opinion, I the writer, one of the reasons for these exclusions and
denials is conceit and the magnifying of deeds. For example, if someone
fasts for one day or spends the entire night in adoration, then he hears
that there are great rewards for his deed, he will not think it as being
far-fetched. Also, this by itself exists had the deed had its own
reward, but he magnifies his deed, admires it, so he believes there is
such a reward.

"My dear one: "If we suppose that we, in all our lifespan, say fifty or
sixty years, undertook all the obligations stated in the Sharī\`a, then
we moved from this life with a sound belief, with good deeds and sound
repentance, what is the measure of the reward for our righteous deeds
and conviction? According to the Book and the Sunnah as well as the
consensus of all sects, such an individual receives the mercy of the
Truthful One, the most Exalted, and he enters Paradise with which he is
promised, a garden in which he will remain eternally in bliss and ease,
in everlasting mercy, tranquility and fragrance".

Is there room in this for denial, had the basis been the reward for the
good deed? Let us erroneously suppose that our righteous deeds are
worthy of being rewarded, the reward of this person will be hardly
imaginable in quantity and quality. It is understood from this that the
matter is based on another premise and revolves on another axis; so,
there is no room for exclusion, and there is no venue opening for
denial."

Here ends his statement, may his shade prolong: “Among the other harms
of conceit is that it forces the conceited person to be pretentious.
This is so because demonstrating what is beautiful of the human
instincts and stopping to show off one's beauty is very difficult, just
as difficult as it is for a hungry and thirsty person not to eat and
drink. The men of knowledge, those who are giants in this field, have
very interesting situations and made very precise statements, but it is
not suitable to quote them here.

This sense does not distinguish between true beauty and an imagined,
fake one. One who admires his deeds, since they look good in his eyes,
and since the deeds which he does must be shown to others, finds it very
difficult to withstand this psychological inclination. Had he had this
will, he would not have been afflicted with conceit in the first place.
This is the opposite of one who does not admire his deeds. He does not
see them as being anything but as nothing, seeing his manners dismal and
his conviction as being unworthy of being demonstrated to others; so, he
does not admire himself, his attributes or deeds. Rather, he sees
himself as not beautiful at all.

Such a person is in no position to make a show of himself and present
his deeds to others. He is just as imām Khomeini, may his shade endure,
has said, "The rotten and ugly merchandise is never displayed at the
wholesale market." But if he sees himself and his deeds as presentable,
he will be in a position to show off his beautiful deeds in their
imagined beauty. Therefore, all the harms mentioned in these sheets are
definitely counted among the harms of conceit as well. In the field of
the harms of conceit, the greatest mentor of manners and spirituality,
imām Khomeini, may his blessings last forever, has made a statement, and
here is a translation of its text:


