Wise Admonishment by Imam Khomeini
==================================

"Let the conceited person know that this abomination is the seed of all
other abominations and the cause of many matters each one of which
independently causes eternal annihilation and lodgment in torment. If he
gets to know these harms properly, reviewing them carefully, studying
the reports and legacies of the greatest Prophet and his Ahl al-Bayt,
blessings of Allāh be with them all, he will surely see for himself that
he must reform them and purge himself of this abomination, must uproot
it from his inner self so he may not leave this world, God forbid, and
go to the next carrying this abomination with him.

This is because once the worldly eye is closed, when one sees the power
of the *barzakh* and judgment, he will see that the condition of those
who committed great transgression is better than his own, for Allāh
Almighty permitted them to dive in oceans of His mercy on account of
their repentance, or due to their reliance on the favor of Allāh
Almighty, while this poor person who saw himself as being independent,
seeing inwardly that he had no need for the favor of Allāh Almighty,
Allāh, praise to Him, held him to account through the scales of His
justice, just as he wanted: Now He informs him that he never intended to
truly worship the Truthful One, that all his acts of worship distanced
him from the side of the Truthful One, all his deeds and conviction were
not only nil and nothing but necessitated his perdition.

They were seeds for painful torment, a cause for being lodged into hell
forever. God forbid that Allāh, praise to Him, should deal with anyone
through His justice, for had this tablet been opened, none from the
first generations and the last would have had a way to salvation. The
imāms of guidance, peace be with them, and the great prophets used to
hope, in their silent supplications to Allāh, for His favor, the most
Praised One, and they were terrified by His justice and judgment.

"The silent supplication by the elite ones to the Truthful One and to
the Infallible Imāms (peace be with them) are full of admission of
dereliction, of incapacitation to truly adore. In one place, the one who
is the very best of everything in existence declares the following: "We
never knew You as You ought to be known, nor did we adore You as You
ought to be adored." The condition of the rest of people is well known.
Yes, they realized the greatness of the Truthful One, the Almighty,
knowledgeable of the ratio of what is possible to what is mandatory.

They knew that had they spent their entire lifespan in the life of this
world adoring, being obedient, praising and glorifying Him, they would
never have thanked Allāh for His blessings; so, how could they fully
meet the requirements for praising Him and His attributes? They knew
that nothing exists by itself, on its own, that life, ability,
knowledge, power and all the other perfections are but the shadow of His
perfection, the Almighty that He is.

What can be is poor, rather, purely poor, living in His shade, never
being independent. How can there be any perfection for one by himself so
he may display his perfection for sale? What power does he have so he
may bargain over his work? The ones who are knowledgeable of Allāh, of
the beauty of the Truthful One, of His Greatness, witnessed through
vision and sight how imperfect they are, how incapable, how weighty
their obligation is, while we, poor souls, are surrounded by the barrier
of ignorance, indifference and conceit!

The barrier of inwardly and outwardly transgressions has veiled from our
eyes, ears, minds, senses and the rest of faculties, so much so that we
display our existence in contrast with the overwhelming authority of the
Truthful One, the Almighty, claiming independence, saying we are
something.

"So, poor being who has no knowledge about his own self and about his
ratio to the Creator! O poor wretch who is unaware of his function
compared to the One Who owns the kings! Such ignorance, such lack of
knowledge, is the cause of these sufferings. We have been afflicted by
them because of the darkness and impurity. The destruction starts from
its origin; the water is impure from its source; our eyes are too blind
to see the deep knowledge. Our hearts are dead. Such is the reason for
all the calamities. Yet we are not in the process to reform them,
either…

"Lord! We plead to You to grant us success, acquaint us with our
functions, grant us a share of the lights of deep knowledge with which
You filled the hearts of those who know and those of Your friends! Show
us how Your power and authority overwhelm, how faulty we are, and enable
us to understand the meaning of praising Allāh, the Lord of the Worlds.
We are the poor ones, the unaware, who attribute all the praiseworthy
attributes to the beings; do inform our hearts that not a single good
attribute belongs initially to any being, and show us the truth of this
verse:

*"**Anything good (O man!) that happens to you is from Allāh, but
whatever evil happens to you is from your (own)*** ***nafs***
***(soul)**"* ***(Qur'ān, 4:79),***

and instill in our cruel hearts, the impure one, the blessed statement
of Tawhīd, for we are the people of the barrier, of the dark, of shirk
and hypocrisy. We love ourselves, we admire them, so help us take the
love for the *nafs* and for this world out of our hearts. Do make us
loving Allāh, worshipping Him; surely You can do anything at all."

This is the conclusion of the wise admonishment of imām Khomeini, may
his blessings last.


