Pretension in traditions:
=========================

1. In his book *Al-Kāfi*, according to *isnād* to Yazīd ibn Khalīfah,
the author cites the narrator saying that Abū Abdullāh, peace be with
him, said to him, "Every form of pretension is *shirk*. One who works
for the sake of pleasing people is to be rewarded by them, and one who
works for Allāh will be rewarded by Allāh."

2. In his book *Al-Āmāli*, al-Sadūq says that the Messenger of Allāh (ص)
was once asked, "What will bring us salvation in the life to come?" He
(ص) said, "Salvation then will be in not attempting to deceive Allāh so
He lets you be deceived, for anyone who tries to deceive Allāh will
himself be deceived. Conviction will be extracted out of him, and he
actually deceives none but his own self."

He was asked, "How can anyone try to deceive Allāh?!" The Prophet (ص)
said, "He acts upon what Allāh has enjoined, then by the same action he
tries to impress others. So, fear Allāh and avoid pretension, for it is
*shirk* against Allāh. A pretender will be called upon the Day of
Judgment with four names: O *Kāfir* (apostate)! O *Fājir* (debauchee)! O
*Ghādir* (deceiver)! O *Khāsir* (loser)! Your deeds are void, your
reward is cancelled, and there is nothing good for you this Day; so,
seek your rewards from those for whom you used to work!"

3. In *Wasā'il al-Shī'ah* by al-Hurr al-\`Āmili, quoting *Qurb
al-Isnād*, through *isnād* traced to the Commander of the Faithful (ع) ,
the Messenger of Allāh (ص) has said, "One who makes himself look good by
doing what Allāh loves then in secrecy defies Allāh by doing what Allāh
hates will find Allāh angry with him in the Hereafter, holding him in
contempt."

This sacred tradition will later be explained, so wait. There are many
such traditions, and what we have stated must suffice and serve the
memory.


