Levels of Pretension From the Aspects of What Is Hidden and What Is Manifest, a Precise Research in the Issue of Pretension
===========================================================================================================================

Be informed that pretension, in as far as being manifest or hidden, has
several levels. Some levels are obvious, some are more obvious, whereas
some others are hidden, and some are more so.

The FIRST level: It is the most obvious level: Someone undertakes an
action in order to show off in a way so as if the need to pretend is not
there, he will not do it. It is the most obvious of its levels and needs
no explanation.

The SECOND level: It is a little bit more hidden: The pretending side
is not initially prompted to undertake the action: rather, the side that
urges the origin of the action is the Divine side, the nearness to the
Almighty, but the non-divine side intrudes into it, so much so that the
act, despite the care of this side, becomes easier to undertake without
it, such as one whose habit is to perform the tahajjud and to perform
the night prayer (qiyam). He performs it every night, but whHe feeling
lazy and drowsy. But when he has a guest, he stands up from his bed with
agility and ease. Had he not hoped for rewards from Allah, he would not
have abandoned the pleasure of sleep not only due to the presence of the
guest but this presence had an impact on him, making it easier for him
to pray and to offer tahajjud, and the prayer will then be easier than
it would have been if he had been by himself.

The THIRD level: In it, the pretension is more hidden than it is in the
second level: The non-divine side has nothing to do with the original
intention to undertake the action, nor in the ease of doing it. But, at
the same time, the substance of pretension is present in the heart. It
is known that such pretension cannot be identified except through the
precise experiment such as suspected terminal physical ailments since
these, after medical analyses, indicate the presence of a disease which
the doctor starts treating. So is the case with this spiritual disease:
Precision is a must in diagnosing it. If some traces of the ailment are
found, its substance will be known to be present. Its indication is that
one must test himself at a time when people accidentally get to see his
adoration. Will he then feel happy and elated on account of their seeing
him or not? An individual may undertake an action with a sincere
intention, desiring no pretension in it: rather, he even avoids
pretending and hating it. But, at the same time, if he realizes that
someone accidentally gets to know about it, he becomes happy, as if he
feels restful when he gets to know that the individual saw how that act
exhausted him. Such happiness and elation form the mark of pretension
which is hidden within him, inside him, from which elation drips. Had he
directed his attention towards anyone other than Allah, and had he paid
no attention to people, there is no sense in this elation when he knows
that others came to know about his I righteous] deed. Happiness [in such
a case] is like a fire that is hidden inside a stone. It becomes evident
when the stone hits iron and the hidden fire comes out to the open and
becomes obvious when the stone hits a stone. People who are acquainted
with and knowledgeable about the stone hitting the iron expose the
hidden pretension. At that time, if this person does not react to this
pleasure, that is, when happiness appears in his heart, and if he does
not rebuke himself for it, reprimand it and meet it with hatred, this
pleasure will be like nutrition for the disease's substance. It grows
undetected, and the effect of that growth gradually creates in him the
need to find a reason for people having, to be familiar with his work.
It is like talking about a subject and saying something casually. For
example, if he is one of those who offer tahajjud, he talks about how
the weather is cold or hot at the end of the night, or about something
like that, so that others will understand that he was awake at that time
[for tahajjud].

It may even be more hidden than that, too, such as one does not say
anything to suggest to others familiarity with them, with his actions,
neither explicitly nor implicitly. But people can get to know it from
the way he dresses himself, his appearance or general conditions, such
as drowsiness, the low tone of his voice, how his lips are withered...,
etc. Or he may not watch himself during his prostration in order to
avoid hitting the ground so prostrating will bear an impact on his
forehead. Deep inside his conscience he will be elated about it, that
is, that he has a visible mark of adoration. Or he may be at a mourning
commemoration for Imam al-Hussain (a.s) or a gathering for supplication.
At the end of the gathering, he does not remove the tears from his eyes
hilly. There are marks like these, and even more hidden than that, which
show no such indications: This means that he may perform a [righteous]
deed sincerely without desiring anyone to notice it, nor does he like it
to show, yet he expects people to start greeting him, to be generous to
him, to meet him with a smile, with respect, to praise him, to be
energetic in carrying out his errands, to be tolerant as they trade with
him, etc. If he goes -to a meeting place, they make room for him. If
anyone falls short of doing any of these things, he will find it in his
heart to be too heavy, and he will find it unsuitable for his status. It
is as if he is rewarded by people for the worship which he hides, so
much so that had he not 'performed such worship, he would not have
demanded all of this, nor would he have found it unacceptable when
people treat him any less than that. In my view, this has roots which
also extend to conceit. In reality, he demands that from Allah, the most
Glorified One, and even wonders why the Almighty did not cast love for
him in the hearts of people so they may respect him although he did
perform that "sincere" act of worship! As a whole, unless the presence
of worship is similar to its absence with regard to everything relevant
to people, and had one not contended himself with the fact that Allah
knows about what he does, such an individual will not be free of
pretension, even as low as the sound of ants' tracks, nor is he free of
conceit either which we, by the will of Allah, will discuss.

It is possible this much pretension voids one's rewards. Nobody is
spared such type of pretension except Allah's sincere worshippers, for
Satan can have no way of reaching them. Perhaps a reference to this lies
in a statement by the Commander of the Faithful Ali (a.s) who is quoted
as having said. "Allah, the most Great, the most Exalted, will say to
those who recite [the Holy Qur'an in public] on the Judgment Day: 'Did
people not sell to you cheap? Did people not start greeting you'? Were
your needs not taken care of by people?' According to tradition, [the
Almighty adds saying] 'There are no wages for you here: you were paid
your wages in full.'"

Abdullah Mubarak is quoted as having said that it is narrated about
Wahab son of Muneer saying that a man from among the travelers said to
his fellows, "We left behind the wealth and the sons fearing oppression,
now we fear lest more oppression has afflicted us than that with which
people who have wealth have been afflicted! If one of us is met, he
likes to be respected because of the station of his piety. If he asks
for something, he likes to be given on account of his faith. And if he
buys something, he likes the seller to sell it to him cheaper because of
his faith!" This reached the knowledge of their king who rode among a
crowd of people. The valley and the mountain became full of people. That
traveler inquired about it and was told that the king was coming. He
asked his servant to bring him food. He was brought beans and oil which
he kept stuffing in his mouth, eating violently. The king asked the
travelers, "Where is your fellow?" They pointed to him, whereupon the
Icing asked him. "How are you?" The man said, "Like anyone else," but
according to another way of telling this incident. "I am fine." The king
said. "There is nothing good with this man." leaving him. The traveler
said, "Praise be to Allah Who sent you away from me, thinking ill of
me!"

Yes, my dear one, the sincere ones were apprehensive of hidden
pretension, trying hard to mislead people about their righteous deeds
out of their concern about hiding them more so than people's concern
about hiding their bad deeds and sins, all of this in the hope their
good deeds will be sincere, so Allah will reward them on the Judgment
Day by hiding these bad deeds and sins from people. These sincere folks
knew and became convinced that Allah Almighty does not accept anything
hut what is purely for His sake, for he has said. "And they have been
commanded no more than this: To worship Allah, offering Him sincere
devotion, being true (in faith): To establish regular prayers, and to
practice regular charity: such is the right and straight religion"
(Qur'an, 98:5). The Judgment Day is the Day of their want and need for
righteous deeds: it is the Day when neither wealth nor offspring will be
of any benefit save for one who reaches Allah with a sound heart.

A scholar has provided this example: The desert travelers go there with
the best currency in circulation because they know that the need for it
is the greatest in the desert, and that the desert people accept only
the best currency. The same applies to those who have hearts. They
witness the Day of Judgment and the rations whereby they supply
themselves: piety, knowing that the best of rations is piety. They bring
about deeds that are free of pretension, protecting themselves against
all levels of pretension.

**UNIQUE QUR'ANIC JEWEL**

WhHe narrating the story of Yousuf (Joseph) and his brothers, the
Qur'an states that alter the latter having come to Egypt and asked
Yousuf to provide them with provisions and rations, the Qur'an states
the following: "At length, once he had furnished them with provisions
(suitable) for them, he put the drinking cup in his brother's
saddle-bag. Then a crier shouted out, '0 you (in) the caravan! Behold!
You are thieves, without doubt!'' (Qur'an, 12:70).

One of the men of knowledge says, "It is not right to think that Yousuf
accused his brother of theft so he would take him and keep him in his
company because if Yousufs purpose was to keep his brother with him, he
did not have to accuse him in this ugly way, embarrassing him and
letting him fall in the public's esteem as a thief although he is the
son of the prophet of Allah. Rather, he could have found another excuse
to do that without scratching his dignity. If he had to, he could have
done so secretly, say, in a confidential personal meeting rather than
before the public, so much so that a crier had to cry out to the
caravan, charging it of theft. So, what prompted this announcement to
the caravan which contained Canaanites who would return to the land of
Canaan and the robbery committed by a prophet of Allah would be the core
of the talk in all meeting places and gatherings'? Men will talk about
it and so will the women, and the reputation of a house about which
people know nothing but honor and spirituality will be ruined. There has
to be something hidden in this matter."

The man of knowledge goes on to say, "The hidden matter is that
reaching truly divine dignity is not easy except through public
humiliation. We tie dignity to the truth because posts and stations
among the public are not truly dignifying. True dignity is in reaching
nearness to Allah. In other words, it is neighborliness of Allah, the
company of the Lord of the Worlds, a station of the truth near an Able
King. The company of Allah's servants is the company of Allah. Whoever
loves you loves Allah, and whoever hates you hates Allah. Whoever Allah
chooses, He starts with you, Whoever visits his brother in Allah, the
Almighty says. 'You have visited Me'. This dignity does not become
available except when conditions are met the greatest of which is
humiliation by the people. If you wish, you can say that the greatest
obstacle in the path towards Allah and towards reaching Allah's
courtyard is love for prominence and eminence among the people.

So long as the heart remains attached to such love, the owner of this
heart cannot reach his destination as this narrative tells us: Two
ferocious wolves, one of which attacks a herd of cattle from its
beginning and the other from its end, are as detrimental to one's creed
as loving distinction and a high station. Therefore, the worldly
mastership is rejected in the eyes of Allah's friends who hate it as the
Master of the Pious has said, 'By the One Who split the seed and created
the breeze, had it not been for the presence of what is present..., you
would have found this world of yours less important in my esteem than a
goat's sneeze.' One who treads this path must take this love out of his
heart, even if it means dropping his esteem from public eyes if he does
not feel secure regarding the ills and detriments of his own nuts, just
as severing a part of the body is permissible, even obligatory, when
there is concern about the health of the rest of the bodily parts.
Therefore, the virtuous al-Naraqi has narrated in his hook Mi'raj
al-Sa'ada about a scholar reciting the Qur'an in front of their students
and sincere ones deliberately in a way about which they claim he has no
knowledge and that he is illiterate. Committing a small harm in order to
attain a great deal of goodness is rational and according to the Shari'a
permissible. This concept has many testimonials from those who tread the
path towards Aim, and many refer to it in their poems.

One of the men of knowledge says, "I saw once in a vision someone whom
I did not know. He handed me a piece of paper and ordered me to sign it.
I signed it without knowing what is written in it or be familiar with
its contents. Once I have signed it, the person who gave it to me said,
'Our narrative is quite hard: it is not tolerated except by an angel who
is near to Allah, or a sent prophet, or a servant whose heart Allah
tested with conviction.' He read this tradition and said, 'I undoubtedly
choose humiliation.' So, I woke up from my sleep and came to know that I
had signed the document of my humiliation among the people so I may win
through such humiliation the ability to bear the difficult traditions
and the secrets of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be with them." This topic has a
lengthy continuation, so we shall leave it for its place and people.

Generally, the impurities of hidden pretension arc numerous, countless.
As much as one realizes on his own about how a human being or an animal
becomes acquainted with his adoration, he still has a branch of
pretension. Since he has no hope set on animals and infants being thus
acquainted with his adoration, he does not care whether they are present
[when he is involved in an act of adoration] or if they are absent,
whether they notice his adoration or not. If one is sincere, having no
desire about anyone [with regard to his acts of adoration], lie will
think very lowly of their knowledge of his acts of adoration because he
knows that they, too, are like children: They cannot bring him
sustenance, nor can they bear any impact on his destiny, nor increase
his rewards. Rather, they cannot bring their own selves any good, or any
harm, or death, or life, or resurrection ..., etc.

At this point, in order to explain what we are driving at, we have to
submit a question because the matter is very important: We see most
people feeling glad when their good deeds are recognized; so, is such
feeling of happiness lauded by the Shari'a, or is it held as
contemptible?

The answer is that it is not lauded at all, nor is it held as
contemptible either. Instead, it is praised in some cases and held with
contempt in others. Here are the details :

The lauded one falls into four categories :

The FIRST is that one's intention is to hide the acts of obedience and
sincerity to Allah, but when people noticed what he was doing, he has to
remember that Allah, the most Praised One, by virtue of His Attribute
expressed in this supplication: "0 One Who manifests what is beautiful!"
has manifested something beautiful, so he is led to think that Allah has
fared well with him: The perfection of His munificence is that He hides
obedience and disobedience. But Allah, due to the beauty of His care,
hides the man's acts disobedience whHe manifesting those of his
obedience. This is a great act of kindness from the part of Allah
Almighty in his regard, hence the man is very happy on account of Allah
having done such a nice thing for him, not because people praise what he
has done or the status in their hearts which he now occupies. It is as
though he sees through it that Allah, due to His favor and mercy, has
accepted his deed, so he is happy about it. "Say: 'In the bounty of
Allah, and in I His mercy, let them rejoice!'" (Qur'an, 10:58). The
SECOND is that his happiness stems from I his conviction that] since
Allah Almighty manifests what is beautiful in him whHe covering up what
is ugly in this life, He will do likewise in the Hereafter as well, for
Allah is the Lord of the Hereafter and of this life. Actually, His mercy
in the Hereafter is broader than it is in the life of this world as
referred to in the traditions. It is as though he is repeating what Imam
Zayn al-'Abidin (a.s) has said in one of his supplications thus: "Lord!
Just Os You have covered up sins that I have committed in this life, I
have a greater need that You will veil them in the Hereafter." His
elation in the first case is due to accepting what is in the present
time without considering the future, whHe in the second his mind is set
about the future. One tradition states the following: "When Allah covers
up the sin of one of His servants in the life of this world, He covers
it up for him in the Hereafter as well."

The THIRD is that his elation stems from his belief that hopefully
those who see his act of adoration will emulate him, hence he will have
an increase in the rewards. Even if he undertakes the action publicly
with this same intention, he will not be violating the spirit of
sincerity: He will have the reward, due to his intention, as though he
undertook that deed privately firstly, and secondly due to Allah
Almighty manifesting his deed and letting others emulate his act of
obedience to Him, and one who thus feels elated is quite justified. The
manifestation of indications of benefit is sweet and undoubtedly prompts
one to be happy bout it.

The FOURTH is this: When he sees how those who noticed his act of
adoration praise him for being obedient to his Lord, he will feel happy
and glad that they, too, obey Allah and love to see people obeying Him
as well; their hearts incline towards the good deeds. There are some
people who see obedient people and hold them in contempt, or feel
envious, or speak ill of them, or ridicule them, or charge them with
pretension rather than praise them for their act of adoration. This
elation is due to seeing how good the belief of Allah's servants is, how
good their souls are. The sign of sincerity in this type is that one
feels happy when people praise someone else just as he feels happy when
they praise him, perhaps even more so, as it is quite obvious.

As regarding what is contemptible, it is when one feels happy for
having earned a status in the hearts of people, so people may now praise
and magnify him: This is hated and is contemptible, and surely Allah
knows best.


