Wise Admonishmment From the Professor of Theology, Imam Khomeini,may His Shade, Endure
======================================================================================

Quite often, it so happens that a pretender does not pay attention to
the fact that pretension has penetrated his actions, that his good deeds
are a pretense and worth absolutely nothing. This is so because the
traps of the self (nafs) and those of Satan are quite minute and
transparent. Humanity's path is very narrow and dark: Unless man fully
examines, he does not pay attention to what he does.

One thinks that his deeds are purely for the sake of earning the
Pleasure of Allah, but they instead please Satan. Since it is the human
nature to be egotistical, such love for one's own self veils him from
seeing his own faults. For example, earning the science of religion,
which is one of the important acts of obedience and adoration, may
afflict one with pretension in this great form of adoration even whHe he
is unmindful, unaware, of it. He, as we have already stated, due to the
thick curtain, the curtain of self-love, likes to solve a scholarly
problem in the presence of scholars and chiefs in a way which nobody
else came up with. It will make him stand out, according to his own
thinking. The more he explains the problem sufficiently, attracting the
attention of those present, the more elated he feels. If someone opposes
him, he has to overcome and humiliate him; he has to make him lower his
head before people, forcing his own argument on him, his opponent,
whether it is right or wrong. After vanquishing the opponent, he feels
within himself that he has distinguished himself and earned a place of
prominence. If a master believes what he says, so much the better. And
the poor man is unaware that although he earned a status among the
scholars and men of virtue, he dropped in the esteem of his Lord, the
King of kings in all domains Who orders the deed of such an individual
to cause him to be hurled into Sijjeen.

This pretentious deed was also mixed with various forms of
disobedience: scandalizing a believer and humiliating him, harming the
brother-in-faith, insulting and sometimes uncovering his faults. All
these are sins and make an independent cause to render such an
individual to be among the fellows of hell. If we suppose that the nafs
places its trap before you and says to you, "My objective is to explain
the legislative ruling and show the word of truth, which is the best
form of obedience. My goal is not to demonstrate my distinction, or to
brag," you must ask it about its inner self the following question: If
my friend, who is like me in my scholarly degree, explains the
legislative ruling, and if he solves the problem himself, and if you
were subdued in that meeting place, will your attitude be
contrariwise?!' If the case is positive, you will be truthful in your
claim. But if the nafs approaches you through the venue of trickery,
abandoning no deception, saying to you, "There is a virtue for
manifesting righteousness, and Allah rewards for it, and I want you to
win this virtue and let you live in the abode of Allah's rewards." you
must say to it, "If we suppose that Allah, the Praised One, granted you
this virtue in case you are subdued and if you believe in righteousness,
will you still seek victory over your opponent?" Upon referring to your
inner-self, if you find out that you love victory, too, and fame among
the men of virtue as being a man of both knowledge and virtue, and that
this scholarly research was in order to gain a status in their hearts,
be informed that you are a pretender in this scholarly research which is
one of the best forms of obedience to the Almighty and one of the best
acts of worship, and that this deed was prompted by love for prominence
and distinction which is more harmful to your conviction than two wolves
raging in a flock the shepherd of which is absent, according to a
narrative. You are obligated, as a man of knowledge who seeks reform,
one who guides others towards the path of the Hereafter, a doctor of
psychological ailment, to reform yourself first and to repair your own
temper so you will not be among the scholars whose good deeds are void,
whose condition is very well known.

Lord! Do purge our hearts of the impurity of shirk and hypocrisy!
Purify the mirror of our hearts from the adornment of loving this world
which is the cause of all these matters. Be our Companion, help us, we
poor souls who are afflicted with loving ourselves, with loving
distinction and eminence, along this dangerous journey, this path that
has many obstacles, the narrow and dark one, surely You can do anything
at all, Allahomma Ameen.

Among the important acts of adoration in Islam is the congregational
prayer service in which the distinction of the imam is greater:
therefore, Satan penetrates in it more than in others. His enmity
towards the imam is greater. Satan stands to deprive the imam of this
virtue, empty his deed of sincerity, thus .causing him to be lodged in
Sijjeen, rendering him associating a partner with Allah, the most Great.
Satan enters into the heart of imams of congregational prayers from
various paths such as conceit and pretension, which is making a show of
this form of worship before the public in order to win a status in their
hearts and earn the reputation of being great and sublime. For example,
Satan sees so-and-so, who is a great worshipper, having attended his
congregational prayers, whereupon he increases his submission, bringing
him closer to himself through various means and tricks in order to get
him in the end to fall in his trap. He reminds the imam in his place of
meeting, or through another way, to let people know that "So- and-so
worshipper attends my congregational prayer service," finding in his
heart love for this person who attends his service, demonstrating love
and sincerity to him in a degree which he does not demonstrate to Allah
Almighty or to His close servants even for one moment in his lifetime,
especially if the attendant of the prayer service is a respected
businessman. If, God forbid, a man of distinction attends the prayer
service because of losing track of his path, so he joins the ranks in
his congregation, the calamity will then be greater. Satan, at the same
time, does not leave the imam alone whose group is smaller in number. He
attends and insinuates to him to let people understand that "I have
abandoned the world and I pray in the quarter's small mosque with the
poor and the indigents." [his imam is like his predecessor, even worse,
because he nurtures in his heart the vice of jealousy, too, permitting
its tree to produce its fruit. Since he had no share of the good things
in this life. Satan deprives him of his share in the Hereafter as well,
rendering him a loser in this life and in the one to come.

This Satan does not leave me or yourselves alone when we are not imams
of the congregational prayer service not because we shy away from it but
our hands fall short of it, so he insinuates to us to defame the group
of Muslims, to charge them, to suggest that there are faults with that
group, counting our deprivation of the group as our isolation from it
and abandonment of this life. We identify ourselves as being free of
love for the self and for prominence. We, then, are in a worse shape
than both previous groups. We do not have the complete life enjoyed by
the first group nor the incomplete one for the second group, nor do we
have the Hereafter. Had we been able, our seeking eminence and our love
for distinction and wealth would have been greater than both those
groups.

Satan is not satisfied with playing tricks on the group's imam, nor is
the fire of his desire quenched by turning the imam into a fellow of
hell, but he also enters the rows of those who follow the imam as well
to commit his mischief.

Since the first row is the best, and since the right side of a row is
better than the left, it is his first target. Satan takes the hand of
the poor worshipper and gets him out of his house despite the distance
from the place where the group congregates and seats him in the right
side of the first row. He starts insinuating to him to inform people of
this virtue which he attained. This poor man, too, without Satan
tempting him, manifests the distinction of his own self with twinkling
and coddling, thus his inner shirk shows itself, entering his deed into
the Sijjeen (the sinners' record).

Then Satan enters in the rest of rows, mobilizing then folks to hold on
to the first row and to throw the poor worshipper, who is sitting in the
first rank, with their arrows of defamation and curses whHe labeling
themselves with integrity. It may be noticed that Satan takes the hand
of a respected person, especially if he is among the people of knowledge
and distinction, to seat him in the other row so that this person may
show people that despite his status among the public or in the world of
knowledge, whHe a man like him ought not emulate such an imam, but "On
account of my renunciation of this life and abandonment of the selfs
desire, I attended his congregational service. Despite all of this.. I
even sat in the last row..." The likes of this individual are never seen
in the first row at all! Satan does not contend himself with only the
imam and those who follow him but sticks to the heard of one who prays
individually, taking his rein, pulling him out of the home or market,
spreading a carpet for him with twinkling and coddling in a corner in
the mosque, a man who does not see any imam as being just, so he
prolongs his bowing and prostrating as people look on, repeating lengthy
sacred verses. This person hides inside himself his desire that people
must understand the folloowing: "Due to the plentitude of my sanctity
and precaution, I abandon the group so I may not be afflicted by praying
with an imam who is not just." Besides being conceited and pretentious,
this man is also ignorant of the issues of the Islamic Shari'a because
the emulation authority of this person perhaps does not apply any
criterion besides a good appearance so he may emulate an imam. Thus do
we place the rest of our matters at the disposal of Satan whHe whenever
this cursed one finds an impure heart to which he resorts, he burns the
apparent and the hidden deeds, rendering him among the fellows of hell
even through good deeds. Thus ends the wise admonishment of Imam
al-Khomeini.

**EXPLAINING HOW TO SCIENTIFICALLY AND PRACTICALLY CURE THE HEART OF
THE DISEASE OF PRETENSION**

Some scholars of the hereafter have made statements in this regard
which I would like to cite here briefly with sonic explanations :

You have come to know that pretension voids the good deeds and causes
Allah to hold one in contempt, that it is one of the major lethal sins;
so, you have to get ready, be serious and struggle whHe bearing the
hardship of uprooting this tree from the heart. Reaching the ladders of
sublime humanity is not easy without bearing hardships. Likewise,
getting rid of terminal diseases cannot be achieved except by taking
bitter medicines. This struggle, though tough in the beginning, fails
vyithin the practical field: its hardship gradually dissipates
completely.

( 67 ) Let it be known that the origin of pretension is love for
prominence. If love for prominence is analyzed, it will be rendered to
three roots :

1. Love for praise: man loves to be praised and lauded; he finds
pleasure in hearing compliments.

2. Flight from ill reputation; man hates to be the source of ill
reputation; he is harmed and feels the pain when hearing that his
reputation is being chewed.

3. Greed for what people possess.

These three often cause pretension.

It may he observed how one does not desire praise, nor does he covet
lauding, nor does he look at what others enjoy, but he cannot tolerate
to be reprimanded and spoken ill of, so he undertakes a pretentious act.
He is like a miser individual who participates in a deed of
righteousness when he sees others doing likewise, spending money for
that cause. He finds himself among generous people who offer plenty of
money by way of charity. He offers little of it by way of charity so he
may not be described as a stingy person. Or he may be like a young man
among youths who are worshipping, keeping themselves busy-with prayer
and supplication, so he, too, prays and supplicates so that he may not
be spoken ill of and accused of being lazy and idle. And there are among
the scholars those who do not covet to be praised by people, but he
cannot tolerate to be identified as knowing very little. If he is asked
about an issue with which he is not familiar, he is swill to issue a
verdict without knowledge rather than convincing himself of asking
someone else who is familiar with it for fear he may be held as
ignorant. Generally speaking, one can be patient with regard to the
pleasure of praise but cannot tolerate the pain of being spoken ill
of.

One who treats these three causes has to know that one seeks and
desires something due to thinking that it is good, useful and sweet to
him, whether it is so now or it will be in the future. If he gets to
know that it is pleasurable in the present time but is harmful in its
outcome, it will be easy for him not to desire it. It is like one who
knows that honey is delicious, so he craves eating it, but if it becomes
obvious to him that it contains poison, it will be easy for him to shy
away from it. Thus is the case with our subject. No matter how much a
servant of Allah knows that pretension is harmful, that it causes him
not to reform his harm, that it deprives him of imminent success and the
loss of a station in the hereafter, in the final outcome, bringing him
punishment, contempt and infamy, when someone cries out as witnesses
testify: "O debauchee, treacherous, pretender, polytheist! Did you ever
feel the shame when you traded the obedience to Allah for what the short
life offered'? Did you not watch people's hearts but did not watch out
when you meet the Truth, Praise to Him? Did you not seek popularity
among the servants of Allah by doing what brings about wrath from Allah?
Did you not decorate yourself with what makes you look bad in the eyes
of Allah'? Did you not seek nearness to the servants of Allah by being
distant from Him? Did you not seek their praise by being ill spoken of
by Allah? Did you not seek their pleasure by exposing yourself to
Allah's anger'? Did anyone else stand in your eyes as being thus less
important than Allah?!" We seek refuge with Allah from such humiliation
and exposure. "If only you could see when the guilty ones bend their
heads down before their Lord..." (Qur'an, 32 : 12).

So, no matter how much a servant of Allah thinks about this
humiliation, comparing it with what he earns from His servants, from
making himself look good in their eyes, a status among them attained
through the venue of pretension, one which he may not even get,
comparing it with what he will face of shame and infamy in the
Hereafter..., he will then come to know that pretension is fire that has
burnt his good deeds, rendering them into the record of the sinners. He
may have lost a high status with Allah by earning this good deed which
he spoiled with pretension, a status that places him in the company of
the prophets and the righteous. Surely pretension has taken him out of
the latter's company and send him to the row of the accursed, add to
this what he will be exposed to in the life of this world of worries
because of trying to please others. To please others is an unattainable
objective; whenever you please a group, another is displeased with you.
What goal does he achieve when he earns their praise? What does he get
when he drops in the eyes of Allah whHe raising himself in the eyes of
His servants whHe such praise does not increase his sustenance, nor does
it prolong his lifespan, nor does it benefit him on the day when he
realizes his poverty and want? So, 0 pretender who lets pretension covet
his good deeds, be informed that Allah, Praise to Him, is the One Who
manipulates the hearts to either withhold or to give, and the beings
have no choice in this regard, nor is there anyone to sustain them
besides Allah. One who sets his hopes on people will never be free of
humiliation and disappointment. Even if he arrives at his goal, he will
not be without indebtedness to others, without receiving humiliation;
so, how could you abandon what Allah has in store with Him in exchange
for a false hope, for a bad whim that may hit the mark or miss it: If it
hits the mark, its pleasure does not compensate for the pain of its bad
outcome and humiliation?!

O pretender! Beware of fearing being spoken ill of! When people speak
ill of you, it does not speed up your demise, nor does it postpone it,
nor does it render you among the residents of hell if you are a resident
of Paradise, nor does it make you contemptible in the eyes of Allah if
you are praised by Him, for all the servants are incapacitated: They
cannot cause any harm to their own souls, nor benefit, nor life, nor
death, nor resurrection; so, perfection is not achieved through their
praise, nor is it diminished because of their criticism. A poet from
Banu Tamim once said, "Praise for me is good, whHe criticizing me is
bad." whereupon the Messenger of Allah (a.s) said to him. "You have
lied! This applies to Allah: There is nothing good except in praising,
nor is there anything bad more than saving something bad about Him. What
good would you get when people praise you whHe you arc held in contempt
by Allah'? And what evil could touch you if people speak ill of YOU whHe
Allah praises you'?"

Generally speaking, it is through thinking about these matters that it
is hoped that one's heart is directed towards Allah, so he gets rid of
the humiliation of pretension and the cruelty of people's hearts. Lights
from his sincerity reflect themselves on his heart whereby his chest is
pleased. Through them will beautiful revelations be opened up that
increase his feeling of happiness for being in the company of Allah, of
being unhappy when he is in the company of people. He will then hold
life in contempt whHe holding the Hereafter with high regards. The
status of the creation drops from his heart. The reason for pretension
collapses, and the paths of sincerity will be facilitated for him ...

WHEN SHOWING OFF ACTS OF WORSHIP IS PERMISSIBLE :

ADVICE BY IMAM KHOMEINI, MAY I BE HIS SACRIFICE,
FOR THOSE WHO WANT ADMONISHMENT
PRACTICAL TREATMENT FOR PRETENSION

Contemplating upon and making plans for the issues which we have
stated, though it has a strong effect in treating this disease, ought
not suffice to scientifically treat this dangerous ailment. Rather, the
disease has also to be practically monitored. The practical medication
is that one must accustom himself to hiding his acts of adoration and
closing the doors whHe doing them just as the doors are closed when sins
are committed, till his heart is convinced that Allah knows about and is
familiar with his acts of adoration, and his soul does not stop him from
seeking anyone to know about them save Allah. It has been narrated that
a companion of Abu Hafs, the blacksmith, spoke ill of this life and of
its people, whereupon Abu Hafs said to him. "You have manifested what
you should have hidden. From this day on, do not keep us company." He
did not even permit showing this much because in speaking ill of this
life there is a sort of invitation to asceticism, and such an invitation
often stems out of pretension; therefore, this student made him the
object of his teacher's reprimanding, There is no cure for pretension
like hiding. This is so even though it, in the beginning, is very
difficult to do, but if one perseveres about it by forcing himself, he
will be aided by divine acts of kindness, and good success will be his;
it will then be easier for him and his burden will fall through support
and help from the Almighty.

Let me cite for you, kind reader, some of what has been narrated about
the biographies of the Imams of Guidance who are the doctors of the
souls :

Al-Qummi, the narrator of traditions, may Allah be pleased with him,
has narrated saying that Imam Ali son of Imam al-Hussain (peace be with
them both) used to come out during the pitch dark of the night carrying
a sack on his back in which he placed small bundles containing [gold]
dinars and [silver] dirhams, and he might also have carried on his back
food or firewood. He would come to a house door and knock it then hand
over something to whoever comes out to open it, covering his face mean
hHe so the poor recipient may not know who he is. When his corpse was
placed down for the burial bath, his hack showed marks of swellings as
large as camel humps. He used to sustain a hundred families from among
the poor of Medina.

The son of Aisha is quoted as having said, "I heard the residents of
Medina saying, 'We have now lost the secret charity when Ali son of
al-Hussain (a.s) died.' When he died and was stripped for the funeral
burial, they kept looking at the marks on his back. They said that he
used to carry flour sacks on his back during the night in order to get
them to reach the poor of Medina stealthily, and he used to say that
secret charities put out the wrath of the Lord."

The Prophet (a.s) has said, "The greatest rewards for an act of worship
are for one who hides them." 1

The Commander of the Faithful, peace be with him, has said, "One of the
treasures of Paradise are: hiding a good deed, persevering whHe facing
calamities, and hiding hardships." 2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Safeenat al-Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 15.
2 Ibid.

The Imams, peace be with them, are also cited as having said, "The
distinction of a good deed done in secrecy over one done openly is that
the first will be rewarded seventy times as much."

There are many other such narratives.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 I say that the professor, may my soul be his sacrifice, has
transmitted this statement from his own great mentor Shah-Abadi (may
Allah be pleased with him). But I saw it recorded in the book titled
Mirsad al-lbad by Sheikh Najm ad-Deen, and favor belongs to the one who
does a good deed first.


