Basharat Al Mustafa Li Shiat Al Murtaza - 511 Ah
================================================

I do not accept the deeds of any doer until he bears witness to your
(s.a.w.) Prophethood and the Mastership of Ali (a.s.). Whoever says -
There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and
attaches himself to the Mastership of Ali will enter Paradise. And these
are the Holy Words of our Creator Allah (s.w.t.) in Hadeeth Qudsi. Let
us find out in detail what will happen on the Day of Judgment as regards
to the Third Testimony.

TAFSEER AL IMAM HASSAN AL ASKARI (A.S.)

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: 'Allah (s.w.t.) Said that one who does
not believe in the Quran has also not believed in the Torah, because He
(s.w.t.) has Said that He (s.w.t.) will not accept their faith on one of
them without the other. In the same way, Allah (s.w.t.) has made it an
obligation to believe in Wilayah of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) just as he
has made it an obligation to have faith in Muhammad (s.a.w.).

If someone was to claim to believe in the Prophethood of Muhammad
(s.a.w.) and disbelieves in the Wilayah of Ali (a.s.) has not believed
in the Prophethood of Muhammad (s.a.w.). Surely Allah (s.w.t.) will
gather the creation on the Day of Judgment a caller will call out to
them to define their belief and disbelief and cry out 'God is Great! God
is Great!

Then another caller will cry out 'O group of creatures repeat this
call!' One of the Sects will become dumb and will not repeat this whilst
the others will do so. Then the caller will call out, 'I bear witness
that there is no God but Allah!' All the creatures will say this except
for the polytheists from among the Magians and the Christians and the
idol worshippers. They will then be separated from the others.

Then the caller will call out 'I bear witness that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah!' All the Muslims will altogether say this but there
will be silence from the Jews and the Christians and other Polytheists.
Then there will be a call directing the Muslims towards Paradise.

Then Allah (s.w.t.) will Say (Make them wait here until I ask them) The
Angels will then ask O Lord! Why are they being detained here? Allah
(s.w.t.) will Say 'Wait while I Ask them about the Wilayah of Ali Ibn
Abi Talib and the Aal E Muhammad (a.s.). O My servants and maids! I had
Ordered you to bear another witness after bearing witness of Muhammmad
(s.a.w.); If you bear this witness then I shall increase your rewards
and good deeds, or if you do not bear this witness then you will have no
benefit from bearing the witness of My Unity and the Prophethood of
Muhammad (s.a.w.).

Whoever has brought this witness is today successful and whoever has
not brought this is destroyed. Then one person will say: 'I have brought
this witness and am a lover of Aal e Muhammad (a.s.)' although he will
be a liar and he will think that he will be saved by his false claim.
Allah (s.w.t.) will Say' O claimant, We will take the witness of Ali
(a.s.) on this'. Allah (s.w.t.) will then Say: 'O Abul Hassan (a.s.)
give witness about this'.

Ali (a.s.) will then say: 'O Lord! Paradise is itself a witness to my
friends and Hell is itself a witness of my enemies. Whoever is true in
this, then the breeze of Paradise will come towards him and will take
him to its highest places and by the Grace of God will place him in his
eternal abode. He will not have any grief or pain over there.

Whoever is a liar in this the hot air and boiling water of Hell and the
smoke of three pronged shadow will take him away and dump him in Hell'.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) will say: 'O Ali! It is due to this that you
are the distributor of Hell and Paradise. You will say to Hell that this
person is for you and you are under my command'. And, so the Mujtahids
and their followers make the claim that the Third Testimony does not
form part of the Adhaan.

They say the Hadeeth that the Third Testimony MUST follow the first two
should be ignored when it comes to Adhaan. And yet they accept this
Hadeeth to be true.

They say the Hadeeth that the first two testimonies are rendered
unacceptable when not accompanied by the third should also be ignored
when it comes to Adhaan. And yet they accept this Hadeeth to be true.

They say the Hadeeth that NO deeds will be acceptable on the Day of
Judgment without having borne the third testimony should also be ignored
when it comes to Adhaan. And yet they accept this Hadeeth to be true.
Does this make sense to anyone? Especially when you consider the
following Hadeeth:

AL MANAQIB - VOL 3 - KHUTBA AL IFTIKHARIYA OF IMAM ALI (A.S.) I am the
Adhaan of Allah (s.w.t.) in this world and the caller (Muezzin) in the
hereafter. When the Holy Imam Ali (a.s.) is in actual fact the Adhaan
itself, how can they justify his testimony not to form part of it? Based
on the above evidence, the argument of the people and their Mujtahid
Imams does not make sense to me.


**The Adhaan Today**

And so we take a look at the Adhaan that we have been given today as
being the correct one by the Mujtahids.

TAWZEEH UL MASAAIL - SYED ALI AL SISTANI - RULE 927 Adhan consists of
the following 18 sentences: Allahu Akbar - four times - (Allah is
greater than any description) Ash hadu an la ilaha illal lah - two
times - (I testify that there is no god but Allah) Ash hadu anna
Muhammadan Rasu lul lah - two times - (I testify that Muhammad is
Allah's Messenger)

Hayya'alas Salah - two times - (Hasten to prayers) Hayya'alal Falah -
two times - (Hasten to deliverance) Hayya'ala Khayril 'Amal - two times
(Hasten to the best act) Allahu Akbar - two times - (Allah is greater
than any description) La ilaha illal lah - two times - (There is no god
but Allah) As you can see that according to this Mujtahid and all others
(except of one Syed Muhammad Shirazi - Rule 117) the Third Testimony
does not form part of the Ad- haan. It looks like the Ijtihad that he
did was different from the ones done by the rest of the Mujtahids.

Let us now look at the some of the declarations of this Adhaan.

The first eight sentences are the declaration of the Greatness of Allah
(s.w.t.) and the bearing of the first two testimonies. The last four
sentences are the two declarations once again of the Greatness of Allah
(s.w.t.) and His Unity. That leaves the six sen- tences of the three
declarations which we should look at.

AL FADHAAIL - SHAZAN BIN JIBRAEEL 5TH C H

The Holy Imam Ali (a.s.) said: I am the Salaat (Prayer) of the
believer; I am (the one referred to in) Hasten to Prayers; Hasten to
deliverance and hasten to the best act. This is a clear reference to the
three declarations in the Adhaan: Hayya'alas Salah - two times - (Hasten
to prayers)

Hayya'alal Falah - two times - (Hasten to deliverance) Hayya'ala
Khayril 'Amal - two times - (Hasten to the best act) As you can see,
virtually the whole of the Adhaan has been designed for the declaration
of Wilayah.

But the Third Testimony does not form part of the Adhaan as given by
them. Yet, they cannot avoid the overwhelming evidence against their
rulings and so they have made it a recommendation, but OUTSIDE the
Adhaan.


**CONCLUSION**

Let us now look at these two Hadeeth once again for the conclusion. AL
MANAQIB - VOL 3 - KHUTBA AL IFTIKHARIYA OF IMAM ALI (A.S.) I am the
Adhaan of Allah (s.w.t.) in this world and the caller (Muezzin) in the
hereafter. AL IHTIJAJ AL TABARSI - VOL 1 P230

So came the order from the Imam Ja'far Al Sadiq (a.s.): 'Whoever says -
There is no God but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah must
immediately say Ali is the Commander of the Faithful'.

Can you give me a reason to let go of the Firmest Handle in the matter
of Adhaan? I rest my case.


