Tashahhud of the Holy Imam Ali Al Ridha (a.s.)
==============================================

MUSTADRAK AL WASSAIL - VOL 2 H5

It is in Fiqh Al Ridha (a.s.) that in the fourth cycle of the prayer he
(a.s.) used to recite the following as well in Tashahhud I bear witness
that You (s.w.t.) are the best Nourisher and Muhammad (s.a.w.) is the
best Messenger and Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is the best Trustee.

Surely, for the Shia, one statement of any one of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) would prove to be sufficient. There is no need to give proof upon
proof for the Shia. The others would rather act upon the instruction of
the Imams other than the twelve Divine Imams of the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt
(a.s.).

SO WHY HAVE THEY TOLD US TO RECITE ONLY TWO TESTIMONIES?

Okay so I consider that, surely there must be some evidence to suggest
that the Namaaz that we have been taught to us, with only two
testimonies, is correct. Yes there is, but it has been misconstrued.

AL KAFI VOL 2 P 547

(The narrator) said: 'I asked Abu Ja'far (a.s.): 'What is the minimum
acceptable in Tashahhud?' He (a.s.) replied: 'Two testimonies'.

As you can clearly see, in this Hadeeth, which is being used to justify
the recitation of two testimonies in preference to three, the question
is quite clear - What is the MINIMUM that is acceptable? The answer is
also quite clear - TWO. So, what is the maximum?

AL KAFI VOL 3 P 337

And in another narration from Safwan from Mansoor from Bakr Bin Habib
says that I said to Abu Ja'far (a.s.): 'What shall I say in Tashahhud
and in Qunoot?' He (a.s.) replied: 'Say the best of what you have
learnt. If it had been fixed, the people would have perished!' Tashahhud
is clearly not fixed, for had it been so, we would have perished.

Is this because if it had been fixed at three, then the oppressive
governments of the adversaries would have put us to death for this? We,
the Shiites have been killed for things even less that this, in
history.

Is this because if it had been fixed at two, the value of our Namaaz
would have not been worthy of mention on the Day of Judgment?

And so what is the best - two or three?

Why are they forcing us to fix it at two? Who are they to fix it when
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have clearly left it unfixed?


CONCLUSION

Let us now look at these three Hadeeth once again for the conclusion.
AL IHTIJAJ AL TABARSI - VOL 1 P230

So came the order from the Imam Ja'far Al Sadiq (a.s.): 'Whoever says -
There is no God but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah must
immediately say Ali is the Commander of the Faithful'.

BASHARAT AL MUSTAFA LI SHI'AT AL MURTAZA - 511 AH

I do not accept the deeds of any doer until he bears witness to your
(s.a.w.) Prophethood and the Mastership of Ali (a.s.). Whoever says -
There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and
attaches himself to the Mastership of Ali will enter Paradise.

AL YAQEEN - SYED IBN TAWOOS 589 - 664 AH

It is reflected in the sayings of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and his
infallible sons (a.s.) in many of the chants of Allah (s.w.t.) that
Wilayah (Mastership) is a precondition to the acceptability of the two
testimonies and it is in the nature of the people - The Oneness of Allah
(s.w.t.), the Prophethood of Muhammad (s.a.w.) and Ali the Commander of
the Faithful (a.s.).


