Our Life
========

Let us now look at the importance of the Third Testimony during our
entire existence. PRE - BIRTH All the Children of the Holy Prophet Adam
(a.s.) have borne this testimony before they were even born.

AL KAFI - H 1077, Ch. 107, h 4

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Ya'qub ibn Yazid from ibn abu 'Umayr
from abu al-Rabi' al-Qazzaz from Jabir who has said the following: "Once
I asked abu Ja'far, recipient of di- vine supreme covenant, 'Why is he
(Ali ibn abu Talib, recipient of divine supreme cove- nant) called Amir
al-Mu'minin?'

He said, 'Allah has given him this name and as such it has come in His
book: "When our Lord asked all the offspring of Adam (before their
birth), 'Am I not your Lord'? All of them testified and bore witness to
their testimony that on the Day of Judgment they would not say, 'We were
not aware of this (fact)', (7:172) [and that Muhammad is My messenger
and Ali is Amir al-Mu'minin] (com- mander of the believers).'"

BIRTH

This is how our conception is supposed to be and how we are supposed to
enter the life of this world.
MUSTADRAK AL WASAAIL - CH 115 H 14

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: 'O Ali! (a.s.) 'If you copulate with
your wife during the third night of the month, there will be ordained
for both of you a child who will be given the
sustenance of a testimony after the testimonies of 'There is no God
except Allah' and 'Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah'. (Allah (s.w.t.)
will not punish him) with the Polytheists, and he will be good of heart,
merciful, clean of tongue without backbiting and lies and false
accusations.'

THIS WORLD

We are all aware of how we live the life of this world. A lot of our
actions are sinful and we need to be cleansed so that we may proceed to
the next stage of our life of purified existence.

BIHAR UL ANWAAR - VOL 67 CH 27 H 38

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: Whoever says 'I bear witness that there
is no God but Allah; the doors of the Heavens will open up for him; and
whoever says (follows) 'Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah' glorifies
the Truth of the Glorious One and rejoices in it; and whoever says 'Ali
is the Trustee of Allah', Allah (s.w.t.) will forgive his sins even
though they be as numerous as the drops of rain'.

And as all things in this world eventually come to an end so will our
physical existence here. We will then proceed to the next phase.

**The Grave**

Needless to say that one of the questions that we will face in the
grave will be whether we had borne the Third Testimony or not. WASAAIL
US SHIA - VOL 3 H3336

It has been reported from Ibn Abbas that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) went
to Fatimah Bint Assad (a.s.) the mother of Ali Bin Abi Talib (a.s.) in
her grave until his face was close to hers and said: 'O Fatima! Surely
there will come to you Munkar and Nakeer and ask you, 'Who is your
Lord?' You say to them, 'Allah is my Lord, Muhammad is my Messenger and
Islam is my religion and Qur'an is my Book and my son is my Imam and my
Trustee.' The he (s.a.w.) said: 'O my Allah! Keep Fatima steadfast on
these words.' He (s.a.w.) then came out of her grave.

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT

The following is to be found engraved is almost all of our graveyards
as you will no doubt recognise. And this is the testimony with which we
shall come out of our graves. As you will notice from the Hadeeth below,
this is normally found in all our graveyards.

MUSTADRAK AL WASAAIL - VOL 47 H 2

It has been narrated by Sheykh Al Mufeed the supplication of Ali (a.s.)
for the inhabitants of the grave. 'In the Name of Allah the Beneficent
the Merciful. Peace be on you O people of There is no God but Allah from
the people of There is no God but Allah. O People of There is no God but
Allah by the Truth of There is no God but Allah, how did you find the
statement There is no God but Allah?

By the Truth of There is no God surely Allah will forgive those who say
There is no God but Allah and bring them in the group who say There is
no God but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, Ali is the Trustee
of Allah.' The Holy Imam Ali (a.s.) said: 'I heard from the Messenger of
Allah who said: 'Whosoever recites this supplication, Allah (s.w.t.)
will give him the reward of fifty years and forgive his sins of fifty
years, and of his parents as well.'
BRIDGE OF SIRAAT

And so we will come to the bridge which is reported to be thinner than
hair and sharper than a sword. (Is this a laser beam?) BIHAR UL ANWAAR -
VOL 84 H 13

Abu Saeed asked the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), 'What is the meaning
of immunity (Declaration of - 9:1)? He (s.a.w.) replied: 'There is no
God but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, Ali is the Trustee of
Allah.'

And then he (s.a.w) asked Jibraeel: 'How will my followers cross the
bridge of Siraat? Jibraeel went and came back and said, 'Allah (s.w.t.)
has Sent you his Salaams and He (s.w.t.) Said: 'You will cross the
bridge by My Light and Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) will cross by your light
and your followers will cross the Siraat by the light of Ali (a.s.) for
the light of your follower is from the light of Ali (a.s.) and the light
of Ali (a.s.) is from your light and your light is from the Light of
Allah (s.w.t.).' And so no one will be able to cross this main bridge
without the Third Testimony.

PARADISE

And so, finally, we will arrive at the Pearly Gates of Paradise. We
shall see inscribed upon all of them the Third Testimony which we will
read as we enter for an eternal life of happiness.

BIHAR UL ANWAAR - VOL 27 H 24

And from the mysterious Book of the Imams it has been narrated from
Jabir al Ansaari that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said that: 'On the night
of Me'raaj I was taken to see the Garden and the Fire in their entirety.
I saw the Garden and its bliss and bounties and I saw the Fire and its
torments and on every door of the doors of Paradise is inscribed 'There
is no God but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, Ali is the
Trustee of Allah.'

**CONCLUSION**

From the point of our creation and every stage of our entire existence,
until such time as we enter the pearly gates of Paradise and live in it
eternally, is all based upon the Third Testimony.

Why have they got the audacity to say to me that the Third Testimony
does not form part of this, that or the other? And why should I not hold
on to the Firmest Handle all the time?


