Preface
=======

Islam has ordered some things and refrained from others. The basis of
this has some purpose and Islamic laws are not imposed without any
reason. For example, foods and drinks, the lawful relations and other
things, all have some benefit or harm hidden in them. Whether the laws
about these are made or not, there is no difference of their effects. If
you ponder on the things, which are forbidden, you will come to know
that the things, which are intoxicating like alcohol etc, are themselves
harmful. Interest is just acquiring wealth of the people and it is like
a trap. Therefore, wine and interest are forbidden because of their
innate harmful effects. On the other side when you look at things, which
are obligatory you will feel that all the worship acts for example,
Prayer and Zakah are obligatory because of the benefits that people
acquire from them. In short, the Islamic laws are based on benefits or
harms or on their goodness or evil. Many things can be understood from
science and experience. This type of research or to know the logic
behind any Islamic law or to ask any questions regarding it is not
disallowed. The curiosity of a human being leads to finding of truth and
his real spiritual want and also it opens the door for progress. It is a
lively sign for man that he tries to acquire knowledge of the things,

which are unknown and hidden to him. This is the reason that people who
do not question about things lag behind and do not prosper. In the view
of Islam, the benefits of Questioning bring progress and perfection.
Islam provides complete code for human progress and not only gives its
followers the right to question the different topics but also the true
guides of Islam have invited people to ask questions. The world must
have not forgotten the famous sentence of the great preacher Ali
(a.s.)**[1]** who said, Ask me whatever you want to ask. The progeny of
the Holy Prophet (a.s.) has answered the questions of their followers.
Not only those followers got satisfactory answers that increased their
thinking power but also today, those in search for truth can use this
valuable treasure of knowledge from the progeny of the Holy Prophet
(a.s.).

The Islamic Seminary, which is serving Islam and is trying to spread
this knowledge, is presenting an independent book based on a
comprehensive philosophy of Islamic Laws.

In this book the exegesis of the Quran, jurisprudence and other topics
are discussed. We expect that our presentation will benefit those people
who want to understand the Islamic laws according to reason and
traditions.

***<span style="font-size: 16pt">Organization</span>***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For maintaining readability, (a.s.) which is an acronym for
Alayhum Salaam is used throughout the book to denote "May God bless him,
her or them. When used for the Prophet, his Household is included. When
used for others, it only refers to that person.
