Tawalli and Tabarri
===================

**Question:** What is the meaning of Tawalla and Tabarra that we are
taught as principles of faith? Can we act upon them in the modern age?

**Answer:** Generally Islam is compared to a blooming tree whose roots
are equivalent to the principles of belief and the practical laws are
like the branches. Generally ten branches of religion are mentioned.

Also the system of acts and worship acts in Islam is very vast. It is
not limited to these ten. However, keeping in mind the importance of
these ten they are given priority.

Three of these: Prayer, Fast and Hajj are connected with the worship
acts, Prayers and attachment with the Almighty. Two of them (Zakah and
Khums) are related to economics and pledge of Allah and five (Jihad, Amr
bil Maroof, Nahy Anil Munkar, Tawalla and Tabarra) are associated with
social, military and political problems.

Here the topics of discussion are the last two; Tawalla (to love) and
Tabarra (to express aloofness). That is, we love some and hate some. We
should love the friends of Allah, those who desire truth, righteous
people and supporters of truth and justice and we should hate the
evildoers, oppressors, lovers of enjoyment and enemies of Allah, His
Prophet and humanity.

Why shouldnt we love all of them? Why shouldnt we behave nicely with all
of them? Can we forgo the method of living with amity in the present
age? However, those who are

Â in favor of having friendly relations with all must be asked:

In the world which has oppressors and oppressed, the unjust and the
victims of injustice, the tyrants and the weak, the equitable and the
usurpers, the pure and the dirty; shall we love all of them? Shall we
remain pleased with all of them? Shall we help all of them? Can any
human logic permit us to do so? Can the living conscience permit this
mixing up?

These two principles are included in the basic principles of Islam so
that the followers of truth, justice, freedom, purity and goodness can
create unity among their ranks and that the impure, oppressive, and the
unjust ones are boycotted and in way they are socially and morally
subjugated by the unity of the good people.

Does the human body accept any sort of food? Isnt the sense of taste a
device to discriminate between tasty and harmful substances? Isnt it a
kind of Tawalla and Tabarra? Does the human body accept the poisonous
substance or in case of cholera does it not throw out the harmful matter
in vomit? Or does it accept everything and take the person to death?
Does not it express distaste of harmful substances and separates it from
useful matter?

Are not the capabilities of attraction and repulsion necessary for
survival of the universe? Then why should the human society be exempted
from Tawalla and Tabarra?

If instead of acting upon the two principles everyone agrees with every
school of thought, every condition is accepted and human society does
not get close to useful things and does not keep away from harmful
things, the humanity will soon be destroyed.

That is the reason that the Holy Prophet (a.s.) has said: The strongest
support of faith is to love for Allah and to express hatred for the sake
of Allah.
