Did Imam Ali Depend On the Tradition of Ghadir To Prove His Caliphate?
======================================================================

**Question:** As we know, on the day of Ghadir, the Holy Prophet (a.s.)
announced the vicegerency and Caliphate of Commander of the faithful
(a.s.) and made obedience obligatory on all Muslims. Now the question
arises:

When the successorship of Commander of the faithful (a.s.) was declared
on this, why didnt he use the hadith to prove his caliphate?

**Answer:** Opposite to the assumption in the above question, Commander
of the faithful (a.s.) had during his lifetime many times quoted the
tradition of Ghadir to prove his successorship. He used to mention the
tradition of his Ghadir to his opponent whenever it was appropriate
according to circumstances and in this way he used to make people aware
of his status. And not only Imam (a.s.), the honorable daughter of the
Holy Prophet (a.s.), her sons, Hazrat Imam Hasan-al-Mujtaba and Chief of
the Martyrs, Hazrat Imam Husain (a.s.) and many other exalted
personalities like Abdullah Ibn Jafar, Ammar Yasir, Asbagh bin Nubata,
Qays bin Saad, Umar bin Abdul Aziz, the Abbasid Caliph, Mamoon and even
the opponents like Amr Aas etc. had quoted this tradition.

Therefore the tradition of Ghadir had been used since the time of Ali
(a.s.) himself. In every age his followers had considered the tradition
of Ghadir to be one of the proofs of his

 Imamate and Wilayah (Guardianship). Here we shall mention of these
instances by way of examples.

On the day of shura (The shura was designated by the second caliph in
such a way that everyone was knowing that someone other than Ali (a.s.)
would become the Caliph) when the ball of Caliphate was thrown by Abdur
Rahman Awf to Uthman, Ali (a.s.) delivered a speech to render the
decision of shura invalid:

I am presenting such an argument that none of you can deny. Then he
said:

I put you under the oath of Allah and ask you is there anyone among you
regarding whom the Holy Prophet (a.s.) has said: Of whomsoever I am the
master, this Ali is his master too. O Allah love those who love Ali and
help those who help Ali, And those who are present here should convey
this to those who are absent<sub>.</sub> [1]

On this juncture the members of shura confessed that this distinction
was solely for Ali (a.s.).

 Without any doubt this was not the only occasion that Ali (a.s.) had
argued with this tradition. He had employed this argument at other times
also as mentioned below:

One day Commander of the faithful (a.s.) was delivering a sermon in
Kufah. During the speech he turned towards the people and said:

> *I put you under the oath of God, if one who was present in Ghadir
> must have himself heard the Holy Prophet (a.s.) had*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Manaqib Khwarizmi p. 217 etc.

> * bestowed on me the distinction of his successorship, he should stand
> up and testify this. But only those people should stand up who had
> themselves heard this from the Holy Prophet (a.s.) and not those who
> have heard it from others.*

At this moment thirty people stood up and testified that they had heard
the tradition of Ghadir.

We should remember that at this time twenty five years had passed since
the event of Ghadir and some of the Companions of the Holy Prophet
(a.s.) were not in Kufah at this time or they had died before this. It
is also possible that some people had refrained from giving testimony
due to various reasons, otherwise the number would have been higher.

The Late Allamah Amini has recorded numerous sources of this tradition
in his flawless book, *Al Ghadir*. Those who wish may refer to this
book.[1]

During the Caliphate of Uthman two hundred senior people from the
Muhajireen and Ansar were present in the Prophets mosque and were
discussing various topics. The subject of the superiority of Quraysh,
their foremost position and migration came up. Thus every tribe of
Quraysh began to express their superior personalities.

This gathering started from the early morning and was on till the noon.
During this many people gave various statements but Commander of the
faithful (a.s.) only heard their discussion and did not say anything. On
this moment the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al Ghadeer vol. 1 pgs. 153-171

 people turned to him and implored him to say something.

Due to this insistence, Ali (a.s.) stood up and spoke about his
relationship with the Holy Prophet (a.s.) and his distinctions. He said:

*You must remember that on the day of Ghadir when Allah told the Holy
Prophet (a.s.) that just as he has explained the rules of Prayer, Zakah
and rituals of Hajj he should declare my leadership.*

And to fulfill this duty the Holy Prophet (a.s.) delivered the following
sermon:

The Almighty Allah has commanded me to perform a duty and I was fearful
that some people will falsify my conveying of divine command. However,
the Almighty commanded me. Convey the message and also assured me
security from the mischief of the people.

> *Yes! O People! Do you know that Allah is my master and I am the
> master of the believers? And I have more authority on them than they
> themselves have:*

On this moment the Prophet (a.s.) said:

> *Ali, get up! And I stood up. Then the Holy Prophet (a.s.) turned
> towards the people and said:*
>
> * Of whomsoever I am the master, this Ali is also his master. O Allah!
> Love those who love Ali and hate those who hate Ali (a.s.)*

At that moment Salman Farsi asked the Messenger of Allah (a.s.): What
type of authority does Ali (a.s.) have on us?

The Prophet (a.s.) replied: Alis mastership on you is same as my
mastership upon you. On whomsoevers life I have authority, Ali also has
the authority.

It is not only Ali (a.s.) who had argued with the tradition of Ghadir.
The daughter of the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) also said on a historical
day to the Companions when she was demanding her rights from them: [1]

Have you forgotten the day of Ghadir when the Prophet (a.s.) said: Of
whomsoever I am the master this Ali is his master too?

When Imam Hasan (a.s.) decided to make truce with Muawiyah he stood up
and delivered a sermon in which he said:

The Almighty Allah preferred the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) through the medium
of Islam. And he selected us and kept us away from every type of
impurity.

Then he said:

All the people heard that the Holy Prophet (a.s.) addressed Ali: Your
position to me is as the position of Haroon with Moosa (a.s.)

Everyone has heard and seen that on the day of Ghadir the Holy Prophet
(a.s.) held the hand of Ali (a.s.) and said:

Of whomsoever I am the master, this Ali is his master too. O

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Faraedus Simtain Chap. 58 Ali (a.s.) has also quoted this
tradition on the day of Rahba, the day of Jamal in the incident of
hadithur Rikban and also in Siffeen.

 Allah! Love those [1]

Hazrat Imam Husain (a.s.) addressing a large gathering at Makkah wherein
some Companions of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) were also present said:

> I put you under oath of God. Do you know that on the day of Ghadir the
> Holy Prophet (a.s.) selected Ali (a.s.) for caliphate and guardianship
> and said: Those who are present should convey this message to those
> who are not.

All the people said that they testify for this

In addition to this many Companions of the Prophet (a.s.), like Ammar
Yasir, Zaid bin Arqam, Abdullah bin Jafar, Asbagh bin Nubata (may Allah
be pleased with them) and other people used to argue the caliphate and
guardianship of Ali (a.s.) with the tradition of Ghadir.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Yanabiul Mawaddah pg 482. **  
 [2]** For more information on these debates and sources refer to Al
Ghadeer (vol. 1 pg. 146-195). This book has recorded 22 such debates
