What Is the Purpose of Prayers of Ayaat?
========================================

**Question:** Why should one perform Prayers of Ayaat  during lunar and
solar eclipse, earthquake, storms or thunder?

**Answer:** Performing Prayers of Ayaat during lunar and solar eclipse
is due to two main reasons:

 (1) Usually the Sun, Moon and their working are astonishing for man.
The shining (golden) rays of the sun give life to all the animals and
plants. The moon moves according to its accurate and disciplined way and
with its first ray reduces the darkness on the Earth and brightens it
for us.

These great and surprising things had a great effect on the past people
and a belief was created in their mind that apparently if these (Sun and
moon) have power on animals, plants and trees they also affect the
destiny of people and they are their creators; and from that time
worship of Sun and Moon came into existence and people started having
faith in them. They accorded divinity to the Sun and the Moon while it
belongs only to the Lord Who actually is the Absolute Creator of this
whole universe.

The greatest blow dealt by Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) on these false beliefs
was that all the planets and heavenly bodies were subservient to the law
and system of the universe.

The setting of those shining bodies and their going away in darkness is
the biggest proof of their limitations; and when a thing itself is
limited and subservient to other things and

 does not have the power to continuously give light to the Earth it
proves that it in not God and it is itself a creature.

The eclipse of Sun and Moon is a sign that they are creatures and to be
limited in front of the Creator is itself a proof and from this we come
to know that these planets that give light to other creatures, do not
have much power. That is the reason that sometimes some things come and
stand in front of them and stop them from performing their duties.

That is why the Solar and Lunar eclipse is the best proof of their being
creatures and being limited before the Almighty Allah.

When we see the Solar and Lunar eclipse (an incident which shows that
these bodies are under a strong and supernatural power, such an incident
creates faith about the real Creator in our hearts, in Whose power the
Sun and the Moon and the whole Universe is). So it is necessary for us
at that time to convert this faith into practice and by praying the
Ayaat prayers put our forehead in the holy court and show our inner
beliefs.

That is why Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) on the setting of those luminary
bodies concluded what we conclude from the solar and lunar eclipse, and
promptly said:

*Surely I have turned myself, being upright wholly to Him who originated
the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the polytheists. [Surah Anam
6:80]*

 (2) Whenever there are some heavenly phenomena and extraordinary things
occur, many people try to find refuge and to remove the effects of these
incidents, think some way out.

Islam has made it obligatory to perform the Ayaat prayers during Solar
and Lunar eclipse so that people may remain away from superstitions and
divert their attention and intelligence towards the fact that He is the
source of all the phenomena in the Universe. This Prayer gives one peace
of mind against such incidents.
