What Is the Difference Between Perspiration and Urine?
======================================================

**Question:** Urine and perspiration, both are released from the body
which is in excess, then why one of it is najis (impure) and the other
pure? Whereas, it is said that both have similar chemical composition?

**Answer:** We should keep in mind that though both urine and
perspiration are similar in chemical composition in some aspects, they
are also different in some aspects and it is possible that due to their
difference in some chemicals two different commands are given about
them. Because as we shall see there is a poisonous substance in urine
which is absent in perspiration. We shall explain it as follows:

The following things are present in Urine: Urea, Calcium, uric acid,
Potassium, Creatinine, Phosphate, Ammonia, Sulphates and Sodium
Chloride. Whereas the components of perspiration are much less.

Incidentally perspiration that comes out from the pores of the skin,
soon evaporates, and this evaporation stops the growth of bacteria on
the skin, whereas it is very much possible that different types of
bacteria remain in urine. On this basis it is understood why Islam has
considered perspiration pure and urine impure. Its reasons are as
follows:

 The colored matter which is present in the chemical composition of
urine, in it the poison is much more than in perspiration and such a
substance is not present in perspiration.

The urea in urine, which has poison in it, is much more than urea in
perspiration.

 As perspiration evaporates from the skin, it does not leave any scope
for growth of bacteria.

 From many aspects the density of urine is more than that of
perspiration. It may be ten times denser than perspiration. That is the
reason that one is harmful and the other harmless.

It is very difficult to avoid perspiration and it will create a lot of
difficulties, whereas it is not difficult to control urinating, and this
itself is a difference between them.
