What Is the Philosophy of Bathing the Dead Body and Bath For Touching the Dead Body?
====================================================================================

**Question:** What is the philosophy behind bathing the dead body and
the bath for one who has touched the dead body? What is the reason that
when a person dies he should be given a bath in a special way and before
being bathed if a person touches the dead body he also has to take a
ritual bath (Bath)?

**Answer:** As we have told many times the logics behind some laws are
not clear to us, but due to the passage of time and due to intellectual
advance of humankind and progress of knowledge some logics are cleared
to us and it is possible that in future as knowledge increases the
Islamic laws will become clearer to us.

As for the point raised in this question: We can say that the necessity
of ritual bath to the dead body, one of its reasons could be that as all
communities respect the living people the same respect is accorded to
their dead.

Although Islam has removed all superstitions about the dead from the
past people and Ummah, it accords respect to the dead by bathing,
shrouding and burial. In this way bathing the dead body is a kind of
respect.

In other words Islam gives importance to the extraordinary value of a
person and it has doubled the value of the person due to its different
resources and sayings, and this status remains for a person after his
death also and according to

 Islam no one can insult the dead body of a Muslim, so much so that no
one should even insult the grave of a Muslim.

To give bath, shrouding and burying a dead body is the sign of a respect
for him, such a respect in which there is no superstition.

According to Islamic point of view, death is not the complete end of the
life of a person but it is a new world, new life, and it is one of the
doors to reach the merciful Allahs. That is why He orders to clean the
dead body and make him wear a simple and clean cloth and bury him under
the earth, so that this action becomes the sign of the eternity of the
real life and a sign of continuity. This is the philosophy of the ritual
bath (*Ghusl al-Mayyit*).

Now the bath of a person who touches the dead body: Before we give its
real answer, it is necessary to mention some points:

 When a person dies, there is sadness and depression in the near and
dear ones and they cannot see their relations cut off from them
suddenly. The relatives who have love and attachment to the dead person,
after his death also they like to kiss him and take him on their lap.

 This point is also clear that due to illness or due to the end of
defensive power, different types of poison are released, generally the
dead body is mixed with different types of bacteria and to go near the
dead body has some effects on the health of a person.

 Islam has never waged a war against emotions and feelings of a person
and never turned a nelsons eye to a persons natural movements. Islam has
guided towards a special way.

After pondering on the above points we can conclude the following:

To save all the people especially all the relatives from different types
of bacteria and diseases, which can penetrate to the people from the
dead body and side by side if Islam prohibits to touch the dead body, it
will hurt the feelings of the relatives, Islam has put a condition on
them, it means that those who come in contact of a dead body, should
take a bath.

There is no doubt that this condition restricts the living to come in
direct contact of the dead body, at the same time it is not hurting the
sentiments of the people. And due to this religious condition, if people
touch the dead body then perform the bath by which the possible bacteria
will be removed, which is a simple and best way.

It is possible that some people may object that due to the touching of
the body, bath becomes wajib (obligatory) and its purpose is to stop
diseases and impurities, then why after giving the bath to the dead
body, bath *Mass al-Mayyit*, (bath for touching the dead body) does not
become wajib? But this objection seems to be baseless and its answer is
crystal clear, because the dead body is given bath with water mixed with
berry leaves and then with water mixed with camphor and finally with
plain water, its a way to clean the dead body from its contagious
effects and due to this the dangers which were there before giving the
bath are not present any more. After sometime the dead body is buried
and there is no possibility of new bacteria coming into existence and
penetrating into the human body.

Whatever is said about the bath to the dead body and bath for touching
the dead body is one side of the philosophy. It is possible there may be
other points also, which at present are invisible to us.
