The Harmful Effects of Pork On the Health of a Person
=====================================================

**Question:** What is the harm in eating pork, that Islam has prohibited
it, whereas Christians consume it with delight?

**Answer:** The present age has realized that pork has many unimaginable
dangerous effects. One who eats pork is affected in a dangerous way. It
is also bad from the ethical point of view, which comes into existence
with the hormones, and also many more health matters. Here we will point
to one harm, a disease called Trichinosis; whose cure has not been found
and it is interesting to know that whatever you are going to read below,
is an article from an American research center which was sent to us
through Dr. Muhammad Gufrani.

**A dangerous disease caused by pork  
** The doctors of health centers have received reports from patients who
have trichinosis and now this report shows that this disease has spread
a great deal and the incidence of this in the society is much more than
it was thought.

Trichinosis is a common disease caused due to a small hair-like worm,
which itself is a type of earthworm. This worm lives in pigs and other
animals. It is possible that those animals that suckleÂ  their young
ones, by eating pork may contract this disease. But in this case human
beings are more prone to this disease. For example bear by eating the
intestine of the pig gets this disease and hunters who use the meat of
bear also get this disease.

Generally when a person eats meat that is not cooked properly he gets
infected by this disease. No one can say surely that pork used by him
was properly cooked as now also we see the incidence of those who are
using it. It has come to light that before consuming pork, it was
prepared with some ingredients to remain safe from the worms, yet people
have suffered. The writer of the article has pointed towards it in the
end.

From the above said article, we come to know that twenty-five million
people are ingesting these worms into their body. Only one group from
them has been diagnosed, but there are thousands of incidences, which
are not known to the doctors.

It is expected that twenty-five million people are infected with this
disease and 16,000 have publicly announced their illness, from which 5%
have died due to the severity.
