Why Is an Unbeliever Impure?
============================

**Question:** What is the logic behind the Islamic point of view that
followers of other religions, and in short the *Kuffar (unbelievers)*
are impure and they cannot keep social contacts with Muslims although in
cleanliness they are ahead of some Muslims? Apparently it is wrong to
reply that mixing with unbelievers might misguide a Muslim and with
their discussion and sayings they might deviate the Muslims and
boycotting them would bring them towards Islam. This should be removed
as Islam is the religion of broad-minded, it is not a religion in which
eyes and ears are closed.

**Answer:** Firstly it is true that Islam is broad-minded faith and not
of where eyes and ears are closed, but if the purpose is that Islam
belongs to only one group, then naturally it is not so because Islam is
the religion of the whole mankind and if the purpose is that broad
minded and intellectuals are more acquainted with Islam, then it is
true. But this cannot become its proof that Islam turns a nelsons eye
towards people with less knowledge or educated people and should not
consider their state.

Now we are coming towards the real question. As it has been pointed
unbelievers are unclean by a type of spiritual impurity, whose body is
also unclean and they are impure, it is to protect the beliefs of
people, who very soon accept the effects of others and get astray and
this is not something new. Preachers have always recommended to the
common people to keep away from polluted and went astray people and
after all Islam has announced that unbelievers are impure.

We do consider that Islam under certain conditions gives the permission
for economic, business relations but has not given the permission for
eating together or in other words Islam wants that Muslims may keep
relations with them and make profit and side by side remain protected
from their beliefs and ethics, which can reach to the people while
intermingling with them.

Here it should not be misunderstood. We are not saying this that broad
minded and educated people, who do not fear that by socializing with the
unbelievers there will be no danger of going astray, or spoil their
ethics, they can stay with them completely and are exempted from the
above rule. No, it is not like that. The orders of Islam do not have any
special angle for anyone and to be sure that the limits of Sharia are
protected. It is necessary that for the generalizationÂ  this order be
maintained, because if it is not like that, then every person will
assume himself to be educated and maintain relations with unbelievers
and the laws and orders of the Sharia will be subverted. (Think for a
while.)

Many unbelievers do not refrain from impure things like blood, pork and
alcoholic drinks; and naturally their whole life is unclean. To remain
safe from those impurities Islam has announced that they are najis
(impure), so that those Muslims who by intermingling with them have the
possibility of becoming impure may remain safe.
