What Is the Purpose of Jizya (capitation Tax)?
==============================================

**Question:** The purpose of the prophethood of the Holy Prophet (a.s.)
was to guide the people and show them the right path which is connected
to spiritualism, whereas on the other side we see in the Islamic laws
that it is not according to the real purpose of Islam (to guide the
people on the right path) as it is revealed:

If Christians and Jews are ready to pay the Jizya (capitation tax), then
free them. Whereas Jizya (capitation tax) itself is diverting towards
materialism.

Why does Islam give such a permission that they remain on their false
religion?

**Answer:** From the things of pride for Islam is that it does not force
anyone to accept this religion without having liking, and
half-heartedness, As Quran says:

*There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has become
clearly distinct from error. [Surah Baqarah 2:256]*

The philosophy of this great verse is also clear. As Islam has invited
towards itself through logic and proof and it is war against foolish and
superstitious things, its only weapon is to explain the truth and
express in a general way. Why after having such a strong weapon, which
can attract an open mind and logical people, it should force the people?

Basically for real faith some special things are required if a person
does not acquire them through perception and far

 sightedness, then it is difficult for them give it a place in the heart
and if forcibly faith is thrust upon them. So it is limited to the
tongue and would not have taken them with their heart and whenever
factors of enforcement are not there, a person may revert to his earlier
condition.

Such type of faith is not profitable to Islam. Islam wants to give such
training to the people that they should remain attached to the
principles of Islam until their death and should not be strayed for a
moment also, and such type of faith cannot be achieved without logic,
proof and open mindedness.

The purpose of Jihad in Islam - defense from enemies -is itself a topic,
which should be discussed separately, whereas Jizya (capitation tax) was
a fixed tax  paid by the People of the Book (*Ahl al-Kitab*) every year
to the government. The reason to levy this tax was, as the
administration was under the Muslims and the unbelievers were in
minority the Islamic government was forced to take care of their
protection, their administration and safety. It was necessary for those
who had not accepted Islam, to take a justified tax from them and spend
it on their life and safety of their wealth. To protect the life and
wealth of people the Islamic government was forced to keep the army on
strategic points, which accrued huge expenses. To meet this expense the
only way was to acquire money from the people and spend it for their own
welfare. Especially when there was war against the enemies, the
non-Muslims did not send their men.

We have many historical facts, from which we come to know that this tax,
which is generally less was not to put pressure on the non-Muslims, but
its purpose was to give peace and

 for safety measures. We give some examples for it:

When Abadah ibn al-Samit invited the commanders of Egypt towards Islam,
he said to them:

 It depends upon your wish that after studying and pondering accept
Islam and if you dont want to become Muslim then give the Jizya
(capitation tax) and live under the protection of the Muslim government.
Till we are there and you are there, we will behave with you in such a
way that each other will be happy. We promise you that we will protect
your lives, wealth, property and land and whoever will cross the border,
we will fight against them.

When the Muslims were victorious over the Romans and many parts of
Shamat came under their control, the people of Hims (in Syria) accepted
to pay the Jizya (capitation tax). Afterwards, the Muslims due to some
reasons cancelled the treaty, which was signed between them and
Christians of Hims after the agreeing of both the sides, cancelled it.
That is why one of the elder Muslims addressed the people of Hims in
this way: Whatever we had taken from you, you take it back from us and
whatever agreement we had made, make us free from it. The people of Hims
answered: We will never separate from you. Your way and style is much
better than the Romans. (If you accept) we will fight against the Roman
army by joining the Islamic army.

The quantity of Jizya (capitation tax) applied by the Holy Prophet
(a.s.) for the Christians of Najran clarify our stand, because it was
decided that they will give yearly three thousand Hilla (the price of
each Hilla was forty dirhams), to be paid in two installments. Two
thousand Hilla in the month

 of Safar and one thousand Hilla in the month of Rajab. In the same way
the Holy Prophet (a.s.) had a treaty with the people of Ezra on the
condition that they will pay one hundred Dinars every year.

For the safety of the life, wealth and property of the enemies, this tax
was nothing for them.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Note by the editor:

Rather this was a blessing for them.  The important point is that war
costs life, injury, hardship, loss to the family of a bread winner etc. 
It is a very painful affair.  Therefore, the capitation tax should be
seen as a great favor to those who were exempted from fighting on the
side of Muslims.
