Why Cannot the Holy Quran Be Given To Any Non-muslim?
=====================================================

**Question:** Our heavenly book, Quran is a spiritual guide and mentor
to different kinds of people and human societies. To achieve this
purpose it is essential that it should be accessible to all the people
of the world (irrespective of their faith), so that he can benefit from
its teachings and move on the path of truth and sincerity. But we find
in Islamic Jurisprudence that Quran cannot be given as a present to
non-Muslims nor it can be given into his custody.

**Answer:** When the purpose of giving the Holy Quran in the possession
of the non-Muslim is to guide him and make him aware of Islam and convey
its message to him and make him attached to it, and if this purpose
cannot be achieved by its translations, then in this situation there is
no prohibition in giving the Holy Quran to a non-Muslim, but if no
purpose is in view then it is prohibited, because the greatest witness
of righteousness of Islam and everlasting miracle of the Prophet of
Islam is the Holy Quran, which is shining on the peak of the times in
the form of a living document and to get benefit from it there is one
way that it should be printed in a nice way and should be distributed in
the whole world, so that people seeking the truth, may acquire knowledge
of Islam in the light of its verses. This itself is witness on the
verses of Quran that this is put in front of the people of all times and
everywhere in the world and invites mankind to ponder and study it.

The Holy Quran commands the Prophet (a.s.) that in the

middle of war also if a non-Muslim tends to listen to the words of Allah
(the Holy Quran) then it is a must for the Prophet that he permits him
to come among the Muslims and listen to the words of Allah and if he
tends to go back, he should be allowed to go to his former position.
[Surah Taubah 9:6]

To the extent it is necessary for every Muslim that he protects the
honor of the Holy Quran, and whenever there is apprehension that a
non-Muslim may act or do something regarding the Holy Quran, which can
be termed as insulting, in such a situation we should not give him the
Book of Allah. And if he had the Book with him beforehand, then by
whatever possible means it should be recovered from him. When Muslim
jurists say that Quran cannot be entrusted to non-Muslim their opinion
is based apparently on this kind of situation and not in the situation
when guidance of a non-Muslim is intended.

In short, the Holy Quran should remain away from the reach of polluted
hands, with this exception when there is likelihood of their guidance it
can be presented to them.
