Marriage Among Blood Relations
==============================

Question: Under what conditions marriage among two blood relations is
not considered to have adverse effect on health?

Answer:[1] Nearly one century earlier Mendel had, after eight years
research, discovered a principle of heredity which we explain below in
simple language for the information of readers.

If two mice are mated, one white and the other ash colored, their
offspring will unconditionally have ash color, while if the two of the
same group are mated, some mice will have ash color and others white. 
White and ash color has been mentioned as a characteristic. As stated
above, the mice of the first generation will all have ash color, i.e.
out of the two characteristics of the parents one will be reflected
completely while the other will remain hidden.  In technical terms, the
characteristic that emerges, i.e. ash color, is called dominant and the
other, i.e. white, is referred as overcome.

In the example, the agent determining the color, ash or white, is called
Genes which brings child into life through the reproductive cells of
parents.

When the reproductive cells bringing an animal into life, i.e. Genes,
have similar characteristics, it is called homogeneous.  It is an
established rule that such a creature will create similar reproductive
cells and the result of two similar persons

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This reply has been given by Dr. Faridun Zanganah.

 mating will be the birth of such children who will be exactly like
their parents in relation to the characteristics under discussion.

When the reproductive cells bringing an animal into life, i.e. Genes,
have dissimilar characteristics, that creature will be referred to as
heterozygote.  In the above example, the ash color mice that were born
in the first generation are referred as adulterated, as one type of
Genes was ash color while the other was white.  There is no doubt that
their reproductive cells were not similar; rather 50% Genes were
producing ash color while the other 50% were having white Genes.  It is
clear that due to mating of two adulterated pairs, the offspring are not
born who would be having the same properties as those of their parents. 
In the above example, some of the second generation mice will have white
color while other will have ash color.

After this introduction that was given to the beloved readers to
acquaint them with the fundamental rules of heredity, we now come
briefly to the real issue, that is, the effect of marriage among two
blood relations from the point of view of religion.

It has now been proved that if any family has hereditary disease, the
marriage among its blood relations is not out of danger, as the child
born of such family is more likely to suffer from the hereditary disease
than in the case of the family not having blood relations. (This point
is explained below in greater detail).

If two persons suffering from a dominant hereditary disease get married
among their families, all their children will have dissimilar genes; in
other words, they will be homozygote.  The childrens disease will be
more severe than that of their parents.  The disease may even be so
severe that in some cases the homozygote may die before or a little
after birth.

If one of the parents does not have the genes carrying such dominant
hereditary disease then all the children will not suffer from it, and
those who do suffer, their disease would not be severer than that of
their parents.

In the case of the overcome disease, if the father or mother is
heterozygote, then one fourth children will suffer from the hereditary
disease, while if one of the parents does not have the genes of the
disease, then no child will suffer from the disease.  However, in the
second case, half the children will be heterozygote, but due to the
disease being overcome, it will not appear in the heterozygote.

Keeping the above facts in view, people are advised to avoid marrying
among their blood relations as far as possible.

However, it should be remembered that if husband and wife are not
suffering from any hereditary disease, then there is no harm in such
marriage.  Therefore, for persons to feel that

 marriage among blood relations is always harmful is totally baseless. 
Rather such marriage is harmful if a hereditary disease is there.  What
can be said for sure is that in doubtful cases, it is better to be
careful and to avoid such marriage.  Perhaps that is the reason why in
some traditions it has been advised that marriage of boys and girls
among cousins should be avoided, except in exceptional cases, and to
avoid it has been considered better.
