How To Ponder On the Philosophy of Islamic Laws?
================================================

From the aspect of contemplating on their secrets all the Islamic laws
are not the same, but they can be divided into four different types.

It is correct for every Muslim to discuss about the philosophy of
Islamic laws as we come to know from the logic of the Quran and through
the style of the Islamic laws. It does not mean that we say anything
without any law and rule and every person gives and spreads the logic of
Islamic laws according to his own mind because interpretations based on
personal whims and fantasies are very harmful, dangerous and illogical
and in the same way as to force a person to pray without asking any
questions.

That is why the question arises that how we should begin this discussion
and how to continue it and what the limits that we must observe are.

First of all, it is important to mention that as we know our worship and
practicing of religious commands does not increase an iota of the
grandeur and greatness of Allah nor His disobedience reduce an iota of
His Glory and Majesty, as Imam Ali (a.s.) said:

> *The sins of the transgressors do not harm Him nor the obedience of
> the worshipper benefits Him.*

He is the bestower to the whole Universe. Everything that we and other
creatures have is given by Him. Nor can we give

 Him anything as He is needless and it is not that we have a thing and
He does not have so that we may give it to Him. Whatever we get, we get
from Him only and He gives whatever He deems fit for us and the original
treasure is with Him:

*And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it, and We do
not send it down but in a known measure. [Surah Hijr 15:21]*

Can a drop of water, which acquires its capital from the huge sea, give
anything to the sea? Can a small mirror, which is kept in front of the
Sun, give light to the Sun? The whole humanity, however powerful it may
be is just like a drop or like this small mirror.

Therefore, if any benefit or harm is hidden in these Islamic laws it is
related to us only.

Seen from another angle we are not only physical bodies that whatever
orders that come from Allah should be for the training and building of
our health and nor only we are just soul that all the orders should be
established for the spiritual effects, we are a compound of body and
soul  and these Islamic laws are for the perfection of both; our body
and soul.

Therefore those people are also misguided who only search for the
medical and economic benefits and perform worship acts, pray and
supplicate to Allah so that it has a good effect on their spirit and
physical body and also to get rid of pains and worries and difficulties
and make it a medium for getting tranquility and think that this is the
sole purpose of it. And they are also wrong who wear clean clothes, cut
their nails, remove cobwebs from walls, and do not drink water from a

cracked bowl and to protect themselves from that water, which is used
for bath, consider these teachings to be have spiritual effects,
regarding whom knowledge and science has still not unveiled their
secrets. In reality some of the Islamic laws are for the spiritual
perfection and for training of the self and some for discipline in
day-to-day life and many Islamic laws affect both.

Now we shall discuss the limits of research about the logic behind
Islamic laws.

Religious commands can be divided into four types:

Those orders whose philosophies were clarified to the people at the
start of *al-Bithah* (proclamation of prophethood) and people understood
according to their caliber and the information they already had and to
make the people to follow the orders regularly rules and regulation were
made for example: lying, breach of trust, aspersion, murder, stealing,
injustice and cheating was prohibited. Justice, cleanliness, honesty,
helping the oppressed, hard work, doing good to parents, relatives and
neighbor, etc. were ordered to be followed. Any sane person understands
the philosophy and purpose of these commands. As and when the knowledge
and information of practical life of a man increases he will be able to
comprehend the values of the Islamic laws in a better way.

Those orders whose wisdom was not understood by the people and sometimes
even the scholars of those times the Quran or the sayings of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) expounded their philosophies. For example, maybe the people of
that time were unaware of the three fold benefits of Fasting (ethical,

social and medicinal) and did not know about its philosophy. That is why
the Holy Quran has pointed towards its ethical effect by saying

*So that you may guard (against evil). [Surah Baqarah 2:183]*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s.) pointed out its social effect and said: So that
the wealthy and the poor live a similar life and the wealthy become
familiar with the hunger of the poor and try to help the needy.

Holy Prophet (a.s.) has said that you should keep fast so that your body
becomes healthy

In this way there are many other commands whose secrets and logic is
mentioned by the verses (verses) of the Holy Quran and the traditions of
the Holy Prophet (a.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.), As mentioned earlier
Shaykh al-Saduq has collected such traditions in *Ilal al-Sharai* and
the famous traditionalist Shaykh al-Hurr al-Aamiliy has explained about
the philosophies of Islamic laws in *Wasaail al-Shiah* at the beginning
of every chapter.

But it is necessary to remember that benefits and secrets were explained
according to the level of intelligence of the people and it does not
mean that whatever philosophy is being given is limited to that alone.
It also does not mean that it is not allowed to contemplate more on it.

Those laws whose secrets were revealed due to the passage of time and
subsequently we could understand the greatness of divine commands.

Like the physical, spiritual and social evils of alcoholic drinks. They
even affect the unborn child and regarding

whose harms we come to know from statisticians. Or the psychological
ills of games of chance and the deaths caused by it or the bad effects
of uneven distribution of wealth on the society, or the obvious social
and economic ills of usury which can be written on paper like mystical
figures, or the dirty foods, water and the destruction of homes which
are strictly forbidden in Islam and the ills that have assumed gigantic
proportions after the spread of germs and viruses. All these problems
are such that the passage of time and scientific developments increased
the understanding of man and he was able to understand the wisdom
regarding them, which was hitherto unknown to him.

But it is necessary to point out that in this method any sort of
extremism, going beyond the limits of reason, wrong notions, short
sightedness, mistaken insight and more than anything else to consider
half-baked research to be confirmed fact takes one further away from the
truth. Instead of making us cognizant of the secrets and knowledgeable
about the logic behind the Islamic laws, it takes us to wander on a
wrong path. Therefore, till science does not have absolute proof about
something and it does not become a confirmed fact we must not make it a
basis of explaining the logic behind an Islamic law.

When we have nothing to say, we must insist on discussing the logic
behind a particular law and even if we have something to say we must
never claim that the logic of that particular law is based on this very
explanation and limited to it.

The last types of laws whose logic was neither explained in the
beginning, nor they were explained in the Islamic books

and the passage of time has revealed their secrets to us. The number of
*Rakahs* (units) of Prayers, the minimum quantity of the items on which
Zakah is obligatory, or some rituals of Hajj etc fall into this
category.

Should the people of the future try to unveil the secrets of these laws
with the help scientific discoveries and advancement of knowledge?

Is the last vicegerent of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) appointed to explain
and expound these affairs?

Or they are from those laws whose logic would not be understood by the
people in the future also?

We do not know any of these things. We only know that the laws of the
fourth category are as deserving of respect and their fulfillment is as
important as those of the first three categories. Since the source of
all these laws is same and the last Prophet who has brought these laws
to us, his appointment to prophethood is proved to us by irrefutable
proofs.
