Why Does Allah Subject People To Tests?
=======================================

**Question:** Allah says in the Holy Quran:

*Who created death and life that He may try you which of you is best in
deeds [Surah Mulk 67:2]*

Now the question is that testing is required by one who is not aware of
something and one who is not aware of the result. While for Allah
apparent and hidden is all same and whatever it is in the heavens and
the earth; nothing is hidden from Him. Then why is it necessary for Him
to test His servants?

**Answer:** We should keep in mind that the purpose of test and trial by
Allah is something different. The man himself because of his deficiency
and lack of wisdom and understanding is compelled to go through the test
to find out the truth, and to remove all kinds of ambiguity. However,
such a situation is impossible for Allah. He is well aware of everything
in the light of His unprecedented and unlimited knowledge, therefore in
that sense, His taking a test is not akin to wisdom. Rather, the test is
in some other sense and for some other purpose, the explanation of which
is given below:

 (1) This can be explained in a way that when a person is born, there
are so many capabilities and astonishing potentialities in his nature.
All the human perfections and ethical proficiencies are hidden in him in
the form of talent. And his temperament is made from that. These
capabilities

 are like yarns under the ground, which do not come out without proper
means and do not reach up to the stage of power and excellence. This is
a matter of commonsense that, as long as these capabilities are not
coming into open, till the time, evolution and excellence and as a
result of it, reward and blessing cannot have a visible existence. The
purpose of such tests is the upbringing of humans and cause to grow up
in him high quality of virtues. If these responsibilities and tests were
not there in the existence of man there the capabilities would never
have become apparent. It could never have been visualized and no one
would have been eligible for reward.

This is mentioned by Commander of the faithful (a.s.) in a short but
very meaningful way in a paragraph in *Nahjul Balagha*. He says:

> *Never say that, O Allah! I seek refuge from tests and trials from
> You, because, there is no one who is not put to trials, rather, while
> doing prayers (or asking for favors) say this that, O Allah! I seek
> refuge from You from such trials which may cause me to go astray
> (means those trials, in which I may not come out successful and
> through it I may not be able to make myself perfect (accomplished)*

After that Imam Ali (a.s.) explains:

The objective of the test and trials is not to gain information and
insight, because in the universe there is not a thing which is hidden
from or unseen by Allah. The intention is that those hidden qualities
say, like happiness and pleasure and anger or the portion of rage and
fury which is given by Allah to become manifest and these hidden
qualities come out in the

 form of action and apparent deeds, so that reward and punishment and
merit of penalty and requital becomes manifest.

As you have observed, Imam (a.s.) has pointed out the purpose of test
that, by them qualities and capabilities of man take the shape of
apparent action and after this the person becomes competent for reward
and punishment otherwise only on the basis of inner qualities (without
the external acts) no reward or punishment can be given. And as a matter
of fact in this situation perfection will not be achieved.

For example when Allah commanded Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) to sacrifice
Hazrat Ismail (a.s.). When Allah tested him, His purpose is not to know
whether Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) would obey His command or not, but, the
intention is that, the soul which was present in the self of Hazrat
Ibrahim (a.s.) which was eager to obey and accept the commands of Allah,
the test will make it perfect, it will make it realize and take it into
the stage of action and in this way Ibrahim (a.s.) will move on the road
of perfection (Pay attention).

Hence, Allah puts everyone to test and trials by difficulties, hardship,
distress and misfortunes; as He says:

*We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger and
loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient. [Surah Baqarah 2:155]*

Difficulties and hardships are just like a furnace, which makes the iron
hard and strong. Man also becomes strong and powerful in difficulties
and misfortunes. And he becomes capable of removing obstacles, which
come in his way to a successful and happy life.

When we say that, by taking tests, the purpose of Allah is to develop
the latent good qualities in His servants it does not mean that all the
persons who have undergone tests would necessarily develop good and
likable qualities. But the intention is that tests from Allah form the
base in the social atmosphere for upbringing and nourishment. Those who
wish good fortune take full advantage of such circumstances and acquire
special upbringing in this way. But some people take undue advantage
from it and their evil and contemptible hidden qualities come into open
and take the shape of evil actions. In technical terms they fail in
their tests.

One of the mysteries of trials and tests from Allah is:

2) People can be recognized as who are virtuous and who are evil
(sinful), who are believers and who are hypocrites and who are good and
who are bad. The Holy Quran indicates towards this point by the word
Tamhees and says:

*And that He may purge those who believe and deprive the unbelievers of
blessings. [Surah Aali-Imran 3:141]*

Allah separates the believers from unbelievers by tests and these two
groups are recognized as different and opposite to each other.

3) The third benefit of tests from Allah is this that it is the
fulfillment of a condition on the false faiths which on general
conditions in normal circumstances make thousands of claims and when the
time of action comes they are proved worthless. That is, they are heroes
in talks and not in character. By tests and trials they are exposed.
They are shown in their true colors.

If these types of people are not put in the furnace of tests, and

 their hollow inside is not disclosed which is contrary to their adorned
and decorated explicit, then it is possible that he himself also may
remain under a wrong impression and others also are enthralled in the
fallacy. And the punishment given by Allah or the deprivation from the
favors of Allah may be considered unjust, but the tests tear the curtain
from reality and the fact of their existence their real self becomes
evident to themselves as well as to others. This is the logic behind the
tests from Allah.
