Are Other Religions Right?
==========================

**Question:** Since Islam had canceled all other religions, in some
verses of Quran why does it consider all the people and communities of
the worldwhether Muslims, Jews and Christians etcif they believe in
Allah and do virtuous deeds, people of salvation and says:

*whoever believes in Allah and the Last day and does good, they shall
have their reward from their Lord, and there is no fear for them, nor
shall they grieve. [Surah Baqarah 2:62]*

Does not this mean that all communities of the world even after the
advent of Islam, as per above-mentioned conditions (belief and action)
would get salvation? And still their religions exist with their own
strength and they are not annulled on the basis of credence?

**Answer:** Let us first see the text of the above-mentioned verses then
we shall analyze them.

 *(1) Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews and the
Christians and the Sabeans whoever believes in Allah and the Last day
and does good they shall have their reward from their Lord, and those is
no fear for them, nor shall they grieve. [Surah Baqarah 2:62]*

* (2) Surely those who believe and those who are Jews and the Sabians
and the Christians whoever believes in Allah and the last day and does
good they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve. [Surah Maidah 5:69]*

There is no difference in the meaning of the first verse and this one.

*(3) Surely those who believe and those who are Jews and the Sabeans and
the Christians and the Magians and those who associate (others with
Allah) surely Allah will decide between them on the day of resurrection;
surely Allah is a witness over all things. [Surah Hajj 22:17]*

It is possible that at first sight, it may be considered that these
verses say that if the followers of aforesaid religions believe in the
oneness of Allah and the day of resurrection and do good deeds, they are
the people of salvation and one concludes that other religious are not
yet abolished. Now when Islam was presented to the people it does not
mean that following other religions was eliminated, but each one from
the previous religions is on a way towards Allah. And man can reach to
his destination through any way he wants. And this is not at all
necessary that a particular religion, for example Islam should be
followed. This is the issue, which is repeatedly put forward by those
people whose study of the Holy Quran is superficial.

Nevertheless it should be kept in mind that the base of exegesis of some
single verse is not on that other verses should be neglected and
overlooked. And relationship of this verse should be cut-off from them.
But to understand the meaning of one verse, other than the circumstances
of revelation, the verse preceding and the verse following that verse
and other verses of the Holy Quran should also be kept in view.

If after the advent of Islam following other religions was allowed then
there was no justification in continuing some other religions law in the
name of Islam. This was also not at all necessary that the Prophet of
Islam (a.s.) should be the

 chief of all the races of the world and write to the leaders and rulers
inviting them all towards his religion, and put forward his religion as
a universal religion and the last divine law.

The letters of the Prophet (a.s.) and his repeatedly inviting towards
Islam in his days and after that Muslims waged holy war that which was
wearing away their strength against the People of the Book and
narrations concerning this which have reached us from Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.), all bear testimony that with the advent of Islam the
period of the apostleship of the previous great Prophets (a.s.) came to
an end and divine law other than Islam and the prophethood other than
that of Muhammad (a.s.) do not have a standing anymore.

Now let us see what the purpose of those verses is. In the
above-mentioned verses two facts are mentioned. One is brief and the
other detailed.

 (1) If the Jews and the Christians are truly by heart the followers of
*Tawheed* (Unity of God) and Qiyamat (day of Judgment) and do not show
off they should according to Taurah (Old Testament) and Injeel (New
Testament) believe in the Prophet of Islam (a.s.), because Taurah (Old
Testament) and Injeel (New Testament) had conveyed the good news of
coming of Prophet (a.s.) and described his signs, like: you know him as
you know your sons. It is a thing worth attention that, the Holy Quran
in Surah al-Maidah just before the verse, which is under discussion
says:

*Say: O followers of the Book! You follow no good till you keep up the
Taurah (Old Testament) and the Injeel (New Testament) and that which is
revealed to you from your Lord [Surah Maidah 5:68]*

There is no need to show that the meaning to keep up those Heavenly
Books is to act on what is in them. And what is entered into those Books
is the Prophethood of the Prophet of Islam (a.s.) and it is universal
Prophethood, which is entered in them. The Holy Quran has pointed
towards it several times. If they really have faith in Allah and the day
of resurrection, then it is a must for them that should have faith in
the universal Prophethood of Prophet (a.s.) also, which is part of the
teachings of Allah in the old and new Testaments. In that case they will
become Muslims and surely get the rewards.

In short faith on Allah and the day of resurrection is not different
from the Heavenly Books and their teachings. (In which the prophethood
of Last Prophet is included). Then such a person who has faith in these
in a sense is not a Christian, but he will be considered a Muslim.

It is evident from studying the verse preceding this verse in Surah
Baqarah that, it is connected to these group of the People of Book, who
believed in Allah in the time of the previous Prophets and they believed
in the day of resurrection. In those periods of time they were following
the commands of their respective religion. In contrast to that, some
others disobeyed the way of *Tawheed* and started worshipping calf and
became shameless to the extent that, they said to Moosa (a.s.) in clear
words: As long as we do not see Allah with our own eyes we will not
worship Him. As a result of such unbecoming ways the Israelites came
face to face with the anger of Allah. And according to the meaning of
the preceding verse, their foreheads were stamped with a seal of
disgrace and misfortune and they were trapped in the

 wrath of Allah because they had committed blasphemy with respect to the
signs of Allah and were killing the prophets unjustly.[1]

Allah has revealed above-mentioned verses to remove the wrong notions
and to explain that the group of the People of Book, which really
believed in *Tawheed* and the day of resurrection and did good deeds, is
different from others. They will get salvation on the day of
resurrection and for them there will be no grief and sadness.

In these circumstances this verse will be especially for that group of
the People of Book, who were alive in the past ages and died before the
proclamation of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) and it is not with regard to the
period of the Prophet of Islam (a.s.).

The purpose of revelation of this verse also explains this subject in a
complete way that, after the apostleship of the Holy Prophet and the
revelation of Holy Quran some Muslims will think that, when Islam is the
only way of truth and salvation, then what will be the fate of our
ancestors, who were the followers of other religions at that time? The
noble verse was revealed to assuage them.

*Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians,
and the Sabians, whoever believes in Allah and the Last day and does
good, they shall have their reward from their*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** And they became deserving of Allahs wrath; this was so because
they disbelieved in the communications of Allah and killed the prophets
unjustly; this was so because they disobeyed and exceeded the limits.
(Surah Baqarah 2:61)

*Lord, and there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve. [Surah
Baqarah 2:61]*

And in a formal way it was announced that all the people who in their
own time believed in Allah and the day of resurrection and continued to
do good deeds, will get salvation and for them there will be no grief
and sorrow.

When Hazrat Salman-e-Farsi (r.a.) met the Holy Prophet (a.s.) for the
first he began to discuss about the caretakers of monastery and monks
and many people also joined the gathering and sat around the Holy
Prophet (a.s.). He addressing the Prophet (a.s.) said:

All the monks of our monastery were waiting for your apostleship, but
with regret I have to say that before they could pay visit to your
honored self they passed away.

At that time someone said to Hazrat Salman (r.a.) that they were the
people of fire. This thing did not go well with Hazrat Salman (r.a.). At
that time the verse which is under discussion was revealed that those
who believed truly in the past true religions, though that may not have
seen the time of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) then too they will get
salvation.

The summary of this answer is this that those people before the Prophet
of Islam (a.s.) in their time had strong belief in true religion, they
will get salvation on the day of Qiyamat. In this situation, this verse
does not have any relevance to the thoughts like peace-loving person
(Every religions follower is from the people of salvation) and this type
of exegesis shows lack of knowledge of the meaning of that verse and the
verses, which are concordant to that.

Other than this the 17<sup>th</sup> verse of Surah Hajj does not have
the

slightest of conformity to the meaning, which they construe. Its meaning
is nothing but that Allah on the day of resurrection will decide between
different communities of the world. This assertion does not bear
testimony at all that the followers of all the religions will get
salvation. And that all are moving on the true path.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For more explanation see. Tafseer Namoona in Persian/Urdu
