Prayer For Correct Guidance To the Right Path
=============================================

**Question:** Even though the Prophet of Islam himself also was on the
right path, and guided the Muslims to follow it, why did he say during
Prayers: Guide us towards the right path? According to terminology is it
not something already achieved?

**Answer:** Where existence with all its phenomena (whether it is
physical or intellectual) is declining and changing. As the way the
birth of a phenomena gets formation with a cause and because of special
conditions. In the same way for the execution and continuance of its
existence special conditions and arrangements are necessary, which will
put on him the dress of continuity and life and will prevents its
decline and destruction.

Directly the subject of guidance is also under the same rules. A special
care (foresight) and conditions are required for guidance, whether of an
individual or society for life and its continuance. Otherwise, it is
possible that a guided person may be diverted from the right path and
after the guidance again he may go astray.

Therefore, an individual and a group by way of guidance may have
acquired great and distinguished status, but its future is ambiguous. It
is up to them to take the benefit of the present situation and present
themselves in the court of Allah and with sincerity invocate that He may
continue this blessings (of guidance) which is prone to changes and prey
to decadence and destruction in all the periods of his life.

Thus if a guided person says, O Allah! Guide us towards the straight
path, the meaning is, keep us steadfast on it and make that blessing
permanent for us.

The great commentator of Islam, Allamah Tabarsi while presenting a
parable in *Majmaul Bayan* says: And such parables of interpretations
are many with us. When you feel that your beloved guest slowly wants to
draw his hand away from food immediately you tell him: Please continue
eating, then he continues. This means that you continue doing that
work.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For more information review that Tafsir of Surah Al-Hamd by
Ayatullah Ozama Al-Khui printed by Jamea-e-Talimat-e-Islami from page
170 to 176.
