What Is the Exegesis of This Verse?
===================================

**Question:** What is the interpretation of the verse:

*Falaa uqsimu bil-khunnasil jawaaril kunnas*

*But nay! I swear by the stars that run their course (and) hide
themselves? [Surah Takweer 81:15-16]*

**Answer:** In the dictionary the meaning of *Khunnas* is one who
returns and one who retreats. The meaning of *Kunnas* is one who gets
concealed and *Jaware* is the plural of *Jari* (to continue, to flow)
its meaning is the one who walks or moves.

As the verses before and after this verse show and the commentators also
say that by these verses it is meant those planets, which can be seen
(mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn), because they are in motion,
they appear sometimes and sometimes they disappear. In the Holy Quran
reference of those stars is given with an oath; and peoples attention is
drawn towards their special and distinct behavior and their movement and
rotation and it calls attention towards the greatness of the Creator of
the universe. This means, the type of those returning stars which move
and disappear.

We should also know that experts of astronomy have given those stars the
name of amaze stars because, their movements are not on a straight line,
and it seems that, they travel for certain period of time and then
slightly they return, and again they continue their travel. The reason
of this behavior is discussed at length in the books of astronomy and it
is possible that the indication of above-mentioned verses

Â (which has mentioned about those stars in the style which are moving
and coming back) may be towards these stars capricious way (no doubt the
way of this capricious travel has some logic which is beyond our
comprehension at present).

Anyhow, these are the same wandering stars, whose special behavior makes
them distinct.
