Importance of Laylat Al-qadr
============================

**Question:** Many causes are mentioned in Islam regarding the
importance and greatness of Laylat al-Qadr. Well-known traditions of
religious leaders indicate it to one of the following nights of the holy
month of Ramadan: 19<sup>th</sup>, 21<sup>st</sup> or 23<sup>rd</sup>.
We are instructed to offer special prayers on this night.

It seems that Laylat al-Qadr is not more than one night every year, but
we know this also that, because of the difference in horizons the
beginning of the month of Ramadan in some countries happens to be one or
two days earlier and in some happens to be one or two days later.
According to this situation in those places, there is difference of one
or two nights of Laylat al-Qadr. And for those different places more
than one Laylat al-Qadr comes into existence. This situation arises
every year, as Laylat al-Qadr being only one night and in that
particular night the angels descend with blessings and bounties, how
harmonious is it? Is it that Laylat al-Qadr was especially in the time
of the Prophet (a.s.) and in Makkah and that night is no more after
that?

**Answer:** According to the religious guides it is absolutely proved
that Laylat al-Qadr was not restricted to the time of the Prophet (a.s.)
and not only in Hijaz area. But in all the periods of time and for all
different places it existed with all its importance and greatness and
there is no scope for anything contrary to this.

Above mentioned objection has come up because it was imagined that
Laylat al-Qadr being one in the whole year

 meant that every year for all the places in the world only one common
night is fixed as Laylat al-Qadr and this night is fixed in every region
of the world and it is liable to end at a fixed time.

However this concept is wrong, as we know that the earth is spherical
and always one of its hemispheres happens to be in dark and the other in
light. Therefore there can never be night at one fixed and common time
in all the parts of the earth. By saying that in the whole year there is
only one Laylat al-Qadr, it means that for the residents of all the
places, according to their own lunar year only one night is Laylat
al-Qadr. The explanation to this statement is that residents of every
place start their lunar year according to the specific horizon of that
place from the first of Muharram. And after passing some lunar months,
the month of Ramadan also of that place, starts with the specific
horizon of that place and in that month, 19<sup>th</sup>, 21st or
23<sup>rd</sup> night is Laylat al-Qadr for the people residing in that
area.

Residents of every place have to fix their holy days and times according
to specific horizon of that place and not only Laylat al-Qadr in
particular. For example, Eidul Fitr and Eidul Azha are holy days in
Islam and special prayers are prescribed for those days of these Eids
not a single one comes on more than one day in the whole year. In
different Muslim countries fixation of this day, even though there being
difference in their existing horizons, each country fixes the day
considering their specific horizon. This is the reason that for example
in Saudi Arabia Eid-e-Azha is mostly celebrated one or two days before
Pakistan and some other countries.

We should know that this account regarding Laylat al-Qadr,

 is not a negation for some other purposes (for example, this that in
this night Angels are descending) Because all these situations are
witness to the enlargement of the special blessings of Allah in this
night, for the residents of all the places.
