Holy Quran and Control Over Planets
===================================

**Question:** In the present age Russian and American scientists have
succeeded in conquering to a certain extent some of the planets. In the
Holy Quran is there any reference to this or not? And will they get more
successes regarding them or not?

**Answer:** There is no doubt that since man came into existence he is
progressing towards perfection and still we see that not a single day
passes when he is not moving forward, and he does not discover some
hidden secret of nature. Therefore there is no doubt that a day may come
when he with his god-given power, may spread his life into the heavenly
spheres.

Maybe the verse, which was revealed in Quran, which is about subjugating
the earth and the heaven by man, may not be without indication to this
possibility. Because either sun and moon and whatever is in the heavens
that have become subdued for man right from the very first day. But
control and to take benefit from this control also has degrees and among
them the absolute degree is that when these heavenly bodies become
cradles of life. In this regard some verses are given below.

 *(1) And He has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens
and whatsoever is in the earth, all, from Himself; most surely there are
signs in this for a people who reflect. [Surah Jathiyah 45:13]*

* (2) Do you not see that Allah has made what is in the heavens and what
is in the earth subservient to you, and made complete*

 

* to you His favors outwardly and inwardly? [Surah Luqman 31:20]*

* (3) And He has made subservient to you the sun and the moon pursuing
their courses [Surah Ibrahim 15:33]*

And this sentence is revealed in different Surahs of the Holy Quran.

According to the above-mentioned verses the Holy Quran says that:
Whatever is in the earth, right from very first day it was given under
your command, whereas man has acquired power over the resources which
are under the earth not at one place and not only once, but gradually
and in all the periods of time to a certain extent he has acquired
knowledge about those resources and he has dug them out. From this it is
understood that when the Holy Quran says: Whatever is in the earth have
given in the command control of humans. Than it does not mean that, all
and every stocks of the earth are given under the command of man.
Because most of the minerals from them have been discovered as the time
passed and in each period of time a particular section of people
succeeded in discovering the stocks under the earth; rather it is meant
to be all the humans that come into existence as time passes. Although
only very few of them are there, who search for minerals.

And it is not far that man would succeed in discovering new resources
from the earth about which he has no knowledge whatsoever in the present
age. On this basis it means that though planets were made subservient to
man from the very first day but with passing of time he may take most of
the benefits from them and bring the heavenly spheres into his reach,
and the words of the Holy Quran ***made subservient to***

*** you whatsoever is in the heavens****[1]* would then fit him
perfectly.

Besides from the 34<sup>th</sup> verse of Surah Rahman it is known that
man will be able to travel in space with the help of present knowledge,
industrial know-how and potentialities. As it is stated:

*O assembly of the jinn and the men! If you are able to pass through the
regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through; you cannot pass
through but with authority. [Surah Rahman 55:33]*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Please note that the above answer was printed before man put his
foot on the moon and the scientist had not sent the first space traveler
in the space. At that time the only step, which was taken in that
direction was to send artificial satellites. The actions of man and his
achievements verify what Quran has said more than 1400 years ago.
