Do These Verses Support the Theory of Evolution?
================================================

**Question:** Recently a book is written whose author has tried to prove
evolution. That is the transformation one living species to another
living species. After much argumentation for the correctness of the
theory of evolution he has tried to compare it with the verses of Quran.
And according to his saying, he proved that the Holy Quran also supports
evolution of a living existing species towards another species. To prove
his view correct, he has argued with the following two verses.

 *(1) Does not man remember that when We created him initially, he was
nothing? [Surah Maryam 19:67]*

The author has also quoted the Quranic words:

Before reaching to this state of excellence man was nothing. He lived a
life like that of single cell of living organisms, which gradually
evolved into man-like monkeys. Even that he did not have any sign of
presently existing physical or psychological excellence of man.

 *(2) There surely came over man a period of time when he was a thing
not worth mentioning. [Surah Dahr 76:1]*

The author here also has deduced from these words that: Before man could
acquire the capability that his name be mentioned in heavenly books, he
was nothing. Extremity is that because the man was not having human
excellence and being in the animal gathering was not having the
capability that his name and condition be mentioned in the heavenly

 books. [Sohofe Ibrahim (a.s.) Taurah (Old Testament), Injeel (New
Testament) and Quran]

The above-mentioned verses do really argue about the mans
(transformation) gradual evolution from one species to another species
and if this is not consistent with the theory of evolution. Then what is
the meaning of these verses?

**Answer:** According our point of view the above-mentioned verses have
no connection with evolution. These verses have other meanings, the
explanation of which is given below:

Tafseer of the first Verse:

One of the issues which are difficult for man to believe satisfy himself
easily is the hereafter i.e. man will be transferred to live in another
place. That is the reason that many Verses of the Holy Quran were
revealed explaining the state of affairs of those atheist (non believers
in hereafter) and with the purpose to remove their doubts. The verses
66, 67, 68 of Surah Maryam are also from them.

In those verses Allah mentions the condition of those atheists negating
the concept of the day of resurrection and giving them answer in this
way:

*And says man: What! When I am dead shall I truly be brought forth
alive?*

*Does not man remember that We created him before, when he was nothing?*

*So, (O Prophet (a.s.)) by your Lord! We will most certainly gather them
together and the Shaitans.*

As you have observed, the verse that the author has used to base his
argument is in reply to those who say that how it is

 possible that man after his death, when the particles of his body have
separated from each other and scattered, can again become alive and come
to his first (original) condition? Have they forgotten the beginning of
their creation? Do they not know that We brought them into existence
from nothing?

Those who know, that We have that Power, why they think that to
resurrect the dead again is impossible for Us. Whereas their initial
creation was as per the laws of permanence of matter and strength, which
can never be destroyed, and remains existing forever. The God Who has
the power to bring man into existence from nothing, can He not put
together the scattered parts of his body?

Therefore the verses cannot in any way be construed to mean that man
before attaining this stage of excellence was in the category of
unlimited living existences. But this verse is like many other verses,
which were revealed regarding the proof of Qiyamat for atheists.

Tafseer of the second Verse:

When a newborn child in a very strong winter is separated from its
parents as a result of some misfortune, naturally that child will die
very soon. Now if some good person reaches there on time and takes that
child to his home and looks after him/her as an affectionate father and
that child is lucky with his love and receives his full favor filled
with trays of grace, then that child of yesterday who was without any
preparations today will find himself to be in such a situation that he
apparently will be the basis of all necessaries of life and be
independent of others.

Many a times it is possible that arrogance and selfishness in

 that boy may obliterate the remembrance of that virtuous mans previous
love from his heart, and he for the sake of his temporary benefits may
fight and quarrel with that man and become guilty of being ungrateful.
In that case the pious man has the right to make that boy remember his
time of helplessness and powerlessness and rebuke him for his
ungratefulness and thanklessness.

The Almighty Allah has also in the beginning of Surah Dahr to admonish
those headstrong and rebellious people, who forgetting their initial
creation have taken to ungratefulness and thanklessness.

Accordingly He says: Those children of Adam who have become headstrong
and arrogant, was not there a time which passed on them, when they were
absolutely nothing and non-existent; and there was absolutely no
existence whatsoever of them? ***When he was a thing not worth
mentioning.***

But We decided that We would bring them from non existent to existence
and cover their bodies with the dress of humanism? Have they forgotten
these blessings and favors and accepted the way of rebellion and
ingratitude?

Thus this Verse also has no connection, whatsoever to the theory of
evolution.
