Is This Verse Contrary To the Issue of Abiding Forever?
=======================================================

**Question:** Our belief is that those who enter paradise do not go out
from there and remain there forever. And many Verses explicitly prove
this. But by Verse No. 108 of Surah Hud it seems that it is possible
that one day they may go out of Paradise.

*And as to those who are made happy. They shall be in the garden abiding
in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord
please, a gift which shall never be cut off.*

**Exception:**

As it evidently seems that it is possible that one day Allah may wish to
drive them out of this center of blessings, whereas other verses prove
that they will never go out of paradise. In this situation what is the
meaning of this verse?

**Answer:** It is true that the Almighty Allah has promised a permanent
stay in paradise in many verses to virtuous people and He will never go
against this promise as He Himself says:

*Whatever Allah has promised, He will never go against that. [Surah Rum
30:6]*

But it is possible that some may think that after this categorical
promise the reins of power go away from Allah and then He does not have
that power that He may drive them out of paradise and He may seize His
grace from them. In the scholarly and conversational term this
categorical judgment puts limit to the Power of Allah. And it diminishes

Â the vastness of strength of Allah. That is the reason that with these
words Allah stresses on this fact that though He has promised them a
permanent stay in paradise and He will never go against His promise;
nevertheless this does not diminish His Power in anyway whatsoever and
He still has the Power and control on all the existing things and can do
anything whatever He wants and His Power and control over everything is
intact and permanent.

Also the same sentence is revealed in the first Verse (regarding the
people of Hell and in which they were promised a permanent
chastisement). And the reason for that is also same, which is related in
reference to the first verse.

The sentence, which has come in the end of the verse, is from the
evident and clear Quran, which is corroborating the Tafseer as mentioned
above. This sentence makes it clear that this gift of Allah is going to
remain intact and established forever and is never going to part.
