The Quran Is Safe From Distortion
=================================

**Question:** Was the Quran revealed to the Prophet of Islam (a.s.) in
the same form as it is presently? And what is the proof of that there
was no tampering with it?

**Answer:** It should be kept in mind that the song of tampering with
Quran was mostly sung by the Christians and the Jews. Since according to
the admitted testimony of history the heavenly books of both those
religions had became prey to change and tampering as the time passed and
have lost their original charm, value and credence. That is why they
make efforts that the Holy Quran also be polluted with allegations of
distortion.

History testifies that copies of Taurah (Old Testament) were destroyed
many a times during different historical calamities and especially in
attack by Nebuchadnezzar on the Jews. Afterwards some Jew scholars
rewrote it.[1]

Testimony is available that all the four Gospels were written many years
after Hazrat Isa (a.s.) by some people. That is why there is no trace of
the Injeel (New Testament), which was sent down on Hazrat Isa (a.s.).[2]
Those people who have kept the foundation of all their religious
principle and the field of knowledge on books, which has become so much
unreliable, unauthentic and without any real value, they like that the
Holy Quran also should be brought to face this same kind of destiny and
say that with passing time the Holy Quran also

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ref. Qamus-e-Maqaddas and Al-hoda Eladdinil Mustafa **  
 [2]** Qamoos-e-Muqaddas

 became prey to distortion. Though in all the periods of Islamic history
the collection and care of the Holy Quran was never worthy of comparison
with the history of Taurah (Old Testament) and Injeel (New Testament) in
the periods of Judaism and Christianity.

History shows that the style of the Holy Quran never in any Islamic
period came face to face with ambiguity and complication. In this regard
we should pay attention to two postulates, which provide answer to many
questions.

 (1) The Holy Quran is such a book, which had established revolution in
all the spheres of social life of Muslims. It scattered their previous
life and in that place gave existence to a new life, the foundation of
which was secured on the belief of human rights. On this basis the Holy
Quran was such a book, which was consistent with the actual conditions
of Muslims and they were getting their political, worldly life, laws of
etiquette to the extent that their homely customs and compliments were
also derived from this heavenly book. They were contacting with this
book during Prayers five times a day. And lastly they use to turn first
towards the Holy Quran in all the affairs of their daily life and then
to Holy Prophets (a.s.) traditions and manners.

How then is it possible that distortion can take place in the book,
which is so much engrossed in the life of people and they turn towards
it and take benefit from it to such an extent. And neither common nor
the scholars had noticed this happening? Is there a possibility that
distortion might have taken place in the Holy Quran and nobody even took
note of it? It is something like that we think it to be possible that in
some big community of the world, tempering with their basic

 laws is done and no one pays any attention to it? Is it possible that
the basic laws of any community become prey to tempering but people do
not understand anything? And no voice of protest is raised? The
influence of basic laws on the communities of the present world is less
than the influence of the Holy Quran on the community life of Muslims
many times more. And that way people used to commit it to the memory
that if there had been a slightest tempering in that it would have faced
too much of protest, rejection and rebuttal. And objection would have
come from all the corners.

 (2) Whether in the time of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) or after that
history is consistent about the collection of the Holy Quran and with
great importance which the Prophet (a.s.) and the Muslims were giving to
the protection and copying of the Holy Quran, it is proved that in the
Holy Quran due to any reason also there was no chance of even a word
being reduced at any time.

(3) According to *Tarikhul Quran* by Abu Abdillah Zanjani, in the time
of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) many learned Muslims whose number is written
to be as much as 43, as per the order of the Prophet (a.s.), every verse
and Surah were being written as soon as they were revealed. And those
written texts of the Holy Quran were being kept among Muslims with every
possible effort and arrangement the care was taken. Out of them those
well-known gentlemen, who with regard to the copying of the Holy Quran
doing arrangement which was many times more compared to others. Among
them the name of Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) tops the list. Thus the
copies of the Holy Quran, which were written by young people, were
present among the Muslims. And they used to come to

 them day and night with respect to recitation and getting benefit of
the Holy Quran.

Other than that, many of the Muslims had remembered by heart the Verses
and Surahs of the Holy Quran. They were very careful in memorizing the
Holy Quran. And they made efforts that not a single word of that
heavenly book be forgotten. Those gentlemen were called Qari (reciter of
Holy Quran) and people with regard to the recitation of Quran, used to
turn always towards them and get the benefit.

Muslims were so strictly guarding and taking care and were vigilant
against the tempering of Quran that in the time of Caliphate of Abu Bakr
many reciters of Holy Quran were killed in the battle of Yamama, so
Muslims decided to pay more attention towards guarding and protecting
the Holy Quran. And to fulfill this purpose they collected all the
copies of the Holy Quran at a place and they ended all the possibilities
of increase or decrease in it. Once again more vigorous attention was
paid towards guarding those copies of the Holy Quran. In the Caliphate
of Uthman also four editions were prepared from the original copies and
were sent to all the Islamic provinces so that they all make the copies
which they held before according to the one sent to them. And while
reciting the Holy Quran they follow them. The gentlemen who were
reciters of Holy Quran and other Muslims paid attention towards guarding
the Holy Quran to such an extent that one day between Ubayy bin Kab and
the Caliph of that period Uthman a difference arose regarding the Verse
No. 34 of Surah Taubah.

*And (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in
Allahs way*

Uthman bin Affan said that in the revelation by Allah the word
*allazina* (those who) is there (i.e. without Waw; coordinating
conjunction) and this letter should be removed from the editions of the
Holy Quran. Whereas Ubayys stand was that we have heard this Verse from
the Prophet (a.s.) in this way only. When the discussion prolonged Ubayy
suddenly said in a very harsh tone:

I will put sword on the shoulder and spill the blood of the person who
wishes to remove this alphabet from Quran.

Due to insistence of Ubayy the caliph took back his words.

When this all took place on the question of removing just one alphabet
can it be said that the Quran has become prey to distortion? And some of
it Verses are omitted?

Other than the two basic things narrated above it should also be
remembered that in many Verses of the Holy Quran specific mention is
there that there will be no tempering and that this heavenly book will
remain protected from any alteration. It is stated that:

*We have sent Quran, and We are its Protector and Caretaker. [Surah Hijr
15:9]*

Islamic scholars and intellectuals also have in the books of exegesis
and theology specifically mentioned that Islamic experts have consensus
that there has been no change or tempering in the Holy Quran and if any
such person who is born from among the wise persons also who has trust
on the subject of the tempering, then the reason of his belief are the
forged traditions which have been added into the books of traditions by
those selfish people. Otherwise in the Holy Quran itself there is no
indication whatsoever regarding their

 claim. It is obvious that such false traditions are eliminated from the
angle of credence.

In other form under the influence of those traditions such belief is
created whose real meaning and sense is not revealed till now. Anyway
many of our intellectuals and research scholars have written books
regarding this and have amply proved that alteration or change in the
Holy Quran is not possible at all.

As regards the traditions that Amirul-Momineen Ali (a.s.) had a copy of
Quran, which was different from other copies. These traditions are not
contrary to the issue of non-existence of tempering in the Holy Quran.
Because as the scholars have said, the Quran, which was collected by
Amirul-Momineen Ali (a.s.) consisted of explanation of circumstances of
revelation of Verses and commentaries and its elucidation, which he had
heard from the Holy Prophet (a.s.). And its difference with other
editions of the Holy Quran was not regarding the original text of the
Quran, but it was only regarding this.
