The Order of Revelation of Surahs of the Holy Quran and the Scribes of Revelation
=================================================================================

**Question:** According to the revelation which is the first and last
Surahs of the Holy Quran? After the revelation by whom was the Holy
Quran being written?

**Answer:** Whatever is written by the reliable Islamic historians
according to that the first Surah which was revealed on the Holy Prophet
(a.s.) was:

*Read in the name of your Lord Who created. [Surah Alaq 96:1]*

And the last Surah was Surah Tauba. The subject matter of these Surahs
also support this assertion.

As regards the writing of Quran in the period of the Holy Prophet (a.s.)
it can be said that whatever verses which were revealed to him some of
his selected comparisons used to regularly and formally ask him about
those verses and write them in the style of Kufi style which was the
current style of writing in those days. Those gentlemen were called
*Katib al-Wahy* meaning writers of the revelations of the Holy Quran.
Historians have written the number of these persons to be 43. Out of
those 43 persons, Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and some other
companions worked very hard as compared to the rest in the job of
writing the verses of Quran. They used to always remain present in the
service of the Prophet (a.s.) and under his subtle guidance and
supervision wrote all the revealed verses.

Keeping in mind that the foundation of Islam is on that

Â heavenly book and it is the basic law of Muslims in all the spheres of
social and the individual life, the Holy Prophet (a.s.) himself
specially arranged the chapters and verses in the present form.

At the time of demise of the Prophet (a.s.) the whole Quran was in
existence in written form with the Muslims. Many people had also
committed it to memory. The Holy Quran, which is present with the
Muslims is the same which existed with the Muslims at the time of demise
of the Prophet (a.s.).
