Interpretation of Quran Based On Personal Views
===============================================

**Question:** It is mentioned in many traditions that no one has the
right to interpret the Quran according to ones personal views and
opinion. And if anyone does it, his place is hell. What is the meaning
of interpreting according to ones personal views?

**Answer:** Muslim scholars and commentator of Quran are unanimous on
the view that no one has the right to interpret the verses of Quran
according to ones personal view and opinion. Many traditions are
narrated in this regard. We present below a few examples of the same:

1. The Holy Prophet (a.s.) said: One who interprets the Quran according
to personal opinion[1] he makes his place in fire (Hell).

2. One who interprets the Quran according to his view,[2] even though it
may be right, yet he has committed a sin.[3]

There are some of the traditions that are related on the topic. Now we
should see what does interpretation on personal view mean.

The great commentators have given three meanings of *Al-*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** These traditions are quoted from the Prophet (s.a.) in many
scholarly books. **[2]** Tafseer Jameul Ahkaam of Qurtubi, Vol 1, p. 32
and Majmaul Bayan, Vol 1, p. 9 **  
 [3]** Jameul Bayan Vol. 3, p. 32

*Tafseer bir-Ray* (interpretation based on personal views) and we shall
explain each of them briefly.

1. If the commentator forms an opinion before conducting considerable
research it becomes a cause that the word which has two meanings and
there is no indication which meaning should be taken or an verse is
enigmatic from the aspect of its meaning and it becomes necessary to
remove its doubt and ambiguity with the help of other verses but the
commentator explains it in a way which is in conformity with his
preconceived notions. In other words to justify the established beliefs
and preconceived notions become the cause that one does the Tafseer of a
particular verse without any testimony and method, on the basis of his
beliefs and instead of making the Holy Quran his guide and leader, he
moulds it according to his own views. Also he were not having these
views previously, he would never have interpreted in this way.[1]

Examples of this type of *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* is seen in the books of
those who follow the Mu'tazilah, Ashariah, Batiniyyah and Sufis. When a
commentator has fully accepted the views of the Mutazilah or Ashariah
school of thought regarding the attributes and actions of Allah and the
people, when he comes to those verses regarding whom it is possible to
interpret them according to his personal belief. And these verses may
have a different inner meaning from that of the apparent meaning and he
may interpret them according to his beliefs. And instead of presenting
his beliefs to the Holy Quran, (to evaluate on the scale of Quran), he
presents the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majmaul Bayan Vol. 1, p.12

 Holy Quran to his beliefs. (That is, he does the tafseer of the Holy
Quran according to his belief) and on the basis of his personal whims
and desire, distorts the meaning of the verses.

*Tafseer Al-Kashshaf*, the commentary of Zamakhshari[1] is a living
example of the interpretation of Quran according to the beliefs of the
Mutazilah. In the same way Mafatihul Ghaib of Fakhruddin Razi is the
tafseer of the Quranic verses according to the Ashariah school of
thought. Both these commentators had tried to justify their predestined
beliefs in the light of Quran and they were not ready to release
themselves from their past beliefs that by freeing themselves from their
original faith they should have made the verses of the Holy Quran
material of their research which were revealed regarding the attributes
of Allah and the deeds of men.

In the same way in different periods of history, the Batiniyyah and some
philosophers have interpreted some verses of the Holy Quran to justify
their views. For example Mulla Abdur Razzaq Kashi has based his tafseer
on the levels of Batiniyyah faith and Muhiyyuddin Arabi has done the
tafseer of Quran according to his Sufi beliefs.[2]

This tafseer which is compiled only for the propagation of a particular
school (a school whose founder was an errant and fallible person) even
though some of the points may be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Though it was written as the Mutazilte commentary yet its beauty
cannot be denied. **  
 [2]** According to some it was not Muhiyuddin Arabi who has written
this Tafseer, it was a student of his who had written it.

 correct but Ashariah as a whole it constitutes *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray*.

At the end of the 13<sup>th</sup> century and the beginning of the
14<sup>th</sup> century this trend became common and discoveries and
inventions threw up new sciences. On the basis of this a new basis of
*Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* came into being for Muslim commentator and the
interpretation of verses dealing with supernatural things like soul,
angels and prophets took a new shape. So that natural and material
scientists could be attracted and the verses could be presented to them
so that they may be considered valuable. The truth of our statement will
become apparent if you study a tafseer like Al Manar. (Though in many of
these commentaries, for example in Al Manar there are also some strong
points and this is itself a remarkable thing ).

Since these intellectuals were influenced by the natural material
science that is why they interpreted the verses of Quran in the light of
scientific research till the present time. According to some, angels
were the power hidden in ones nature.

Some experts of ethics, having a keen eye for ethics and morals have
gone to such limits in interpreting the verses of Quran that they have
explained Shaitan to be Nafs-e-Ammara (sensual appetite) and they do not
accept the existence of any such thing as Shaitan.

Sometimes it is also seen that some people interpret verses (like: Go to
Firon he has exceeded his self) in the way that it is not about a
particular Firon. It is about anyone who goes

 against his conscience.[1]

These kinds of commentaries are *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* because they are
influenced by pre-conceived beliefs and the apparent of the verses is
ignored and some other meaning is derived from them.

2. The second meaning of *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* is that the initial words
of the verse are followed (without considering the confirmed proofs and
studying other verses which are related on this topic). For example an
intellectual proof and ignoring other verses which clearly negates that
God has a physical body and by the apparent meanings of some verses
which are all metaphorical and that it should be proved that Allah has a
body and for example it is said: The hands of Allah were on their hands
proves that Allah has hands, although doubtlessly here hands do not
denote hands of Allah but it refers to the power of Allah.

3. The third meaning of *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* is that regarding the
tafseer of the Holy Quran apart from the Holy Quran some other source is
referred. Apart from the verses concerned with Islamic laws all the
Quranic verses can explain all the other verses and regarding the
Tafseer of the Holy Quran does not require the understanding of the
Companions and the Tabe'een (Companions of Companions).[2]

The compiler of Kashfuz Zunoon[3] has mentioned five types of
*Al-Tafseer bir-Ray*. Their basic points are the same as

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Baraheenul Quran, p. 55 **  
 [2]** Tafseer Mizan Vol 3, p. 85-86 **  
 [3]** Preface to Majmaul Bayan p. 6

 mentioned above.

Here it is necessary to mention the point that the different meanings
related about *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* are such that no one has ever said
that *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* according to the Holy Prophet (a.s.) is
Tafseer without reason so that we may object upon it and say:

He has mentioned this meaning so that people may not understand the Holy
Quran and they may keep Quran like the Christian priests of the middle
ages had kept Taurah (Old Testament) and Injeel (New Testament). And to
prohibit the contemplation and pondering on Quran thus making it into a
book whose body remains among the people and its soul is unknown and its
value should just remain of holy words and secret and enigmatic voice.

Those Islamic commentators who have discussed *Al-Tafseer bir-Ray* they
have not this meaning of tradition in their discussion, rather Muslim
intellectuals and specially the Shia intellectuals consider reason (Aql)
to be a divine argument and absolute proof so much so that they consider
it in the Class of the Book, the Sunnah and Ijma (consensus).

How can they take word Rayy that is mentioned in the tradition of the
Prophet (a.s.) in the sense of Aql and reason while in the Arabic
Lexicon which is compiled to explain. The words of the Holy Quran and
traditions mention the meaning of the word Rayy to be Zann, Suman hadath
and Tahmeem (conjecture and guess).[1]

If people of a particular group (Akhbaris) do not act on the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mufradat of Raghib

apparent meaning of those verses which are regarding the practical laws
then it is not due to the fact that they say: Holy Quran must not be
interpreted by Aql. Rather it is because the Verses are of different
types, abrogating and abrogates, general and special, absolute and
conditional. And it is not possible for us to classify them without
referring to the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.). On the basis of this, we
do not act on the apparent meanings of these verses.

Even if one or two unreliable people have made such a statement would it
be correct that such a baseless allegation should be presented in this
way? That people imagine that in different periods of Islam, the Islamic
intellectuals had kept the people away from understanding the Quran and
did not permit them to understand its meanings while the same scholars
and intellectuals have written hundreds of commentaries of Holy Quran in
different languages. And to know the number of commentaries of the Holy
Quran written by the scholars refer to Kashfuz Zunoon and
Dharia.(reference?)

The truth is that if they had intended to keep the Quran to themselves
like the Taurah (Old Testament) and Injeel (New Testament) they would
not have written commentaries on this heavenly book. They would not have
discussed and debated on the Quranic verses from the aspect of Aql and
traditions.

One who says this has also committed another mistake. That they have
given the translation of the hadith as follows.

One who does the tafseer of Quran according to his personal view his
abode will be filled with fires.

 Although the feminine Tabbu from which Yattabbu is taken is not in the
meaning of filling. Rather its meaning is to prepare and obtain the
place.

Also the meaning taken by that person is for a particular place though
it is definitely not so. Rather in hadith it denotes place and not a
particular spot.

In the following verse both words are used and the meaning of both is
the same as we have already given.

And when you did go forth early in the morning from your family to lodge
the believers in encampments for war [Surah Aali-Imran 3:121]

 (Either it denoted the preparation of places for them to fight).[1]

Thus, the correct meaning of this verse is: One who interprets the Quran
from his personal view he should select a place for himself in the Hell
or prepare for himself a place in Fire. (And those who have construed
some other meaning of the hadith it shows their ignorance of Arabic
literature).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tafseer Majmaul Bayan Vol 5, p 495
