What Is the Aim of Repetitions in the Quran?
============================================

**Question:** Why are some verses repeated in the Quran and in this way
why are some stories mentioned on many places?

**Answer:** We should remember that the Holy Quran was revealed over a
period of 23 years according to different circumstances and happenings.
The Holy Quran is not a dry jurisprudence book or a classic that should
present an analysis of intellectual problems and laws. The Holy Quran is
a discourse, a book of religious propagation and guidance whose aim is
enunciate the realities of human life and laws that are necessary to
take humanity to perfection and they should purify the souls and
thoughts of people and establish the proper social laws so that a
society is established which would be perfect from the economic as well
as the ethical point of view. To achieve this aim the Holy Quran has
spoken on all the important subjects. The Holy Quran is revealed over a
period of 23 years in different circumstances to reply to the needs.

Now so far as repetition is concerned, we see that there are two types
of repetitions.

1. Repetition of some historical stories.

2. Repetition of those verses which mention some very special kinds of
realities.

As regards the historical incidents we should remember that the aim of
Quran relating the historical incidents is to invite the attention of
the people towards the laws which have ruled

 over the past communities.

The Holy Quran desires to familiarize the people with those laws and
invite their attention towards the causes of the advancement and
progress or downfall of the past nations. What were the serious
consequences of their rejection of their prophets? What they had to
suffer as the result of unleashing justice and oppression. What were
their actions which cause of their downfall and destruction? And finally
what were the signs of their weakness and strength.

In those verse the Holy Quran has invited the attention of the people
towards those laws and in this same way indicated the consequence of the
disobedience of the sinful and oppressive people.

The same fact became the cause that the Holy Quran should analyze the
past societies and indicate towards their different aspects. Therefore
the Holy Quran mentions for example the Bani Israel and the creation of
Adam (a.s.) in different places. On every occasion it indicate towards a
special part of loftiness of this incident and desires that every time
it should invite the attention of the people to an special aspect which
has not been indicated other times.

It is a reality that can be realized only if you ponder upon the stories
of the Holy Quran. The verses that are repeated on other occasion (for
example Surah Rahman the verse of: which then of the bounties of your
Lord will you deny?) is for the purpose to create a psychological effect
on the hearers. When the Almighty desires to exhort people He repeats to
them again and again those points which have special psychological and
emotional aspect. For example in the same

 Surah Rahman the Almighty Allah enumerates some important bounties that
have fundamental effect on the formation and continuation of human
society. And in the same the major bounties are mentioned; that are
arranged for man in the hereafter. The aim of enumerating those bounties
is to awaken the emotions of man. Allah repeats the sentence: Which then
of the bounties of your Lord will you deny, so that people develop the
ability to recognize truth and it prepares him to submit to the truth
and develops his humanity and feelings. Therefore the repetition of this
type is itself necessary from the point of view of guidance and it does
not in any way mar the eloquence of Quran, rather it is counted as the
beautiful discourse because it first of all becomes the cause of
emphasis and effect.

This type of repetition is widely seen in the Urdu, Arabic and Persian
literature. And there are numerous examples of Arabic Panegyric (Qasida)
which are designed on the repetition of one sentence or stanza. One such
example is the Qasida of Adi bin Rabiah the uncle of Imrul Qays, which
he composed in the memory of his brother, Kaleeb. The sentence Alaa
Laisa Adlam min Qaleeb is repeated twenty times. And of the Urdu poets,
especially in Dr Iqbals poetry we find such examples of repetition.
