Islamic View On Artificial Insemination
=======================================

**Question:** What is the Islamic view on Artificial Insemination?
(Artificial Insemination means the insertion of sperm into the womans
uterus through special means).

**Answer:** Many ancient examples of artificial insemination/pollination
are available with regard to animals and plants. And many plants and
animals are grafted to give fruits. But artificial insemination to human
beings is absolutely new. And the encouragement for this is some men who
are not able to produce children due to some causes but the wives are
fertile they opt for artificial insemination to make their wives
pregnant. The sperm of the husband or of another man is inserted into
the womans womb. In this way she becomes pregnant.

This matter has been debated by the lawmakers of the western world
(England, France, Egypt and other countries.) The House of Commons
(England) has decided that a committee of legal experts should be formed
so that they may study this subject. The medics of France have made this
matter dependant on the agreement of the spouses and permitted this if
both of them agree. In Italy the Pope has made it prohibited through a
religious decree. And the Grand Mufti of Egypt has stated it to be worse
than adoption which is prohibited in Islam.

**Two kinds of Artificial Insemination  
** In the first kind the sperm of a man is inserted into his own

Â wife. From the viewpoint of proofs of jurisprudence there is no problem
in this artificial insemination because on both sides the two people are
legal and religious spouses. The husband and wife have the right to
become parents. It does not make any difference that this procedure is
through sexual intercourse or medical means. Although at the time of
artificial insemination it must be ensured that during this some illegal
action is not committed. For example, another man must not perform this,
rather the husband must do it.

The next type of artificial insemination is that a strangers sperm is
inserted into the womb of someone elses wife. This kind of artificial
insemination in the view of Islam (which has based marriage on
precaution, carefulness, accuracy and piety) is absolutely illegal and
the same is view of the great jurists of Islam and from some traditions
regarding marriage we can know that it is prohibited.

In addition to this from the ethical, social and psychological points of
view this is absolutely illegal and prohibited. And it has three main
defects as described. Below:

1. From the ethical point of view it encourages promiscuity in women and
slowly it attracts her to illegal liaisons. She tends to think that what
difference it makes because the sperm of a stranger is inserted into her
womb or this is carried out through illegal intercourse. After this
procedure (even if this had the husbands sanction) this woman most of
the time attempts illegal liaisons. Because in doing thus she has no
fear from the husband. And if she becomes pregnant she can easily
transfer the responsibility to artificial insemination which has been
carried out with the permission of the husband.

2. From the social point of view this shakes the foundation of the
family and it causes the destruction of family system and genealogy. As
we know one of the evils of illegal relationship is enmity among the
people and the severing of relation between children and the father. And
this is seen as an unavailable effect of artificial insemination. As a
result when the child grows up he does not know who the real father is.

3. In the training and rearing of children and arranging of the
necessities of their life natural emotions play a very important role
and we must never be careless of this because it is the natural emotion
which prepares the father to provide the necessities of life for his
children. This human emotion is created only when he considers the child
a part of himself. But if he knows that the child is the issue of
someone else, there remains no reason why he should fulfill the needs of
the child.
