What Is the Command Regarding Contraception?
============================================

**Question:** Does Islam permit Contraception?

**Answer:** In Islamic law there is great encouragement for procreation
and increase in population. So much so that the Holy Prophet (a.s.)
says: Marry and procreate. Because on the basis of your huge numbers I
am proud over other (past) communities. Even on the basis of your
aborted children.

The aim of this topic is also clear because the power of a community
mostly depends upon its numerical strength. Communities having less
numbers are mostly weak and powerless.

It is correct that a country may be populated. Sometimes it may create
problems regarding food and housing but in spite of that this same dense
population becomes the cause of its strength and greatness. This is the
reason why the most powerful communities of the world are those who have
numerical strength. As for the food shortage it can be solved through
scientific agriculture. Thus contraception is not a good thing in
Islamic view. (Except when there are really social and training
problems).

In spite of this Islam has not made it illegal and according to the
decrees of most of Islamic scholars contraception is allowed if both
partners agree. Some have even allowed it even if the wife does not
agree. Actually Islam has left the avenue open for the Muslims so that
if there is need for contraception (For example the woman is weak or
there is

Â some other problem) they can gain benefit from this action and avoid
pregnancy.

Though we should remember that all this is permitted when the conception
has not yet taken place. But when conception has already taken place its
abortion is absolutely haraam (forbidden). That is after the conception.
(Even if it is one day old.), abortion is not allowed.
