Why To Face the Kiblah in Prayers?
==================================

**Question:** Why it is necessary to stand towards Kiblah (the Holy
Kabah) while praying, while Allah is everywhere and does not have a
specific direction?

**Answer:** To pray in a specific direction does not mean that Allah is
in a specific direction. The glorious Quran says about Kiblah and
explains its reality:

*And Allahs is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allahs purpose [Surah Baqarah 2:115]*

And in another verse Allah says:

*The East and the West belong only to Allah. [Surah Baqarah 2:142]*

It means east and west belongs to Allah (and all places are similar for
Him).

In fact to pray facing the Kiblah is due to that since a person has
physical body, while praying he has to face some direction and Islam
desires that for the perfection of this worship, he should take as much
benefit as possible. The reason to face the holy Kaba is, as we all
know, the holy Kaba is the oldest center of monotheism. It is the house
built by the hands of the Pillar of Monotheism, Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.)
and was the center of attention of all the Prophets and guides of
Monotheism that is why turning towards this center of Monotheism means
turning towards Allah. It is correct that Allah is not confined by
space, but when a person stands towards such a center, because of many
reasons he is nearer to Allah and feels himself in Allahs proximity. The
turning of

the Muslims of the world towards this holy center five times a day
creates the inspiration of oneness and unity and this creates the
similarity between the Muslims of the world and connection between them
who are spread from East to West and shows their magnanimity and
greatness and after all represents to the world the purpose and faith of
Islamic teachings.
