How To Pray and Fast in the Polar Regions?
==========================================

**Question:** When we meet some materialists and non-Muslim people they
say that how can Islam be a universal religion while its laws be applied
only in our areas and area like ours. For example to pray five times a
day and fast in the month of Ramadan is not possible at the north and
the south poles because there the days and nights are exceptionally
long. Some places have a six-month day and a six-month night.

**Answer:** By divine wisdom, Islamic law has provided the solution to
such problems before they arose. On the basis of this, Islamic laws are
enforceable without any difference.

The explanation of this statement is that our senior jurisprudents have
discussed this problem in their books. For example, the late Kazim
Yazdi, who is of our senior jurisprudent. In this book *Urwathul Wuthqa*
he has mentioned this problem and given a clear verdict that the duty of
such people is that they must pray and fast according to the timings of
areas which have moderate day and nights. But these people should see
how long the days and nights in that season are. And then he can fast
according to it and perform the five daily prayers.

This matter can also be explained in another way by which all the doubts
and objections are dispelled. (Please note).

In the Polar region where the nights and days are long and sometimes the
sun is visible in the sky for six months, and it does not set, it goes
from one horizon to the other once in

 every twenty four hour.

In such regions the movement of the sun around the horizon is not the
same all the year round. When it circles the horizon once sometimes it
goes up and sometimes it comes down and seen in a low lying ground, from
this aspect sometimes the surroundings are more lighted and sometimes
less. Thus this process is repeated once a day. If you see those
pictures which are taken during the movement of sun around the horizon
which were taken from those places you will know the facts.

When the sun is at zenith the people living near the poles call it day
and they start working when it declines and reaching near the horizon it
dims, they call it night and rest.

We should remember that when the sun sign reaches the horizon at the
polar region the moderate regions which have equal days and nights,
there is actual night.

From the aspect of this calculation the night and day can be determined
easily. If a pole is fixed in the ground when the length of its shadow
increase little more than its size it is the time of Noon Prayers and
Afternoon Prayers and when it becomes the longest, then it would be
midnight. And in this way it is easy to determine noon and midnight.

Now if we know the length of days and nights at this time of year in the
moderate regions. For example we know that in the beginning of summer
the days are normally of fourteen hours and nights are of ten hours, we
could easily know the timings of our prayers and fasts etc.

And whatever is mentioned above on the basis of this in long days the
responsibility of Prayers and fast have become clear

 but when the nights are prolonged we should remember that in
twenty-four hours the atmosphere is not the same. Rather sometimes it is
absolutely dark and sometimes it is lighted a little bit. Sometimes the
sun is near the horizon and the atmosphere is misty or darker than this
and sometimes the sun moves away from the horizon and the atmosphere
becomes dark.

In the nights the position and the movement of the stars, their distance
from the horizon and in the same way the darkness and brightness of the
atmosphere could help us to determine the noon and midnight and keeping
in view the median length of days and nights in the moderate regions,
the religious duties can be performed.

The above-mentioned explanations show that the duties of Prayer and
fasting along with the other Islamic duties are not applicable to only
one particular area and they can be acted upon in all the regions.
