What Are the Causes of Advancement of the Muslims in the Past Ages and Their Downfall in the Modern Era?
========================================================================================================

**Question:** What were the causes of the advancement of the Muslims in
the past ages? And what are the reasons for their backwardness and
downfall? What is the reason that once upon a time the Muslims were
ruling over many cultured nations and were the leaders of the caravan of
civilization. Now they have become dependant on developed nations.

**Answer:** This question certainly is worth attention and it is one of
the delicate questions, and it is worth writing a book on this. In
*Dairatul Marif*, Farid Wajedi has mentioned ten reasons for the
scientific advancements of the Muslims. And other intellectuals have
also discussed this subject. But actually the basic reason of the
advancement of the Muslims is nothing but Islamic knowledge and the
cause of their backwardness is aloofness from Islamic teachings. In the
beginning of Islam the Muslims used to benefit from Islamic teachings in
every field of science. But today most of the Muslims have deviated from
the true path of Islam. And it can be said that they are not true
Muslims but geographical Muslims. The basic cause of their backwardness
is this. In addition we shall discuss some of the causes of their
advancement and backwardness.

**The Spirit of Sacrifice  
** 1. The Muslims of the early period of Islam were ready to

 give all types of sacrifices. In their view the religion of Islam and
its commands were more respectable to him than his family, wealth and
property. They used to sacrifice all their material possessions on
Islam. And the history of Islam, especially the battles fought by the
Messenger of Allah (a.s.) are living testimonies of this. But now many
people have left religion on one side and this spirit of sacrifice is
nowhere to be seen. For some people Islam in sacred only to the limit
that it is not a hurdle to their wealth and position. On the other hand
there would be very few people who would refrain from something
profitable just on the basis of religious law. Because the Muslims of
the early period had to pay a heavy price for Islam and they had
purchased it in exchange of the lives of their dear ones, they used to
value it, but we have received Islam as inheritance from our parents.
This is the reason why practically we do not accord it much importance.

2. On one hand is unity and agreement and on the other hand are
controversies and differences. These are the two causes of advancement
and backwardness. In the beginning of Islam the Muslims were united and
agreed on most issues and according to the Quranic command they were as
brothers. But after the demise of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) some
differences that arose, in spite of this Commander of the faithful
(a.s.) and his sons used wise diplomacy and did not allow them to halt
the progress of Islam. They became aloof from the usurpers of their
rights because they desired that at least the principles of Islam should
remain safe. But now hypocrisy and controversies of the ruling elite has
reached to its zenith. In the recent centuries there has been a
considerable increase in intersected animosities. And every sect
considers others apostles and infidels, and try their best to insult and
degrade

 them. Today differences and controversies between the Muslims have
intensified and the true face of Islam has been concealed behind the
veils of misunderstandings and misconceptions. In the circumstances is
it possible that Muslims would be able to regain their lost glory?

**Familiarity with prevailing circumstances  
** 3. It was one of the important causes of the advancement of Muslims
in the past centuries. They used to equip themselves with latest
knowledge and the most developed weapons. At the time of the battle of
Hunain the Holy Prophet (a.s.) received the information that in Yemen a
new weapon has been invented which can destroy fort and raze strong
fortifications. He at once prepared some people that they travel to
Yemen and learn of the techniques of manufacturing and operating it.

The Muslims of the early centuries translated the books of science,
philosophy, medicine and astronomy into Arabic and added their research
and investigations advancing them further. Also, they established great
universities and libraries. Thus they became needy of the scientific
advancement of others and themselves became the torchbearers of
knowledge. For a long time Baghdad, Shaam, (Syria), Misr (Egypt) and
Andalusia quenched the thirst of those who flocked there in search of
knowledge but today the majority of the Muslims have ignored the
prevailing situations and disregarded the demands of the present age.
They desire that they should make do with ancient customs and methods
and also to claim superiority over the whole world. While in the world
there are new changes every day and the sciences, arts, culture and
civilization all are moving towards development and

 perfection. But the method of Islamic propagation and spread of Islamic
teachings still follows the old methods.

These three factors are a part of the causes due to which the Muslims of
the early period trod the path of progress. Apart from this there were
other causes also that had a role to play in their progress. We shall
not mention the details of all of them here and end this discussion with
the following verse in which the Muslims have been informed of the
causes of advancement. The Almighty Allah addresses the Muslim Community
and says:

*And be not infirm, and be not grieving, and you shall have the upper
hand if you are Believers. [Surah Aali-Imran 3:139]*

In the view of the above verse and the forgone discussion the reply to
the second question is also clear. That, is there any hope Muslims will
regain their past glory?

The reply to this question is clear if we study the reply to the
previous questions. Because the factors that caused advancement and
progress of the Muslims in the past centuries if again they are revived
and Muslims seek benefit from them they will again be able to obtain
that same glory.

If the Muslims of the present age have the spirit of sacrifice like the
ancient Muslim and maintain unity among themselves, and Muslim readers
understand well the scientific trends of the modern age, they can again
attain progress and success. However, it is necessary that every type of
development and change should be within the limits of Islamic law. It
should not be that understanding the recent trends could be made an
excuse of throwing to the winds the established code of law of Islam.
