Why the Youth of Today Avoid Religious Thgatherings?
====================================================

**Question:** What are the factors that cause a section of youth to
remain aloof from religious gatherings? Is not time ripe that we take
steps to remove this difficulty? What is the method of solving this
problem? And what course of action can be adopted to attract the youth
to religious gatherings?

**Answer:** In our view many youths keep away from religious programs
due to a number of factors. Two of them are most important.

First of them is poisonous propaganda that foreign agents have unleashed
on our young people since a long time. This had made them suspicious of
our religious gatherings and spirituality. Because facts are presented
to them in a distorted form.

Another thing is the lack of discipline in the religious programs. And
in many programs there is lack of attention to Islamic principles
through the exalted knowledge of which the thirst of curious youngsters
is quenched.

These two factors are such that due to their effect many of our young
people have become distanced from those programs. But fortunately in
recent years there has been awakening in our youth. And they have
realized the evil intentions of those foreign elements, who used to
poison their minds. That is why that youth attend the religious programs
in large numbers and we see them present in those programs with our own
eyes.

Regarding the second factor of repulsion of the youth, steps have been
devised andÂ  there is no lack of people who keep the changing times in
view and through Islamic logic can solve the mental confusion of the
young Muslims. Though we agree that their number is not as required by
the present circumstances.
