How Can We Control the Misuse of Polygamy?
==========================================

**Question:** It is correct that when man observes rules and justice
with regard to divorce and polygamy, that is he does not divorce his
wives unreasonably and does not put many women to trouble, the position,
personality and rights of women are secured. And she is saved from
humiliation and oppression. And many a times conflicts arising out of
the inequality of sex is cured by relying on justice.

But in our times when unfortunately many of the Muslims are in name
alone, and very few follow the religious rules, they take unfair
advantage of the law of polygamy. In such circumstances, question arises
that in Islam what is the prophecy regarding such shameless people. And
how their misuse be limited?

**Answer:** As per principle no matter how eager and sensible are the
desirous of laws, till the time there is guarantee of their enforcement
they cannot be sufficient for the well-being of the society.

Though it is possible that education and training and faith upon God
should refrain people from breaking and misusing law. But in spite of
this these can never make a person loyal to the Islamic law and aware of
their duties. Some how or the other such people appear who act against
the law and  take undue advantage from it.

Therefore in order to assure social justice and protection of law and
help of the oppressed, it is necessary that there

 should be a responsible ruler (governor) who can keep an eye on the
actions of the people and take steps to implement the laws. It can only
be the Islamic government.

For achieving this aim, Islam has given wide rights to the Islamic
government. So that when people are not capable enough to recognize
their duties and responsibilities and want to exceed their limits, and
if they take undue advantage of religious laws, the Islamic government
has the right that for helping the oppressed and supporting the law it
should take steps and to being in control those who have exceeded the
limits.

In this regard there is no difference between the laws of divorce and
polygamy and other laws. That is just as Islamic government is the
helper and supporter of oppressed and inimical to the oppressors in the
same way if divorce and polygamy is a cause for injustice upon the
woman, and her rights are trespassed, the Islamic government has the
right that in territories within its control, it should refrain the man
from misusing the law of polygamy and help the women.

Apart from this regarding various sections of Islamic law it must
necessarily be remembered that the laws of Islam are connected to each
other like the links of a chain. And we should never see one of them in
isolation and then start argumentation and criticism. The laws of Islam
must be studied keeping in view the prevailing circumstances. Where
Islam is ruling and where its laws are in force. For example the
punishments and penalties, judgment and wisdom and marriage and divorce
laws of Islam should be seen in the society where all the Islamic laws
are absolutely in force.

From this aspect if all the Islamic laws are applied fully no one would
go against the law and trespass on the rights of others. And men will
never consider polygamy as forced control over women. Rather they will
have to follow all the Islamic laws and rules.
