Has Islam Prescribed the Duties of Women?
=========================================

**Question:** According to the decree of Islamic jurisprudence, the
housework and breastfeeding of children and their care is not obligatory
for the woman. Also, it is obligatory on the husband to arrange for the
maintenance of the wife. On the basis of this, she does not need to work
outside her home. Therefore, neither is it obligatory for her to earn
nor is she bound to do the housework. What is the duty of woman in the
society?

**Answer:** If Islam has not made housework, breastfeeding and care of
children on woman its aim was the position of women should be elevated
in society. And in order to do this they were given a free hand so that
she does all this willingly. And if she desires she can take recompense
for all this. But we should remember that if a particular thing is not
obligatory it does not mean that she has been refrained from doing it.

Doubtlessly in order to elevate the status of women, Islam has not made
housework obligatory on them. So that they are not reduced to a
maidservant. Actually it has based these things on her conscience and
natural desires. Apparently mothers love their children to no end. This
motherly feeling makes them feed them with the juice of her body and
brings them up. Women are by nature inclined towards the beautification
of the house and this inclination is itself a surety of the well being
of house. Thus nearly fourteen centuries have passed since the dawn of
Islam and the same customs continue between Muslim men and women. Muslim

 

women should continue to fulfill these natural duties, and in times of
need they have been capable  to gain benefits from their legal rights.
