Is Khums the Recompense of Prophethood?
=======================================

**Question:** There is no doubt that the Holy Prophet (a.s.) has not
demanded anything in return of the efforts and hardships he had borne to
guide the humanity. He has sought the recompense of this only from the
Almighty Allah. But we see that in some Quranic verse, like the verse of
Mawaddat the love of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) is termed as the recompense of
Prophethood due to the fact that this love is a favor upon the people
themselves and a channel for their guidance because wilayah
(Guardianship) of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) becomes a cause to follow the words
and actions of these noble personages. This itself is a kind of guidance
and righteousness, which is bestowed on the people through a medium. But
what is the reason for making Khums obligatory (half of which is the
share of Sadaat)? Is it not a price for Prophethood?

**Answer:** As well all know Khums is not for every Sadaat. It is only
for those who are needy. If the amount of Khums exceeds the needs of
Sadaat it has to be deposited in the Islamic treasury (according to the
commands that have reached us) so that it can be spent for common food
of the people. In the same way if the needs of the poor Sadaat are more
than the Khums paid by the people the deficit has to be made up by the
Baitul Maal (Islamic treasury). On the other hand the Sadaat are
prohibited to receive Zakah which is the right of other needy people
(Even if the Zakah is taken from rich Sadaat).

Therefore actually Khums is in place of Zakah which is paid

Â to other needy people and the requirements are same as for the
recipients of Zakah. But in order to maintain the honor of the Holy
Prophet (a.s.) and as a mark of respect its payment has been given
another form and another title (Khums instead of Zakah). It is a mark of
respect for the esteemed position of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) and it is
not in anyway a sort of recompense or price. Obviously, there is a wide
difference between maintaining respect of honor of exalted personalities
and paying a price.
