Chapter 1: Ideology And Creed
=============================

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have taken a special interest in
ideology and faith, because these two matters represent the basis of any
human society. When the ideology and faith of any community is strong,
clear, compatible and comprehensive, the community will be powerful and
capable of facing the difficulties, problems, and various conditions
that stem from the natural progress of history.

The Holy Qur’an has paid the greatest attention to this aspect and has
prioritized the issue of creed and thought over all other issues, to
implant it firmly in the Muslim community.

The following features are visible in the Ahl al-Bayt’s procedure of
building a virtuous community inside Muslim society through ideology and
faith:

The Holy Qur’an and Sunnah; the Sources of Faith
------------------------------------------------

The Holy Imams (‘a) strictly abided by the ideas that can easily be
inferred from the Holy Qur’an and the authentic Sunnah; therefore, they
cited texts from the Holy Qur’an and Prophetic traditions as accurate
proofs of the ideas they discussed. In addition, they always presented
beliefs that were compatible with human nature. This fact is visible in
their verbal demonstration of these beliefs and also in their style of
providing arguments and discussing other ideas.[^1]

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), realizing that conjecture is not
sufficient, paid special attention to *reason* *in understanding faith,*
in realizing facts and creating conviction and confidence in the
doctrinal notions. Nevertheless, they never failed to confirm the point
that the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah carried the accurate faith that can be
certified by sound human intellect.

Integration between Faith and Sect
----------------------------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have integrated doctrinal and sectarian fundaments
of faith and the nature of the universe, life, the seen and unseen
worlds on the one hand and the branches that ramify from these doctrines
on the other. In other words, they have considered the necessity of
perfect alliance between theory and application, faith and behavior,
fundamental and secondary issues. The sect of the Imamiyyah Shi’ah rests
upon the belief that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) play a role fundamental to
faith with regard to the universal view of Islam. Imamate enjoys a
divine nature similar to the nature of Messengership and its
responsibilities, with the exception of receiving divine revelation. An
Imam, just like a Messenger, is chosen by Almighty Allah to complete a
mission.

In fact, human behavior depends upon understanding such doctrines. On
proving this fact, we will clearly note that there is correlation
between the belief in *wilayah* (divinely commissioned leadership of the
Holy Imams) and the integration of faith and deeds.

In this respect, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported Imam al-Baqir and Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإيـمَانُ إقْرَارٌ وَعَمَلٌ، وَالإسْلاَمُ إقْرَارٌ بِلاَ عَمَلٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Faith is to profess and act, and Islam is to profess without acts.*[^2]

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّ لَنَا عَاصِياً فَهُوَ عَاصٍ؛ وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ لَنَا
مُطِيعاً فَهُوَ مُطِيعٌ: وَمَنْ أَعَانَ ظَالِماً فَهُوَ ظَالِمٌ:
وَمَنْ خَذَلَ ظَالِماً فَهُوَ عَادِلٌ. إنَّهُ لَيْسَ بَيْنَ اللهِ
وَبَيْنَ أَحَدٍ قَرَابَةٌ، وَلاَ تُنَالُ وِلاَيَتُنَا إلاَّ
بِالطَّاعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever loves a person who is disobedient to us is himself disobedient
to us, whoever loves one that is obedient to us is actually obedient to
us, whoever assists a wrongdoer is actually a wrongdoer, and whoever
hinders a wrongdoer is actually just. Verily, there is no proximity
between Almighty Allah and any person. Loyalty to us cannot be attained
except by means of obedience.*[^3]

In the book of *‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha*, it is recorded that Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Hamdani reported Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ خَذَلَ عَادِلاً فَهُوَ ظَالِمٌ. وَلا يَنَالُ أَحَدٌ وَلايَةَ
اللَّهِ إِلاَّ بِالطَّاعَةِ. وَلَقَدْ قَالَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ‏ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لِبَنِي عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبِ: ائْتُونِي
بِأَعْمَالِكُمْ لاَ بِأَنْسَابِكُمْ وَأَحْسَابِكُمْ. قَالَ اللَّهُ
تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَلاَ أَنسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ
وَلاَ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ. فَمَنْ ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ. وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ
خَسِرُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ فِي جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدُونَ. ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever hinders a decent person is actually a wrongdoer. No one can
attain loyalty to Allah except by means of obedience to Him. The Holy
Messenger of Allah—may Allah bless him and his Household—once said to
the sons of ‘Abd al-Muttalib,* *“Bring me your deeds, not your
ancestries or lineages.”* *Almighty Allah says,*

***“When the trumpet is blown, there shall be no ties of relationship
between them on that day, nor shall they ask of each other. Then, as for
him whose good deeds are preponderant, these are the successful, and as
for him whose good deeds are light, these are they who shall have lost
their souls, abiding in hell. (23:101-103)**”*[^4]

The Shi’ah depend upon the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in both
the principle and secondary affairs of religion. They believe that they
possess:

a) Perfect knowledge among finite human beings; (Almighty Allah alone
has perfect knowledge)

b) Infallibility from sinning or misinterpretation; and,

c) Right of leadership to issue instructions (to be followed) and
prohibitions (to be avoided).

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْعِلْمَ الَّذِي نَزَلَ مَعَ آدَمَ لَمْ يُرْفَعْ، وَالْعِلْمُ
الَّذِي يُتَوَارَثُ، وَكَانَ عَلِيٌّ عَالِمَ هَذِهِ الأُمَّةِ،
وَإنَّهُ لَمْ يَهْلَكْ مِنَّا عَالِمٌ قَطُّ إلاَّ خَلَفَهُ مِنْ
أَهْلِهِ مَنْ عَلِمَ مِثْلَ عِلْمِهِ أوْ مَا شَاءَ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, the knowledge that was brought down to the earth with Adam has
not been taken back. Knowledge is transmitted among generations through
inheritance. ‘Ali (‘a) was the most knowledgeable of this nation.
Whenever a knowledgeable individual of us (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a))
passes away, another knowledgeable one—from his household holding the
same knowledge as he, or any other amount that Allah decides for
him—will succeed him.*[^5]

Dhurays al-Kannasi is reported to have said that he once visited Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) and found Abu-Basir there. The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ دَاوُودَ وَرِثَ عِلْمَ الأَنْبِيَاءِ وَإنَّ سُلَيْمَانَ وَرِثَ
دَاوُودَ وَإنَّ مُحَمَّداً وَرِثَ سُلَيْمَانَ وَإنَّا وَرِثْنَا
مُحَمَّداً وَإنَّ عِنْدَنَا صُحُفَ إبْرَاهِيمَ وَأَلْوَاحَ مُوسَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, (Prophet) David (‘a) inherited the knowledge of the prophets.
(Prophet) Solomon (‘a) then inherited David’s. Most surely, (Prophet)
Muhammad (S) inherited Solomon’s and we inherited Muhammad’s. We also
possess the Scriptures of (Prophet) Abraham (‘a) and (Prophet) Moses
(‘a).*

Abu-Basir commented, “This is real knowledge.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا مُحَمَّدٍ! لَيْسَ هَذَا هُوَ الْعِلْمَ؛ إنَّمَا الْعِلْمُ
مَا يَحْدُثُ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ يَوْماً بِيَوْمٍ وَسَاعَةً
بِسَاعَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Abu-Muhammad, this is not knowledge. True knowledge is to know what
happens during the night and day, each day and every moment.*

Hence, to turn towards the Holy Imams (‘a) in order to obtain knowledge
is not similar to turning to narrators or well-versed scholars whose
tasks are restricted to transmitting traditions and issuing verdicts
(*fatwa*). People resort to scholars to learn certain religious laws by
means of transmission of traditions and issuing of verdicts. Such
individuals are not divinely designated leaders of the nation and they
cannot enact any religious law in question that is not present in the
Islamic code of religious law; rather, they only issue verdicts
according to their knowledge of traditions and fundamentals of the set
laws of Islam.

Authentic traditions relegate the knowledge of the laws of Islam to
well-qualified scholars under certain conditions. Besides, the
referential religious authorities (*marji’*) rely upon intuition and are
exposed to mistake and lack of awareness in understanding certain texts,
retaining others, or inferring rules from others, unlike the well-guided
Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) who hold divinely commissioned
leadership over people and enjoy decisive knowledge.

Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Maythami has reported that he heard Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) stating:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَدَّبَ رَسُولَهُ حَتَّى قَوَّمَهُ عَلَى مَا
أَرَادَ، ثُمَّ فَوَّضَ إلَيْهِ. فَقَالَ عَزَّ ذِكْرُهُ: ﴿وَمَا
آتَاكُمْ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا﴾
فَمَا فَوَّضَ اللهُ إلَى رَسُولِهِ فَقَدْ فَوَّضَهُ إلَيْنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah, the Almighty and Majestic, has verily disciplined His Messenger
(S) so highly that He made him as exact as He wanted him to be. He then
delegated the affairs to him, saying, “Take what the Messenger assigns
to you and deny yourselves that which he withholds from you.” Whatever
has been granted to the Messenger of Allah (S) by Him has been granted
to us.*[^6]

For that reason, the individuals of the virtuous community did not
suffer from schism or ambivalence between the commands issued by the
political rulers of the Muslim community and the verdicts that were
issued by specialist scholars of Muslim jurisprudence. In fact, these
scholars used to issue verdicts either out of their private
understandings of the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah or their references to
presumptive matters like the rules of analogy (*qiyas*), equitable
preference (*istihsan*), and acceptable advantages (*al-Masalih
al-Mursalah*).

They would adopt unfounded rules whenever they failed to come upon the
religious text that revealed the accurate law of an issue. At other
times, they issued verdicts that were in violation of religious texts,
especially when they depended upon their personal views (*ijtihad*),
because in their conception these religious texts were remote from
equitable preference and the achievement of acceptable social advantages
that they estimated through personal understanding of social conditions.

It happened sometimes that such jurisprudents (i.e. issuers of verdicts)
came under threat of prosecution by the ruling authorities because of
such contradictions. For instance, Abu-Hanifah (the founder of the
Hanafiyyah school of law) was arrested and imprisoned by al-Mansur, the
‘Abbasid ruler, because he issued a verdict supporting two sons of
‘Abdullah al-Mahdh. Another example is Ahmad ibn Hanbal (the founder of
the Hanbaliyyah school of law) who exposed himself to maltreatment by
the ruling authorities because of his attitude towards the issue of the
creation of the Qur’an and his disagreement with al-Ma'mun, the ‘Abbasid
ruler, on this issue.

The virtuous community did not experience the schism that took place
between theologians and Muslim philosophers—who adopted certain
doctrinal hypotheses and views about which they disagreed with each
other to a great extent—and the verdicts that were issued by some
jurisprudents who did not accede to certain hypotheses. Some Muslim
communities had to refer to a jurisprudent of a certain sect who adopted
certain doctrines and ideologies, such as those adopted by the
Ash’ariyyah, the Mu’tazilah, and the Mufawwidhah (Indeterminists). When
the latter adopted contradictory doctrines and ideologies, they
disagreed with the referential religious authority.

Such doctrinal and ideological differences cannot be found among the
scholars and referential authorities of the Shi’ah, the followers of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

Comprehensibility of Doctrines
------------------------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) covered a large variety of doctrinal issues with
elaborate explanations, clarifications and details. They did not leave
any aspect uncovered; thereby, blocking any personal opinions,
impressions, and inferences to interfere in the issuance of religious
laws.

Unlike the behavioral issue, which is secondary, the doctrinal issue is
primarily significant. Sensitive and incisive results and consequences
stem from this issue and all details of the spiritual, social,
political, and futuristic structure of human life reflect upon it. In
view of this, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not restrict their presentations
of doctrinal aspects to the principles of Muslim faith, such as Unity of
Almighty Allah (*tawhid*), Prophethood (*nubuwwah*), and Final
Assemblage (*ma’ad*); rather, they also discussed various aspects like
the following:

1. Divine justice (*‘adl*)

2. Imamate (*imamah*)

3. Fatalism (*jabr*) and indeterminism (*ikhtiyar*)

4. Predestination (*qadar*)

5. Disbelief (*kufr*) and belief (*iman*) and their relationship to
personal acts and behavior

6. Infallibility or inerrancy (*‘ismah*)

7. Decency

8. Death and life

9. Norms of history

10. Divine test

11. Loyalty (to the divinely designated leaders)

12. Love and hatred

13. Ethics

14. The advent of al-Mahdi in the last period of time

15. Details of the Final Abode, such as:

a) The period between burial and the final judgment (*barzakh*)

b) The resurrection (*ba’th*)

c) Raising to life (*nushur*)

d) The Divine Pond (*hawdh*)

e) The Discriminating Bridge (*sirat*)

f) Vision (*ru’yah*)

g) The calling to account (*hisab*)

h) Intercession (*shafa’ah*)

i) Paradise and Hellfire

j) Chastisement and comfort

k) Immortality in Hellfire or Paradise

16. Rational good and evil of things

17. Divine Revelation

18. Reason

Presenting the details of all these issues, the Holy Imams (‘a)
demonstrated their intellectual and doctrinal aspects through consummate
situations that played a vital role in strengthening the doctrinal and
structural foundation of the virtuous community, ensuring the firm
integration of its individuals.

This comprehensiveness is obvious when we refer to Shaykh al-Saduq’s
book of *al-’Aqa'id* (The Beliefs) and Shaykh al-Mufid’s commentaries on
this book. The contents of these two books rely in essence upon the
traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) with regard to the detailed
presentation of these beliefs.

Looking at the history of Imamate, the period of the Holy Imams’ (‘a)
presence (i.e. the lifetimes of eleven of the Holy Imams (‘a)) reveals a
wide range of disagreements about doctrinal issues among the followers
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). As a result, secondary sects and groups emerged
among these followers. However, the Holy Imams (‘a) began to present the
doctrinal issues in a comprehensive and all-inclusive manner, reducing
these sects and groups to an inconsequential number by the age of the
Major Occultation.

This was a great achievement considering the conditions of this age were
more difficult, due to the impossibility of direct contact with a Holy
Imam, than when the Holy Imams (‘a) were present. This doctrinal
stability was a big achievement of the Holy Imams (‘a)—an achievement
that could guarantee the doctrinal and ideological soundness of the
virtuous community. This amply testifies to the significance of
establishing this doctrinal foundation among this community.

Furthermore, the history of Islam witnessed wide-ranging doctrinal
disagreements among the other Muslim groups that have continued to the
present day due to their differences with the Shi‘ah in following the
referential authority (i.e. the Imams (‘a))—who can provide necessary
details—together with the Holy Qur’an. The result is that other Muslim
groups do not have a referential religious authority who can resolve
their differences.

Despite the fact that all Muslims agree upon the Holy Qur’an, it can be
subjected to various interpretations; therefore, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
laid great stress on the necessity of the existence of a referential
authority capable of interpreting the Holy Qur’an in the authentic
manner. The Holy Prophet (S), in the famous tradition known as *hadith
al-thaqalayn* (the Two Weighty Things) and *hadith al-safinah* (the Ark
of Salvation) emphasized the necessity of referring to the second
“weighty thing”, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).[^7]

Freedom of Thought and Sound Logic
----------------------------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) established the rules of true methodology in
dealing with doctrinal and ideological issues by emphasizing freedom of
thought and belief. These rules were founded on the following grounds:

a) *Sound logic, the use of reason, sentiment and inherent human
nature*.

b) *Reference only to the Holy Qur’an and the Prophetic authentic
traditions to obtain sound beliefs*. This does away with personal
desires and individual political tendencies, personal or qualitative
tastes, tempers, trends, and conjecture, by use of which errors are
committed widely, such as when using analogy and equitable preference.
These things are called ‘opinion (*ra'y*)’ in the words of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S), who is reported
to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ فَسَّرَ الْقُرْآنَ بِرَأْيِهِ فَقَدْ كَفَرَ. إنَّ دِينَ اللهِ لاَ
يُدْرَكُ بِالْعُقُولِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever* *interprets the Qur’an according to his own opinion has
definitely become a disbeliever. Verily, the religion of Allah cannot be
comprehended through opinions.*[^8]

A number of traditions emphasize the absolute referentiality of the Holy
Qur’an and authentic Prophetic traditions, such as the following:

Ayyub ibn al-Hurr has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

*All things must be referred to the Book of Allah and to the Sunnah. Any
tradition that is not compatible with the Book of Allah is fake.*[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ شَيْءٍ مَرْدُودٌ إلَى كِتَابِ اللهِ وَالسُّنَّةِ؛ وَكُلُّ
حَدِيثٍ لاَ يُوَافِقُ كِتَابَ اللهِ فَهُوَ زُخْرُفٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَتَاكُمْ عَنَّا مِنْ حَدِيثٍ لاَ يُصَدِّقُهُ كِتَابُ اللهِ فَهُوَ
بَاطِلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any discourse that is not supported by the Book of Allah must be
false.*[^10]

c) *Opening the door to ijtihad and inference* (of religious laws from
their sources) *within regulations and valid principles of inference* by
finding in the Holy Qur’an all phenomena and events encountered by
humanity in an objective spirit that is receptive to all probabilities
and conditions man may face.

To summarize, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School and the virtuous community
distinctively embody:

(1) Freedom of thought

(2) Commitment to regulations and restrictions of inference (of
religious laws from their sources) as exactly as they are defined by
Islamic law (i.e. the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah)

(3) Receptiveness to emerging issues, reevaluation of their
understanding, inference, examination and treatment, compatible with
inherent human nature, reason and sentiment

These distinctive features also enabled this community to defend the
genuine Islamic doctrine and ideology against not only other
intellectual and doctrinal personal opinions within Muslim society but
also intellectual and doctrinal currencies outside the Islamic frame.

[^1]: - Examples on such discussions can be seen in Shaykh al-Majlisi’s
book of Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 10, Shaykh al-Tabrisi’s al-Ihtijaj, and
Shaykh al-Kulayni’s Usul al-Kafi, Chapter: Faith and Unbelief (kitab
al-iman wal-kufr). Books on the biographies of the Holy Imams (‘a) are
also full of reports on their discussions of other beliefs. All such
discussions prove that the Holy Imams (‘a) depended upon the Holy Qur’an
and Sunnah in their debates. For instance, let us refer to two examples
only: 1. Lady Fatimah al-Zahra'’s Sermon: “O Muslims! Is my inheritance
usurped?! O son of Abu-Quhafah, is it in the Book of Allah that you
inherit your father’s property, yet I do not inherit my father’s?
Surely, you have done a strange thing! Have you deliberately deserted
the Book of Allah and turned your back on it? Allah said, “And Solomon
was David's heir. (27:16)” He also said about Yahya (‘a) (Prophet John)
son of Zachariah (‘a): “Oh, give me from Thy presence a successor who
shall be my heir and also heir to the house of Jacob. (19:5-6)” He also
said, “And those who are akin are nearer one to another in the ordinance
of Allah. (8:75)” He also said, “Allah enjoins you concerning your
children: The male shall have the equal of the portion of two females.
(4:11)” He also said, “Bequest is prescribed for you when death
approaches one of you, if he leaves behind wealth for parents and near
relatives. (2:180)” You claim that I have no position and no inheritance
from my father, and there is no kinship between us. Did Allah
distinguish you with a verse, from which He excluded my father? Or, do
you say: the people of two religions do not inherit from each other? Are
my father and I not of one religion? Or, are you more aware of the
Qur’an than my father and my cousin? So, here it is before you! Take it
with its noseband and saddle! It shall dispute with you on the Day of
Punishment; what a fair judge Allah is, the master is Muhammad (S), and
the appointment is the Day of Resurrection. At the time of the Hour, the
wrongdoers shall lose, and it shall not benefit you to regret then! For
every Message, there is a time limit, and you shall know to whom a
punishment that will confound him comes, and upon whom a lasting doom
will fall.” (al-Ihtijaj, 102). 2. Argument of Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin
(‘a) on fighting the people of al-Basrah: Al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah reported
that he was standing by Imam ‘Ali (‘a) on the day of the Battle of the
Camel when a man stood before him and said, “O Amir al-Mu'minin, those
people (against whom we will fight) declare the Unity of Allah and so do
we, confess that there is no god save Allah and so do we, and perform
the prayers and so do we. For what reason will we then fight them?” The
Imam (‘a) answered, “We will fight them according to what Almighty Allah
has revealed in His Book.” The man asked, “As for me, I do not have full
knowledge with all that which Almighty Allah has revealed in His Book;
so, please explain it to me.” The Imam (‘a) answered, “We fight them
according to what has been revealed in Chapter (Surah) al-Baqarah.” The
man asked, “I do not have knowledge with all that which Almighty Allah
has revealed in Surah al-Baqarah, so please explain it to me.” The Imam
(‘a) answered, “It is exactly the following verse (ayah): ‘We have made
some of these messengers excel over others; among them are they to whom
Allah spoke, and some of them He exalted by (many degrees of) rank; and
We gave clear miracles to Jesus son of Mary, and strengthened him with
the holy spirit. And if Allah had pleased, those after them would not
have fought one with another after clear arguments had come to them, but
they disagreed; so there were some of them who believed and others who
denied; and if Allah had pleased they would not have fought one with
another, but Allah brings about what He intends. (2:253)’ Verily, it is
we who have believed and it is they who have denied.” The man added,
“Verily, those people have denied. I swear it by the Lord of the
Ka’bah.” He then attacked the enemies and fought them until he was
martyred, may Allah have mercy upon him.” (al-Ihtijaj, pp. 169-170).

[^2]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, 2:24, H. 2.

[^3]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha 1:260.

[^4]: - These traditions can be also found in al-Hurr al-’Amili’s
Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:446.

[^5]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:24, H. 3.

[^6]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:268, H.9.

[^7]: - Hadith al-thaqalayn reads: The Holy Prophet (S) is authentically
reported to have said: إِنِّي مُخَلِّفٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ؛ كِتَابَ
اللهِ وَعِتْرَتِي، أَهْلَ بَيْتِي، مَا إِنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِمَا لَنْ
تَضِلُّوا بَعْدِي أَبَداً، وَإِنَّهُمَا لَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى يَرِدَا
عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ. Verily, I am leaving among you two precious things:
the Book of Allah and my progeny, the members of my Household [Ahl
al-Bayt]. If you hold fast to them, you shall never go astray. These two
will never separate from each other until they meet me at the Pond. Kanz
al-’Ummal 1:185, 189. Hadith al-safinah reads: The Holy Prophet (S) is
reported to have said: إِنَّ مَثَلَ أَهْلِ بَيْتي فِيكُمْ كَمَثَلِ
سَفِينَةِ نُوحٍ؛ مَنْ رَكِبَهَا فَقَدْ نَجَا وَمَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عَنْهَا
فَقَدْ غَرِقَ. The like of my Household in this nation is the Ark of
Noah; whosoever embarked upon it was saved, but whoever turned away from
it was drowned. Kanz al-’Ummal 1:186.

[^8]: - See the author’s book of Muhadharat fi ‘Ulum al-Qur’an, Chapter:
Exegesis and Interpretation of the Holy Qur’an & Chapter: Exegesis in
the View of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

[^9]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:69, H. 3; Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin
1:347, H. 127 ; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 2:242, H. 37.

[^10]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:347, H. 128; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 2:242, H. 38.


