Chapter 2: Ethical Aspect
=========================

In the process of structuring a human community, moral standards
represent the second basis on which it stands. These moral standards
express the sentimental and cerebral aspects of human behavior and ties
linked to justice and injustice, goodness and evil, spiritual/mental
perfection and depravity in the progress of humanity. To sum up,
philosophers describe *moral standards as practical reason* and
*doctrinal and intellectual values as dependent upon hypothetical
reason.*

The Role of Ethics in the Formation of Religious Laws
-----------------------------------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) presented the features of this
aspect through the following two points:

(1) The role played by moral standards in the formation of religious
laws and a system for human society.

(2) The responsibility of man regarding moral standards defined through
the desire to achieve perfection through them.

These two points became the sharpest points of disagreement in Islamic
ideology. A large number of Islamic intellectuals adopted the notion of
fatalism (*jabr*), which argues that man actually has no control over
his ethical and behavioral deviations since they are independent of his
free will; hence, man is controlled by the Divine will throughout his
existence, and his deeds are only made and created by God.

This, however, makes no sense. It implies that God’s punishment of man
for violations of religious laws is opposed to Divine justice or
inappropriate because man lacks any independent ethical perceptions by
which he may deem things good or hideous. On the contrary, man is
obligated to obey religious laws representing God’s commandment and
Will. In this case, humans are under the absolute authority of God in
all affairs and, as is declared in the following Qur’anic verse, God
cannot be questioned about any of His affairs:

> لَا يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ (21:23)

***He cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they shall be
questioned. (21:23)***

Moreover, religious laws, under such circumstances, become devoid of any
ethical or human background because these laws are exclusive expressions
of the Divine legislative Will.

Conversely, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School has laid stress on two
conceptions of this notion:

**First**: Just as man is ethically capable of perceiving the goodness
and evilness of things on the whole, so also can he perceive the
evilness of punishing people for deeds that they are compelled to do and
the evilness of forcing people to perform some acts and avoid others
while they lack any willpower to act. It is this ethical perception that
can guide man to many divine facts.

**Second**: Religious law has come to reveal and define the details of
the total awareness with which Almighty Allah has created man. Thus,
Divine religious law is not only an obligation through which Almighty
Allah practices His absolute authority over man but also represents
Divine justice, wisdom, and Almighty Allah’s absolute dispensation of
man’s acts. In other words, religious law corresponds to benefits and
detriments of existence and progress of man towards perfection in this
world. Hence, it holds an ethical aspect.

We can now understand the significance of the theological battle that
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) fought to define the ethical aspects of religious
laws by raising the issue of the goodness and evilness of things
understood by the human will and the relationship between human will and
Divine will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ جَبْرٌ وَلاَ تَفْوِيضٌ؛ بَلْ أَمْرٌ بَيْنَ أَمْرَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is neither compulsion (by Almighty Allah to do things), nor is
there absolute delegation of power to man; rather, it is a course in the
middle of these two courses.

People’s deeds, which are the objects of religious laws, are the result
of a person’s will, thus making the person responsible for them. At the
same time, humans are the creatures of Almighty Allah Who has created
them with a will, and humans—in their existence, survival and power—are
subject to Divine will and power and cannot act without Divine provision
of existence and power.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have extracted this role of moral standards from
the Holy Qur’an. Confirming freedom of human will, the Holy Qur’an sets
forth the following example:

> ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا عَبْدًا مَمْلُوكًا لَا يَقْدِرُ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ
> وَمَنْ رَزَقْنَاهُ مِنَّا رِزْقًا حَسَنًا فَهُوَ يُنْفِقُ مِنْهُ
> سِرًّا وَجَهْرًا ۖ هَلْ يَسْتَوُونَ ۚ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ ۚ بَلْ
> أَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ(16:75)

***Allah sets forth a parable: consider a slave, the property of
another, who has no power*** ***over anything, and one whom We have
granted from Ourselves a goodly sustenance; so, he spends from it
secretly and openly. Are the two alike? All praise is due to Allah! Nay,
most of them do not know. (16:75)***

It also provides humans the desire to ponder this issue, such as in the
following holy verse:

> قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُونَ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
> (39:9)

***Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike? (39:9)***

It also provides the concepts of good and evil, justice and inequity,
honesty and lying, and miserliness and altruism as well as other
concepts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَسْتَوِي الْحَسَنَةُ وَلَا السَّيِّئَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Not alike are the good and the evil. (41:34)***

By discussing such concepts, the Holy Qur’an aims at arousing man’s
natural and sentimental perceptions, because these perceptions represent
the foundations of ethical behavior, which is defined and depicted by
the Holy Qur’an in detail and which we call *rational good and evil*.

When the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) directed their followers to adhere to this
doctrine of Divine justice, which has become one of the fundamentals of
their sect, they intended to establish an ethical basis in the spiritual
and mental structure of their followers. They instituted a sort of
psychological and spiritual immunity to protect their followers against
supporting or keeping silent with regard to grave ethical deviations,
like the ascription of inequity and aggression to Almighty Allah.

Distinction between Islam and Faith
-----------------------------------

The Holy Imams (‘a) distinguished a Muslim from a believer on ethical
grounds, as is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتِ الْأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا ۖ قُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلَٰكِنْ قُولُوا
أَسْلَمْنَا وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلِ الْإِيمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ
تُطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَا يَلِتْكُمْ مِنْ أَعْمَالِكُمْ
شَيْئًا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ  إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَرْتَابُوا
وَجَاهَدُوا بِأَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ
أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الصَّادِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The dwellers of the desert say, “We believe.” Say, “You do not
believe but say, ‘We submit’ and faith has not yet entered into your
hearts. And, if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not diminish
aught of your deeds. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. The (true)
believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger then
they doubt not and struggle hard with their wealth and their lives in
the way of Allah. They are the truthful ones. (49:14-15)***

Accordingly, declaration of Islam in utterance of the two statements of
belief (i.e. *shahadah*), belief in the Last Day, performing obligatory
prayers, observance of fasting, performance of the ritual pilgrimage (to
the Holy House of Allah in Mecca), and payment of the poor-rate
(*zakat*)—all stand as the first step of Islamic doctrine. By declaring
and performing such, one’s blood is protected from being shed, property
and honor maintained, and the general Islamic social laws applied. From
an ethical aspect, however, all these differ in reality from the actual
commitment to Islam and that which stems from such commitment.

As for faith (i.e. iman), it represents a high rank of firm belief in
the doctrine and also steadfastness in whatever it requires and whatever
results from it.

The following text—reported by al-Kulayni, in his book of *al-Kafi*,
through a valid chain of authority, from Hamran ibn A’yun—is the best
depiction of this conviction and clarifies the difference between being
Muslim and being faithful:

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإيـمَانُ مَا إسْتَقَرَّ فِي الْقَلْبِ وَأَفْضَى بِهِ إلَى اللهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَصَدَّقَهُ الْعَمَلُ بِالطَّاعَةِ للهِ وَالتَّسْلِيمِ
لأَمْرِهِ. وَالإسْلاَمُ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْ قَوْلٍ أَوْ فِعْلٍ، وَهُوَ
الَّذِي عَلَيْهِ جَمَاعَةٌ مِنَ النَّاسِ مِنَ الْفِرَقِ كُلِّهَا.
وَبِهِ حُقِنَتِ الدِّمَاءُ وَعَلَيْهِ جَرَتِ الْمَوَارِيثُ وَجَازَ
النِّكَاحُ وَاجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى الصَّلاَةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ وَالصَّوْمِ
وَالْحَجِّ فَخَرَجُوا بِذَلِكَ مِنَ الْكُفْرِ وَأُضِيفُوا إلَى
الإيـمَانِ. وَالإسْلاَمُ لاَ يُشْرِكُ الإيـمَانَ وَالإِيـمَانُ
يُشْرِكُ الإسْلاَمَ وَهُمَا فِي الْقَوْلِ وَالْفِعْلِ يَجْتَمِعَانِ،
كَمَا صَارَتِ الْكَعْبَةُ فِي الْمَسْجِدِ وَالْمَسْجِدُ لَيْسَ فِي
الْكَعْبَةِ. وَكَذَلِكَ الإِيـمَانُ يُشْرِكُ الإسْلاَمَ وَالإسْلاَمُ
لاَ يُشْرِكُ الإيـمَانَ. وَقَدْ قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: { قَالَتْ
الأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا. قُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا، وَلَكِنْ قُولُوا:
أَسْلَمْنَا، وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلْ الإِيـمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ.} فَقَوْلُ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَصْدَقُ الأَقْوَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Faith (iman) is what settles in hearts, revealed to Almighty Allah, and
is verified by practicing acts of obedience to Him and submission to His
decrees. Islam, on the other hand, stands for the words and deeds that
one says or does publicly. Accordingly, Islam is that which is adopted
by groups of people of all sects. Due to declaration of the creed of
Islam, one’s blood is spared, laws of inheritance are applied to him,
and marriage is permitted. Both Muslims and faithful are equal in
performing the obligatory prayers, paying the poor-rate, observing the
(obligatory) fasting, and undertaking the ritual pilgrimage (hajj). By
doing these acts, they depart atheism and attach themselves to faith.
Islam does not necessarily beget faith while faith always accompanies
Islam, even though both Islam and faith meet in words and deeds. Just as
the Ka’bah lies in the Sacred Mosque while the Sacred Mosque is not
situated in the Ka’bah, so also does faith accompany Islam while Islam
does not necessarily beget faith. Almighty Allah has said, “The dwellers
of the desert say, ‘We believe.’ Say, ‘You do not believe but say, we
submit; and faith has not yet entered into your hearts.” Verily, the
saying of Almighty Allah is the most truthful of all sayings.*

*The reporter of this saying asked, “Does a faithful believer enjoy a
preference in virtues, laws, provisions, or any other things over a
Muslim?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ. هُمْ يَجْرِيَانِ فِي ذَلِكَ مَجْرىً وَاحِداً. وَلَكِنَّ
لِلْمُؤْمِنِ فَضْلاً عَلَى الْمُسْلِمِ فِي أَعْمَالِهِمَا وَمَا
يَتَقَرَّبَانِ بِهِ إلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“No, the same laws and rulings are applied to both Muslims and faithful
believers. However, a faithful believer enjoys preference over a Muslim
in deeds and acts of seeking nearness to Allah, the Almighty and
Majestic.”*

*The reporter asked, “Almighty Allah says, ‘Whoever brings a good deed,
shall have ten like it (6:160),’ while you have just said that Muslims
and faithful believers both perform the prayers, pay the poor-rate,
observe fasting, and go on the ritual pilgrimage! How do you explain
this preference?”*

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَيْسَ قَدْ قَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: {فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ أَضْعَافًا
كَثِيرَةً؟} فَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ هُمُ الَّذِينَ يُضَاعِفُ اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ لَهُمْ حَسَنَاتِهِمْ لِكُلِّ حَسَنَةٍ سَبْعِينَ ضِعْفاً.
فَهَذَا فَضْلُ الْمُؤْمِنِ، وَيَزِيدُهُ اللهُ عَلَى قَدْرِ صِحَّةِ
إيـمَانِهِ أَضْعَافاً كَثِيرَةً. وَيَفْعَلُ اللهُ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مَا
يَشَاءُ مِنَ الْخَيْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Almighty Allah has also said,* ***‘Who is it that will offer Allah a
goodly gift, so He will multiply it for him manifold. (2:245)’*** *Those
who receive multiplication of their acts by Almighty Allah are the
faithful believers. Each good act of theirs will increase seventyfold.
This is the preference for the faithful believers. Their acts Almighty
Allah will multiply manifoldly according to the degrees of their faith.
Moreover, Almighty Allah imbues faithful believers with uncountable
virtues as He wills.”*

*The reporter asked, “If one converts to Islam, does this mean that he
has become a faithful believer?”*

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ. وَلَكِنَّهُ قَدْ أُضِيفَ إلَى الإِيـمَانِ وَخَرَجَ مِنَ
الْكُفْرِ. وَسَأَضْرِبُ لَكَ مَثَلاً تَعْقِلُ بِهِ فَضْلَ الإِيـمَانِ
عَلَى الإسْلاَمِ: أَرَأَيْتَ لَوْ بَصُرْتَ رَجُلاً فِي الْمَسْجِدِ،
أَكُنْتَ تَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ رَأَيْتَهُ فِي الْكَعْبَةِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“No, it does not. Such conversion only attaches him to belief and takes
him out of disbelief. Let me cite for you an example that will make you
understand the preference of faith over (profession of) Islam. If you
see a man in the Sacred Mosque, can you testify that you saw him in the
Ka’bah?”*

*The reporter answered, “No, I cannot.”*

The Imam (‘a) asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ بَصُرْتَ رَجُلاً فِي الْكَعْبَةِ، أَكُنْتَ شَاهِداً أَنَّهُ قَدْ
دَخَلَ الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you see a man in the Ka’bah; can you testify that you have seen him
in the Holy Mosque?”*

*The reporter answered, “Yes, I can.”*

*The Imam (‘a) asked, “How is that?”*

*The reporter answered, “This man cannot arrive at the Ka’bah before he
enters the Sacred Mosque.”*

*The Imam (‘a) said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَصَبْتَ وَأَحْسَنْتَ. كَذَلِكَ الإِيـمَانُ وَالإسْلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“You are right and you have done well! Such are faith and Islam.”*[^1]

Faith and Deed
--------------

The Holy Imams (‘a) presented the practical aspect of belief in Almighty
Allah, which signifies man’s most important ethical characteristic. They
also taught their followers how to take this faith out of its abstract
doctrinal state and sheer mental commitment to its behavioral,
practical, and applied form by interpreting faith as a reality,
essentially composed of different ranks and classes capable of being
attained when put into practice.

It seems that this topic was quite controversial during the ages of the
Holy Imams (‘a). Some scholars argued that there is no difference
between the faith of the prophets and the faith of Satan, because faith
is an unchangeable fact in the sense that it stands for no more than
commitment to believing in the existence of Almighty Allah. This fact
can be either present or absent. The only difference between the
prophets and Satan in this ideology lies in their behavior and deeds not
in the original existence of their commitment to belief.

On the other hand, the instructions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) entailed
that belief in Almighty Allah is of various ranks that vary from one
believer to another, because it depends upon practical actions to a
great extent. Hence, the more a servant (of Almighty Allah) commits
himself and gives his commitment a material form in his behavior, the
more his degree of faith increases and stands firm in his heart and
sentiment.

In his book of *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid chain of
authority, has reported Jamil ibn Darraj as saying:

I, once, asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) to define faith.

He (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهَادَةُ أَنْ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ اللهُ وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّداً رَسُولُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is to profess that there is no deity save Allah and Muhammad is His
messenger.”*

*I further asked, “This is an act; is it not?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Yes, it is.”*

*I added, “So, action is part of faith.”*

The Imam (‘a) clarified:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَثْبُتُ لَهُ الإيـمَانُ إلاَّ بِالْعَمَلِ، وَالْعَمَلُ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One’s faith is not substantiated without action, which is part of
faith.”*[^2]

This concept has been explained by some texts in various ways, such as
in the following tradition:

In *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported that Hammad ibn ‘Amr
al-Nusaybi said that someone once asked the knowledgeable Imam (‘a) the
following question:

*“O Knowledgeable, inform me of the best of all deeds in the view of
Almighty Allah.”*

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لاَ يُقْبَلُ عَمَلٌ إِلاَّ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is verily the deed without which no other deed will be accepted.”*

*“What is that?” asked the man.*

The Imam (‘a) explained:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإيـمَانُ بِاللهِ، الَّذِي هُوَ أَعْلَى الأَعْمَالِ دَرَجَةً
وَأَسْنَاهَا حَظّاً وَأَشْرَفُهَا مَنْزِلَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is belief in Almighty Allah (i.e. faith), which is the highest of
all deeds in rank, the most sublime in measurement, and the most
honorable in standing.”*

*“Please, tell me whether faith is both word and deed or only word
without deed,” asked the reporter.*

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإيـمَانُ عَمَلٌ كُلُّهُ، وَالْقَوْلُ بَعْضُ ذَلِكَ الْعَمَلِ
بِفَرْضٍ مِنَ اللهِ بَيَّنَهُ فِي كِتَابِهِ، وَاضِحٌ نُورُهُ،
ثَابِتَةٌ حُجَّتُهُ، يَشْهَدُ بِهِ الْكِتَابُ وَيَدْعُو إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Faith is deed all in all.* *Word (i.e. utterance of the creed of
faith) is only part of that deed according to a decree of Almighty Allah
that He has shown in His Book with obvious light and firm argument to
which the Book (i.e. Qur’an) testifies and upon which it calls.”*

*“Please, describe this to me so that I can understand it,” requested
the reporter.*

The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الإيـمَانَ حَالاَتٌ وَدَرَجَاتٌ وَطَبَقَاتٌ وَمَنَازِلُ فَمِنْهُ
التَّامُّ الْمُنْتَهِي تَمَامُهُ وَمِنْهُ النَّاقِصُ الْمُنْتَهِي
نُقْصَانُهُ وَمِنْهُ الزَّائِدُ الرَّاجِحُ زِيَادَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Faith is of various states, ranks, classes, and standings. Some people
hold the most perfect degree of faith, others an extremely deficient
degree, and others a ponderously abundant degree.”*

*The reporter asked, “Can faith be perfect, increasable, and
deficient?”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Yes, it can.”*

*The reporter asked, “How is that?”*

The Imam (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى فَرَضَ الإيـمَانَ عَلَى جَوَارِحِ
بَنِي آدَمَ وَقَسَّمَهُ عَلَيْهَا وَفَرَّقَهُ عَلَيْهَا؛ فَلَيْسَ مِنْ
جَوَارِحِهِمْ جَارِحَةٌ إلاَّ وَهِيَ مُوَكَّلَةٌ مِنَ الإيـمَانِ
بِغَيْرِ مَا وُكِّلَتْ بِهِ أُخْتُهَا، فَمِنْهَا قَلْبُهُ الَّذِي بِهِ
يَعْقِلُ وَيَفْقَهُ وَيَفْهَمُ، وَهُوَ أَمِيرُ بَدَنِهِ الَّذِي لاَ
تُورِدُ الْجَوَارِحُ وَلاَ تَصْدُرُ إلاَّ عَنْ رَأْيِهِ وَأَمْرِهِ،
وَمِنْهَا يَدَاهُ اللَّتَانِ يَبْطِشُ بِهِمَا وَرِجْلاَهُ اللَّتَانِ
يَمْشِي بِهِمَا وَفَرْجُهُ الَّذِي البَاهُ مِنْ قِبَلِهِ وَلِسَانُهُ
الَّذِي يَنْطِقُ بِهِ الْكِتَابَ وَيَشْهَدُ بِهِ عَلَيْهَا،
وَعَيْنَاهُ اللَّتَانِ يُبْصِرُ بِهِمَا، وَأُذُنَاهُ اللَّتَانِ
يَسْمَعُ بِهِمَا. وَفُرِضَ عَلَى الْقَلْبِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى
اللِّسَانِ، وَفُرِضَ عَلَى اللِّسَانِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى
الْعَيْنَيْنِ، وَفُرِضَ عَلَى الْعَيْنَيْنِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى
السَّمْعِ، وَفُرِضَ عَلَى السَّمْعِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى
الْيَدَيْنِ، وَفُرِضَ عَلَى الْيَدَيْنِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى
الرِّجْلَيْنِ، وَفُرِضَ عَلَى الرِّجْلَيْنِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى
الْفَرْجِ، وَفُرِضَ عَلَى الْفَرْجِ غَيْرُ مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى الْوَجْهِ.
فَأَمَّا مَا فُرِضَ عَلَى الْقَلْبِ مِنَ الإيـمَانِ فَالإقْرَارُ
وَالْمَعْرِفَةُ وَالتَّصْدِيقُ وَالتَّسْلِيمُ وَالْعَقْدُ وَالرِّضَا
بِأَنْ لاَ إلَهَ إلاَّ اللهُ وَحْدَهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ، أَحَداً
صَمَداً لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ صَاحِبَةً وَلاَ وَلَداً، وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّداً،
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، عَبْدُهُ وَرَسُولُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has imposed faith on the
organs of human beings, spread it out and distributed it among them.
Therefore, every organ in the human body is ordained with a sort of
faith that is completely different from other sorts imposed upon other
organs. One of these organs is one’s heart with which he can realize,
comprehend, and understand things. It is the chief of the body and all
other organs cannot do or stop doing anything except by its command.
Other organs are his hands with which he can hold things, his feet with
which he can walk, private parts that receive commands from the heart,
the tongue with which he can utter (the texts of) the Book and testify
to it, the eyes with which he can see, and ears with which he can hear.*

*The faith that Almighty Allah has imposed on man’s heart is different
from that which* *He has imposed upon the tongue; the faith imposed upon
the tongue is different from that imposed upon the eyes; the faith
imposed upon the eyes is different from that imposed upon the hearing;
the faith imposed upon the hearing is different from that imposed upon
the hands; the faith imposed upon the hands is different from that
imposed upon the feet; the faith imposed upon the feet is different from
that imposed upon the private parts; and the faith imposed upon the
private parts is different from that imposed on the face. The part of
faith that is imposed upon man’s heart is to profess, recognize,
testify, submit, avow and accept that there is no deity but Allah. Also,
that He is the One and Only, without any partner, Singular, eternally
besought of all, has taken neither consort nor son, and that
Muhammad—may He bless him and his Household—is His servant and
messenger.”*[^3]

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) said one’s faith is decided on
the above grounds. They also believed that Almighty Allah’s
commissioning with a duty must be in the scope of man’s ability and
power.

It has been narrated on the authority of ‘Ammar ibn al-Ahwas that Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَضَعَ الإيـمَانَ عَلَى سَبْعَةِ أَسْهُمٍ:
عَلَى البِرِّ وَالصِّدْقِ وَالْيَقِينِ وَالرِّضَا وَالْوَفَاءِ
وَالْعِلْمِ وَالْحِلْمِ. ثُمَّ قَسَّمَ ذَلِكَ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ. فَمَنْ
جُعِلَ فِيهِ هَذِهِ السَّبْعَةُ الأَسْهُمِ فَهُوَ كَامِلٌ مُحْتَمِلٌ.
وَقَسَمَ لِبَعْضِ النَّاسِ السَّهْمَ وَلِبَعْضٍ السَّهْمَيْنِ
وَلِبَعْضٍ الثَّلاَثَةَ حَتَّى انْتَهَوا إلَى السَّبْعَةِ... لاَ
تَحْمِلُوا عَلَى صَاحِبِ السَّهْمِ سَهْمَيْنِ وَلاَ عَلَى صَاحِبِ
السَّهْمَيْنِ ثَلاَثَةً فَتَبْهَضُوهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Allah, the Almighty and Majestic, has placed faith on seven
qualities: piety, honesty,* *certitude, contentedness, loyalty,
knowledge, and forbearance. Next, He distributed these qualities among
people. He who won all these seven qualities is definitely perfect (in
faith) and capable (of deserving all these seven qualities). He then
granted some people one quality, two qualities, and three qualities up
to seven…Do not impose two qualities of faith upon him who has been
granted one only and three qualities upon him who has been granted two
only and so on up to all seven, lest you overburden them.*[^4]

In a validly reported tradition, Sadir has reported that Imam al-Baqir
(‘a) addressed him as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَى مَنَازِلَ؛ مِنْهُمْ عَلَى وَاحِدَةٍ،
وَمِنْهُمْ عَلَى اثْنَتَيْنِ، وَمِنْهُمْ عَلَى ثَلاَثٍ، وَمِنْهُمْ
عَلَى أَرْبَعٍ، وَمِنْهُمْ عَلَى خَمْسٍ، وَمِنْهُمْ عَلَى سِتٍّ،
وَمِنْهُمْ عَلَى سَبْعٍ. فَلَوْ ذَهَبْتَ تَحْمِلُ عَلَى صَاحِبِ
الْوَاحِدَةِ ثِنْتَيْنِ لَمْ يَقْوَ، وَعَلَى صَاحِبِ الثِّنْتَيْنِ
ثَلاَثاً لَمْ يَقْوَ، وَعَلَى صَاحِبِ الثَّلاَثِ أَرْبَعاً لَمْ
يَقْوَ، وَعَلَى صَاحِبِ الأَرْبَعِ خَمْساً لَمْ يَقْوَ، وَعَلَى
صَاحِبِ الْخَمْسِ سِتّاً لَمْ يَقْوَ، وَعَلَى صَاحِبِ السِّتِّ سَبْعاً
لَمْ يَقْوَ، وَعَلَى هَذِهِ الدَّرَجَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, the believers are of various ranks. Some of them hold one rank
only, others two, some others three, some others four, some five, some
others six, and some others seven. If you impose (an act that cannot be
done except by those who enjoy) two ranks upon one who has one rank
only, he will certainly fail to undertake it. If you impose three*
*ranks upon one who has two only, he will fail to undertake it. If you
impose four ranks upon one who has three only, he will fail to undertake
it. If you impose five ranks upon one who has four only, he will fail to
undertake it. If you impose six ranks upon one who has five only, he
will fail to undertake it. If you impose seven ranks upon one who has
six only, he will fail to undertake it. So also are the other ranks*[^5]
*of faith.*[^6]

In view of this, one’s faith is threatened when one deviates from
practical behavior and abandons ethical conduct. Likewise, one’s faith
is increased and perfected when one abides by the highest moral
standards of behavior.

This also reveals to us a method of education and management. The more
perfect one’s faith is, the more authorized to hold higher grades of
duties and responsibilities. Similarly, whenever entrusting some
responsibilities with some people, it is necessary to take into
consideration their level of faith in order to restrict to them the
duties that are rendered to those of lower ranks of faith, as is
instructed in the aforementioned tradition.

Beyond doubt, such a method of understanding faith and the role that
moral standards play in the composition of this faith has great positive
effects on behavioral and moral commitments and on the undertaking of
responsibilities and tasks.

Pattern of Conduct and Morality
-------------------------------

The Holy Imams (‘a) firmly instructed their companions and followers to
play the role of excellent exemplars and models of trust and reliance
for the Muslim community.

Presenting the philosophy of history, the Holy Qur’an refers to two
kinds of exemplars:

**The first kind** is the ‘Excellent Exemplar’ (*al-uswah al-hasanah*)
that is perfect in ideals, values and moral commitments, such as the
exemplary role played by Prophet Abraham (‘a), his companions, and
Prophet Muhammad (S) as well as other Prophets and Messengers of
Almighty Allah. In this respect, the Holy Qur’an reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِمَنْ كَانَ
يَرْجُو اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ وَذَكَرَ اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly, you have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent example
for him whose hope is Allah and the latter day and remembers Allah much.
(33:21)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ كَانَتْ لَكُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ
مَعَهُ إِذْ قَالُوا لِقَوْمِهِمْ إِنَّا بُرَآءُ مِنْكُمْ وَمِمَّا
تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, there is for you a good example in Abraham and those with him
when they said to their people: Surely, we are clear of you and of what
you serve besides Allah. (60:4)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِيهِمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِمَنْ كَانَ يَرْجُو
اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly, there is for you in them a good example, for him who fears
Allah and the*** ***last day. (60:6)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحُكْمَ
وَالنُّبُوَّةَ ۚ فَإِنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهَا هَٰؤُلَاءِ فَقَدْ وَكَّلْنَا
بِهَا قَوْمًا لَيْسُوا بِهَا بِكَافِرِينَ أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ هَدَى
اللَّهُ ۖ فَبِهُدَاهُمُ اقْتَدِهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are they to whom We gave the Book and the Wisdom and the
prophecy; therefore, if these disbelieve in it, We have already
entrusted it to a people who are not disbelievers in it. These are the
ones whom Allah has guided; therefore, follow their guidance.
(6:89-90)***

**The second kind** is the wicked exemplar (*al-uswah al-sayyi'ah*)
which relies upon power, authority, and external domination. This is
specifically the pattern of oppressors, tyrants, leaders of evil, ruling
authorities, and the rich. Referring to these wicked exemplars, the Holy
Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ قَالُوا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَىٰ أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ
آثَارِهِمْ مُهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay! They say: We found our fathers on a course and surely, we are
guided by their footsteps. (43:22)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّا أَطَعْنَا سَادَتَنَا وَكُبَرَاءَنَا
فَأَضَلُّونَا السَّبِيلَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They shall say: O our Lord! Surely, we obeyed our leaders and our
great men, so they led us astray from the path. (33:67)***

Usually, man acts upon one of the following two basic factors in the
issue of exemplar:

**First**, sound human nature and the effects of righteousness, decency,
and sentiment within man’s inner self.

**Second**, whims, lusts, fear, craving, and the points of weakness and
defect in man’s inner self.

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) urged their followers to mobilize
and utilize the first factor in order to attain this social and human
position.

‘Abdullah ibn Abi-Ya’fur has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُونُوا دُعَاةً لِلنَّاسِ بِالْخَيْرِ بِغَيْرِ ألْسِنَتِكُمْ،
لِيَرَوْا مِنْكُمُ الإجْتِهَادَ وَالصِّدْقَ وَالْوَرَعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Act as heralds to goodness in the milieus of people by other means than
your tongues (i.e. speech) so that they can become aware of your
diligence, honesty, and piety.*[^7]

Ibn ‘Abbas has reported that the Holy Prophet (S) was asked about the
best of associates. He answered,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(خَيْرُ الْجُلَسَاءِ) مَنْ تُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ رُؤْيَتُهُ، وَيَزِيدُ
فِي عِلْمِكُمْ مَنْطِقُهُ، وَيُرَغِّبُكُمْ فِي الآخِرَةِ عَمَلُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(The best associate) is he who reminds you of Almighty Allah when you
see him, increases your knowledge when he speaks, and awakens your
desires for the Hereafter when he acts.*[^8]

Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَبْغَضَ النَّاسِ إلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَنْ يَقْتَدِي
بِسُنَّةِ إمَامٍ وَلاَ يَقْتَدِي بِأَعْمَالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, the most hated of all people by Allah—the Almighty and
Majestic—is one who follows the beliefs of a leader but does not imitate
his conduct.*[^9]

Decency and Good Manners
------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) conferred a vital role upon
decency[^10] in practical social life. According to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
School, decency is essential in people who hold such offices, positions,
and acts like rulership, judicature, governmental offices, issuance of
religious laws, leading congregational prayers, testifying in
litigations, divorces, and other offices listed in books on the
practical laws of Islam. This is clear-cut evidence regarding the fact
that decency, as a quality, is of great importance, since it plays a
vital role in social life.

Decency is so important that it is preferred to knowledge and
experience. Hence, knowledge of a person who lacks decency and piety is
worthless. Moreover, knowledge without piety denotes mischief.
Therefore, the Holy Imams (‘a) have intensely warned against wicked
scholars (i.e. knowledgeable persons who lack decency).

Thus, decency has occupied a special position in the mentality and
psychological and spiritual conditions of the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a). It has also had a profound impact on the attitudes of
jurisprudents, judges, politicians, and managers of public activities.

Such understanding of decency is missing in other Muslim sects or the
religious milieus to which these sects belong. For instance, other
Muslim sects admit, yet with discrepancy, that a decadent person
(*fasiq*) may lead a congregational prayer and rule over the Muslim
community. They also show lenience regarding the capacity of witnesses.

Without a doubt, decency holds a connotation wider than trustworthiness
and reliability; therefore, it engrosses a wide-ranging moral aspect.

Naturally, decency that is essential in witnesses differs in degree from
decency essential in rulers, governors, judges, and issuers of verdicts
(*mufti*). In the latter, decency must be of a higher degree in order to
be compatible with the significance of these offices and enable such
people to handle their psychological and social pressures easily.

Method of Self-Purification
---------------------------

The Holy Imams (‘a) have instituted certain methods for the virtuous
community to attain self-purification and the required degree of high
morality. One of these is struggle with the carnal self.

Struggle With The Carnal Self: Proposition And Approach
-------------------------------------------------------

### Proposition

We need to understand the Islamic approach and proposition of struggle
with the carnal self as a topic. Briefly, we can allude to the following
aspects:

**First**: Human life is extensively long in the sense that it is not
restricted to existence in this world, which is in fact short and
limited when compared to the eternal life of human beings. This worldly
existence is a period of test and tribulation but, because of its short
term, it is treated as a period of “play, idle talk, pageantry, and
boasting.” On the other hand, the other eternal life is the Hereafter in
which the reality of all actions and their just consequences
materialize.

**Second**: The basis of perfection of human life is the human soul, or
*self*, not the physical aspect—the body—because that which survives and
continues to exist and develop is the *self* not the body, which
eventually perishes, reverses in nature, changes, and transforms.

Thus, struggle with the carnal self is an element of perfection of the
human self.

**Third**: Almighty Allah created man and gave him reason, recognition
of Him, a general inclination towards true guidance, and recognition of
truths and causes of advantages and disadvantages, yet in a general
manner. Almighty Allah also placed in man fancies and lusts that can
allure him towards worldly life in order to test and try him on the one
hand and to make these fancies act us a motivating power on the other.
Hence, these are two factors, both parallel and opposite, that create
human activity.

Besides, Almighty Allah has granted man the capability of creating
personal activities, notions about the future, and arriving at
generalizations. As a result, human volition has been the decisive
factor in man’s movement and choice of certain acts.

Whenever man applies his reason to direct his will and choice and
prevail over them, he will advance on the path of perfection. On the
other hand, if man allows his fancy and lusts to prevail over his will
and direct his actions, he will slip onto the path of deterioration and
regression.

In the earlier hypothesis, the passions—directed by reason and
knowledge—become energy that propel towards perfection, while in the
latter, they become destructive and detrimental energy.

**Fourth**: Out of His kindness, mercy, magnanimity, wisdom and infinite
knowledge, Almighty Allah sent the prophets with books, missions and
guidance through Divine revelation in order to lead humanity towards the
truth especially when facts are confused and the truth resembles
falsehood or when man fails to realize and appreciate the truth or his
benefit and loss.

The average person fails to recognize these truths and advantages;
therefore, the prophets and messengers of Almighty Allah undertake the
missions of conveying His messages, leading humanity to righteousness,
teaching the Holy Book and wisdom, judging with justice between people
in matters wherein they differ and witnessing their conduct and
activity.

**Fifth**: If human will coincides with the Divine Legislative Will
represented by Divine edicts, laws, and provisions, the human self will
attain perfection because it will be compatible with the truth and its
advantages. To achieve this, man is required to strive against his
fancies and control his lusts in order to make them fall in line with
the religious laws.

Moreover, struggle with the self—against fancies and lusts—intrinsically
leads to self-perfection, which is the groundwork of human perfection,
just as physical self-perfection can be attained through physical
exertion and sports.

Islam has set up a definite course to overcome psychological strife of
the self and attain self-perfection. Of course, this course has certain
pillars, foundations, and practical forms. The following is a summary of
these pillars and foundations in addition to other general aspects that
relate to the practical forms and methods. Details are postponed for
another occasion.[^11]

### The Way

The pillars of the Ahl al-Bayt’s Islamic method of struggle with the
carnal self are as follows. The detailed features can be obtained from
discussions published on the topic of struggle with the carnal self or
self-purification.[^12]

**First**: One of the foundations of struggle with the carnal self,
according to Islam and the Ahl al-Bayt’s instructions, is to strengthen
one’s ties with Almighty Allah through:

(1) Strong faith in Him

(2) Full trust in Him

(3) A good concept of Allah

(4) Sincerity in deed and intention

(5) Love for Him

(6) Fear of Him

(7) Hope in Him

**Second**: *The second foundation of struggle with the carnal self is
to comply with reason that guides towards the truth.* One of the
features of complying with reason is to depend upon knowledge and
erudition to face ignorance and fancies and avoid falling under their
influence. In view of this fact, *Divine punishment and reward will be
in accordance with one’s reason.* It is strongly recommended to consult
one’s reason and then give preference to it over fancy in all matters
that one may face in life.

**Third**: The other foundation of struggle with the carnal self
includes the avoidance of disobedience to Almighty Allah, sins, and
wrongdoing and the practice of piety, chastity and restraint when the
self inclines towards evil and lusts. The next stage is identifying
one’s development in the struggle against the carnal self, control over
tendencies, and use of faculties of the self within legal restrictions.
The positive and negative psychological and spiritual consequences on
life are connected to such commitment to contend with the self.

**Fourth**: The fourth foundation of struggle with the carnal self can
be summarized in the following points:

(1) Be steadfast in obeying Almighty Allah

(2) Be committed to religious duties

(3) Forsake acts of disobedience

(4) Avoid committing forbidden acts

(5) Withstand psychological and external pressures by means of
refraining from surrendering, accepting, or submitting to them

(6) Persist in the path of obedience

(7) Shun all acts of disobedience

(8) Strengthen factors of patience

(9) Develop willpower and capability for endurance

(10) Control one’s emotions and passivity by strengthening one’s
willpower

**Fifth**: Another foundation of struggle with the carnal self is the
practice of calling oneself to account and monitoring one’s deeds and
activities as well as emotions, feelings, and senses. By doing this one
can figure out the scope of compatibility of one’s acts, behavior,
emotions and feelings with religious laws, Islamic morals, perfective
features and noble goals that Almighty Allah has put before man along
his progress towards self-perfection.

**Sixth**: The other foundation is to repent and frequently turn to
Almighty Allah whenever one feels that he has deviated from the path of
truth and the straight course of justice, and whenever one falls into
sin and wrongdoing or unwittingly commits offences. As soon as man finds
himself performing such wrong deeds, he must hurry to repent by feeling
sorry, confessing that he has committed a sin, determining to commit
himself to religious duties, and compensating for the financial or moral
wrongdoings that he may have committed against others.

**Seventh**: The seventh foundation is to detect sources of lustful
drives, such as egoism and pursuance of desires like “women, sons, and
hoarded treasures of gold and silver.” It also requires detecting
psychological tendencies in one’s personality, such as rage, envy,
hunger for power, arrogance, cavorting about, avarice, laziness, tribal
or national fanaticism, ignorance-based zealotry, wronging others,
inclination to transgression, violation of others’ rights, and so on.
The stage following detection must be to remedy these drives and be
watchful of them.

**Eighth**: Creation of immunity, resistance, impregnability, and refuge
against fancies inside the human self can play a major role in the
establishment of the high level of struggle against the carnal self that
guides man in his progress towards self-perfection. To achieve such
strength in the inner self, one needs to commit oneself to performing
recommended acts and avoiding forbidden acts. Such commitment builds a
defensive fence around the self to prevent it from falling under the
influences of fancies. When this is done, the *self* climbs more steps
towards self-perfection.

More Methods for Struggle with the Carnal Self
----------------------------------------------

In addition to the above, other methods of struggle with the carnal self
can be derived from general Islamic teachings, as follows:

**(1) Supplicatory prayers (pl.** ***ad’iyah*****/sing.** ***du’a'*****)
and remembrance of Almighty Allah (i.e.** ***dhikr*****):** The Holy
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt ('a) set a course of supplicatory prayers and
words and statements of *dhikr* that cover all the hours of days and
nights. They also invited attention to the importance of devotional acts
practiced on nights such as:

The Qadr Nights (the 19th, 21st, and 23rd of Ramadhan); Thursday nights
(i.e. the nights before Fridays);

The nights preceding the Feast Days (i.e. ‘Id—the 1st of Shawwal and
10th of Dhu’l-Hijjah);

The eves of Islamic occasions such as the eves of the Holy Prophet’s
birth, the Divine Mission, ‘Id al-Ghadir, the 15th of Sha’ban…etc.

In addition to these nights, certain days of the year are of special
significance with regard to acts of worship, such as:

The first nine days of Dhu’l-Hijjah;

The Tashriq Days (the 11th, 12th, and 13th of Dhu’l-Hijjah);

The ‘Id Days, including the day of ‘Id Ghadir;

The Holy Prophet’s birthday;

The anniversary of the Divine Mission;

The day of ‘Ashura', and other special days.

**(2) Special Recommended Prayers:** The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
('a) prescribed a number of voluntary prayers to be performed at any
time. These are prayers ascribed to the Fourteen Infallibles, Ja’far
al-Tayyar’s Prayer, and other prayers, as well as other general prayers
to be voluntarily offered on particular nights that have special
devotional acts, such as the nights of Ramadhan and Islamic
anniversaries.

**(3) Other Acts of Worship**: The Holy Imams ('a) have also recommended
other devotional, yet voluntary, acts such as fasting, confinement to
mosques (*i’tikaf*), ‘Umrah, visitations to the tombs of the Holy
Prophet (S), the Holy Imams (‘a) and the righteous servants of Almighty
Allah. Statements of glorification of Almighty Allah (*dhikr*), giving
alms from one’s wealth for the sake of Allah, and visiting one’s
relatives, neighbors, brethren-in-faith and even Muslims in general are
included.

The minute details of all these devotional acts can be found in
reference books of *hadith* on chapters dedicated to certain subjects
like struggle with the carnal self, self-perfection, skill in social
relationships, affiliation with one’s brethren-in-faith and excellent
moral behavior. Practicing such devotional acts escalates the moral
aspects and behavioral commitments and strengthens the personality at
both individual and social levels.

Details of these acts are discussed in the coming book on Rituals and
Acts of the Worship System.

[^1]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:26-27, H.5.

[^2]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:38, H.6.

[^3]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:38, H.7.

[^4]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:42, H.1. To impose two qualities of
faith upon one who has been granted only one…etc.—this means to charge
one who has only one quality of faith with an act that cannot be done
except by one who enjoys two qualities or more is unacceptable because
he will not be able to undertake such.

[^5]: - This may be an indication of the grades mentioned by Almighty
Allah in the holy verse that reads, “They are of varying grades in the
sight of Allah. (3:163)

[^6]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:45, H. 3.

[^7]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:513, H. 1.

[^8]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 8:412, H. 4.

[^9]: - Shaykh al-Sadur, al-Khisal 1:21, H. 62; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 71:178, H. 25.

[^10]: - Decency (‘adalah) is a supreme rank of straightness and
righteousness on the path of the religion, or mental disposition that
prevents man from falling prey to prohibitions and abandoning obligatory
acts or repenting after committing a sin.

[^11]: - In my exegesis of Surah al-Jumu’ah (No. 62) I have thrashed out
the course of purification and education in Islam. In the discussions of
the ‘Social Relations System’ and ‘Rituals and Acts of Worship System’,
I will introduce an aspect of this topic.

[^12]: - I have dealt with this topic, in some details, in my lectures
of Ramadhan, 1413-1414. Traditions in this respect are overlooked on
account of briefingbrevity. However, these traditions can be seen in
al-Hurr al-’Amili’s Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, Vol. 11, Section:
Self-StrifeStruggle with the Carnal Self, Section: Enjoining the Right
and Forbidding the Evil, and other sections.


