Chapter 3: Cultural Aspect
==========================

Prelude
-------

Culture, or education, occupies the third place of importance in the
process of building the virtuous community. It can portray the correct
features of this community, since it represents the proportionally
detailed outlines of the doctrinal and moral content and the foundation
on which the superstructure of the virtuous community can be
established. The institutions, programs, and consequences of education
can maintain the endurance and continuity of this structure in addition
to connecting with the doctrinal and moral aspects. Education helps make
these aspects become part of the culture by which the nation abides.

Education is a well-fortified shelter that can maintain the doctrines
and morals of the nation on the one hand and supply the people with a
high moral spirit on the other.

It can also hold together the nation and the virtuous community from all
parts of the world to unify them on their path, affairs, and goals. This
is so because education monitors the details of the social structure and
supplies all aspects with the concepts it needs at political, economic,
social, organizational, or security levels and even at the levels of
form, content, and purport.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School has granted the educational aspect a special
privilege and particular significance through their actions and by
building the virtuous community.

No doubt, the Holy Qur’an, being the richest source of Islamic education
in the view of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), has been the object of their
greatest interest. For that reason, Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) took
the initiative of compiling the Holy Qur’an based on its revelation and
interpretation.

In this respect, ‘Amr ibn Abi’l-Miqdam has reported on the authority of
Jabir that he heard Imam al-Baqir (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا إدَّعَى أَحَدٌ مِنَ النَّاسِ أَنَّهُ جَمَعَ الْقُرْآنَ كُلَّهُ
كَمَا أُنْزِلَ إلاَّ كَذَّابٌ؛ وَمَا جَمَعَهُ وَحَفِظَهُ كَمَا
نَزَّلَهُ اللهُ تَعَالَى إلاَّ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ
وَالأَئِمَّةُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*None may claim that he compiled the entire Qur’an as exactly as it was
revealed but a liar. None compiled and preserved it as exactly as it was
revealed except ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib (‘a) and the Imams (‘a) after
him.*[^1]

Likewise, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) was the first to compile, write down and
preserve the Prophetic Traditions (Sunnah), because these traditions are
considered the second source of Islamic culture. His efforts resulted in
the Comprehensive Document (*al-Sahifah al-Jami’ah*) that was
transferred to the Holy Imams (‘a) thereafter.

Abu-Basir has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا مُحَمَّدٍ! وَإنَّ عِنْدَنَا الْجَامِعَةَ. وَمَا يُدْرِيهِمْ
مَا الْجَامِعَةُ؟ صَحِيفَةٌ طُولُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعاً بِذِرَاعِ
رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَإمْلاَئِهِ مَنْ فَلْقِ
فِيهِ وَخَطِّ عَلِيٍّ بِيَمِينِهِ. فِيهَا كُلُّ حَلاَلٍ وَحَرَامٍ
وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ يَحْتَاجُ النَّاسُ إلَيْهِ حَتَّى الأَرْشَ مِنَ
الْخَدْشِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Abu-Muhammad, we do have the Jami’ah with us. What do they know about
the Jami’ah? It is a seventy-cubit long document that was measured and
directly dictated by Allah’s Messenger (S) and handwritten by ‘Ali (‘a).
It includes all that which is lawful and unlawful and everything people
may need, even matters that are as minute as the expiation for a
scratch.*[^2]

Abu-Basir has also reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), talking
about the verdicts of Ibn Shabramah, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَ هُوَ مِنَ الْجَامِعَةِ؟ أَمْلَى رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَخَطَّهُ عَلِيٌّ بِيَدِهِ. فِيهَا جَمِيعُ
الْحَلاَلِ وَالْحَرَامِ حَتَّى أَرْشُ الْخَدْشِ فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*How can he be compared with the Jami’ah? It is the dictations of
Allah’s Messenger (S) and the handwriting of ‘Ali (‘a). It comprises all
that which is legal and illegal even matters that are as minute as the
expiation for a scratch.*[^3]

Additionally, Imam ‘Ali (‘a), after the Messenger of Allah (S), was the
most knowledgeable of all people, the most skilled in judgment, and the
most experienced in the lawful and the unlawful issues as well as the
interpretation of the Holy Qur’an. He was verily the door to the city of
the Holy Prophet’s knowledge.

At the level of practice, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) was the most liberal of all
people in cultural and educational aspects after the Holy Prophet (S).
He was the first to set courses and invent new branches in the sciences
of education. He is thus the founder of a number of sciences, such as
jurisprudence (*fiqh*), hadithology, exegesis of the Holy Qur’an
(*tafsir*), syntax (*nahw*), and many others.[^4]

The same course of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) has been followed by the other Holy
Imams (‘a), their followers and partisans who, directed by the Holy
Imams (‘a), founded the Islamic sciences.[^5]

In the field of education, while building the virtuous community, the
Holy Imams (‘a) worked on diagnosing and constructing two important
projects:

First Project: Cultural And Educational Courses
-----------------------------------------------

Any educational course plays a major role in successfully strengthening
the cultural aspect of the virtuous community by making its individuals
competent enough to fulfill their requirements and fill the gaps of
their cultural needs.

While building the virtuous community culturally, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
adopted four cultural policies that complemented each other. These
policies are as follows:While building the virtuous community
culturally, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted four cultural policies that
complemented each other. These policies are as follows:

### Freedom of Thought and Sources of Islamic Education

#### First Line: Freedom of Thought and Accurate Ijtihad

Freedom of thought and accurate *ijtihad* forms the general framework
and foundation of educational policy. A reference to this point, which
is one of the distinctive features by which the jurisprudence of the
Twelver Imamiyyah sect outmatches other sects and jurisprudential
schools, has been made in the previous chapter regarding intellectual
and doctrinal aspects. We saw that the Holy Imams (‘a) had a clear-cut
goal and accurate course on which their educational school was set up
and its scientific foundations framed. This framework was established on
the following foundations:

**First**: The Holy Qur’an and the authentic Sunnah (traditions) of the
Holy Prophet (S) are the essential sources of Islamic culture in all
fields such as historical-philosophy, socio-philosophy, Muslim
jurisprudence, ethics, ideology, cosmology, literature, and linguistics.

**Second**: The principle of the referential authority of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) must be observed in understanding Islam, its convictions
and in obtaining Islamic law. In fact, Islamic texts, history and
Prophetic traditions have suffered inaccuracy in interpretations and
explanations in addition to variety and multiplicity in situations and
trends.

The policy of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School firmly attests that the Holy
Imams (‘a) are the referential authorities in obtaining an accurate
understanding of Islam in addition to being the divinely appointed
leaders of the Muslim nation and the legitimate representatives of the
Holy Prophet (S). The famous *hadith al-thaqalayn* (Tradition of the Two
Weighty Things) has referred to this very fact, as has been previously
cited.[^6]

**Third**: Jurisprudential rules and fundamental principles of Islam can
be inferred from the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah—the two sources of Islamic
legislation. General rules and universal laws can be applied in order to
deal with the latest developments. The Holy Legislator has left the
Representative of the Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Imam (‘a) or a
well-qualified jurisprudent, to deduct laws from their sources.

Inasmuch as the Islamic system is the final divinely revealed code of
law, it must cover all ages and times. In view of this fact,
jurisprudents and well-versed scholars are required to play the role of
inferring the secondary and circumstantial religious laws from their
sources in order to meet with the latest circumstances, on condition
that such inference is based on the general laws of Islam. Furthermore,
jurisprudents and scholars are required to assess the legal situation
and human responsibility towards every event and condition.

As a part of the mission, competent scholars are required to implement
the Qur’anic verses regarding Islamic law in their inferences regarding
new developments that occur in Muslim life in general. They are also
required to apply historical concepts and norms to their inferences
attributed to the social and political conditions of the Muslim
community.

**Fourth**: Considerable attention has been paid by the Holy Imams (‘a)
to teach their followers the precise method of inference of religious
laws from their sources and the accurate approach of using the Islamic
texts (i.e. texts of the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah) in the most appropriate
way. They are expected to compare the texts, which seem to be
contradictory, with one another in order to come up with an acceptable
result and to uncover points of concurrence and connection between them
and also prefer some texts over others on the basis of certain
regulations and standards that are defined in *‘Ilm al-Usul*
(Fundamentals of Muslim Jurisprudence)*.*

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) asserted the significance of
familiarization with the abrogating and abrogated, decisive and
allegorical, general and particular, concise and elaborate texts of the
sources of the religious legislation before a process of inference of
religious laws is carried out. They also emphasized the use of the
method of dealing with such texts and understanding some of them in the
light of others. This matter was one of the gifts in which Imam ‘Ali
(‘a) used to excel over the other companions of the Holy Prophet (S),
since it was one of his peculiar excellences.

##### Ijtihad and Vitality of Islamic Law

The objective of such meticulous freedom of thought was to accomplish
the following two significant matters:

**First**: Freedom of thought aimed at creating among every generation a
class of well-qualified scholars competent enough to infer religious
laws from their genuine and fundamental sources. This was done to avoid
falling into chaotic situations due to reliance upon the opinionism[^7]
in which the opinionists (*ashab al-ra'y*) had fallen; in other words,
the Hadithists had become inert by depending upon a single text and not
subjecting these single texts to perfect comprehension by comparing them
to other texts. In fact, the totality of Almighty Allah’s words (i.e.
the Holy Qur’an), the Holy Prophet’s traditions (i.e. Sunnah), and the
Holy Imams’ (‘a) reported discourses are considered one word—one
explaining the other—just like the uninterrupted speech of an individual
when the first, middle, or the last part of that speech indicates the
speech as a whole.

**Second**: Freedom of thought aimed at maintaining the vitality of the
religious code of Islamic law and sustaining its capability to adapt
itself to the changing circumstances and developments, without (1)
falling victim to the perils of distortion, falsification and imitating
other jurisprudential schools, (2) interpreting the sacred texts
inappropriately, or (3) challenging the truth due to the political and
cultural chaos into which the Muslim world had fallen as a result of the
spread of seditious matters and painful events suffered by Muslims all
through history.(3) challenging the truth due to the political and
cultural chaos into which the Muslim world had fallen as a result of the
spread of seditious matters and painful events suffered by Muslims all
through history.

### Seeking Knowledge and Learning

#### Second Line: Promotion of Seeking of Knowledge

The second line in the educational course of the Holy Imams (‘a) is
urging seeking of knowledge in general and knowledge of the religious
law in particular. In the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School, seeking knowledge has
become a religious duty, the violation of which brings about
accountability. Books of hadith have dedicated separate chapters to this
subject, since many traditions, such as the following, have confirmed
it:

Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has reported Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعْتُ رَسُولَ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، يَقُولُ: طَلَبُ
الْعِلْمِ فَرِيضَةٌ عَلَى كُلِّ مُسْلِمٍ... بِهِ يُطَاعُ الرَّبُّ،
وَبِهِ تُوصَلُ الأَرْحَامُ، وَبِهِ يُعْرَفُ الْحَلاَلُ وَالْحَرَامُ.
اَلعْلِمُ إمَامُ الْعَمَلِ، وَالْعَمَلُ تَابِعُهُ: يُلْهَمُهُ
السُّعَدَاءُ وَيُحْرَمُهُ الأَشْقِيَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I heard the Messenger of Allah (S)* *saying, “Seeking knowledge is
obligatory upon every Muslim… Through it, the Lord is obeyed (properly),
kinships are observed, and lawful and unlawful (matters) are recognized.
Knowledge is the leader of deed while deed is its follower. Knowledge is
inspired in the blessed but withheld from the wretched.”*[^8]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ عَلِمَ النَّاسُ مَا فِي الْعِلْمِ لَطَلَبُوهُ وَلَوْ بِسَفْكِ
الْمُهَجِ وَخَوْضِ اللُّجَجِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Had people realized the benefits of knowledge, they would have
certainly sought it even by exposing themselves to death and the toil of
tumults.*[^9]

Zayd al-Zarrad has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَبُو جَعْفَرٍ الْبَاقِرُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ: يَا بُنَيَّ؛
إعْرِفْ مَنَازِلَ الشِّيعَةِ عَلَى قَدْرِ رِوَايَتِهِمْ
وَمَعْرِفَتِهِمْ، فَإنَّ الْمَعْرِفَةَ هِيَ الدِّرَايَةُ
لِلرِّوَايَةِ، وَبِالدِّرَايَاتِ لِلرِّوَايَاتِ يَعْلُو الْمُؤْمِنُ
إلَى أَقْصَى دَرَجَاتِ الإيـمَانِ. إنِّي نَظَرْتُ فِي كِتَابٍ
لِعَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَوَجَدْتُ فِي الْكِتَابِ: إنَّ قِيمَةَ
كُلِّ إمْرِئٍ وَقَدْرَهُ مَعْرِفَتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Imam (Abu-Ja’far) al-Baqir ('a) said, “O Son, you can recognize the
ranks of the Shi’ah according to their reports and knowledge. Verily,
knowledge is to have acquaintance with the traditions. Through
familiarity with traditions, a believer can mount up to the furthest
rank of belief. As I looked at it, I found the following in the Book of
‘Ali (‘a): “The value and worth of each individual is his/her
knowledge.”*[^10]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِعْرِفُوا مَنَازِلَ شِيعَتِنَا بِقَدْرِ مَا يُحْسِنُونَ مِنْ
رِوَايَاتِهِمْ عَنَّا، فَإنَّا لاَ نَعُدُّ الْفَقِيهَ مِنْهُمْ
فَقِيهاً حَتَّى يَكُونَ مُحَدَّثاً... اَلْمُؤْمِنُ يَكُونُ مُفَهَّماً،
وَالْمُفَهَّمُ مُحَدَّثٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You can recognize the standings of our Shi’ah (i.e. adherents) through
recognizing the amount of their reporting of our traditions in a
proficient way. We cannot regard the jurisprudents among them as true
jurisprudents until they prove themselves as reporters of our
traditions…A believer can receive understanding of things (from the
angels), and one who receives understanding is actually talked to by the
angels.*[^11]

In this respect, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not stop at
touching this matter in general terms; rather, they portrayed the steps
leading to it. These steps are as follows:

##### Knowledge and Opinion

The Holy Imams (‘a) laid much stress on adopting the Qur’anic
methodology of research, highlighting the role of science and positivism
in obtaining knowledge as opposed to the course of adopting conjecture
and surmise. As has been previously cited, the Holy Imams (‘a) attached
acquaintance with the religious laws to the authentic resources of these
laws. In addition, they asserted that the dependence upon these
resources must be consistent with the methodology of research founded on
study and learning derived from the true scholars, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

As a result of these instructions, the Holy Imams (‘a) blocked the way
of adopting surmise and personal views, opinions and conjecture, such as
the so-called principles of equitable preference (*istihsan*), analogy
(*qiyas*), acceptable advantages (*al-masalih al-mursalah*) and similar
invented principles. Divine truths, religious laws and the details of
advantages and disadvantages related to these laws cannot be realized
except by Divine revelation and inspiration. This is granted to prophets
and divinely selected individuals or by learning, erudition, recording,
and taking from the true scholars who are the Household of the Holy
Prophet (S) and trustees of Divine revelation.

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ عَلَى غَيْرِ عِلْمٍ كَانَ مَا يُفْسِدُ أَكْثَرَ مِمَّا
يُصْلِحُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who acts without knowledge will bring about more corruption than
correction.*[^12]

Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ النَّاسَ آلُوا بَعْدَ رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، إلَى ثَلاَثَةٍ: آلُوا إلَى عَالِمِ هُدىً مِنَ اللهِ قَدْ
أَغْنَاهُ اللهُ بِمَا عَلِمَ عَنْ غَيْرِهِ، وَجَاهِلٍ مُدَّعٍ
لِلْعِلْمِ لاَ عِلْمَ لَهُ، مُعْجَبٍ بِمَا عِنْدَهُ، قَدْ فَتَنَتْهُ
الدُّنْيَا وَفَتَنَ غَيْرَهُ، وَمُتَعَلِّمٍ مِنْ عَالِمٍ عَلَى سَبِيلِ
هُدىً مِنَ اللهِ وَنَجَاةٍ. ثُمَّ هَلَكَ مَنِ إدَّعَى وَخَابَ مَنِ
إفْتَرَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*After the departure of Allah’s Messenger (S), the people separated into
three groups. One group represented the scholars that were truly guided
by Almighty Allah Who made them needless of other than Him due to the
knowledge He gave them (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)). Another group
represented the ignorant ones who pretended to be knowledgeable while
they lacked knowledge. They were admirers of what they had. They were
tempted by this world while they themselves tempted others. The third
group represented those who were learning from scholars for the sake of
finding Allah’s guidance and salvation. Beyond these three categories,
perdition befall him who claims falsely and frustration befall him who
forges lies.*[^13]

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَفْتَى النَّاسَ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ وَلاَ هُدىً مِنَ اللهِ
لَعَنَتْهُ مَلاَئِكَةُ الرَّحْمَةِ وَمَلاَئِكَةُ الْعَذَابِ،
وَلَحِقَهُ وِزْرُ مَنْ عَمِلَ بِفِتْيَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who gives a verdict without knowledge and true guidance will be
cursed by the angels of mercy and the angels of chastisement and will be
responsible for the deeds of those who acted upon his verdict.*[^14]

Answering the question of his companion who asked him to mention the
creatures’ duty towards Almighty Allah, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported
to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ يَقُولُوا مَا يَعْلَمُونَ، وَيَكُفُّوا عَمَّا لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ،
فَإذَا فَعَلُوا أَدُّوا إلَى اللهِ حَقَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They are required to say only that which they know and refrain from
that which they do not know. If they do so, then they will have carried
out their duty towards Almighty Allah.*[^15]

##### Recording the Hadith

In addition to memorizing, reflecting on, and comprehending the Holy
Qur’an, the Holy Imams (‘a) highlighted the significance of reporting,
memorizing, and recording the Hadith. In this regard, history has
recorded a precedence for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers who
were the first to record, maintain, and circulate the Hadith, especially
after the Holy Sunnah had been in danger of extinction due to negativity
shown by the second caliph in the earliest age of Islam. When the
suggestion of recording the Hadith was put before him, the second caliph
rejected it, claiming that such records would have a negative bearing on
retaining the Holy Qur’an and distract the public from it (i.e. the Holy
Qur’an).[^16]

As a result of the trend of recording and reporting the Hadith under the
encouragement of the Holy Imams (‘a), their companions attained high
ranks in jurisprudence and general knowledge in which they excelled over
all others.[^17]

By virtue of these instructions, the companions of the Holy Imams (‘a),
in successive ages, endeavored to write down and record the *ahadith*
(plural of *hadith*). These recordings were known as *al-Usul
al-Arba’mi'ah* (The Four Hundred Principles). Some of the Holy
Imams’(‘a) companions, such as Aban ibn Taghlib and ‘Ubaydullah ibn ‘Ali
al-Halabi referred to these recordings.[^18] The Holy Imams (‘a) praised
those companions who undertook this work, including Burayd ibn Mu’awiyah
al-’Ajli, Abu-Basir, Muhammad ibn Muslim, and Zurarah ibn A’yun.[^19]

##### Propagation of Knowledge and Learning

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) instructed their companions and followers to seek
knowledge and learn. They highlighted these two activities as much as
they focused on retaining and recording the Hadith. Consequently, these
practices became as important as recording the Hadith.

As a result, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) managed to pave the way for making
seeking of knowledge easy-to-obtain and within reach by the individuals
of the virtuous community despite the difficult political circumstances
encountered by these individuals. They suffered constant harassment by
the ruling authorities who also imposed economic and educational
boycotts on them.

Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book of *al-Kafi*, has reported Mu’awiyah ibn
‘Ammar as saying, I asked (Abu’Abdullah) Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “There is a
reporter of your traditions who spreads them among people so as to show
them and your partisans the right way. There is, on the other hand, a
worshipper among your partisans that does not have such ability to
report your traditions. Which one is better?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّاوِيَةُ لِحَدِيثِنَا يَشُدُّ بِهِ قُلُوبَ شِيعَتِنَا أَفْضَلُ
مِنْ أَلْفِ عَابِدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A reporter of our traditions who strengthens the hearts of our Shi’ah
(partisans) is better than a thousand worshippers.*[^20]

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَذَاكَرُوا وَتَلاَقَوْا وَتَحَدَّثُوا؛ فَإنَّ الْحَدِيثَ جَلاَءٌ
لِلْقُلُوبِ. إنَّ الْقُلُوبَ لَتَرِينُ كَمَا يَرِينُ السَّيْفُ،
جَلاَؤهُ الْحَدِيدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hold sessions of discussions, meet each other, and exchange discourses.
Verily, discourses polish hearts. Just as swords rust and are then
polished by iron, so also do hearts rust.*[^21]

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَرَادَ الْحَدِيثَ لِمَنْفَعَةِ الدُّنْيَا لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ فِي
الآخِرَةِ نَصِيبٌ؛ وَمَنْ أَرَادَ بِهِ خَيْرَ الآخِرَةِ أَعْطَاهُ
اللهُ خَيْرَ الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*
*

He who learns the science of reporting any traditions for the sake of
gaining a worldly benefit will have no share (of benefit) in the
Hereafter, but he who learns it for the sake of gaining the benefits of
the Next World will be granted by Allah the benefits of this world and
the Next World.

[^22]
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ حَفِظَ مِنْ أَحَادِيثِنَا أَرْبَعِينَ حَدِيثاً بَعَثَهُ اللهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَالِماً فَقِيهاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who retains forty of our traditions, Almighty Allah, on the Day of
Resurrection, will include him with the well-versed scholars.*[^23]

Muhammad ibn Muslim has reported the following:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “When I hear a tradition from you, is it
acceptable to add or delete part of the statement when I convey it to
others?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنْ كُنْتَ تُرِيدُ مَعَانِيَهُ فَلاَ بَأْسَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If your intention is to explain its meaning, it is then agreed.*[^24]

This policy is the only reason for the continuity of the Ahl al-Bayt’s
cultural momentum and the endurance of their scientific and cultural
centers in spite of the difficult circumstances they had to encounter.
In addition, one of the most prominent features and evident
characteristics of the scientific policy of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School
is free education with which this school, along with all its branches,
has withstood all pressures and difficulties.

At the same time as the ruling authorities strongly supported the
official schools of the other Muslim sects by means of massive
donations, they exercised pressure and official persecution against the
schools of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers in addition to depriving them of
any support, donations or aid. Nevertheless, the Ahl al-Bayt’s schools
endured in such an increasing manner that they occasionally excelled all
the other officially supported schools that would have collapsed and
vanished if governmental aid had stopped.

Among the major reasons for such endurance and continuity was the method
of free education, the propagation of seeking knowledge and the adoption
of seeking nearness to Almighty Allah through learning.

In fact, this is still the general feature of these schools and their
prevailing methodology with regard to dealing with all educational
activities appertaining to the individuals of the virtuous community at
all levels, including teaching, propagation, communication of religious
laws, writing books, or any other level of education.In fact, this is
still the general feature of these schools and their prevailing
methodology with regard to dealing with all educational activities
appertaining to the individuals of the virtuous community at all levels,
including teaching, propagation, communication of religious laws,
writing books, or any other level of education.

### Variety in Educational Methodology

#### Third Line: Variety in Methods of Educating and Teaching

In addition to the current styles for preaching sermons, reporting
traditions and composing poetry that were widely known in the earliest
era of Islam, the Holy Imams (‘a) took much interest in other styles
that were new methods for general education because they were unfamiliar
practices and behaviors. These styles included supplicatory prayers
(*du’a’*), bequests (*wasiyyah*), epistles (*risalah*), statements
(*bayan*), formulas of visitation (*ziyarah*), sessions (*majlis*),
general gatherings (*ijtima’*) including congregational commemoration of
Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom (*al-majalis al-husayniyyah*).

##### Supplicatory Prayer (Du’a')

In the educational system of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), supplications (or
supplicatory prayers) have transformed into a perfect school that
teaches doctrines, ethics, Islamic and social concepts, human
relationships and high moral standards as well as self-purification,
high discipline, and expression of relationships with Almighty Allah.

Through his famous supplications (*du’a’*) and whispered prayers
(*munajat*), Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) founded this style for
which he is famed. The most famous of his supplications is one reported
by Kumayl ibn Ziyad al-Nakha’i and known as *Du’a’ Kumayl*.

One of the distinctive and famous formulas of supplication of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) is Imam al-Husayn’s ‘*Supplication on the Day of ‘Arafah*’.

Taking advantage of this style, yet more expansively, Imam ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) produced an extensive collection of
supplications, the role and impact of which has been considerable on the
educational course of the Shi’ah. It was the most successful style of
treating the educational and moral degradation that struck Muslim
society on the one hand and overcoming the difficult political
circumstances that Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) had to encounter after the
martyrdom of his father and the proscription that the Umayyad ruling
authorities imposed on him, on the other hand.[^25]

##### Bequest (Wasiyyah)

The style of using bequests was started by the Holy Prophet (S) who
addressed Imam ‘Ali (‘a) with a number of political, educative, and
edifying instructions. Continuing this style, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) instructed
his son Hasan (‘a), as well as his other sons, through a number of
bequests. After that, this style became another idiosyncratic course
adopted by the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), who left such a
valuable asset of bequests—touching on various educational features—that
they can be compiled in a voluminous book.[^26]

##### Epistle (Risalah)

The style of epistles can be seen in the instructive and educational
letters and statements of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) in the *Nahj al-Balaghah.* The
same style is visible in the epistles that the Holy Imams (‘a) used to
send to their partisans and followers, such as the epistles of Imam
al-Baqir (‘a), Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), and Imam al-Kazim (‘a), that
contained many precise and varied details of educational
guidelines.[^27]

##### More Styles

In coming books of this series, we will discuss in detail other styles,
such as *Ziyarah* (Ritual Systems); the Husayni Assemblies (Educational
Foundations); and general gatherings (System of Social Relations).

In these books, we will have a look at the great, organized work of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the variety of educational styles they engendered,
some of which have become substantial establishments and distinctive
ventures.In these books, we will have a look at the great, organized
work of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the variety of educational styles they
engendered, some of which have become substantial establishments and
distinctive ventures.

### Variety in Topics of Education

#### Fourth Line: Miscellaneous Education and Scientific Specialization

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took much interest in the variety
of educational and scientific specializations because they believed that
their followers must master such variety and specialization in various
human and natural domains.

Not satisfied with the multiplicity and variety in educational
information, the Holy Imams (‘a) urged their followers to adopt
specialization in fields of knowledge in order to be able to reach high
levels in various educational issues. Since the beginning, the Holy
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) realized the significance of enlarging the
fields of human and natural sciences. They also foresaw the expansion in
the horizons of knowledge as well as intellectual conflicts and
doctrinal deviations that the Islamic world would face, such as
tendencies of infidelity, atheism, exaggeration, fanaticism, opinionism,
personal views, and adjacency with the Greek, Indian, Persian, and
Byzantine civilizations.

As a result of such efforts, specialization in various branches of
science was practiced not only in later ages of Islamic history when
educational affairs and branches ramified and expanded, but also in past
ages, particularly in the beginning of the second century of Hijrah, and
under the special direction of the Holy Imams (‘a). For instance, Husham
ibn al-Hakam was specialized in theology, Zurarah ibn A’yun and Muhammad
ibn Muslim in issuance of religious verdicts, Aban ibn Taghlib in the
sciences of the Holy Qur’an, and Sulaym ibn Qays, Lut ibn Yahya, and
Aban al-Ahmar al-Bujali in history.

In natural sciences, Jabir ibn Hayyan, who received his knowledge
directly from Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a), not only specialized in
chemistry but also established the foundations of this science. In
addition, al-Mufadhdhal ibn ‘Umar and many other prominent companions of
the Holy Imams (‘a) were specialists.[^28]

Such comprehensiveness and specialization represented a policy in the
educational building of the virtuous community aimed at meeting the
requirements, filling the gaps and meeting the needs of this community
on the one hand, and granting them their independence in construction,
movement, and self-dependence on the other. This enabled the virtuous
community to take its normal position in the Muslim nation in the
capacity of its being a pioneering group that undertook its mission of
safeguarding, reinforcing, and protecting Islam.

Naturally, such specialization does not mean turning away from the other
fields of knowledge. In fact, the companions and followers of the Holy
Imams (‘a) dealt with the other sciences by means of research and
learning side by side with their specialization, concentrating on a
certain branch of science so that the educational movement would be
comprehensive and characterized by profundity and power.

Second Project: Cultural And Scientific Establishments
------------------------------------------------------

After identifying the sources of Islamic culture and organizing the
general courses to be taught, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
devoted their attention to building educational and scientific
establishments.[^29] They also encouraged others to activate
establishments, such as mosques, which were the first educational and
worshipping establishments known in Muslim societies. They also founded
other educational establishments unfamiliar to Muslims, where special
sessions were held by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and through the efforts of
the virtuous community for the purpose of propagating and teaching their
traditions. With the passage of time, these establishments became one
expansive educational establishment that included the congregational
commemoration of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom (currently known as
*al-Majalis al-Husayniyyah*).

Interest grew in these educational establishments for two reasons that
are related to the cultural aspect:

The **First Reason** was to instill these educational approaches into
the mainstream to ensure its continuity under all circumstances.

The **Second Reason** was that these unique approaches were not capable
of being maintained by public establishments, no matter how competent
they happened to be. Also, the opportunities offered by these
establishments would be limited to the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). For these two reasons, the Holy Imams (‘a) took a considerable
interest in creating special establishments.

In the following sections, we shall refer to certain establishments that
had a great impact on the educational aspect of the lives of the
followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

### Shi’ite Seminaries (Ḥawzah ‘Ilmiyyah)

Since their first day, Muslims were forming debate groups in the form of
assemblies (*halqah*) to confer the various branches of their sciences.
Such sessions progressed into famous schools in the history of Islam,
such as the School of Kufah, Madinah, Basrah, Mecca, Cairo, Andalusia
and many others. In the tradition of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers, such
schools are called *hawzah* (seminaries).

Moving with this stream, which was familiar to Muslims, the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) established these schools to not only teach the general knowledge
of Islam but also activate schools of other fields of knowledge and
Islamic sciences in all the cities of the Muslim world. This role became
more evident during the age of Imam al-Baqir and Imam al-Sadiq—peace be
upon them. They played a distinctive role in educating and disseminating
knowledge among the entire Muslim community. As has been previously
cited, the major Muslim scholars and scientists studied under the Holy
Imams (‘a).[^30]

Likewise, the Holy Imams (‘a) played a major role in the establishment
of schools, especially for their followers and partisans (Shi’ah),
within a special course which they drew up to build the virtuous
community. This interest originated from their belief in the vital role
the educational establishment could play in founding the pillars of
education.

### Schools of Kufah and Qum

The School of Kufah was one of the private schools in the history of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). Shi’ism found its way to Iraq at the beginning of the
Islamic conquest of Iran along with the earliest prominent companions of
the Holy Prophet (S), such as Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman and Salman
al-Farsi. They participated in this conquest and were the first to hold
the highest governmental offices of the Islamic caliphate in the city of
Mada'in, along with ‘Ammar ibn Yasir, ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud, and many
others.

The School of Qum, a branch of the School of Kufah before it became an
independent school specializing in the sciences of the Shi’ah, was then
established in this small town by sincere followers of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) to avoid being harassed by the ruling authorities.

Other schools in the Muslim east followed the Schools of Kufah and Qum,
such as the schools in Ray (southern Tehran), Khurasan (northern Iran),
Isfahan (central Iran), Afghanistan, and Jabal ‘Amil (southern Lebanon).

After that, the School of Kufah, from which four thousand scholars
graduated, each of whom used to say, “Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (‘a)
taught me…”, developed to extend to Baghdad. That was during the ages of
Imam al-Hasan al-’Askari (‘a) and the ‘Four Envoys’ in the Age of the
Minor Occultation.

It distinctively expanded during the periods of Shaykh al-Mufid,
al-Sharif al-Murtadha, and Shaykh al-Tusi in whose age this school moved
to the cities of Najaf, Hillah, and Karbala' respectively. Finally, it
settled in the holy city of Najaf in the last couple of centuries.

Passing through different stages, the School of Qum kept on swinging
between expansion and contraction until it became the second most
important school in the Shi’ite world in modern history after the School
of Najaf.[^31]

### Graduation of Well-Versed Jurisprudents

The Holy Imams (‘a) took much interest in establishing religious
seminaries. To achieve this goal, they encouraged their followers to
embark upon teaching, issuing verdicts, and holding meetings and
assemblies dedicated to such subjects. A firm, influential methodology
was set up for running such schools in order to put into action a set of
scientific, educational, and spiritual objectives and contribute to the
achievement of other social, political, and organizational goals, the
details of which will be discussed in the following books of this
series.

However, the principal goal was to maintain the momentum of *ijtihad*.
In addition to the graduation of proselytizers from all countries where
the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) existed, the most important
objective of the scholastic courses in these schools was to graduate
well-versed scholars and researchers in fields like Muslim
jurisprudence, *Usul*, preliminary sciences to these two fields and
other Islamic sciences. Actually, this curriculum remained consistent
for ages until the latest developments of the modern age made it
necessary to add some new courses to it.

As a result, we can see that such schools (*hawzah*) are abounding with
large numbers of well-versed jurisprudents (*mujtahid*) in every age and
among every generation and social class. It is also noticeable that
these schools differ from one another competitively in the quality and
quantity of their graduates and in the profundity of the
jurisprudential, fundamental, and Islamic studies that they teach.

However, such increasing interest in the achievement of this goal
resulted in negative consequences that affected the nature of the
scientific outcome of these schools and their capability of achieving
other goals. It is thus noticed that there are gaps, both wide and
limited, in the yield of other Islamic fields of knowledge, such as
exegesis of the Holy Qur’an, Islamic doctrine, philosophy, ethics,
Hadith*,* history, and literature. This is so because there was always
urgent need for *ijtihad* (i.e. deep specialization) in the fields of
*fiqh* and *Usul*, and some other fields of knowledge which did not need
such specialization.[^32]

Nevertheless, these schools made speedy progress in opening the door to
Ijtihad and maintaining the graduation of well-versed scholars in the
various fields of Islamic sciences even in the harshest circumstances
through which the Islamic world passed.

They could also stand steadfast in the face of attempts at distortion
which were encountered by other religious schools in the Islamic world,
such as al-Azhar in Cairo and the al-Zaytunah Schools of the Indian
subcontinent, plus the schools of Mecca, Madinah, Baghdad, and other
places.

### Graduation of Missionaries

Among the other objectives of these schools was to graduate preachers,
missionaries, envoys to other countries and teachers for subsidiary
religious seminaries.

In this respect, these schools had to face a big problem. This was the
absence of a curriculum competent enough in form and content to achieve
these objectives directly and respond to the requirements of the latest
developments and the various stages, especially in the new regions of
the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). This was so because the level of
general knowledge of the Muslim nation, as well as the type of knowledge
and the new cultural and educational problems, were different and more
progressive than the previous ones. Besides, the multiplicity,
ramifications, and reciprocity of the branches of knowledge, in addition
to the existence of modern scientific and technical methods, not to
mention other channels of development—all required a new treatment of
the curricula at both levels of form and content so as to spare time for
the students, summarize knowledge for them, and supply them with useful
means in practical fields.

In view of this, the idea of specialization in the various fields of
knowledge became practicable and more effective since it would meet
realistic requirements.

### Surmounting New Problems

In spite of all the problems mentioned, the religious seminaries were
able to surmount them, albeit partially, by means of increasing their
personal scientific competence to enable a student to acquire scientific
and technical knowledge through personal effort widening the horizons of
knowledge.

The following features of these schools have helped in the achievement
of all that has been accomplished in the discipline:

(1) Freedom of thought and research

(2) Freedom in choosing classes and instructors

(3) Freedom in controlling and utilizing time suitably

(4) The financial system of these schools which is, to a great extent,
controlled by the social and cultural requirements of the virtuous
community

(5) The system of social relations that drives students to respond to
the cultural requirements of the Muslim nation

Another factor was the moral course of the religious seminaries that
arouses religious responsibility, prompts the highest degrees of piety
and asceticism, and induces mental and spiritual education.

These factors have made the students of these religious seminaries move
speedily to fill these gaps and stand steadfast against temptation.

### Maintenance of Islamic Heritage

Among the other objectives of the religious seminaries was the
maintenance of Islamic heritage in general and the heritage and culture
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in particular. They were to provide Islamic
thought, doctrine, history, and other researches related to Islam with
the new, genuine, and pure thought based purely on Islamic resources and
intended to face the other ideological trends.

We notice that these schools and seminaries continued to produce
profound research and wide-ranging cultural investigation to maintain
this heritage, such as research in the biography of reporters of Hadith
(*‘ilm al-rijal*) and Islamic encyclopedias of Hadith and jurisprudence.

These seminaries produced grand scholars and reformers in various
scientific fields, such as Avicenna, Shaykh al-Mufid, Sharif
al-Murtadha, Sharif al-Radhi, Shaykh al-Tusi, Shaykh Nasir al-Din
al-Tusi, al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, ‘Allamah al-Hilli, Shaykh al-Tabrisi,
al-Shahid al-Awwal (First Martyr; Muhammad ibn Makki), al-Shahid
al-Thani (Second Martyr: Zayn al-Din al-’Amili), Ibn Tawus, Shaykh
al-Baha'i, Sayyid al-Damad, Mulla Sadra (Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi),
‘Allamah al-Majlisi (Muhammad Taqi); Shaykh al-Majlisi (Muhammad Baqir),
al-Faydh al-Kashani, al-Muhaqqiq al-Karaki, al-Wahid al-Bahbahani,
Sayyid Bahr al-’Ulum, Shaykh Kashif al-Ghita', Shaykh al-Jawahiri (known
as *Sahib al-Jawahir*), Shaykh al-Ansari, and al-Shirazi the reformer.

In the past century, these seminaries produced master scholars such as
Jamal al-Din al-Afghani, Shaykh al-Akhund al-Khurasani, Shaykh
al-Mamuqani, Shaykh al-Na'ini, al-Muhaqqiq al-’Iraqi, Sayyid
al-Burujerdi, ‘Allamah Kashif al-Ghita', ‘Allamah Sharaf al-Din, Sayyid
Muhsin al-Amin, Shaykh al-Balaghi, Sayyid al-Hakim, ‘Allamah
al-Tabataba'i, Sayyid al-Khumayni, Martyr Mutahhari, Martyr al-Sadr,
Sayyid al-Khu'i, and many others who played a major role not only in the
Shi’ite world but also in the Islamic world as a whole. These scholars
have enriched the Islamic scientific schools with new theories as they
have written scientific encyclopedias and research papers on Muslim
jurisprudence, the sciences of the Holy Qur’an, various fields of
Islamic knowledge, history, and doctrine. In addition, they approached
with great determination the events through which they served Islam and
its blessed renaissance and boldly faced international colonization,
atheism, and local tyranny.

### Masjid and Husayniyyah

Since the beginning, the mosque (*masjid*) has played the role of an
educational institution, not to mention its religious and administrative
roles in the Muslim community. Sermons, lessons, and lectures were
delivered in mosques and people frequented mosques in order to quench
their thirst from this spring of Islamic education.

Following this pattern, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) used
mosques to link the general culture with religious duties on the
strength of belief in Almighty Allah and thus confer sacredness upon
them (i.e. cultures). It was one of the religious duties to seek
knowledge, as expressed by the Hadith that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طَلَبُ الْعِلْمِ فَرِيضَةٌ عَلَى كُلِّ مُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seeking of knowledge is obligatory upon every Muslim.*[^33]

The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) patterned this course after the
Holy Prophet (S) and his noble companions lead by Imam ‘Ali ibn
Abi-Talib (‘a)—the Master of the Successors of the Prophets. During his
reign as caliph, he changed the mosque into a perfect Islamic foundation
of rule, judicature, jihad, and social attitudes, and made education act
as one of the basic features of this foundation.

### The Virtuous Community and Mosque

In the various regions of the Muslim world, the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) had to encounter the problem of the aggression and
harassment of the tyrannical ruling authorities against them, their
culture, thoughts, and doctrines. Because of this, they could rarely
find an opportunity to make use of mosques as cultural foundations,
since mosques were under the management of the ruling authorities. They
therefore had to choose other places away from the watchful eyes of the
tyrants and their agents to study their religion, teach others, and
exchange viewpoints in the various fields of life and culture.

Nevertheless, they never deserted the mosque; rather, they always
established firm relationships with it as they practiced the Islamic
rituals in the mosques even under the most vehement circumstances
because they believed that the mosque was not only a place of study but
also a place of worship, supplication, and confidential talk with
Almighty Allah. In addition, mosques were a communication device of the
Muslim nation.

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) worked earnestly toward keeping
and maintaining this connection between their followers and mosques.

Whenever they would find an opportunity, the followers of the Holy Imams
(‘a) made mosques their starting points for cultural work. As has been
previously cited, al-Kufah Mosque was one of the major centers of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School throughout the Islamic era.

Likewise, the mosques of the regions in which the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) could find some freedom and security were used as centers
of Islamic education without seeking alternative locations, such as
mosques in Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, and other regions.

Additionally, the followers of the Holy Imams (‘a) took much interest in
building, reconstructing, and concerning themselves with mosques—a fact
that is witnessed in all Muslim regions that are inhabited by followers
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

### The Virtuous Community and Husayniyyah

In the regions where the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) could not
find freedom and security, they would betake themselves to other places
in order to maintain their culture, doctrines, and history. This was the
reason for establishing places that are currently known as
*Husayniyyah*[^34] because the original idea was to find centers in
which they could speak freely and securely, as is derived from many
traditions reported from the Holy Imams (‘a).

The main subject discussed in such places was Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and
the atrocities he encountered. Later on, this idea developed so largely
that the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) established many such
*Husayniyyah*s as cultural and social centers.

Attending to the religious and ritual role of mosques, they would
dedicate one part of such buildings to worship and another part to
commemoration of the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn. This guaranteed more
freedom of work and activity and kept the mosque away from the
religiously discommended or banned matters, taking into consideration
the fact that jurisprudents from the Ahl al-Bayt School (‘a) believed in
keeping mosques free of ceremonial impurity. They also hold it unlawful
for the menstruous and the ceremonially impure to remain in mosques and
it is not recommended to eat and sleep in mosques or to bring children
therein. Of course, such rulings are not applicable to *Husayniyyah*s.
There are also other specific acts and practices discommended in mosques
but not in *Husayniyyah*s.

In addition, *Husayniyyah*s are originally dedicated to holding and
practicing certain social and cultural ceremonies, such as mourning
ceremonies, particular events, general festivals, and establishment of
loan offices and public libraries that may help those who gather
therein.

In view of this, *Husayniyyah*s have changed into special cultural
foundations that the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have adopted for
the sake of proclaiming the Islamic culture. Likewise, they have become
the springboard to the establishment of a wide-ranging cultural
foundation that the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have as a
distinctive feature. This foundation is namely the commemoration of Imam
al-Husayn’s martyrdom (*al-sha’a'ir al-husayniyyah*). Nevertheless,
*Husayniyyah* is in fact an extension of the Islamic foundation of
mosques. is in fact an extension of the Islamic foundation of mosques.

### Commemoration of Imam al-Ḥusayn’s Martyrdom

Commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom has been one of the significant
fundamentals that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) established in the field of
cultural activities. It has also been one of the distinctive features of
their followers and devotees. This fundamental includes holding
ceremonies commemorating Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and his martyrdom,
collective recital of *ziyarah* (formulas to be said when visiting the
tombs of the Holy Imams (‘a)), and other ceremonies that will be
described.

Actually, commemoration of Imam Husayn’s martyrdom is regarded as one of
the significant objectives that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted in building
a virtuous community. It is important because they relied on it in their
movement inside the Muslim nation, and it received inspiration from Imam
al-Husayn’s uprising and venerated and highlighted the various
political, cultural, doctrinal, and spiritual aspects of its goals.

The Holy Imams (‘a) laid the foundation of this commemoration, giving it
a purely religious color and defining its form and contents so that it
corresponded with the significant role these ceremonies needed to play.

As for the form, these ceremonies must be utterly compatible with the
circumstances of the tragic saga of Karbala' and the circumstances of
the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers.

As for the contents, they must be compatible with the political,
spiritual, cultural, and doctrinal aspects of Imam al-Husayn’s (‘a)
uprising and martyrdom.

Beyond doubt, Imam al-Husayn’s uprising has had a far-reaching impact on
movements of the Muslim nation and has resulted in safeguarding Islam
and the Muslim nation from a variety of distortions.

The ceremonies of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom have played a great role in
consummating the role of Imam al-Husayn’s uprising. This role is mainly
consecrated within the virtuous community, even though it has had some
impact on the Muslim milieus in general.

Because the cultural aspect is one of the basic, most important goals
among its multifaceted goals, we will single out a rather comprehensive
discussion on these ceremonies and include other aspects in order to
round off its benefits.Because the cultural aspect is one of the basic,
most important goals among its multifaceted goals, we will single out a
rather comprehensive discussion on these ceremonies and include other
aspects in order to round off its benefits.

### Commemoration of Imam al-Ḥusayn’s Martyrdom and the Virtuous Community

The commemoration of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom can be organized in the
following two major sections according to its form and contents:

#### (1) Prescribed Rituals

The first section deals with the ceremonies held according to authentic
and forthright instructions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). Their
authenticity depends upon their performance:

##### A) Grief and Weeping

In addition to all reasonable semblances of grief, sorrow, and complaint
about the offensive carried out against the grandson of the Holy Prophet
(S), many traditions that are reported from the Holy Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) have referred to the significance of weeping over Imam
al-Husayn’s martyrdom. These sorrowful slogans of protest obviously
express the emotional and spiritual reaction to Imam al-Husayn’s tragedy
and introduce the persecution he had to encounter and the brutal crime
that was committed against him.

Many other traditions have asserted that the Holy Imams (‘a) did weep
for Imam al-Husayn (‘a), as a token of protest that was initially
instituted and raised by Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a).

In his book of *Kamil al-Ziyarat*, Ibn Qawlawayh has reported that a
servant of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a) saw him while he was prostrating
before Allah and weeping. He asked, “O ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (‘a), has the
time of the termination of your grief not yet come?”

The Imam (‘a) raised his head, looked at him, and answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْلَكَ! وَاللهِ لَقَدْ شَكَا يَعْقُوبُ إلَى رَبِّهِ فِي أَقَلَّ مَا
رَأَيْتُ حِينَ قَالَ: ”يَا أَسَفِي عَلَى يُوسُفَ!“ وَإنَّهُ فَقَدَ
إبْناً وَاحِداً. وَإنِّي رَأَيْتُ أَبِي وَجَمَاعَةَ أَهْلِ بَيْتِي
يُذَبَّحُونَ حَوْلِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Woe to you! By Allah I swear, (Prophet) Jacob (‘a) complained to his
Lord for less than what I have seen, saying, “O my sorrow for Joseph!”
That was because he had lost one son only. As for me, I saw my father
and a group of my household lying slain around me!*[^35]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَكَى عَلِيُّ بْنُ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَى الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ
صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِمْ أَجْمَعِينَ عِشْرِينَ ـ أَوْ أَرْبَعِينَ ـ
سَنَةً. وَمَا وُضِعَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ طَعَامٌ إلاَّ بَكَى عَلَى
الْحُسَيْنِ حَتَّى قَالَ لَهُ مَوْلىً لَهُ: ”جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ يَا بْنَ
رَسُولِ اللهِ! إنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكَ أَنْ تَكُونَ مِنَ
الْهَالِكِينَ!“ قَالَ: ”إنَّمَا أَشْكُو بَثِّي وَحُزْنِي إلَى اللهِ.
إنِّي لَمْ أَذْكُرْ مَصْرَعَ بَنِي فَاطِمَةَ إلاَّ حَنَقَتْنِيَ
الْعَبْرَةُ.“
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Ali ibn al-Husayn wept for (his father) Husayn ibn ‘Ali (peace of
Allah be upon them all) for twenty or fourty years. Whenever he was
served with food, he would weep for Husayn (‘a). Once, one of his
servants said to him, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you, O son of
Allah’s Messenger (S)! I fear you will die (by weeping so much).” The
Imam answered, “I only complain of my grief and sorrow to Allah.
Whenever I recall the killing of Fatimah’s sons, tears gush out.”*[^36]

This intensive practice of weeping of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a) cannot
be interpreted as mere emotional reaction to the scenes that he had
witnessed in those days of Muharram, after which he was not able to
suppress his feelings and emotions. In addition to this understanding,
this practice must have apprised his followers of a well-determined plan
based on the tragic truth the Imam (‘a) had to personally suffer. This
confirms its profundity and enormity so much so that this tragedy
permanently exists as an issue experienced by the Muslim nation since
the time it took place and as a basic motive for the virtuous community.

After Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a), other Holy Imams (‘a) offered further
insight when they propounded it as a third example of holding in honor
the rituals of God.[^37] This was done by declaring an objection to
injustice and personally reacting to the issue and goals of the tragedy
of Karbala', and undertaking a course of self-purification and
self-discipline. As a result, weeping over Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom
has changed into an act of worship practiced by people individually and
collectively.

The Ahl al-Bayt’s emphasis on the significance of actually weeping and
trying to weep for Imam al-Husayn ('a) and the reward of such acts shows
that this act has become an example of weeping recommended by Almighty
Allah, similar to weeping out of fear of Him.

In this regard, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have asked Fudhayl,
“Do you regularly gather and mention us?”

Fudhayl answered, “Yes, we do.”

The Imam (‘a) commented,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ تِلْكَ الْمَجَالِسَ أُحِبُّهَا، فَأَحْيُوا أَمْرَنَا يَا
فُضَيْلُ. فَرَحِمَ اللهُ مَنْ أَحْيَا أَمْرَنَا. يَا فُضَيْلُ، مَنْ
ذَكَرَنَا أَوْ ذُكِرْنَا عِنْدَهُ فَخَرَجَ مِنْ عَيْنِهِ مِثْلُ
جَنَاحِ الذُّبَابِ غَفَرَ اللهُ لَهُ ذُنُوبَهُ وَلَوْ كَانَتْ أَكْثَرَ
مِنْ زَبَدِ الْبَحْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I love these assemblies. Bring to life our affairs (i.e. deeds), O
Fudhayl. May Allah have mercy upon him who revitalizes our deeds! O
Fudhayl, if one mentions us or listens to our deeds and his eyes shed a
tear that is as little as a fly’s wing, Allah will forgive all his sins
even if they were as vast as the foam on the seas.*[^38]

Abu-Harun al-Makfuf (the blind) has reported that he once visited Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) who asked him to say an elegy about Imam al-Husayn (‘a).
Abu-Harun recited the elegy in an ordinary way, but the Imam (‘a) said,
“Do not recite it in this ordinary way; rather, chant it as you do at
the graves.”

So, Abu-Harun started with this verse, “Pass by Husayn’s grave and say
to his pure bones.”

As he saw Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) weeping, Abu-Harun stopped. The Imam (‘a)
commanded him to continue. He went on until the end of the lamentation.
The Imam (‘a) then asked for more, so Abu-Harun chanted another elegy
beginning with, “O Maryam, mourn for your master and weep soulfully for
Husayn (‘a).”

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) then wept, his body heaving with sobs, and women also
began to wail. When they stopped, the Imam (‘a) said to Abu-Harun:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَنْشَدَ فِي الْحُسَيْنِ فَأَبْكَى عَشَرَةً فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ…
مَنْ أَنْشَدَ فِي الْحُسَيْنِ فَأَبْكَى وَاحِداً فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.
مَنْ ذَكَرَهُ فَبَكَى فَلَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If one recites an elegy about Husayn (‘a) and makes ten persons weep,
Paradise will be his reward. If he makes nine persons weep, Paradise
will be the reward…If he makes even one person weep, Paradise will still
be the reward. If one mentions Husayn (‘a)* *and weeps, Paradise will
also be his reward.*[^39]

<span id="logic-weeping">[Logic for Weeping](#logic-weeping)</span>
If we take into consideration the following consequences of weeping, we
can understand its significance:

First: There is a political facet in weeping for Imam al-Husayn (‘a).
Weeping is generally the best human and social method—sound and
gentle—to condemn wrongdoing and express the profundity of this tragedy
and the transgressions to which Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and his noble goals
were exposed. The political significance of this method manifests under
circumstances of ordeal, repression of freedom and terrorism, when all
other aspects fail to convey the truth.

In various stages of history, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have
been experiencing difficult and brutal conditions; therefore, the method
of weeping has been the most appropriate in expressing and abiding by
their political posture.

We can now clearly understand Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s inclination to this
method considering his psychological state due to his presence in
Karbala' during that tragedy.

This issue highlights a significant truth about the Ahl al-Bayt’s
strategy about political issues: a faithful individual is required to
demonstrate his political belief through this practice—under all
circumstances—despite the fact that it represents the least degree of
faith. Hence, it is imperative for a believer to be duly conscious of
political ideology and belief. Many reports that deal with the duty of
enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong confirm this. Such reports
focus on condemning that which is wrong, even if only in one’s heart
when higher levels of condemnation are impossible (such being described
as the lowest level of faith).

Second: At the same time, weeping represents, at minimum, a moral and
subjective reaction to the tragedy of Karbala', an arousal of Muslims’
emotions towards the event and its goals, and detachment from the
enemies, their acts and wicked purposes.

This moral aspect of weeping became one of the natural means through
which the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) maintained the morality of unification. The
virtuous community stood by the right party, faced wrongdoers despite
pressures at various levels, including the external pressures of
despotic rulers and the internal pressures of personal desires and lust.

Third: Because weeping has some bearing on tenderheartedness,
wakefulness of the conscience, and awareness of the sentiments, it
promotes a course of self-purification from sins and raises sensitivity
towards the pains of humanity, deviations of the community and issues of
persecution and justice.

The issues of hardheartedness, tenderheartedness, and reverence are the
most important factors that create an impact on the personal progress of
humanity. Relying on this fact, the Holy Qur’an treated and criticized
hardheartedness and praised tenderheartedness and reverence on many
occasions, some of which are as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قَسَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ فَهِيَ كَالْحِجَارَةِ
أَوْ أَشَدُّ قَسْوَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Thenceforth were your hearts hardened: they became like a rock and
even worse in hardness. (2:74)Thenceforth were your hearts hardened:
they became like a rock and even worse in hardness. (2:74)Thenceforth
were your hearts hardened: they became like a rock and even worse in
hardness. (2:74)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ يَأْنِ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنْ تَخْشَعَ قُلُوبُهُمْ لِذِكْرِ
اللَّهِ وَمَا نَزَلَ مِنَ الْحَقِّ وَلَا يَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ أُوتُوا
الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلُ فَطَالَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْأَمَدُ فَقَسَتْ
قُلُوبُهُمْ ۖ وَكَثِيرٌ مِنْهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Has not the time arrived for the Believers that their hearts in all
humility should engage in the remembrance of Allah and the Truth
revealed to them, and that they should not become like those to whom was
given Revelation aforetime, but long ages passed over them and their
hearts grew hard? For many among them are rebellious transgressors.
(57:16)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ أَمْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبٍ أَقْفَالُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do they not then earnestly seek to understand the Qur’an, or are
there locks upon (their) hearts? (47:24)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌ ۚ بَلْ لَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ بِكُفْرِهِمْ
فَقَلِيلًا مَا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They (i.e. the Jews) say, ‘Our hearts are the wrappings.’ Nay,
Allah's curse is on them for their blasphemy. Little is it they believe.
(2:88)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَيْلٌ لِلْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ مِنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ
فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Woe to those whose hearts are hardened and cannot celebrate the
praises of Allah! They are manifestly wandering in error. (39:22)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَابًا مُتَشَابِهًا مَثَانِيَ
تَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ
تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ
هُدَى اللَّهِ يَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ
فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has revealed from time to time the most beautiful Message in
the form of a Book, consistent with itself, yet repeating its teaching
in various aspects. The skins of those who fear their Lord tremble
thereat; then their skins and their hearts do submit to the celebration
of Allah's praises. Such is the guidance of Allah: He guides therewith
whom He pleases, but those whom Allah leaves to stray can have none to
guide. (39:23)***

The state of hearts and setting a seal on them, mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an, is the state of hardheartedness. The opposite state is that of
purity, reverence, fear, tenderness, leading to tranquility.

Based on this fact, the Holy Legislator has encouraged weeping for fear
of Him. Thus, an eye that weeps for fear of Allah is, according to
sacred texts, in line with the eyes abstaining from violating His
prohibitions and staying awake to guard in His way.[^40] In addition to
its political and moral aspects, weeping enjoys a spiritual and
sentimental aspect.

No doubt, weeping is the finest way of cleansing the filth from the
hearts and preparing them to respond to improvement. This is linked to
justice and injustice. The motives of weeping that stir up such
emotional and sentimental feelings have an impact on man’s outlook on
life and reaction to various socio-politico-economic issues. When
feelings towards wrong and oppression are aroused in a person and when
he reacts to such feelings, he will undoubtedly think about the causes
of injustice and the standards of justice and resort to methods of
commitment to it. Usually, discussions of such ideas surface after
stimulation of such feelings.

##### B) Significance of Ziyarah

Originally, Ziyarah of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) indicated presence near his
tomb. Later, it took on a broader aspect appertaining to paying tribute
to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) since it required visitation of Imam al-Husayn
(‘a) on various occasions from near and far. After that, visitations to
Imam al-Husayn’s tomb paved the way for visiting the shrines of the
other Holy Imams (‘a), their descendants and followers.

According to certain reports, the first to have visited Imam al-Husayn’s
grave was Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a), forty days after his martyrdom
(ceremonially called *al-arba’in*), on his return from Sham (currently
Syria) to Madinah.[^41]

Subsequently, the other Holy Imams (‘a) recommended visiting Imam
al-Husayn’s tomb. According to traditions, some of which will be cited
hereinafter, visiting Imam al-Husayn’s tomb is a duty required by every
Shi’ite individual who believes in Imam al-Husayn’s Imamate.

Authentic traditions, reported from the Holy Imams (‘a), have mentioned
the great rewards ensuing from this blessed act of devotion as well as
its preference to the recommended (i.e. not obligatory) pilgrimage to
Mecca (*‘umrah*).

Shaykh al-Tusi in his book of *Misbah al-Za'ir* has recorded a form of
the *ziyarah* that is different from the famous one that is recited on
the day of ‘Ashura'. Through a valid chain of authority, he has also
reported this formula of *ziyarah* from ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan, the author
of *al-Mazar al-Kabir*, as follows:

*On the tenth of Muharram (‘Ashura') of one year, I visited my master
Abu-‘Abdullah Ja‘far ibn Muhammad (al-Sadiq) (‘a) and found him gloomy,
apparently aggrieved, with tears flowing from his eyes like pearls. I
asked,* *“O Son of Allah’s Messenger (S)! What is making you weep? May
Allah never cause your eyes to weep!”*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “Are you inattentive? Do you not know that
Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a) was martyred on this day?”*

*I then asked, “O master, what do you say about fasting on this day?”*

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُمْهُ مِنْ غَيْرِ تَبْيِيتٍ، وَأَفْطِرْهُ مِنْ غَيْرِ تَشْمِيتٍ،
وَلاَ تَجْعَلْهُ يَوْمَ صَوْمٍ كُمْلاً، وَلْيَكُنْ إفْطَارُكَ بَعْدَ
صَلاَةِ الْعَصْرِ بِسَاعَةٍ عَلَى شَرْبَةٍ مِنْ مَاءٍ، فَإنَّهُ فِي
مِثْلِ ذَلِكَ الْوَقْتِ مِنْ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ تَجَلَّتِ الْهَيْجَاءُ
عَنْ آلِ رَسُولِ اللهِ وَانْكَشَفَتِ الْمَلْحَمَةُ عَنْهُمْ وَفِي
الأَرْضِ مِنْهُمْ ثَلاَثُونَ صَرِيعاً فِي مَوَالِيهِمْ، يَعَزُّ عَلَى
رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ مَصْرَعُهُمْ. وَلَوْ كَانَ
فِي الدُّنْيَا يَوْمَئِذٍ حَيّاً لَكَانَ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ هُوَ
الْمُعَزَّى بِهِمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَبْدَ اللهِ بْنَ سِنَانٍ! إنَّ أَفْضَلَ مَا تَأْتِي بِهِ فِي
هَذَا الْيَوْمِ أَنْ تَعْمَدَ إلَى ثِيَابٍ طَاهِرَةٍ فَتَلْبَسُهَا
وَتَتَسَلَّبُ… تُحَلِّلُ أَزْرَارَكَ وَتَكْشِفُ عَنْ ذِرَاعَيْكَ
كَهَيْئَةِ أَصْحَابِ الْمَصَائِبِ، ثُمَّ تَخْرُجُ إلَى أَرْضٍ
مُقْفَرَةٍ أَوْ مَكَانٍ لاَ يَرَاكَ بِهِ أَحَدٌ أَوْ تَعْمِدُ إلَى
مَنْزِلٍ لَكَ خَالٍ، أَوْ فِي خِلْوَةٍ مُنْذُ حِينَ يَرْتَفِعُ
النَّهَارَ فَتُصَلِّي أَرْبَعَ رَكَعَاتٍ تُحْسِنُ رُكُوعَهَا
وَسُجُودَهَا وَخُشُوعَهَا، وَتُسَلِّمُ بَيْنَ كُلِّ رَكْعَتَيْنِ.
تَقْرَأُ فِي الأُولَى سُورَةَ الْحَمْدِ وَ{قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا
الْكَافِرُونَ} وَفِي الثَّانِيَةِ الْحَمْدَ وَ{قُلْ هُوَ اللهُ أَحَدٌ}
ثُمَّ تُصَلِّي رَكْعَتَيْنِ أُخْرَيَيْنِ تَقْرَأُ فِي الأُولَى
الْحَمْدَ وَسُورَةَ الأَحْزَابِ وَفِي الثَّانِيَةِ الْحَمْدَ وَ{إذَا
جَاءَكَ الْمُنَافِقُونَ} أَوْ مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ تُسَلِّمُ وَتُحَوِّلُ وَجْهَكَ نَحْوَ قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ وَمَضْجَعِهِ. فَتُمَثِّلُ لِنَفْسِكَ مَصْرَعَهُ
وَمَنْ كَانَ مَعَهُ مِنْ وُلْدِهِ وَأَهْلِهِ. وَتُسَلِّمُ وَتُصَلِّي
عَلَيْهِ وَتَلْعَنُ قَاتِلِيهِ وَتَبْرَأُ مِنْ أَفْعَالِهِمْ، يَرْفَعِ
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَكَ بِذَلِكَ فِي الْجَنَّةِ مِنَ الدَّرَجَاتِ
وَيَحِطَّ عَنْكَ مِنَ السَّيِّئَاتِ. ثُمَّ تَسْعَى مِنَ الْمَوْضِعِ
الَّذِي أَنْتَ فِيهِ إنْ كَانَ صَحْرَاءَ أَوْ فَضَاءً أَوْ أَيَّ
شَيْءٍ كَانَ خَطَوَاتٍ، تَقُولُ فِي ذَلِكَ: إنَّا للهِ وَإنَّا إلَيْهِ
رَاجِعُونَ؛ رِضىً بِقَضَاءِ اللهِ وَتَسْلِيماً لأَمْرِهِ. وَلْيَكُنْ
عَلَيْكَ فِي ذَلِكَ الْكَآبَةُ وَالْحُزْنُ. وَأَكْثِرْ مِنْ ذِكْرِ
اللهِ سُبْحَانَهُ وَالاسْتِرْجَاعِ فِي ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإذَا فَرَغْتَ مِنْ سَعْيِكَ وَفِعْلِكَ هَذَا، فَقِفْ فِي مَوْضِعِكَ
الَّذِي صَلَّيْتَ فِيهِ ثُمَّ قُلْ: اَللَّهُمَّ عَذِّبِ الْفَجَرَةَ
الَّذِينَ شَاقُّوا رَسُولَكَ وَحَارَبُوا أَوْلِيَاءَكَ وَعَبَدُوا
غَيْرَكَ وَاسْتَحَلُّوا مَحَارِمَكَ، وَالْعَنِ القَادَةَ وَالأَتْبَاعَ
وَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْهُمْ فَخَبَّ وَأَوْضَعَ مَعَهُمْ أَوْ رَضِيَ
بِفِعْلِهِمْ لَعْناً كَثِيراً. اَللَّهُمَّ وَعَجِّلْ فَرَجَ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ وَاجْعَلْ صَلَوَاتِكَ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَيْهِمْ
وَاسْتَنْقِذْهُمْ مِنْ أَيْدِي الْمُنَافِقِينَ الْمُضِلِّينَ
وَالْكَفَرَةِ الْجَاحِدِينَ وَافْتَحْ لَهُمْ فَتْحاً يَسِيراً وَأَتِحْ
لَهُمْ رَوْحاً وَفَرَجاً قَرِيباً وَاجْعَلْ لَهُمْ مِنْ لَدُنْكَ عَلَى
عَدُوِّكَ وَعَدُوِّهِمْ سُلْطَاناً نَصِيراً. ثُمَّ ارْفَعْ يَدَيْكَ
وَاقْنُتْ بِهَذا الدُّعَاءِ وَقُلْ وَأَنْتَ تُؤمِي إلَى أَعْدَاءِ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may abstain from eating and drinking on that day but without a
predetermined* *intention of ritual fasting and you may break your
abstinence from eating and drinking but without prearrangement. Do not
fast for the whole day; rather, you must* *break your fast an hour after
the Afternoon (‘Asr) Prayer with a drink of water. At this very time of
that day, the combat with the family members of Allah’s Messenger (S)
terminated and the massacre ended while thirty of their supporters were
thrown on the ground. Their slaying is very hard for Allah’s Messenger
(S).* *Had he been alive then, he would have been the one consoled for
their death.*

*O ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan, the best act you may do on this day is to dress
yourself in clean clothes, undo the buttons, and uncover your arms, just
like those stricken by a disaster. At midday, you may take leave to a
wasteland or a place where nobody can see you, go to an empty house you
own, or keep yourself secluded. You may offer a four-unit (rak’ah)
prayer with genuflection (ruku’) and prostration (sujud). After each two
units,* *you say the taslim (the concluding statement of prayers). In
the first unit, you recite Surah al-Hamd (al-Fatihah, No. 1) and Surah
al-Kafirun (No. 109) and in the second Surah al-Hamd and Surah al-Tawhid
(al-Ikhlas, No. 112). You then offer another two-unit prayer, reciting
in the first unit Surah al-Hamd and Surah al-Ahzab (No. 33) and in the
second Surah al-Hamd and Surah al-Munafiqun (No, 63) or any other part
of the Holy Qur’an as much as is easy.*

*You then say the taslim and turn your face towards Husayn’s tomb and
place of rest. You then call to mind the way he, his sons and family
members were slain. You salute him, invoke Allah’s blessings upon him
and Allah’s curse* *upon those who slew him, and distance yourself from
their crimes. By doing so, Almighty* *Allah will raise your rank in
Paradise and absolve you from your evildoings.*

*You then take some steps in the place where you are, be it desert, an
empty space, or any other area, repeating the following words:*

*“We are Allah’s and unto Him shall we return. We are pleased with His
decree and we submit to His decisions.”*

*Depression and sadness should be manifest on your mien. You should also
mention Almighty Allah as much as you can and repeat the previous
statement.*

*When you finish walking while doing the previous acts, you should stop
in the same place where you offered the prayers and say the following
statements:*

*“O Allah, torture the wicked ones who contended with Your Messenger
(S), fought against Your Representatives (‘a), worshipped other deities
than You, and violated Your prohibitions. Curse the leaders and the
followers as well as those who loved them, those who participated with
them, and those who approved of their crimes with much cursing. O Allah,
hasten the Deliverance of Muhammad’s Family (‘a). Shower on them Your
blessings and save them from the grasp of the misleading hypocrites and
the contemptuous unbelievers. Grant them (‘a) manifest victory. Confer
upon them soothing mercy and approaching relief, and furnish them with
an overcoming authority from You over Your enemy and theirs.”*

*You then raise your hands, pointing to their (‘a) enemies, and say the
following… etc.*[^42]

Investigation of the political, ethical, social, and spiritual
denotations of this sublime *ziyarah* requires a lengthy discourse,
especially when we take into consideration the historical aspect and the
reactions of the despotic ruling authorities to it during the various
stages of history. However, let us now refer to a number of basic
aspects briefly. (S)

<span id="various-aspects-ziyarah">[The Various Aspects of
Ziyarah](#various-aspects-ziyarah)</span>
**First Aspect**: This *ziyarah* represents the same set of principles
represented by the rituals of Hajj according to the Islamic ruling, yet
in a special framework and a restricted goal, which is to refine the
virtuous community and the genuine line of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers
in accordance with the purposes behind Imam al-Husayn’s uprising.

Such refinement can be achieved through loyalty to this Islamic
standard, namely Imam al-Husayn (‘a), and by responding to his call in
the capacity of a caller to Almighty Allah. This response has been
introduced in the following formula:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَّيْكَ دَاعِيَ اللهِ! إنْ كَانَ لَمْ يُجِبْكَ بَدَنِي عِنْدَ
إسْتِغَاثَتِكَ وَلِسَانِي عِنْدَ إسْتِنْصَارِكَ، فَقَدْ أَجَابَكَ
قَلْبِي وَسَمْعِي وَبَصَرِي. سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إنْ كَانَ وَعْدُ
رَبِّنَا لَمَفْعُولاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Here I am responding to you, O caller to Allah. If my body could not
respond to your call when you called for aid and my tongue could not
respond to your call for help, then, verily, my heart, my hearing, and
my sight have responded to you. Glory be to our Lord! Most surely, the
promise of our Lord was to be fulfilled.*[^43]

**Second Aspect**: The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) aimed at
connecting the movement of the virtuous community and the genuine line
of Islam to Imam al-Husayn’s Islamic standard and his religion-based
situations. In view of differences in their conditions, which required
variety in their provisional political affairs, the Holy Imams (‘a)
needed to confirm a fixed line to be followed by their movement and a
clear-cut practice for their school. This line signifies the objection
to oppression and injustice, which was declared by Imam al-Husayn (‘a)
in his first sermon delivered to the people of al-Kufah, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
قَالَ: مَنْ رَأى سُلْطَاناً جَائِراً مُسْتَحِلاًّ لِحَرَامِ اللهِ،
نَاكِثاً لِعَهْدِهِ، مُخَالِفاً لِسُنَّةِ رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، يَعْمَلُ فِي عِبَادِ اللهِ بِالإثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ،
فَلَمْ يُغَيِّرْ عَلَيْهِ بِقَوْلٍ وَلاَ فِعْلٍ كَانَ حَقّاً عَلَى
اللهِ أَنْ يُدْخِلَهُ مَدْخَلَهُ. أَلاَ وَإنَّ هَؤُلاَءِ قَدْ لَزِمُوا
طَاعَةَ الشَّيْطَانِ، وَتَوَلَّوْا عَنْ طَاعَةِ الرَّحْمَنِ،
وَأَظْهَرُوا الْفَسَادَ، وَعَطَّلُوا الْحُدُودَ، وَاسْتَأْثَرُوا
بِالْفَيْءِ، وَأَحَلُّوا حَرَامَ اللهِ وَحَرَّمُوا حَلاَلَهُ، وَإنِّي
أَحَقُّ بِهَذَا الأَمْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O people: Verily, Allah’s Messenger (S) has said, “He who realizes that
an unjust ruler is violating the prohibitions of Allah, breaching his
pledge with Him, opposing the traditions of His Messenger (S) and
oppressing His servants yet does not try to change that through his
deeds or words, then Allah will definitely place him with that ruler.”
Verily, those rulers have acted in accordance with Satan, abandoned
their obedience to the All-beneficent God, made overt mischief,
infringed upon the provisions of Allah, seized booty, violated the
prohibitions of Allah, and prohibited that which Allah has deemed
lawful. Most certainly, it is my duty, more than anyone else, to oppose
them.*[^44]

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took much interest in
consolidating this fixed line in an unambiguous, clear way by
concentrating on visiting Imam al-Husayn’s tomb, rendering homage to
him, responding to his call, showing loyalty to his devotees and
followers, and announcing hostility towards his enemies and all those
who support and follow them.

**Third Aspect**: The Holy Imams (‘a) worked towards educating the
individuals of the virtuous community on commitment to the doctrinal,
ethical, and political concepts present in the texts of the *ziyarah*
that are addressed to Imam al-Husayn (‘a) on various occasions.

Visiting Imam al-Husayn’s tomb was consecrated within a certain season
to express commitment to these multifaceted concepts. As a result, a
cultural line, which is characterized by attentiveness and firmness, was
created in the milieus of the virtuous community.

**Fourth Aspect**: By way of connecting with Imam al-Husayn’s movement,
the Holy Imams (‘a) introduced the virtuous community politically and
socially and opened the doors for other Muslims to join this movement.
This fact explains the following two events that manifested themselves
eminently throughout history associated with the visitation to Imam
al-Husayn’s tomb.

**First Event**: The despotic authorities and the criminal tyrants
practiced suppression and violence against the Muslims who visited the
holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (‘a). Throughout history, these visitors
had to encounter various sorts of injury: some were killed, some fined,
some their hands cut off and others persecuted. The holy tomb of Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) was exposed to many attempts of ruination at the hands of
despotic rulers, such as al-Mutawakkil, the ‘Abbasid ruler (822-861 AD),
the Wahhabis at the end of the thirteenth century of Hegira, and the
‘Aflaqi[^45] rulers of Iraq (1968-2003).

**Second Event**: The Holy Imams (‘a) adopted the course of
precautionary dissimulation (*taqiyyah*) and worked on safeguarding
their followers and keeping them away from all risks and pain. However,
they enlightened their followers on the necessity of reciting the
*ziyarah* no matter what menace they faced, since visiting Imam
al-Husayn’s tomb came to be regarded by them as a fight for the sake of
Allah (i.e. jihad).

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُرُوا شِيعَتَنَا بِزِيَارَةِ قَبْرِ الْحُسَيْنِ بْنِ عَلِيٍّ،
عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ، فَإنَّ إتْيَانَهُ مُفْتَرَضٌ عَلَى كُلِّ
مُؤْمِنٍ يُقِرُّ لِلْحُسَيْنِ، عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ، بِالإمَامَةِ مِنَ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Command our followers to visit the tomb of Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a), for
this deed is obligatory upon each and every believer who has confessed
to the divinely commissioned leadership of Husayn (‘a).*[^46]

Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ أَنَّ أَحَدَكُمْ حَجَّ دَهْرَهُ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَزُرِ الْحُسَيْنَ
بْنَ عَلِيٍّ، عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ، لَكَانَ تَارِكاً حَقّاً مِنْ
حُقُوقِ اللهِ وَحُقُوقِ رَسُولِهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ،
لأَنَّ حَقَّ الْحُسَيْنِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فَرِيضَةٌ مِنَ اللهِ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَاجِبَةٌ عَلَى كُلِّ مُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you go on Hajj every year for your entire lifetime but miss visiting
Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a), you will have abandoned one of the duties towards
Allah and towards His Messenger (S). Carrying* *out the duty towards
Husayn (‘a) is verily obligatory upon each Muslim by a command of
Almighty Allah.*[^47]

<span id="commemorating-imam-al-husayns-martyrdom">[Commemorating Imam
al-Husayn’s
Martyrdom](#commemorating-imam-al-husayns-martyrdom)</span>
The ceremonies commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom (*al-majalis
al-husayniyyah*) are the assemblages that the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) hold on the days of the great disaster, in Muharram and
Safar, and on other days of the year. In these assemblages, Muslims
gather to recollect the events of the tragedy of Karbala' as well as
probe other religious issues.

Originally, these ceremonies expressed deep grief for Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom (‘a). They recalled the terribleness of the calamity that
befell Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and his family members, and pointed out the
savagery of the Umayyad band in general and Yazid the tyrant in
particular, revealing the deep-rooted hatred and animosity they had
against Islam, the Messenger (S), and his Household (‘a).

In the following stages, these ceremonies developed into a mobile school
of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers to meet the cultural, political,
emotional, and social needs of the virtuous community whose individuals
could move freely in the midst of these ceremonies under all
circumstances.

Since the first days of the tragedy of Karbala', such sessions were
first held in Sham when Yazid began to retreat in the face of the mass
denunciation of the tragedy.

This mass wakefulness was the result of the all-inclusive enlightenment
that Lady Zaynab and Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) spread among the public
when their caravan, carrying them as captives, entered Sham and they
were presented in the court of Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah. Some traditions
confirm that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (‘a) held a three-day funeral ceremony
in Sham.[^48]

The other members of the Holy Prophet’s household and some of his wives,
such as Ummu-Salamah, also held funeral ceremonies in al-Madinah as soon
as the surviving members of Imam al-Husayn’s family, headed by Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin (‘a), returned home.[^49]

Whenever they had an opportunity and especially on the first ten days of
the month of Muharram, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) continued to hold such
ceremonies. They also encouraged their followers and devotees to do the
same, as has been previously cited.

Although discussions of the history, aspects, consequences, and logic
for these ceremonies of commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom are too
extensive for one book, we will hereinafter refer to some of these
aspects briefly:

<span id="significance-and-aspects">[Significance and
Aspects](#significance-and-aspects)</span>
**First**: These ceremonies contribute to the preservation of the great
event of Imam al-Husayn’s uprising, which also embodies a Divine
proposal the purpose of which is to draw the Muslim nation’s attention
towards safeguarding the final Divine message of Islam against loss,
distortion, and deformation.

Since the beginning, the tyrannical authorities attempted to
misrepresent the truth by presenting Imam al-Husayn’s uprising as mutiny
against the legal authority, as an act of rebellion aimed at destroying
Muslim unity. They also tried to cast a shadow on Imam al-Husayn’s
personality and on the goals, background, causes, and circumstances of
his uprising. The masses need to learn the truth of this great uprising
in the history of Muslims.

In the beginning Yazid, the tyrant, tried to absolve himself from the
responsibility of this catastrophic massacre and cast the blame on
‘Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, the commander-in-chief. However, the reason-based
planning of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) reiterated the features of this
uprising in such ceremonies and saved the truth from being hidden or
lost. As a result, Imam al-Husayn’s uprising, with all its details and
attributes, has been well-protected in the history of Islam.[^50]

**Second**: These ceremonies keep the following significant aspects
existent, active, and influential in Islamic life in general and the
milieus of the virtuous community in particular:

A) These ceremonies activate the conscience of Muslims. One of the basic
goals of this uprising was to shake, revive and move this conscience
whenever it was exposed to death or cultural anesthesia, or whenever it
buckled under the psychological pressures or methods of terrorism that
lead to absence of willpower despite acquaintance with the truth.[^51]

The tragedy of Karbala' has thus become a moving factor not only for the
present generation but also for all generations throughout the ages.

A pioneering role in this field has been played by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
through their magnificent depictions that embodied the tragedy in the
most effective way. Additionally, poets of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School
have contributed to portraying and presenting this tragedy through the
elegies they have composed in various stages of Muslim history.

We can understand the reason for the traditions that urged composing and
reciting poetry on the tragedy of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) in
particular.[^52] We can also understand the reason for the voluminous
poetic heritage on Imam al-Husayn (‘a), which is too huge to find its
match in human literature as a whole.

B) These ceremonies reveal the politico-cultural recognition of the
events by which the Muslim sects in general and the virtuous community
in particular are passing, since this community has been characterized
by profound and unique recognition of all political events and its
commitment to Islamic principles and revolutionary ethics.

C) These ceremonies shed light on the need of a genuine Islamic
inspection of the Islamic system of government and its components. It is
necessary to stipulate the correct attitude regarding the Islamic system
of government and have the competence of distinguishing between right
and wrong practices within this system, along with the capability of
distinguishing between the red, green and grey lines so that a more
comprehensive understanding is achieved of the issues that menace Islam
which must be confronted and resisted.

**Third**: The ceremonies of commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom
maintain the human and social relations among the members of the
virtuous community and the other Muslims who interact with them.
However, such interactions must be within the accurate frame of these
relations—a frame that represents the goals and moralities of Imam
al-Husayn (‘a).

Just as these sessions and ceremonies have provided great opportunity to
confirm such relations and strengthen the bonds of mutual love and
affiliation among the members of the virtuous community and increase the
spirit of cooperation and fraternity, so also have they become
opportunities for spending, giving, offering, and attending to the
feeble and poor after recognizing their condition. This can be
accomplished because the largest congregations of Muslims of various
social and religious levels attend such sessions and celebrations.

This aspect in the Ahl al-Bayt’s (‘a) plan (of commemorating Imam
Husayn’s martyrdom) has preserved the unity of the virtuous community in
its social and human relations throughout history regardless of the
difficulties, ordeals, and pain the members of this community have to
face.

**Fourth**: These sessions and ceremonies of commemorating Imam
al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom have contributed to spreading the
genuine Islamic culture, which faced several attempts of ideological and
physical debarments and terrorism at certain stages of its history as
well as unavailability of both human and material potential for
promulgating this culture.

The culture of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School, in its various aspects
including the doctrinal, ethical, behavioral and historical has been
characterized by the features and peculiarities of genuine Islam as
practiced by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). Opportunities to promulgate this
culture were not always available; rather, they were even banned at
certain times. Secondly, religious establishments, such as seminaries,
mosques, and other cultural centers, were neither helpful nor available.
As a result, the virtuous community was threatened by dissolution, loss,
ignorance, or baseless fanaticism.

To tackle these needs, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) recommended establishing the
commemoration of Imam al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom, thus
establishing mobile cultural schools. Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid
chain of authority, has reported Maysar as saying:

*Imam Abu-Ja‘far (al-Baqir) once asked me, “Do you (Shi‘ite groups)
usually seclude yourselves to exchange discourses and say whatever you
have in mind freely?”*

*I answered, “Yes, I swear it by Allah. We usually seclude ourselves to
exchange discourses and say whatever we have in our minds freely.”*

The Imam (‘a) commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا وَاللهِ، لَوَدِدْتُ أَنِّي مَعَكُمْ فِي بَعْضِ تِلْكَ
الْمَوَاطِنِ. وَأَمَا وَاللهِ، إنِّي لأُحِبُّ رِيحَكُمْ
وَأَرْوَاحَكُمْ. وَإنَّكُمْ عَلَى دِينِ اللهِ وَدِينِ مَلاَئِكَتِهِ.
فَأَعِينُوا بِوَرَعٍ وَاجْتِهَادٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah I swear, I do wish I were with you on even some of these
occasions. By Allah I swear, I do love your fragrance and your souls.
You are following the very religion of Allah and the religion of His
angels. So, help (us) by means of piety and diligence.”*[^53]

<span id="basic-objectives">[Basic
Objectives](#basic-objectives)</span>
In view of the aforementioned display of the goals and outcomes of
commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom, we can ascertain
that the nearer these ceremonies get to achieving their objectives in
the most appropriate forms of practice the more they fulfill the actual
function that the Holy Imams (‘a) planned.

However, when practiced in unacceptable forms, they will definitely fail
to achieve their goals and be just like prayers performed without
cordial attention to Almighty Allah.

The objectives of practicing these rituals and ceremonies are summarized
below:

The *first objective* is to create a spiritual, mental, and emotional
attachment to Imam al-Husayn (‘a), the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), and the
purposes of this great uprising.

The *second objective* is to accurately inspect, at two levels of policy
and religion, the issue of government rule and political events that the
Muslim nation faces, including the issues of injustice, justice,
enjoining the right, forbidding the wrong, and constructing the divine
system of rule.

The *third objective* is to implant the features of genuine moral
education in the virtuous community’s political and social movement.
Such features can be represented through self-sacrifice, altruism,
steadfastness, feelings of responsibility towards Muslim issues of
resisting injustice and tyranny, abiding by what is right, fulfillment
of pledges and covenants, sincerity to Almighty Allah, perseverance, and
compliance with principles.

The *fourth objective* is to spread Islamic culture and cognizance of
its various aspects, such as recognition of Islam, studying its
fundamentals, raising the degree of feeling in human souls, and
awakening sentiments and consciences.

The *fifth objective* is to strengthen the relations of fraternity,
mutual love, and cooperation among the believers as well as take
interest in their affairs, provide them with the required advice, help
the poor and the feeble among them, bring into being more joint
liability among them, and present them as a powerful, invulnerable and
united community.

#### 2) Innovative Rituals

The second section of this discussion deals with the rituals associated
with the commemoration of Imam al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom, which
have not been prescribed or recommended by the Holy Imams (‘a). These
rituals have been invented by their followers in various stages of
history. These include organizing processions for expressing grief and
sadness for Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom (*al-mawakib al-husayniyyah*) and
rituals of representing and acting out the scenes of Imam al-Husayn’s
tragedy in addition to other rituals that may be invented in the future.

Discussion in this respect can be based on the following two topics:

**The First Topic** is dedicated to the legal justifications of
performing such rituals about which we cannot find a tradition reported
from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) at the three levels of words, deeds, and
confirmation.

The best justification in this respect is the idea that any practice or
act is regarded as a traditional expression of glorifying Imam al-Husayn
(‘a) or showing sorrow for his tragedy, especially if such a practice or
act was common during the ages of the Holy Imams (‘a), or a tradition
reminding of his tragedy and goals. Such practice and act will thus be
legal according to the following Qur’anic rule:

> ذَٰلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقْوَى
> الْقُلُوبِ (22:32)

***Whoever holds in honor the symbols of Allah, such (honor) should come
truly from piety of hearts. (22:32)***

To describe Imam al-Husayn (‘a) as ‘the Vengeance of Allah’ is one of
His symbols or signs and rituals that hold Imam al-Husayn (‘a) in honor
is to hold in honor signs of Allah. Besides, many traditions of general
purport have instructed showing sorrow for Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and
proclaiming his tragic event on the days of ‘Ashura' (the first ten days
of Muharram).

**The Second Topic** is about the limits and framework in which these
innovative ceremonies and rituals are practiced to satisfy the
aforementioned Qur’anic rule.

The first kind is legally correct under all circumstances because its
forms and contents have been mentioned in traditions reported from the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). It, therefore, represents a fixed line.

As for the second kind, its legality must include the same contents and
purport that Almighty Allah has decided for it; that is, the symbols of
Allah must be held in honor. It is not sufficient to claim that the
effectuation of such ceremonies is for Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and not for
holding in honor the symbols of Allah, as long as their form expresses a
traditional reason-based style of holding honor. Hence, such practices
must be in line with the legitimate content of Imam al-Husayn’s
uprising, as has been previously explained.

This content can be restricted to two basic lines:

**The Positive Line,** which entails the goals determined for holding
the ceremonies of commemorating Imam al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom
in their third line. As much as these ceremonies achieve the goals cited
in the previous five points, these practices express holding in honor
the symbols of Almighty Allah.

**The Negative Line** entails that these practices must not violate the
sacredness of Islam and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School and must not deform
the view of this School. This may happen when these practices take a
form that is incompatible with the actual goals that the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) decided for them. Such distortion is obvious in some unwanted
practices that are irreconcilable with any act of worship or behavior
that the Holy Legislator has accepted to be an expression of connecting
with, loving, honoring or glorifying Almighty Allah, as well as other
forms that reasonable people acknowledge in social life.

Some unwanted practices are disgusting to pure sentiment, sound human
taste and reason. In fact, such practices are only expressions of
uncontrolled passions, reckless emotions, and imaginations without
legitimate basis since they cannot be sanctioned by Islamic law. They
are therefore practiced by naive people who lack acquaintance with
Islamic culture and stand rejected by the well-versed scholars of
jurisprudence and divinity.

[^1]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:228, H. 1. Undoubtedly,
‘compilation’ in this tradition must stand for collecting the Holy
Qur’an with all of its peculiarities that went along with it, beginning
with the reasons for the revelation of its verses and its inferences
including the Holy Prophet’s explanations of it.

[^2]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:239, H. 1; al-Saffar, Basa'ir
al-Darajat, p. 143, H. 4 and pp. 151-152, H. 3; al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 26:22, H. 11.

[^3]: - Al-Saffar, Basa'ir al-Darajat, p. 145, H. 15; al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 26:35, H. 61 (quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^4]: - This subject will be discussed in further detail in the coming
book regarding the intellectual referential authority.

[^5]: - Refer to Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr, Ta'sis al-Shi’ah li-’Ulum
al-Islam (The Shi’ah: Founders of the Sciences of Islam). This book has
been summarized in Al-Shi’ah wa-Funun al-Islam (The Shi’ah and Islamic
Arts) and Mu'allifu al-Shi’ah fi’l-Islam (Shi’ite Authors in Islam) by
Sayyid ‘Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din.

[^6]: - Proofs on this fact will be cited in a coming book about the
referential authority of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) within this series.

[^7]: - Opinionism (in Islamic traditions) is the trend of using
personal views and conjectures in the issuance of religious verdicts.

[^8]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, pp. 487-488; al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 1:171, H. 24 (quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^9]: - Ibn Abi-Jumhur, ‘Awali al-La'ali 4:61, H. 9; al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 1:171, H. 53 (quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^10]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Ma’ani al-Akhbar, p. 1, H. 2; al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 2:184, H. 4 (quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^11]: - Al-Kashshi, Ikhtiyar Ma’rifat al-Rijal 1:61, H. 2; al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 2:82, H. 1 (quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^12]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:12, S (section) 4, H.
13.

[^13]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:7, S. 3, H. 4.

[^14]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:9, S. 4, H. 1, 11, 14.

[^15]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:12, S. 4, H. 10. Refer
to Chapter: Qualifications of Judges in the same reference book, S. 6
(Illegality of Analogy and Conjectures), H. 14, 15, 20, 21.

[^16]: - Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 5:140; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, Jami’
Bayan al-’Ilm 2:147; al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffa¨ 1:4-5; al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Kanz al-’Ummal 5:239, H. 4865.

[^17]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:61, S. 8, Sifat
al-Qadhi (Qualifications of Judges), H. 35.

[^18]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:72-3, S. 8, H. 80-81.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:57-59, H. 14, 16, 21.

[^20]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:52, S. 8, H. 1.

[^21]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:52, S. 8, H. 3.
According to other forms of this tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) said,
“Just as swords rust, so also do hearts rust, and discourses are the
polish of the rust of the hearts.”

[^22]: Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:52, S. 8, H. 4.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:52, S. 8, H. 5.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 18:52, S. 8, H. 9.

[^25]: - The al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah (also called Psalms of Islam) by
Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) is one of the clearest examples in this
respect.

[^26]: - Examples on such precepts are: The Holy Prophet’s precept to
Imam ‘Ali (‘a) (Tuhaf al-’Uqul by Ibn Shu’bah al-Harrani), Imam ‘Ali’s
precept to Imam al-Hasan (‘a) (Nahj al-Balaghah), Imam al-Baqir’s
precept to Jabir al-Ju’fi (Tuhaf al-’Uqul), Imam al-Sadiq’s precept to
Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man (Tuhaf al-’Uqul), and Imam al-Ka¨im’s precept to
Husham ibn al-Hakam (Tuhaf al-’Uqul).

[^27]: - Examples on such epistles are: Imam al-Sadiq’s Epistle to his
followers (al-Kafi 8:397), Imam al-Baqir’s Epistle to the entirety of
the Shi’ah and his companions (al-Kafi 8:230), Imam al-Hadi’s Epistle of
refutations of the Fatalists and Indeterminists (Tuhaf al-’Uqul 341),
and Imam ‘Ali’s Instructive Epistle to his companions (400 instructions
compiled in Tuhaf al-’Uqul 66-83).

[^28]: - Refer to Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr, Ta'sis al-Shi’ah li-’Ulum
al-Islam (The Shi’ah; the Founders of the Sciences of Islam).

[^29]: - Each of these establishments can be a topic for a complete,
expansive study. Nevertheless, we have to refer to the basic features of
these establishments for brevity.

[^30]: - This discussion will be further discussed in the topic of the
intellectual referential authority within my encyclopedia entitled ‘The
Role of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in Muslim Life’.

[^31]: - The history of these schools involves many details. I expect to
have the opportunity to discuss these details in my book on the virtuous
referential authority, which deals with the applied aspect and the
history of the virtuous community after the Occultation.

[^32]: - During the age of the referential authority of Sayyid Muhsin
al-Hakim in the holy city of Najaf and Sayyid al-Burujirdi in Qum,
several attempts were made to rectify the progress of the scholastic
courses of these schools and fill the gaps found therein. These attempts
developed greatly to reach their climax after the victory of the Islamic
Revolution in Iran when a large movement of reformation began to bear
fruit.

[^33]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:30-31; Abu’l-Fath al-Karajaki,
Kanz al-Fawa'id 2:107; Ibn Abi-Jumhur, ‘Awali al-La'ali 4:70, H. 36;
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 1:177, H. 54 (as quoted from the previous
reference book); al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-’Ummal 10:57-79, S. Kitab
al-’Ilm.

[^34]: - Such places are ascribed to Imam Husayn (‘a) because the
ceremonies of commemorating his martyrdom and the lectures about his
uprising and its spiritual, moral, political, social, and doctrinal
features were held therein.

[^35]: - Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 46:110, H. 4, as quoted from Kamil
al-Ziyarat.

[^36]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 2:922, H. 7.

[^37]: - This is an indication of Almighty Allah’s remark mentioned in
the Holy Qur’an, “Whoever holds in honor the rituals of Allah, such
should come truly from piety of heart. (22:32)”

[^38]: - Al-Himyari al-Qummi, Qurb al-Isnad, p. 36, H. 117; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 44:282, H. 14 as quoted from the earlier
reference book.

[^39]: - Allamal al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 44:287, H. 25 as quoted from
Kamil al-Ziyarat.

[^40]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 93:329.

[^41]: - Some reports indicate that the first to have visited Imam
Husayn (‘a) on the forty-day occasion was Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari,
a grand and revered companion of the Holy Prophet (S). See al-Muqarram,
Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 360.

[^42]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 101:303-307 as quoted from
Shaykh al-Tusi’s Misbah al-Za'ir.

[^43]: - Imam al-Husayn’s formula of Ziyarah on the fifteenth of Rajab
and Sha’ban, as quoted from Abbas al-Qummi’s Mafatih al-Jinan.

[^44]: - Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk (known
as Tarikh al-Tabari) 4:304; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 4:48
(with little difference).

[^45]: - Michel Aflaq (1910-1989), an anti-Islam leader and the founder
of al-Ba‘th Socialist Party, fought against Islam in general and against
the rituals of the Shi‘ah in particular.

[^46]: - Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Mazar, p. 37.

[^47]: - Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Mazar, p. 37.

[^48]: - Sayyid ‘Abdullah Shubbar, Jala' al-’Uyun 2:264.

[^49]: - Muhammad ibn Sa’d, in his famous book of al-Tabaqat al-Kubra,
has recorded that when she was informed about the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn ('a), Ummu-Salamah, the Holy Prophet’s wife, cried out, “Did they
have the courage to do it? May Allah fill their houses and their graves
with fire!” She then wept so heavily that she lost consciousness. See
also Ibn Hajar al-’Asqalani’s al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:218.

[^50]: - It is natural to find small differences in the details of the
event. Not all the accounts that relate the details of Imam Husayn’s
martyrdom are adopted as truths; rather, such details and special
situations are aimed at presenting the basic features, trends, plans,
reasonable grounds, backgrounds, and tragedies of this uprising,
although there may be differences in depiction.

[^51]: - In my book entitled Thawrat al-Imam al-Husayn (Imam al-Husayn’s
Uprising), I have discussed this goal in further detail.

[^52]: - Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said: مَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ
قَالَ فِي الْحُسَيْنِ شِعْراً فَبَكَى وَأَبْكَى بِهِ إِلاَّ أَوْجَبَ
اللهُ لَهُ الْجَنَّةَ وَغَفَرَ لَهُ. As for any one who composes poetic
verses about Imam Husayn (‘a) and weeps for him or makes others weep,
Almighty Allah shall certainly award him Paradise and forgive his
offenses. See al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 10:464, H. 1.

[^53]: - Al-Hurr al-Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:567, H. 5.


