Chapter 4: Spiritual And Moral Aspect
=====================================

The spiritual and moral aspect is important in Islamic theory, because
it is associated with the issues of feelings, emotions, and spiritual
and moral senses. Coming after doctrine, ethics and culture, this aspect
occupies the fourth rank in importance, since it is founded on the fact
that man’s behavior, which is the natural consequence of willpower and
determination, directly acts upon this aspect, whereas the other three
aspects represent the basis, background, and foundation on which these
sentiments and feelings rely. They are also the starting point of these
three aspects. Feelings, emotions and sentiments stand for the stirring
energy that supplies human behavior with motion, activity, and agitation
although such behavior is submissive to man’s willpower and its cause.

By virtue of this, there is a balanced relationship between man’s
feelings and actions. Man’s determination, steadfastness and willpower
become stronger and more powerful when there is compatibility between
these feelings and reasonable, ethical, and cultural foundations.

For this reason, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took much
interest in the spiritual and moral aspect. They worked on directing it
on the course that was compatible with both general goals of building a
virtuous community and doctrinal, ethical, and cultural foundations.

We can observe the major lines that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) established to
implant the spiritual and moral aspect in the virtuous community from
their reported traditions and instructions for their followers and the
treatment of issues.We can observe the major lines that the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) established to implant the spiritual and moral aspect in the
virtuous community from their reported traditions and instructions for
their followers and the treatment of issues.

Spirit of Piety and Combining Faith with Practice
-------------------------------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) fed their followers with the
spirit of piety and the combining of faith with practice through the
following features:

**First Feature**: They worked towards enhancing the spirit of piety and
establishing a firm connection with Almighty Allah through the following
three major ways:

**First Way**: The Holy Imams (‘a) laid stress on and instructed the
course of prayer, supplication, and confidential talk with Almighty
Allah. Their great interest in supplication and their superb
supplicatory prayers are numerous.

Their prayers and supplications cover all times and circumstances and
take various forms, such as post-prayer supplications, supplications at
each hour of the day and night, special supplications on special
occasions and during religious seasons, such as supplications in the
months of Ramadhan, Sha‘ban, Rajab, and Dhi’l-Hijjah as well as
occasions like feast days. There are also various prayers offered on
special occasions. The supplicatory heritage of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
encompasses many books that are voluminous, well known, and common to
all ages.

They have left for us extensive supplications that carry educational and
cultural features. Some of these include:

Imam ’Ali’s supplication reported by Kumayl ibn Ziyad al-Nakha‘i (known
as *Du‘a’ Kumayl*)

Imam al-Husayn’s supplication on the Day of ‘Arafah (the ninth of
Dhu’l-Hijjah)

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s supplication that is reported by Abu-Hamzah
al-Thumali, the supplication known as *Du‘a’ al-Jawshan*

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s supplications in *Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah*, and
many more.

In addition to their previously noted cultural aspects, these
supplications and prayers represent a great spiritual domain that builds
in the inner selves of worshippers a connection with Him through piety
and a combination of fear and hope in Him.

**Second Way**: The Holy Imams (‘a) entered upon the styles of written
or specifically delivered bequests (*wasiyyah*) and excellent
exhortation. As has also been mentioned, not only do such styles
represent cultural and educational aspects but they also embody
spiritual and moral trends.

Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported the following from his infallible
fathers (‘a):

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَمْ يُحْسِنِ الْوَصِيَّةَ عِنْدَ مَوْتِهِ كَانَ نَقْصاً فِي
عَقْلِهِ وَمُرُوَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever fails to write his will before his death lacks reason and
manliness.*

*He (S) was asked, “How should writing of one’s will be, Allah’s
Messenger?”*

He (S) instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا حَضَرَتْهُ الْوَفَاةُ وَاجْتَمَعَ النَّاسُ إلَيْهِ قَالَ:
اَللَّهُمَّ فَاطِرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ، عَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ
وَالشَّهَادَةِ، الرَّحْمَنُ الرَّحِيمُ؛ إنِّي أَعْهَدُ إلَيْكَ أَنِّي
أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لاَ إلَهَ إلاَّ أَنْتَ وَحْدَكَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ،
وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّداً عَبْدُكَ وَرَسُولُكَ، وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ آتِيَةٌ
لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهَا، وَأَنَّكَ تَبْعَثُ مَنْ فِي الْقُبُورِ، وَأَنَّ
الْحِسَابَ حَقٌّ، وَأَنَّ الْجَنَّةَ حَقٌّ، وَمَا وَعَدَ اللهُ فِيهَا
مِنَ النَّعِيمِ وَمِنَ الْمَأْكَلِ وَالْمَشْرَبِ وَالنِّكَاحِ حَقٌّ،
وَأَنَّ النَّارَ حَقٌّ، وَأَنَّ الإيمَانَ حَقٌّ، وَأَنَّ الدِّينَ
كَمَا وَصَفْتَ، وَأَنَّ الإسْلاَمَ كَمَا شَرَعْتَ، وَأَنَّ الْقَوْلَ
كَمَا قُلْتَ، وَأَنَّ الْقُرْآنَ كَمَا أَنْزَلْتَ، وَأَنَّكَ أَنْتَ
اللهُ الْحَقُّ الْمُبِينُ. وَإنِّي أَعْهَدُ إلَيْكَ فِي دَارِ
الدُّنْيَا أَنِّي رَضِيتُ بِكَ رَبّاً وَبِالإسْلاَمِ دِيناً
وَبِمُحَمَّدٍ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ نَبِيّاً وَبِعَلِيٍّ
عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ إِمَاماً، وَبِالْقُرآنِ كِتَاباً، وَأَنَّ أَهْلَ
بَيْتِ نَبِيِّكَ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ أَئِمَّتِي.
اَللَّهُمَّ أَنْتَ ثِقَتِي عِنْدَ شِدَّتِي، وَرَجَائِي عِنْدَ
كُرْبَتِي، وَعِدَّتِي عِنْدَ الأُمُورِ الَّتِي تَنْزِلُ بِي، وَأَنْتَ
وَلِيِّي فِي نِعْمَتِي، وَإلَهِي وَإلَهُ آبَائِي، صَلِّ عَلَى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَلاَ تَكِلْنِي إلَى نَفْسِي طَرْفَةَ عَيْنٍ
أَبَداً، وَآنِسْ فِي قَبْرِي وَحْشَتِي وَاجْعَلْ لِي عِنْدَكَ عَهْداً
يَوْمَ أَلْقَاكَ مَنْشُوراً. فَهَذا عَهْدُ الْمَيِّتِ يَوْمَ يُوصِي
بِحَاجَتِهِ. وَالْوَصِيَّةُ حَقٌّ عَلَى كُلِّ مُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the last hours of his life and when people gather around him, he
must say: “O Allah! O Designer of the heavens and the earth! O Knower of
the unseen and seen! O Most Beneficent! O Most Merciful! I confide in
You that I bear witness that there is no god* *save You alone, without
Your having any associate. I bear witness that Muhammad (S) is Your
servant and messenger and that the Hour shall undoubtedly come. You
shall* *raise the dead from their graves, and the Questioning will take
place. Paradise is true, and that which You have promised to be
therein—such as bliss, eating, drinking and marriage—is true. Hellfire
is true, and Faith is true, and the (true) religion is as exactly as You
have described, and Islam is exactly as You have established, and all
that which You have said is exactly the truth, and the Qur’an is as
exactly as what You have revealed, and You are verily Allah, the
Manifest Truth. I also confide in You in this world that I submit to You
being my Lord, Islam being my religion, Muhammad being my Prophet, ‘Ali
being my Imam, the Qur’an being my Book, Your Prophet’s Household—peace
be upon him and them—being my Imams. O Allah, in You I trust at the time
of tribulation. You are my only provision when misfortunes befall me,
You are my patron in blessings, and You are my God and the God of my
ancestors. So send blessings upon Muhammad and his Household and do not
make me depend on my own self even for the twinkling of an eye. Please,
entertain me in my grave and my loneliness and keep my confidence in You
active for the day on which I shall meet You.”*

*This is the covenant of the moribund when he makes his will, which is
obligatory upon each Muslim individual.”*[^1]

**Third Way**: The Holy Imams (‘a) worked towards connecting faith with
deed. In addition to its doctrinal contribution to understanding the
reality of faith and unbelief, this course carries a spiritual and moral
aspect that builds the spirit of piety and connection with Almighty
Allah. As a rule, faith is not realized unless it is connected with
deed, behavior, and commitment.

Shortly in this book, I will cite many traditions confirming that true
Shi‘ah are those who represent actual piety, diligence, and
steadfastness in tribulations and ordeals and are forerunners in worship
and asceticism.Shortly in this book, I will cite many traditions
confirming that true Shi‘ah are those who represent actual piety,
diligence, and steadfastness in tribulations and ordeals and are
forerunners in worship and asceticism.

Real Supporters of the Truth
----------------------------

**Second Feature**: The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) worked towards creating an
emotional and sentimental connection with the virtuous community. They
laid emphasis on affiliation with the virtuous entity by:

(1) Ingraining genuineness and reality in their followers

(2) Providing them with profound historical roots

(3) Securing their belief in the Ahl al-Bayt’s school to the highest
levels

(4) Promoting as righteous the creed in which a righteous individual
believes by means of standards, proofs and logical evidence so that
belief evolves from mere reason-based states to spiritual, psychological
and emotional commitments to faith. Such evolution depends on testifying
that:

(a) Their doctrines are the true and genuine doctrines of Islam, utterly
free from doubt and spuriousness

(b) Their community is the best of all communities and groups

(c) They are part of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) because they are the worthiest
in loyalty and the nearest to them

(d) They are the only group that fulfils the Divine Covenant as it
should be fulfilled

(e) Their love for and loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are the things
that shall benefit them on the Day of Resurrection

(f) They shall resort to the Holy Prophet (S) on the Day of Resurrection
according to the glad tidings conveyed to them by the Holy Imams (‘a)

More than one Imam has confirmed these facts to increase their
followers’ level of faith. From these confirmations, we conclude that
the Holy Imams (‘a) aimed to achieve a certain degree of emotional and
sentimental momentum and deepen their followers’ commitment to and
confidence in the virtuous community.

Let us now refer to some examples so that the idea will be clearer:

1. ‘Imran ibn Maytham has reported that Habbabah al-Walibiyyah said to
him, “I will tell you about a discourse that I have heard from your
master, al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a). He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي جَعَلَ أَحْمَسَ خَيْرَ بُجَيْلَةٍ، وَعَبْدَ الْقَيْسِ خَيْرَ
رَبِيعَةٍ، وَهَمْدَانَ خَيْرَ الْيَمَنِ؛ إَنَّكُمْ خَيْرُ الْفِرَقِ.
مَا عَلَى مِلَّةِ إبْرَاهِيمَ إلاَّ نَحْنُ وَشِيعَتُنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I swear by Him Who has caused (the clan of) Ahmas to be the best of
(the tribe of) Bujaylah, has caused ‘Abd al-Qays to be the best of
Rabi‘ah, and has caused Hamdan to be the best of the Yemen, you are
verily the best of sects. None is following the faith of (Prophet)
Abraham (‘a) except us and our Shi‘ah (partisans).*[^2]

2. ‘Umar ibn Yazid has reported that Abu-‘Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq) (‘a)
once said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمْ، وَاللهِ، مِنْ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah, I swear that you all are verily part of Muhammad’s Household
(‘a).*

I asked, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! Do you mean that we are
part of them?”

The Imam ('a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَعَمْ، وَاللهِ، مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Yes! I swear by Allah. You are part of Muhammad’s Household (‘a)
itself.*

He repeated it three times. He (‘a) then gazed at me, I gazed at him and
he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عُمَرُ؛ إِنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى يَقُولُ فِي كِتَابِهِ: "
إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَٰذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۗ وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ "
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ‘Umar, Allah the Blessed and Exalted says in His Book:* ***“Most
surely, the nearest of people to Abraham (‘a) are those who followed him
and this Prophet (S) and those*** ***who believe and Allah is the
guardian of the believers. (3:68)**”*[^3]

3. Abu-Dharr is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ، مَا صَدَقَ أَحَدٌ مِمَّنْ أَخَذَ اللهُ مِيثَاقَهُ فَوَفَى
بِعَهْدِ اللهِ غَيْرُ أَهْلِ بَيْتِ نَبِيِّهِمْ وَعِصَابَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ
مِنْ شِيعَتِهِمْ. وَذَلِكَ قَوْلُهُ تَعَالَى: " وَمَا وَجَدْنَا
لِأَكْثَرِهِمْ مِنْ عَهْدٍ ۖ وَإِنْ وَجَدْنَا أَكْثَرَهُمْ
لَفَاسِقِينَ "
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah I swear, none of those with whom Almighty Allah made His
covenant fulfilled this covenant except their Prophet’s Household (‘a)
and a small group of their partisans. This is the meaning of Almighty
Allah’s saying (in the Holy Qur’an),* ***“And We did not find in most of
them any faithfulness to the covenant, and We found most of them to be
certainly transgressors. (7:102)**”*[^4]

4. Yunus ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman has reported Kulayb al-Asadi as saying that
he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا وَاللهِ، إنَّكُمْ لَعَلَىٰ دِينِ اللهِ وَمَلاَئِكَتِهِ.
فَأَعِينُونَا عَلَى ذَلِكَ بِوَرَعٍ وَإجْتِهَادٍ. عَلَيْكُمْ
بِالصَّلاَةِ وَالْعِبَادَةِ. عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْوَرَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah, I swear positively, you are following the religion of Allah
and of His angels. So, help us by means of piety and diligence. Abide by
prayer and worship. Abide by piety.*[^5]

5. Abu’l-Tufayl has reported that Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) once
ascended the pulpit and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ بَعَثَ مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى الله عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
بِالنُّبُوَّةِ وَإصْطَفَاهُ بِالرِّسَالَةِ، فَأَنَالَ فِي النَّاسِ
وَأَنَالَ. وَعِنْدَنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ مَفَاتِيحُ الْعِلْمِ
وَأَبْوَابُ الْحِكْمَةِ وَضِيَاءُ الأَمْرِ وَفَصْلُ الْخِطَابِ. وَمَنْ
يُحِبَّنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ يَنْفَعْهُ إيـمَانُهُ وَيُتَقَبَّلْ مِنْهُ
عَمَلُهُ. وَمَنْ لاَ يُحِبَّنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ لاَ يَنْفَعْهُ
إيـمَانُهُ وَلاَ يُتَقَبَّلْ مِنْهُ عَمَلُهُ وَإنْ أَدْأَبَ اللَّيْلَ
وَالنَّهَارَ لَمْ يَزَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah has sent Muhammad—peace be upon him and his
Household—with prophethood and chosen him for conveying His Message.
Therefore, he promulgated the religion for the people some of whom
accepted and others rejected. We, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), hold the keys to
knowledge, the doors to wisdom, the light of all affairs, and the most
decisive speech. Whoever loves us—the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)—will benefit from
his faith and will have his deeds accepted, but whoever does not love us
will not benefit from his faith and will not have his deeds accepted
even if he works* *every day and night ceaselessly.*[^6]

6. Burayd al-’Ajali, Zurarah ibn A’yun, and Muhammad ibn Muslim—all
these are authentic reporters who have said that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(‘a) said to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا الِّذِي تَبْغُونَ؟ أَمَا لَوْ كَانَتْ فَزْعَةٌ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ
لَفَزِعَ كُلُّ قَوْمٍ إلَى مَأْمَنِهِمْ، وَلَفَزِعْنَا إلَى نَبِيِّنَا
وَفَزِعْتُمْ إلَيْنَا. فَأَبْشِرُوا ثُمَّ أَبْشِرُوا ثُمَّ أَبْشِرُوا!
لاَ وَاللهِ، لاَ يُسَوِّيكُمُ اللهُ وَغَيْرَكُمْ، وَلاَ كَرَامَةَ
لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What more are you seeking? If a horrible thing happens in the heavens
and people* *resort to a place to protect them, we shall resort to our
Prophet (S) and you shall resort to us. So, enjoy the glad tidings!
Enjoy the glad tidings! Enjoy the glad tidings! By Allah I swear, He
shall never treat you like others and they will have no dignity with
Him.*[^7]

Love for and Loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
--------------------------------------------

**Third Feature**: With regard to their relationship with the virtuous
community, the Holy Imams (‘a) not only provided authentic proofs and
valid demonstrations but also made use of emotions and feelings in order
to strengthen love and loyalty. They also connected it to many
significant values and ideals on the one hand and relevance people’s
lives on the other.

As a result, love for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) has played a major role in
keeping their followers steadfast against the pressures and pains they
had to encounter. They have even given up their lives and properties and
faced all sorts of ordeals and pains for the sake of the love they had
for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

This sort of education, which was initially established by the Holy
Qur’an, had a great impact not only on the Ahl al-Bayt’s partisans and
followers but also on Muslims in general. Consequently, the issue of
love for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) has become a standard by which a Muslim
individual, sober in behavior and conduct, is distinguished from other
Muslims pretending to follow Islam but lacking in human and Islamic
feelings. Such individuals have been afflicted with hostility and malice
towards the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

Love of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), in the capacity of their having been the
Holy Prophet’s kith and kin has been confirmed by the Holy Qur’an that
reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (42:23)***

This love for the “near relatives” has been also confirmed by
authentically reported uninterrupted traditions of the Holy Prophet (S)
in both meaning and words. Moreover, invoking Almighty Allah’s blessings
upon the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is a part of the obligatory prayers so that
love for them naturally has an impact on Muslims in general and becomes
a common trend among them.

The merit, outcome, and reward of invocations of Divine blessings upon
the Holy Prophet (S) and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) will be discussed in
further details in the coming book on Acts of Worship within this
series.

Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi‘i is well-known for composition of poetic
verses proving the existence of this common trend among Muslims and
referring to some political tendencies that opposed this trend for
political and non-religious reasons.

Some of al-Shafi‘i’s poetic verses are as follows:

*O Household of Allah’s Messenger, love for you is a duty imposed by
Allah and revealed in the Qur’an.*

*It is sufficient for you that he who does not send blessings upon you
will have his prayers nullified.*

He has also composed the following:

*If love for Muhammad’s Household (‘a) is a protest (against religion),
then let both men and jinn witness that I am protesting (rafidhi).*[^8]

Besides its great moral value, this love has cultural and political
functions.

As for its cultural function, it has turned hearts towards true
guidance, uprightness, and surrender to the culture and instructions of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

As for its political function, it defends the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their
followers and provides ample opportunity to believe in their Divinely
ordained leadership and their efficacious role in the history of Islam.

For these reasons, the political enemies of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) waged
political campaigns against them and attempted to extinguish the torch
of this love and loyalty and presented alternatives and other loyalties.
They also attempted to debilitate this loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
and fight the issue of love for them. In order to achieve these vicious
goals these political enemies used fanaticism, antagonism and hatred as
weapons, always ready to commit inhumane crimes against the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) and their followers.

In fact, the issue of love and affection for the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) has
always been clear at all levels, including authentic religious texts,
historical facts, and practices in the ages of the Holy Prophet (S), the
Companions (*Sahabah*), the Followers (*Tabi’un*) and the other
righteous Muslims.

Hundreds of traditions that are reported from the Holy Prophet (S) and
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have laid the foundation of this love and
considered it to be a basic goal and a means of winning Almighty Allah’s
reward, pleasure, and forgiveness. In this regard, the Holy Prophet (S)
is reported to have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإسْلاَمُ عُرْيَانٌ؛ فَلِبَاسُهُ الْحَيَاءُ، وَزِينَتُهُ الْوَقَارُ،
وَمُرُوءَتُهُ الْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ، وَعِمَادُهُ الْوَرَعُ. وَلِكُلِّ
شَيْ‏ءْ أَسَاسٌ، وَأَسَاسُ الإِسْلاَمِ حُبُّنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Islam is naked. Modesty is its dress, faithfulness its adornment, good
deeds its personality, and piety its pillar. Everything should have a
basis. The basis of Islam is the love for us—the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).*[^9]

Imam ’Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) is reported to have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْكُمْ بِحُبِّ آلِ نَبِيِّكُمْ، فَإنَّهُ حَقُّ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
وَالْمُوجِبُ عَلَى اللهِ حَقَّكُمْ. أَلاَ تَرَوْنَ إلَى قَوْلِ اللهِ
تَعَالَى: " قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ
فِي الْقُرْبَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are advised to love your Prophet’s Household (‘a). This is your duty
towards Almighty Allah due to which He shall fulfill His promise to you.
Have you not considered Almighty Allah’s saying:

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (42:23)”***[^10]

Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported Imam ‘Ali (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذِكْرُنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ شِفَاءٌ مِنَ الوَعْكِ وَالأَسْقَامِ
وَوِسْوَاسِ الرَّيْبِ. وَحُبُّنَا رِضَا الرَّبِّ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To mention us, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),* *is the cure of apathy, disease,
and suspicion. To love us is the pleasure of the Blessed and Exalted
Lord.*[^11]

Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (‘a) has also reported the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا شَافِعٌ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ لأَِرْبَعَةِ أَصْنَافٍ وَلَوْ جَاؤوا
بِذُنُوبِ أَهْلِ الدُّنْيَا: رَجَلٌ نَصَرَ ذُرِّيَّتِي، وَرَجُلٌ
بَذَلَ مَالَهُ لِذُرِّيَّتِي عِنْدَ الضِّيقِ، وَرَجُلٌ أَحَبَّ
ذُرِّيَّتِي بِاللِّسَانِ وَالْقَلْبِ، وَرَجُلٌ سَعَى فِي حَوَائِجِ
ذُرِّيَّتِي إذَا طُرِدُوا أَوْ شُرِّدُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Day of Resurrection I will certainly intercede for these four
categories of people, even if they are overburdened with the sins of the
inhabitants of this world: (1) those who support my descendants, (2)
those who spend their wealth for my descendants when they are in
distress, (3) those who express love for my descendants through their
speech and with their heart, and (4) those who exert efforts to satisfy
the needs of my descendants when they are pursued and banished.*[^12]

Hannan ibn Sadir has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا ثَبَّتَ اللهُ حُبَّ عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ فِي قَلْبِ أَحَدٍ
فَزَلَّتْ بِهِ قَدَمٌ إلاَّ ثَبُتَتْ لَهُ قَدَمٌ أُخْرَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for one in whose heart Almighty Allah fixes the love for ‘Ali (‘a),
if one of his feet slips (from the Discriminating Bridge), the other
foot will certainly be steady.*[^13]

Al-Fudhayl reported Imam al-Ridha (‘a) to have quoted Imam al-Baqir (‘a)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّنَا إيـمَانٌ وَبُغْضُنَا كُفْرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To love us is faith and to hate us is unbelief.*[^14]

Self-Sacrifice and Altruism
---------------------------

**Fourth Feature**: The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) solidified in
the souls of their followers the spirit of self-sacrifice, altruism, and
readiness to give up worldly pleasures for the sake of faith and
principles. They ('a) also spread among them the spirit of struggle for
the sake of principles and supreme goals.

In order to achieve these goals, the Holy Imams (‘a) used various means
and exposed themselves to various tribulations. They (‘a) suffered all
sorts of pain and ordeals patiently and sacrificed personal matters for
the sake of achieving the public interests of Islam. They (‘a) were also
ready to make any sacrifice required, including giving up their lives,
the lives of their family members and companions. They (‘a) made their
household subject to captivity and their wealth and prestige to
usurpation and aggression for the sake of achieving these goals.

They (‘a) always became the targets of enemies’ assaults and
conspiracies, struggling to save Islamic principles.

The issue of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom has thus become the climax and
the most eminent symbol of self-sacrifice. The same thing can be applied
to all the Holy Imams (‘a) who never desisted in giving up everything
possible in all fields of life for the sake of safeguarding Islam.

The Holy Imams (‘a) trained their followers in the spirit of
self-sacrifice and altruism demonstrated by Imam al-Husayn’s astounding
tragedy in the history of Islam to make self-sacrifice manifest itself
as a signpost indicating the path to the truth. It also revealed the
injustice that befell the Holy Prophet’s Household (‘a) and unmasked the
hideous face of the Umayyad dynasty.astounding tragedy in the history of
Islam to make self-sacrifice manifest itself as a signpost indicating
the path to the truth. It also revealed the injustice that befell the
Holy Prophet’s Household (‘a) and unmasked the hideous face of the
Umayyad dynasty.

Moral Features of Imam al-Ḥusayn's (‘a) Uprising
------------------------------------------------

In the previous discussions on the cultural aspects of building a
virtuous community, I have dealt with the issue of Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom from the cultural, ethical, and doctrinal viewpoints. Under
this title, I will attempt to study the moral features of this uprising
in a methodical way.

The following spiritual and moral features are found in Imam al-Husayn’s
uprising:

### Clash between Right and Wrong

The issue of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom is the clearest representation
of the conflict between right and wrong and belief and disbelief with
regard to the extreme deviations that eventually led to unbelief and
vacated the Islamic concept of its actual components within the Muslim
community. The issue also depicts the incontrovertible situation of the
righteous party who were exposed to this great injustice, irresponsible
behavior and disgrace because of their principled stand.

Imam al-Husayn’s situation and attitude to this clash is incontestable
and agreed upon by all Muslims without exception despite the political
and cultural efforts the Umayyad rulers and their followers exerted to
disfigure the great uprising and paint the position of Yazid and the
Umayyad ruling authorities with a color of religious legality.

Also, they made other attempts to keep the public silent and made them
surrender to the unjust rulers and submit to their rule by presenting
themselves as religiously legal authorities. This culture spread among
the public after the ruling authorities despotically controlled and
dominated the Islamic homeland.[^15]

Hence, the issue of Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom has survived as a
signpost which directs towards true guidance those who stray off and
wander in the murk of distortion and deception and from which the
strivers, revolutionists, and freedom fighters obtain accurate
potential, power, and determination.

### Moral Values

Imam al-Husayn’s historic uprising and then martyrdom upholds all human
and moral values. It therefore embodies a school of genuine Islamic
teachings.

The secret of the endurance of this great uprising in influence and
interaction lies in its tremendous moral content, which is compatible
with basic human nature. The uprising of Imam al-Husayn ('a) embodied
dignity, decorum, self-esteem, courage, altruism, kindness to everyone
including enemies, steadfastness on principles, and endurance in
misfortunes, pain, and difficulties.

It also demonstrated exertion of all possible efforts to guide and save
the lives of the people as well as maintain an ideal relationship with
one’s relatives, friends, and followers and the leadership, the
community, and other people of different nationalities. In fact,
representatives of other peoples and nationalities stood by Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) and suffered part of his astounding tragedy.

When put into practice during times of tribulation and colored with
blood and sacrifice, these values and ideals attain a special
significance that is different in profundity, rank and level from all
other values and ideals when raised as mere cultural slogans.

### The Massive Dimension of Sacrifice

Imam al-Husayn’s uprising is distinguished by its high rank and massive
magnitude of sacrifice for the sake of Islam and the Muslim nation.
Besides giving up his soul and wealth as well as the souls of his sons,
brothers and companions, Imam al-Husayn ('a) sacrificed other family
members and his women exposing them to the ordeal of captivity and
aggression.

However, Almighty Allah protected them and saved them from the
consequences and other tragic ramifications of captivity.

Moreover, Imam al-Husayn (‘a) sacrificed himself and the group of
virtuous, righteous, and honorable scholars and individuals who stood
with him. Each one of these companions could have become a great school
of knowledge and ethics or a prominent guide and instructor of the
Muslim community.

When facing such perils in the conflict against unbelief and deviation,
one might hang back or choose to keep silent and surrender because the
conflict would require a massive amount of sacrifice. Throughout
history, many people who had good intentions, sound ideas, and clear
prospects stopped, developed reservations, or failed to carry on their
conflicts against injustice because of the massive pressure of the
enemies.

This fact was visible in the responses of some virtuous personalities
during the time of Imam al-Husayn (‘a). Some advised the Imam (‘a) not
to head for Iraq, such as Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, ‘Abdullah ibn
Ja‘far, and ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas who were the closest to him (‘a) and
shared his views about the ruling regime. However, they did not agree
with his views about self-sacrifice and altruism.

### Clarity in Seeking the Truth

Imam al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom contrasts the fairness and truth
of his own stance and the injustice with which he was treated. At the
same time it reveals the falsity and viciousness of the party led by
Yazid. Due to this clarity, feelings were shaken and the way was opened
before the Muslim nation to aggressively participate in this tragedy and
its objectives.

This clarity was one of the main objectives that Imam al-Husayn (‘a)
planned in his uprising. He (‘a) paved the way for his uprising through
dexterous informative work, powerful political speech, efficacious
interaction with the masses and by adopting the preferable approach to
the prerequisites and needs of that stage of Islam.

As a result, the Muslim community asked the Imam (‘a) to take the
leadership and confront the despotic rulers. Public support was gathered
by educating and spiritually arousing the masses to respond to the
Imam’s uprising. Although the people did not have enough willpower,
courage, and determination to participate in his revolutionary action,
they believed in the validity of the objectives and motives of the
uprising.

Undoubtedly, the clarity of objective in the uprising of Imam al-Husayn
(‘a) was obvious but the Muslim nation had cold feet and responded to
his calls for uprising with dejection and betrayal. These two factors
had a great impact on stirring up the moral spirit of the virtuous
community whose members felt sorrow, pain, and regret and vowed to do
something lest such a painful encounter take place again.

It was improbable that those who had committed the sin (of abandoning
the Imam (‘a)) would feel sorry and regretful. What was possible was
that all those who could comprehend and apply the incident to their
lives would understand this aspect and feel sorry and regretful for
having missed contributing to the Imam’s uprising. Maybe they would not
allow the political conditions of their own time to descend to such
level of lowliness and retardation and thus avoid falling in the same
trap in which the others had fallen or face the same fate the others had
faced.

### Multifaceted Tragedy

The tragedy of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) has multifaceted misfortunes
including crimes like the following committed by Yazid’s followers:

(1) They brutally killed Imam al-Husayn’s sons, brothers, cousins and
children, including infants and adults.

(2) They also killed many leaders, chiefs, scholars, young and old men,
women, friends and followers of Imam al-Husayn (‘a).

(3) His family members and those of the martyrs were subjected to
plundering, robbery, captivity, and mayhem.

(4) Psychological and physical torture, material and mental aggression,
that took various forms, was inflicted on the bereaved members of his
(‘a) and the martyrs’ families.

These excesses supplied Imam al-Husayn’s great uprising with a spiritual
and moral momentum.

### Determination for Martyrdom

Imam al-Husayn’s group of active supporters was fully determined to
attain martyrdom and sacrifice everything for the sake of the matter and
question, and were prepared for the consequences even if they had to
face them seventy times. This was the state of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and
his devotees who knew the consequences and the fact that their uprising
was not powerful enough to overthrow Yazid’s ruling regime.

In conclusion, the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and his followers
came after their determination to achieve martyrdom. This fact gives
their martyrdom a spiritual level difficult to imagine. Generally,
martyrdom that is determined and chosen bears great spiritual and moral
fruit.

### Heir of the Divine Message and the Messenger (S)

Imam al-Husayn (‘a) was heir to the divine message of Islam and the
Messenger (S) who nurtured him in childhood. He was also of Allah’s
Messenger (S) who showed deliberate care towards the sons of his
daughter Fatimah (‘a) and cousin ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib (‘a) in order to
heavily burden Muslims’ consciences when this son would be martyred.
Imam al-Husayn (‘a), together with Imam al-Hasan (‘a), Lady Zaynab and
Lady Kulthum (‘a)—his brother and sisters—represented the remaining
offspring of the Holy Prophet (S).

The Tragedy and the Morale
--------------------------

**Fifth Feature**: In addition to their sacrifices and emphasis on
self-sacrifice by bringing to the fore the issue of Imam al-Husayn’s
uprising and martyrdom, the Holy Imams (‘a) confirmed that their
followers will be exposed to various sorts of tribulations and ordeals.

In this respect, Sharif al-Radhi (the compiler of *Nahj al-Balaghah*)
has recorded that when Sahl ibn Hunayf al-Sa‘idi passed away in Kufah
immediately after his return from the Battle of Siffin, Imam ‘Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin ('a) was visibly grieved because he was one his best
friends. He (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ أَحَبَّنِي جَبَلٌ لَتَهَافَتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Even if a mountain loves me, it will definitely collapse.*[^16]

Explaining this word, Sharif al-Radhi states that ordeals pounce upon
one who loves Imam ‘Ali ('a) and afflict him with various sorts of
misfortunes. Such ordeals attack none but the pious, upright,
well-chosen, and good people. Similar to this meaning is another maxim
of Imam ‘Ali in which he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ فَلْيَسْتَعِدَّ لِلْفَقْرِ
جِلْبَاباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever loves us, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), must ready himself for poverty
with which he must dress himself.*[^17]

Moreover, trials and tests are among the inevitable necessities of true
faith, since they measure the degree of faith one has.

Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid chain of authority, has reported ‘Abd
al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj as saying that when the trials that smite the
faithful believers in particular were discussed before Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a), he commented as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُئِلَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: مَنْ أَشَدُّ
النَّاسِ بَلاَءً؟ فَقَالَ: النَّبِيُّونَ، ثُمَّ الأَمْثَلُ
فَالأَمْثَلُ. وَيُبْتَلَى الْمُؤْمِنُ بَعْدُ عَلَى قَدْرِ إيـمَانِهِ
وَحُسْنِ أَعْمَالِهِ. فَمَنْ صَحَّ إِيـمَانُهُ وَحَسُنَ عَمَلُهُ
إشْتَدَّ بَلاَؤُهُ، وَمَنْ سَخُفَ إيـمَانُهُ وَضَعُفَ عَمَلُهُ قَلَّ
بَلاَؤُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s Messenger (S) was asked, “Who are the most afflicted with
ordeals in this world?” He (S) answered, “They are the Prophets (‘a)*
*and then the nearest to them descending downwardly. A faithful believer
is tested according to the amount of his faith and good deeds. Those
whose faith is sound and deeds are excellent will be tested more
intensely than the others. Those whose faith is deficient and deeds are
weak are tested the least.”*[^18]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ لَيَتَعَاهَدُ الْمُؤْمِنَ بِالْبَلاَءِ كَمَا يَتَعَاهَدُ
الرَّجُلُ أَهْلَهُ بِالْهَدِيَّةِ مِنَ الْغَيْبَةِ وَيَحْمِيهِ مِنَ
الدُّنْيَا كَمَا يَحْمِي الطَّبِيبُ الْمَرِيضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Almighty Allah is attentive towards the faithful believers
through calamities in the same way as an absent husband attends to his
wife with gifts. He also protects them from worldly seductions in the
same way that a physician protects his patient.*[^19]

Al-Husayn ibn ‘Alwan has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said the
following to Sadir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ إذَا أَحَبَّ عَبْـداً غَتَّهُ بِالْبَلاَءِ غَتّاً. وَإنَّا
وَإيَّاكُمْ، يَا سَدِيرُ، لَنُصْبِحُ بِهِ وَنُمْسِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, when Almighty Allah loves one of His servants, He will thrust
him abruptly into tribulations. O Sadir, you and we are entering upon
morns and eves with such tribulations.*[^20]

Addressing their partisans, the Holy Imams (‘a) confirmed that none
deserves to be Shi‘ite except certain individuals who are ready to make
such high-ranking sacrifices. They (‘a) used to test the sincerity and
honesty of their true Shi‘ah (i.e. followers) through their propensities
towards self-sacrifice.

Describing the righteous among his companions, Imam ‘Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin (‘a) ascribed this feature to them, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمُ الأَنْصَارُ عَلَى الْحَقِّ، وَالإِخُوَانُ في الدِّينِ،
وَالْجُنَنُ يَوْمَ الْبَأْسِ، وَالْبِطَانَةُ دُونَ النَّاسِ، بِكُمْ
أَضْرِبُ الْمُدْبِرَ، وَأَرْجُو طَاعَةَ الْمُقْبِلِ، فَأَعِينُوني
بِمُنَاصَحَة خَلِيَّة مِنَ الْغِشِّ، سَلِيمَة مِنَ الرَّيْبِ؛
فَوَاللهِ إِنِّي لأَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِالنَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You are the supporters of the Truth, the brethren in faith, the shield
on the Day of Tribulation, and (my) trustees among the rest of the
people. With your support, I strike he who turns away and hope for the
obedience of he who comes forward. Therefore, extend to me your support,
which is free from deceit and pure from doubt because, by Allah, I am
the most preferable of all for the people.*[^21]

Similarly, many traditions have been reported from the Holy Imams (‘a)
concerning their encouragement of their followers to sacrifice
themselves, risk themselves, give, offer, and strive for the sake of
Almighty Allah.

Let us display some of these facts, instructions, and guidelines:

Abu-Jamilah has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying that Imam ‘Ali
Amir al-Mu'minin’s precept for his companions was as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعْلَمُوا أَنَّ الْقُرْآنَ هُـدَى اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَنُورُ
اللَّيْلِ الْمُظْلِمِ عَلَى مَا كَانَ مِنْ جَهْدٍ وَفَاقَةٍ. فَإذَا
حَضَرَتْ بَلِيَّةٌ فَاجْعَلُوا أَمْوَالَكُمْ دُونَ أَنْفُسِكُمْ،
وَإذَا نَزَلَتْ نَازِلَةٌ فَاجْعَلُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ دُونَ دِينِكُمْ.
وَإعْلَمُوا أَنَّ الْهَالِكَ مَنْ هَلَكَ دِينُهُ، وَالْحَرِيبُ مَنْ
حُرِبَ دِينَهُ. أَلاَ وَإنَّهُ لاَ فَقْرَ بَعْدَ الْجَنَّةِ، أَلاَ
وَإنَّهُ لاَ غِنَى بَعْدَ النَّارِ؛ لاَ يُفَكُّ أَسِيرُهَا وَلاَ
يَبْرَءُ ضَرِيرُهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Be it known to you that the Qur’an is guidance during night and day and
in the dim of gloomy nights, because it suffices from all fatigue and
indigence. If you are afflicted with a tribulation, you must protect
yourselves with your wealth, but if a catastrophe afflicts you, you must
then protect your religion with your souls. Know that one who has truly
perished is he whose religion has perished, and one who has truly been
despoiled is he whose religion has been despoiled. Verily, there shall
be no poverty after Paradise and there shall be no wealth after Hellfire
whose captive shall never be released and whose blindness shall never be
cured.*[^22]

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَإِنَّ الْجِهَادَ بَابٌ مِنْ أَبْوَابِ الجَنَّةِ،
فَتَحَهُ اللهُ لِخَاصَّةِ أَوْلِيَائِهِ، وَهُوَ لِباسُ التَّقْوَى،
وَدِرْعُ اللهِ الحَصِينَةُ، وَجُنَّتُهُ الوَثِيقَةُ، فَمَنْ تَرَكَهُ
رَغْبَةً عَنْهُ أَلبَسَهُ اللهُ ثَوْبَ الذُّلِّ، وَشَمِلَهُ البَلاَءُ،
وَدُيِّثَ بِالصَّغَارِ وَالقَمَاءَةِ، وَضُرِبَ عَلَى قَلْبِهِ
بِالاِْسْهَابِ، وَأُدِيلَ الحَقُّ مِنْهُ بِتَضْيِيعِ الجِهَادِ،
وَسِيمَ الخَسْفَ، وَمُنِعَ النَّصَفَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Now then, surely jihad (i.e. striving for Almighty Allah’s sake) is one
of the doors of Paradise, which Allah has opened for His chief friends.
It is the dress of piety and the protective armor of Allah and His
trustworthy shield. Whoever abandons it, Allah covers him with the dress
of disgrace and the clothes of distress. He is kicked with contempt and
scorn, and his heart is veiled with screens (of neglect). Truth is taken
away from him because of missing jihad. He has to suffer ignominy, and
justice is denied to him.*[^23]

3. Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book of *al-Kafi*, has reported on the
authority of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) that the Holy Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْخَيْرُ كُلُّهُ فِي السَّيْفِ وَتَحْتَ ظِلِّ السَّيْفِ. وَلاَ
يُقِيمُ النَّاسَ إلاَّ السَّيْفُ. وَالسُّيُوفُ مَقَالِيدُ الْجَنَّةِ
وَالنَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The entirety of goodness lies in swords and under their shadows.
Nothing amends people except swords. Swords are verily the keys of
Paradise and Hellfire.*[^24]

Although this evaluation and comprehensive understanding of jihad has
expansive denotations, the Holy Imams (‘a) did not stop at it; rather,
they expounded and explained its laws and gave it more expansive
significance in practical life—significance that includes honest words,
distinguished behavior, and virtuous deeds.

We can observe that these high spirits of propensity towards
self-sacrifice and strife for Almighty Allah’s sake are among the basic
features identifying the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). They also
perpetuate this spiritual momentum in the Muslim nation to face the
various circumstances to which they are exposed.

Perseverance
------------

**Sixth Feature**: The Holy Imams (‘a) imbued their followers with the
spirit of resistance and perseverance and tolerance at times of
misfortune, pain and ordeal during confrontations in order to overcome
their enemies.

The Holy Qur’an has laid great emphasis on perseverance. The Holy
Prophet (S), too, expresses the significance of perseverance through
many pieces of advice and teaches us to learn lessons from the
experiences of the earlier Prophets (‘a). The Holy Qur’an thus reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ كَمَا صَبَرَ أُولُو الْعَزْمِ مِنَ الرُّسُلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therefore, bear up patiently as did the messengers endowed with
constancy bear up*** ***with patience. (46:35)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قَالَ الَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُلَاقُو اللَّهِ كَمْ مِنْ
فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ وَلَمَّا بَرَزُوا لِجَالُوتَ وَجُنُودِهِ
قَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا وَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا
وَانْصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ  فَهَزَمُوهُمْ بِإِذْنِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who were sure that they would meet their Lord said, “How often
has a small party vanquished a numerous host by Allah's permission, and
Allah is with the patient.” And when they went out against Goliath and
his forces they said, “Our Lord, pour down upon us patience, make our
steps firm, and assist us against the unbelieving people.” So, they put
them to flight by Allah's permission. (2:249-251)***

To arouse the spirit of steadfastness and perseverance in their
followers, the Holy Imams (‘a) used many methods that we can observe in
their discourses, precepts, and practices:

(1) They emphasized the significance and role of perseverance in the
accomplishment of man’s spiritual perfection and success in this world
and the Hereafter by drawing their attention to what the Holy Qur’an had
corroborated in this field, and through their discourses. Many
traditions have been reported from them in this field. For instance, the
famous book of *Wasa'il al-Shi‘ah* has an independent chapter dealing
with this subject. The Holy Imams (‘a), through numerous traditions,
intended to implant this aspect in their followers’ mentalities.

Hafs ibn Ghiyath has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as addressing him with
the following words:

> يَا حَفْصُ! إنَّ مَنْ صَبَرَ صَبَرَ قَلِيلاً، وَإنَّ مَنْ جَزَعَ
> جَزَعَ قَلِيلاًٍ. عَلَيْكَ بِالصَّبْرِ فِي جَمِيعِ أُمُورِكَ، فَإنَّ
> اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بَعَثَ مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
> فَأَمَرَهُ بِالصَّبْرِ وَالرِّفْقِ، فَقَالَ: وَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا
> يَقُولُونَ وَاهْجُرْهُمْ هَجْرًا جَمِيلًا {10}

> وَذَرْنِي وَالْمُكَذِّبِينَ أُولِي النَّعْمَةِ وَمَهِّلْهُمْ
> قَلِيلًا {11} وَقَالَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى:

> ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ فَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ
> عَدَاوَةٌ كَأَنَّهُ وَلِيٌّ حَمِيمٌ {34} وَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا
> الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا ذُو حَظٍّ عَظِيمٍ {35}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَبَرَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ حَتَّى نَالُوهُ
بِالْعَظَائِمِ وَرَمَوْهُ بِهَا. فَضَاقَ صَدْرُهُ، فَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ {97}
> فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُنْ مِنَ السَّاجِدِينَ {98}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ كَذَّبُوُهُ وَرَمَوْهُ، فَحَزِنَ لِذَلِكَ. فَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> قَدْ نَعْلَمُ إِنَّهُ لَيَحْزُنُكَ الَّذِي يَقُولُونَ ۖ فَإِنَّهُمْ
> لَا يُكَذِّبُونَكَ وَلَٰكِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ
> يَجْحَدُونَ {33} وَلَقَدْ كُذِّبَتْ رُسُلٌ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فَصَبَرُوا
> عَلَىٰ مَا كُذِّبُوا وَأُوذُوا حَتَّىٰ أَتَاهُمْ نَصْرُنَا ۚ{34}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَلْزَمَ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ نَفْسَهُ
الصَّبْرَ. فَتَعَدَّوْا فَذَكَرُوا اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى
وَكَذَّبُوهُ. فَقَالَ: قَدْ صَبَرْتُ فِي نَفْسِي وَأَهْلِي وَعِرْضِي،
وَلاَ صَبْرَ لِي عَلَى ذِكْرِ إلَهِي. فَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ{10}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَبَرَ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فِي جَمِيعِ
أَحْوَالِهِ. ثُمَّ بَشَّرَ فِي عِتْرَتِهِ بِالأَئِمَّةِ وَوُصِفُوا
بِالصَّبْرِ، فَقَالَ جَلَّ ثَنَاؤُهُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا لَمَّا صَبَرُوا ۖ
> وَكَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يُوقِنُونَ {24}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعِنْدَ ذَلِكَ قَالَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: الصَّبْرُ مِنَ
الإيمَانِ كَالرَّأْسِ مِنَ الْجَسَدِ. فَشَكَرَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
ذَلِكَ لَهُ، فَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ الْحُسْنَىٰ عَلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ بِمَا
> صَبَرُوا ۖ وَدَمَّرْنَا مَا كَانَ يَصْنَعُ فِرْعَوْنُ وَقَوْمُهُ وَمَا
> كَانُوا يَعْرِشُونَ {137}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: إنَّهُ بُشْرَى وَإنْتِقَامٌ.
فَأَبَاحَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ قِتَالَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ فَأَنْزَلَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ الْحُسْنَىٰ عَلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ بِمَا
صَبَرُوا ۖ وَدَمَّرْنَا مَا كَانَ يَصْنَعُ فِرْعَوْنُ وَقَوْمُهُ وَمَا
كَانُوا يَعْرِشُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَتَلَهُمُ اللهُ عَلَى يَدَيْ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ وَأَحِبَّائِهِ، وَجَعَلَ لَهُ ثَوَابَ صَبْرِهِ مَعَ مَا
ادَّخَرَ لَهُ فِي الآخِرَةِ. فَمَنْ صَبَرَ وَاحْتَسَبَ لَمْ يَخْرُجْ
مِنَ الدُّنْيَا حَتَّى يُقِرَّ اللهُ لَهُ عَيْنَهُ فِي أَعْدَائِهِ
مَعَ مَا يَدَّخِرُ لَهُ فِي الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Hafs, whoever perseveres will in fact persevere for a short
while*[^25] *and whoever breaks down will break down for a short while.*

*You must thus persevere in all your affairs. Verily, Almighty Allah has
sent Muhammad (S) (as His messenger) and ordered him to be patient and
lenient. He thus says,*

***“Bear patiently what they say and avoid them with a becoming
avoidance. Leave Me to deal with the rejecters, the lords of ease and
plenty. (73:10-11)”***

*He also says,* ***“Repel evil with what is best, when lo! He who was
your enemy would be as if he were a warm friend. None is made to receive
it but those who are patient and none is made to receive it but those
who have a mighty good fortune. (41:34-35)”***

*So, the Holy Prophet (S) continued to deal with them patiently until
they forged unbearable things against him and accused him falsely of
these things; therefore, he was distressed at what they had forged
against him. As a result, Almighty Allah revealed to him the following:*
***“Surely, We know that your breast straitens at what they say!
Therefore, celebrate the praise of your Lord and be of those who make
obeisance. (15:97-98)”***

*They then belied and accused him of fabrications that made him sad. So,
Almighty Allah revealed to him the following:* ***“We know indeed that
what they say certainly grieves you, but surely they do not call you a
liar, but the unjust deny the communications of Allah. Certainly,
messengers before you were rejected, but they were patient on being
rejected and persecuted until Our help came to them. (6:33-34)”***

*Although the Holy Prophet (S) committed himself to patience, they
transgressed all limits when they began to speak irreverently of
Almighty Allah and belied Him. So, the Holy Prophet (S) said, “I have
borne patiently what they said about myself, my family, and my honor,
but I cannot stand anymore what they are speaking profanely of my Lord.”
So, Almighty Allah revealed the following:* ***“Bear patiently what they
say. (73:10)”*** *So, the Holy Prophet (S) remained patient under all
conditions.*

*Then, Almighty Allah gave him the good tidings of the Imams being from
his offspring and ascribed perseverance to them, saying,* ***“We made of
them Imams to guide by Our command when they were patient and they were
certain of Our communications. (32:24)”*** *Only then, the Holy Prophet
(S) declared, “The position of patience to faith is as the position of
the head to the body.”*

*For this situation, Almighty Allah thanked His Prophet (S) and revealed
to him the following:*

***“The good word of your Lord was fulfilled in the children of Israel
because they bore up (sufferings) patiently and We utterly destroyed
what Pharaoh and his people had wrought and what they built. (7:137)”***

*The Holy Prophet (S) understood the good tidings and the punishment of
Almighty Allah mentioned in this verse.*

*Then, Almighty Allah allowed him to fight against the polytheists,
saying, “Slay the idolaters wherever you find them, and take them
captives and besiege them and lie in wait for them in every ambush.
(9:5)” “Kill them wherever you find them. (2:191)” So, Almighty Allah
slew them at the hands of His Messenger (S) and those who love Him. He
also kept for His Messenger (S) the reward of patience along with what
He had* *already kept for him in the Hereafter.*

*Succinctly, whoever draws on patience will never depart this world
before Almighty Allah delights him concerning his enemies not to mention
what He has stored for him in the Hereafter.*[^26]

Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (‘a) has also reported the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَأْتِي عَلَى النَّاسِ زَمَانٌ لاَ يُنَالُ فِيهِ الْمُلْكُ إلاَّ
بِالْقَتْلِ وَالتَّجَبُّرِ، وَلاَ الْغِنَى إلاَّ بِالْغَصْبِ
وَالْبُخْلِ، وَلاَ الْمَحَبَّةُ إلاَّ بِاسْتِخْرَاجِ الدِّينِ
وَاتِّبَاعِ الْهَوَى. فَمَنْ أَدْرَكَ ذَلِكَ الزَّمَانَ فَصَبَرَ عَلَى
الْفَقْرِ وَهُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلَى الْغِنَى، وَصَبَرَ عَلَى الْبُغْضَةِ
وَهُوَ يَقْدِرُ عَلَى الْمَحَبَّةِ، وَصَبَرَ عَلَى الذُّلِّ وَهُوَ
يَقْدِرُ عَلَى الْعِزِّ آتَاهُ اللهُ ثَوَابَ خَمْسِينَ صِدِّيقاً
مِمَّنْ صَدَّقَ بِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*After me, there shall come upon people an age in which sovereignty
cannot be gained except by means of killing and arrogance, wealth cannot
be obtained except by means of usurpation and stinginess, and
amicability cannot be attained except by means of disregarding the
religious affairs and pursuing the whims. So, as for him who lives in
that time and tolerates poverty while he can be rich, tolerates humility
while he can be a master, and tolerates people’s displeasure while he
can obtain their respect, Almighty Allah will give him the rewards of
fifty veracious men who have believed in me.*[^27]

(2) The Holy Imams (‘a) interpreted tribulations and ordeals (that
afflict the faithful believers) to be means of nearness to Almighty
Allah and divine favor. Providing examples, they referred to their
personal tribulations and ordeals. Previously, I have introduced some
traditions demonstrating this issue.

(3) The Holy Imams (‘a) averred that submission to and satisfaction with
such tribulations and ordeals are in themselves high ranks of belief in
Almighty Allah Who confers them upon none but His elite servants. Of
course, this fact stirs up in souls the feelings of satisfaction,
tranquility, steadfastness, and resistance. A statement in a famous
formula of *ziyarah* reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ فَاجْعَلْ نَفْسِي مُطْمَئِنَّةً بِقَدَرِكَ، رَاضِيَةً
بِقَضَائِكَ… صَابِرَةً عَلَى نُزُولِ بَلاَئِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, cause my soul to be fully tranquil with Your decrees,
satisfied with Your providence… and steadfast against affliction of Your
tribulations.*[^28]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَأْسُ طَاعَةِ اللهِ الصَّبْرُ وَالرِّضَا عَنِ اللهِ فِي مَا أَحَبَّ
الْعَبْدُ أَوْ كَرِهَ. وَلاَ يَرْضَى عَبْدٌ عَنِ اللهِ فِي مَا أَحَبَّ
أَوْ كَرِهَ إلاَّ كَانَ خَيْراً لَهُ فِي مَا أَحَبَّ أَوْ كَرِهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The apex of obedience to Almighty Allah is perseverance and
satisfaction with Allah regardless of whether His servant likes or
dislikes the circumstances. Whenever a servant is pleased with Almighty
Allah in what he likes or dislikes, this shall certainly be better for
him than the matter that he liked or disliked.*[^29]

Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزُّهْدُ عَشَرَةُ أَجْزَاءٍ؛ فَأَعْلَى دَرَجَاتِ الزُّهْدِ أَدْنَى
دَرَجَاتِ الْوَرَعِ. وَأَعْلَى دَرَجَاتِ الْوَرَعِ أَدْنَى دَرَجَاتِ
الْيَقِينِ. وَأَعْلَى دَرَجَاتِ الْيَقِينِ أَدْنَى دَرَجَاتِ الرِّضَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Asceticism is of ten grades the highest of which is the lowest grade of
piety. The highest* *grade of piety is the lowest grade of conviction.
The highest grade of conviction is the lowest grade of
satisfaction.*[^30]

(4) The Holy Imams (‘a) assured their followers that their fate and
future was the same as their own.

(5) The Holy Imams (‘a) also explained in detail the great rewards that
their followers will win for attaching themselves to them and suffering
because of it.

Such attachment and sufferings shall be the reason for acceptance of
their deeds and redemption on the Day of Resurrection.

Al-‘Ala' ibn Muhammad has reported that he asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a)
about the meaning of the following holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأُولَٰئِكَ يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ ۗ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones, and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (25:70)***

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْتَى بِالْمُؤْمِنِ الْمُذْنِبِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ حَتَّى يُقَامَ
بِمَوْقِفِ الْحِسَابِ، فَيَكُونُ اللهُ تَعَالَى هُوَ الَّذِي
يَتَوَلَّى حِسَابَهُ لاَ يُطْلِعُ عَلَى حِسَابِهِ أَحَداً مِنَ
النَّاسِ. فَيُعَرِّفُهُ ذُنُوبَهُ، حَتَّى إذَا أَقَرَّ بِسَيِّئَاتِهِ
قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِلْكَتَبَةِ: ”بَدِّلُوهَا حَسَنَاتٍ
وَأَظْهِرُوهَا لِلنَّاسِ.“ فَيَقُولُ النَّاسُ حِينَئِذٍ: ”أَمَا كَانَ
لِهَذَا الْعَبْدِ سَيِّئَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ؟!“ ثُمَّ يَأْمُرُ اللهُ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ بِهِ إلَى الْجَنَّةِ. فَهَذَا تَأْوِيلُ الآيَةِ، وَهِيَ فِي
الْمُذْنِبِينَ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا خَاصَّةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A faithful believer, who has committed sins, will be brought on the Day
of Resurrection for questioning. It will be Almighty Allah Who takes
upon Himself the calling to account of such servants so that none will
witness it. Then, Almighty Allah displays the sins that servant had
committed and the servant will confess to them. After that, Almighty
Allah will order the Noble Writers to change these sins into good deeds
and then show them to the people. As they see these records, the people
will say to each other, “This servant has not committed any single sin
all his life.” Then, Almighty Allah will determine Paradise for that
servant. This is the interpretation of the verse. This is for our Shi‘ah
exclusively.*[^31]

On the authority of his fathers, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has reported the
Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّنَا، أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ، يُكَفِّرُ الذُّنُوبَ وَيُضَاعِفُ
الْحَسَنَاتِ. وَإنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى لَيَتَحَمَّلُ عَنْ مُحِبِّينَا
أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ مَا عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ مَظَالِمِ الْعِبَادِ إِلاَّ مَا
كَانَ مِنْهُمْ فِيهَا عَلَى إضْرَارٍ وَظُلْمٍ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ.
فَيَقُولُ لِلسَّيِّئَاتِ: ”كُونِي حَسَنَاتٍ.“
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To love us, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),* *erases the sins and doubles the
rewards. Verily, Almighty Allah shall take upon Himself the
responsibility of our lovers’ wrong deeds against others except for the
deeds that have caused loss and injustice to other faithful believers.
He shall order the wrongdoings to change into good deeds.*[^32]

In vol. 68 of *Bihar al-Anwar*, there is a section entitled ‘*bab
al-safh* (Section: Pardoning)’ comprising many authentic traditions that
demonstrate the same purport of this tradition.

If we combine these traditions with the other ones that specify piety
and diligence as stipulations for joining the community of Shi‘ism, we
can conclude that the virtuous community cannot include anyone except
those who are characterized by piety and diligence; however, if such
individuals commit sins, they shall be forgiven by Almighty Allah on
account of their loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their sufferings
because of this loyalty.

Treatment Of Psychological Pressures
------------------------------------

**Seventh Feature**: The Holy Imams (‘a) dealt with all the elements of
the psychological campaigns and political and informational attacks that
their enemies waged against their followers.

There are two strong negative issues, which mentally influenced the
virtuous community:

**First Issue**: The virtuous community was a minority compared to the
majority of Muslims, especially during the ages of the Holy Imams (‘a).
Despite fewness in number, the virtuous community used to live within
the expansive Muslim communities without having an independent entity or
community. This fact made the members of the virtuous community feel
mental and spiritual distress.

Such psychological distress has been usual for all the small faithful
communities throughout the history of divine messages. In many verses,
the Holy Qur’an has treated this problem by referring to the small and
big numbers of the parties of right and wrong, indicating that fewness
in number is usually observed for virtuous communities, while deviation
and perversity usually accompany the larger communities. For instance,
the Holy Qur’an reads,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ وَلَوْ حَرَصْتَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most men will not believe though you desire it eagerly. (12:103)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَلِيلٌ مِنْ عِبَادِيَ الشَّكُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Very few of My servants are grateful. (34:13)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most of them will not believe. (26:8)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الْخُلَطَاءِ لَيَبْغِي بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَقَلِيلٌ مَا هُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely, most of the partners act wrongfully towards one another
save those who*** ***believe and do good. Very few are they. (38:24)***

**Second Issue**: The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) were accused of
protesting (*rafdh*), sowing dissension among the Muslims, and opposing
the larger Muslim community that aimed at imposing sieges on the
virtuous community attempting to make it seem unorthodox and remote from
the truth isolating it from the larger Muslim community.

Some such charges developed into formal verdicts claiming members of the
virtuous community to be atheistic, perverted, apostate, and therefore,
killing or banishing them!

The followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) used to feel great distress
because of such charges and besiegement; The Holy Imams (‘a) treated
these two issues directly by finding solutions to them; and indirectly
by confirming that it was Almighty Allah Who selected certain
individuals to be their followers. As a result, to tolerate these
charges and accompanying suffering patiently would bring about great
rewards.

They also assured their followers that their fate is connected to their
Imams’ (‘a) fate and that the Holy Qur’an makes exclusive references to
them in the capacity of their being the only followers of the true
religion of Almighty Allah.

The following are some examples of such confirmations:

‘Utaybah, the reed trader, has reported that he told Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
that a man said to him, “Do not ever be a *Rafidhi*.” The Imam (‘a)
commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ، لَنِعْمَ الإسْمُ الَّذِي مَنَحَكُمُ اللهُ مَا دُمْتُمْ
تَأْخُذُونَ بِقَوْلِنَا وَلاَ تَكْذِبُونَ عَلَيْنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah I swear, how excellent this title is, which Almighty Allah has
bestowed upon you, as long as you carry out our commands and avoid
forging lies against us.*[^33]

Abu-Basir has reported that he said to Imam al-Baqir (‘a), “We have been
given a title because of which the ruling authorities are shedding our
blood, confiscating our properties, and persecuting us.”

The Imam (‘a) asked, “What is that title?”

Abu-Basir answered, “It is *Rafidhah*!”

The Imam (‘a) commented,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ سَبْعِينَ رَجُلاً مِنْ عَسْكَرِ فِرْعَوْنَ رَفَضُوا فِرْعَوْنَ
فَأَتَوْا مُوسَى . فَلَمْ يَكُنْ فِي قَوْمِ مُوسَى أَحَدٌ أَشَدَّ
إجْتِهَاداً وَأَشَدَّ حُبّاً لِهَارُونَ مِنْهُمْ. فَسَمَّاهُم قَوْمُ
مُوسَى الرَّافِضَةَ. فَأَوْحَى اللهُ إلَى مُوسَى أَنْ أَثْبِتْ لَهُمْ
هَذَا الإسْمَ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ، فَإنِّي نَحَلْتُهُمْ. وَذَلِكَ إسْمٌ
قَدْ نَحَلَكُمُوهُ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Seventy men from the military forces of Pharaoh had protested (rafdh)
against Pharaoh and* *joined (Prophet) Moses (‘a). They thus were the
most diligent and they loved (Prophet) Aaron (‘a) more than anyone else
did in the community of Moses (‘a). As a result, the other followers of
Moses (‘a) called them Rafidhah. Almighty Allah revealed to Moses (‘a)
to record this title for them in the Torah, as gifted by the Lord to
them. Hence, this title has been gifted to you by* *Almighty
Allah.*[^34]

‘Ali ibn ‘Aqabah ibn Khalid has reported the following from his father:

Mu’alla ibn Khunays and I visited Abu-‘Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq (‘a))
When he looked at us, he welcomed us. He then sat down and said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمْ، وَاللهِ، أُولُوا الأَلْبَابِ فِي كِتَابِ اللهِ. قَالَ اللهُ
تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَبْشِرُوا، أَنْتُمْ عَلَى إحْدَى الْحُسْنَيَيْنِ مِنَ اللهِ. أَمَا
وَإنَّكُمْ إنْ بَقِيتُمْ حَتَّى تَرَوْا مَا تَمُدُّونَ إلَيْهِ
أَعْنَاقَكُمْ، شَفَى اللهُ صُدُورَكُمْ وَأَذْهَبَ غَيْظَ قُلُوبِكُمْ
وَأَدَالَكُمْ عَلَى عَدُوِّكُمْ. وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللهِ تَبَارَكَ
وَتَعَالَى:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَشْفِ صُدُورَ قَوْمٍ مُؤْمِنِينَ  وَيُذْهِبْ غَيْظَ قُلُوبِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإنْ مَضَيْتُمْ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَرَوْا ذَلِكَ، مَضَيْتُمْ عَلَى دِينِ
اللهِ الَّذِي رَضِيَهُ لِنَبِيِّهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَبَعَثَهُ عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah (I swear), you are verily those described in the Book of Allah
as being endued with understanding. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
says,*

***“It is those who are endued with understanding that receive
admonition. (13:19)”***

*You are the object of Almighty Allah’s glad tidings of winning one of
the two weighty things.*

*If you survive until you witness that thing to which you are extending
your necks (i.e. what you ardently wish), then Almighty Allah will heal
your breasts, remove the rancor of your hearts, and give you a hand over
your enemies.*

*This is the word of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, in the Qur’an
saying,* ***“…and He heals the breasts of Believers and stills the
indignation of their hearts. 9:14-15)”***

*If you pass away before you can witness that, then you will have passed
away following the very religion of Allah that He has accepted for His
Prophet (S) and for which He has appointed him.*[^35]

Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Tha‘labi has reported that he heard Ja‘far ibn
Muhammad al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ خِيرَةُ اللهِ مِنْ خَلْقِهِ، وَشِيعَتُنَا خِيرَةُ اللهِ مِنْ
أُمَّةِ نَبِيِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We are the elite choice of Allah among His creatures and our Shi‘ah are
the elite choice of Allah among the community of His Prophet (S).*[^36]

Muhammad ibn Qays and ‘Amir ibn al-Simt reported Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(‘a) to have quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأْتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ قَوْمٌ عَلَيْهِمْ ثِيَابٌ مِنْ نُورٍ،
عَلَى وُجُوهِهِمْ نُورٌ، يُعْرَفُونَ بِآثَارِ السُّجُودِ.
يَتَخَطَّوْنَ صَفّاً بَعْدَ صَفٍّ حَتَّى يَصِيرُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ رَبِّ
الْعَالِمِينَ. يَغْبِطُهُمُ النَّبِيُّونَ وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ
وَالشُّهَدَاءُ وَالصَّالِحُونَ. أُولَئِكَ شِيعَتُنَا، وَعَلِيٌّ
إمَامُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the Day of Resurrection, a group of people dressed in clothes of
light with luminous faces identified by the signs of prostration will
come. They will pass the rows until they stand in front of the Lord of
the Worlds. The prophets (‘a), the angels, the martyrs, and the
righteous people will be glad for them…These are our Shi‘ah, and ‘Ali
(‘a) is their Imam.*[^37]

Abu-Basir has reported that he heard (Imam) Ja‘far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq
(‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ أَهْلُ بَيْتِ الرَّحْمَةِ، وَبَيْتِ النِّعْمَةِ، وَبَيْتِ
الْبَرَكَةِ. وَنَحْنُ فِي الأَرْضِ بُنْيَانٌ، وَشِيعَتُنَا عُرَى
الإسْلاَمِ. وَمَا كَانَتْ دَعْوَةُ إبْرَاهِيمَ إلاَّ لَنَا
وَشِيعَتِنَا. وَلَقَدْ إسْتَثْنَى اللهُ إلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ إلَى
إبْلِيسَ فَقَالَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We are the Household of mercy, the House of grace, and the House of
blessing. In the earth, we are the structure and our Shi‘ah are the
handles of Islam. The supplicatory prayer of (Prophet) Abraham (‘a) was
for none save our Shi‘ah and us. Up to the Day of Resurrection, Almighty
Allah has excluded us from the sway of Satan (Iblis), saying,*

***“Surely, as regards My servants, you have no authority over them.
(15:42)”***[^38]

Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا نَزَلَتْ هَذِهِ الآيَةُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ
خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ: هُوَ أَنْتَ يَا
عَلِيُّ وَشِيعَتُكَ. تَأْتِي أَنْتَ وَشِيعَتُكَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
رَاضِينَ مَرْضِيِّينَ، وَيَأْتِي عَدُوُّكَ غِضَاباً مُقْمَحِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As revealed in this holy verse:*

***“As for those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of
men. (98:7)”***

*When it was revealed, Allah’s Messenger (S) said, “These are your
Shi‘ah and you, ‘Ali (‘a). On the Day of Resurrection, your Shi‘ah and
you shall be pleased and well-satisfied, while your enemies shall be
enraged and have their heads raised aloft.*[^39]

Being pleased and well-satisfied is an indication to this verse, which
follows the earlier one:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَزَاؤُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا
الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا ۖ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ
وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِيَ رَبَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their reward with their Lord is gardens of perpetuity beneath which
rivers flow, abiding therein forever; Allah is well pleased with them
and they are well pleased with Him; that is for him who fears his Lord.
(98:8)***

Inextinguishable Torch of Hope
------------------------------

**Eighth Feature**: The Holy Imams (‘a) endeavored to keep the torch of
hope and the far-reaching view of human perfection active to help endure
all suffering in the future and ensure the continuity of human progress
and achievement of goals.

Islam has always urged its followers to maintain hope and has forbidden
despair no matter how difficult the circumstances be, how unsurpassable
the obstacles, and how unbearable the pain.

In this respect, Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا اسْتَيْأَسَ الرُّسُلُ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ قَدْ كُذِبُوا
جَاءَهُمْ نَصْرُنَا فَنُجِّيَ مَنْ نَشَاءُ ۖ وَلَا يُرَدُّ بَأْسُنَا
عَنِ الْقَوْمِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Respite will be granted until the messengers give up hope of their
people and come to think that they were treated as liars. Then Our help
reaches them and they are delivered into safety as We will. Never will
those who are in sin escape Our punishment. (12:110)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَنْ تَدْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِكُمْ مَثَلُ
الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ ۖ مَسَّتْهُمُ الْبَأْسَاءُ
وَالضَّرَّاءُ وَزُلْزِلُوا حَتَّىٰ يَقُولَ الرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا مَعَهُ مَتَىٰ نَصْرُ اللَّهِ ۗ أَلَا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللَّهِ
قَرِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do you think that you shall enter the Garden of bliss without such
trials as came to those who passed away before you? They encountered
suffering and adversity and were so shaken in spirit that even the
Messenger (S) and those of faith who were with him cried, “When will
come the help of Allah?” Ah! Verily, the help of Allah is always near.
(2:214)***

Under the harshest circumstances, the Holy Prophet (S) used to talk to
his companions about hope and a bright future. In the battles of Uhud
and al-Ahzab (the Allies), he promised them the conquest of the
countries of Khosrow the Persian, and Caesar the Roman, which were two
great powers of that time.

The enemies of Islam, the hypocrites, and the ill-hearted ones attempted
to arouse doubts and implant despair and despondency among Muslims so as
to achieve their wicked goals, as is cited in *Surah al-Ahzab* (No. 33)
because as soon as the torch of hope is extinguished and desperation
creeps into the soul, man is defeated after which he buckles before
surrounding pressures and his despair becomes a lethal weapon. At all
times, psychological wars focus on one chief goal, which is,
extinguishing the spirit of hope.

However, the most important reason for building the virtuous community
was the issue of expecting the advent of the Rising[^40] Imam, Mahdi
(‘a). The Holy Imams (‘a), besides confirming the advent of the last
Imam (‘a) after his occultation and asking their followers to believe in
and wait in eager expectation of him, strove to make their followers
live the state of actual expectation of the Imam’s advent in all ages
including the ages of the Holy Imams (‘a) themselves.

Accordingly, their followers used to experience the likelihood that each
Imam (‘a) might be the promised and expected one to undertake the
mission. This state supplied the virtuous community with a dynamic and
spiritual motive of achieving the final victory by overcoming the
corrupt conditions of society caused by its doctrinal and moral
deviations.

However, this presentation had some negative impacts on the virtuous
community who were contemporaries of some of the Holy Imams (‘a). They
believed that the Imam of their age was the expected Imam and were not
mentally prepared to accept the death of that Imam. This very thing
occurred to Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far al-Kazim (‘a), because his political
movement was so powerful that his companions believed him to be the
Promised Imam. Hence, when he was poisoned in prison, these companions
could not believe that he had died. Consequently, some of them believed
that Imamate ended with him and a problem took place in the milieus of
the virtuous community after his martyrdom. However, some of them
believed in the Imamate of his successor, Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha
(‘a) who managed to overcome this problem afterwards.[^41]

In fact, such negative consequences soon vanish when the Holy Imams (‘a)
overcome them because of their capacity to convince their followers with
the truth. The positive consequence always remains prevalent in the
milieus of the virtuous community.

In this manner, the expectation of the Promised Imam became a sort of
worship—which the Holy Prophet (S) maintained to be the most favorable
of all devotional acts—that the virtuous community practiced and took
action on its basis. Subsequently, paving the way for the advent of the
Promised Imam has become one of the features of this expectation and one
of the effective factors of moving towards setting up the government of
ultimate justice.

To conclude, the issue of expecting the advent of the Promised Imam—may
Allah hasten his advent—and the confirmation of the particularities and
features of this expectation during the Minor and the Major Occultation
have had a huge impact on the spiritual aspect that distinguishes the
virtuous community from other communities. Such an impact is not visible
in other Muslim communities. The reason is not that they do not believe
in the idea of Imam Mahdi (‘a) because it is one of the issues about
which all Muslims agree unanimously. The actual reason is that belief in
the existence and life of Imam Mahdi (‘a) is not found in the other
Muslim communities at the same level and in the same form as is adopted
by the individuals of the virtuous community.

It seems appropriate to take a general look at the matter of Imam Mahdi
(‘a) as well as its spiritual and moral outcomes.

The Issue of Imam Mahdi (‘a)
----------------------------

Like Imam al-Husayn’s uprising and martyrdom the issue of Imam Mahdi
(‘a) has great relevance to the building of the virtuous community. The
relevance is doctrinal, ethical, educational, and spiritual. Of course,
to display the details of all of the pertinent items requires a lengthy
dissertation[^42] because this issue represents an entire interpretation
of history that corresponds with the Qur’anic idea entailing that the
earth shall be eventually inherited by the righteous servants of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ
الْأَرْضَ يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, We have written in the Scripture, after the Reminder: My
righteous servants will inherit the earth. (21:105)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَىٰ لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا ۚ يَعْبُدُونَنِي
لَا يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا ۚ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ
فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has promised such of you as believe and do good work that He
will surely make them succeed the present rulers in the earth even as He
caused those who were before them to succeed others. Also, that He will
surely establish for them their religion which He has approved for them
and will give them in exchange safety after their fear. They serve Me.
They ascribe nothing as partner unto Me. Those who disbelieve
henceforth, they are the miscreants. (24:55)***

The moral and spiritual aspect contributes to understanding the Holy
Imams’ (‘a) reason for building the virtuous community on the basis of
expecting the advent of Imam Mahdi (‘a).

According to the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) Imam Mahdi (‘a)
represents a living embodiment of the aforementioned historical fact (of
the inheritance of the earth by the virtuous servants of Almighty Allah)
not only at the level of the unpredicted future but also at the level of
the experienced present. (In Iran, Iraq and Lebanon) this belief has
begun to embody the actual existence and life of Imam Mahdi (‘a). These
followers and partisans believe in the existence and birth of Imam Mahdi
(‘a) and the fact that he is witnessing all the harsh conditions through
which Muslims are passing. He is observing and interacting in all human
and social experiments and will execute the government of ultimate
Divine justice in the future of human progress.

A faithful believer who suffers distress, doubt or confusion in the
credibility of facts and norms of history which the Holy Qur’an talks
about, such as the final win of the righteous over the wicked and the
final victory of right over wrong must read the following verse of the
Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ ۚ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ
زَهُوقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: The truth has come and falsehood has vanished. Surely, falsehood
is a vanishing thing. (17:81)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَنَنْصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely, We help Our messengers and those who believe in this
world's life and on the day when the witnesses shall testify. (40:51)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse. (9:33)***

Another Divine norm is the custom of replacement in human communities:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَنْ يَرْتَدَّ مِنْكُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِ
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ
عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لَائِمٍ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ فَضْلُ
اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe, whoever from among you turns back from his
religion, then Allah will bring a people. He shall love them and they
shall love Him, lowly before the believers, and mighty against the
unbelievers. They shall strive hard in Allah's way and shall not fear
the censure of any censurer. This is Allah's Favor bestowed on whom He
pleases. Allah is the Ample-Giver, Knowing. (5:54)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ تَتَوَلَّوْا يَسْتَبْدِلْ قَوْمًا غَيْرَكُمْ ثُمَّ لَا
يَكُونُوا أَمْثَالَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If you turn back, He will bring in your place another people. Then,
they will not be like you. (47:38)***

Another Qur’anic norm is the relationship between piety and the descent
of boons and blessings:

> وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرَىٰ آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوْا لَفَتَحْنَا
> عَلَيْهِمْ بَرَكَاتٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَلَٰكِنْ كَذَّبُوا
> فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ {96}

***If the people of the towns had believed and guarded (against evil),
We would certainly*** ***have opened up for them blessings from the
heaven and the earth, but they rejected so We overtook them for what
they had earned. (7:96)***

Another norm is the progress of human nature towards perfection and
belief in Almighty Allah:

> فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا ۚ فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
> النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ
> الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ {30}

***Then, set your face upright for religion in the right state—the
nature made by Allah in which He has made men. There is no altering of
Allah's creation. That is the right religion, but most people do not
know. (30:30)***

Another norm is the fact that man represents Almighty Allah on earth and
man’s preference over angels as a result of this representation:

> وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الْأَرْضِ
> خَلِيفَةً ۖ قَالُوا أَتَجْعَلُ فِيهَا مَنْ يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ
> الدِّمَاءَ وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ ۖ قَالَ
> إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ {30}

***When your Lord said to the angels, “I am going to place in the earth
a viceroy.” They said, “What! Will You place in it such as shall make
mischief in it and shed blood and we celebrate Your praise and extol
Your holiness?” He said, “Surely, I know what you do not know.”
(2:30)***

All these norms and facts may bring about an important question in the
mind of the faithful individual when he sees pain, ordeals, and
corruption prevail in the entire earth and notice that right is not
practiced and wrong is rampant. However, when he contemplates the
existence of Imam Mahdi (‘a) who will achieve all his hopes and put into
practice the credibility of all these norms and facts, things becomes
very clear and evident for him.

Moreover, the issue of Imam Mahdi (‘a), which is a central concern in
the building of the virtuous community, entails the following moral
facts:

### Clarity in Carrying out Religious Duties

An individual who believes in the existence of Imam Mahdi (‘a) and in
his expected advent can clearly feel divine duty and religious
commandments when he intends to perform any religious activity. He can
also feel that all his deeds, service, struggle and sacrifices are being
carried out under the blessed standard and the special care of Imam
Mahdi (‘a).

This clarity in carrying out the religious duties grants a huge moral
impetus to proceed and work—an impetus that is similar to the moral one
obtained by those who fought under the standards of the prophets and
messengers and achieved great triumphs and made sweeping changes in
human society.

With the increase of man’s feelings of the approaching divine reality,
looming divine care, and getting closer to the actual power as
represented by Almighty Allah, man’s feelings of achieving victory and
carrying out duty grow manifold. Of course, to feel the care of the Holy
Imam (‘a) and to associate oneself with him in motion and activity make
one feel a nearness to Almighty Allah and His care as well as desire to
comply with His commands.

### Maintenance of Divine Values

The belief in the advent of Imam Mahdi (‘a) maintains one’s principles,
values and divine ideals. It also encourages ceaseless endeavor to
achieve human perfection away from the worldly concepts of gain and
loss, material profit or the attainment of authority, power, and
domination.

All these principles, values, and ideals are inspired from the concept
of Imam Mahdi (‘a) and from the objectives he is divinely ordained to
achieve; namely, the establishment of the ultimate Divine justice on
earth.

Generally, any progression that is intended for Almighty Allah and the
Divine message which are ascribed to the Unseen World, and to Imam Mahdi
(‘a)—who is ascribed to the perceived world—can derive all these
significances from him, because he plays the greatest role in the
history of humanity, which shall be eventually realized.

Perception of these concepts will be steadier and more profound for
those who believe in the advent of the Promised Imam (‘a) than for
others; therefore, they can preserve a high spirit, which moves on the
strength of gallant human values and ideals in tandem with their own
progression.

### Perseverance and Steadfastness

Those who believe in Imam Mahdi (‘a) attain spirits of perseverance and
steadfastness from him. They can attain perfection through these two
features and act as models bearing suffering and trials. Through his
blessed existence, Imam Mahdi (‘a) represents the great and most
excellent example of perseverance and steadfastness, because he can see,
incur, feel, and interact with all the pain and ordeals during his
lifetime. Nevertheless, he perseveres, exposes himself to Almighty
Allah’s trial for the sake of achieving great goals and waits for the
appropriate opportunity to undertake his stately role.

On the other hand, the long duration of his occultation, despite his
actual existence gives him the chance of being subjectively perfect
because of experiencing such ordeals and tribulations. His progression
will be perfect so that he will undertake his mission, which is unique
in the history of humanity, completely and competently. Besides, the
political, social, ideological, and mental conditions of humanity, which
are other outcomes of such experience and suffering, will make it
necessary to establish such a Divine government.

Such perfection will eventually give great impetus and high moral
spirits of perseverance and steadfastness to those who believe in the
advent of Imam Mahdi (‘a) and help them move towards human perfection.

### Contribution to Justice

The belief in the advent of Imam Mahdi (‘a) makes one feel that all
deeds and activities contribute to his historical role and pave the way
for the establishment of his government of ultimate justice.

It is unreasonable to weigh up the role, deeds and activities of a
faithful individual on the balance of the goals he achieved in his
relatively short span of life, or on the balance of what he could
achieve and what reformations could be achieved in one’s society. It is
unfair to renounce all these deeds and activities because they seem to
have been worthless in influence and in achieving goals. An individual
who believes in the advent of Imam Mahdi (‘a) feels that he is
undertaking his private role in the sequence of events, goals and deeds
that, altogether, end up with the establishment of the virtuous human
society in the future.

Naturally, such feelings raise the moral spirit of man vis-à-vis his
activities, deeds and sacrifices. They make his goal so great that it
covers all such activities, deeds, efforts, and sacrifices no matter how
major and difficult, or how minor and limited his efforts might be.

### Great Hope

The belief in the advent of Imam Mahdi (‘a) furnishes its believer with
a great, incessant, and inextinguishable hope in the achievement of
victory regardless of the time that it takes. It also grants the feeling
that the round must reach its finish and that looking forward to a
better future must be incessantly continuous.

Hope is undoubtedly one of the greatest motivations that supplies people
with the capacity to go on with steadfastness, perseverance and
sacrifice.

A soldier who believes that his progress will be completed by other
soldiers who will achieve victory after him is ready to give himself up
and make greater sacrifices than a soldier who believes that when he
falls in the battlefield, his progress will stop and he will lose the
battle.

Similarly, a soldier who is engaged in a battle while he believes that
there are other battles to enter in order to obtain victory does not
stop when he loses the first round; rather, he continues to move
forward. Such feelings cannot be found except with those who believe in
the idea of Imam Mahdi’s promised advent, because he shall lead the
battle persistently until he reaches the end. This belief makes hope so
lively and ablaze that it pushes man towards motion and activity under
all circumstances.

### Revenge for the Oppressed

Those who believe in Imam Mahdi (‘a) as the Divinely commissioned
reformer who will establish a government of ultimate Divine justice and
give each one his due, feel that they will eventually be able to avenge
the torment which the faithful believers were exposed to and punish the
criminals who committed such crimes and offenses against humanity.

Apart from the individual’s role in this process of vengeance, which is
related to the idea of the Return (*raj‘ah*)[^43] and its political and
social purports, revenge will be imposed upon those who imitated their
criminal ancestors. It is logically proven that the past and the present
criminals form one trend of the same thought, behavior, goals, and fate;
therefore, to take revenge upon the last of them is to take it upon the
former generations, also.

The idea of taking revenge and retaliating—which stands for making
reprisals for the values and principles of right and justice—is a sound
Islamic idea to which the Holy Qur’an has referred on more than one
occasion, such as the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَاتِلُوهُمْ يُعَذِّبْهُمُ اللَّهُ بِأَيْدِيكُمْ وَيُخْزِهِمْ
وَيَنْصُرْكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَيَشْفِ صُدُورَ قَوْمٍ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Fight them; Allah will punish them with your hands and bring them to
disgrace, and assist you against them and heal the hearts of a believing
people. (9:14)***

Traditions have also spoken about this idea when they described Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) as the Vengeance of Allah[^44] and that Imam Mahdi (‘a)
will avenge his murder and raise the slogan of “Revenge for
Husayn.”[^45] A formula of *ziyarah* of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) comprises
the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاقْرِنْ ثَأْرَنَا بِثَأْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*(Please) bind our revenge with his revenge.*[^46]

This feeling symbolizes a great spiritual power in the inner selves.
Almighty Allah has conferred upon man such a feeling and man inclines to
it naturally in his lifetime because it represents one of the motives of
man’s progress.

Islam has taken much interest in this motive and feeling lest it may
swerve and change into a meager expression of one of man’s instincts and
miss its target—human perfection. However, Islam has subordinated the
feelings of taking revenge, retaliating, and giving vent to one’s anger
to certain values and principles to save them from becoming mere
expressions of certain psychological feelings and sensual tendencies. It
is clear that the question of revenge and retaliation in the issue of
Imam Mahdi (‘a) does not involve taking revenge from certain persons;
rather it is punishing the corrupted reality of man which inevitably
brings about justice, right, and goodness.

[^1]: - ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 13:193, H. 1 as quoted from
Sayyid Ibn Tawus, Falah al-Sa'il.

[^2]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1 :243, H. 449-450. Following the faith of
Prophet Abraham (‘a) stands for true and utter commitment to his
religion.

[^3]: - Tafsir al-Qummi 1:105 (the tradition is reported through a valid
chain of authority); ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:84, H. 1 (as
quoted from the previous reference book).

[^4]: - Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 2:23, H. 59; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 68:85, H. 7 (as quoted from the previous reference book).

[^5]: - Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Tabar, Bisharat al-Mustafa, pp. 84-85, H.
15; p. 225, H. 50; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:87, H. 14 (as
quoted from the previous reference book).

[^6]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:316, H. 629.

[^7]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:261, H. 105.

[^8]: - Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p. 133 ; al-Shablanji, Nur
al-Absar, p. 104.

[^9]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:141, H. 6.

[^10]: - ‘Abd al-Wahid al-Amudi, Ghurar al-Hikam wa Durar al-Kalim, No.
6244.

[^11]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:135, H. 171.

[^12]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:556, H. 2.

[^13]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, pp. 132-133, H. 212; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:199, H. 3 (as quoted from the previous
reference book).

[^14]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:247, H. 463.

[^15]: - Further details about this topic have been cited in some of my
other studies.

[^16]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim No. 111.

[^17]: -Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim No. 112.

[^18]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 2:6-9, H. 1. In the same
chapter of this reference book, there are several authentically reported
traditions demonstrating the same thing.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 2:6-9, H. 9.

[^20]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 2:6-9, H. 11.

[^21]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 118.

[^22]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:216, H. 2.

[^23]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 27.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:5, H. 1. The
authenticity of this tradition is corroborated by other traditions that
are mentioned in the same chapter of this reference book.

[^25]: - The Holy Imam (‘a) means that one who is patient will be so for
a short while, because he is either patient for his whole life, which is
relatively short (when compared to the other life, which is the reward
of his patience) or for the time of tribulation, which is also short.

[^26]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:88-89, H. 3; Al-Hurr al-’Amili,
Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:207, H. 1 (as quoted from the earlier reference
book).

[^27]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:91, H. 12; al-Hurr al-’Amili,
Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:208, H. 2 (as quoted from the earlier reference
book).

[^28]: - Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, Ziyarah of Amin
Allah.

[^29]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:60, H. 1.

[^30]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:62, H. 10.

[^31]: - Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Amali, pp. 298-299, H. 8; Shaykh al-Tusi,
al-Amali, pp. 72-73, H. 105; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:100,
H. 4 (as quoted from the earlier reference books).

[^32]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, p. 164, H. 274; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 68:100, H. 5 (as quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^33]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin: 1:256, H. 487; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 68:96, H. 1 (as quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^34]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:257, H. 489; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 68:97, H. 3 (as quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^35]: - Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin 1:272-273, H. 137; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 68:93, H. 35 (as quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^36]: - Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Tabari, Bisharat al-Mustafa, p. 32, H. 17;
‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:43, H. 88 (as quoted from the
earlier reference book).

[^37]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Fadha'il al-Shi’ah, pp. 30-31, H. 26; ‘Allamah
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 68:68, H. 123 (as quoted from the earlier
reference book).

[^38]: - Tafsir al-’Ayyashi 2:243; ‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar
68:35-36, H. 75 (as quoted from the earlier reference book).

[^39]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Amali, pp. 405-406, 671, H. 1414 (with
little difference in the order of words but not in the meaning); Tafsir
al-Tabari 30:171; Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur 8:589; Ibn
Hajar, al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p. 161.

[^40]: - The Arabic word al-Qa'im means one who rises to undertake the
mission. It is the chief title of Imam Mahdi, the promised and expected.

[^41]: - These circumstances will be discussed in further detail in one
of the coming books of this series when we discuss the situations of
each of the Holy Imams (‘a) independently.

[^42]: - The issue of Imam Mahdi (‘a) requires a survey of many aspects
some of which are as follows: In its doctrinal aspect, we need to
introduce concepts and evidence that prove the existence of the
ostensibly absent Imam as well as explanations of this unique phenomenon
in human life. The cultural aspect deals with the philosophy,
perfection, perpetuity, theoretical compatibility with the idea of the
infallibility of the Imams (‘a) and commitment to the instructions and
guidelines of this issue. Accordingly, this issue is included in the
core of the cultural establishments and courses. The historical aspect
deals with the life and political conditions of Imam Mahdi (‘a), his
occultation, signs of his dvent and, the future of humanity when he
undertakes his mission. The moral aspect deals with the practice of a
certain system of morals during the expectation of the Imam’s advent.
The spiritual aspect correlates with the moral aspect. The dear reader
can refer to hundreds of books that have dealt with Imam al-Mahdi, one
of which is the unique, though small, thesis that my mentor, Martyr
Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, wrote under the title of ‘bahth hawla
al-mahdi (A Study on Mahdi (‘a))’.

[^43]: - The Return (or raj’ah) is an idea mentioned in the traditions
reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), entailing that the virtuous and the
righteous, as well as the unbelievers and hypocrites shall be returned
to this world after their death so as to witness the victory of right
over wrong and the wronged persons shall defeat the wrongdoers. More
light shall be shed on this idea in one of the coming books of this
series. In their doctrinal books, scholars of the Imamiyyah Shi’ah have
dealt with this topic in detail. (See, for instance, the Faith of the
Imamiyyah Shi’ah, by Shaykh al-Mu¨affar, Chapter: Our Doctrine
concerning the Return (Raj‘ah)).

[^44]: - In the famous Ziyarah of Warith, the following statement is
mentioned: “Peace be upon you, O Allah’s revenge and the son of His
revenge…” See Mafatih al-Jinan.

[^45]: - (ya litharat al-husayn): Refer to Shaykh al-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar
al-Ridha 2:268-269, Shaykh al-Saduq, al-Amali, pp. 192-193, H. 202;
‘Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 44:286, H. 23 (as quoted from the
earlier reference books).

[^46]: - Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Mazar, pp. 410-411.


