Chapter One : Revelation
========================

**1.Meaning of Wahyi & Ilham**

"WAHYI" (وحي) literally means inspiration, revelation suggestion, to
point out a thing to someone, to put a thing into the mind of someone
secretly; letter, writing: something revealed or written or the idea
inspired or revealed; saying; commandment; to dispatch a messenger to
someone; to speak with someone secretly; to urge; voice. In Islamic
terminology, wahyi means communication of idea, command and information
from Allah to a chosen human being, conveyed either directly or through
supernatural agencies like angels. "ILHAM" (الهام) literally means to
inspire: to put a thought or an idea into the mind of someone. In
Islamic terminology, ILHAM means inspiration of an idea or information
from Allah to any chosen person.

It will appear from above that while ILHAM is limited to unspoken and
unwritten inspiration, WAHYI is used for spoken as well as unspoken and
written as well as unwritten inspiration and revelation. Every religion
which believes in God believes in revelation.

**2.modes of Revelation**

According to the Qur'an, there are three basic methods of revelation:

"It is not possible for a man that he should receive the message of
Allah except either by inspiration or from behind a curtain, or Allah
sends angels and the angels bring the message of Allah, whatever Allah
wishes. Verily Allah is High, Omniscient". (42-51).

**INSPIRATION**

There are two types of inspirations; 1.True Dreams; this method is not
new. There are at least four instances in the Bible where Israeli
prophets received the divine message in dreams. The Dictionary of the
Bible records under the word "Dream" about divine dreams: "Dreams,
employed by God for the purpose of His Kingdom… they are (a) intended to
effect the spiritual life of individuals; (b) Directive and prophetic
dreams… they seem to have carried with them credentials of their divine
origin".

Our Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w) even before he was commanded to proclaim
his prophethood, used to receive divine messages through this medium. In
later days, he saw two dreams, which are mentioned in the Qur'an. In the
first dream, he saw that the Umayyads were climbing his pulpit like
monkeys. He was so grieved by that dream that he did not smile from then
on till his last breath. This sorrow was based upon the sure knowledge
that Umayyads would destroy his religion, as they actually did. They
used the name of Islam to alter Islamic teachings and Islamic spirit. In
the second dream, he saw (in the 6th year of Hijra) himself together
with his followers entering Ka'bah. It was a time when, by worldly
reasoning, he had no chance of doing so. Within less than 2 years, this
dream became a reality.

This type of inspiration still continues. The Holy Prophet said, "There
is no prophethood after me except the good tidings". He was asked, "And
what are the good tidings, O Messenger of Allah?" He said, "Good dreams
or true dreams". But the difference between a dream of a Prophet or Imam
and that of others is that a Prophet or an Imam appointed by Allah never
sees a false dream; whatever he dreams is a message or command from
Allah; while other people's dreams are more often than not false, caused
by physiological or psychological reasons.

2.Prophetic Inspirations: these inspired thoughts may be accompanied
with clear words or may be in the form of a thought without words. The
Qur'an says, "He (i.e. the Prophet) does not speak of his own desire, it
is nothing but a revelation revealed". (53:3-4). By the authority of
these verses of Qur'an even the traditions of the Holy Prophet are
treated as revelation. Their words are not from Allah; but the idea
is.


**FROM BEHIND A CURTAIN**

The revelations, which are sent "from behind a curtain", are, also, of
many kinds;

1.The first is like hearing some low murmuring sounds (like buzzing of
bees) and knowing the interpretation.
2.The second is like hearing high-pitched sounds and knowing the
interpretation.
3.The third is hearing the sound from a material object. The first call
to the Prophet Musa (a.s) is one example. He was astonished to see a
bush burning and yet remaining unconsumed by fire. As he turned aside,
gazing at a sight so unique, he received an authoritative call from God,
calling him to prophethood. Another example is of our Prophet (s.a.w)
when he ascended to the heavens in mi'raj. He, at last, arrived at a
sublime place where neither any prophet nor any angel had ever reached.
He saw a curtain of light, and then heard a voice from it.
4.The fourth type of this revelation is hearing the voice of an angel
without seeing him. It should be mentioned here that this fourth type of
revelation "from behind a curtain" is not reserved for the prophets.
Other chosen people also may be honored by such angelic conversations.
They are called "al-muhaddath" (المحدّث) i.e. the one with whom the
angels talk.

**THROUGH ANGELS**

Now we come to the last type of the modes of revelation, i.e.,
receiving the message through an angel. Gabriel usually came to our
Prophet (s.a.w) to convey the messages of Allah. Sometimes he came in
his own image, other times in likeness of a man. Messages sent through
an angel were mostly oral. But at least in one case it was a written
one. The Torah was sent to the Prophet Musa (a.s.) as "written tablets":
and wrote we for him in the tablets lessons of every kind… (7:145).

**3.Epilepsy & Revelation:A Christians' Allegation Analyzed**

These were, in short, some method by which the messages of God come to
the prophets. As I have mentioned earlier, the Divine revelations to our
Prophet (s.a.w.) began with "true dreams"; later on, he used to see the
heavenly lights and visions and hear the voices, but without seeing the
speaker. After that, he saw the angel Gabriel, who brought the Divine
message. This was the easiest and clearest from of revelation.

Sometimes, continuous and high-pitched voices would reach his ears, at
the end of which he would find the message of God imprinted on his
heart. This was the hardest form of revelation. Often, at the time of
receiving such revelations, he would be overcast with gloom. The color
of his face would fade away. Sometimes he would bend his head, and his
companions would understand that he was receiving the revelation and
they also would bend their heads. At times, even during the coldest
months, perspiration would pour down from his forehead. After some time
he would raise his head and relate the revelation to them. According to
Shaykh as-Saduq, this mode was chosen by Allah when He wished to reveal
something to the Holy Prophet without using the agency of Gabriel.

Having recorded the above-mentioned effects of this type of revelation,
Washington Irving says, that "The ringing of ears is a symptom of
epilepsy". A Muslim brother from Aden had asked me whether it was true,
as many Christian writers had written, that our Holy Prophet was
suffering from epilepsy. A short article was published in The Light
(May-August, 1968) in reply to that question, some parts of which are
reproduced below: This allegation is the outcome of Dr. Gustav Weil's
imagination. He was an orient-list. Latter writers have blindly followed
him because it suited their purpose. It is this tendency of the
Christians about which Bishop Boyd Carpenter wrote in The Permanent
Element in Religion: "Muhammad is by many seen only through the fog
which dread and ignorance have spread around him. To them he is an
object of horror against which anything evil might be said… But, now the
mists of prejudice have cleared away, we can afford to see the founder
of Islam in fairer light".

Did not those Christian writers know that such effects at the time of
receiving revelation were not unique in the history of prophethood?
Alfred Guillaume writes in his book Islam about the institution of
prophethood that "the Hebrew religion gave content and meaning to the
word "Nabi", which, originally, applied to a person who in a state of
uncontrollable emotion and excitement proclaimed a message which his
hearers attributed to a god… the outward marks of a prophet in Israel
were (a) impassioned utterance; (b) poetry: (c) intense pre-occupation
with God and moral issues: (d) a sense of compulsion urging him to
declare the will of God. Naturally these characteristics varied from
prophet to prophet".

Also, the following statement from Concise Bible Commentary is worth
noting; "The prophets of the (Old Testament) as their writings show,
based their teachings largely on ecstasy and vision". Again it says;
"Probably the main difference between false and true prophets was that
the former used traditional methods to go into ecstasy, while the latter
were seized, often against their will, by God.

So, it is crystal clear that "uncontrollable ecstasy" was a common
feature of revelation even in Israelite prophets. Are the Christians
prepared to say that all the prophets of Israel suffered from
epilepsy?

Now let us see the charge of his suffering from epilepsy from medical
point of view. Pears Cyclopaedia, 68th edition (1959-60) says about
epilepsy: "Epilepsy manifests itself in various ways, the common being
grand mal-seizures, in which the patient falls down unconscious, his
muscles become tense, his jaws clenched so that he is in danger of
biting his tongue, and the limbs begin to contract rhythmically. As this
phase passes away the patient lays down his limb, and gradually recovers
consciousness. Often he does not know what has happened. Sometimes, he
is confused, forgets where he is, and wanders away in an attack of loss
of memory (amnesia or epileptic fugue). In petit mal -the name means
little sickness - the attack may be hardly noticeable. The patient is
perhaps talking or doing some-things, when without any warning, he
simply stops, looks dazed or confused for a brief period, and then
carries on again".

The thing to note is that neither every attack of epilepsy is
accompanied by unconsciousness nor every attack of unconsciousness is a
symptom of epilepsy. The Pears Cyclopaedia says: "Fits may have many
causes.. It is important not to jump to the conclusion that because
someone has a fit, they therefore have epilepsy, and all such cases
should be carefully investigated".

So, according to the medical authorities unconsciousness (even If we
accept that the effects at the time of revelation meant
'unconsciousness') and epilepsy are not inter-connected as cause and
effect, either way. I fail to understand how can a sane person jump to
the conclusion that a prophet must have suffered from epilepsy, just
because he appeared to go into ecstasy (or even let us say,
unconsciousness)?

The other facts are also worth considering. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
generally received the Divine message when some event had either taken
or was about to take place, or someone had put a question to him. We
must remember that: often (an epileptic) does not know what has
happened. Sometimes he is confused, forgets where he is, and wanders
away in an attack of loss of memory". Had the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) ever
been attacked by epilepsy after question had been put to him, he would
have forgotten as to where he was or who had asked him what. Instead, he
always gave most satisfactory and to-the-point answer in an extremely
forceful, fluent and eloquent language immediately after this so-called
epilepsy attack. Another point to consider is that the fits of epilepsy
are more likely to occur at the time of emotional stress on nerves. But
no historian has ever said that there was ever such an attack on the
Holy Prophet during any battle or distress.

The following words of Alfred Guillaume are enough to expose the
hollowness of this malicious and baseless charge: "A past generation of
Arabists… advanced the theory that Muhammad was an epileptic. The charge
had been made by a Byzantine writer long before. Such a hypothesis seems
gratuitous and can safely be ascribed to anti-Muhammadan prejudice.
Study of the psychological phenomena of religious experience makes it
extremely improbable.

Prophets are not normal people; but that does not authorize the
assertion that their abnormal behavior is due to a morbid condition.
Moreover, Muhammad was a man whose common sense never failed him. Those
who deny his mental and psychic stability, do so only by ignoring the
over-whelming evidence… had he ever collapsed in the strain of battle or
controversy, or fainted away when strong action was called for, a case
might be made out. But all the evidence we have, points in the opposite
direction, and the suggestion of epilepsy is as groundless in the eyes
of the present writer as it is offensive to all Muslims…"


**Chapter Two : Pre-Islamic Revelations**

**1.Some Previous Books**

The revelations sent to the previous prophets were often committed to
writing. But only three of them have been mentioned by name in the
Qur'an. The Tawrat which was revealed to Prophet Musa, the Zabur which
was revealed to Prophet Dawud, and the Injil which was revealed to
Prophet Issa (peace be on them all). Apart from those, there is a
mention of "SUHUF- books" of Ibrahim (a.s.).

Zoroastrians claim that the Zend Avasta is a divine book. Hindus claim
the same about the Vedas. Allah had sent prophets to every nation and
every region. (Qur'an 35:24) Obviously they must have been given some
books in their own languages. (14:4). However, we can neither confirm
not deny the claims made about the Zend Avasta or the Vedas because they
are not mentioned in the Qur'an.

The Books of Ibrahim (a.s.) are completely lost, as is the Injil of
Prophet Issa (a.s.). The two remaining books were all altered, added,
subtracted and extensively changed by those very people who professed to
believe in them. Some details of those alterations will be given in
later chapters. Here this fact is mentioned just to explain why Allah
sent a new SHARI'AH (Islam) and a new Book (the Qur'an). Our
responsibility towards previous prophets and their books is that we
should believe that they were true prophets sent by Allah and that they
were given the books as mentioned in the Qur'an. But as we know that
those books were either completely lost or extensively edited, we cannot
accept anything written in them unless they conform completely with what
is revealed in the Qur'an.

As the subject of this booklet is not the review of the previous books,
I will not go into details about all of them. However, in these days our
youths are mostly confronted with Christianity; therefore, in the
following chapters, I will mention some aspects of the Old and the New
Testaments only.


**2.The Torah**


**History Of Present Compilation**

The Torah (Law) is the name of the book of Prophet Musa (a.s.). The
Jews and the Christians use this name for the first 5 books of Old
Testament: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy. Together
they are called 'Pentateuch'. Pentateuch was believed to have been
written by Musa (a.s.). He is probably to be dated in the fifteenth to
thirteenth century BC and the belief that he wrote Pentateuch continued
up to the 18th century CE; and this was in-spite of the inherent
impossibilities of this belief, like the account of the death of Moses
himself. In the 18th century, some Christian scholars started what is
now known as 'higher criticism'. Their views are now accepted by
majority of Christians. They proved that the Pentateuch was not written
by Moses; that it is not even work of a single man or single era; that
it contains the works of unknown number of people right up-to 1,000
years after the death of Moses.

Rev. W.K.L Clarke in his Concise Bible Commentary gives the following
timetable and sequence of editing:

The book says that by the end of the 19th century, it was generally
recognized that there were four main sources in the Pentateuch, to be
assigned to 9th, 8th, 7th and 5th or 4th centuries BC respectively. "The
first book at the Pentateuch shows three characteristic styles
illustrated by Genesis 1, Genesis 2 and Deuteronomy and the documents
marked by these styles were first to be noticed.

"The obviously early source begins in Gen.2: 4. This source is called
'J' after the 'J' of Jehovah (pronounced Jahweh). 'J', is generally
thought to have been put into written form about 850BC

"Another source…is D, so called from the book of Deuteronomy, which was
the book law discovered in Josiah's reign. "The third source is called
Priestly document, P for short. The writer is particularly interested in
legislation and most of the laws of Exodus and all those of Leviticus
and Numbers belong to P. A large part of the Priestly Code is believed
to have been composed in Babylonia and brought to Jerusalem by Ezra in
397BC. How much of P was omitted in final compilation of Pentateuch we
have no means of knowing. Nothing has been said yet about a subordinate
source found in Lev. 17-28 and known as the Code of Holiness, H for
short. It was adopted into P but evidently had a separate history…
Opinion is divided as to its date, whether it was written before 586 or
whether exiled priests after the fall of the city committed to writing
the Temple traditions…"

"Now comes the fourth source. After taking P,D and J from the
Pentateuch a considerable amount of material remains, parallel to J, but
in Genesis using Elohim for God and not Yahweh. This non-P Elohim matter
begins in Gen. 20: 1-7… Altogether E is more mature religiously and is
thought to have reached written form about 750 BC". These are the four
main sources of Pentateuch. How they were compiled to form the
Pentateuch? "The first step was to combine J and E. this must have been
done after the fall of Samaria in 721 BC. The two were combined in a
document which is called JE.

"Then in 621 Deuteronomy was discovered, or at least a large part of
it. The next stage was to put JE, and D together. This will have taken
place during the exile.. A perceptible amount of editing of JE took
place. "P was written in Babylonia and brought to Jerusalem by Ezra in
397 BC. Later, editors used it as a frame work and incorporated JED,
thus producing the Pentateuch… in about 300 BC".

We might as well sum it up in the words of the commentator himself.
"Probably a multitude of persons have combined 1,000 years after Moses
is called the Book of Moses! But it appears from the same authorities
that probably it was not attributed to Moses till 200 BC! Even that
minority of the Christian scholars which still holds fast to the theory
of Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch has to admit that it must have
been re-written by the subsequent generations to modernize the language.
This concession has to be given because "it is hardly probable that the
Hebrew of Moses' day was like that of Biblical Hebrew". (See the
Westminster Dictionary of the Bible under "Pentateuch").


