Miracles of Prophecies
======================

Another miraculous aspect of the Qur'an is its prophecies. For
instance, the destiny of Abu Lahab and his wife was foretold to be the
hell; and they both died idolaters. Hence both of them deserved the
hell. "Soon shall he (Abu Lahab) enter into blazing fire, and his wife,
the wood-carrier" (111:3-4)

When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) was in Mecca, a war broke out between the
Romans and the Persians in which the Romans were defeated. The Meccans
were overjoyed because the Persians were fire-worshippers, and the
idol-worshipping Meccans took their victory over the Christians
(nominally Unitarians) as a good omen that too would ultimately vanquish
the Muslims.

Then came the revelation telling the Meccans that the Romans would be
victorious in the second round:

"The Romans have been defeated, in the near land, and they after their
defeat will be victorious within few years; Allah's is the command
before and after that; and on that day the believers will rejoice".
(30:2-4) In a few years, the Romans defeated the Persians. While the
Holy Prophet was about to migrate to Medina, his heart was full of grief
for leaving his hometown. Then came the good news to console him: "Most
surely He who has made the teaching of the Qur'an binding on thee, will
bring thee back to thy place of return". (28:85) Within eight years the
Holy Prophet returned to Mecca triumphantly.

The dream (in 6 A.H) that he was entering Mecca was followed by the
ayah: "Surely has Allah in truth fulfilled for His Messenger the Vision;
you will certainly enter the Sacred Mosque (i.e. Ka'bah) if Allah wills,
in security, some having their head shaven and others having their hair
cut short, and you will have no fear". (48:27). This prophecy also
proved correct. There are many other prophecies - some have already been
fulfilled, and others will surely be fulfilled.

**FREE FROM DISCREPANCIES**

"Do not they ponder on the Qur'an (with care)? Had it been from other
than Allah, they would surely find therein much discrepancy". (4:82) The
Qur'an is a Book which covers may subjects and events. Its topics are
not separated as is the case with scholar's books and theses. It
discusses many topics in one page at times, but without losing the
purpose and without going away from the main aim. The Qur'an is a book
that you enjoy reading; and the more you read it, the further the desire
to read it again. Indeed in every reading you see some horizons that you
had not seen before.

Considering the range of the topics the Qur'an comments on, the
repetition of some stories, the non-classification of the topics, it is
hard to find such a book without contradictions and errors. By human
standard, practically no book is free from mistakes whether it is on
history, physics, chemistry, astronomy or biology.

But here is a book, which was not written at one time. It is a
collection of piecemeal revelations, covering a span of about 23 years.
Can any scholar believe that any human being, unlettered, will remember
every single word, which he had uttered during the previous 23 years? It
is impossible and hence the chances of contradictions. But Qur'an has no
contradiction; and, according to that test, it is the word of Allah.
There is a tradition in al-Ihtijaj reporting that an atheist had
mentioned some ayat to Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) which he thought
were contradictory to each other. When Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
explained the meaning and purpose of those ayat, that atheist had to
admit that the Qur'an was free from discrepancies.

Leaving that lengthy report aside, I quote here a paragraph from a
shorter tradition in which Imam Ali (a.s.) had replied to a question of
similar nature put by a Kharijite, Abdullah ibn al-Kawwa'. The Kharijite
had claimed that the following three ayat contradicted one another:

1. But nay! I swear by the Lord of the [many] Easts and [many] Wests…
(70:40)
2. The Lord of the two Easts and the two Wests. (55:17)
3. The Lord of the Easts and the Wests… (73:9)

He thought it contradictory, because in one place it speaks of one East
and one West, while another ayah mentions two Easts and two Wests and
yet a third describes many Easts and many Wests. Imam Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.) showed that there was no discrepancy at all. The ayah speaking of
"the East and the West" refers to the two cardinal points; the one
mentioning "two Easts and two Wests" describes the two extreme points of
the sunrise and sunset of the winter and the summer, and the one of many
Easts and many Wests draws attention to the scientific exactitude
because every day the Sun rises and sets in a different place from the
previous day.

Thus we should understand that whatever word or expression is used in
the Qur'an it points out to one or the other great truth. Mankind will
gain much by pondering upon the words of God, which has come to us in
its purest form in the Qur'an.

**SCIENTIFIC REVELAITONS**

Now, a non-Arab may rightly wonder about the claim of the literary
miracle. He does not know Arabic, so miraculous aspect of the language
might not be appealing to him, or even to uneducated or half-educated
modern Arabs. The reason for the latter is the deterioration of the
colloquial Arabic and its distance from the classical standards.

Obviously in this era we are in need of a miracle in science, telling
us what is in the heavens and within ourselves. The Qur'an, although not
a scientific text, reveals many secrets and wonders of the heavens and
of ourselves as part of its call to believe in the Creator of Universe.
Now any person who wants to be a biologist, physicist or astronomer
needs to study for at least twenty years aided by sophisticated
machines, tools and libraries and under proper supervision. Then he
might be able to break through, and discover some of the hidden facts of
the nature. The Qur'an not only reveals many secrets of the Universe but
also is not confined to a special field of the science.

"See you not how Allah created seven heavens one above the other? And
made the moon a light therein, and the sun a lamp?" (71:15-16) The moon
is a solid object which reflects light, hence it is a "light". But the
sun is a source of energy and light, so it is a "lamp". "The sun and the
moon follow (their courses) according to a reckoning". (55:5) The sun is
not static but moving in a path exactly computed. Remember the
middle-ages' belief that the sun is the center of the universe and the
earth is a plane. Remember that for contrary belief scientists were
burned alive or imprisoned. And see that the Qur'an declared these facts
1400 years ago.

"And the sun is moving on the course determined for it. That is the
decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing; and the moon, we have measured
for it stages (to traverse) till it becomes like the old a date-stalk;
it is not permitted to the sun to catch up the moon, not can the night
outstrip the day; and each swims along in (its own) orbit". (36:38-40)
"Then turned He to the heaven which was yet a smoke, and said He unto it
and unto the earth 'Come both of you, willingly or reluctantly'. They
said: We come willingly". (41:11)

The heaven was smoke- which means dark and containing gas and steam. It
is the exact description of the so-called cloud in heaven as most
reliable recent discoveries reveal. "Allah it is who raised up the
heavens without visible supports, and He is firm in power, and made the
sun and the moon subservient, each runs unto an appointed term; He
regulates the affair; He makes clear the signs that you may be certain
of the meeting your Lord". (13:2) The invisible support, naturally,
means the force of gravitation that exists in the universe which holds
the planets apart and within a predetermined limit.

"O Company of Jinn and men, if you can penetrate the regions of the
heavens and the earth, then do penetrate (them): you will not penetrate
except with a power". (55:33)

This verse comes with undoubted encouragement to people to explore and
travel through the outer space. Here one should pause and think of the
society that the Holy Prophet was living in. The means of transport were
camels, horses and donkeys. The people lived in tents and worshipped
idols. They had not even dreamt of a car or an aero-plane or even an
engine of any kind. How the Qur'an puts such a high idea to encourage
people not only to fly but to travel to other planets and heavens? In
materialistic thinking this should be impossible, because they claim
that human thinking is a reflection of his material environment!

Then the only solution in this case is to believe that Qur'an was not a
product of human mind, but a revelation from Allah. No human being could
definitely put forth such an idea even if he were the greatest
astronomer or scientist. There are many verses of scientific nature and
there are many volumes dealing with them, but the Muslims have shut
their eyes from them. People in our time are proud of their knowledge,
and the Qur'an baffles them even now. There are so many examples that a
certain ayah remained a puzzle for commentators, until the discoveries
of recent times made its meaning clear. To quote two examples:

In the surah, 'the Believer', there is a verse: "And Pharaoh said, 'O
Haman, build for me a tower that I may reach the avenues, the avenues of
the heavens, and may mount to the God of Moses, for I verily deem him a
liar". (40:36-37)

Rev. J.M. Rodwell writes in its foot-note: "Haman, the favorite
Ahasuers and enemy of the Jews, is thus made the vizier of Pharaoh. The
Rabbis make this vizier to have been Korah, Jethro or Balaam"

The objection of Rev. J.M. Rodwell may be excused, because neither he
nor any Rabbi knew before this century that "Amon" was the name of the
great Egyptian deity who was often given the title "King of the gods".
He was patron of the most powerful pharaohs, and was pre-eminently the
national god. Its high priest also was given the name "Amon", and he was
responsible for all temples and religious buildings. All these things
have been discovered by excavations during the last 100 years. Now that
we know something about Amon and the high priest and the priest's
functions, does it seem strange that pharaoh should have asked Amon's
priest (also called Amon) to build a tower to look at the God of
Moses?

But these things were unknown 1400 years ago. Still the Qur'an used the
correct title of the priest and assigned to him the correct function.
Does anybody want more scientific miracles? This single verse is
sufficient to make one believe that this book is from God, not from any
human being. The second example is also connected with Pharaoh. Speaking
about the drowning of Pharaoh, Allah says in the QUR'AN:

"And We brought the children of Israel across the sea; the Pharaoh and
his hosts pursued them in rebellion and hostility; till, when drowning
overtook him, he said, 'I believe that there is no God but He in Whom
the children of Israel believe, and I am of those who submit to him.
'What! Now! While thou didst disobey before and waste of those who
create mischief. So this day We will save thee in thy body, that thou
may be a sign to those who come (after thee)". (10:90-92).

These 'AYAT clearly say that Pharaoh's body was recovered and it became
a sign of warning to later generations. But this thing is not mentioned
in the Bible. Still the QUR'AN claimed that the body of Pharaoh was
recovered. And 1300 years after that revelation, excavations have
brought into light that body which was mummified and preserved for
future generations, and even after these long centuries his face and
body clearly show the effect of drowning.

If the QUR'AN was the work of a man, how did he know of this fact which
was not known even to the Jews and the Egyptians of that time? An
extremely amazing quality of the QUR'AN is that many of its 'AYAT are
capable of multi-layered interpretations. Our Imams have described this
distinction in these terms: "The QUR'AN has an inner meaning and that
too has another inner meaning and it has an apparent meaning". And it is
worth noting that all strata of connotations are valid and correct.

For example, look at this verse: "Thou makes the night to enter into
the day and Thou makes the day to enter into the night…" (3:27). The
Muslim scholars have been explaining these sentences in terms of the
continuously changing lengths of days and nights, throughout the year.
In the northern hemisphere, from mid-winter to mid-summer, days become
longer and longer and nights shorter and shorter- it is the entering of
the day into the night. And from mid-summer to mid-winter, nights become
longer and longer and days shorter and shorter and shorter- it is the
entering of the night into the day. The position in the southern
hemisphere is just opposite. When the nights are longer in one
hemisphere, they are shorter in the other; the same happens with the
days. In this way, Allah is always making the day to enter into the
night, and the night to enter into the day.

This explanation is doubtlessly correct; but now we have witnessed
another phenomenon, which seems even more appropriate to these
sentences. MAURICE BUCAILLE has written: "{The astronauts have seen} how
the Sun permanently lights up (except in the case of an eclipse) the
half of the Earth's surface that is facing it, while the other half of
the globe is in darkness. The Earth turns on its own axis and the
lighting remains the same, so that an area in the form of a half-sphere
makes one revolution around the Earth in twenty-four hours while the
other half-sphere, that has remained in darkness, makes the same
revolution in the same time. This perpetual rotation of the night and
day is quite clearly described in the QUR'AN. It is easy for the human
understanding to grasp this notion nowadays because we have the idea of
the Sun's (relative) immobility and the Earth's rotation. This process
of perpetual coiling, including the interpenetration of one sector by
another is expressed in the QUR'AN…."

Now you see how the QUR'AN has an apparent meaning and then another
stratum of even more clear meaning. The same may happen in the cases of
inner meanings.

But mind it! We do not judge the QUR'AN by contemporary theories and
discoveries. Theories may change overnight; discoveries may be surpassed
by further discoveries. These are passing phases. But the word of Allah
is the eternal truth. Therefore, in our eyes QUR'AN is not to be tested
by ever-changing theories. These theories should be tested by QUR'AN. If
they are in total agreement with the QUR'AN we know that they are right
and correct. If not, then we shall wait till one day somebody discovers
something which will tally with the QUR'AN and then we shall know that
it was right.


**Miracles As The Best Code Of Life**

Islam is not just a relation between the Creator and man as is
understood in the West. Islam is a complete and perfect system of life,
arranging human relationship with Allah as well as among the people
themselves. The QUR'AN has not left or neglected any aspect of human
life without providing a code for it.

Economy is adjusted to achieve fair and just transaction and to
preserve the dignity of every individual. Politics is given special
attention since the course and stability of the society depends mainly
on the leader and administration. Social life is built and bonded
strongly in order to achieve maximum co-operation and cohesion.

Humanity has been striving to live under a system of justice, security
and happiness. But these fruits were never tasted under any man-made
system. Only the Islamic system, based on Divine revelation, has proved
to be the best and the most perfect code of life. Dealing with each
task. Hence confining ourselves to some brief examples is best suited
here.

For the economic system, the QUR'AN dictates two sets of fundamental
laws: The first set deals with immuring the society against unfair or
harmful transactions such as monopoly, usury, gambling, cheating etc. "O
you who believe! Intoxicants, gambling, dedication of stones, and
divination by arrows are an abomination of Satan's handicraft. Satan's
plan is but to excite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants and
gambling, and hinder you from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer.
Will not you then abstain"? (5:90-91).

The second set aims at reducing and lessening the accumulation of
wealth in a few hands. The QUR'AN has imposed taxes on rich people and
the money is spent on the needy people and social welfare. The says:
"….righteousness is rather one who…gives his wealth, out of love for
Him, to the kindred and the orphans and the poor and the wayfarer and to
those who ask and for those in bondage: and establish prayer and pay the
ZAKAH: and who fulfill their promise when they make a promise…"
(2:177).

It should be noted that some of these laws are compulsory such as ZAKAH
while others are voluntary. The QUR'AN does not deny the self-interest
of people and satisfies it fully by promising full reward in the life
hereafter for those who donate and sacrifice. But this is not the only
reward and satisfaction; they are promised a prosperous life in this
world too. This fact reveals itself by looking at the stable
co-operative society that Islam is aiming at. Naturally one of the very
important realities of a prosperous society is stability, i.e. freedom
from crimes, friction, envy, and hatred between different classes.

Social life is built on family units. "And your Lord has commanded that
you shall not worship any but Him and do goodness to parents…" (17:23).
Islam has given the family the greatest attention, realizing the
importance and weight that it bears on the whole society. First of all,
marriage is emphasized and it secures for both partners equality of
tights and restores their dignity. Then the QUR'AN came with the most
excellent bond which will keep the society coherent and healthy.
Wayfarers are enabled to reach their homes; the old people are respected
and looked after and the children are treated tenderly and brought up in
good conditions.

John William Draper writes: "The Koran abounds in excellent moral
suggestions and precepts; its composition is so fragmentary that we
cannot turn to a single page without finding maxims of which all men
must approve. This fragmentary construction yields texts, and mottos,
and rules complete in themselves, suitable for common men in any of the
incidents of life".

Rev. J.M RODWELL writes: "It must be acknowledged, too, that the Koran
deserves the highest praise for its conceptions of the Divine nature, in
reference to the attributes of power, knowledge, and universal
Providence and Unity-that its belief and trust in the One God of Heaven
and Earth is deep and fervent-and that…it embodies much of a noble and
deep moral earnestness, and sententious oracular wisdom, and has proved
that there are elements in it on which mighty nations and conquering…
empires can be built up".

**6. How To Interpret the QUR'AN**

I have been asked, "Must we always take the literal meaning of the
QUR'AN or metaphorical"? The answer is already given in the third
chapter of the QUR'AN: "He it is Who has sent down to thee the Book, of
it there are decisive verses: they are the bases of the Book; and others
(which are) ambiguous. But those in whose hearts is perversity pursue,
forsooth, that which is ambiguous, seeking to cause mischief and seeking
to explain it (as they like)". (3:7).

Every literary work has some plain sentences and some metaphorical, and
the QUR'AN is no exception. Unfortunately, some sects like the
WAHHABIYAH do not see the point and try to explain the metaphorical
passages too in literal way. This trend has caused many absurdities. As
a matter of fact, the portions dealing with legal matters (the SHARI'AH)
are decisive and clear; they are not allegorical. Other passages are
sometimes clear and sometimes allegorical. Allegorical passages should
be explained with the help of relevant clear verses and as taught by the
Prophet and the Imams. That, and that alone, will be the true
interpretation.

To interpret the QUR'AN by twisting its meanings, or to try to find an
interpretation which suits one's fancy, is a capital sin. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) has said: "He who interprets the QUR'AN according to
his own views should prepare his seat in the Fire (of Hell)". On the
other hand, many AYAT of the QUR'AN invite mankind to ponder upon its
meaning. How can these two directives be reconciled? It is very easy:
First, learn all those subjects which are necessary to understand the
QUR'AN.

Secondly, mould your thinking according to the teachings of the Holy
Prophet and his rightful successors. Thirdly, remove all personal
prejudice and preferences from your mind. Lastly, ponder upon the AYAT
of the QUR'AN and follow them wherever they may lead you. Do not try to
lead the AYAT to your goal. When you will ponder upon the QUR'AN in this
way, with full knowledge and mature mind, without trying to mould the
QUR'AN according to your preconceived ideas, and with a desire to mould
your thinking in the light of the QUR'AN, you will find the right
answer.

**AN EXAMPLE OF ABSURD INTERPRETATION**

ANAS relates that "the Holy Prophet was playing with children when
Gabriel descended, and putting him down on the ground, Gabriel opened
the breast of the Prophet. He took out some thick blood from his heart,
and said that so much was the part of the Satan in him. Then he washed
his heart with water of the ZAMZAM, in a gold basin, and having washed
it properly, put it back into his chest and put stitches over it. When
the children saw this, they ran to HALIMAH, his nurse, and told her that
Muhammad was killed. When the people came, they saw that the color of
his face had faded away.

This absurdity needs no comment. Alfred Guillaume says, "Really, what
is the basis of this story is difficult to say, except that people have
tried to put literal meaning to the literary aspect of the verse, 'Have
We not expanded for thee thy breast? (94:1)'.

This idea gets strengthened further by the fact that this fiction is
related to have taken place at different times from early childhood till
the time of the Ascension. The author of RAWDATU S-SAFA has compounded
the absurdity by concluding that this incident must have happened more
than once; as if, God forbid, the Holy Prophet's condition was such that
every time Gabriel cleansed away the satanic portion from his heart, the
Satan got the upper hand! No doubt, this is the result of commenting on
the verses of QUR'AN, without the guidance of the Prophet or his Holy
Family.

Guillaume says, "On the basis of this false story, the Arabic Scholars
of the last generation propounded the hypothesis that Muhammad suffered
form Epilepsy…. To propound such a theory on the basis of a fiction
which has apparently no historical truth is a sin against historical
criticism and research".

In fact the verse, "Have We not expanded for thee thy breast"?
signifies exactly what the expanding of breast signifies elsewhere. For
example, see the following two verses : "So (for) whomsoever Allah
intends that He should guide him aright, He expands his breast for
Islam…" (6:126) (Moses) said, "O my Lord, expand my breast for me".
(20:25). The expansion of breast signifies in fact, as a commentator
puts it "its illumination with wisdom and its vastness for the reception
of what was to be revealed to him".

**ANOTHER EXAMPLE THE FRAUD OF NUMBER 19**

Even more damaging to Islam has been the latest example of unauthorized
interpretation of the QUR'AN by one American named RASHAD KHALIFA, and
his fraudulent claim in the beginning that the QUR'AN was safe from
alteration. Unfortunately, a vast majority of the Muslims swallowed his
bait gladly. They forgot the admonition of the Leader of the faithful,
IMAM ALI (A.S), that when a person listens to someone's words, he in
fact worships him; if the words are from Allah, then he worships Allah,
but if not then he worships Satan. Unfortunately the common people are -
to use again the words of ALI (A.S)-followers of every croaking crow
(ATBA'U KULLI NA'IQ). They blindly accept whatever claim is made by any
charlatan-especially if it comes from Europe and America, and is
presented in an attractive packing. Previously that packing was the
word, "science", nowadays it is "computer"!! So RASHAD KHALIFA used the
word "computer" to make the Muslims believe what he claimed. And he
planned his moves very carefully.

First, he took the verse 30 of the 74th chapter (AL MUKKATHTHIR) out of
its context to "prove" that it pointed to the "code of 19". The verse
says, "over it are nineteen". In fact, it clearly speaks about the
number of the wardens of hell. It occurs in a well-connected speech
which begins from verse 11 and ends at verse 31. the verse 26 to 31 are
presented here to give a clear picture:

I will cast him into hell. And what will make you realize what hell is.
It leaves naught nor does it spare aught. If scorches the mortal. Over
it are nineteen. And we have not made the wardens of the fore other than
angels, and We have not made their number but as a trial for those who
disbelieve…

Although RASHAD KHALIFA was of Arab origin, it is surprising that he
was unaware of such elementary grammatical facts that all names of hell
were of feminine gender, whereas the word "al-QUR'AN" (as well the
adjectives used for it, like, DHIKR, FURQAN, NUR AND KITAB) were of
masculine gender; and that the pronoun in this verse is feminine. This
unawareness led him to think that the verse meant: "Over the QUR'AN are
nineteen". He did not realize that the Arabic pronoun HA (translated
here as "it") is of feminine gender and refers to hell; had it referred
to the QUR'AN, it would have been of masculine gender, HI.

We do not wish to labor on his erudition and knowledge of Arabic or
Islam. One more example will be of interest to the readers. He writes in
his monthly bulletin, Muslim Perspective (April 1985), that UMAR IBN
AL-KHATTAB was the Prophet's son-in law.

BISMI 'L-LAHI 'R-RAHMANI 'R-RAHIM is a part of every chapter of the
QUR'AN except the 9th. This is the belief of the SHI'AHS, the SHAFI'IS,
the AHLU'L-HABIT and many other groups. RASHAD KHALIFA himself says in
his book, QURAN; Visual Presentation of the Miracle (p.74), that this
"statement" has come 113 times in the beginnings of the SURAHS, and once
within the text of the SURAH 27 (verse 30); thus restoring its frequency
to 114 (19x6). He also counts various letters from BISMI 'L-LAHI
'R-RAHMANI 'R-RAHIM at the beginning of various SURAHS, when it suits
his purpose. Yet he counts its words only at the beginning of the first
chapter (AL-FATIHAH); and does not include the remaining 112 ISM, ALLAH,
RAHMAN and RAHIM when counting these words in the QUR'AN.

It should be mentioned here that every word of the QUR'AN is counted
and enumerated in detail by many authors, the most popular being
AL-MU'JAMU 'L-MUFAHRAS of MUHAMMAD FU'AD 'ABDU 'L-BAQI, of Egypt, which
is used in the Muslim word since last many decades. Yet there are a few
omissions in it. A later work, AL-MU'JAMU 'L-IHSA'I, by DR. MAHMUD
RUHANI is more complete and trustworthy.

RASHAD KHALIFA twice revised his "computerized" total. According to his
count, ISM has come in the QUR'AN only 19 times. But what about 112 ISM
in "BISMI 'L-LAHI 'R-RAHMANI 'R-RAHIM"? He first said, ALLAH has come
2698 times (19x142). Then he said it was 2699 times. Apparently his
first count was based not on 'computer' but on the above-mentioned,
AL-MU'JAMU 'L-MUFAHRAS in which ALLAH of the BISMILLAH of the first
SURAH is left out by mistake (although the other 3 words have been
counted). Be as it may. But his revised number, 2699, shatters his
theory. Actually it is neither 2698 nor 2699; it has come 2811 times
(2699+112) which also is not divisibly by 19.

On the one hand, he says AR-RAHMAN has come 57 times only. But, on the
other hand, while counting the letters ALIF, LAM RA, HA, MIM and NUN of
this word, he even counts the ones found in BISMI 'L-LAHI 'R-RAHMANI
'R-RAHIM of many SURAHS. Then how can he leave out the complete word
AR-RAHMAN in those 112 verses. The total number 169 (57+112) is not
divisible by 19. Likewise AR-RAHIM is not used 114 times as he claims,
but 115 times. If we add to it 112, the total is 227. Both 115 and 227
are not divisible by 19.

KHALIFA was so arrogant that he did not hesitate in committing
alteration (TAHRIF) in the QUR'AN. For example, in the SURAH 68 AL-QALA,
the letter NUN (ن) even including the one found in AR-RAHMAN of
BISMILLAH comes to 132. But he needed 133 letters to make it divisible
by 19. So e wrote the NUN in the beginning of the SURAH phonetically as
(نون) claiming that it was written like this in the original QUR'AN! His
audacity is truly amazing. Where did he find the original QUR'AN? The
oldest extant copy of the QUR'AN is the one belonging to the third
caliph, UTHMAN; and there too it is written (ن ) (and not نون). He did
not have the honesty to admit that his theory was wrong; he was ready to
play with the QUR'AN and commit TAHRIF to prove that there was no
TAHRIF!!

There are many examples of such deception - compounded by his ignorance
of Arabic. He has claimed in his above-mentioned book that the first
revelation, i.e. the first five verse of the SURAH 96, contain 19 words.
Now, words may be nouns, verbs, pronouns, conjunctions or prepositions.
Therefore, if we thoroughly count the words in these five verses, the
total comes to 24, not 19. But RASHAD KHALIFA'S ignorance made him count
the following 9 words as 4:

بسم = ب and اسم = 2 words. ربك = رب and ك = 2 words. وربك = رب, و and ك
= 3 words. بالقلم = ب and القلم = 2 words. Unfortunately, Muslims
swallowed his baits line, hook and sinker in the name of "mathematical
proof" of the truth of the QUR'AN. They remained bli8nd to the TAHRIF
being done by RASHAD KHALIFA himself. A sincere Muslim like AHMAD DEEDAT
in his uncritical admiration of RASHAD KHALIFA'S theory popularized this
myth through his lectures, booklets and videos beyond the wildest dreams
of RASHAD KHALIFA.

Then after all that hullabaloo about the previously "definite"
computerized proof and test, RASHAD KHALIFA wrote in his news -
bulletin, Muslim Perspective, that further checking's had shown that his
theory of 19 could only be correct if the last two verses of the 9th
chapter (AT-TAWBAH) were removed. Even then, instead of admitting that
his theory was wrong, he boldly and shamelessly declared that, God
forbid, these two verses were "interpolation", added by someone in the
QUR'AN! What a champion of the QUR'AN who claims that there was TAHRIF
in the QUR'AN in order to prove that there was no TAHRIF!!

Why pick particularly on these two verses? First let us look at their
wording and theme:

Certainly a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate, merciful (RAHIM). But it
they turn back, say; "ALLAH is sufficient for me, there is no god but
He; on Him do I rely, and He is the Lord of mighty power".

1. The Wording: there is one RAHIM and one ALLAH in these verses. If
they could be discarded, the total number of ALLAH would come to 2698,
and of RAHIM to 114. {In fact, even these two numbers are not correct,
as I have described earlier}.

2. The Theme: The verses show the love and mercy, which the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) had for his UMMAH; and on reciting them, the Muslims,
in their turn, felt intense love for their Prophet. This love and
respect has been and is the major obstacle in the way of those who want
to claim prophet-hood after the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.).

3. And by claiming that these verses were interpolated, RASHAD KHALIFA
discredited the QUR'AN and paved the way for his own claim of
"messenger-ship".

He says in his translation of the QUR'AN that these verses were added
by the companions who had "idolized" Muhammad. According to him, it was
to eradicate that "idolizing of Muhammad" that Ali had to fight against
MU'AWIYAH, and it was for this reason that HUSAYN offered his life in
KARBALA! Have you ever heard of such fantastic research in Islamic
history, theology, 'ILMU 'R-RIJAL and TAFSIR? However, after this
audacity, he has felt bold enough to claim that he was a messenger sent
by ALLAH. He said that although the Holy Prophet of Islam was the final
Prophet (NABI), he was not the last messenger (RASUL).

This man did not know even the elementary things about Islam. He was
not aware that prophet-hood (NUBUWWAH) is the basic root, from which
messenger-ship (RISALAH) branches out. Every messenger has to be a
prophet, but not vice versa. The QUR'AN, by using the words, {KHATAMU
N-NABIYYIN- the last of the Prophets} or as RASHAD KHALIFA says, the
final prophet, for Muhammad S.A.W.) Has shut the door of the
prophet-hood as well as the messenger-ship.

As every charlatan is sure to get a few followers, he too got a handful
of believers in his (messenger-ship). According to them, the
declaration, I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,
said in KALIMAH, ADHAN, IQAMAH and elsewhere is SHIRK (polytheism). They
have drastically changed the method of SALAT and many other rules and
regulations of the SHARI\`AH \_all in the name of (QURAN) {RASHAD
KHALIFA always wrote \`QURAN\`, while the correct transliteration is
QUR\`AN}.

There is a lesson in this unsavory episode for those who were
glorifying FASHAD KHALIFA and translating his books and writings in
Persian, Arabic, Urdu, Gujarati and other languages. Perhaps now the
Muslims would realize that such blind acceptance of the words of every
Tom, Dick and Harry, however religious he might appear, may easily take
them to the brink of hell.

**7. ORIENTALISTS ON THE QUR\`AN**

The following few quotations from the writing of some non-Muslims show
what impact the Holy Book of Allah has had on them. Rev. J.M. RODWELL
quotes Rev. G. MARGOLIOUTH in the Introduction of his translation of The
Koran: (The Koran admittedly occupies an important position among the
great religious books of the world. Though the youngest of the
epoch-making works belonging to this class of literature, yields to
hardly any in the wonderful effect, which it has produced on large
masses of men. It has created an all but new phase of human thought and
a fresh type of character).

A.J. ARBERRY advises the Western readers on the study of QUR\`AN: (Bad
translation is not the whole story by any means. In fact the Koran has
not been unlucky in its English translators: Sale and Palmer were
talented writers. No, the fault lies not so much in the manner of
translation as in the manner of reading the translations. The root of
the trouble is that the ordinary reader, and for that matter the
extraordinary reader as well, has not been sufficiently advised how to
read the Koran.

(In the fist place, the Western reader must get rid of the assumptions
that the Koran is more or less like the Old Testament. The
misapprehension is natural enough when the first casual glance picks out
the names of Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, Solomon, Jonah, Joseph, Job;
the Biblical style of the popular translations does not furnish exactly
a corrective. Misled by these early expressions, the reader makes the
fatal mistake of trying to take it too much at once; he opens at a
likely place,

the beginning of a SURAH, and is lulled into suspicion by the familiar
layout of chapter and verse; he finishes his first SURAH and goes on to
several more; he is bewildered by the rapid and seemingly illogical
changes of subjects and he quickly wearies of the frequent repetitions
of themes and formulas, he misses the homely straightforwardness of
Kings or Samuel, the sustained eloquence of the Psalm or Isaiah. Having
no clue to the Koran's own Excellencies he compares it unfavorably with
what he has known since childhood, and is now ready to concur with
Carlyle.

(The Koran, like the poetry which it resembles in so many ways, is best
sampled a little at a time; and that little deserves and needs
meditation.. He (the reader) will become gradually familiar with the
Koran's claim to be a confirmation of earlier scriptures. He will
observe how the Koran assumes a knowledge of the contents of those
scriptures, and only latter expands the individual narratives into
something like connected stories. He now follows step by step the
gradual unfolding of the full prophetic powers; and when he comes to the
polemic and the legislation he is readier to receive and understand
them.

(He, the uninitiated enquirer, however strenuous and sincere his
purpose, will always be denied participation in the believer's joy
because he is screened from it by the double veil of a printed page and
a foreign idiom. Yes, a foreign idiom, for the Koran is God's revelation
in Arabic, and the emotive and evocative qualities of the original
disappear almost totally in the skilful-lest translation.

When appreciation rests upon these foundations, the charges of
wearisome repetition and jumbled confusion become meaningless. Truth
cannot be dimmed by being frequently stated, but only gains in clarity
and convincingness at every repetition; and where all is true,
inconsequence and incomprehensibility are not felt to arise.


