The Style of Ahadiths Books
===========================

The recording of traditions varied in size and style as follows:

1. A narrator would record one long tradition on one subject. For
example, SALMAN recorded the HADITH of literature was of this type.

2. Others collected the AHADITH of one subject in one booklet. During
the period of Imams (a.s) thousands of such booklets were written. The
collection was usually known by the subject; such as "KITABU 'S-SALAH-
the Book of Prayer", "KITABU 'L-HAJJ- the Book of Pilgrimage" etc.

3. Some narrators collected AHADITH of different subjects in one
volume. Such collections were called "AN-NAWADIR".

4. Many companions noted down whatever HADITH they heard from Imams,
without any distinction of subject and without dividing them into
chapters. Such collections were known as "ASL" (pl. USUL), foundation.
Four hundred such USUL were prevalent among the SHI'AS at the time of
the death of Imam HASAN AL-'ASKARI (A.S.).

These four hundred USUL were most popular of all collections and they
formed the main source of the tenets, beliefs and laws of SHI'A ITHNA
ASHARI faith.

However, there were many difficulties in relation to the
above-mentioned four styles of HADITH collection:

Firstly, as there was no press in those days, those USUL and other
HADITH literature were not easily available everywhere. The persecution
of the SHI'AS compounded the problem by making the owners
extraordinarily cautious: they did not give their copies except to those
whom they fully trusted. Secondly, none of those four hundred USUL
contained AHADITH concerning all aspects of religion in one place.
Moreover, they were not divided according to subject. This resulted in
great difficulty for anyone trying to find the relevant HADITH.

Thirdly, there was a danger that these treasures of religious knowledge
would be lost forever due to the persecution of the SHI'AS and also
because of the difficulty in obtaining and preserving the four hundred
USUL.

**THE FOUR BOOKS (AL-KUTUBU'L-ARB'AH).**

These problems warranted the need for a new style in recording in which
the AHADITH from all available sources be collected and arranged
subject-wise, divided into chapters and sections. Such collections were
called "KITAB-Book". However, the words ASL and KITAB are usually
interchangeable.

The need for this type of HADITH collection was felt by the SHI'A
scholars after the death of Imam HASAN AL-ASDARI (A.S.). They believed
that if the AHADITH in those USUL were collected in one book and divided
subject-wise into parts, chapters and sections, it would fulfill a great
need of the time since handling one book would be much easier than four
hundred booklets. This would also ensure the preservation of that vast
treasure of knowledge.

It was, however, not an easy task: collecting the USUL from far and
wide was an uphill task in itself; then editing and arranging them was
another painstaking job. All eyes turned to THIQATU 'L-ISLAM ABU JA'FAR
MUHAMMAD IBN YA'QUB AL-KULAYNI AR-RAZI. When pressure mounted, he
accepted the responsibility. This was during the Minor Occultation of
our Twelfth Imam who was accessible to the people only through his
special deputies who resided in Baghdad.

ABU JA'FAR AL-KULAYNI was the religious head of the SHI'A in Ray (near
Tehran) and had moved to Baghdad just two years before his death. He
spent twenty years of his life in collecting AHADITH, several times
traveling to other places and obtaining as many USUL as he could. Thus,
after twenty years of continuous backbreaking effort AL-KAFI came into
being.

AL-KAFI alone contains more AHADITH than all the six books
(AS-SIHAHAS -SITTAH) of the SUNNIS put together. It is divided into
three parts: AL-USUL (related to matters of belief) in 2 volumes;
AL-FURU (related to SHARI'AH laws) in 5 volumes; and AR-RAWDAH, one
volume. Each volume is divided in sections, and in all there are thirty
sections, containing 16199 traditions.

AL-KULAYNI was born in 260 AH and died in 329 AH/941 CE. In other
words, his life began and ended with the Minor Occultation. Other
scholars also collected the AHADITH from other books and USUL. The most
famous among them are:

ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD IBN ALI IBN HUSAYN IBN MUSA IBN BABUWAYH AL-QUMMI,
popularly known as SHAYKH AS-SADUQ (born cir. 306 AH; died 381 AH/991
CE) wrote MAN LA YAHDURUHU 'L-FAQIH. This book contains 5963 AHADITH
divided into 666 chapters.

ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD IBN HASAN IBN ALI AT-TUSI, popularly known as
SHAYKHU 'T-TA'IFAH and SHAYKH AT-TUSI (born 385 AH; died 466 AH/1067 CE)
wrote TAHDHIBU 'L-AHKAM and AL-ISTIBSAR. TAHDHIBU 'L-AHKAM has 393
chapters with 13590 AHADITH; and AL-ISTIBSAR has 925 (or 915) chapters
containing 5511 AHADITH.

The later two books opened the way of critical study of AHADITH, and
thus laid the foundation of IJTIHAD.

You may have noticed that all three authors of these four books were
named "Muhammad" and all had the KUNYAH of "ABU JA'FAR". In 448 AH, the
SUNNIS of Baghdad attacked the SHI'AS and burned the house of SHAYKH
AT-TUSI and his library, which contained many unique manuscripts.
Disheartened, he left Baghdad and went to Najaf. His disciples and
seeders of knowledge followed him: this was the beginning of the town
and the religious university of Najaf.

Many other collections of AHADITH were written in the period under
review, but only these four became popular and famous. There was another
collection, MADINATU 'L-ILM, by SHAYKH AS-SADUQ which would have formed,
in view of SHI'A scholars, as the fifth of the "Early Books", if it
would not have been lost.

A point, which students of HADITH must bear in mind, is that if a
HADITH is found in any of the above-mentioned four books, it does not
necessarily follow that that "HADITH" is authentic. On the other hand,
if a HADITH is found in other collections and fulfils all the required
conditions, then it will be accepted as authentic even if it is not
found in the four books.

**THE THREE LATER BOOKS**

In later period the following collections of AHADITH became very
popular:

1. MUHAMMAD IBN MURTADA IBN MAHMUD, popularly known as MULLA MUHSIN
FAYD AL-KASHANI (d. 1091 AH/1680 CE) wrote AL-WAFI.

2. SHAYKH MUHAMMAD IBN HASAN AL-HURR AL-'AMILI (d. 1104 AH/1692 CE)
wrote WASA'ILU'SH-SHI'A. its new edition has been printed in 20 volumes;
and contains 35850 AHADITH.

3. MUHAMMAD BAQIR IBN MUHAMMAD TAQI, popularly known as ALLAMAH MAJLISI
(d. 1111 AH/1700 CE) wrote BIHARU 'L-ANWAR in 26 bulky volumes. Its new
edition in typescript has been published in 110 volumes.

It is interesting to note that these three traditionalists were also
named Muhammad. They are called "the later three MUHAMMADS". In the 14th
century, SHAYKH HUSAYN NURI (1254-1320 AH) wrote MUSTADRAKU 'L-WASA'IL
in 1319 AH. It contains 23,000 AHADITH. With the exception of AL-KAFI
and BIHARU'L-ANWAR, the other six collections are confined to the
AHADITH related to the SHARI'AH laws. Among them, AL-WAFI is considered
the best in style, classification and other distinctions.

In our times, a new collection, known as JAMI'U AHADITHI'SH-SHI'AH, is
being prepared and published which is sure to eclipse all the
above-mentioned six collections. This work began by order and under
patronage of the late AYATULLAH SAYYID HUSAYN AL-BURUJARDI (d. 1380 AH)
in QUM. The project has continued under patronage of succeeding MARAJI',
and is nearing completion. So far 25 volumes have been published.

**THE SUNNI COLLECTIONS**

It will not be out of place to give here the names of some famous
collections of AHADITH written by the SUNNI scholars:

1. IMAM MALIK IBN ANAS IBN MALIK (d. 175 AH/795 CE) wrote AL-MUWATTA.

2. IMAM MUHAMMAD IBN ISLAM'IL AL-BUKHARI (d. 256 AH/870 CE) wrote SAHIH
AL-BUKHARI,

3. IMAM MUSLIM IBN HAJJAJ AN-NISHAPURI (d. 261 AH/875 CE) wrote SAHIH
MUSLIM.

4. HAFIZ MUHAMMAD IBN YAZID IBN MAJAH AL-QAZWINI (d. 264 AH/886 CE)
wrote AS-SUNAN.

5. HAFIZ ABU DAWUD SULAYMAN IBN ASH'ATH AS-SIJISTANI (d. 275 AH) wrote
his AS-SUNAN.

6. HAFIZ ABU 'ISA MUHAMMAD IBN 'ISA IBN SURA AT-TIRMIDHI (d. 279 AH/893
CE) wrote AL-JAMI', known as SAHIH AT-TIRMIDHI.

7. IMAM ABU 'ABDI 'R-RAHMAN AHMAD IBN SHU'AYB AN-NASA'I (d. 303 AH/915
CE) wrote his AS-SUNAN. He also wrote AL-KHASA'IS.

The books nos. 2 to 7 are jointly known as AS-SIHAH AS-SITTA (The Six
Authentic Books) among SUNNIS.

8. The son of IMAM AHMAD IBN HANBAL collected his AHADITH, which is
known as MUSNAD of IMAM AHMAD IBN HANBAL. (IMAM AHMAD IBN HANBAL died in
241 AH/855 CE). This book is thought by many SUNNIS to be as authentic
as AS-SIHAH AS-SITTA.

9. IMAM ABUL QASIM SULAYMAN IBN AHMAD AT-TABARANI (d. 360 AH) wrote
AL-MU'JAMU 'L-KABIR.

10. IMAM MUHAMMAD IBN ABDULLAH AL-HAKIM AN-NISHAPURI (d. 405 AH) wrote
AL-MUSTADRAK 'ALA'S-SAHHAYN.

11. IMAM ABDU R-RAHMAN JALALU 'D-DIN AS-SUYUTI (d. 911 AH) wrote JAMU'
'L-JAWAMI'.

12. SHAYKH MULLA ALI IBN HUSAMU 'D-DIN AL-MUTTQI AL-HINDI (d. 975 AH)
edited the book of AS-SUYUTI and named it KANZU 'L-UMMAL.

It should be noted again that being included in, or excluded from,
these books has no effect upon the authenticity or otherwise of a given
HADITH. As the writer of MISHKATU 'L-MASABIH says, "The books of
AS-SIHAH AS-SITTA contain all types of HADITH: SAHIH, HASAN and DA'IF".
Not only that. A thorough study will show that there are even many
forged and completely baseless "AHADITH" in these books; therefore,
every HADITH has to be judged on its own merits.

5.The Problem of Fabrication & Its Solution

MAWDU' literally means forged. In Islamic terminology it is used for a
"HADITH" which is not from any MA'SUM but has been forged by someone and
attributed to a MA'SUM. It is HARAM and strictly unlawful to narrate a
MAWDU' "HADITH" except when it is first declared to be forged. It is an
extremely painful tragedy of early Islamic period that a good number of
the companions of the Holy Prophet and many of their disciples used to
fabricate AHADITH for material benefits or for the sake of sectarian
polemics. It is not possible to give full detail of this tragedy here. I
will enumerate some of the causes, which prompted such unscrupulous
persons to lie against the Holy Prophet and Imams:

1. Some people fabricated AHADITH to please the rulers.

2. Others fabricated AHADITH on the spur of the moment to fit it in
their talks so that their popularity brings them worldly gains.

3. Many apparently pious people forged AHADITH to exhort their audience
to do good work. Such AHADITH are found mostly on the subject of
abstaining from worldly affairs and in sermons dealing with ethics.

4. Many people forged AHADITH to support their own religious views. For
examples, the atheists (ZANADIQA) forged at least 12,000 AHADITH and
attributed them to the Holy Prophet. A KHARIJITE said after repenting
from his previous belief; "Be careful in listening to AHADITH; because
we used to forge HADITH whenever we wanted to support an opinion". Also
those people who believed that Imams were gods fabricated AHADITH in
support of their belief.

5. MU'AWIYAH and his successor UMAYYAD rulers started wholesale
fabrication of AHADITH in praise of the first three KHALIFAS and in
condemnation of Imam Ali and his family (a.s).

Muslim history records that in the beginning of the UMAYYAD rule, those
people who forged 'the saying of the Prophet' according to the wishes of
the rulers, were greatly encouraged. They were given handsome presents
and heavy monthly allowances and thus they were immensely enriched. And
those who dared mention any true saying of the Prophet which happened to
be against the desires and wishes of the rulers, were denied their basic
rights and their names were removed from the roll of BAYTU 'L-MAL
(public treasury). Such a person was turned away from the courts of the
rulers and his statements were treated as false and were rejected.

It is clear that those sayings of the Prophet, which were against the
policy of the government, had more chances of being genuine than those,
which were in favor of the reigning group. Those who wrote against the
government were always in danger of losing their lives, property and
honor. On the other hand, those who wrote for the government had a
strong worldly motive to coin stories and forge traditions. The
political needs of those sovereigns gave rise to many things in the
HADITH corpus, which were totally against the Islamic tenets.

Some examples have been given in my other books. See for example, the
comment of 'ALLAMAH SHIBLI on the belief of predestination of man's
actions (in Justice of God) and the controversy about MI'RAJ- ascension
of the Holy Prophet (in The Holy Prophet).

One more example may be given here of such "AHADITH" which attribute
sins to the previous prophets and to the Holy Prophet of Islam. Most of
the rulers who are regarded as caliphs according to the SUNNI belief,
were fallible (non-MA'SUM), and most of them (especially from the
UMAYYADS and then, the ABBASIDS) were of very low moral standard; they
were more depraved than even a common man. 'ALLAMAH SHIBLI has slightly
hinted at it, in the statement quoted in Justice of God. Under these
circumstances, it was the easiest thing for saving their skins from
various charges, to invent stories and coin AHADITH to show that even
the Holy Prophet Himself was not free from sins; and, therefore, there
was no harm if those caliphs were guilty of various sins and crimes.

These "traditions" were forged by some companions of the Holy Prophet
like ABU HURAYRAH and his ilk. It is interesting to note that ABU
HURAYRAH accepted Islam at the end of the 7th year of HIJRA and remained
with the Holy Prophet for about 3 years only during which, period he
also went to Bahrain. And he claimed to hear in such a short period so
many things from the Holy Prophet that exceed by far the total AHADITH
narrated in SUNNI books from the first four caliphs (ABU BAKR, UMAR,
ALI), the lady FATIMAH, all wives of the Holy Prophet (including
AISHAH), and HASAN and HUSAYN. Traditionalists have counted that there
are 5374 AHADITH narrated by ABU HURAYRAH. Now look at The AHADITH of
some of the above mentioned personalities recorded in SUNNI books:

- ABU BAKR: 142 AHADITH
- UMAR: 537 AHADITH
- UTHMAN: 146 AHADITH
- ALI (A.S): 586 AHADITH
- TOTAL 1411 AHADITH

And these 4 KHALIFAS had spent together a total of about 86 years with
the Holy Prophet. Now compare 1411 AHADITH in 86 years with 5374 AHADITH
in less than 3 years!!!

What is more tragic is that ABU HURAYRAH is not alone. There are scores
like him, and their "AHADITH" have found place in all SUNNI books
because they were companions of the Holy Prophet! It is such AHADITH
which serve as the armory for the enemies of Islam, who use them to cast
doubt on the character, sincerity, integrity and truth of the Holy
Prophet on Islam.


