Preface
=======

Three years had passed since the commencement of the prophetic mission
of the Prophet. After inviting his nearest kinsfolk the Prophet resorted
to general invitation. During these three years he had guided some
persons by special contacts to accept the Islamic faith but this time he
invited the general public openly to the religion of worshipping Allah
the One and the Unique One. One day he took his place on a high rock and
said aloud: 'Ya Sabahah'! [^1]

The Holy Prophet's call received attention. Some persons belonging to
different families of Quraysh ran up to him. Then he turned to those
assembled there and said: "O people! Will you believe me if I tell you
that your enemies have taken positions on the other side of this hill (
Safa) and intend attacking your lives and property?" All of them said We
have never heard anything false from you throughout our lives . Then he
said: "O people of Quraysh! Save yourselves from fire. I cannot do
anything for you in the presence of Allah. I warn you of painful
torture!" Then he added: "My position is like that of a watchman who
observes an enemy at a far-off point and immediately runs to his people
for their safety and warns them of the impending danger by saying 'Ya
Sabahah' in the particular manner".

These sentences indicate the basis of his invitation and religion.
Quraysh were more or less aware of his religion but these sentences
created such a fear in their hearts that one of the leaders of
infidelity (Abu Lahab) broke the silence of the people and said: "Woe be
to you! Did you call us for this thing?" Then the people dispersed


