The Role of Faith and Fortitude
===============================

The secret of everyone's success lies in two things: Firstly faith in
one's aim and secondly steadfastness and effort in the path of its
attainment. Faith is the inner stimulant which perforce pushes man to
his object and invites him day and night to attain his aim because he
firmly believes that his welfare supremacy prosperity and good end are
associated with it. And in view of the interest which man takes in
himself whenever he develops faith and confidence the strength of his
faith automatically directs and persuades him to overcome all
difficulties and keeps him away from every doubt notwithstanding the
fact that his prosperity may be dependent upon the attainment of a
specific target. For example a sick man who knows that his remedy and
welfare lies in taking a bitter medicine takes it easily and a diver who
believes that there are precious gems beneath the tides of the sea
throws himself into the mouth of the tides without any apprehension; and
returns to surface after achieving his purpose.

However if the ailing person or the diver are doubtful about the
achievement of their objects or do not at all believe in the usefulness
of their job they either do not take any steps in that direction or even
if they do they are faced with hardship and anguish. Hence it is the
very strength of belief and faith which solves all difficulties.

Nevertheless there is no doubt about the fact that achievement of one's
target is associated with difficulties and obstacles. It is therefore
necessary for us to combat against those hurdles and to make necessary
efforts in that behalf so that all the obstacles may be removed with our
full might. It has been said since olden times that wherever there is a
flower (a prized object) there is also a thorn (difficulty) with it. The
flower should therefore be plucked in such a way that the thorn does not
prick one's hands or feet.

The Holy Qur'an has mentioned this subject (that the secret of success
lies in faith in one's aim and steadfastness in its attainment) in a
short sentence and has said: "As for those who say: 'Our Lord is Allah '
and take the right path.........." (Surah al-Fussilat 41:30). (Viz.
those who have faith in Allah and believe in a particular aim and then
display steadfastness and fortitude will definitely achieve their object
and are helped by the angels).

**STEADFASTNESS AND FORTITUDE OF THE HOLY PROPHET**

As a result of the special contacts of the Prophet before the 'general
invitation' and his indefatigable efforts thereafter a selected and
faithful team came into existence against the forces of infidelity and
idolatry. The Muslims who had embraced Islam secretly before the
'general invitation' developed complete acquaintance with those who
responded to the Prophet's call thereafter and the bells of danger rang
in all the assemblies of infidelity and polytheism. No doubt it was
quite easy for the strong and well-equipped Quraysh to crush a
newly-born movement but the reason for their being afraid was that the
members of the movement did not belong to only one family but persons
belonging to various families had also embraced Islam. Hence it was not
easy for Quraysh to take a decisive action.

After mutual consultations the chiefs of Quraysh decided to remove the
very foundation of this faith and the founder of the new religion by
different means. They proposed to achieve this purpose by approaching
him sometimes with allurements and at other times by extending to him
various promises and occasionally by using threats and torture. For ten
years Quraysh behaved in this manner and eventually they decided to kill
the Holy Prophet. In order to save him therefore Allah ordered him to
quit Makkah.

During the aforesaid period the chief of the family of Bani Hashim was
Abu Talib. He was a man who possessed a noble nature and a magnanimous
spirit and his house was an asylum for the needy and the orphans.
Besides being the chief of Makkah and possessing some offices with
regard to the Holy Ka'bah he enjoyed a very high position in the Arab
society and as he had been the guardian of the Prophet after the demise
of Abdul Muttalib the other chiefs of Quraysh approached him in the form
of a group [^2] and addressed him thus: "O Abu Talib!

Your nephew abuses our gods speaks ill of our religion laughs at our
thoughts and beliefs and considers our forefathers misguided. Ask him to
keep aloof from us or surrender him to us and refrain from supporting
him".[^3]

The elder of Quraysh and the head of the family of Bani Hashim replied
to them in a tactful manner and in a soft tone and consequently they
abandoned their activities. However Islam was penetrating and expanding
day after day and the spiritual rapture of the religion of the Prophet
and the attractive and eloquent words of the Heavenly Book (the Qur'an)
were lending support to it. The Prophet especially presented his
religion before the people in the months in which fighting was
prohibited when a large number of pilgrims gathered in Makkah. His
eloquent and sweet speeches and his attractive beliefs impressed many
persons. In the meantime the Pharoah of Makkah also realized that the
Holy Prophet had gained popularity amongst all the tribes and had
acquired many followers amongst the settled and unsettled Arab tribes.
They therefore decided to approach the Prophet's only supporter (Abu
Talib) once again and to make known to him the dangers to which the
liberty of the Makkans and of their religion had become subjected owing
to the propagation and expansion of Islam. Hence they once again
approached him jointly and referring to their former demands spoke to
him thus:

"O Abu Talib! You are superior to us in the matter of nobility and age.
However we met you earlier and requested you to restrain your nephew
from propagating the new religion but you did not pay any heed to our
words. The position had now become unbearable for us. We cannot tolerate
any longer that a person should abuse our gods and should consider us to
be foolish and ignorant. It is necessary for you to restrain him from
all these activities failing which we will fight against him as well as
against you who are his supporter so that the duty of each group should
become specific and one of them should be wiped out".

Abu Talib the distinguished supporter and defender of the Prophet
realized through his sagacity and perfect wisdom that it was appropriate
to show forbearance to the people whose entire dignity of existence was
now open to danger. He therefore adopted a peaceful attitude and
promised that he would convey the sentiments of the chiefs to his
nephew. No doubt this reply was given primarily with the object of
quenching the fire of their wrath so that an appropriate way of solving
the difficulty could be adopted later. Hence after the departure of the
chiefs he contacted his nephew and conveyed their message to him and
incidentally in order to test his faith in his own object demanded a
reply from him. However while replying the Holy Prophet uttered a
sentence which is considered to be one of the outstanding and golden
lines of history. Here is the text of his reply: "Dear uncle I swear by
Allah that even if they place the sun in my right hand and the moon in
my left hand (i.e. even if they provide me with rule over the entire
world) I shall not desist from propagating my religion and pursuing my
object and shall continue my efforts until I overcome the difficulties
and achieve my final goal or lay down my life for its sake".

Thereafter the Prophet's eyes were filled with tears on account of his
love and enthusiasm for his object and he stood up and departed from his
uncle's presence. His penetrating and attractive speech made such a
wonderful impression on the chief of Makkah that notwithstanding all the
dangers to which he was exposed he called back his nephew and said to
him: "By Allah! I will not give up my support to you and you may very
well pursue your object to its end". [^4]


