Quraysh Approdched Abu Talib For the Third Time
===============================================

The ever-increasing expansion of Islam disturbed Quraysh very much and
they were keen to find out a solution to this problem. They assembled
once again and were of the view that Abu Talib's support to Muhammad was
possibly due to the fact that he had adopted him as his son and if that
were so it was possible that they might take the most handsome young man
to him and ask him to adopt him as his son. They therefore took with
them 'Ammarah bin Walid bin Mughayrah who was the most handsome of the
Makkan young men and approaching Abu Talib for the third time began
complaining and threatening in these words: "O Abu Talib! Walid's son is
a young man who is a poet and is also handsome and intelligent. We are
prepared to hand him over to you so that you may adopt him as your son
and cease supporting your nephew". On hearing this Abu Talib was cut to
the quick and shouted upon them with a burning face and said: "You are
doing a great injustice to me. You wish that I should nurture your son
and surrender my dearest child to you so that you may kill him. I swear
by Allah that it will not be so". Mut'am son of Adi then stood up and
said: "The offer made by Quraysh is quite fair but you are not going to
accept it". Abu Talib replied: "You have not been just and I am sure
that you want to humiliate me and to instigate Quraysh to fight against
me. However you are free to do what you can".

**QURAYSH TRY TO ALLURE THE HOLY PROPHET**

Quraysh became sure that it was not at all possible to make Abu Talib
agree to their suggestion and although he did not declare openly to be a
follower of Islam he had a great faith in his nephew and dearly loved
him. They therefore decided to refrain from entering into any discussion
with him. They however thought of another plan and it was that they
should allure Muhammad by offering him status wealth gifts and beautiful
women so that he might abandon his call. They therefore went to the
house of Abu Talib in the form of a group at a time when his nephew was
also sitting with him. The spokesman of the group opening the talk said:
"O Abu Talib! Muhammad has scattered our united ranks and has created
dissension amongst us. He has laughed our intellect down and has
ridiculed us and our idols. If he has been prompted to do so on account
of his poverty and indigence we are prepared to place enormous wealth at
his disposal. If he wants status we are ready to accept him as our ruler
and will listen to him. And in case he is invalid and needs medical
treatment we will bring an expert physician to attend upon
him............."

Abu Talib turned his face to the Prophet and said: "The elders of your
tribe have come and request that you should refrain from criticizing the
idols so that they too may leave you alone". The Holy Prophet replied to
his uncle thus: "I don't desire anything from them. As against these
four offers they should accept one word from me so that under its
auspices they may rule the Arabs and make non-Arabs their camp
followers". At this stage Abu Jahl stood up and said: "We are prepared
to hear you ten times". The Prophet replied: "My only word is that you
should admit Oneness of the Lord". The unexpected words of the Holy
Prophet were like cold water thrown on a hot kettle. They were so much
engulfed in amazement coupled with disappointment and despair that they
said involuntarily all at once: "Should we forsake 360 gods and worship
only one Allah?"

Quraysh left the house while their faces and eyes were burning with
anger and they were thinking about the means for achieving their object.
In the following verses of the Holy Qur'an this very incident has been
related: [^5]

It seems strange to the pagans that a man from their own people should
come to them as a Prophet. The unbelievers have said he is only a lying
magician . They say Has he condemned all other gods but One? This is
certainly strange . A group of the pagans walked out of a meeting with
the Prophet and told others Let us walk away. Be steadfast in the
worship of your gods. This man wants to dominate you. We have heard
nothing like this in the latest religion. This is only his own false
invention. (Surah Sa'd, 38:4-7)


