An Example of the Tortures and Persecutions By Quraysh
======================================================

One of the most tragic periods of the life of the Holy Prophet began on
the day on which he broke the seal of silence and the elders of Quraysh
lost all hope of his accepting their offers in view of his well-known
words: "By Allah! Even if you place the sun in my right hand and the
moon in my left hand so that I may abandon my call I will not rest until
Allah makes my religion prevail or I lay down my life for its sake".
Till that time Quraysh had during all their encounters with him
preserved his respect but when they saw that all their conciliation
offers had failed they were compelled to change the course of their
thinking and to forestall the expansion of Islam at all costs and to
utilize all means for this purpose. Hence the council of Quraysh decided
unanimously to practice ridicule torture and intimidation to restrain
the Prophet from pursuing his object.

It is evident that a reformer who is anxious to guide the people of the
whole world must observe patience and fortitude in the face of
inconveniences intimidations dastardly attacks and corporal and mental
blows so that by and by he should be able to overcome difficulties and
this has been the policy of other reformers as well. We give below an
account of some of the persecutions and tortures of Quraysh so that the
extent of the Holy Prophet's patience and fortitude may become
manifest.

Besides the mental and spiritual factor (faith steadfastness and
fortitude) which helped him internally the Prophet also possessed an
external factor which ensured safety and support for him and that was
the support of Bani Hashim with Abu Talib at their head because when Abu
Talib came to know that Quraysh had taken a final and irrevocable
decision to persecute his nephew he called all the members of Bani
Hashim and asked them to protect Muhammad. Some of them undertook to
support and protect him on account of their faith and others agreed to
do so in view of the bond of kinship. Out of them only three (namely Abu
Lahab and two others whose names will be mentioned later along with
other enemies of the Prophet refrained from endorsing his decision.
However in spite of this these defensive measures could not protect him
from some unpleasant incidents and as and when the enemies found him
alone they did not desist from doing him all sorts of harm. Here is an
example of the tortures inflicted by Quraysh:

1. One day Abu Jahl saw the Prophet in Safa and abused and grieved him.
The Prophet did not speak to him at all and went away to his house. Abu
Jahl also went to join Quraysh who had assembled by the side of the
Ka'bah. Hamzah who was the uncle and foster-brother of the Prophet also
returned on that day from hunting and was carrying his bow on his
shoulder. It was customary with him that after returning to Makkah and
before seeing his children and relatives he went to the Ka'bah and
performed 'tawaf' (circumambulation) and then went over to the different
groups of Quraysh who gathered round the Ka'bah and exchanged greetings
with them.

On that day after performing these ceremonies he went to his house. By
chance a slave-girl of Abdullah Jad'an who had witnessed the aforesaid
incident came forward and said "O Abu 'Ammarah (the patronymic of
Hamzah) I wish that you had been here a few minutes earlier and had seen
the incident which I have seen! Then you would have learnt how Abu Jahl
has abused and persecuted your nephew". The words of the slave-girl made
a strange impression on Hamzah and he decided to avenge his nephew's
insult upon Abu Jahl before doing anything else. He therefore returned
and saw Abu Jahl sitting amongst a group of Quraysh. Without speaking to
anyone he raised his hunting bow and struck it on the head of Abu Jahl
and his skull was injured. Then he said to him: "You abuse him (the
Prophet) and I have embraced his religion and am treading the same path
which he treads. If you possess any strength come on and fight with
me".

A group of persons belonging to the family of Makhzum then stood up to
support Abu Jahl. However as he was a clever and diplomatic person he
avoided every sort of quarrel and defence and said "I misbehaved with
Muhammad and Hamzah is entitled to feel uneasy about it". [^6]

This admitted historical fact shows that Hamzah who later became one of
the greatest commanders of Islam was a highly influential and brave
personality. He did all he could to protect and defend the Holy Prophet
and strengthen the group of Muslims. As Ibn Athir says [^7] Quraysh
considered the Islam of Hamzah to be one of the greatest factors for the
advancement and strength of the Muslims and they therefore resorted to
other plans which will be mentioned later.

Some Sunni historians like Ibn Kathir Shami insist that:

"The effect of the Islam of Abu Bakr and Umar was no lesser than the
effect of the Islam of Hamzah and the Islam of these two great caliphs
became the means of the glory strength and freedom of the Muslims''.[^8]
Of course there is no doubt about the fact that every person contributed
to the strength and expansion of Islam but in spite of this it can never
be said that the effect of the Islam of these two caliphs was at par
with the effect of the Islam of Hamzah. The reason for this conclusion
is that Hamzah was the man who on hearing that an elder of Quraysh had
abused the Holy Prophet went in quest of the culprit without informing
anybody of his intention and took a very hard revenge on him. And none
had the courage to oppose him or to fight with him. On the other hand
Ibn Hisham the great biographer of Islam narrates an incident with
regard to Abu Bakr which shows that when he joined the circle of the
Muslims he did not possess the requisite strength to defend either
himself or the Holy Prophet. [^9] The details of the incident are given
below:

One day the Prophet was passing by a group of Quraysh. Suddenly those
people encircled him and everyone of them began repeating by way of
ridicule his words about the idols and the Day of Judgement and said:
"Do you say this?" The Prophet replied to them: "Yes. I am the person
who says this".

As Quraysh saw that there was none to defend the Holy Prophet they
decided to kill him. A man therefore came forward and held the ends of
his dress. Abu Bakr happened to be there by the side of the Prophet.
With tears in his eyes he stood up to support the Prophet and said: "Is
it proper that you should kill a man who believes in monotheism?" Later
(for some reasons) those people desisted from maltreating the Prophet
and he went his own way whereas Abu Bakr proceeded to his own house with
an injured head.

Although this incident may be an evidence of the Caliph's sentiments
for and interest in the Prophet it is first of all a firm evidence of
his weakness and fear. It shows that at that time he did not possess
either strength or an appreciable social status. And as a practical step
by Quraysh against the Prophet might have entailed evil consequences
they left him alone and directed the severity of their action towards
his companion and broke his head. If you place the incident of Hamzah
which clearly shows his valour and bravery side by side with this
episode you can very well decide as to whose Islam had a greater effect
in the early days of Islam on the honour strength and fear of the
unbelievers.

You will soon read about the Islam of Umar. His Islam also like that of
his old friend did not strengthen the defensive power of the Muslims.
But for 'As bin Wai'l it was possible that the blood of the Caliph might
have been shed on the day he embraced Islam because he ('As bin Wai'l)
came and addressed the group who wanted to kill Umar in these words:
"What do you want from a man who has adopted a faith for himself? Do you
think that the family of Adi will surrender him easily?" This sentence
shows that it was the fear of his family which made others spare him and
defence by the families of those who belonged to them was something
natural and usual and there was no difference in this regard between the
low and the high.

Yes! The base of defence of the Muslims was the house of Bani Hashim
and the heavy burden of the task lay on the shoulders of Abu Talib and
his family for as regards other persons who joined the Muslims they did
not possess the requisite strength even to defend themselves and the
question of their Islam becoming the source of the dignity and
exaltation of the Muslims did not therefore arise.


