Abu Jahl Lies in Ambush For the Holy Prophet
============================================

The ever-increasing advancement of Islam had made Quraysh very much
uneasy. Every day a report regarding the inclination (to Islam) of one
member or another of their tribe reached them. On this account therefore
their anger was flaming out. One day the Pharaoh of Makkah Abu Jahl said
in the assembly of Quraysh: "O people of Quraysh! You can see how
Muhammad considers our religion to be worthless and abuses the faith of
our forefathers and their gods and declares us to be ignorant. By God I
will lie in ambush for him tomorrow and will place a stone by my side;
and when Muhammad goes into sajdah (prostration) I will strike that
stone on his head. On the following day the Holy Prophet arrived in
Masjidul Haram to offer his prayers and stood between 'Rukn-i Yamani'
and the 'Black Stone'. A group of Quraysh who were aware of the
intention of Abu Jahl were wondering whether or not he would succeed in
his campaign.

The Holy Prophet went into sajdah and his old enemy came out of the
ambush and approached him. However it was not long before he was struck
with awe and he returned to Quraysh trembling and aghast with a
countenance distracted. All of them ran forward and said "O Aba Hakam!
what has happened?" He said with a very weak voice which betrayed his
fear and disturbance of mind "There appeared before my eyes a scene
which I had never seen before in my life. It was for this reason that I
abandoned my plan".

It goes without saying that an unseen force had arisen by the command
of Allah and had created a spectacle which protected the Prophet of
Islam from harm by the enemies in accordance with the Divine promise:
"We shall protect you from the mischief of those who mock".

Numerous instances of torture by Quraysh are recorded in the pages of
history. Ibn Athir has allocated a chapter to this subject and has
mentioned the names of the foremost enemies of the Prophet in Makkah and
the atrocities perpetrated by them. [^10] Whatever has been said above is
only a specimen. The Prophet found himself faced every day by a new
persecution. For example one day 'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it saw the Prophet
performing 'Tawaf' and abused him. He twisted his turban round his neck
and dragged him out of the Masjid. Some persons freed the Prophet from
his hands on account of fear of Bani Hashim. [^11]

The torture and persecution to which the Holy Prophet was subjected by
his uncle Abu Lahab and his wife Umme Jamil was unprecedented. He
happened to be a next-door neighbour of theirs. They did not refrain
from throwing any sort of dirt on him and one day they threw the
entrails of a sheep on his head. Eventually Hamzah with a view to take
revenge thrust the same on the head of Abu Lahab.


