Persecution of Muslims By Quraysh
=================================

In the early days of the prophetic mission the advancement of Islam was
the result of a number of factors one of which was the steadfastness of
the Prophet and his companions and supporters. Examples of the patience
and fortitude of the leader of the Muslims have already been stated
whereas the forbearance and perseverance of the Muslims who lived in
Makkah (the centre of polytheism and idolatry) deserves attention. An
account of their sacrifices and steadfastness will be given in the
chapters relating to events after Hijrah (migration to Madina). For the
present we mention the tragic events connected with the lives of some
old devotees of the Prophet who lived in the shelterless environments of
Makkah.

**BILAL THE ETHIOPIAN**

The parents of Bilal were amongst those persons who had been brought
from Ethiopia to Arabia as captives. He himself (who later became the
mu'azzin of the Prophet) was the slave of Umayyah bin Khalaf. Umayyah
was one of the sworn enemies of the great leader of the Muslims. As the
kinsmen of the Prophet had undertaken his own defence Umayyah with a
view to take revenge used to torture openly his slave who had been newly
converted to Islam. He made him lie naked on hot sand during the hottest
days placed a big red-hot stone on his chest and addressed him in these
words: "I will not release you until you die in this condition or abjure
the faith of Muhammad and worship 'Lat' and 'Uzza'.

In spite of all this torture however Bilal replied him with only two
words which are a clear proof of his firm faith. He said 'Ahad! Ahad!'
(viz. Allah is One and I will never revert to the religion of polytheism
and idolatry). Others wondered at the steadfastness of this black slave
who was a captive in the hands of a hard-hearted person. So much so that
Waraqah bin Nawfal the Christian Arab scholar wept on the condition of
Bilal and said to Umayyah: "By Allah! If you kill him in this manner I
will make his grave a sacred place to be visited by pilgrims ". [^12]

At times Ummayah acted with still greater severity. He put a rope round
the neck of Bilal and handed it over to the children so that they might
drag him in the streets.[^13]

Ummayah and his son were captured in the Battle of Badr the first
battle of Islam. Some Muslims were not in favour of killing Umayyah but
Bilal said: "He is the leader of infidelity and must be killed". On his
insistence the father and the son were recompensed for their crimes and
were put to death.

**SELF-SACRIFICE OF AMMAR AND HIS PARENTS**

Arnmar and his parents were amongst the early Muslims. They embraced
Islam when the Prophet had selected the house of Arqam bin Abil Arqam as
the rendezvous for the propagation of Islam. When the idolaters became
aware of their having adopted the Divine religion they did not neglect
torturing and persecuting them. Ibn Athir [^14] says: "The idolaters
compelled these three persons to quit their house in the hottest season
and to spend their time in the heat and the scorching wind of the
desert. This torture was repeated so many times that Yasir succumbed to
his troubles. One day his widow Sumayyah quarrelled with Abu Jahl on
this account. That hard-hearted and cruel person thrust a spear in her
heart and killed her also. The Holy Prophet was very much moved on
account of the persecution to which they were subjected. One day he saw
them being tortured. He turned his face to them with tears in his eyes
and said "O family of Yasir! Be patient for your place is in Paradise
".

After the death of Yasir and his wife the idolaters tormented and
tortured Ammar as well as they had tormented Bilal. To save his life he
had no alternative left but to abjure Islam but he repented soon and ran
to the Prophet with a palpitating heart. He related the incident to the
Prophet who enquired of him: "Has any instability taken place in your
inner faith?" He replied: "My heart is abounding with faith". The
Prophet then said: "Do not entertain the least fear in your mind and
keep your faith hidden to save yourself from their mischief".

The following verse was revealed with regard to the faith of Ammar:
[^15] (There shall be a grievous punishment for him) who disbelieves in
Allah after believing in Him other than him who is compelled while his
heart is firm in his faith. (Surah Nahl 16:106)

It is said that Abu Jahl decided to take to task the family of Yasir
who belonged to the class of the most unprotected persons in Makkah. He
therefore ordered that fire end scourage might be made ready. Yasir
Sumayyah and Ammar were then dragged to the appointed place and
tormented with the point of the sword and with the flames of fire and
whipping. This persecution was repeated so many times that Yasir and
Sumayyah consequently breathed their last but they did not forsake the
praise of the Prophet till their last moments.

The men of Quraysh who had witnessed this calamitous and tragic scene
notwithstanding the fact that they had unity of interest in defeating
Islam got the wounded and grief stricken Ammar released from the
clutches of Abu Jahl so that he might bury his parents.


