Ruthless Enemies of the Holy Prophet
====================================

Recognition of some enemies of the Prophet is necessary in connection
with some Islamic events which took place after migration and we give
below briefly the names and particulars of some of them:

Abu Lahab: He was the neighbour of the Prophet. He did not miss any
opportunity of contradicting and torturing him and the Muslims.

Aswad bin Abd Yaghus: He was a clown. As and when he saw the helpless
and indigent Muslims he ridiculed them and said: "These poverty-stricken
people consider themselves to be the kings of the world and think that
they will soon possess the throne and the crown of the Emperor of Iran".
However death did not allow him to see with his own eyes as to how the
Muslims had acquired the lands thrones and crowns of Kaiser and Kisra.

Walid bin Mughayrah: He was an old man of Quraysh who possessed
enormous wealth. We shall record his conversation with the Holy Prophet
in the following chapter.

Umayyah and Abi sons of Khalaf: One day Abi brought the decayed and
worn out bones of some dead persons to the Holy Prophet and asked: "Can
your Allah restore these bones to life?" Right came the reply from the
source of revelation:"Say the Lord who created them first will bring
them to life again". These two brothers were killed in the Battle of
Badr.

Abul Hakam bin Hisham: The Muslims used to call him Abu Jahl (father of
ignorance) on account of his unwarranted enmity and fanaticism against
Islam. He too was killed in the Battle of Badr.

'As bin Wai'l: He was the father of Amr 'As. He was the person who had
given the nickname of 'Abtar' (issueless) to the Holy Prophet.

'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it: [^17] He was one of the most fierce enemies of
Islam and never missed an opportunity to do harm to the Holy Prophet and
the Muslims.

There was also another group of the enemies of Islam including Abu
Sufyan and others. The historians have recorded the particulars in
detail and for the sake of brevity we refrain from reproducing them
here.


