Death related issues
====================

Introduction
------------

Almighty Allah says in the Qur’an:

***“Every person is going to taste death, and you shall only be paid
fully your reward on the resurrection day; then whoever is removed far
away from the fire and is made to enter the garden, he indeed has
attained the object; and the life of this world is nothing but a
provision of vanities.”*** **(3:185).**

He also said,

***“And no one knows what he shall earn on the morrow; and no one knows
in what land he shall die; surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.”***
**(31:34).**

General Rules
-------------

Here are some rules in brief concerning the dying person, washing of the
corpse and its shrouding, and burial procedure.[^1]

Before Death
------------

137. It’s a matter of obligatory precaution that one should move the
dying person in the direction of the *qiblah* during the last moments of
his life. This is to be done by placing him on his back with his feet
pointing towards the *qiblah* as though if he sits up, his face would be
facing in that direction.

It is recommended to read and ask the dying person to repeat the
testament of belief *(shahada)* concerning the Oneness of God and the
faith in Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.).

138. It is recommended to close the eyes of the dead person, their
mouth, stretch their arms along their sides, straighten their legs,
cover the body with a sheet of cloth, recite the Qur’an, and light up
the room in which they lived. It is disliked to leave the corpse alone.

Ablution (Ghusl) for the Corpse
-------------------------------

139. After getting rid of the impure *(najis)* elements that are on the
body of the dead person (e.g., blood, semen, etc.), the corpse has to be
given three ablutions as follows:

    a. First wash it with *sidr* water. That is, water to which a little
of *sidr* has been added.[^2]

    b. The second wash is with camphour water. That is, water to which a
little bit of camphour has been added.

    c. The third wash is with pure water.

If *sidr* is not available, then it is precautionarily obligatory to
wash the corpse with pure water instead. Similarly, if camphour is not
available, it is precautionarily obligatory to wash it with pure water
instead. Then it should be washed the third time with pure water. In
such a case, after the three washings, one *tayammum* should be
performed on the corpse.

140. It is necessary that the ablution given to the corpse be of the
*tartibi* kind: that is, the body should be washed in **proper
sequence** with the head and the neck first, then the right side of the
body, and then the left side.

141. The person washing the corpse must be of the same **gender** as the
dead person. So, a male should wash a male corpse, and a female should
wash a female corpse. However, husband and wife are allowed to perform
ablution to one another; although it is better that the washing be done
with the body covered with a sheet of cloth.

If a person of the same gender is not available, then, based on
obligatory precaution, those of the opposite gender who are *mahram* to
the deceased can perform it. *Mahram* means those relations with whom
marriage is forbidden because of blood relationship or nursing
(suckling) relationship or marriage, like brother and sister [or
son-in-law and mother-in-law]. However, it is better that the washing be
done with the body covered with a sheet of cloth. Unity of gender is not
required when giving ablution to a corpse of a child that had not
reached the age of discerning the right and wrong.[^3]

142. Based on obligatory precaution, the person performing ablution must
be a *mu’min*. If neither a *mu’min* of the same gender as the deceased
is available nor a *mahram* [even of the opposite gender], it is
permissible that a Muslim of the same gender can wash the deceased.

143. If even a Muslim is not available, then the deceased can be washed
by an *Ahlul* *Kitab* person [that is, a Jew, a Christian or a
Zoroastrian] of the same gender with the condition that the person
should first wash himself and then perform ablution to the corpse. If
even an *Ahlul* *Kitab* person of the same gender is not available, the
duty of performing ablution to the corpse is lifted, and the deceased
should be buried without it.

Tahnit and Shrouding
--------------------

144. After giving the ablution, it is wajib to do tahnit. Tahnit means
to rub camphour powder (which has maintained its fragrance) on the seven
parts of the body that touch the ground in a posture of sajdah: the
forehead, the palms, the knees, and feet toes. It is preferable to start
tahnit with the forehead and end with the palms.

145. After tahnit, the deceased has to be shrouded in three pieces of
cloth as follows:

    a. The *mi’zar:* a piece of cloth [like an apron] that must cover
the body between the navel and the knees, based on obligatory
precaution.

    b. The *qamis:* a piece of cloth [like a shirt] that must cover the
body from the shoulders to mid shank, based on obligatory precaution.

    c. The *izar:* a large sheet of cloth that must cover the entire
body. Based on obligatory precaution, it must be long and wide enough so
that the top and the bottom parts could be tied [with a string], and the
front parts overlap.

The Prayer
----------

146. It is obligatory to say prayer over a deceased Muslim’s body of six
years and over. Based on obligatory precaution, prayer should also be
said over the body of a child who could do thesalat even if he or she
had not yet reached the age of six.

147. The way to conduct prayer on the deceased:

The person praying should recite five *takbirs* (say “Allahu Akbar”).
However, it is preferable that after each *takbir* he says the
following:

After the first *takbir,* he should say the *shahadatayn* (declaration
of faith in God and Prophet Muhammad).

After the second *takbir,* he should say the *salawat* on Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his progeny (a.s.).

After the third *takbir,* he should say a prayer for the believing men
and women.

After the fourth *takbir,* he should say a prayer for the deceased.

He should say the fifth *takbir* and end the *salat*.

Burial
------

148. It is necessary to bury the deceased after the salat. Burial is
intended to protect the body from wild animals and its smell is
contained within so that no one is annoyed by it. The body should be
placed on its right side with the face towards the qiblah.

149. It is not permissible to bury a deceased Muslim in the graveyard of
non-Muslims, except if a section of that graveyard is specifically
reserved for Muslims. Similarly, no non-Muslim can be buried in the
graveyard of Muslims.

150. When it is neither possible to get a grave for a deceased Muslim in
the graveyard of Muslims, nor transfer the body to a Muslim country for
burial in a Muslim graveyard, that deceased Muslim may be buried in the
graveyard of non-Muslims.’

151. It has been narrated from the Prophet (s.a.w.) that he said, “No
time comes upon the dead person more difficult than the first night [of
burial]. Therefore have mercy on your dead ones by giving charity [on
their behalf]. If one does not have anything [to give in charity], one
of you should pray two *rak‘ah* for them: in the first *rak‘ah,* after
*al*-*Hamd*, recite *Ayatu ’l-kursi;* and in the second *rak*‘*ah*,
after *al*-*Hamd*, recite *surah* *al*-*Qadr* ten times. After *salam*,
say: *‘Allah humma salli ‘ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad, wab‘ath
thawabaha ila qabri fulan;*’[^4]and name the deceased person [instead of
*fulan*].”[^5]

Question and Answers
--------------------

152. **Question:** In some non-Muslim countries, the corpse is placed in
a coffin and then buried in the grave. What is our duty in such a
situation?

**Answer:** There is no problem in placing the corpse in a coffin when
burying him in the ground. However, the religious requirements of burial
must be fulfilled; and one of those requirements is that the corpse be
placed on its right side with the face towards the *qiblah*.

153. **Question:** A Muslim died in a non-Muslim city that has no Muslim
graveyard; and although it is possible to transfer the body to a Muslim
country for burial but the cost of transportation is exorbitant—is this
a sufficient [reason] for burying the body in the graveyard of
non-Muslims?

**Answer:** This is not a sufficient [reason].

154. **Question:** A Muslim dies in a non-Muslim city that has no Muslim
graveyard and the family of the deceased cannot transfer the body to a
Muslim country because it cannot afford the cost of transportation. In
such cases, is it obligatory upon the Islamic centers that are
responsible for Muslims’ affairs to provide the cost of transportation?
And is this obligatory upon the Muslims who reside in that city?

**Answer:** If burying the deceased in an appropriate grave in that same
city or other city (excluding non-Muslim graveyards) depends on spending
some money, and neither has he left any estate that can pay for it nor
are the heirs capable of providing for it—then it is *wajib kifa’i* upon
the Muslims to provide for it. And it is permissible to count it from
the religious or charitable dues *applicable* to him.

155. **Question:** When there is no heir for a deceased Muslim person in
the foreign land, who should take charge of his burial?

**Answer:** If it is not possible to contact his heir and ask his
consent in handling the burial procedures, the requirement of consent is
lifted and it becomes obligatory, on basis of *wajib* *kifa’i,*on the
Muslims to handle the burial.

156. **Question:** From where should the expenses of transportation to a
Muslim country and burial come, if it is not possible to bury a Muslim
in the city in which he died because there is no Muslim graveyard?
Should these expenses come from the estate of the deceased before
dividing it amongst the heirs? Or from the one-third [of the estate] if
he has specified that? Or from other sources?

**Answer:** The expenses of burying a dead body in a place appropriate
for it comes from the estate [before its distribution among the heirs]
if he did not make a will specifying that it be taken from the
one-third. Otherwise [if he made a will regarding the one-third], it
should come out of it.

157. **Question:** The Muslim communities in non-Muslim countries are
increasing day by day. Knowing the fact that a deceased Muslim will one
day be buried in the graveyard of non-Muslims either because of lack of
funds available to the family to send the dead body to Muslim countries
for burial or because of negligence; so, is it obligatory, as a matter
of *wajib kifa’i,* upon the capable Muslims to buy a graveyard for the
Muslims?

**Answer:** Burying a deceased Muslim in a place appropriate to his
status (other than non-Muslim graveyards) is an obligation of the heir
just like other obligatory deeds connected with the burial procedures.
And if the deceased has no heir or the heir is refusing to fulfill his
duty or is not capable, it is obligatory, on the basis of *kifa’i,* upon
other Muslims [to bury the deceased in an appropriate place]. And if
fulfilling this *wajib kifa’i* duty depends on acquiring a piece of land
in advance by purchase or other means, it is obligatory to try and
acquire it in advance.

158. **Question:** What is preferable: burying a dead Muslim in an
Islamic cemetery in a non-Muslim city in which he died or transferring
the dead body to a Muslim city which entails exorbitant expenses?

**Answer:** It is preferable to transfer the dead to any holy shrines or
other recommended places if there is a donor who can bear the expenses
—from the heirs or others— or if the one-third of his estate which he
has endowed for religious charity, would suffice for that purpose. And
Allah knows the best.

159. **Question:** If transferring a deceased Muslim to Muslim countries
entails great difficulty, is it permissible to bury the body in
cemeteries of non-Muslims from among the followers of the revealed
religions [that is, *Ahlul* *Kitab*]?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to bury a Muslim in cemeteries of
non-Muslims, except if that is the only choice because necessity knows
no laws.

[^1]: For further details, see Sayyid as-Sistani, Minhaju 's-Saliheen,
vol. 1, p. 95 ff.; as-Sistani, al-Masa'ilu 'l-Muntakhaba, p. 50 ff.

[^2]: Translator's Note: Sidr is name of a lotus tree; "sidr water"
means the water to which sidr leaves have been added.

[^3]: Translator's Note: The age of discerning right and wrong (tamyiz)
is different from the age of maturity (bulûgh). The latter is 9 for
girls and 15 for boys but the former could be at five or six.

[^4]: "O Allah, send Your blessings upon Muhammad and the Family of
Muhammad, and send the reward of this prayer to the grave of x."

[^5]: Sayyid as-Sistani, al-Masa'ilu 'l-Muntakhaba, p. 63.


