Work & investment
=================

Introduction
------------

As a principle, it is permissible for a Muslim to engage, as an employee
of a non-Muslim in various vital activities of life and in different
kinds of [company], of general benefit so that he may be of use to
himself and humanity. This permission is conditional to the fact that
such work is not forbidden by the laws of Islam and that it does not
lead to harming the interest of Muslims or serve the interest and
schemes of the enemies of Islam and Muslims.

General Rules
-------------

247. It is not permissible for a Muslim to debase himself in front of
any human being be they Muslim or non-Muslim. So, if the work, that a
Muslim does, debases him in from of a non-Muslim, it is not permissible
for him to engage in that debasing work.

248. A Muslim is allowed to **serve meat** of an animal that was not
slaughtered according to Islamic laws to those who consider it lawful
like Christians, Jews, and others. Similarly, it is permissible for him
to work in preparing and cooking that meat. The money that he receives
in return for that work can be legitimized by the rule of *tanazul*
(withdrawing your exclusive right from that meat).

249. It is not permissible for a Muslim to **sell pork** to those who
believe it is lawful for them among the Christians and others. Based on
obligatory precaution, one should not even serve that meat to them. (See
the question-answer section below.)

250. A Muslim is not allowed to **serve intoxicating drinks** to anyone
at all, even to those who believe it is lawful to them. He is not [even]
allowed to wash the dishes or give them to others, if that washing and
giving is part of the drinking of intoxicants.

251. A Muslim is not allowed to hire himself out for selling or serving
intoxicanting drinks or for washing the dishes for that purpose, just as
it is not allowed for him to take the wages for this work, as it is
unlawful. As for the “extreme need” justification used by some people
for this kind of work, it is an unacceptable justification. Almighty
Allah says,

***“And whosoever is careful of (his duty towards) Allah, He will make
for him an outlet; and give him in sustenance from whence he thinks not.
And whosoever trusts in Allah, He is sufficient for him…”***
***(65:3)***

He also said,

***“Surely those whom the angels cause to die while they are unjust to
their souls, they shall say, ‘In what state were you?’ They shall
answer, ‘We were weak in the earth.’ They shall say, ‘Was not Allah’s
earth spacious so that you should have migrated therein?’ So, these it
is whose abode is hell, and it is an evil resort except the weak from
among the men and the children who have not in their power the means nor
can they find a way (to escape).”*** **(4:97-98)**

In his sermon of the last pilgrimage, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) said,
“Know that the Trustworthy Soul (Jibra’il) has inspired in my mind that
no soul shall die until its sustenance is completed. Therefore, fear
Allah and work hard in seeking [the sustenance]; and let not the delay
in getting your share of the sustenance compel you to seek it through
disobeying Allah for the Blessed and Almighty Allah has divided the
sustenance among His creation by lawful means and not through unlawful
means.

So, whosoever fears Allah and has patience, Allah will provide them
sustenance from lawful [means]; but whosoever tears apart the curtain of
propriety, makes haste and acquire their portion from unlawful [means],
it will be taken off from their lawful sustenance and they will be held
accountable for it on the Day of Resurrection."[^1] (See the
question-answer section below.)

252. It is not permissible to work in places of entertainment and other
similar places of debauchery if that work would cause one to drift
towards unlawful acts. (See the question-answer section below.)

253. It is permissible for Muslims to participate as **partners with
non-Muslims** (like Christians and Jews for example) in various kinds of
businesses considered lawful in Islamic laws like selling, buying,
export, import, building contracts, etc.

254. It is permissible **to deposit** [money] in non-Muslim (private or
state-owned) banks.

255. If a Muslim intends **to get a loan** from such banks, it is
necessary that he should do so with the intention that it is a
transaction without return, even if he knows that he will end up paying
the capital as well as the interest. And he should not do so with the
intention of getting the loan with the condition of [paying] interest.

256. It is permissible for a Muslim to authorise another person to use
his name (and his credit) to buy shares, in return for an amount (in
money or commodity) on which both have reached an agreement.

257. It is not permissible for a Muslim to buy products of the countries
that are in a state of war with Islam and Muslims, for example, Israel.
(See the question-answer section below.)

258. A Muslim is allowed to **exchange the currency** with some other
currency at the market price, or at a lower or higher rate, irrespective
of the fact that the exchange is of an immediate or a deferred nature.

259. It is forbidden to use bank-notes that are **counterfeit** or have
no value at all—the money that is used by a fraudster when he pays the
worker who is unaware of its forgery or worthlessness. The business deal
conducted with this kind of money is not valid.

    a. It is not permissible for a Muslim to buy tickets of chance
(including **lottery**), if he buys them with the intention of luckily
winning the prize.

    b. It is permissible for him to buy the lottery tickets if he buys
it with the intention of participating in a charitable cause that is
accepted Islamically like building hospitals, orphanages, etc., but not
with the intention of winning the prize. However, this hypothetical
situation is extremely difficult to occur in non-Muslim countries that
consider certain activities that are forbidden in Islam to be of a
charitable nature according to their own understanding.

In both the cases [of “a” and “b” if a Muslim wins the lottery], it is
permissible to receive the prize from a non-Muslim [person or company].
(See the question-answer section below.)

260. It is permissible to sell wild animals whose meat is forbidden like
tiger, hyena, fox, elephant, lion, bear, and other similar animals like
cat and whale if there is any legitimate benefit which makes them
valuable in the market (even if in view of only some experts of that
field). Non-hunting dogs and pigs are exempt from this rule. (See the
question-answer section below.)

261. It is permissible to sell and buy **gold and silver utensils** for
the purpose of decoration; however, it is forbidden to use them for
eating and drinking.

262. No *khums* is levied on the salary paid by a government in a Muslim
country directly into the bank account of its employee, even if it is
more than his annual expenses—as long as he does not receive it in his
hands. (See the question-answer no. 260 section below.)

**Questions and Answer**

263. **Question:** In the West, it is possible for a person to open a
variety of current accounts with high or low **interest rates** equally
without any difficulty in both the cases. Is it permissible to open
accounts with high interest rate with the understanding that the person
will not demand the interest, if the bank denies it to him? If it is not
permissible, is there a solution that would allow them to open such an
account knowing well that they, in their heart, are seeking the best
interest?

**Answer:** They are allowed to open the account in the bank and it is
[also] permissible for them to deposit in it with the condition of
earning the interest, if the bank is financed by non-Muslim governments
or people.

264. **Question:** Banks in the West give loans —known as **mortgage**—
to those who do not have enough money to buy houses; this is to be paid
back in [weekly or monthly] installments with a high rate of interest.
Is a Muslim allowed to use this facility? If it is not permissible, is
there a solution in your view for someone who claims that he needs the
mortgage to buy his own residential house and does not possess enough
money to pay for it?

**Answer:** It is permissible to take the money from the bank that is
financed by non-Muslim government or private funds but not with the
intention of loan. The knowledge that the bank will sooner or later
force him to pay the capital as well as the interest does not affect
[the lawfulness of] his taking the money.

265. **Question:** Some governments are committed to providing housing
for the needy under specific circumstances. Is it permissible for a
Muslim to buy a house in which he resides for a short time (so that he
will not be liable for *khums* [on that house]), and then he gives it
out on rent so he can then go and live in a house subsidized by the
government?

**Answer:** *Khums* is not waived from a house just by living in it for
a short while without actually being in need of it, as has been presumed
in the question.

266. **Question:** Some trading and manufacturing companies get loans
from private or state banks in Muslim countries and also from other
[non-Muslim] institutions with the condition of interest; and they also
earn interest on the deposits they leave in those banks. Are we allowed
to buy shares from these companies or be partners in their ventures?

**Answer:** If the partnership with them is like participating in their
interest-bearing activities, it is not allowed. However, if Muslims own
the company and it receives interest from the banks of non-Muslims,
there is no problem [in buying its shares or partnership] from this
perspective.

267. **Question:** Some governments and some companies in non-Muslim as
well as Muslim, countries deposit the salaries of their employees
directly into their accounts in the banks. The employee does not get the
money in his hand, although he can withdraw it whenever he wants. Now,
if the statement of his account shows that the money has surpassed his
annual expenses, is *khums* obligatory on it?

**Answer:** *Khums* is obligatory in what has surpassed his annual
needs, except in the case of a government employee in a Muslim state
that deposits his salary into a state or private bank. In the latter
case, *khums* would not be obligatory on the salary that has been
deposited in the bank until he [physically] takes possession of it with
the permission of the *mujtahid*[^2] then the salary will be included in
his income of that year and *khums* will become obligatory on what is in
excess to that year’s expenses.

268. **Question:** A Muslim took a loan from another Muslim. After a
while the market value of that amount goes down. How much should he pay
back to the creditor? The amount that he got as loan or its equivalent
in the market value at the time of payment? Does the rule differ if the
creditor is non-Muslim?

**Answer:** He has to pay the same amount that he got as loan; and there
is no difference whether the creditor was Muslim or non-Muslim.

269. **Question:** Is it permissible to invest in companies who deal in
part, in intoxicating drinks without the possibility of separating one’s
investment from that of the others in that line of production?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to participate or deal in the
production of intoxicating drinks.

270. **Question:** A Muslim builder or contractor is approached for
building a place of worship for non-Muslims in a non-Muslim country. Is
it permissible for him to accept that job?

**Answer:** It is not permissible because it involves promoting the
false religions.

271. **Question:** A Muslim calligrapher is approached for preparing a
billboard promoting intoxicating drinks, or for an all-night dance
party, or for a restaurant that serves pork. Is it permissible for him
to accept these jobs?

**Answer:** It is not permissible because it involves advertising
indecent acts and promoting immorality.

272. **Question:** Is it permissible to buy goods from companies that
allocate part of their profits to supporting Israel?

**Answer:** We do not allow that.

273. **Question:** A Muslim buys a building but does not know that it
also contains a pub whose lease he cannot terminate [before its expiry].
Then he finds out the fact.

a. Is it permissible for him to receive the rent of the pub from the
lessee?

b. If it is not allowed, is it permissible for him to receive the rent
with the permission of the *mujtahid*? Or under other pretext?

c. If we assume that he knew about the existence of the pub before
buying the building, is it permissible for him to buy that building
knowing that he cannot terminate the *lease* *of* *the pub owner*?

**Answer:**

a. It is not permissible for him to receive the rent in return for
renting that place as a pub.

b. Since he owns the right of rent of that place for permissible use, he
is allowed to take (from the money given to him as rent for the pub) an
amount that is his right. If the lessee is non-Muslim, the owner can
take the money but not as rent [for the pub].

c. It is permissible for him to buy that building, even if he knew about
the above-mentioned lessee and that he cannot terminate that lease.

274. **Question:** Is it permissible for a Muslim business owner to
employ non-Muslims in his business even though there are Muslims who
need jobs?

**Answer:** On its own terms, it is permissible; but based on the
demands of Islamic brotherhood and the rights that Muslims have over one
another, it is better to choose Muslims over non-Muslims as long as
there is no problem in it.

275. **Question:** Is it permissible to work as salesman or cashier in
shops that sell pornographic magazines? Is it permissible to deal in
these kinds of magazines? Is it permissible to print them?

**Answer:** None of these [activities] is permissible because they aim
at promoting forbidden acts and propagating immorality.

276. **Question:** A Muslim works in a non-Muslim country, in a private
office, or in a government office, or on contract for a specific project
where he is paid by the hour. Is it permissible for him to waste some
hours or work negligently or intentionally delay the job? Does he
deserve the full wages?

**Answer:** This is not allowed; and if one does it, he is not entitled
to full wages.

277. **Question:** Some Muslims deal in the **manuscripts** of the Holy
Qur’an which they import from Muslim countries. Is this permissible? If
the obstacle in selling is the law that forbids selling the Qur’an to
non-Muslims, is it possible to overlook this condition so that the deal
may be legitimate? If it is permissible, how do we bypass this
condition?

**Answer:** We do not allow this since it is detrimental to the
[intellectual and cultural] heritage of the Muslims and their resources.

278. **Question:** Is it permissible to deal in manuscripts, art works,
and Islamic artifacts by importing them from Muslim countries with the
purpose of selling them at high prices in, for example, European
countries? Or is this considered ruinous to Islamic heritage, and
therefore not permissible?

**Answer:** We do not allow this for the reason mentioned earlier.

279. **Question:** During some nights the clubs are filled with their
non-Muslim customers who usually get drunk, and come out looking for
restaurants to eat their meal. Is it permissible for a Muslim to work in
such restaurants to serve permissible food to drunkards and sober
customers alike? Is it a sin, if that permissible food helps in
decreasing the effect of intoxication or other similar effect?

**Answer:** On its merits, there is no problem in this.

280. **Question:** Is it permissible for a Muslim to sell **pork** to
those who believe it is permissible for them like the *Ahlul* *Kitab*?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to deal in pork at all.

281. **Question:** Is it permissible to work at a store that sells pork
in the sense that the Muslim supervisor asks one of his employees to
give pork to the customer?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to sell pork, even to those who
consider it lawful, be it directly or through an intermediary. As for
handling pork for those who consider it lawful, there is problem in it;
however, based on obligatory precaution, one should refrain from it.

282. **Question:** A person knows for sure that one day he will see a
*haram* scene on television or video. Is it then permissible to buy it?

**Answer:** The reason compels him not to buy.

283. **Question:** You have said that a Muslim is allowed to buy
**lottery** tickets, if he intends to contribute to a charitable cause,
i.e. with no intention of winning the prize. Now, if a Muslim intends
that he is donating some part of the price of the lottery ticket for a
charitable cause that the lottery company chooses, and the rest of the
price is with the intention of winning the prize—would it be permissible
to buy the lottery ticket with such intention?

**Answer:** It is not permissible.

284. **Question:** Is it allowed for a mature and responsible Muslim to
encourage a child to buy a lottery ticket and then ask him to present it
to himself as a gift? Is it permissible for him to ask an *Ahlul*
*Kitab* person to buy the ticket [for him] with the intention of winning
the prize?

**Answer:** The prohibition is not lifted by any of those [loop holes]
because the rule of causing or delegating [the act of buying the lottery
ticket] is like doing it directly.

285. **Question:** Is it permissible to buy, say, honey, which has on it
a lottery ticket with the intention of winning the probable prize at the
time of buying?

**Answer:** It is permissible, if the entire price is for the honey and
not for the probable prize.

286. **Question:** A Muslim wins a lottery prize and then decides to
donate a portion of the prize to a charitable organization. Is it
permissible for that charitable organization to accept the money [or the
item] and use it for the welfare of Muslims? And does it make a
difference if the intention of the winner from the very beginning had
been to use some of the prize for the well-being of Muslims?

**Answer:** If the prize belongs to those whose wealth is not sacrosanct
[in Islam], it is permissible to utilize it.

287. **Question:** If a winner of the lottery performs *hajj* with the
prize of the lottery, is his *hajj* valid?

**Answer:** The ruling is clear from the answer of the last question.

288. **Question:** If an unjust and usurping establishment gives an
amount of money to a Muslim [to spend it for hajj], what is the status
of his *hajj*?

**Answer:** If it is not known that that particular money was aquired
unlawfully, the recipient should not worry if the giver is unjust and
usurper.

289. **Question:** Is it permissible **to work in a restaurant** where
intoxicating drinks are served, if the worker does not himself serve
them; nevertheless, sometimes he would be washing the cutlery [in which
the drinks were served]?

**Answer:** If washing the cutlery used for the intoxicating drinks is
considered as a first step in drinking the liquor and serving it to the
customers, it is forbidden.

290. **Question:** A Muslim who is committed to promote his religion is
compelled to work in a government department in the West; this may lead
to committing certain forbidden acts. He does this with the hope that he
will have in future a greater influence in that department. In this way
he serves his religion and considers this service more important than
committing the forbidden acts. Is this permissible for him?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to commit a forbidden act just for
future [positive] expectations.

291. **Question:** Is it permissible for a holder of a law degree to
become a **lawyer** in a non-Muslim country upholding the laws of that
country, and taking cases of non-Muslims since his purpose is to attract
cases irrespective of their nature?

**Answer:** If it does not involve violation of a right or lying or
other forbidden acts, there is no problem in it.

292. **Question:** Is it permissible for a holder of a law degree to
become a judge in non-Muslim countries in which he acts according to
their laws?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to administer judgment for those who
are not qualified, and [it is not permissible to judge] based on
non-Islamic laws.

293. **Question:** An electrical engineer in a European country is
sometimes called to install or repair public address systems; at times
those places are establishments for illicit entertainment. Is it
permissible for him to engage in this work in such places with the
knowledge that if he declines the customer, it will hurt his business,
in that customers will eventually leave him?

**Answer:** It is permissible.

294. **Question:** A person works in a restaurant in which he might be
required to serve meat that is not *halal* or pork to non-Muslims. You
have kindly answered the first situation; but the question remains with
regard to the second situation that involves serving pork alongside the
meat that is not *halal.* Is this allowed? If he refuses to serve pork,
he might lose his job and be fired.

295. **Answer:** Serving pork even to those who consider it lawful is a
problem; and based on obligatory precaution, it must be avoided.

296. **Question:** Is a Muslim allowed to work in grocery stores that
sell liquor in one of its sections, and his work is only as a cashier?

**Answer:** He is allowed to receive the price of items other than
liquor and also the price of liquor, if the buyers are non-Muslims.

297. **Question:** A printer in the West prints the menus of
restaurants. Such menus include pork. Is this allowed? Is he allowed to
print the advertisements for pubs and establishments that provide
forbidden entertainment knowing well that his business will be affected,
if he does not print these kinds of materials?

**Answer:** It is not permissible for him to do that even if it affects
his business.

[^1]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Wasa'ulu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 17, p. 44.

[^2]: Translator's Note: Working for a government in a Muslim state is
itself problematic from the religious point of view unless it is an
Islamic government. So the salary received from such a government cannot
become legitimate unless permission is sought from the mujtahid. This is
the underlining reason for the clause "without the permission of the
mujtahid" in the above answer.


