Interaction in social life
==========================

Introduction
------------

Each society has its own social circumstances with its own traditions,
formalities, values and customs. It is natural that the values and
customs of societies in foreign countries would differ from those of our
Muslim societies. These differences place the Muslim living in such
societies, in a constant state of questing about what is permissible for
him and what is not.

Becoming part of societies that cater for Western values imposes upon
the immigrants (from Muslim countries) the resistance against becoming
absorbed in the melting pot of the new values, and the protection of
themselves and their children from gradually melting into it. This is
bound to put upon them extra hardship to protect themselves, their
families and children from the societies destructive influences.

General Rules
-------------

Rights of one’s Relatives
-------------------------

298. Maintaining **ties with one’s relations** *(silatur rahim)* is
obligatory upon Muslims, and severing those ties *(qat‘ur rahim)* is one
of the major sins. Since maintaining the ties is obligatory and severing
them is a major sin for which Allah has threatened Hell-fire, the need
for maintaining the ties becomes more important in foreign lands; and
observing this obligation takes greater priority in countries where
relations are few, families break up, religious bonds erode, and
material values rule supreme.

Allah, the Almighty, has forbidden the severing of ties with one’s
relatives. He said in the Holy Book:

***“But if you held command, you were sure to make mischief in the land
and cut off the ties of kinship! Those it is whom Allah has cursed so He
has made them deaf and blinded their eyes.”*** **(47:22)**

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “A family that is united and whose members
support one another, Allah gives them sustenance, even if they be
sinners; a family that is divided and severs ties with one another,
Allah deprives them [from sustenance], even if they be pious.”[^1]

It has been narrated from Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) that: “In the book of
‘Ali [it says], ‘There are three traits whoever possesses them shall not
die until he sees their evil consequences: adultery, severing the ties
with one’s relations, and a false oath in which Allah is invoked. Indeed
the good deed that expedites reward is maintaining the ties with one’s
relations. There could be a people, who are sinners, yet they maintain
ties with one another, and so their wealth increases and they have
affluence. Verily a false oath and severing of ties will destroy
populated centres.”[^2]

299. It is *haram* to cut the ties with one’s relation even if that
person had severed his ties [with you]. It is *haram* to do so, even if
he or she is negligent of *salat*, a drunkard, and takes some religious
injunctions lightly (for example by not observing the *hijab,* *etc*) to
the extent that there is no use in advising, counseling or warning him
or her. This prohibition is only lifted when maintaining the ties
encourages that relation to continue in his or her immoral ways.

Our holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) said, “The best of virtues is to
maintain the ties with one who has severed it; to give in charity to one
who has deprived you [of help]; and to forgive one who has done wrong to
you.”[^3] He also said, “Do not sever the ties with your relations even
if they have severed them with you.”[^4]

300. Probably the least of deeds that a Muslim can do (within the realm
of possibility and ease) in order to maintain the ties with his
relations is to visit them and meet them; or to inquire about their well
being by enquiring even from far [via telephone, etc].

Our noble Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) said, “The good deed that brings
rewards faster [than other deeds] is maintaining the ties with one’s
relations.”[^5] Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “Maintain the link with your
relations even by greeting. Allah, the Almighty, says,

***‘Be careful of (your duty towards) Allah by whom you demand of one
another (your rights), and (to) the ties of relationship; surely Allah
ever watches over you.’*** **(4:1)”**[^6]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Maintaining the ties and charity make the
reckoning [of the Day of Judgement] simple, and protects from the sins.
Therefore, maintain the ties with your relations and be charitable
towards your brethren even by greeting kindly and replying to the
greetings.”[^7]

The Parents
-----------

301. The most serious type of severing the ties is **causing distress**
***(‘uqûq)*** **to the parents** whom Almighty Allah has enjoined
kindness and compassion. The Almighty says in His noble Book,

***“And your Lord enjoins that you should not worship but Him and be
kind to the parents. If either or both of them reach old age with you,
say not to them (so much as) ‘ugh’ nor chide them, and speak to them a
generous word.”*** **(17:23)**

The Imam says, “The lowest kind of *‘uqûq* is to say ‘ugh’. If Allah the
Almighty had known anything lower than that, He would surely have
forbidden it.”[^8]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Anyone who looks towards his parents with
hatred, even if they had been unjust to him, Allah shall not accept his
*salat*.” There are many such *ahadith*.[^9]

302. As opposed to the above is **being kind to one’s parent**s which
indeed is the best means of attaining the pleasure of Almighty Allah. He
has said in the holy Qur’an:

***“…and lower for them the wings of humility out of mercy, and say, ‘My
Lord! Have mercy on them as they had nourished me when I was an
infant.’”*** **(17:24)**

Ibrahim bin Shu‘ayb narrated that he said to Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), “My
father has become very old and weak so much so that we carry him [to the
toilet] when need be.” He said, “If you can help him in that, then do
so, and [also] feed him with your hand because this [service] will be a
shield [against the hell-fire] for you tomorrow [i.e., in the next
world].”[^10]

Maintaining the ties with one’s **mother before the father** has also
been mentioned in many noble *ahadith*. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “A
person came to the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah! To whom should I do a good deed?’ He replied, ‘To your mother.’
Then the person asked, ‘Then who?’ The Prophet replied, ‘Your mother.’
Then the person asked, ‘Then who?’ The Prophet replied, ‘Your mother.’
Then the person asked, ‘Then who?’ The Prophet answered, ‘Your
father.’”[^11] (See the question-answer section below.)

303. In some *ahadith* the right of the **eldest brother** over the
younger ones has been mentioned. This right should be observed and
implemented in order to strengthen the ties of brotherhood within the
single family and to guarantee its survival as a strong and well-knit
structure if and when it goes through a rough patch. The Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.) said, “The right of the eldest brother over the
younger ones is like the right of the father over his child.”[^12]

304. Besides the guardian of the child or someone authorized by him, no
one is allowed to physically **punish a child** when he commits a
forbidden act or causes harm to others. The guardian and someone
authorized by him are allowed to discipline a child. [However, there are
limits that must be observed:] the act of, say, hitting should be light,
not agonizing, and should not be such that it leaves bruises on the
child’s skin; that it should not exceed three hits [in one instance];
and that also only when disciplining the child depends on corporal
punishment.

Therefore, the elder brother does not have the right to hit the younger
brother unless he is the legal guardian of the child or authorized by
the guardian. It is not permissible at all to hit a school pupil without
the permission of his guardians or someone authorized by the guardian.
(See the question-answer section below.)

305. It is not permissible to hit a *baligh* child in order to prevent
him from an evil act, except in accordance with the conditions of
*al-amru bi ’l-ma‘rûf wa ’n-nahi ‘ani ’l-munkar* (enjoining the good and
forbidding the evil) with the permission of the religious authority.
Based on obligatory precaution, a *baligh* child should not be hit at
all.

The Elderly
-----------

306. **Respecting the Elders:** The noble Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) has
asked us to respect the elderly and honour them. He said, “One who
recognizes the virtue of an elder person and honours him for his age,
Allah shall protect him from the fear of the Day of Judgment.”[^13]He
also said, “One way of exalting Allah, the Almighty, is to honour the
believer with a white beard.”[^14]

Visiting One Another
--------------------

307. Many noble *ahadith* from the Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.)
have emphasized the idea of visiting one another, maintaining cordial
relationship among the believers, making the believers happier,
fulfilling their needs, visiting their sick, participating in their
funerals, and helping them in good as well as restrained circumstances.
Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Anyone who visits his brother [in faith] for
the sake of Allah, Almighty Allah will say, ‘You have visited Me,
therefore your reward is upon Me, and I will not be satisfied with a
reward for you less than Paradise.’”[^15]

The Imam said to Khaythamah, “Convey our greetings to those who love us
and advise them to fear Allah, and that the affluent and strong ones
among them should visit the poor and weak ones; they should participate
in their funerals and meet one another in their homes.”[^16]

The Neighbour
-------------

308. The right of the **neighbour** is close [in importance] to the
right of kin. A Muslim and a non-Muslim neighbour are equal in this
right because the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) established the right of
the non-Muslim neighbour when he said:

“There are three kinds of neighbours: 1. Some of them have three rights
[upon you]: the right of Islam, the right of neighbourhood, and the
right of relationship.

2. Some have two rights: the right of Islam and the right of
neighbourhood.

3. Some have just one right: the non-Muslim who has the right of
neighbourhood.”[^17] The Prophet said, “The best neighbourly act is to
be trustworthy for those who are your neighbours.”[^18]

In the advice Imam ‘Ali gave to Imams al-Hasan and al-Husayn after the
accursed Ibn Muljim had wounded him, he also talked about neighbours. He
said, “be mindful of your duty towards Allah regarding your neighbours
because it was the advice of your Prophet who continuously talked good
about them until we thought that he might give them a share in our
estate.”[^19]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Accursed, accursed is he who harasses his
neighbour.”[^20] He also said, “One who does not maintain good
neighbourly relations with his neighbours is not one of us.”[^21](See
the question-answer section below.)

309. Among the qualities of the good believers is to emulate the noble
character of Prophet Muhammad (a.s.) whom the Almighty has described in
His Book as follows: *“And you verily are on a high level of noble
character.”* (68: 4-6.)[^22]Indeed the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said,
“Nothing will be placed on the scale of the Day of Judgement better than
good character.”[^23] Once the Prophet was asked, “Who is the best in
faith among the believers?” He replied, “The best among them in
character.”[^24]

Truthfulness
------------

310. Among the qualities of good believers is **truthfulness** in speech
and action, and fulfilling the promise. Almighty Allah has praised
Prophet Isma‘il (a.s.) by saying: *“He indeed was true in [fulfillment
of] promise and was a messenger, a prophet.”* (19:54)

The noble Prophet said, “One who believes in Allah and the Last Day
should fulfill whatever he promises.”[^25]

The importance of truthfulness and fulfillment of promise is more
emphasized when we realize that many non-Muslims judge Islam by the
action of Muslims. As much good a Muslim does, he positively portrays
Islam to non-Muslims through his good conduct, and as much evil a Muslim
does, he negatively portrays Islam through his bad conduct.

Husband and Wife
----------------

311. Among the qualities of a **good wife** is refraining from
harassing, hurting, and irritating her husband. Among the qualities of a
**good husband** is refraining from harassing, hurting, and irritating
his wife. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “If a man has a wife who harasses
him, Allah will neither accept her ritual prayer *(salat)* nor any of
her good deeds —until she has pleased him— even if she fasts and prays
at all times, emancipates slaves, and gives away her wealth in charity
for the sake of Allah. She will be the first to enter the Fire.” Then he
said, “And the husband has the same burden and chastisement, if he is a
harasser and unjust [in his behaviour towards his wife].”[^26]

Friendship with non-Muslims
---------------------------

312. A Muslim is allowed to take **non-Muslims for acquaintances and
friends**, to be sincere towards them and they be sincere towards him,
to help one another in fulfilling the needs of this life. Almighty Allah
has said in His noble Book:

***“Allah does not forbid you in regard to those who have not made war
against you on account of (your) religion, and have not driven you forth
from your homes, that you show them kindness and deal with them justly;
surely Allah loves the doers of justice.”*** **(60:8)**

When these kinds of friendship produce good results, it guarantees that
the non-Muslim friend, neighbour, or colleague and business partner will
know about the values of Islam, and it will bring him closer to this
upright religion. The Prophet said to Imam ‘Ali, “If Allah guides
through you a single person from His servants, that is better for you
than anything upon which the Sun shines from the East to the West.”[^27]
(See the question-answer section below.)

313. It is permissible to greet *Ahlul Kitab* (the Jews and the
Christians, etc) and also the non-*Ahlul Kitab* on the occasions they
celebrate like the New Year, Christmas, Easter, and the Passover.

***Al-Amr bi ’l-Ma‘rûf*** **and** ***an-Nahi ‘ani ’l-Munkar***

314. **Enjoining good and forbidding evil** are obligatory rituals,
whenever the conditions exist, on all believing men and women. Almighty
Allah has said in His noble Book: *“There should be a group among you
who should be calling (people) to the good, enjoining the good, and
forbidding the evil; they are the successful ones.”* (3:104) He also
said, *“The believing men and the believing women are helpers of one
another, they enjoin the good and forbid the evil.”* (9:71)

Our noble Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) said, “My community will continue to
be blessed as long they enjoin the good and forbid the evil, and help
one another in good deeds. When they do not do this, blessings will be
withheld from them, and some [evil persons] among them will have
hegemony over the others; and they shall have no helper neither on the
earth nor in the heaven.”[^28]

Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq (a.s.) qualted the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) as
saying, “How will it be with you when your women will become corrupt
and, your youths sinful while you will not be enjoining the good nor
forbidding the evil?” The people said, “Will this happen, O Messenger of
Allah?” He replied, “Yes; and even worse than that. How will it be with
you when you will be enjoining the evil and forbidding the good?” The
people said, “O Messenger of Allah! will this actually happen?” He said,
“Yes, and even worse than that. How will it be with you when you will
think of good as evil and of evil as good?”[^29]

These two obligations become more pressing when the person neglecting
the good or committing the evil is one of your family members. You might
find someone among your family who neglects some obligations or takes
them lightly; you might find some of them

performing *wudhu* or *tayammum* or *ghusl* incorrectly, or does not
purify his body and clothes from impurities correctly. Or does not
recite the two *surahs* and the obligatory recitations in *salat*
correctly; or does not purify his wealth by paying *khums* and *zakat*.

You might find someone among your family members committing some sins
like masturbation or gambling or listening to songs or drinking
intoxicants or eating *haram* meat or devouring people’s property
unlawfully or cheating and stealing.

You might find someone among the women in your family not observing
*hijab,* not concealing her hair; and you might find that she does not
remove the nail polish at the time of *wudhu* or*ghusl*. You might even
find among them someone who wears perfume for men other than her
husband; and does not conceal her hair or body from the eyes of her
cousins (maternal or paternal), brother-in-law, or husband’s friend with
the justification that they all live in the same house, and under the
pretext that he is like her brother, or other similar groundless
excuses.

You might find someone in your family who habitually lies, backbites and
infringes upon the rights of others, usurps people’s property, supports
the wrong-doers in their unjust activities, and harasses his neighbour,
etc.

If you find any such situations, you should enjoin the good and forbid
the evil by applying the first two methods: that is, expressing your
displeasure at the situation, and then speaking about it. If these two
methods do not work, then apply the third method (after asking the
permission from the *mujtahid):* adopting practical [or physical]
measures moving from softer to harsher ones. If that person is ignorant
of the religious rules, it is your duty to teach them, if they have the
intention of learning and acting accordingly.

Kindness towards People
-----------------------

315. **Kindness towards people,** all the people, is among the
recommended rituals that have been emphasized by our religion. The
Messenger of Allah said, “My Lord has commanded me to be kind towards
the people just as He has commanded me to fulfill the obligatory
[prayers].” He also said, “If a person does not have three things, his
deeds are not complete: [spiritual] armor that prevents him from
disobeying Allah; noble character by which he shows kindness towards the
people; and forbearance by which he repels the foolishness of the
ignorant person.”[^30]

Kindness is not limited to the Muslims only. It has been narrated that
Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) became a travelling companion of a non-Muslim on the
way to Kufa. When they reached to a crossroad, the Imam walked with him
for a distance before saying farewell. The non-Muslim asked him why he
walked that extra distance, the Imam replied, “This is the right of
companionship, i.e. see them through for a short distance when they
separate. This is what our Prophet has ordered us to do.”[^31]That man
accepted Islam because of this noble gesture.

An interesting story was narrated by ash-Sha‘bi concerning the justice
of Imam ‘Ali with one of his non-Muslim subjects. He narrated that one
day ‘Ali bin Abi Talib went to the market and saw a Christian selling a
coat of arms. ‘Ali (a.s.) recognized that coat of arms and said to the
seller, “This is my body armour; let us go to the judge of the Muslims.”
The Muslim judge was Shurayh, and ‘Ali himself had appointed him in that
position.

When they went to Shurayh, he said, “What is the matter, O *Amiru
’l-mu’mineen*?” ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “This is my coat of arms which I have
lost since a long time now.” Then Shurayh asked the seller, “O
Christian, what do you have to say?” The Christian seller said, “I am
not accusing *Amiru ’l-mu’mineen* of lying, but the coat of arms is my
property.” So Shurayh turned to ‘Ali (a.s.) and said, “I do not see [any
ground on which] you can take it from his possession. Do you have a
proof [supporting your claim]?” Since ‘Ali (a.s.) had no proof, he said,
“Shurayh is correct [in his judgement].”[^32]

On hearing the judgment, the Christian seller said, “I bear witness that
these are the laws of the prophets: the Leader of the Believers comes to
a judge appointed by himself, and the judge passes a judgment against
him! By God, O *Amiru ’l-mu’mineen*, this coat of arms is yours—I
followed you in the army, and the coat of arms slipped down from your
camel, so I took it. I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “Now that
you have become a Muslim, it belongs to you.” Then he carried it on a
horse. Sha‘bi said that he subsequently saw the man fighting the
non-Muslims. This version of the *hadith* has been narrated from Abu
Zakariyya.[^33]

Similarly, we have heard from *Amiru ’l-mu’mineen* ‘Ali (a.s.) what
could be considered as a historical precedence of social security that
is so commonly practiced at present in the Western world. ‘Ali did not
differentiate between a Muslim and a non-Muslim in the Islamic state.
The narrator said that one day an old blind person passed by him
begging. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), “What is this?” Those who were around him
said, “O said, he is a Christian!” Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) answered, “You have
used him until he became old and incapable, and now you are depriving
him [of the benefits]! Provide for him from the public treasury.”[^34]
It has also been narrated from Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), “If a Jewish person
comes to sit with you, make that a good meeting.”[^35]

Making Peace Between People
---------------------------

316. There is a great reward in **making peace between people,**
reconciling their differences, making them friends of one another, and
lessening the gulf of disagreement between them. More so when making
peace is done in a non-Muslim land far away from the homeland, family,
relations, and friends. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) had given certain advice to his
sons, al-Hassan and al-Husayn, just before his death after the Kharijite
Ibn Muljim al-Muradi had injured him. He said, “I advise you both, all
my children and family members, and whosoever to whom this letter of
mine reaches: to fear Allah, to organize your affairs, to establish
peace because I have heard your grandfather (s.a.w.) say, ‘Making peace
is better than a whole year of praying and fasting.’”[^36]

Sincere Advice for Muslim Brethren
----------------------------------

317. **Sincere advice** —that is, to wish that the blessings of Allah
may continue on the believing brethren, to dislike that evil may afflict
them, and to exert efforts in guiding them towards what is good for
them— is among the deeds loved by the Almighty Allah.

3.8  
 318. There are countless *ahadith* on the importance of sincere
counsel. For instance, the Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “The person with
greatest status in the eyes of Allah on the Day of Judgement will be the
person who worked most in His earth to give sincere counsel to His
creatures.”[^37] Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said, “The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) said, ‘A person from among you should give sincere advice to
his brother in faith as if he is advising himself.’”[^38] Imam as-Sadiq
(a.s.) said, “It is necessary for a believer to sincerely advise another
believer in his presence as well as in his absence.”[^39] He also said,
“You should be careful about advising Allah’s creatures sincerely for
His sake because you can never meet Allah with a deed better than
that.”[^40]

Spying
------

319. **Spying** —that is, snooping in order to gain information and
embarrass people— is forbidden in Islamic laws. Almighty Allah has said
in His Book:

***“O You who believe, refrain from most of suspicions because some
suspicions are sins, and do not spy…”*** **(49:12)**

Ishaq bin ‘Ammar, a companion of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), said: I heard
as-Sadiq (a.s.) saying, “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said, ‘O you
who have accepted Islam with your tongue [i.e., with your verbal
declarations of faith] and faith is yet to enter your hearts! Do not
disparage the Muslims nor disclose their frailties, because whosoever
discloses their shortcomings, Allah shall disclose his; and he whose
weaknesses are disclosed by Allah, will indeed be disgraced, even if he
is inside his house.’”[^41]

Backbiting, Namimah
-------------------

320. **Backbiting** means “speaking ill of a believer in their absence
with the purpose of disparaging or not, and no matter whether the
alleged shortcoming was related to his body, lineage, behaviour, deeds,
statements, religion, or life, and other defects which are [usually]
concealed from the people. Similarly, it does not matter whether the
description was done by words or by gesture.”[^42]

Almighty Allah condemned backbiting in His noble Book and has described
it such that mind and body feel abhorrence towards it. He said,

***“And some of you should not backbite the others: would anyone of you
like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? No, you abhor it.”***
**(49:12)**

The Prophet (s.a.w.) said, “Be careful of backbiting because backbiting
is worse than adultery, in that a person who commits adultery can repent
and ask forgiveness from God, and Allah can forgive him whereas Allah
will not forgive the backbiter until the person who was at the receiving
end forgives him.”[^43]

It is not appropriate for a believer to listen to backbiting against his
believing brother. Indeed, it appears from the sayings of the Prophet
and the Imams (may Allah bless them all) that it is obligatory upon one
who hears backbiting to support the person who is being disparaged; and
that if he does not repel the backbiting [against his believing
brother], Allah will abandon him in this world as well as in the
hereafter, and he shall be held accountable just like the one who did
the backbiting.

321. When we talk about backbiting, another religious terminology also
comes to the mind of the believer that has been equally forbidden by
Islam for the sake of holding the society together. It is the term known
as ***“an-namimah”*** which means sowing dissension by statements like
“So and so was saying this and that about you” with the intention of
damaging the relationship between the believers or increasing bitterness
between them.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) has said, “Shall I not inform you of the
worst person among you?” People said, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah!” He
said, “Those who spread slanderous rumours; those who divide
friends.”[^44]Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said, “Paradise is forbidden upon the
backbiters and those who spread slanderous rumours.”[^45] Similarly,
Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “The spiller of blood [i.e., murderer], the
alcoholic, and the one who spreads slanderous rumours will not enter
Paradise.”[^46]

322. **Suspicion.** Almighty Allah has forbidden us from having
suspicious thoughts. He says in His noble Book,

***“O you who believe! Refrain from most of the suspicions because some
suspicions are a sin.”*** **(49:12)**

Based on this noble Qur’anic verse, it is not permissible for a believer
to entertain suspicious thoughts about his fellow Muslim without any
clear proof and evidence, because no one other than Allah knows the
inner-most thoughts of a person. So, as long as it is possible to place
the action of a believer in a proper context, we should do so until it
is pro s proven otherwise. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “Place the affair of
your brother in the best possible [context] until you get a proof which
convinces you [of the contrary]. And do not have suspicious thoughts
about a word that comes out of your brother [in faith] while you have a
positive context for it.”[^47]

Extravagance and Waste
----------------------

323. Extravagance and waste are two bad qualities condemned by Almighty
Allah. He says,

***“Eat and drink but do not waste because He does not like the
squanderors.”(7:31)***

He has also condemned those who engage in waste by saying,

***“Verily the wastrels are brethren of the Satans, and verily the Satan
was ungrateful to his Lord.”(19:27)***

324. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) wrote a letter to Ziyad in which he condemned
wastage and squandering. He wrote: “Give up lavishness and be moderate.
Every day remember the coming day. Hold back from the funds what you
need and send forward the balance for the day of your need. Do you
expect that Allah may give you the reward of the humble while you
yourself are arrogant in His view? And do you covet that He may give you
the reward of those doing charity while you enjoy comforts and deny them
to the weak and the widows? Certainly, a man is rewarded according to
what he has done, and he shall meet what he has sent forth.”[^48]

Charity
-------

325. Charity for the sake of Allah: Allah has encouraged us in His noble
Book to give charity for His sake and has described it as a deal which
will never go sour. He says,

***“Those who recite the Book of Allah, establish the prayer, and give
in charity secretly as well as openly out of what We have given them,
they hope for a deal that will never go sour. Allah shall pay them their
rewards in full and give them more out of His grace; indeed He is
Forgiving, Multiplier of rewards.” (35:29-30)***

In another chapter,

***He says, “Who is there that will offer to Allah a good loan so that
He will double it for him, and he shall have an excellent reward. On
that day you will see the believing men and the believing women while
their light shall be running before them and on their right side—[they
will be told:] ‘good news to you today: gardens beneath which rivers
flow, to abide therein, that is the great achievement.’” (57:11-12)***

In a third verse, Allah reminds us to hasten to giving charity before
death strikes. He says,

***“And give in charity out of what We have given you before death comes
to one of you, so that he*** ***should say, ‘My Lord! Why did Thou not
respite me to a near term, so that I should have given alms*** ***and
been of the doers of good deeds?’ And Allah does not respite a soul when
its appointed term*** ***has come, and Allah is Aware of what you do.”
(63:10-11)***

Then Allah clarifies the end of those who hoard wealth and do not spend
in charity for His sake. He says,

***“(As for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in
Allah’s way, announce to them a painful chastisement on the day when it
shall be heated in the fire of hell, then their foreheads and their
sides and their backs shall be branded with it; this is what you hoarded
up for yourselves, therefore taste what you hoarded.” (9:34-35)***

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) was the living example and the embodiment of the great
values of Islam; he gave in charity whatever his hands could hold,
preferring frugality in this transitory world and avoiding its beauties
and luxuries while he had the control of the entire public treasury of
the Muslims. He describes himself [in letter to his governor in Basra]
as follows:

“If I wished I could have taken the way leading towards (worldly
pleasures like) pure honey, fine wheat and silk clothes, but it cannot
be that my passions lead me and greed takes me to choosing good meals
while there may be people in the Hijaz and in Yamamah who have no hope
of getting bread or who do not have a full meal. Shall I lie with a full
belly while around me there may be hungry bellies and thirsty livers? Or
shall I be as the poet has said,It is enough for you to have a disease
that you lie with your belly full while around you people may be badly
yearning for dried meat?”[^49]

Various sayings have come from the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the
Imams (a.s.) describing clearly the benefits gained by the person who
gives in charity, not only in this world, but also more than what he
expects on “the day when neither wealth shall benefit [a person] nor
children.”

Sustenance is one reward that a generous person gets. The Prophet
(s.a.w.) said, “Let sustenance flow [from God] through charity.”[^50]

Curing disease is another benefit of giving in charity. The Prophet
(s.a.w.) said, “Cure your sick ones through charity.”[^51]

Prolonging life span and averting tragic death is another result of
giving in charity. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said, “Benevolence and charity
eliminate poverty, prolong life span, and spare the charitable person
seventy kinds of tragic deaths.”[^52]

Fulfillment of debts and [increase in] blessings are also benefits of
giving in charity. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Charity fulfills the
payment of debts and yields.”[^53]

The children of a charitable person are taken care of after blessing his
death. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “No person has given good charity in
this world but that Allah has made good provision for his children after
his departure [from this world].”[^54]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said, “If I could take care of a Muslim family,
feeding the hungry among them, clothing the naked among them, and
protecting their honour in society [their having not to beg], this is
preferable than going for hajj, [then another] hajj, [then a third] hajj
until I go ten times or even until I go seventy times.”[^55]

Doing charity for the sake of Allah is a vast subject that cannot be
fully covered in this short treatise.[^56]

Gifts for Family members
------------------------

326. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) had encouraged heads of family to
buy gifts for their families so as to make them happy. Ibn ‘Abbas
narrates from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) that he said, “Whosoever
enters a market and buys a gift, and takes it to his family is like a
person who do charity to those who are in need of it.”[^57]

Concern for the Muslim Ummah
----------------------------

327. One of the issues that the Islamic shari‘a has emphasized is the
the of being concerned for the affairs of Muslims. The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.) said, “Whosoever get up in the morning and has no concern
for the affairs of Muslims is not a Muslim.”[^58] He also said,
“Whosoever gets up without being concerned with the affairs of Muslims
is not one of them.”[^59] There are many other sayings on this issue
cannot be mentioned here.[^60]

Questions and Answers
---------------------

328. **Question:** Is it permissible to participate in the **funeral**
ceremony **of a non-Muslim,** if he was, for example, a neighbour?

**Answer:** If the deceased and those organizing the funeral are not
known to have hatred towards Islam and Muslims, there is no problem in
participating in the funeral. However, it is better to walk behind the
coffin and not in front of it.

329. **Question:** Is it permissible to exchange greetings and gifts
with a non-Muslim, if he is a neighbour or a co-worker, etc.?

**Answer:** If he does not express hatred towards Islam and Muslims in
words or actions, there is no problem in doing what is required in
friendship like being good and charitable towards him. Almighty Allah
has said,

***“Allah does not forbid you in regard to those who have not made war
against you on account of (your) religion, and have not driven you forth
from your homes, that you show them kindness and deal with them justly;
surely Allah loves the doers of justice.”*** **[60:8]**

330. **Question:** Is it permissible for the people of *Ahlul* *Kitab*
and other **non-Muslims to enter the mosques** *(masjid)* and other
Islamic places of worship [like husayniyya or imambargah which are not
*masjid*]? And is it necessarily for us to enforce the *hijab* on those
[non-Muslim women] who do not observe *hijab* and allow them to enter
[the mosque or places of worship], if it is permissible?

**Answer:** Based on obligatory precaution, it is not permissible for
them [i.e., non-Muslims] to enter the mosque *(masjid)*. As for their
entering the places of worship, etc, there is no problem in it. If their
entry [in *imambargah* or a *husayniyya* or a center] without *hijab* is
considered as a sign of disrespect, *hijab* should be enforced on the
[non-Muslim] women.

331. **Question:** Is it permissible to harass a Jewish, or a Christian,
or an Atheist neighbour?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to harass them without justification.

332. **Question:** Is it permissible to give charity to the poor among
non-Muslims? Would a person get reward [*thawab* from Allah] for this
charity?

**Answer:** There is no problem in extending charity to [a non-Muslim]
who does not show hatred against Islam and Muslims; and one who gives
such a charity will be rewarded for this deed.

333. **Question:** Is it obligatory to enjoin the good *(amr bi
’l-ma‘rûf)* and forbid the evil *(nahi ‘ani ’l-munkar)* in regard to
those who are not followers of Islam or are from *the Ahlul Kitab, who
are receptive*, without any harm coming our way?

**Answer:** Yes, it is obligatory, provided that the other conditions
also exist. One of those other conditions is that the person to be
admonished should not have an excuse for doing the evil or neglecting
the obligation. Being ignorant out of negligence is not an acceptable
excuse. So, such a person should first be guided to the right conduct,
and then if they do not act accordingly, they should be asked to do good
or be forbidden from doing evil.

However, if the evil deed is of a category that one knows Allah does not
like it to happen in any circumstances —like creating corruption in the
earth, killing an innocent person, etc— it is necessary to prevent it,
even if the doer is ignorant out of innocence.

334. **Question:** In European schools, there are teachers who do not
believe in any religion and reject the idea of God in front of their
pupils. Is it permissible for Muslim pupils to remain in such schools,
knowing that they can be greatly influenced by their teachers?

**Answer:** It is not permissible; and the guardian of the child is
fully responsible for that.

335. **Question:** Is it permissible for male and female pupils
/students in elementary and secondary schools to mix when one knows that
this mixing will surely lead one day to a forbidden act by the male or
the female student, even if that is just [as minor an act as] a
forbidden glance?

**Answer:** It is not permissible under the circumstances described [in
the question].

336. **Question:** Is it permissible for a Muslim man to go to a mixed
swimming pool with the knowledge that the women there swimming suits
form and would not listen to any admonishing?

**Answer:** Although looking without bad thoughts or lustful intentions
at the women who are indecently dressed (and who would not listen to you
if you wish to admonish them) is allowed, yet based on obligatory
precaution, going to such places is absolutely forbidden.

337. **Question:** Is it permissible for those who reside in the West to
send their *muhajjaba* daughters to co-ed schools (irrespective of
whether or not education is compulsory) while there exist non co-ed
schools which obviously are expensive, located faraway or of a low
academic standard?

**Answer:** It is not permissible, [even] if it [just] corrupts their
character, let alone if it harms their beliefs and commitment to the
faith which is what normally happens!

338. **Question:** Is it permissible for a Muslim youth to accompany the
girls who study with him in foreign universities for walking together,
in vacation tours, etc.?

**Answer:** It is not permissible, except with surety that he will not
commit a forbidden act.

339. **Question:** Is it permissible to look at a passionate scene
taking place on the street?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to look at it with lustful intentions
or with ill thoughts; rather, based on obligatory precaution, one should
refrain from watching it totally.

340. **Question:** Is it permissible to go to a mixed [i.e., co-ed]
cinema and other *haram* places of entertainment without having any
guarantee that one will not engage in a forbidden act?

**Answer:** It is not permissible.

341. **Question:** Is it permissible to swim in a mixed swimming pool
without having any lustful intention?

**Answer:** Based on obligatory precaution, it is not permissible to go
to the places of indecency at all.

342. **Question:** Is it permissible to go to sea beaches and public
parks during sunny days for walking while one might come across scenes
which are against the norm of decency?

**Answer:** Without a guarantee that one will not commit a forbidden
act, it is not permissible.

343. **Question:** In European countries, public baths are built with
certain considerations. Whether or not it is in the direction of *qibla*
is not one of their considerations unlike the situation in Muslim
countries:

    a. Is it permissible for us to use such facilities, if we do not
know where the direction of the *qibla* is?

    b. And if we know the baths do face the direction of the *qibla,* is
it permissible for us to use them? If it is not permissible, what is the
solution?

**Answer:**

    a. In the first case, based on obligatory precaution, it is not
permissible to use them except after failing to know the direction of
the *qibla* and that it is not possible to wait or that waiting would
entail harm and place the person in difficulty.

    b. In the second case, based on obligatory precaution, it is
necessary —while using the bathroom— to refrain from facing the *qibla*
or turning one’s back to it. However, in the event of emergency, one
should sit with their back towards the *qibla.* This is based on
obligatory precaution.

344. **Question:** Suppose that Muslim, residing in a non-Muslim country
finds a suitcase (full of clothes) with or without the owner’s nametag
on it. What should he do with it?

**Answer:** A suitcase of personal belongings normally has the nametag
through which the owner can be contacted. If he knows that it belongs to
a Muslim or a non-Muslim whose property is sacrosanct (or even if there
is a likelihood —a considerable likelihood— [that it belongs to a
non-Muslim whose property is sacrosanct]), it is necessary for him to
announce it for one whole year that he has found that item [so that the
owner can come forward and claim it]. If he cannot find the owner [even
after the lapse of one year], he should, based on obligatory precaution,
give it in charity.

345. However, if he knows that it belongs to a non-, it is permissible
for him to keep it provided that he is not legally bound to announce
what he finds in that country or to hand it over to the authorities,
etc.[^61] In the latter case, he is not allowed to take possession of
it; rather it is compulsory on him to act in accordance with the legal
undertaking.

346. **Question:** If I find an item in a European country without any
distinctive sign on it [identifying the owner], is it permissible for me
to keep it?

**Answer:** If it has no distinctive sign by which one can contact the
owner, it is permissible for you to keep it except in the case [of the
legal undertaking] mentioned earlier.

347. **Question:** Some people, be they Muslim or non-Muslim, in the
West approach you with expensive items for sale at a price so cheap that
the potential buyer is almost convinced that the item is stolen. Is it
permissible to buy it, if one knows for sure, or feel a strong
probability, that it is has been stolen from a Muslim?

**Answer:** If one knows or gets a strong feeling that the item has been
stolen from a person whose property is sacrosanct, it is not permissible
to buy it or keep it.

348. **Question:** The price of cigarettes is very high in Western
countries. Would it be forbidden to buy them because of extravagance and
waste, especially when one knows that they are harmful [to one’s
health]?

**Answer:** It is permissible to buy them; and using them would not
become *haram* for the reasons mentioned [in the question]. Of course,
if **smoking** causes great harm to the smoker while quitting it can
cause him no harm or lesser harm, it is necessary for him to quit it.

349. **Question:** There are machines used in telephone tapping. Is it
permissible to use such devices without the knowledge of the intended
person in order to use it against them when the need arises?

**Answer:** It is not obligatory on one speaker to ask the permission of
the other speaker to record the conversation on the telephone line.
However, he is not allowed to publicize it or let others listen to it if
it will cause an insult of a *mo’min* or disclose his secret — unless
that is over-ridden by another equal or more important obligation.

350. **Question:** A photographer is asked to take pictures at a wedding
reception where intoxicating drinks are served. Is this permissible for
him?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to take pictures of the scenes of
drinking intoxicants and other forbidden substances.

351. **Question:** What are the limits of obeying one’s parents?

**Answer:** The duty of a child towards his parents is of two kinds:

    a. The First: To be kind towards them by providing for them, if they
are in need. To provide for their day-to-day needs. To respond to their
requests that are related to their daily lives at a level that is normal
and usual for a human being, in the sense that if he refuses to fulfill
them, it would be regarded as “not being good to them” — and that would
differ depending on whether they are healthy and strong or ill and weak.

    b. The Second: To behave towards them kindly, by not offending them
in word or action, even if they are unjust to him. In some religious
text, it says, “And if they hit you, do not shun them; instead say, ‘May
Allah forgive you.’”

This is as far as it relates to the parents’ situation. As for those
issues concerning the affairs of the child himself by which he could
offend one of the parents, these are of two kinds:

    a. The First: If the parent’s distress results from his concern for
the child, it is forbidden for the child to do something that would
distress his parent, irrespective of whether or not the parent has
prevented him from it.

    b. The Second: If the parent’s distress results from of his own evil
characteristics (for example, dislike for the good of this world or the
hereafter for his child), this kind of distress has no bearing on the
child, thus, it is not obligatory on the child to submit to this kind of
desires.

It becomes clear from this that, on its own, obeying the parents in
their personal commands is not obligatory. And Allah knows the best.

352. **Question:** Some parents fear for their concerning enjoining the
good and forbidding the evil [and, therefore, ask them not to embark on
this road]. So, is it obligatory to obey them in this matter, especially
if the child knows that his advice will be effective and there is no
danger to him [in doing *amr* or *nahi*]?

**Answer:** When it becomes obligatory upon the child [to do *amr* or
*nahi*], with all the conditions present, no creature can be obeyed in
exchange of disobeying the Creator.

353. **Question:** A son argues with his father or a daughter with her
mother, over a serious day-to-day issue, in a heated manner that causes
distress to the parents. Is this permissible for the children, and what
is the limit when a child is not allowed to argue with the parent?

**Answer:** A child is allowed to discuss with the parents in matters
that he or she thinks are not right; but the child must observe
politeness and respect in the discussion; he or she should not angrily
look at them, nor raise his voice over theirs, let alone use harsh words
and expressions.

354. **Question:** If a mother advises her son to divorce his wife with
whom she has differences, is it obligatory upon him to obey her in this
matter? What if she says, “You are an *‘aq* child,[^62]if you do not
divorce her”?

**Answer:** It is not obligatory on him to obey her in this matter, and
her statement [about him becoming disobedient] has no effect whatsoever.
Of course, as mentioned earlier, it is necessary for him to hold back
from any insulting statement or action towards her.

355. **Question:** A father hits his child severely that it leaves blue
or red marks on his skin—is it obligatory upon the father to pay
indemnity for bodily injury? Is the rule different if the person who hit
the child was not his father?

**Answer:** The indemnity is obligatory upon the one who hits [in the
way described above], regardless of whether he is the father or someone
else

356. **Question:** If a Muslim is sure of his father’s displeasure
—although he has not heard him say no— in his travelling abroad, is it
permissible for him to travel, should he know that the journey is good
for him?

**Answer:** If being kind towards the father —in the context mentioned
earlier in the answer to a previous question— demands that the son
should be close to him, or that the father will be in distress out of
his concern for the son, he should not embark on travelling as long as
he will not be in loss; otherwise, it is not necessary for him to
refrain [from travelling].

357. **Question:** Is it part of righteousness for the wife to serve
in-laws? Is it part of kindness for the husband to be considerate of his
in-laws, especially in foreign countries?

**Answer:** There is no doubt it is part of righteousness and an example
of kindness towards the husband or the wife; but it is not obligatory.

[^1]: Al-Kulayni, al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 348.

[^2]:  Ibid, p. 347.

[^3]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 260.

[^4]: Al-Kulayni, al-Usûl mina 'l-K?fi, vol. 2, p. 347; also see
as-Sadûq, Man La Yahdhuruhu 'l-Faqih, vol. 4, p. 267.

[^5]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 152.

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 155.

[^7]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 157.

[^8]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 348.

[^9]:  Ibid.

[^10]:  Ibid, vol. 2, p. 162.

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 160.

[^12]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 267.

[^13]:  As-Sadûq, Thawabu 'l-A'mal wa 'Iqabu 'l-A'mal, p. 225.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Al-Kulayni, al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 176.

[^16]:  Ibid; for more information, see the sections "Fulfilling the
Needs of Believer" (vol. 2, p. 192), "Striving for Need of a Believer"
(vol. 2, p. 196), "Relieving the Suffering of a Believer" (vol. 2, p.
199) of al-Usûl mina 'l-K?fi of al-Kulayni.

[^17]: An-Nuri, Mustadraku 'l-Wasa'il ("Kitabu 'l-Hajj"), section 72.

[^18]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 267. Also see the
section on "rights of the neighbour" in al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p.
666.

[^19]: Nahju 'l-Balagha (ed. Subhi as-Salih) p. 422.

[^20]: Mustadraku 'l-Wasa'il, vol. 1, section 72.

[^21]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 268.

[^22]: To know more about the noble character of the Prophet (a.s.), see
at-Tabrasi, Makarimu 'l-Akhlaq, p. 15ff, and the various books of
history and hadith.

[^23]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 1, p. 443.

[^24]:  Ibid, vol. 2, p. 331. Also see al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p.
99 and Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 198ff.

[^25]: An-Naraqi, ibid. Also see al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 363ff.

[^26]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 20, p. 82. Also see
'Abdu 'l-Husayn Dastghayb, adh-Dhunûbu 'l-Kabirah, vol. 2, p. 296-297.

[^27]: An-Nuri, Mustadraku 'l-Wasa'il, vol. 12, p. 241.

[^28]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 16, p. 396.

[^29]:  Ibid, vol. 16, p. 122.

[^30]: Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 12, p. 200.

[^31]: Ibid, p. 135.

[^32]: Translator's Note: Shurayh's judgement was based on the principle
that possession is itself a proof of ownership, and that the claimant
has to provide the proof in support of his claim.

[^33]: As-Sayyid al-Milani in Qadatuna, quoting al-Bayhaqi, as-Sunanu
'l-Kubra, vol. 4, p. 135.

[^34]: At-Tusi, at-Tahdhib, vol. 6, p. 292.

[^35]: Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 12, p. 201.

[^36]: Nahju 'l-Balagha (Subhi as-Salih's edition) p. 421.

[^37]: Al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 208.

[^38]: Ibid; also see Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 213.

[^39]: Ibid.

[^40]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 164; for more information see the relevent
sections in Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 16, p. 381-384.

[^41]: Ibid, vol. 12, p. 275.

[^42]: As-Sayyid as-Sistani, Minhaju 's-Saliheen, vol. 1, p. 17.

[^43]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 302

[^44]: An-Naraqi, Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 276.

[^45]: Al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 369.

[^46]: As-Sadûq, Thawabu 'l-A'mal, p. 262.

[^47]: Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 8, chapter 161.

[^48]: Nahju 'l-Balagha, letter no. 21.

[^49]:  Nahju 'l-Balaghah, letter no. 45.

[^50]: Al-Majlisi, Biharu 'l-Anwar, vol. 19, p. 118.

[^51]:  Al-Himyari, Qurbu 'l-Asnad, p. 74

[^52]: As-Sadûq, al-Khisal, vol. 1, p. 25.

[^53]: Wasa'lu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 6, p. 255.

[^54]: Ibid, vol. 19, p. 118

[^55]: As-Sadûq, Thawabu 'l-A'mal, p. 172.

[^56]: For more information on this, see as-Sayyid 'Izzu 'd-Din Bahru
'l-'Ulûm, al-Infaq fi Sabilillah.

[^57]: As-Sadûq, Thawabu 'l-A'mal, p. 239

[^58]: Jami'u 's-Sa'adat, vol. 2, p. 229.

[^59]: Ibid.

[^60]: See al-Usûl mina 'l-Kafi, section on "Being Concerned for Affairs
of the Muslims."

[^61]: Translator's Note: Agreement, in the above context, means "the
immigration agreement made between the host country and the immigrant."

[^62]: ãq means a child who is disobedient to his parents.


