Medical Issues
==============

Introduction
------------

Because of the scientific and technological advancements in the West,
the Muslims travelling to these countries seeking treatment are
increasing, just as the Muslim residents in these parts of the world
need medical treatment.

General Rules
-------------

358. It is not permissible to perform autopsy on the body of a dead
Muslim for the sake of education and other purposes. It is only
permissible, if the life of another Muslim depends on it—even if it is
sometime in the future.

359. It is permissible to transplant an organ from an animal (including
dogs and pigs) to a human being; the transplanted organ will be
considered as an organ of the recipient; all rules will apply to it. So
*salat* will be permissible with it by considering it ritually pure
*(tahir)* after it becomes part of the human body and its cells become
rejuvenated. (See the question-answer section below.)

360. It is not permissible for a doctor to switch off the medical
apparatus providing a Muslim patient with oxygen, even if he is brain
dead, i.e. in vegetative state. This is because the human life in Islam
is sacrosanct.

The doctor should not give in to the demand of the patient or his
family-members for stopping medical aid. If the doctor pulls out the
plug and the Muslim patient dies because of it, he will be considered
killer.

361. It is not permissible for a medical student to look at the private
parts of anyone during his or her training for that profession, unless
he would be repelling serious harm from a Muslim in the process—even if
it is sometime in the future— .

362. It is not obligatory on a Muslim to investigate whether or not the
medicine [given to him] consists of forbidden ingredients, even if the
process of reading a result is easy for him.

Question and Answers
--------------------

352. **Question:** The serious harm of narcotic drugs to the user or
society in general (whether from being addicted to them or other
[sociatal, familial, and ethical] reems) is well known. Therefore, the
doctors and health care professionals are strongly opposing the misuse
of drugs and the laws governing the society is also strongly against it.
So, what is the view of the noble *shari‘a* on this matter?

**Answer:** By considering the serious harm of narcotic drugs, it is
forbidden to use them due to the great damage they cause. Based on
obligatory precaution, it is compulsory to refrain from using them in
any way [even if there is no harm], except for medical purposes and the
like; in the latter case, it can be used only to the extent of need. And
Allah knows the best.

353. **Question:** Medical literature states that **smoking** is the
main cause for heart and cancer diseases, and it also shortens the life
span of the smoker. So, what is the rule on smoking concerning (a) the
beginner, (b) the compulsive smoker, and (c) the passive smoker? In the
third case, the medical experts say that the smoke also harms a person
sitting besides a smoker. What would be, the ruling if he considers
passive smoking to be of considerable harm?

**Answer:**

    a. Smoking becomes haram for the beginner if it entails serious
harm, even at the future, regardless of whether that serious harm is
certain, most probable, or just probable so much so that sensible people
would demand caution. However, with the protection from serious harm
(for example, by smoking less frequently), there is no problem in it.

    b. If continuing to smoke will cause serious harm to the compulsive
smoker —as explained above— it is necessary for him to refrain from it
unless the harm in quitting is similar, greater than to the harm in
continuing, or the great difficulty that he will face in quitting is
such that it cannot be normally tolerated.

    c. The same rule as explained in (a) for the beginner, applies in
this case also.

354. **Question:** Some people believe that a brain-dead person is a
dead person, even if the heart has not yet stopped and that it will
definitely stop after that. This is what the doctors say. Is a person
who has been pronounced brain-dead be considered dead, even if his heart
is still working?

**Answer:** The criterion in applying the term “dead” in so far as the
application of religious laws goes is the common perception of people,
in the sense that they would call him “dead”. And this is not proven in
the situation mentioned in the question.

355. **Question:** The medical profession demands that the doctor checks
his female patients carefully; and since getting undressed for medical
checkup is common in some European countries, is it permissible to
engage in medical practice here in such circumstances?

**Answer:** It is permissible, if one refrains from forbidden looking
and touching, except where the check up of the patient requires them.

356. **Question:** Sometimes the practising physician feels that he has
to uncover certain parts, other than the private parts, of the female
patient [for examination]. Is it permissible for him to uncover her body
in the following circumstances:

    d. When a female physician is available, yet costly?

    e. When the patient is not in danger, although she is sick
regardless?

    f. What is the rule if the part that the physician has to examine is
a private part?

**Answer:**

    a. If visiting a female physician is possible, it is not permissible
[for a female patient to uncover her body for a male physician], unless
the cost is so much that it will hurt her financial situation.

    b. It is permissible, if not visiting that male physician will harm
[her health-wise] or put her in a serious inconvenience that is not
normally tolerated.

    c. The rule is the same as explained above; and in both the cases,
he must only uncover the parts that need examining. And if it is
possible to treat the case without looking directly at the parts that
are *haram* to look at (for example, if he can see through a monitor or
a mirror), that should be the course of action, based on precaution.

357. **Question:** Some experts of genetic engineering claim that they
can improve the human race by altering the genes in the following ways:

    g. Removing the ugliness of the face;

    h. Replacing it with beautiful characteristics;

    i. By both of the above.

Is it permissible for the scientists to engage in these kinds of
activities? Is it permissible for a Muslim to allow the doctors to alter
his genes?

**Answer:** If there are no side effects, then, in principle, there is
no problem in it.

358. **Question:** Pharmaceutical companies in the West run tests on the
drugs they manufacture before selling them in the market. Is it
permissible for a doctor to use a drug on his patient —without the
knowledge of the patient— before its testing period is over thinking
that that particular drug would cure the disease?

**Answer:** It is necessary to inform the patient about the situation
and seek his consent on using the drug on him, except when he is sure
that the drug would not cause side effects and that the doubt is only
about its benefit [or otherwise].

359. **Question:** In certain cases, some governmental agencies demand
that autopsy be performed on the body of the deceased to establish the
cause of death. When is it permissible to agree to their demand and when
is it not?

**Answer:** No heir of a deceased Muslim is allowed to give consent for
autopsy to be carried out on the body of the deceased for the purpose
mentioned above and other similar purposes; and it is necessary for him
to prevent the autopsy if possible. Of course, if another important
factor comes into play that is of equal or more importance than this
basic rule, it is permissible.

360. **Question:** Is donating an organ by a living person to another
living person (for example, a kidney) or by a dead person, by virtue of
his will, to a living person permissible? Would the ruling be different,
if it were from a Muslim to a non-Muslim or vice versa? Is the ruling
confinable to certain organs to the exclusion of others?

**Answer:** As far as donating an organ by a living person to another
person is concerned, there is no problem in it if it does not entail a
serious harm to the donor. (For example, donating one kidney by a person
who has another healthy kidney.)

As far as removing an organ from a deceased (as directed in his will)
for the purpose of transplanting it into a living person is concerned,
there is no problem in it so long as:

    j. The deceased was not a Muslim or someone who is considered a
Muslim.

    k. Or the life of a Muslim depended on such transplantation.

Apart from these two cases, there is a problem in enforcing the will [of
the deceased] and in allowing the removal of the organ. However, if the
will had been made [by the deceased], there will be no indemnity on the
person removing the organ from the dead body.

361. **Question:** If an organ of an atheist is transplanted in a
Muslim’s body, would it be considered ritually pure *(tahir)* when it is
considered, after transplantation, as part of the Muslim’s body?

**Answer:** An organ extracted from the body is ritually impure
*(najis)* irrespective of whether it came from a Muslim or a non-Muslim.
And when it becomes, by rejuvenation, part of a Muslim’s body or of
someone who is considered a Muslim, it becomes *tahir*.

362. **Question:** Insulin used for treatment of diabetics is sometimes
extracted from the pancreas of pigs. Can we use it?

**Answer:** There is no problem in injecting insulin in the muscles,
veins or under the skin.

363. **Question:** Is it permissible to transplant the liver of pig in a
human’s body?

**Answer:** It is permissible to transplant pig’s liver into the body of
a human being. And Allah knows the best.

364. **Question:** Is the process of test-tube babies allowed? In the
sense that the wife’s ovum and the husband’s sperm are extracted to be
fertilized outside the body, and then placed in the womb [of the wife].

**Answer:** In principle, it is allowed.

365. **Question:** There are certain hereditary diseases that are
transferred from parents to children and pose a danger to their lives in
the future. Modern science has acquired the means of preventing some of
such diseases by fertilizing the woman’s ovum in a test tube and
examining the genes to eliminate the problematic ones. Then it is
returned the woman’s womb. The remaining genes [i.e., ova] are
destroyed. Is this religiously permissible?

**Answer:** In principle, there is no problem in it.

366. **Question:** In the process of fertilization in a lab, more than
one ovum is fertilized at a time. Secured in the knowledge that
implanting all fertilized ova in the mother’s womb will endanger her
life. Is it permissible for us to use only one fertilized ovum and
destroy the remaining ones?

**Answer:** It is not obligatory to implant all the fertilized ova in a
test tube into the womb. Therefore, it is permissible to use one ovum
and destroy the remaining ones.

367. **Question:** Is it permissible to engage in embellishing the face
and the body [of another person]?

**Answer:** It is permissible, provided that one refrains from looking
and touching what is *haram* to look at or touch.

AIDS
----

AIDS or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome is a disease that has
afflicted, based on 1996 data, eight million people worldwide and there
are about twenty-two million who carry the AIDS virus. The latest data
show that one and a half million people have died of AIDS in the year
1996 only, bringing the total number of those who died of the disease to
six million! This was announced by World Health Organization on the
International Aids Day on 1 December 1996.

Doctors have identified the following ways in which AIDS is transmitted:

a. Sexual intercourse between members of the same sex or the opposite
sex [in which one member is already afflicted]. This represents the most
dangerous and widespread method of the spread of AIDS. The chance of
transmission through this method is 80%.

b. Through blood vessels: by transfusion; by injection (especially in
the case of drug addicts); by open wounds; and organ transplantation,
and even through surgery if the instruments are not properly sterilized.

c. The feotus can be afflicted while in the womb or at the time of birth
if the mother is already afflicted with AIDS.

The data indicate that this disease has affected all countries and that
no nation is immune against it; and that the majority of the victims are
male. Diseases that had been eradicated have again started reappearing
because of the AIDS epidemic (e.g., pulmonary tuberculosis).

Against this background, we presented the following questions to his
eminence, Ayatullah Sistani:

368. **Question:** What is the rule concerning isolating an AIDS
patient? Is it obligatory on him to isolate himself? Is it obligatory on
his family to isolate him [from the public]?

**Answer:** It is not obligatory on him to isolate himself just as it is
not obligatory on others to do so. Indeed, it is not permissible to
prevent him from frequenting public places like *masjid*, etc, as long
as there is no danger of infecting the others with the virus. It is,
however, obligatory for him as well as others to be careful in
situations where there exists certainty or probability of infecting
others.

369. **Question:** What is the rule on intentionally infecting others
with the AIDS virus?

**Answer:** This is not allowed. If it leads —even after the passage of
time— to the death of the person who has been infected, then the heirs
of the deceased have the right of retribution from the person
responsible for causing to demand the infecting, provided that the
latter was aware that that infection could lead to death; but if he was
ignorant of that effect, or unaware of it, at that time, only indemnity
(blood money) and penalty would apply.

370. **Question:** Is it permissible for a person infected with AIDS to
marry a person who is free from it?

**Answer:** Yes; but it is not permissible for him or her to mislead the
other party by deliberately presenting himself or herself as free from
AIDS at the time of proposing while they are not. Similarly, it is not
permissible for him or her to become intimate in a way that would infect
the other partner.

However, if there is only a probability of infection and no certainty,
then it is not obligatory for him or her to refrain from intimacy,
provided that there is agreement on it.

371. **Question:** What is the ruling on marriage between two people who
are carriers of the AIDS virus?

**Answer:** There is no problem in it. However, if sexual relation
between them is bound to worsen the disease to a serious level, it is
necessary for them to refrain from it.

372. **Question:** What is the ruling on the sexual relations of an AIDS
patient? Is it permissible for a non-infected person to refuse sexual
relation with their spouse because sexual intercourse is one of the main
ways of transmitting the virus?

**Answer:** It is permissible for a non-infected wife not to make
herself available to her infected husband for intimacy that could lead
to infection by the virus. It is indeed obligatory on her to prevent him
from such intimacy.

If it is possible to lessen the chances of infection to a level that is
insignificant —for example, 2%— by using condom, etc, it is permissible
for her to be intimate with her husband. In such a case, it is, based on
precaution, not permissible for her to refuse [intimate relations with
her husband].

This clarifies also the case of a husband who is not a carrier of the
virus and wife who is: it is not permissible for him to have sexual
relations with her in accordance with what sensible people perceive as
considerable risk— of being infected by the virus. In such a case, the
wife’s right to have sexual relations [at least once] every four months
is suspended, except when it becomes possible to adopt methods that
would properly prevent infection with the virus.

373. **Question:** What is the ruling concerning the right of the
non-infected spouse in seeking separation?

**Answer:** If deception was involved in the marriage, in the sense that
the husband or the wife concealed the fact that they had AIDS at the
time of proposing, engagement, so much that the marriage contract
*(‘aqd)* was recited based on that understanding, the deceived party has
the right of annulment.

However, if the wife or her representative did not say anything about
the issue of the disease and the husband assumed that she is free from
it, the silence does not count as deception and, it therefore, does not
yield the right of annulment.

If there was no deception or the disease flared up after the marriage,
the non-infected husband has the right to divorcing his infected wife.
Does the non-infected wife have the right to ask for divorce from her
infected husband on the grounds that she is being deprived of her
conjugal rights?

There are two views [on this]; precaution should not be ruled out in
this case. Of course, if her husband abandons her completely and she
becomes like a suspended woman [neither married nor unmarried], it is
permissible for her to take her case to the religious judge[^1] to force
her husband to choose one of two courses: either end the abandonment or
divorce her.

374. **Question:** What is the ruling on the divorce of a woman whose
husband is AIDS patient?

**Answer:** It has already been mentioned above.

375. **Question:** What is the ruling on abortion for a pregnant woman
who is infected with AIDS?

**Answer:** It is not permissible, more so after the soul has entered
the feotus. Of course, if continuation of the pregnancy poses a danger
to the mother, it is permissible for her to abort it before the entering
of the soul in the feotus, but not after it.

376. **Question:** What is the ruling on the custody of an infected
mother with regard to her non-infected baby and also on breast-feeding?

**Answer:** She does not lose the right of custody of her baby; but she
must adopt sufficient methods to ensure that the virus does not infect
the baby. If it is probable —a considerable probability— that the virus
may be transmitted through breast-feeding, it is necessary for her to
refrain from it.\\

377. **Question:** What is the virus on considering AIDS as terminal
illness?

**Answer:** Since this disease lasts long, what can be classified as
terminal is its last stage only which is closer to death that is brought
about by the disruption and complete destruction of the immune system or
the occurrence of fatal nervous breakdown.

378. **Question:** When a person is diagnosed as having ADIS, is it
permissible for the doctor or is it obligatory on him to inform the
patient’s relatives, especially their spouse?

**Answer:** It is permissible to inform them, if the patient or his
guardian gives consent. It is obligatory if the survival —for a longer
time span— of the patient depends on it. It is similarly obligatory, if
he knows that by not informing them, the virus would infect them for not
taking necessary precautions. And Allah knows the best.

379. **Question:** If a Muslim knows that he contracted AIDS, is it
permissible on him to engage in sexual relations with his wife? Is it
obligatory for him to inform his wife about it?

**Answer:** If he knows that the virus can infect her through sexual
relations, it is not permissible for him at all. Similarly [it is
obligatory on him to refrain from sex] if there exists a considerable
level of likelihood [of infection], except in the case where the wife
knows about it and agrees to it.

[^1]: Translator's Note: "Religious judge" means the mujtahid or someone
authorized by him in judicial matters.


