Marriage
========

Introduction
------------

The Islamic legal system regulates the relationship between members of
the opposite sex covering its various important aspects and expanding on
its details. That is because it is an important need of the human race
and many issues relating to the individual and society are based on it.

There are many rules concerning the relationship between man and woman.
Yet, I shall confine myself only to the ones that are relevant to
Muslims residing in non-Muslim countries.

General Rules
-------------

380. Marriage is among the highly recommended deeds. The Prophet has
said, “Whosoever marries, he has protected half of his religion.”[^1] He
also said, “Whoever likes to follow my tradition, then [he should know
that] marriage is of my tradition.”[^2] In another *hadith*, he said,
“No Muslim man has gained a benefit besides Islam better than a Muslim
wife who is a source of his pleasure whenever he looks at her, who obeys
him when he commands her, and remains faithful to him when he is
away.”[^3]

381. Man should give importance to the qualities of the woman he would
like to marry. He should not marry except a woman who is chaste,
honourable, of good lineage, and righteous. She should be a source of
help to him in the affairs of this world and the hereafter.

382. And should not confine his choice to the woman’s physical beauty
and wealth. It has been narrated from the Prophet (s.a.w.) that he said,
“O People! Beware of the green grass [growing] in a waste site.” Someone
asked, “O Messenger of Allah! And what is the green grass in a waste
site?” He replied, “A beautiful woman in an evil environment.”[^4]

383. The woman and her guardians should give importance to the qualities
of the man she chooses to marry. She should not marry except a man who
is religious, chaste, of good character, not a drunkard or someone who
commits sins and evil deeds.

384. It is better not to reject the proposition of a man who is
religious and of good character. The Prophet has said, “When a man whose
religion and character pleases you comes to you [with a proposition],
then marry him. If you do not do so, there will be chaos and a great
corruption in the world.”[^5]

385. It is *mustahab* (recommended) to work in getting people married,
in being intermediary, and in bringing the two parties to an agreement.

386. It is permissible for a man to look at the attractive features of
the woman he intends to marry. Similarly, it is permissible to talk to
her before proposing. So, it is permissible to look at her face, hair,
neck, hands and wrists, and legs and other parts of her body, provided
that he does not so without sexual gratification. (See the
question-answer section below.)

387. In Islamic law, marriage is of two kinds: permanent and temporary.
Permanent Marriage means the marriage in which there is no fixed time.
The wife in this marriage is known as “the permanent wife”.[^6]

Temporary Marriage means the marriage in which the time limit is fixed
to a year or more or less. The wife in this marriage is known as “the
temporary wife”.[^7]

388. The formula for solemnizing the permanent marriage is as follows:
The woman says to the man: “*Zawwaj-tuka nafsi bi mahrin qadruhu* x — I
give myself to you in marriage for the marriage gift which is x.” (In
place of “x” mention the agreed marriage dowry [*mahr*].) The man
immediately says, “*Qabiltut tazweej* — I accept the marriage.”

The formula for solemnizing the temporary marriage is as follows: The
woman says to the man: ““*Zawwaj-tuka nafsi bi mahrin qadruhu* (x) *li
muddati* (x) — I give myself to you in marriage for the dowry of (x) for
the time period (x).” (In place of first “x” mention the agreed *mahr*
and in place of the second “x” mention the agreed time.) The man
immediately says, “*Qabiltut tazweej* — I accept the marriage.”

389. It is permissible for the couple to recite the formula of marriage
agreement by themselves or by appointing representatives who will recite
it on their behalf. There is no condition for the presence of witnesses
during the solemnization of the marriage, just as the presence of a
cleric is not a condition for the validity of the marriage.

390. For a person who cannot recite the formula of marriage in Arabic,
it is permissible to say it in a language that would convey the meaning
of marriage, even if he can appoint someone to say it in Arabic.

391. A Muslim man is allowed to marry a Christian or a Jewish woman in
temporary marriage. Based on precaution, it is obligatory to refrain
from marrying a non-Muslim woman in permanent marriage.

A Muslim man is not allowed to marry, neither permanently nor
temporarily a non-Muslim woman who is not among *Ahlul Kitab*. Based on
obligatory precaution, a Muslim man must refrain from marrying a
Zoroastrian woman, even temporarily.

As for a Muslim woman, she is not allowed to marry a non-Muslim man at
all. (See the question-answer section below.)

392. In marrying a virgin woman, whether Muslim or from *Ahlul Kitab*,
it is necessary to get the consent of her father or paternal
grandfather, if she is not independent. However, it is precautionarily
obligatory to seek their consent [i.e., of the father or the paternal
grandfather], even if she is independent. Consent of the woman’s
brother, mother, sister or other relations is not required.

393. The consent of the father or the paternal grandfather to marry a
virgin woman, who is both adult and sensible, is not required [in the
following cases:]

    a. if they stop her from marrying someone who is her equal in the
eyes of both *shar’ia* and common practice;

    b. if they completely withdraw from the involvement in her marriage;

    c. when it is not possible to get their consent because of their
absence.

In these cases, she is permitted to marry, if she is in need of
marriage.

394. The consent of the father or the paternal grandfather is not
required in the marriage of a non-virgin woman (that is, a girl who had
previously married and had sexual intercourse). But the case of the
woman who had lost her virginity because of fornication or another cause
is like that of a virgin.

395. In countries where the majority of people consists of atheists and
Ahlul Kitab, i.e. non-Muslims, it is necessary for a Muslim to ask the
woman whom he wants to marry about her religion so that he may ensure
that she is not an atheist and thus the marriage be valid. Her answer
[about her faith and religion] is to be accepted.

396. A Muslim man who is married to a Muslim woman is not allowed, in
his concurrent second marriage, to marry an *Ahlul Kitab* woman, i.e. a
Jew or a Christian, without asking the consent of his Muslim wife. Based
on obligatory precaution, the man should refrain from marrying her, even
it is temporary and his Muslim wife consents to it. Whether or not the
Muslim wife lives with him is irrelevant. (See the question-answer
section below.)

397. It is not permissible to engage in sexual relations with an *Ahlul
Kitab* woman without a marriage contract, even if the government of her
country is in a state of war with Muslims. (See the question-answer
section below.)

398. Based on obligatory precaution, one should refrain from marrying a
woman whose notorious for adultery, unless she has repented. Similarly,
based on obligatory precaution, the adulterer should not marry the woman
with whom he committed adultery, unless she has repented. (See the
question-answer section below.)

399. If the marriage that took place among non-Muslims is valid
according to their custom, such marriage is also considered valid by us
regardless of whether the spouses are both *Ahlul Kitab*, both
*non-Ahlul Kitab*, or one is an Ahlul Kitab and the other is *non-Ahlul
Kitab*. When both spouses embrace Islam together, they will remain
married based on the past marriage, i.e. there would be no need to
recite the marriage formula anew according to the tradition of our
religion and school of thought.

400. If the father withdraws his guardianship from his virgin daughter
and considers her independent, after reaching the age of eighteen, as is
common in the West, it is permissible to marry her without getting the
consent and approval of her father.

401. “It is permissible for the husband and wife to look at the body of
one another, outside and inside, including the private parts; and also
to touch any part of one another with any part of their own body with
lust and without it.”[^8]

402. It is obligatory on the husband to provide for the wife if she is a
permanent wife and obedient to him in matters in which she is required
to obey him. In this case, it is obligatory on the husband to provide
whatever the wife needs in her life like food, dress, and accommodation
with the required amenities like fan, air-conditioner, carpets,
furniture, etc. that are commensurate with her status as his wife. Such
status would differ according to place, time, circumstances, common
perceptions, customs, standard of living, etc. (See the question-answer
section below.)

403. It is obligatory on the husband to pay for his wife when he asks
her to accompany him in his travels. It is similarly obligatory on him
to meet her travelling expenses when she goes on a journey that is
necessarily connected to the affairs of her life. For example, if she is
sick and her treatment depends on traveling to a specialist, it is
obligatory on the husband to pay for the expenses, her ticket as well as
medical charges.

404. “It is not permissible to neglect sexual relations with a young
wife for more than four months, unless there is an excuse like
unbearable difficulty or harm [in fulfillment of that duty] or unless
she agrees to it [that is, forgoes her conjugal rights] or if it was
part of their agreement at the time of marriage.

“Based on obligatory precaution, this rule is not limited to the
permanent wife, i.e. it includes the temporary wife also. Similarly,
based on obligatory precaution, it is not restricted to the husband who
is present. It also includes the husband who is travelling. Therefore,
it would not be permissible for him to prolong his journey, (without
valid reason), if it entails depriving the wife of her right, more so
when the journey is not regarded as essential in the people’s eyes, i.e.
a vacation or pleasure.”[^9]

405. “It is not permissible for a Muslim woman to marry a non-Muslim man
in permanent or temporary marriage.”[^10]

406. “If the husband harasses his wife and is spiteful towards her
without any valid reason, it is permissible for her to present her case
to the religious judge who will force him to live with her in an
amicable manner if that is possible, or censure him as he seems fit. If
that also does not work, she can demand divorce from her husband. If he
refuses to divorce her and it is not possible to force him to divorce
her, the religious judge will pronounce her divorced.”

407. It is permissible to artificially inseminate the wife with her
husband’s sperm, provided that the process of insemination does not
involve a haram act, like looking at the body parts that are forbidden
and other haram acts. (See the question-answer section below.)

408. It is permissible for a woman to use contraceptives (the pill) to
prevent pregnancy, provided that it does not damage her health in a
serious manner, irrespective of whether or not the husband has agreed to
it.

409. It is permissible for a woman to use Intrauterine Devices (IUD) and
other birth control devices provided that they do not pose serious harm
to the woman’s health and that the insertion of the device does not
involve a haram act, such as the male touching or looking at the private
parts of the woman’s body that are forbidden for him to look at.
Similarly, it should not involve the female looking at, and touching
without gloves the private parts that are haram to touch or look at.
Moreover, the IUD should not cause the abortion of the fertilized ovum
after its implantation [in the womb].[^11]

410. It is not permissible for a woman to abort the feotus after the
soul has entered into it, irrespective of the reason for abortion. It is
permissible to abort the feotus before the soul enters it, if there is
an unbearable harm to the mother in continuing the pregnancy or it
becomes extremely difficult for her. (See the question-answer section
below.)

411. If the mother aborts the feotus by herself, she is liable fot the
indemnity. Similarly, if the father or a third person, like a doctor,
caused the abortion, the indemnity is payable by that person. (See the
question-answer section below.) There are other details and rules
regarding the issue of abortion in the Manuals of Islamic Laws and other
books of Islamic jurisprudence.[^12]

Questions and Answers
---------------------

412. **Question:** Is it permissible for us to give the Imam’s portion
of *khums* for the marriage of a believer (*mo’min*) in the West,
knowing that the amount of money that is given here [for this one
marriage] can be used for marriages of more than one believer [in the
Muslim countries], and there are many needy believes, in Muslim
countries? Is it not necessary that most possible numbers of deserving
people should be helped from *sahm-e* Imam?

**Answer:** Although providing for the marriage of needy believers is
among the avenues covered by the portion of the Imam (a.s.), one is not
permitted to utilize it for this or its other purposes without the
permission of the *marja‘* or his representative.

It is not necessary to use the *sahm-e* Imam to serve the interests of
the most possible number of deserving people; what is important is to
prioritize the important causes. This prioritization varies according to
circumstances.

413. **Question:** Is it sufficient for a non-Arab to pronounce the
marriage formula in Arabic without understanding the meaning of the
words, even though we know that the purpose for uttering those words is
to solemnize the marriage in the right way?

Supposing that just the utterance is sufficient, is it necessary to say
it in Arabic without having the need to say the marriage formula in
another language?

**Answer:** It would be sufficient, provided that the person has some
understanding, even roughly, of the meaning of the Arabic words based on
obligatory precaution, it would not be sufficient to pronounce it in
another language.

414. **Question:** Is it valid to pronounce the marriage formula through
a telephone?

**Answer:** It is valid.

415. **Question:** Is it possible [for a witness] to give evidence using
the telephone or fax or letter?

**Answer:** The rules and consequences that apply to the bearing of
witness in presence of a judge cannot materialize without the physical
presence of the witness. As for the testimony that just deals with
describing the incident the way it occurred, the methods mentioned
above, and other methods similar to them, are sufficient, provided that
they are secured from fraud and error.

416. **Question:** Is it permissible to look carefully at the body, with
exception of the private parts, of the woman one intends to marry with
sexual motivation or without it?

**Answer:** It is permissible to look at the woman’s features like the
face, the hair, and the hands but without lustful intention. And [it is
permissible], even if one knows that lustful thoughts will naturally
occur [by looking at her]. When a person has come to know about her
features by the first look, it is not permissible to look again.

417. **Question:** Some Western governments allow the daughter to be
independent of her parents, after she has passed the age of sixteen. If
she seeks her parents advice, it is only for seeking their opinion or
out of respect for them. Is such a virgin girl allowed to marry, be it
permanent or a temporary marriage, without the consent of her father?

**Answer:** If this means that the father has allowed her to marry
whomsoever she wants or that he has withdrawn from interfering in the
matter of her marriage, it is permissible for her to do so; otherwise,
based on obligatory precaution, it is not permissible.

418. **Question:** If a woman is over thirty years of age, and still
virgin, is it necessary for her to seek the permission of her guardian
for marriage?

**Answer:** If she is not independent, it is obligatory on her to seek
his consent. Rather, even if she is independent, she must seek his
consent, as a matter of compulsory precaution.

419. **Question:** Is it permissible for a virgin girl to use the light
beauty powder in order to draw attention [to herself] in ladies only
gatherings? What if she does so with the purpose of seeking marriage —
wouldn’t it be counted as concealing physical defects, [if there were
any]?

**Answer:** It is permissible for her to do that and it would not be
regarded as “concealing the physical defects”. Even if it were, it would
not be *haram* unless she was intent on deceiving the person who wants
to marry her.

420. **Question:** When is it permissible for a wife to ask for divorce
through the religious judge? Is it permissible for a wife — whose
husband constantly treats her badly or a wife whose is sexually not
satisfied by her husband to an extent that she fears committing that
which is *haram* — to ask for divorce and be divorced?

**Answer:** It is permissible for her to ask for divorce through the
religious judge, if her husband refuses to fulfill her marital rights
and also refuses to divorce her after the religious judge has ordered
him to do one of the two. In such a case, the judge would pronounce the
divorced the wife.

The circumstances in which this could happen are the following:

    a. When the husband refuses to provide for the wife and also refuses
to divorce her. This would include the case of a husband who is unable
to provide for his wife and also refuses to divorce her.

    b. When the husband harasses the wife, treats her unjustly, and does
not behave with her kindly as Almighty Allah has ordained.

    c. When the husband abandons her completely and she becomes like a
suspended woman, i.e. neither married nor free to marry.

As for the case where he does not fully satisfy her sexual needs to an
extent that she fears committing the *haram,* then, based on compulsory
precaution, the husband must fulfill her needs or consent to her demand
for divorce. However, if he does not do that, then the wife has to bear
the situation patiently and wait [for a better future].

421. **Question:** There is a Muslim woman whose husband has left her
for a long time now so much so that there is no hope of their getting
reunited in the near future; she claims that she cannot stay without a
husband because of the difficulty in living as a single woman in the
West where she fears robbery and stealing by break-ins into the house.
Can she ask for divorce through the religious judge so that he may
pronounce the divorce, whereby she can, remarry whosoever she wants?

**Answer:** If the husband has abandoned her, she can take her case to
the religious judge who will then force the husband to choose one of two
courses: either end the abandonment or release her [by divorce] so that
she can marry someone else. If he refuses to do any of the two, and it
is not possible to force him to adopt one of the two alternatives, the
religious judge has the right to pronounce the divorce at her request.

But if the wife is the one who has left her husband without any [valid]
justification, there is no way for the religious judge to pronounce her
divorced.

422. **Question:** A Muslim couple got separated for a long time. Is it
permissible for him to marry, temporarily or permanently, a woman from
*Ahlul Kitab* without the knowledge of his Muslim wife? Is it
permissible for him to marry, with the permission of his Muslim wife?

**Answer:** For a Muslim man to marry a woman from *Ahlul* *Kitab*
permanently is against the compulsory precaution in any circumstance.

And his temporary marriage to a Jewish or a Christian woman is allowed,
only if he is not already married to a Muslim wife. If he has a Muslim
wife, temporary marriage with an Ahlul Kitab woman is not permissible
without her consent; nay, even with her consent, it is not permissible,
based on compulsory precaution.

423. **Question:** A Muslim man who is married to a Muslim woman
migrated from his country. After a longthy stay in the West country, he
wants to embark on temporary marriage with a woman from *Ahlul Kitab*
just a few days after divorcing his Muslim wife. Is this permissible for
him, espeually when his Muslim wife is still in her waiting period
*(al-‘idda)*?

**Answer:** The temporary marriage mentioned in the question is
considered invalid because the wife who is in the waiting period of a
revocable divorce is still considered as a wife. It has just been
mentioned that to temporary marry an *Ahlul Kitab woman* while one has a
Muslim wife is not permissible [as a matter of compulsary precaution].

424. **Question:** Is it obligatory to inform the man who wants to marry
a woman from the *Ahlul Kitab* or a Muslim woman that she has not yet
observed the waiting period *(‘idda)* of a divorce of a previous
marriage, or that she is still in the *‘idda* [during which marriage is
forbidden for her]?

**Answer:** It is not obligatory.

425. **Question:** Is it permissible for a Muslim man to marry a
non-Muslim woman who is still married to a non-Muslim man? Is there an
*‘idda* period for her when she separates from her non-Muslim husband?
What is the period of that *‘idda?* Is it permissible to have sexual
relations with her during the time when she is in the *‘idda* from her
non-Muslim husband? If she embraces Islam, how long will her *‘idda* be,
if she intends to marry a Muslim man?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to marry her while she is married to a
non-Muslim in a marriage which is recognized by them because she is a
married woman. It is permissible to marry her temporarily after her
divorce and after the completion of the *‘idda* from her non-Muslim
husband. (The period of her *‘idda* is not different from the *‘idda* of
a Muslim woman.) Therefore, it is not permissible before the completion
of the *‘idda.*

If she becomes a Muslim after having had sexual relations with her
non-Muslim husband and the husband has not embraced Islam, it is
precuationarily obligatory for a Muslim not to marry her until after the
completion of her *‘idda.* But if she became a Muslim without having
ever established sexual relations with her non-Muslim husband, then
their marriage will be annulled immediately and there is no *‘idda* in
such a case.

426. **Question:** What is the meaning of “justice” required by
religious law in dealing with one’s wives?

**Answer:** The justice that is required [in dealing with polygamy] is
related to the division [of time between them] in the sense that when he
spends a night with one of them then, he must spend one night each with
the rest of them in every four nights.

The justice that is required as a recommendation is equality in spending
money, giving attention, cheerfulness, and fulfillment of their sexual
needs, etc.

427. **Question:** If a Muslim woman commits adultery, is it permissible
for her husband to kill her?

**Answer:** Based on obligatory precaution, it is not permissible for
him to kill her, even if he sees her in the act of committing adultery.

428. **Question:** What is meant by the expression “an adulterous woman
known for adultery” that is used in the Manuals of Islamic Laws?

**Answer:** It means that such a woman is known among the people for
committing adultery.

429. **Question:** Is it permissible to be party to temporary marriage
with a woman who is “known for adultery”, if no other woman is available
and the person is in desperate need of marriage?

**Answer:** Based on obligatory precaution, one should refrain from
marrying such a woman except after her repentance.

430. **Question:** What is the meaning of the expression used by the
jurists that “there is no waiting period *(‘idda)* for an adulterous
woman because of her adultery”?

**Answer:** It means that she is allowed to marry after having committed
adultery without observing the *‘idda;* and, if she is married, then it
is permissible for her husband to have sexual relations with her without
observing the *‘idda* except in the case of *al-wat’i bis-shubha*
(sexual relation established based on mistaken identity or ignorance of
the law).

431. **Question:** A man lived with a woman whom he intended to marry
and also had sex with her without entering into a marriage contract
*(‘aqd)*; thereafter he married her in the proper religious way. Is
their co-habitation before the *‘aqd* considered marriage in the eyes of
religious law? Does the subsequent *‘aqd* have retroactive effect? What
will be the status of the children born before the *‘aqd?*

**Answer:** In [an Islamic] marriage, the spousal relationship is
established by the verbal expression of the proposition and the
acceptance. More over no action or deed that reflects the intention of
marriage can be a substitute for the spoken words. Consequently, the
marriage mentioned in the question is not valid except after the
pronouncement of the religious marriage formula that does not have any
retroactive effect.

As for the children, they will be considered legitimate if the parents
did not know the law [requiring the *‘aqd*] because their relationship
will be classified as *“wat’i bis-shubha”*. But if both were aware of
the law, their relationship is considered adulterous. Consequently the
children will be deemed illegitimate. However, if only one knew about
the law without the other, the children will be deemed legitimate in
relation to the ignorant parent only.

432. **Question:** Certain circumstances demand that the use of
insemination between husband and wife in order to increase the chances
of pregnancy; this process of insemination requires exposing the private
parts before the doctor. Is this allowed?

**Answer:** Exposing the private parts for the purpose mentioned above
is not allowed. However, if there is a need that compels one to have
children, and having children requires exposing the private parts, it is
allowed. An example of “need” is when enduring childlessness becomes an
unbearable difficulty for the couple

433. **Question:** A woman who does not want children asks the doctor to
tie her falopian tubes. Is this permissible for her—regardless of
whether or not it is reversible; and whether or not the husband agrees
to it?

**Answer:** It is permissible for her, provided that it does not involve
any *haram* touching or looking, irrespective of whether or not it is
reversible. The permission of the husband is not required; of course,
his permission might be required for other considerations.

434. **Question:** In the West [more precisely, in Italy] an ovum of a
woman was fertilized in the laboratory, then the fertilized egg was
implanted in the womb of the mother; the feotus developed in and was
born from the grandmother’s womb. Is it permissible to implant a feotus
[or the fertilized ovum] in its grandmother’s womb? And who will be the
child’s mother according to the*shari‘a*?

**Answer:** It is difficult to consider it permissible in principle,
even if we overlook the haram looking and touching that is involved in
this kind of procedure. And if this process takes place and the child is
born, then in determining who is to be considered the child’s mother
from the genealogical perspective —the genetic mother or the biological
mother— there are two views. It is prudent to observe caution in regard
to both women. [That is, fulfill the rights of mother in regard to
both.]

435. **Question:** Sometimes the sperm of a man is preserved in a sperm
bank. Is it permissible for a divorced Muslim woman to use the sperm of
a strange man [to artificially inseminate herself] with or without his
permission and without recitation of marriage formula? What is the
ruling if the sperm is that of her ex-husband, and she intends to use it
during the waiting period or after it?

**Answer:** It is not permissible for a woman to inseminate herself with
the sperm of a strange man; and it is permissible to do so with the
sperm of her husband, even during the waiting period but not after it.

436. **Question:** A man is put in a situation that he either pleases
his family or pleases his wife: should he divorce his wife in order to
please his family or should he do the opposite?

**Answer:** He should adopt the situation that is best for his religion
as well as his world, that he should be inclined towards justice and
equitability, and refrain from injustice and violation of the rights [of
others].

437. **Question:** What is the meaning of “obligatory maintenance” that
a husband must provide for his wife? Should the level of the support be
according to the social standing of the husband, the standard of life
that the wife was used to in her father’s home, or other than that?

**Answer:** The criterion is the level that would be appropriate for her
status in relation to that of her husband. [That is, the level that
would be appropriate for her “as the wife of her husband”.]

438. **Question:** The wife has certain rights upon the husband; now if
the husband neglects some of those rights, is it permissible for the
wife to ignore his sexual advances?

**Answer:** She does not have such a right; if counseling and then
warning do not help [in changing the husband’s attitude], she can take
her problem to the religious judge who should take appropriate action.

439. **Question:** On embarking on a journey or coming back, a Muslim
traveller embraces and kisses his wife in public. Is this permissible
for him?

**Answer:** It is not haram to do that, if the rules of appropriate
covering [of the clothes] and hijab are observed and as long as it does
not entice lust [in other people]; it is preferable to refrain from this
kind of behaviour.

440. **Question:** Legal divorce according to Western laws had already
taken place between a man and his wife. The husband is not willing to
uphold her religious rights, neither does he pay any maintenance money
for her. He refuses to listen to the religious authorities who work as a
go-between. What should the wife do, knowing well that her patience
under such circumstances will surely cause her [unbearable] difficulty?

**Answer:** She should present her problem to the religious judge or his
authorized representative who will then advise the husband to either
provide for her or grant her religious divorce—even by appointing
someone else to do that. If he refuses to do either, and it is not
possible [for the religious judge] to provide for her from the husband’s
wealth, the judge or his representative will pronounce the divorce for
her.

441. **Question:** Is it permissible to have sex with a non-Muslim woman
—from Ahlul Kitab or others— without doing the religious marriage on the
basis that her country is in a state of war, directly or indirectly,
with the Muslims?

**Answer:** This is not allowed.

442. **Question:** A wife neither obeys her husband nor fulfills her
marital duties; she also goes out without his permission to stay with
her own family for seven months. Then instead of having recourse to
Islamic laws, she goes to a non-Islamic court in order to get spousal
maintenance, custody of the children, and divorce from her husband. Does
such a wife have the right in getting anything from her husband? In such
a situation, when she goes to non-Islamic court it will apply
non-Islamic laws to grant her divorce and her rights (spousal support
and custody of children), does she deserve her full spousal rights?

**Answer:** The wife mentioned above does not deserve the spousal
maintenance from a shari’a point of view. But her mahr (dowry) and her
right of custody of children (under the age of two) should not be
suspended because of her disobedience.

443. **Question:** A young lady had gone through an operation in which
her womb was removed, and consequently she had stopped having her menses
for more than fifteen years. Then she married a man in temporary
marriage for a length of time that has now ended. Is it necessary for
her to observe the waiting period (‘idda)? And if yes, what would be the
time length of her ‘idda?

**Answer:** If she still is in the age of women who usually see their
menses, then her ‘idda in the temporary marriage would be forty-five
days.

444. **Question:** Sometimes a non-Muslim woman would verbally bear
witness [of belief in Islam] for the sake of marriage which does attract
plausible credence for others that she has really believed in Islam. Can
the others [who have doubt about her belief] still treat her as they
would treat Muslims?

**Answer:** Yes, the Islamic treatment would be applied to her as long
as she does not say or do something that would contradict [her
declaration of the faith].

445. **Question:** Sometimes the fertilized ovum of a woman is
transplanted in the womb of another woman. Is this allowed? If pregnancy
occurs, whose child will this foetus be considered?

**Answer:** There is no problem as long as the haram touching and
looking is not involved. And whether the genealogical mother of the
child will be the genetic mother (who provided the ovum) or the
biological mother (who carried the foetus in her womb), there are two
views. Based on obligatory precaution, caution should be exercised in
regard to both of them.

446. **Question:** The foetus swims in the liquid that is in the
mother’s womb. This liquid comes out at the time of birth or just before
it, sometimes with blood, at others without blood. Is this water
considered ritually pure, if it comes out without blood?

**Answer:** Yes, it is ritually pure (tahir) in this case.

447. Question: When is it permissible to abort a feotus? Does the age of
the foetus have anything to do with it?

**Answer:** Abortion is not allowed after the implantation of the
[fertilized] ovum [on the lining of the womb], except if the mother’s
life is in danger or the continuation of pregnancy will cause difficulty
for her that is not normally bearable and there is no other solution but
abortion. In this case, it would be permissible to abort the foetus as
long as the soul has not entered into it; after the entering of the
soul, it is not permissible at all.

448. **Question:** Sometimes the doctors reach the following conclusion:
This foetus is afflicted with a very serious disease; it is therefore
preferable that it should be aborted because if that child is born, it
will be deformed or will die soon after birth. Is it, therefore,
permissible for the doctor to abort the foetus? Is it permissible for
the mother to agree to the abortion? And who of the two will become
liable for indemnity?

**Answer:** Just the fact that the child will be deformed or that it
will not live for a long time after his birth does not ever justify the
termination of the pregnancy. Therefore, it is not permissible for the
mother to consent to the abortion just as it is not permissible for the
doctor to go ahead with the procedure. And whoever performs the abortion
will become liable for the payment of indemnity.

449. **Question:** Is a mother allowed to abort the feotus, if she does
not want it while the soul has not yet entered it and there is no
serious danger to the mother’s life?

**Answer:** She is not allowed to do that, except if the continuation of
the pregnancy would harm her health or put her in an unbearable
difficulty.

[^1]: Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 20, p. 17.

[^2]:  Ibid, p. 18

[^3]: As-Sistani, Minhaju 's-Saliheen, vol. 2, p. 7.

[^4]: Wasa'ilu 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 20, p. 35.

[^5]: At-Tusi, Tahdhibu 'l-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 395. Also see the chapter
on compitability in marriage in the same book, p. 394ff.

[^6]: For more information on marriage and its laws, see Sayyid 'Izzu
'd-Din Bahru 'l-'Ulûm, az-Ziwaj fi 'l-Qur'an wa 's-Sunnah. [Also see
Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Marriage and Morals in Islam.]

[^7]: For more information on temporary marriage and its laws, see
Sayyid Muhammad Taqi al-Hakim, az-Ziwaju 'l-Muwaqqat wa Dawruhu fi Halli
Mushkilati 'l-Jins.

[^8]: Ibid, p. 11.

[^9]: As-Sayyid as-Sistani, Minhaju 's-Saliheen, vol. 2, p. 10-11; also
see the last reference.

[^10]: Ibid, p. 67.

[^11]: Translator's Note: "The medical experts do not exactly know how
IUD works. Presently there are two opinions: one says that the IUD
prevents fertilization; and the other says that it prevents the
fertilized ovum from implantation onto the uterus. Since the shar'i
pregnancy begins at implantation, there is no problem in using the IUD
as a birth control device irrespective of the above differences among
professionals." Marriage & Morals in Islam (Toronto: IEIC, Revised
Edition, 1994) p. 121.

[^12]: See as-Sistani, Minhaju 's-Saliheen, vol. 2, p. 136-137 as well
as his al-Masa'ilu 'l-Muntakhaba, p. 385-419.


