Youth's issues
==============

Introduction
------------

The influx of devout Muslim youths to non-Muslim countries has
increased, especially to European and American countries where they come
for education, temporary visits, or for permanent residence.

The commitment of Muslim youths to Islam causes great concerns,
problems, and inquires about the issues that are important to them.
Therefore, it is appropriate to present the following religious laws
which address some of these concerns. (See the question-answer section
below.)

General Rules
-------------

494. The *mujtahids* talk about prohibition of **looking indecently and
lustfully at women**. By the expression “prohibition of looking
lustfully,” they mean that it is prohibited to look at them with sexual
desire. By the expression “looking indecently,” they mean a glance that
could lead one to a situation whereby they may be tempted to commit a
*haram* act.

495. It is permissible to look without lust at the women who would not
listen, if they were forbidden from exposing themselves [by not
observing the *hijab*]. Therefore, it is permissible to look at the
face, the hands, and the feet of the woman as well as those parts of
their bodies that they normally expose in public but not those parts
that some of them, against their own custom, would expose publicly. This
is with the condition that the look is not combined with carnal appetite
and the onlooker should not fear the temptation of getting into a
situation whereby they may commit the *haram*. (See the question-answer
section below and issue No. 500).

496. It is not permissible for a man to look at another man with lust;
similarly, it is not permissible for a woman to look at another woman
with lust.

497. Homosexuality (*Ash-shudhûdh al-jinsi)* is *haram*. Similarly, it
is forbidden for a female to engage in a sexual act with another female,
i.e. lesbianism. (See the question-answer section below.)

498. **Masturbation** by any whatever means is forbidden;

499. Based on obligatory precaution, one must refrain from viewing
**pornographic pictures** and films, even if one looks at them without
indecent intention and lust. (See the question-answer section below.)

500. The immoral establishments have produced an item that has the
features of the private parts of a woman, and it is possible for a man
to become intimate with it by placing it over his penis at bedtime.
Based on obligatory precaution, one must refrain from using, it even if
he does not intend to reach the stage of ejaculation. This law applies
without any difference between a married and an the unmarried man. (See
the question-answer section below.)

501. It is permissible for a man to use the **condom** to prevent
pregnancy; however, it is precautionarily obligatory that he should seek
the consent of his wife to using it.

502. It is not permissible for a Muslim man to go to unisex **swimming**
pools and other places where people go about half-naked. That is if it
entails a *haram* act. Based on obligatory precaution, one must refrain
from going to such places, even if it does not entail a *haram* act.

503. A Muslim man is not allowed to **shake hands** with a woman without
a barrier, such as gloves, unless refraining from shaking hands will put
him in a considerable harm or unbearable difficulty. In the latter case,
he is allowed to shake hands to the extent of necessity only. (See the
question-answer section below.)

504. A young man is allowed to kiss his young sister or maternal aunt or
paternal aunt or their small daughters out of affection and love.
However, he is not allowed to kiss them, if it entails sexual arousal.

505. It is *haram* to play **chess,** regardless of whether or not the
play is with betting. It is also *haram* to play chess through
computerized instrument, if there are two players involved in it. Based
on obligatory precaution, one must refrain from it, even if just the
computer is the other player. (See the question-answer section below.)

506. It is similarly *haram* to play with instruments of gambling in
which betting is involved. Based on obligatory precaution, one must
refrain from it even when no betting is involved.

507. It is permissible to engage in **sports games** with balls like
football (soccer), basketball, volleyball, table tennis, handball, etc.
It is also permissible to watch such games at the sports stadiums or on
various displays and monitors with payment or without payment as long as
that does not entail a *haram* act, like looking with lust, or
neglecting an obligation like *salat*.

508. It is permissible to engage in **wrestling and boxing** without
betting as long as it does not lead to serious bodily harm.

509. Based on obligatory precaution it is not permissible for a man to
**shave** his beard. Similarly, it is not permissible for him to just
leave the hair on his chin and shave the sides. This too is based on
obligatory precaution. (See the question-answer section below.)

510. A Muslim is allowed to shave his beard, if he is compelled to do so
or if he is forced to shave it for medical reasons, etc. It also allowed
if he fears harm to his life by not shaving or if growing the beard
would put him in difficulty (for example, if it becomes a cause of
ridicule and humiliation that is not normally tolerable by a Muslim).

Questions and Answers
---------------------

511. **Question:** A father asks the friend of his son to monitor his
behaviour in order to know his son’s character. Is the friend allowed to
disclose any information regarding the character of the son to the
father that might include things that the son does not want to be known
to anyone?

**Answer:** It is not allowed, except when he is involved in an evil act
from which he must be stopped and that stopping him is not possible
through anything other than disclosure of his behaviour (which would
embarrass and hurt him).

512. **Question:** What is the meaning of the statement from the
*hadith* that “the first glance is [permissible] for you, but the second
one will [be held] against you”? Is it permissible to prolong the first
glance while looking at a woman on the basis, as claimed by some, that
it is still “the first permissible glance”?

**Answer:** Apparently the meaning of the statement mentioned above is
to differentiate between the two glances in the sense that the first was
just an accidental and a passing one, and so it is considered guiltless
since no lustful desires were involved in it, as opposed to the second
glance which was naturally intentional and accompanied with an element
of desire, and therefore is detrimental. It is because of this that a
statement has been quoted by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) in which he says, “The
glance after the [first] one creates in the heart the desire and that is
sufficient as a temptation for the person.”

It is, however, clear that the statement quoted in the question does not
intend to define the permissible glance on the basis of numbers, in the
sense that the first glance is permissible, even if it is intentional
and guileful from the very beginning. Or that it becomes such, if it is
prolonged and more persistant because the on-looker cannot control it by
casting his glance away from the woman that he is looking at. Nor does
it mean that the second glance is forbidden, even if it is for a single
moment without any lust at all.

513. **Question:** While discussing the issue of looking at a woman,
many expressions are used that are not clearly defined for most people.
So, what is the meaning of “*ar-rayba*, *at-taladh-dhudh*, and
*ash-shahwa*”?

**Answer:** *At-Taladh-dhudh* and *ash-shahwa* mean lustful and sexual
desire, not just any lust or any desire that is part of the human
instinct that appears when one sees beautiful scenes.

*Ar-rayba* means the fear of temptation or the falling into *haram*.

514. **Question:** What is the limit of forbidden lust?

**Answer:** Its minimum limit —if what is meant is the ranking order—
i.e. it is the first stage of sexual arousal.

515. **Question:** In British government schools and also in other
Western countries the students, male as well as females, are taught sex
education which includes detailed description of sexual organs with or
without model. Is it permissible for a young student to attend classes
like this? Is it necessary for the parents to prevent the young child
from attending such classes when the child expresses interest in by
claiming that it will be useful for him in the future?

**Answer:** If attending such classes does not entail other *haram*
deeds like looking lustfully and, as a result of studying that unit,
would result preventy him from deviant behaviour, then there is no
problem in it.

516. **Question:** Is it permissible to recite erotic poems in presence
of women without intending to woo them, or with such an intention, if
they are unmarried and can be influenced by such recitation?

**Answer:** This is not allowed.

517. **Question:** Is it permissible to talk to women about love without
lustful intention or fear of temptation or encouraging a *haram* act?

**Answer:** Based on obligatory precaution, it is not allowed.

518. **Question:** Is it permissible to praise in erotic poetry, or in
prose, a unspecified woman or women in general?

**Answer:** If it is devoid of intent to commit *haram* or similar acts
and entails no other harm [in moral and ethical sense], then there is no
problem in it.

519. **Question:** Is it permissible to talk with women without lustful
intention for the purpose of gaining satisfaction with one of them and
then to propose temporary marriage to her?

**Answer:** If the talk is devoid of what one should be talking about to
a strange [i.e., non-*mahram*] woman, then there is no problem in it.

520. **Question:** A new craze has spread in Europe in which men wear
ladies’ earrings in one or both ears. Is this allowed for them?

**Answer:** It is not permissible if it is made of gold; rather not at
all, based on obligatory precaution.

521. **Question:** If a person commits *haram* by shaving his beard by
razor blade on day one, is it permissible for him to do the same on the
second, the third, the fourth day and so on?

**Answer:** It is precautionarily compulsory to refrain from it.

522. **Question:** At times the big companies in Europe discriminate
—among those who come to them seeking jobs— between those who shave
their beards and those who don’t shave them. If this is true, then is it
permissible to be clean shaven in order to get the job?

**Answer:** Shaving the beard —whose prohibition is based on obligatory
precaution— would not become permissible just by the desire to get a job
with these companies.

523. **Question:** Is it permissible to shave the two sides of the face
and leave the hair on the chin?

**Answer:** Shaving the beard is *haram* based on obligatory precaution,
and this includes the hair that grows on the sides of the face. However,
there is no problem in shaving the hair that grows on the cheeks.

524. **Question:** Is it permissible to play games of chance of all
kinds on electronic machines (computers) without betting or with
betting?

**Answer:** It is not permissible, and it is treated the same as normal
[non-electronic] gambling instruments.

525. **Question:** Some permissible games use dice in them. So is it
allowed to play with it?

**Answer:** If the dice is not from the tools that are exclusively for
gambling, then there is no problem in using it in non-gambling games.

526. **Question:** Is it permissible to look at what the non-Muslim
women normally expose of their body during the summer season?

**Answer:** If the glance does not entail lustful desire or temptation
[to commit sins], then there is no problem in it.

527. **Question:** Is it permissible to look at the picture of a
well-known *muhajjaba* woman who appears without *hijab* in that
picture? [*Muhajjaba* means a lady who observes *hijab*.]

**Answer:** Based on obligatory precaution, one must refrain from
looking at other than the face and the hands of that woman; even in the
case of these two, it is permissible without lustful intent and
temptation [for sin].

528. **Question:** (a) Is it permissible to look at non-Muslim women who
are naked or half-naked in television and its like for the purpose of
fulfilling the inquisitive nature with no guarantee whether or not
sexual desire will be aroused?

(b) Is it permissible to look at them in the streets not for the purpose
mentioned above but for arousing [the sexual desire of] the husband
towards his wife?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to look with lust at the naked live
scenes, on television, etc. Rather, based on compulsory precaution, one
must refrain from it at all times.

529. **Question:** Is it permissible to look at arousing scenes if one
is sure of not attaining arousal?

**Answer:** If it is a naked [indecent] scene, then based on obligatory
precaution, one should refrain from looking at it.

530. **Question:** Is it permissible to view sex movies without lust?

**Answer:** It is not permissible at all based on obligatory precaution.

531. **Question:** There are certain television stations that offer
monthly subscription for their programs that are not of immoral nature;
but after midnight, it relays sexual movies. Is it permissible to
subscribe in such programs?

**Answer:** It is not allowed, unless one is confident about himself and
others [in the house] that they would not view the sexually explicit
material.

532. **Question:** In some countries it is customary that the person who
arrives [at a meeting or an office] will shake hands with all who are
present including women, of course, without lustful intention. And if he
refuses to shake hands with the women, it would be considered abnormal,
and more often than not it would be considered an act of contempt and
insult towards the woman. All this would reflect negatively on their
view concerning the person. Is it, therefore, permissible to shake hands
with women?

**Answer:** It is not permissible. And the problem should be tackled by
not shaking the hands of anyone or by wearing gloves, for example. If
this is not possible for the person and he thinks that refusing to shake
hands would cause great and unbearable difficulty for him, then it is
permissible at that time. All this is based on the assumption that it is
necessary for him to attend such a gathering; otherwise, if it is not
possible for him to refrain from *haram*, then it is not permissible for
him to attend such a gathering.

533. **Question:** In Western countries, shaking hands is considered as
a means of greeting and salutation. Refraining from it could sometimes
lead to losing job and education opportunities. So, is it permissible
for a Muslim man to shake hands with a woman or for a Muslim woman to
shake hands with a man in circumstances of necessity?

**Answer:** When refraining from touching is not possible by wearing
gloves or such like, then it is permissible, especially if not shaking
hands would lead to considerable harm or great difficulty that is
normally unbearable.

534. **Question:** Is it permissible for a Muslim man who resides in the
West to marry a non-Muslim woman especially when Muslim women are
scarce. That is, in spite of the dangers that exists in regard to
children because of difference in language, religion, ways of upbringing
children, values, and social customs — all this could lead to
psychological problems for the children?

**Answer:** It is not permissible for him to marry a woman from *Ahlul
Kitab* on permanent basis.

Although temporary marriage is permissible, we advise not to have
children by her. This applies, if he does not already have a Muslim
wife, who is away from him. In this case it would not be permissible
without her consent—rather even with her consent, based on obligatory
precaution.

535. **Question:** Some companies have produced an item similar to the
woman’s vagina that some men would place over their penis at bedtime for
carnal desire. Is this classified as masturbation that is forbidden?

**Answer:** It is *haram* if he seeks to ejaculate intentionally or
ejaculation is normal [in such a circumstance] for him. Rather, based on
obligatory precaution, he must refrain from it, even if he is confident
of not ejaculating.

536. **Question:** What is the view on a man embracing another man with
lust, and go about kissing one another with sexual desire? What if they
go even further and enter the domain of deviant sexual behaviour?

**Answer:** All of this is *haram* even if there might be difference in
the degree of prohibition.


