Music, singing & dancing
========================

Introduction
------------

The residents of non-Muslim countries, as well those in some Muslim
countries, are used to be bombarded by music, songs, and rhythms of
dancers, be they indoors or outdoors. A question arises in their minds:
is it permissible for us to listen to this tune or that song? Is it
permissible for us to dance? I shall answer these two questions and
others like them in the following rules.

General Rules
-------------

537. **Music** is an art that has spread far and wide during these days.
Some varieties of this art are permissible while others are forbidden;
therefore, it is permissible to listen to the first while it is
forbidden to listen to the latter.

538. Music that is permissible is the music that does not entail
entertainment in gatherings held for that purpose. Forbidden music is
the music that is suitable for entertainment and amusement gatherings.

539. The expression “the music or the song that is suitable for
entertainment and amusement gatherings” does not mean that the music or
the song’s tune amuses the heart or changes the mental state because
there is nothing wrong in it. The expression actually means that the
person listening to the music or the song’s tune —especially if he is an
expert in these matters— can distinguish that this tune is used in the
entertainment and amusement gatherings or that it is similar to the
tunes used therein. (See the question-answer section below.)

540. It is permissible to visit places where *halal* music is being
played, and it is permissible to listen to it as long as it is *halal*.

541. It is permissible to visit public places where music is being
played, even if it is suitable for entertainment and amusement
gatherings, provided that one does not intentionally listen to it: for
example, passengers on course, waiting areas for visitors, public parks,
restaurants and cafes, etc —even if the music played there is suitable
for entertainment and amusement gatherings— because there is no problem
in hearing forbidden tunes without intending to listen to it.

542. It is permissible for adults as well as children to learn the art
of *halal* music in music schools or other places as long as their
visits to such places do not have any negative effect on their proper
upbringing.

543. **Singing** ***(al-ghina’)*** is *haram*: doing it, listening to
it, or living of it. By “singing — *al-ghina’,*” I mean an amusing
statement expressed in the tunes that are suitable for those who provide
entertainment and amusement.

544. It is not permissible to recite the Holy Qur’an, supplications
(*du‘a*s), and words of praise in tunes that are commensurate to
entertainment and amusement gatherings.

Based on obligatory precaution, one must refrain from reciting other
non-amusing statements, in poetry or prose, in that tune. (See the
question-answer section below.)

545. The prohibition of intentionally listening and giving ear to
*haram* songs and music has beenmentioned in the holy tradition. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said, “And the person with the [sin of]
singing *(al-ghina’)* will be raised [on the day of resurrection] blind,
deaf and dumb. The person with [the sin of] adultery, of wood-wind, and
of drum will also be raised in the same way.”[^1]

He also said, “Whoever listens to the entertainment (song and music),
lead will be melted inside his ear on the day of judgment.”[^2] He also
said, “Singing and music are enchantment for adultery.”[^3] That is, it
is a stepping stone or a way that leads to adultery.

546. It is permissible for a woman to **dance** in front of her husband
to please and arouse him. But it is not permissible for her to dance in
front of other men; based on obligatory precaution, she must not dance
in front of other women also. (See the question-answer section below.)

547. It is permissible to **applaud** in a marriage ceremony, religious
gatherings, seminars, and other functions. This is equally permissible
for women and men.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

548. **Question:** Many questions are asked concerning permissible and
forbidden music.

Is it correct to say that the music that arouses sexual, lustful urges
and promotes unstable and degrading behaviour is the forbidden one?

And is it correct to say that the music that soothes the nerves or
causes relaxation, the music that forms the background of a scene in a
movie to increase the effect of the scene on the viewers, the music that
is used for physical exercise during workouts, the music that dramatizes
a particular scene by its tune, or the one that arouses the zeal [in
soldiers] is the permissible one?

**Answer:** Forbidden music is the music that is suitable for
entertainment and amusement gatherings, even if it does not arouse
sexual temptations.

Permissible music is the music that is not suitable for such gatherings,
even if it does not soothe the nerves like the martial music and that
played at funerals.

549. **Question:** Just as many questions are asked about *halal* and
*haram* music, many questions are asked about *halal* and *haram* songs.

Is it correct to say that haram songs are those that arouse sexual,
lustful urges and promote unstable and degrading behaviour?

Is it correct to say that songs that do not arouse lustful desires, but
elevate the souls and thoughts to lofty levels like religious songs of
praise dedicated to the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.),
or the songs that lift the spirits and morale [of the fighters] and the
like are *halal* songs?

**Answer:** All songs *(al-ghina’)* are *haram*. Based on the definition
that we accept, *al-ghina’* is the entertaining expression by way of
tunes that are common to those who provide entertainment and amusement.

In this prohibition, we should include the recitation of the Holy
Qur’an, supplications (*du‘a*s), and songs of praise of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) uttered to the accompaniment of those tunes [that are used by the
entertainers]. The prohibition of reciting other non-entertaining
expressions —like songs intended to lift the morale [of fighters]— is
based on compulsory precaution.

However, the tune that cannot be described as such is not *haram* by
itself.

**560. Question:** Is it permissible to listen to religious songs in
praise of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that are accompanied with music?

**Answer:** Songs *(al-ghina’)* are *haram* absolutely. However, singing
praise [of the Prophet or the Ahlul Bayt] that is sung with a good tune
but is not in *ghina’* form is without problem.

As for the music, it would be allowed, if it is not suitable for
entertainment and amusement gatherings.

**561**. **Question:** Is it permissible to soothe the senses by
listening to the reciter of the Qur’an who recites in a vibrant,
quavering tone?

**Answer:** If the tune used in its recitation is not *ghina’*, there is
no problem in listening to it.

**562**. **Question:** Some of the reciters, singers or chanters adopt
the tunes of sinful people [i.e., haram entertainers] and then sing or
chant with their tunes poems in praise of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and his
family—the result is that the context is different from that of the
sinful people, yet the tune is suitable to theirs. Is it forbidden to
sing in this way? Is it forbidden to listen [in this case]?

**Answer:** Yes, based on obligatory precaution it is forbidden.

**563**. **Question:** Is it permissible for women to sing in the a
wedding party in whatever tune, even if it is suitable for the
gatherings of sinful people? Is it permissible for them to use musical
instruments while singing that night? Is it permissible for them to
sing, wearing henna [on the bride’s hand and feet], or on the eve of the
seventh night [after the marriage]? Or is the permission restricted to
the marriage eve?

**Answer:** Based on compulsory precaution, they should refrain from it,
even on the marriage eve, let alone other occasions. As for the issue of
music, its rules have already been mentioned earlier.

**564**. **Question:** Is it permissible to listen to revolutionary
songs accompanied by sounds of piano, lute, drum, wind-pipe, and
electronic piano?

**Answer:** If the music accompanying it is that which is suitable for
entertainment and amusement gatherings, it is not permissible to listen
to it.

**565**. **Question:** What is the meaning of the phrase: “common among
sinful people”?

**Answer:** This expression is not mentioned in our fatwas (religious
edicts). What we have mentioned in defining *al-ghina’* is “the tunes
that are common for those who provide entertainment and amusement;”
whose meaning is clear.

**566**. **Question:** A non-practicing Muslim has recently become more
committed [to Islam]. Is it permissible for him to softly hum what he
remembers from the past songs by himself or in front of his friends?

**Answer:** If it falls in the category of *al-ghina’*, then it is not
allowed.

**567**. **Question:** There are certain songs in foreign languages that
the teachers of linguistics recommend listening to in order to expedite
the learning process of that language. Is it permissible to listen to
such songs for that purpose?

**Answer:** If it falls within the category of *al-ghina’* as explained
earlier, it is not allowed.

**567**. **Question:** Musical instruments are of different kinds.
Sometimes they are used in musical gatherings and sometimes for soothing
the soul. Is it then permissible to buy these instruments, manufacture
them, deal in them, or play them to soothe the soul or listen to the ir
sounds when someone else is playing them?

**Answer:** It is not permissible to deal in the instruments of *haram*
entertainment: neither selling nor buying, just as it is not permissible
to manufacture them and accept remuneration for making them.

“An instrument of *haram* entertainment” means that its physical
shape—that gives its value and eventually the purpose for acquiring it—
is not suitable except for use in *haram* entertainment.

**568**. **Question:** Is it permissible to manufacture, sell, or buy
musical instruments that are made for children’s play? And is it
permissible for adults to use them?

**Answer:** If the music that is suitable for entertainment and
amusement gatherings comes out of it, then it is neither permissible to
deal in, nor are adults allowed to use them.

**569**. **Question:** In government schools of the United Kingdom and
may be some other countries also, students have to take part in dance
classes to the sound of special musical tunes that synchronize the
movements of the students while they are dancing.

(a) Is it permissible to attend such classes?

(b) Is it obligatory on the parents to prevent their children from
attending such classes if the young boy or girl is inclined towards
attending them?

**Answer:** (a) It is not permitted, if it has any negative effect
—which is quite common— on their religious upbringing. Rather, it is not
permitted at all, as a matter of obligatory precaution.

(b) Yes, it is obligatory. Also please refer to the answer to question
no. 563 below.

**570**. **Question:** Is it permissible to learn dancing?

**Answer:** It is not allowed at all, as a matter of obligatory
precaution.

**571**. **Question:** Is it permissible to organize dance parties where
each husband dances only with his own wife to the sound of soothing
musical tunes, wearing dresses that are not indecent?

**Answer:** It is not allowed.

**572**. **Question:** Is it permissible for women to dance in front of
other women or for men to dance in front of other men in a gender-wise
segregated gathering with or without music?

**Answer:** Dancing of women in front of women or dancing of men in
front of men is problematic, as a matter of obligatory precaution, one
must refrain from it. The rules governing music have already been
discussed earlier.

**573**. **Question:** Is it permissible for a wife to dance for her
husband with music or without music?

**Answer:** It is allowed as long as dancing is not accompanied with
*haram* music.

**574**. **Question:** Some schools in the West make it obligatory that
their male and female students learn dancing. This dancing is neither
accompanied by the common song, nor is it for entertainment; it is part
of the educational curriculum. So, is it *haram* for the parents to
allow their sons and daughters to attend such classes?

**Answer:** Yes, if it contravenes the religious upbringing. Rather it
is, based on obligatory precaution, forbidden absolutely, if the student
has reached the age of maturity — except if he has a valid reason for
approving of it; for example, if he follows a *mujtahid* who allows it.
In the latter case, nothing prevents him from allowing his child to take
part in [such activity].

[^1]: As-Sayyid al-Khu'I, al-Masa'ilu 'sh-Shar'iyya, vol. 2, p. 22.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 23.


