Epilogue
========

It is important for me to stress at the end of this book that my first
attempt in writing *Islamic Laws for Muslims in non-Muslim countries* is
in need of evaluation. This being so to establish a body of laws for
Muslims in those countries that deal with various aspects of their lives
and so that those issues could be governed by noble principles of the
Islamic *shari‘a*.

The number of Muslims, be they citizens or residents in non-Muslim
countries —especially America and Europe— is increasing. The percentage
of the immigrants coming to this part of the world from Muslim lands has
also gone up. On the other hand, the pace of change and transformation
in these societies is very fast. This on its own poses more questions
and creates new situations that must be studied carefully so that the
right solutions could be presented. This is needed to keep pace with
change in reality, and be proactive rather than reactive.

I should also point out the importance of writing in this subject
without losing sight of spirituality as seen by Islamic ethics and
morality, especially in an environment that is attached almost totally
to materialism and all that the latter stands for.

I have attempted here and there to emphasize some of Islam’s values, as
espoused by the Qur’anic verses and the noble *ahadith*: This was done
in a bid to blend the codes of ethics with jurisprudence just as I have
previously done in my book, *al-Fatawal ’l-Muyassara* (Jurisprudence
Made Easy) since I have detected the active link between the theoritical
and the practical planes [of life]. Also because I can see the need that
these teachings should find their way to materialization in the
day-to-day conduct of Muslims, especially those who reside in the midst
of non-Muslim societies.

It is sufficient for me that I have tried.

I seek the help of Allah, hope for His aid, and pray for his acceptance
since He is the Most Merciful of the Mercifuls. All praise be to Allah,
the Lord of the Universe. And may Allah be pleased with our master,
Muhammad, and his pure and infallible progeny.

**Author**


