Translator's Preface
====================

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

May Allah send His blessings upon Muhammad and his progeny.

Writing the manuals of Islamic laws for use by Muslims is an
evolutionary process, reflecting the change in lifestyles and the
relevance (or the lack of it) of certain problems and issues that vary
from time to time and place to place. The spirit and the purpose remain
constant but the style and the format change.

In the present century we first saw the widely used Tawdihu 'l-Masa'il
in Persian (also known as risala-e 'amaliyya), and then came the Minhaju
's-Salihiyn in Arabic by the late Ayatullah al-Hakim (which was later
expanded by the late Ayatullah al-Kh√ª'i and even further improved by
Ayatullah as-Sistani). In mid seventies, the late Ayatullah Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr brought about a completely new style in his
al-Fatawa al-Wadiha.

The present book, al-Fiqh lil Mughtaribin by Hujjatul Islam Sayyid
'Abdul Hadi al-Hakim, is a further development in the same line of
change and continuity. Sayyid 'Abdul Hadi's distinction is that he has
focused on the problems and issues faced by the Muslims in the West,
formulated those questions, and compiled their answers without going
into details that can be easily obtained from other commonly used
sources of Islamic laws. And so it was indeed a great pleasure when I
was asked to undertake the translation of this book into English.

A Note on Translation: I have been quite liberal while translating the
author's Introduction but had to strictly abide by the wording and
expressions as they appeared in the original in the latter and the major
part of the book. This was done to ensure the accuracy in conveying the
views of the Grand Ayatullah as-Sistani.

This translation is based on the first Arabic edition of 1998 but with
quite a few changes and amendments done by the Fatwa Committee of the
Office of Ayatullah as-Sistani in Qum. And so those who would compare
this translation with the first Arabic edition should keep this fact in
mind. The changes were of various length and nature: in some instances,
words, phrases and sentences were changed or added to further explain
the problem;[^1] in some cases, the rulings have changed;[^2] and in
three cases, the items were deleted completely.[^3]

Moreover, in some instances I had asked for further elaboration that was
kindly provided by the Committee.[^4] I have also taken the liberty of
changing the placement of certain rulings so that similar issues are
found in the same section. For the same reason, in Part Two, I have
switched the sequence of two chapters: Chapter 8 ("Youths' Issues") and
Chapter 9 ("Women's Issues) since women's issues are much closer to
issues of Chapter 7 on "Marriage". Interestingly this is the order that
the author himself has listed pages 31 and 136 of the Arabic but has
somehow changed it in the final printing. I have written some footnotes
to clarify the meaning and have also added a short list of "Frequently
Used Terms" at the beginning of each chapter.

I pray to Almighty Allah to accept this work as a humble attempt in
simplifying His laws for the Muslims in non-Muslim societies, and may He
reward the author and grant long life to the Ayatullah as-Sistani on
whose expert opinion this book is based.

**Toronto**

**Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi**

**Shawwal 1419 / February 1999**

[^1]: See for example items 16m 20, 23, 29-30 on p. 37-39; item 11, p.
56; item 96, p. 100; item 178, p. 149; item 301, p. 203; item 383, p.
251. All page numbers in this note refer to the first Arabic edition.

[^2]: See, for example, item 114 on p. 110 on sighting of the new moon.

[^3]: See item 218 (p. 168), item 285 (p. 191), and item 269 (p. 187) in
the first edition.

[^4]: See item 115 in this translation on the criterion of following the
moon sighted in a city west of your own city.


