Author's Preface
================

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

It is a pleasure for me to present to the respected readers my book,
al-Fiqh lil Mughtaribin, according to the views: of his eminence Grand
Ayatullah as-Sayyid 'Ali al-Hussaini as-Seestani (May Allah prolong his
blessed presence among us).

This book is the first attempt at writing Islamic laws For Muslims who
have settled in non-Muslim Countries. Muslims who were compelled to
leave their countries and the places where they grew up, and had to
migrate to non-Muslim countries in which they now live under different
laws and systems, dissimilar values and rules, and unfamiliar customs
and habits. The modes of conduct and manners of the host societies are
greatly at variance with what the guests were used to; there is a wide
gulf between their own upbringing and the values of the host countries.
Consequently, new problems have emerged and a number of questions arose
that called for answers - answers that would clarify the ambiguous,
enlighten the obscure, guide the stray, and brighten the darkness.

From this came the need for writing a book that would deal with the
various practical problems of immigrant Muslims, and provide answers and
present solutions for them.

It was against this background that al-Fiqh lil Mughtaribin was written
with a detailed introduction, followed by two parts with each part
branching out into various chapters which contain new questions, issues
that had not been charted before, and problems that have not been
discussed in most Manuals of Islamic Laws and other commonly used books
of Islamic Jurisprudence. Hopefully these parts and chapters will act as
a stimulus for further questions that the learned reader may raise; and
I will be greatly pleased to receive those queries so that they may be
included with their answers in future editions, insha Allah.

Islamic Laws for Muslims in non-Muslim Countries is the third attempt
following two other books "al-Fatawa al-Muyassara" (Jurisprudence Made
Easy) and "al-Muntakhab mina 'l-Masa'ili 'l-Muntakhabah" (Current Legal
Issues) through which I hope to have contributed to the process of
making Islamic laws accessible, and endear them, to lay people. If I
have succeeded in my aim, all praise is due to Allah; and if I have not,
it is sufficient that I have tried "and my success is not but from
Allah, and in Him I place my trust and to Him I turn."

I had the privilege of reading some chapters of this book to my
respected father (may Allah prolong his life) during his stay with me in
London when he came for treatment. His guidance has indeed enriched this
book.

I pray to the Almighty Allah that He may accept this work with a good
acceptance I am grateful to those who helped me in completing this book.
I would like to especially thank His Eminence the Grand Ayatullah
as-Sayyid 'Ali al-Hussaini as-Seestani (may Allah prolong his blessed
presence) who took upon himself the trouble to provide the answers to
the questions. I am also grateful to the offices of the Grand Ayatullah
in Najaf [Iraq], Qum [Iran], and London for helping me in ensuring the
accuracy of what I have written and in ensuring that it is in accordance
with the views of the Ayatullah.

"Our Lord! Do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake. Our Lord! Do
not lay on us a burden as Thou did lay on those before us. Our Lord! Do
not impose upon us that which we have not the strength to bear; and
pardon us and grant us protection and have mercy on us. Thou are our
Master, so help us against the unbelieving people."

**'Abdul Hadi as-Sayyid Muhammad Taqi al-Hakim**

**27 Ramadhan 1418 / 26 January 1998**


