Migration to Non-Muslim Countries
=================================

Introduction
------------

A Muslim who is born and raised in a Muslim country where he consciously
and subconsciously absorbs the laws, values and teachings of Islam,
grows up into a young person who is aware of the customs of his
religion, following its path and is led by its guidance. On the other
hand, a Muslim who is born, and brought up in a non-Muslim country
demonstrates the influence of that environment very clearly in his
thoughts, ideas, behaviour, values, and etiquette unless his Lord helps
him. This un-Islamic influence is seen more in the second generation of
those who have migrated to non-Muslim countries.

This was the reason for Islam's view on at-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra as
reflected in many ahadith. At-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra literally means
"becoming shorn of one's percepts of faith after migrating [to city],"
and technically, it means leaving an environment where you could follow
Islam and moving to a place where you maybe prone to not following
Islam. Such a migration is counted as one of the major sins. Abu Basir
says that he heard Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) saying: "The major sins are
seven: killing a person intentionally; associating someone or something
with the Almighty Allah (shirk); wrongfully accusing a married woman of
adultery; Knowingly dealing in usury; running away from the battle-field
in jihad; at-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra; causing distress to one's parents
[by encroaching on their rights]; and wrongfully acquiring the property
of the orphan." Then he said, "At-ta'arrub and shirk are one and the
same [in severity]."[^1]

Ibn Mahbûb narrates that some of our companions wrote through me a
letter to Imam al-Hasan al-'Askari (a.s.) asking him concerning the
major sins. He (a.s.) wrote: "The major sins are the ones for which
Allah has threatened with the Hell-Fire; the one who refrains from them,
He will forgive his sins if he is a believer. Those seven which cause
[one to burn in Hell Fire] are: killing an innocent person; causing
distress to one's parents [by not upholding their rights]; dabbling in
usury; at-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra; wrongfully accusing a married woman of
adultery; unlawfully confiscating the property of the orphan; and
running away from the battle-field in jihad."[^2]

Muhammad bin Muslim narrates from Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.): "The major sins
are seven; intentionally killing a believer; wrongfully accusing a
married woman of adultery; running away from the battle-field in jihad;
at-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra; unlawfully confiscating the property of the
orphan; dabbling in usury; and every act for which [the punishment of]
the Fire has been promised"?[^3]

'Ubaydullah bin Zurarah narrates that he asked Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.)
about the major sins. The Imam said, "In the book of [Imam] 'Ali, they
are seven: disbelieving in Allah; killing a person; causing distress to
one's parents; dabbling in usury; unlawfully confiscating the property
of the orphan; running away from the battle-field in jihad; at-ta'arrub
ba'd al-hijra." Then he asked, "So these are the most major of sins?"
The Imam replied, "Yes."[^4]

Imam ar-Rida (a.s.) explained the prohibition of at-ta'arrub ba'd
al-hijra as follows: "Since there is the danger that because of
at-ta'arrub, he [the immigrant] might abandon [Islamic] knowledge, get
involved with the ignorant people, and drift away"[^5]

This, however, does not mean that entering non-Muslim countries is
always forbidden. Other ahadith had described for us the reward of one
who visits non-Muslim lands, the reward that every Muslim longs for.
Hammad al-Sindi narrates that he asked Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.), "I visit
the cities of polytheism [i.e., of the polytheists]; and there are some
among us who say that 'if you die over there, you will be raised [in the
Hereafter] along with them.'" The Imam asked me, "O Hammad, when you are
over there do you talk about our affair [i.e., our truth] and call
[people] to it?" I replied, "Yes." The Imam asked me, "When you are in
these cities, the cities of Islam, do you talk about our affair and call
[people] to it?" I replied, "No." The Imam said, "If you die over there
[in the land of the non-Muslims], you will be raised as an ummah by
yourself, and there will be light in front of you!"[^6]

General Rules
-------------

Based on these and other similar ahadith, and other religious proofs,
the jurists (mujtahidin) have issued the following rulings:

1. It is recommended for a believer to travel to non-Muslim countries
for the purpose of spreading the religion [of Islam] and its teaching,
provided that he can safeguard himself and his young children against
the dangers of loss of the faith. The Prophet said to Imam 'Ali, "If
Allah guides a person from among His servants through you, then that is
better than everything between the east and the west on which the sun
shines."[^7] When asked by a person for a counsel, he said, "I advise
you not to associate anything with Allah...and to call the people to
Islam. You should know that [the reward] for you for each person who
answers [your call] is [equal to] emancipating a slave from the children
of [Prophet] Ya'qûb."[^8] (See the question-answer section below.)

2. A believer is allowed to travel to non-Muslim countries provided that
he is sure or has confidence that the journey would not have a negative
impact on his faith and the faith of those who are related to him.

3. Similarly, a believer is allowed to reside in non-Muslim countries
provided that his residing there does not become a hurdle in the
fulfilling of his religious obligations towards himself and his family
presently as well as in future. (See the question-answer section below.)

4. It is haram to travel to non-Muslim countries in the East or the West
if that journey causes loss of the faith of a Muslim, no matter whether
the purpose of that journey is tourism, business, education, or
residence of a temporary or permanent nature, etc. (See the
question-answer section below.)

5. If the wife strongly feels or is sure that her travelling with the
husband [to a non-Muslim country] will result in loss of faith, it is
haram for her to travel with him.

6. If the baligh[^9] boys or girls strongly feel that their journey [to
the non-Muslim country] with their father or mother or friends will
cause loss of faith, it is haram for them to travel with those people.

7. What do the jurists mean when they speak of, "loss of faith"? It
means either committing a forbidden act by indulging in minor or major
sins like drinking intoxicant, adultery, eating forbidden meat, or
drinking najis (impure) drinks, etc. It also means abandoning the
fulfillment of a compulsory act like neglecting salat, fasting, hajj and
other obligations.

8. If circumstances force a Muslim to migrate to a non-Muslim country
with the knowledge that the migration will cause loss of faith (e.g., a
person seeks political asylum in a non-Muslim country in order to save
his life), it is permissible for him to make that journey to the extent
that it saves his life, and not more than that. (See the question-answer
section below.)

9. If an immigrant Muslim, residing in a non-Muslim country, knows that
his stay in that country will lead to loss of faith or of that of his
children, it is wajib on him to return to one of the Muslim countries.
(See the questions at the end of this section.) As mentioned above, this
loss of faith is realized by neglecting the obligatory acts or by
committing sins.

10. The obligation to return to a Muslim country applies only if it does
not lead to death [for example, for a political opponent who has fled
his own country], or to putting him in untenable situation or, to an
emergency situation where religious obligations are suspended (e.g., the
necessity of preserving life which allows a person to eat haram meat in
order to prevent his own death from starvation).

11. If the journey is haram for a person, then his journey will be
considered "a journey of sin;" and, in such cases, he loses the benefit
of the concession of praying (qasr) in four -rak'at salat and also the
benefit of not fasting during the month of Ramadhan. As long as his
journey maintains the status of "sin," he cannot benefit from such
concessions provided by the shari'a for travellers.

12. A son is not allowed to disobey his parents when they forbid him
from travelling, if their refusal to give permission is out of their
concern for the son, or if his journey will cause distress to them
because of his separation from them - provided that he does not suffer
loss by not travelling.

13. It is permissible to approach the competent authorities [like police
and the justice system in a non-Muslim country] for various important
issues -like prevention of harm befalling the person, the honour and the
property of a Muslim- provided that it is the only way for exacting
one's right and preventing injustice.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

14. **Question:** What is the meaning of at-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra which
is one of the major sins?

**Answer:** Some jurists have said that during our time, it applies to
residing in countries that may cause the loss of faith. It means the
migration of a person from a country -where it is possible for him to
learn the obligatory religious teachings and laws, and where it is
possible for him to fulfill his obligations and refrain from what is
forbidden- to a country where this possibility does not exist fully or
partially.

15. **Question:** A believer residing in Europe, America and other
similar countries feels estranged from the religious environment in
which he was born and raised. Neither does he hear the voice of the
Qur'an [recited from mosques] nor the sound of the adhan[^10] coming
[from the minarets]; and there are no holy shrines, and their spiritual
atmosphere, that he can visit. Is leaving such an Islamic environment of
his country and its positive aspects considered "loss of faith"?

**Answer:** This is not the loss of faith that would make residing in a
non-Muslim country haram for that person. However, staying away from
such a religious environment may, with the passage of time, weaken the
religious resolve of the immigrant to an extent that he may consider
negligence of wajib deeds and committing of sins as insignificant. If a
person has this fear that he might lose the faith in this manner, then
it is not permissible for him to take residence in that country.

16. **Question:** Sometimes a Muslim residing in Europe and America (and
other similar places) indulges in haram activities that he would not
have done, if he remained in his Muslim country. The manifestations of
temptation in non-Muslim societies may attract a Muslim to committing
haram deeds even if he is not inclined towards them. Does this come
under the banner of "loss of faith" that makes it haram for him to stay
in that country?

**Answer:** Yes; unless the sins he sometimes indulges in, and without
insisting upon them, they are of the minor category.

17. **Question:** At-ta'arrub ba'd al-hijra has been described as
"migrating to a country in which the religious knowledge of the
immigrant will decrease, thus becoming more alienated from his faith."
Does this mean that a Muslim in such countries is duty bound to be extra
vigilant lest he should become alienated from his faith?

**Answer:** The extra care becomes wajib when not being mindful leads to
loss of faith as described earlier.

18. **Question:** If a religious preacher who is mindful of his faith
starts facing more situations where he commits haram deeds because of
the social environment (e.g., nudity and indecent exposures), is it
haram for him to stay in those countries; that is, should he stop
propagation (tabligh) and return to his own country?

**Answer:** If he indulges in some minor sins occasionally, then it is
not haram for him to stay in that country, provided that he is confident
that he would not be tempted to commit more serious sins.

19. **Question:** If an immigrant fears the loss of faith for his
children, is it haram for him to stay in that non-Muslim country?

**Answer:** Yes, the same rule applies to himself also.

20. **Question:** Is it wajib on the immigrants in Europe and America
(and other similar countries) to strive for teaching their children
Arabic, and that ignorance of Arabic may lead in the future to ignorance
of the main Islamic body of knowledge, and that will naturally lead to
less familiarity with religious teachings and loss of faith?

**Answer:** To teach them Arabic is wajib only to the extent which is
necessary for performing their religious duties that have to be done in
Arabic (e.g., recitation of the Opening chapter of the Qur'an, a second
chapter, and other wajib recitations in salat). Teaching more than that
is not wajib as long as it is possible to provide them with religious
knowledge in a foreign language.

Of course, it is recommended to teach them the holy Qur'an [in Arabic];
rather it is important to teach them Arabic in a precise form so that
they may benefit from the basic sources of Islamic teachings,
especially, and foremost among them, after the holy Qur'an, is the
Prophetic sunna and the sayings of the Ahlul Bayt (peace be with them
all).

21. **Question:** If it is possible for a Muslim to reside in a Muslim
country with some financial difficulty compared to his present
situation, then is it wajib on him to travel to that Muslim country and
leave leave his residence in Western countries?

**Answer:** It is not wajib [to leave the Western country] except if he
has no confidence in himself, in that he may lose his faith -as
explained earlier- while residing in the foreign country.

22. **Question:** If a person has the ability to propagate Islam to
non-Muslims or to disseminate religious knowledge among Muslims in
non-Muslim countries without any danger of losing his own faith, is it
wajib on such a person to do propagation (tabligh)?

**Answer:** Yes, it is wajib kifa'i upon him and all the others who have
the ability to propagate [Islam].

23. **Question:** Is it permissible for a person to buy a passport
[i.e., to illegally obtain a passport] or change the picture in the
passport so that he may be able to enter a country, and then he would
let the immigration officials of that country know the truth about his
identity?

**Answer:** We do not allow it.

24. **Question:** Is it permissible for a person to reside in non-Muslim
countries with all its temptations that confronts the person on the
street, the school, the television and other media while he has the
ability to migrate to a Muslim country although that transfer would
cause difficulty in residence, loss of material wealth and comfort, and
constrain the worldly aspects of his life? If it is not permissible to
remain in such a country, would his efforts in propagation among the
Muslims (reminding them of their obligations and encouraging them to
refrain from haram) change the rule for him and allow him to remain in
that country?

**Answer:** It is not haram to stay in that country, if it does not
create hurdles for him and his family in fulfilling their religious
obligations presently as well as in future; otherwise, it would not be
permissible even if he is engaged in some kind of propagation
activities. And Allah knows the best.

[^1]: Muhammad bin Ya'qûb al-Kulayni, al-Usûl min al-Kafi, vol. 2, p.
281.

[^2]: Ibid, p. 277.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Ibid, p. 278.

[^5]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Tafsilu Wasa'ili 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 15, p. 100.

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 16, p. 188.

[^7]: Al-Hurr al-'Amili, Tafsilu Wasa'ili 'sh-Shi'a, vol. 16, p. 188.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Translator's Note: Baligh means the legal age in Islamic laws
which for boys starts at fifteen lunar years and for girls at nine lunar
years. Growth of pubic hair or sexual discharge is also a sign of
attaining the age of maturity.

[^10]: Translator's Note: Adhan means the call for prayer announced at
prayer times from the mosques.


