Taqlid: Following a Jurist
==========================

Introduction
------------

Taqlid means acting according to the opinion of the jurist (mujtahid)
who has all the necessary qualification to be emulated. So you do what
the mujtahid's expert opinion says you should do, and refrain from what
his expert opinion says you should refrain from without any research [in
Islamic sources] on your part. It is as though you have placed the
responsibility of your deeds squarely on his shoulders.

Among the conditions which must be found in a jurist (mujtahid) who can
be followed is that he must be the most learned (al-a'lam) jurist of his
time and the most capable in deriving the religious laws from the
appropriate sources.

General Rules
-------------

Now it is appropriate to clarify the following issues:

25. A person who does not have the ability to extract and derive the
religious laws must take up taqlid of the most learned mujtahid. The
deeds of such a person without taqlid or ihtiyat are null and void.

26. The most learned mujtahid (al-a'lam) is the most capable in deriving
the religious laws from their sources.

27. In order to determine who is the most learned mujtahid, one must
refer to the ahlul khibra (those who are sufficiently knowledgeable in
Islamic jurisprudence). It is not permissible in this matter to refer to
a person who has no expertise in this subject.

28. You can know the opinion (fatwa) of your marja' by one of the
following methods:

    a. By hearing the ruling from the mujtahid himself.

    b. By being informed about the mujtahid's fatwa by two just men or
by a reliable person.

    c. By referring to the Manual of Islamic Laws (risala) of the marja'
or other books of that category.

29. When the most erudite mujtahid has no fatwa on an issue or if it is
not possible for the layman to find the opinion of his marja' when he
needs it, he can then refer to another mujtahid who is the second best
in the line of hierarchy of being a'lam.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

30. **Question:** The jurists tell us that it is wajib to emulate the
most learned (a'lam) mujtahid, and when we ask the religious scholars in
our area, "Who is the a'lam?" we do not get a clear-cut answer so that
we may follow his fatwa. When we ask them about their answer, they say
that they are not ahlul khibra and they also say that: "we have asked
ahlul khibra[^1] and have been informed that identifying the a'lam
mujtahid requires the study of the books of the mujtahids and that
obviously is a time consuming and difficult task; so go and ask the
others."

If the problem of identifying the a'lam mujtahid is so difficult in
religious circles, obviously the problem would be even more difficult in
other countries like Europe and America. After a lot of difficulty when
we convince the youths of these countries that it is necessary to abide
by the shari'a laws, we reach to the question of who is the a'lam, and
find ourselves lost for words. Is there a solution to this problem?

**Answer:** If there are some ahlul khibra who refuse to identify the
a'lam for one reason or another, there are other ahlul khibra who
readily identify him. It is possible to contact those ahlul khibra
through the religious scholars and others who are reliable and have
contacts with religious seminaries and with the scholars in other
countries. So, although identifying the a'lam is not without difficulty,
yet it is not a serious problem.

31. **Question:** How do we know who ahlul khibra are so that we may ask
them about the a'lam mujtahid? How do we reach them since we are far
away from religious seminaries? Is there a way that can simplify for us
the process of determining whom we should follow in taqlid

**Answer:** The ahlul khibra are the mujtahids and those next in line in
religious sciences, and they know quite well that one person in a
limited group of mujtahids is the a'lam. And they have to consider the
following three things to identify that a'lam:

    a. **First:** His knowledge concerning the methods for providing the
authenticity of the hadith, and that involves 'ilmu 'r-rijal (the
science of narrators of hadith) and 'ilmu 'l-hadith (the science of
hadith). On this subject, issues like familiarity with the books [of
hadith] and the ahadith that have been tampered with; knowledge of
causes for fabrication [of ahadith]; variance in the manuscripts and
distinguishing the most correct one; and being aware of confusion which
sometimes occurs between the text of a hadith and the explanation of the
compilers, are of utmost importance.

    b. **Second:** His ability to understand the meaning of the text by
considering the general rules of speech, especially the style used by
the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) in describing the laws. The science of
'usûlu 'l-fiqh (Principles of Jurisprudence), Arabic grammar and
literature, as well as familiarity with the views of the Sunni jurists
who were contemporaries of the Imams play an important role in the
understanding of the hadith texts.

    c. **Third:** Soundness of his view in deriving the rules from the
sources. And the method of getting acquainted with those in whom the
status of a'lam is confined to having scholarly discussions with them or
to referring to their books or to the transcripts of their lectures on
Jurisprudence and the Principles of Jurisprudence.

If a person cannot know the ahlul khibra by himself, he can come to know
them through the religious scholars and others whom he trusts. The
geographical distance should not be a barrier to establishing
communication with them in this era where many fast means of
communication are easily available.

32. **Question:** Sometimes the heart feels at ease in regard to a
particular mujtahid. Is this feeling sufficient to do his taqlid if the
ahlul khibra have difference of opinion in determining the a'lam?

33. **Answer:** If the ahlul khibra have difference of opinion in
determining the a'lam, one must follow the view of those who are more
qualified and capable among the ahlul khibra. This is the norm in
dealing with all cases where the experts have difference of opinion.

34. **Question:** If the ahlul khibra have difference of opinion in
determining the a'lam mujtahid or just say that following any one from
the given number of mujtahids is sufficient, can a person apply the
fatwa of one mujtahid in one issue and another mujtahid in another until
it becomes clear for him who is the a'lam?

**Answer:** This question has three parts:

    d. **First:** That some ahlul khibra announce that "it is sufficient
to follow one specific mujtahid or of a group of mujtahids." This has no
religious value at all.

    e. **Second:** That the ahlul khibra announce that two or more
mujtahids are equal in knowledge and piety (in the sense of being
careful in deriving the laws [from their sources]), then a lay person
has the option of acting according to the views of any one of the
mujtahids in all the issues.

However, as a matter of precaution (ihtiyat) in some issues, if
possible, one could act in such a manner as to fulfill the requirements
of both views; for example, in the case of praying concessionary qasr
and full (tamam) prayers. [That is, praying the same prayer in qasr as
well as in tamam forms.]

    f. **Third:** That some ahlul khibra announce that mujtahid 'a' is
the a'lam whereas others among the ahlul khibra announce that mujtahid
'b' is the a'lam. This can have two situations:

        i. A person knows that one of the two mujtahids is the a'lam but
he does not know which one specifically. This is a very unusual
situation and it has been discussed in detail in Minhaju 's-Saliheen,
question No. 9.

        ii. A person does not know which of the two is the a'lam in the
sense that he thinks both are equal in knowledge. This refers back to
the second of the three parts mentioned above, provided that the person
is unable to identify the more Godfearing of the two mujtahids. If he is
able to identify the more Godfearing of the two mujtahdis, he must
follow the fatwa of that mujtahid.

35. **Question:** If a person does not know the view of his marja', in a
certain problem, is it necessary for him to find out about it even if it
involves expensive telephone calls? Or is it sufficient to act on the
known view of any other mujtahid until he finds out the view of his own
marja'? And in such a case what will be the verdict on the past acts
[done according to the view of the other mujtahid] if it differs from
the view of his own marja'?

**Answer:** It is necessary for him to find out the view of his a'lam
marja' even through telephone contact as long as it does not cause him
harm [physically or financially]. If it is not possible for him to find
out the view [of his own marja'], it is permissible for him to refer in
that particular case to the other mujtahids, taking into account the
hierarchy of the al-a'lam and the next a'lam in line. The deeds
performed according to the view of the second mujtahid would be valid
even if the worshipper later on finds out that it was not in accordance
with the view of his own marja'.

[^1]:  Translator's Note: See rule no. 26 for meaning of ahlul khibra.


