Taharat & Najasat: Ritual purity & impurity
===========================================

Introduction
------------

A Muslim tries to maintain the ritual purity of his body, clothes and
everyday commodities by avoiding contact with impure things because such
contacts would render the other items impure and would, therefore
necessitate the process of purification.

Residing in a non-Muslim country makes the process of maintaining purity
difficult for some Muslims as they deal with its non-Muslim citizens in
various situations of their day-to-day life: in restaurants, cafes,
barber's shops, laundrettes, and, in public baths and utilities, etc.
Therefore, it is appropriate for me to clarify for the respected readers
the religious rules concerning taharat (ritual purity) and najasat
(ritual impurity).

General Rules
-------------

36. A well known religious law says: "Everything is ritually pure for
you unless you come to know that it is ritually impure." This law
declares everything to be pure unless one becomes sure a particular item
has become impure. And as long as you are not sure that it has become
ritually impure (najis), it is to be considered pure and you can apply
all the rules of purity to it without any hesitation or doubt.

37. The Ahlul Kitab (that is, the Jews, the Christians and the
Zoroastrians) are ritually pure (tahir) as long as you do not know that
they have become ritually impure (najis) by coming into contact with an
impure object. You can follow this ruling when dealing with them.

38. The impurity transfers from one item to another through flowing
wetness [that is, there is so much wetness in the impure item that it
permeates to another item and makes it impure]. The impurity is neither
transferred when it is dry, nor is transferred by non-flowing wetness.
So, if you place your hand on a dry najis item, your hand will not
become impure.

39. You can assume the ritual purity (taharat) of any person that you
meet and shake hands with (even if that person's hand is wet) as long as
you do not know his faith and religion - in such cases you can assume
that he might be a Muslim or one of the Ahlul Kitab. Moreover, it is not
obligatory for you to ask him in order to ascertain his religion; that
is, even if doing so does not put you or him in any inconvenience. (See
the question-answer section below).

40. Any water drops or other liquids that fall upon your body or dress
are to be considered pure as long as you do not know that they are
najis.

41. All kinds of alcohol (whether extracted from wood or other sources)
is pure, not najis. So, the medicines, the perfumes, and the food
containing alcohol are pure and can be used. It is also permissible to
eat such food if the amount of alcohol is very minute.

42. No matter who was the previous user, the everyday commodities and
utensils can be used without the need for purifying them as long as you
do not know that they had become najis previously. (See the
question-answer section below.)

43. If the carpet and the mattress become najis by the elements that do
not have a mass (i.e., do not leave any marks or stains on the carpet or
the mattress), it can be purified by sprinkling water over it from a
kettle or a jug once until the pure water covers the impure area, and
then wipe the water away by using a piece of cloth or a vacuum cleaner,
etc. The carpet or the mattress will now be considered pure; and the
water removed from it will be considered, on the basis of obligatory
precaution, as najis.

The same rule will apply in purifying the cloth if it becomes najis by
impure sources other than urine. Things becoming najis by urine will be
discussed later on.

44. If one wants to purify the carpet or the mattress by using pure
water connected to the kurr source [e.g., by using a hose pipe instead
of pouring water from a jug], there is no need to wipe the water off
using a piece of cloth or a vacuum cleaner, etc. As soon as the kurr
water covers the najis area, it will become pure [and the water will
also be considered as pure].

45. It is possible to purify the carpet or the mattress which has become
najis by the elements that do have a mass (i.e., do leave marks or
stains like blood or semen) by the same method as mentioned in No. 39
provided that the impure element is removed while washing or prior to
washing. The only difference is that if it is purified by the qalil
water [e.g., from a jug or a glass], then the water removed from the
carpet will be considered najis as a confirmed opinion and not as an
obligatory precaution.

46. If a carpet or a mattress becomes najis by urine of an infant child
that mostly gets nutrition by breast-feeding, then it can be purified by
sprinkling water - even if it is little - on it until it covers the
najis area. In this case, there is no need to remove the water by using
a piece of cloth or vacuum cleaner, etc.

47. If clothes become najis by urine, they can be purified by sprinkling
little water on them from a kettle or a jug, etc., until it covers the
najis area; then the water should be wiped off by using a piece of
cloth, etc. You have to do this twice so that the clothes restore their
taharah.

48. The water that has been wiped off from the clothes (while purifying
it two times) will be considered najis on the basis of obligatory
precaution, if there is no urine in them. Conversely the water will be
considered najis as a confirmed opinion.

49. If one wants to purify such a clothes with pure water which is
connected to a kurr source [e.g., under the water tap or by using a hose
pipe], even then it is necessary to wash them twice. Similarly, it is
necessary to wash the body twice -even when washed in kurr water- while
purifying if it has become najis because of urine.

50. If the hand and the clothes become impure because of an intoxicating
drink, a single wash can purify them. However, in case of purifying the
same with little water, it is necessary to rinse the cloth after
washing.

51. Utensils and cups that have become impure because of intoxicating
drink should be washed three times if purified with little water. If
they are purified with pure water connected to a kurr source, even then
it should be washed three times, as a matter of obligatory precaution.

52. A single wash can purify the hand and the clothes that have become
impure by licking of a dog. Such a clothes, need to be rinsed if it is
purified by little water. (See the question-answer section below.)

53. Utensils and cups that have become impure by licking of a dog or by
the dog drinking from them can be purified as follows: first they should
be cleaned by using earth or dust, and then by washing them twice with
water.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

54. **Question:** The earth is one of the purifying agents. Following
the example of a shoe's sole that can be purified by walking on the
earth, would the same rule apply to car tires?

55. **Answer:** The earth cannot purify the tires.

56. **Question:** Where does the domino effect of mutanajjis items stop
when it is no longer wet?[^1]

57. **Answer:** The first mutanajjis item would make the item that comes
into contact with it impure; similarly, the second mutanajjis would make
the item that comes into contact with it impure; but the third
mutanajjis can no longer make other items impure, irrespective of
whether it is wet or dry.

58. **Question:** If a dog licks my body or clothes, how should I purify
it?

**Answer:** It is sufficient to wash it once. However, if the water is
little, it is necessary to rid it of the water by wringing.

59. **Question:** Are the Sikhs considered to be among the followers of
the past revealed religions like the Jews and the Christians?

**Answer:** They are not counted among the People of the (Revealed)
Books (the Ahlul Kitab).

60. **Question:** Are the Bhuddhists among the Ahlul Kitab?

**Answer:** They are not from them.

61. **Question:** Can Muslim, who rents a fully furnished house in the
West, consider everything in it to be ritually pure as long as he does
not find any trace of impure things in it, even if the previous occupant
was from Ahlul Kitab, i.e., a Christian or a Jew? What if the previous
occupant was a Bhuddhist or an atheist who does not believe in God and
the prophets?

**Answer:** Yes, he can consider everything in the house ritually pure
as long as he does not know that it has become impure. Just conjecture
or doubt about impurity is of no value.

62. **Question:** The floor of most houses in the West is covered with
carpet which is glued to the floor in such a way that it is difficult to
lift it off. How can such a carpet be rendered pure (tahir), if it
becomes impure with urine or blood? The water used to purify in both the
cases could be qalil or kathir. Please explain the ruling in both cases.

**Answer:** If it is possible to wipe the water off the carpet by using
a piece of cloth or a vacuum cleaner, it can be purified with qalil
water, provided that the water is wiped off the carpet, in the process.
Conversely, it must be purified by kathir water [i.e., by using a hose
pipe connected to the tap].

63. **Question:** In the West, there are many public laundry places in
which Muslims and non-Muslims wash their clothes. Is it permissible for
us to pray in the clothes washed in such facilities, especially when we
have no knowledge whether or not the washing machines are connected to
the kurr water[^2] at some stages of the washing, and whether or not it
purifies the clothes in the process of washing?

**Answer:** There is no problem in praying in those clothes that were
pure before washing them [in such facilities] as long as you are not
aware that they have become impure. [In other words, what goes in the
public washing machine as pure comes out as pure unless you are sure
that it has become impure.]

Similarly, [you can pray in] the impure clothes [that were washed in the
public laundry machines] provided that you are reassured:

    a. that the impure element, if any, has been washed away;

    b. that the pure water covered the entire impure area twice (if it
had become impure by urine and even if the water was connected to kurr
source as an obligatory precaution) or just once (if it had become
impure by other elements);

    c. and that the water was removed from the clothes by wringing or
other similar method [i.e., spinning of the machine] if it was qalil.

However, if you are not sure and just have conjecture that the garment
has been purified as per religious requirement, the previously impure
garment will still be considered impure and praying in it would not be
valid.

64. **Question:** Can the clothes washed with liquid detergent in
laundry facilities owned by a non-Muslim be considered tahir while
knowing that Muslims as well as non-Muslims wash their clothes there?

**Answer:** If you do not know that the clothes have come into contact
with a source of najasah, you can consider them tahir (pure).

65. **Question:** Some soaps contain pigs' fat or other animals not
slaughtered Islamically. Furthermore, we do not know whether or not
chemical change has taken place in the manufacturing process. Can such
soaps be considered tahir? [Chemical change is a purifying agent in the
sense that it purifies a najis item.]

**Answer:** If it is proven to contain those [impure] elements, it
should be considered impure, except if the occurrence of chemical change
is proven. Such a change is not proven in manufacturing of soaps.

66. **Question:** A toothbrush that contains bristles from the hair of a
pig: is it permissible to buy, sell and use it? Does the mouth become
impure by using such a toothbrush?

**Answer:** It is permissible to buy, sell and use it; however, the
mouth will become impure by using it; and the mouth will become pure by
taking that toothbrush out and getting rid of the remaining toothpaste
from the mouth.

67. **Question:** If blood is seen in the yolk or the white part of the
egg, does it make the egg impure and haram for us? Is there a solution
for it?

**Answer:** The clot of blood inside the egg is pure, but it is haram
[for consumption]. Therefore, the egg can be eaten by removing the blood
from it, provided it not very minute and been absorbed in it. [In the
latter case, is not removable, then the egg becomes haram.]

68. **Question:** Are alcoholic beverages pure? Is beer pure?

Answer: There is no doubt about the impurity of alcoholic drinks. As far
as beer (fuqa') is concerned, it is impure on the basis of precaution;
however, there is no doubt in it being haram.

69. **Question:** The people residing in Europe are of different faiths,
nationalities and religions; and when we buy moist or wet food items,
the shopkeeper may touch it with his hands. Since we do not know his
religion, can we consider that food as pure?

**Answer:** As long as it is not known that the hands of the shopkeeper
were najis, the food is to be considered tahir.

70. **Question:** What about the leather products made in a European
country, if we are unaware of the source of that leather? It is said
that some European countries import cheap leather from Muslim countries
and then use it for manufacturing various products. Can we consider such
leather pure? Are we allowed to say salat in them? Can such a weak
probability [about it originating from a Muslim country] be given any
credence?

**Answer:** If the probability of the leather originating from a zabiha
(an animal slaughtered Islamically) source is so weak that people would
not normally give any credence (for example, the probability of 2%), it
is to be considered impure and this cannot be used in salat. But if the
probability is not so weak, it can be considered pure and using it in
salat would be permissible.

[^1]: Translator's Note: An item which is impure by itself is known as
'ayn najis or simply najis; the item that becomes impure by coming into
wet contact with an 'ayn najis is known as "mutanajjis," that is impure
by secondary reason.

[^2]: Translator's Note: All laundry machines are connected to kurr
source because it comes from the main reservior supplying the water to
the city.


