Foreword
========

Hijab in a society has its roots in the culture of that society, a
culture comprising the manner of apprehension and the type of views of
the society about man and life. It is on the basis of these
apprehensions and types of views that culture delineates the human
existence in general and the position of women in particular. In the
Islamic hijab culture, a human being occupies an honourable and
dignified position in whose body, made of clay, God has breathed His
soul, and therefore he possesses the innate capability of acquiring the
divine qualities in the course of his evolutionary journey.

Naturally this holds good even in case of woman, being half of the
mankind. However, Islam believes that the Creator of man and the world,
in order to regulate the human affairs and the society, has created man
and woman in two different forms, and has assigned basically different
roles to each of them in the society. It is these differences based on
divine Wisdom, which are responsible for the mutual attraction in both
the sexes, which also guarantee companionship, playing the role of a
complement to each other and lastly the continuation of the human life
on earth.

What is important and valuable for a man and a woman from Islamic point
of view is the occupation of their respective positions and the proper
fulfillment of their own roles with the help of their existential
capacities. In the Islamic hijab culture one can easily find the
elements of realism, kindness, truth and perfection. This culture relies
upon realities in its dealing with man and the problems relating to him,
and keeps itself away from indulgence in fanciful whims, idealism and
aberrant thinking current these days, assigns the roles carefully and
delicately and does not neglect the tender sides of human character
particularly in dealing with woman.

It does not utter a word irresponsibly or unrealistically, and takes
into account the respective qualities of man and woman and saves them
from degeneration, degradation and deviation in thoughts and deeds. In
such an intellectual system, hijab has some meanings. Hijab is meant for
covering and concealing the attractive and delicate parts of the body
and controlling the undue exposure of the sex-appeal (in a woman) in the
society.

Islam recognizes man and woman on the basis of existing realities and
the laws governing the human existence, and is fully cognizant of the
fact that they possess appeal and attraction for each other. Although
this appeal and attraction applies to all the existential dimensions of
the two sexes, yet their most superficial manifestation is their outward
attraction for each other.

From the Islamic viewpoint, woman occupies a number of delicate and
attractive qualities which, if exposed in a vast and unlimited manner in
the society, may not only cause sexual, emotional, intellectual and
psychological disorders and ruin the very foundations of the society,
but may also lose its healthy and useful effects within that framework.

When sex is allowed an unlimited and uncontrolled sway in the society,
it destroys its very foundations based on human relations in a
reasonable and solemn manner. So also when it wields its adverse effects
on the family that is based on profound spiritual and emotional
relations, it shall also ruin its foundations. This would be the
greatest tragedy one can imagine in a society, since most of the social
crises in the West that have led to the unrestricted and free sexual
activity in all the fields and departments of human life emanate from
the same source.

It is possible for some people to conclude that the best solution for
this problem is to remove woman from the sphere of social activity so
that the society may be cured of the plague of her sex-appeal and
attraction. Another group holds the view that we should basically fight
against sex-appeal itself, since it is the source of all sufferings and
disturbances.

Both these views, the former being forwarded by the dry and fossilized
minds throughout the past centuries and the latter held by Christianity,
are the product of aberrant thinking and indulgence in fanciful whims,
and have tread the wrong path in dealing with woman and the sexual
instincts, and, due to superficial and aberrant thinking, have tried to
rely on wrong solutions.

Islam repudiates both the above viewpoints, and finds the solution of
this problem in the adoption of hijab system by woman, and thus brings
woman to society in the most active and best manner without allowing her
to be a source of sexual disturbances and disorders. In fact, woman
enters the field of social activity sans sexuality, so that firstly she
may have the opportunity to utilize and manifest her capabilities and
creative faculties as a human being, and secondly, society may be
allowed to benefit itself from her energies and useful qualities.

Of course, Islam has not been heedless to the priorities and
necessities. It considers woman as the only person competent to bring up
children, and as such it has assigned some particular role to her. From
the Islamic viewpoint, woman, in the position of a mother, has to play a
very important and delicate role in the proper functioning of her
society, since due to a special emotional texture she happens to possess
a great collection of capacities and energies for the physical,
intellectual, spiritual and religious training of the children, which,
if and when fully realized and properly utilized, can bring about a
great change in the society. However, even this important factor does
not prevent her from participating in the general social life.

This is why we find that in the Islamic civilization, woman occupies the
highest peak in the human values, and enjoys the most beautiful and
delicate manifestations of human life. From the Islamic point of view,
all the importance and value is attached to this very active and
evolutionary role of woman in the human society, and nothing else.

Here is "The Message of Hijab from a Muslim Woman" one of the most
valuable works of Sister Zahra Rahnavard. It carries a message in all
the domestic, social, political, cultural and other fields for you, O
woman! For you who form half of the body of the human society. For you
who possess the capability and capacity to move towards the achievement
of a supreme and sublime objective. Such movement may turn you into an
unparalleled innocent person, in the same way as it did with Fatimah,
the venerable daughter of the holy Prophet, peace be upon him.

Cultural Consulate,
The Islamic Republic of Iran,
Islamabad, Pakistan July, 1987


