About The Author
================

(Excerpts from an Interview with the Author)

It is now about 18 years when sister Zahra Rahnavard started her
political career with the teachers' strike against the pro-American
regime of the ex-Shah. Subsequent to her dismissal from the government
service in education department due to her political activities, she
took up the cudgels against the Shah's regime with a semi-underground
life by writing with the same nom de plume.

During this period she wrote a number of books, which were either
published clandestinely or could not see the light of the day due to
their protracted detention by the regime's censor. They included the
books entitled: "The Emigration of Joseph", "The Revolt of Moses"
delineating the Qur'anic philosophy of history, "The Social Strata from
Qur'anic Point of View", a politico-sociological study of the holy
Qur'an and the short stories entitled "Ali and Mash Madina".

While still under prosecution, she succeeded in leaving for abroad.
Several of her lectures to the foreign students were compiled in the
form of books: "The Message of Hijab from a Muslim Woman" and "The Rise
of a Muslim Woman" which were smuggled and published in Iran. In the
last days of the Satanic regime of the Shah, when the state's
sensitivity towards such activities subsided, she returned to Iran.

She produced her anthology: "Tempests and the Tulips of Shahrivar" under
the nom de plume of Zaynab Boroujerdi after the bloody massacre of 17th
Shahrivar (8th September) by the pro-American regime of the ex-Shah, and
dedicated it to Imam Khomeini (RA). After the state authorities came to
know of the real identity behind her pen name, she was again forced to
return to an underground life. Throughout the Islamic revolution she
took herself to delivering lectures in most of the towns and
universities, thereby exposing the regime of those days, until at last
the revolution was blessed with success.

After the revolution, she wrote "Imperialist Roots of the Abolition of
Hijab". She soon assumed the position of the Chief Editor of the
magazine "Rahe Zaynab", (The Pathway of Zaynab). During the turbulent
days of the Cultural Revolution, she was the only lady who had the
honour to teach at the first Faculty of Anthropology founded on the
basis of Islamic guidelines. Subsequently she gave a wider perspective
to her University activities and started teaching at the Tehran
University, where she produced several works including "Aesthetics",
"Insight into the Qur'anic Verses", "Philosophy of the Islamic Art" and
"A Hero from the Qur'anic Viewpoint", the last one being in the press.

Sister Rahnavard is a graduate from the Faculty of Fine Arts, and is
presently a Professor at the University. She has finalized the stage of
writing her Doctoral Dissertation in the Department of Political
Science. She is the wife of the present Prime Minister of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and the mother of three children. Following are the
excerpts from an Interview with Madam Rahnavard, published in "Shahide
Banowan", No.107 dated 1st Ordibehesht 1325/21st April 1986.

Q: Sister Rahnavard, why have you cut down your social activities after
Mr. Musavi has assumed the position of the Prime Minister of Iran?

A: In fact, when Mr. Musavi accepted such a big responsibility, it added
to my responsibilities at home. It is because his heavy official
engagements and the vast expanse of his service to the people did not
leave any time for him to shoulder his responsibility at home fully.
Therefore I had to cut down my (social) activities, pay greater
attention to my home and confine myself to teaching at the University
and writing books. During this period I have produced my research works
in the fields of "Aesthetics in Islam", "Insight into the Qur'anic
Verses" and "The Philosophy of Islamic Art".

Now that my children have grown up, and my presence at home is not as
necessary as before, I think I should devote myself more to the social
work I used to perform during the tumultuous days of the Islamic
Revolution. I hope, by the Grace of God, I shall always be successful in
the performance of my service to the community of Hezbollah (The Faction
of Allah's Believers).

Q. Some people believe that the Prime Minister has prevented you from
social activities

A. No, it is not so. They are a bit inconsiderate. Like every other
Muslim, Mr. Musavi also believes that the most honourable and dignified
duty of a woman is her role as a mother. But at the same time, he is of
the opinion that a woman must certainly have some activity in the
society and should shoulder some important and fundamental
responsibilities. I think, it would be injustice to Mr. Musavi to say
that he has prevented his wife from social activities.

We are first indebted to our Leader for the Islamic Revolution, and then
to the mothers who have produced men who laid down their lives for the
sake of the Revolution. The Leader of the Community has also said:
"It is the lap of the mother from where man ascends the highest peaks
of glory."

This is the great role of mothers which is acknowledged by all the
Muslims, including Mr. Musavi himself, who is most willing to see all
the ladies, including myself, undertaking various social activities in
the society.


