Imperialist Roots of The Abolition of Hijab
===========================================

"From Woman's Lap Man Ascends to the Skies". (Imam Khomeini [RA])

The Islamic Revolution of Iran, before being a political revolution for
getting hold of the power, or an economic revolution dealing with the
economic and class relationships, is a cultural revolution possessing a
moral and spiritual value in the depth of the being of the individual
and society as well as the heroes of the Muslim community of Iran.

It is a gift of Allah's angels to the people which has been showered
through the Imam of the Community from the hidden divine treasures to
the land of the oppressed, and clean-washed the souls addicted to the
hunger for power and position, the greed for amassing wealth, adoration
for beauty, Occidentosis and Orientosis.

In relation to the woman too, like its relationships and connections
with so many other sections of the society, it brought into vogue some
new values, values which have their roots ingrained in the nature of all
human beings which had since been buried, in our land during the 2500
years of despotic rule, under the dust of the tyrannical breeding,
etiquettes, affronts at the hands of autocracy, and which have
languished in a distorted form among all the other Muslim people too
throughout the period of Imperialist domination.

Under this shower of divine benediction and in such favourable
background, the Muslim woman discovered the mysteries of her being and
came to realize that her existence was not confined to her body and sex,
but was primarily a divine and celestial substance which was to be
exalted and elevated in order that it may be salvaged and may achieve
communion with its sublime, divine origin, (as promised by Allah)

***"Indeed he attains deliverance who purifies his soul". (Surah
al-Shams: 91:9)***

Even the men of our society came to understand that woman is not a mere
"beautiful and sexual thing", but is, in fact, a divine substance about
which Imam Khomeini (RA) has very aptly said:
"From women's lap man ascends to the skies".

The person whom the Western Imperialism had convinced and said: "You are
the sole source of pleasure! You are the ladder for the achievement of
political power by the (Super) powers, kings, cartels, trusts and
multinational companies"
The person who, through centuries and ages, had been a manifestation of
intellectual deficiency, foolishness, intrigues and temptation;
And on whose bosom would descend abjectness and disgrace of mankind and
human values;

All of a sudden became the pinnacle of human glory, the ladder that
leads man to the acme of dignity. The woman, however, has attained this
value and honourable position after undergoing lot of hardships. It is
because, at the summit of the Islamic revolution, this gift of Allah's
angels has been bestowed upon the women who have qualified themselves
for it after the sacrifice of their own dear ones, their children and
husbands, in the way of defending Islam, women who carried in their
bosoms their dear ones wallowing in blood after they had been martyred
at the torture centres of CIA and MOSSAD executioners and dismembered
after they had been killed by the firing squads of the pro-American
Shah; women who had valiantly fought in the battlefield of life against
the Satanic regime which was responsible for engendering the unbalanced
mental, psychological and educational traits hitherto ingrained in her
being. In this battle of internal and external forces they had come out
with flying colours, pure and clean, with their laps being the perching
places of the sublime values.

Alas! When you look back into the distant past the disgraceful life of
the woman, and find the first steps dragging her into the quagmire of
dishonour, on the way to the erosion of the values of her Godly essence
and the noble origin of her being in order to establish and bring into
prominence her physical and sexual values, and go through the history
of' the woman in the decadent societies particularly in the contemporary
Imperialist systems; you will come across a history full of sexual
display.

It will not be astonishing when, in its wake, we find intellectual
slavery, because Western Imperialism with its bestial, profit-oriented
and power-seeking motives used the abolition of hijab as the most
powerful weapon for degrading and dishonouring woman, because
Imperialism fully realized that one of the mechanisms for the decadence,
downfall or elevation of a people lies hidden in the person of woman. It
was the first step towards enervating or distorting the potentialities
and faculties of woman a leap more forward than taken by all the other
despots and power-seekers of history, so that by the display of her
physical features and replacing the Islamic breeding and behaviour by
the Western habits and character, Western Imperialism may drag the
Muslim people to gradual annihilation and ultimately lead the Muslim men
and women to cultural, followed by, political and economic subjugation.

Now, let us study the inauspicious course of the abolition of hijab in
the Muslim countries, particularly in Iran, and see how the enemy
started his evil designs.

Effacement of the Self
----------------------

The roots of the effacement of Muslims' self go back to the past, a
distant past, to the Crusades, when the West during the Crusades learnt
a large number of sciences and arts from Muslims, and within a very
short span of time, with the help of these sciences and arts, the
Western people succeeded in developing their own techniques and
equipments, but, instead of being grateful to us, most shamefully and
ungratefully they used the same weapons against us which they had
borrowed from us. Travelling around the world, which took place very
sparsely, became very frequent. The world travellers or tourists of yore
turned into greedy traders whose voracious appetite for ownership could
not be satiated by any amount of wealth.

Travelling from one place to another brings maturity in man's outlook.
He can see every image, as far as he can, in the mirror of original
moulds. The travellers of yesterday, who had turned into avaricious
traders through penetrating eyes and long experience, entered the depths
of the earth beneath its heavy surface and, in the heart of the warm and
ancient lands of the Orient, they discovered untouched pearls, springs
of oil and mines of gold, silver and copper.

With what sort of eyes and with what type of equipments did they do it?
With the eyes of greed and the equipments of covetousness and the
insatiable desire for more and more.

Henceforth they were not content with dealing in spices or cloth alone
or stealing away (the gold and diamonds from) the tombs of the saints or
rings and seals (of kings and princes).

They had now turned all their attention to unearthing the hidden
treasures of these lands. But it required the riches of Croesus to buy
the contents of these underground treasures. Thus, it has been through
robbery and intrusion that these traders succeeded in their filthy
designs. It was here that they had to face an unexpectedly tough
resistance from the Eastern people.

They thought and thought, how to get over this obstacle and reach their
cherished goal. At last they were supported by their instinctive
intelligence and specialized skill of a robber, intruder and plunderer.
They came to realize that the Eastern people are endowed with a very
precious object more precious than all the riches the West wanted to
steal, an object which, unlike the mines, was not created by Nature and
was not the product of the geological survey, an object which could not
be seen by the visual eye and which could not be touched by the feeling
hand.

It is the precious gem produced by the teeming millions through many a
millenium with their beliefs, with their sorrows and joys, with their
culture and religion, with their ancient history. This precious,
exquisite and inaccessible gem is the "Self". Man can work wonders
through science and technology. He can break atom. He can melt steel. He
can reach the depth of the oceans. He can discover the stars and planets
and can even land himself there. He can make cloth, chocolates and
candies with petroleum. But he cannot have access to this "Self" through
science and technology. The West knew well that unless it succeeds in
getting hold of this "Self" and annihilate it, it cannot reach the depth
of the warm lands of the Orient and their hidden treasures.

How could the West break this "Self" and exterminate it. Its people
pondered and pondered, and chalked out plans. At first they specified
their general target that they must extirpate this "Self" which was the
secret behind the force and resistance of the East or must bring about
the "Effacement of the Self" of the East, and breathe into its body
their own soul or the soul they so much wanted to see in its body.

Now, in order to achieve this object, they used the following two
methods:

### 1. Debasement of "the Oriental Self"

The first method is the one adopted by all the despots and dictators of
history. The holy Qur'an refers to the story of Pharoah in (almost) the
following words:
"The Pharoah assembled the people of his land and said to them:

***'O People, behold what gardens full of fruits I have! What cool and
roaring rivers are under my control! How precious bracelets and earrings
I have! (Now decide) whether I am better or this Moses who is penniless
and is in tatters, and does not even know how to talk," (Derived though
not literally from Surah al-Zukhruf: 43: 51-52)***

The Qur'an concludes the story thus:

***"Then Pharoah debased his people, and they obeyed him." (Surah
al-Zukhruf: 43:54)***

So the West adopted, the method of humbling "the Oriental Self" and
showing itself as great, important, powerful and wealthy.

### 2. Obliteration of the Manifestation

The second method adopted by the West was the obliteration of the
manifestation of this "Self", or, in other words, destruction of
whatever is the outward exponent or external display of this "Self" or
its nature, or according to the famous saying, destroying the form in
the hope of putting an end to the content, or ruining the exterior for
destroying the interior. Of course, later the West adopted some more
subtle ways.

Progressive and Reactionary
---------------------------

Initially the West exploited a psychological peculiarity of human being
which has also been emphasized by the holy Qur'an, where it says:

***"But man wishes to explode his advance (ment)." (Surah al-Qiyamah:
57:51)***

What is meant by man's advancement. The Qur'an emphasizes the aversion
to love for what is old and advocates the love for whatever is new and
novel, the desire to eat fresh fruits and the desire to experience newer
and newer phenomena not experienced before. Now, the West came to the
East and told its people.

"Whatever you have is old, and belongs to the past, to the bygones. It
is the product of lack of civilization. Whatever we have is new, fresh
and modern. If you have culture, customs, laws, dress, architecture,
art, literature, language or whatever else, let you know that it is all
out of date. In our stock lies a lot of fresh and modern commodity. Come
and take away this commodity," At first the West did all this through
its traders, and then it also used force and at last it fulfilled its
designs through the Westernised intellectuals and thinkers.

In our country Mirza Malcolm Khan[^1] was the pioneer of this movement,
until we had Taqizadeh [^2] who would proclaim: "Let us be Westernized
from the head to the toe!"

They were followed by their successors who are still there, and whatever
troubles we have experienced in the post-Revolution period had been at
the hands of these very persons.

At last one day the Eastern people came to hate themselves. The West had
so much propagated that "the Oriental Self" is rotten and out-of-date.
Consequently, the Eastern people felt an aversion to their "Self". They
felt ashamed to think of their "Self".

This was the best ground for the growth of Occidentosis. This was the
beginning of the cultural Imperialism of the West, which later led to
the tragic plunder of the Eastern mines and other resources. Now that
the Eastern people had obliterated their "Self", they would easily fall
prey to the insinuation of adopting what was superior from the West, the
occidentosis, to give up their aversion to and estrangement from the
West (and bring it to their own land, and hand over their own control
and domination in its hands. It was all accepted very easily and with
pleasure. This process was accomplished rapidly with the help of the
'Westernised intellectuals and indigenous rulers of the land.

The Self of the Muslim East is "the Islamic Self"
-------------------------------------------------

Let us mention here that in every corner of the world this "Self" has
its own type. It is in one form in the Far East and in another in the
Middle East. The Muslim East for the last one thousand and four hundred
years has experienced all its sorrows, joys, heroes, history, art,
literature, marriage ceremonies, mournings, births and deaths under the
shade of Islam.

Therefore the Self of this part of the East is an "Islamic Self". In the
Lexicon of the plunderer West, the "Effacement of the Self" of this part
of the East is an exact synonym for "Obliteration of Islam". In other
words, the "Self" which the West has been keenly busy destroying in this
part of the world is the Islamic character of these people.

The West has an extreme aversion to this "Islamic Self". It is for the
following reasons.

1. The Islamic Self is a source of unity and force for a great part of
the people of the world who are by themselves a "Superpower", and if
this unity persists, it would lead to rapid annihilation of the Western
[^3] powers.

2. The Islamic Self means a Self demanding justice, opposed to the
amassed force and wealth and against atheism and infidelity.

3. The Islamic Self is basically one seeking God and demanding justice
and stands to assemble the whole world around this centre.

4. The Islamic Self, in view of its relationship and common affinity
with human nature and being, has its roots in the depth of human
psychology, and therefore it possesses a strong power of resistance to
the blows of its opponents. We have observed how in spite of all the
hostile machinations (by the West) from the Safavid period, particularly
during the last half century, aimed at the effacement of our dear
people, with the success of our Islamic Revolution under the able
leadership of Imam Khomeini, the power of resistance of this "Islamic
Self" has been fully realized by all the enemies and how the latter were
thrown into the abyss of defeat and despair.

Muslim Woman is the most Living Manifestation of Islamic Self
-------------------------------------------------------------

As already mentioned, the second method adopted by the West for
Effacement of the Islamic Self has been the obliteration of the
manifestation (of this Self). In their view whatever is a manifestation,
sign, expression or product of this "Self' must be obliterated. So the
Algerian language must be changed from Arabic to French, the Indian
language from Urdu to Hindi [^4] and local dialects to English. The
Turkish script must be replaced by Latin, our architecture must be
replaced by Western architecture, our art by Nihilism and our local
dress by Western dress.

The most important of all these, and the most living manifestation (of
this Self) is woman, the Muslim woman. If they succeed in changing this
manifestation of our Self, this Lap bringing up our Self, if this can be
changed, the enemies would succeed in striking the biggest blow on "the
Islamic Self."

Of course, the Eastern woman has an external self and an internal self.
She has an intellect and a soul and a peculiar feminine character. The
Muslim woman occupies the most distinct place among the Eastern women.
Her pecularities are greater and her relationship with the identity and
Self of her people is deeper and she has stronger roots than the rest of
the Eastern women. Now, what should the West do to change her? What
should be the plan of the West, and which of her weak points should be
exploited? Is Muslims' bias [^5] in encountering women a weak point? If
it is so, how is it to be tackled?

Imperialist Tactics, Weakness of Muslims' Bias and Treacheries
Perpetrated by the Satanic Regime
In order to execute their nasty plans against woman as a manifestation
and exponent of Islamic Self, there were two internal factors which had
been effective and paved the way for it.

Weakness of Muslims' (not Islamic) Bias Against Women
-----------------------------------------------------

On the one hand, it was long since Islam had been divorced from the
field of social activity, and what was left of it was nothing more than
its outward appearance and shell. On the other, the usurping tyrant
powers had prevented the religious leaders and intellectuals from
discovering and disclosing the Islamic practical solutions for the
vexing problems of the society.

This was why as a general mental attitude of Islam, particularly in
regard to its relationship with woman, conditions had been created which
were responsible for the opinion that not only Islam did not provide any
support to woman, but it had also plenty of laws which were directed
against the womenfolk and granted right of domination to man, and thus
brought the shelterless Muslim woman under the yoke of heavy pressure.
But they realized that if the womenfolk who find no supporter among the
so-called Muslims come to have even an iota of information about their
real rights and the power (granted to them by Islam) they would
throwaway this yoke and release themselves from it.

This propaganda that Islam is against the womenfolk has been carried on
by the Imperialists, under one pretext or the other, through their mass
media in the East and the West, their news imperialism and groups
associated with the Americans and the USSR as well as the other
anti-revolution members of SAVAK and pro-monarchy groups, and every now
and then they are raising a hue and cry against Islam and the Muslims.
At one time they raise the question of inequality of man and woman in
Islam, and at another they harp on the issue of hijab, and so on.

In fact, however, (under the illuminating and guiding leadership of Imam
Khomeini), millions of common womenfolk have returned to their divine
nature, to the dignity of their own Self, and under the loving patronage
and protection of the Islamic Republic of Iran we are advancing towards
preparing the ground for new legislation, so that on the basis of the
Islamic laws and precepts suitable laws may be framed for this period of
time for the rights and true worth of the womenfolk in order that all
the oppressed women of the world may come to realize that the only way
of their deliverance is the path of Islam and not the Capitalist,
humanist or Communist ideologies, and that the only guarantee for
materializing this objective is the Islamic revolution.

B. The other internal factor has been the multidimensional enervation of
woman for the last over two thousand years. The Satanic regimes, which
attached importance to woman from the sexual point of view, kept women
in a state of extreme ignorance and lack of information and awareness.
They had put woman's mind so much in inertia that with the least
analysis she could take the most relentless foes for good and reliable
friends and most deceitful hell for a paradise of kindness and favour,
as all the plans for corrupting women implemented by the Imperialists
have been misunderstood by a large number of women as friendly acts.

It was with this background that the Imperialist enemy turned towards
the Muslim women and, in order to annihilate the Islamic identity of our
people, he took up the mission of breaking the Muslim woman into pieces.
He thought out the way to obliterate' the identity of the Muslim woman.
He tried to find out the common factor between the identity of the
Muslim woman and the Muslim community. He made "hijab" his target, as it
was the manifestation of the Islamic character of a Muslim woman as well
as the symbol of Islamic nature of Muslim community's self.

The Tragedy of Abolition of Hijab
---------------------------------

Reza Khan, the founder of modern Iran on the foundations of three
pillars: Occidentosis, Infidelity and subservience to Imperialism, first
brought his own wife and daughter without observing hijab in the
official functions, and later through a decree made it compulsory for
women to appear without the conventional head-cover but wearing a
Western chapeau in all gatherings and functions.

How Surprising it is that this obnoxious practice which was started by
the Occidentosis-stricken and the stooges of the British Imperialists in
the beginning was later recognized as a true movement for advancement
and emancipation and progress of women by the American Imperialism in
the later Pahlavi period, and the nonobservance of hijab was considered
to be a synonym for women lib!

Although at first the brave Muslim people of Iran opposed this
Imperialist conspiracy due to the just and proper religious orthodoxy,
but they soon came to realize that behind this so called movement for
abolition of hijab, the ban on the use of the special dress of the
clergy and the disuse of the traditional dress of men was hidden nothing
but a dangerous conspiracy of eroding the Islamic identity and Self of
the Iranian people and handing over the country to the foreigners.

They came to understand that this anti-Islamic movement was, in fact, a
movement against the political, cultural and economic independence of
the country. This was why they sought refuge in the shrine of Imam Reza
(AS) in the holy city of Meshed and took sanctuary in that holy shrine.
At the time of the brutal attack on the shrine of Imam Reza (AS) by the
agents of Reza Khan, a Western stooge, they took themselves to defend
their Islamic identity, beliefs and self, and soaked the floor of the
Gowharshad Mosque of Meshed with their own blood.

Whatever the nature of the tragedy of abolition of hijab might be, at
first it had to face a strong resistance from the noble Muslim men and
women spearheaded by the clergy and the students of religious
institutions. The genera! massacre at the Gowharshad Mosque in Meshed
was but a part of the bloody defence of the holy dress and this
manifestation of the Islamic and divine Self of our oppressed people.

For our Islamic Self there has not been a greater tragedy than the
abolition of hijab. Likewise, on the body of Islamic identity of our
people one could not think of a deadlier blow than the separation of
this divine symbol from the Iranian belief and this most penetrating and
effective Islamic message from the hearts of the people.

As soon as this lofty and exalted flag of Islam and nobility fell down
from the hands of the people, it was replaced by ignominy, dishonour,
unlimited freedom, villainy, cruelty, ostentation, depravity, debauchery
and loss of complete freedom and independence. May God break the hand of
the Western and Eastern system of oppression that has thrown us for the
fast fifty years in the abyss of ignominy of the isolation from our
exalted Islamic Self!

Analysis of Abolition of Hijab among the Marxists having Orientosis and those having Occidentosis
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Islamic Revolution of Iran has in practice been a crucible in whose
burning flame all beliefs, schools, groups and factions have been put to
test:

How better it would be if persons are tested on the anvil of experience
so that everyone who has an alloy may suffer disgrace. The Marxists, the
Capitalists, those suffering from Orientosis and those suffering from
Occidentosis and the gleaners in spite of their apparently different
theories are unanimous, united and supporters of one another in opposing
Islam, fundamentals of Islamic Revolution and the spiritual values of
women including the observation of hijab by Muslim women. They have been
in unison with the Western Imperialism, particularly the American
Imperialists, in their hue and cry against hijab.

Now, that we have come to understand the methodology of the Imperialists
regarding the abolition of hijab, it would not be out of place if we
also analyze hijab in the opinion of the Marxists (those having
Orientosis) as well as those suffering from Occidentosis.

However, before we continue the analytical study of the Imperialist
roots of the abolition of hijab, let me point out two explanations of
these phenomena at which I have arrived recently. Hijab is like a gate
of a green garden, a wooden gate whose colour has faded, which is not so
pretty that whenever you open it you may come across a pleasant garden
of spring on whose branches you would find the illumination of divine
light. In this respect, hijab is a prologue to gnosis. If you dare come
close to this gate and open it, enter its threshold, you shall explore
that green and pleasant garden of spring and that eternal light.

The other explanation is that hijab for a woman is what fire was for
Abraham, so that when among the rising flames of fire he surrendered
himself to the Almighty One, every flame turned into a bough and every
amber into a flower, till at last the burning fire turned into a cool
garden for Abraham.

A woman who accepts hijab and surrenders her heart to its hidden laws
succeeds gradually in exploring the spiritual garden, and becomes so
much habituated to it that whenever she is away from that garden her
heart starts singing sad songs like a nightingale (away from its
flower}.

Thus the enemy started with the intrigues for damaging and eroding the
"Self" of the Muslim women through taking her away from hijab. If we
have time we shall try to analyze the attitude of every school towards
hijab.

As regards the Imperialist roots of the abolition of hijab to which
brief reference has already been made, we have to discontinue that
discussion in order to go deep into the matter, and refer briefly to the
analysis of the hijab by the Marxists. They analyze hijab in two ways,
both of which as usual have economic roots.

The first of their analyses about the Imperialist roots of the abolition
of hijab is that they believe that during the days of Reza Khan, the
accursed, which coincided with the unlimited growth of capitalism and
its transformation into Imperialism, abundance of capital and piling up
of surplus products, the Western Imperialism, in order to save itself
from insolvency which was the natural outcome of such economic
conditions, found it indispensable to export its capital as well as its
products to other countries, so that it could invest its capital in
their industries and also sell its products to the unfortunate people of
these countries, and thus protect it from lying in the god owns and
going waste and rotten.

For this purpose, Reza Khan, who was a stooge of the West, took himself
to abolish hijab by force, so that firstly women who, as a result of
their dress, which had been an obstacle in their easy movement, had
become inactive should be free to work in the factories run by Western
capital, and secondly by the abolition of hijab there could be some
activity in the consumption of the commodities exported by the West, and
at the same time the women through their beauty and sex-appeal could be
used for the publicity of the Western commodities. So Reza Khan, the
accursed, resorted to the abolition of hijab more than forty years ago,
so that he could save the Western capitalists who were on the verge of
insolvency.

According to the second analysis of the Marxists, as Islam is a feudal
religion, hijab is also based on a feudal system of dress. As during the
historical stages of evolution feudalism is replaced by capitalism, a
system higher and more advanced than feudalism, we may conclude that
when society has passed the stage of feudalism and entered the stage of
capitalism, it is said to have attained capitalist stage.

In the view of the Marxists, Reza Khan's time was a period of progress
of the bourgeoisie, non-enlightenment and decline of feudalism. So
according to the above conclusion, the abolition of hijab, which is one
of the characteristics of the feudal age, manifests advancement, and is,
in fact, a historical evolution in the dress of women. This is the
reason why the Marxists have very delightfully welcomed this glorious
evolution in their writings of that period as well as of the present
period, because, according to their analysis, the dress of a Muslim
woman (as worn by the Iranian ladies) is a reactionary dress.

In view of the above two analyses by the Marxists, you may notice that,
in their consideration of the hijab in both the ways, they have one
thing in common with Reza Khan and Imperialism, namely, that the present
dress of the Muslim (Iranian) women is not worth wearing.

The difference, however, is that the Capitalists say that the reason for
their opposition of the present dress of Muslim women is that the
abolition of the present dress has an economic utility for the
Capitalists, while the Marxists assert that the abolition of the Islamic
dress is a sign of evolution and advancement from the stage of feudalism
to the Bourgeois stage and a proof of progress and development. They
link the end of the so-called discussion about reaction and advancement
with the summit of hijab.

As regards the opinion about hijab of those suffering from Occidentosis,
being at the same time a class-analysis too, according to their view
whatever is Western or has a Western brand is a sign of advancement, and
whatever has an Eastern brand, particularly the Eastern Islamic one, is
reactionary. The dress of the Muslim women, which has no prototype or
pattern in the West is a reactionary dress as compared to the dress of
the latest Western fashions. Reza Khan himself believed that he wanted
to guide Islam towards the gates of advancement. One of such gates was
the abolition of hijab and civilizing and modernizing the women!

This is why you may find that in the opinion of the nobles and
aristocrats of Reza Khan's time, the majority of whom consisted of
Western educated persons and intellectuals or those suffering from
Occidentosis, the dress of the Muslim women is the dress of illiterates,
the lower classes and the maidservants.

In the words of Dr. Shari'ati:
"The wife of a Europe returned graduate does not observe hijab! while
his maidservant and illiterate mother observe hijab."

According to the above opinion, hijab is a sign of illiteracy, poverty
and backwardness, because according to the view of such persons,
suffering from Occidentosis, and patronized by Reza Khan, human beings
are either advanced, fashionable, a la mode and in the Western style, or
the reactionary men, growing beards, or women wearing chador and
observing hijab in the style of Muslims.

Meanwhile, the roots of reaction and advancement in our country, as well
as in other Imperialist colonies, are exactly linked with this problem
that everything which is imported from the West and is based on a new
and latest fashion is advanced, and on the contrary, whatever has come
down from the past, and belongs to the East, particularly to the Muslim
East, is reactionary.

It is astonishing to note that the Marxists and those suffering from
Occidenteosis have reached the same conclusion in their final analysis
of the dress of the Muslim women. It is not only with the Marxists and
those suffering from Occidentosis, but the Imperialist West, who is the
mother of all Occidentosis, also sees eye to eye with the Marxists as
regards this analysis.

In our study of the Imperialist roots of the abolition of hijab, we have
reached the following conclusions:

1. Effacement of Self is an Imperialist method. In order to impose their
own culture on the oppressed country, the Imperialists first degrade its
identity and Self in its own eyes and then give another identity to it
according to what they like.

2. The Self in the Muslim East is the Islamic Self, and so the
effacement of Self here is identical with the effacement of Islam.

3. The Muslim woman is the manifestation of the Islamic Self of her own
people.

4. The dress of the Muslim women is the common factor between 1the
Islamic Self of the Muslim people and the Self of the Muslim women.

5. The Marxists believe that the abolition of hijab had a sole economic
objective, and its final aim was to benefit the capitalists. At the same
time they believe that the hijab-oriented dress is a feudal dress, and
with the evolution of the society and its entering the stage of
Capitalism, this dress will automatically become extinct. In other
words, the abolition of hijab will take place parallel with the
evolution and advancement.

6. Those suffering from Occidentosis believe that hijab is a symbol of
reaction, while the nonobservance of hijab, being a Western phenomenon,
and that too modern and progressive, is a symbol of evolution and
advancement.

Now the important problem is that, in principle, every explanation which
is formed without taking into consideration the indigenous mechanism and
on the basis of merely dry theories shall be deficient and shall lack
the capacity of analysis and appraisal of the problems.

The Indigenous Mechanisms
-------------------------

In the East, particularly in our own country, and that too especially
during the period of Islamic protection of the Muslim countries, there
existed the indigenous mechanism that "Woman is the manifestation of the
collective honour of a people". Well, if this manifestation were
subjected to disgrace and dishonour, it would naturally lead to
shattering the morale of those people. You may have noticed that in war
countries that overpower the enemy in the battle as the first step
violate the honour and chastity of the enemy's women. Apart from it's
being good or bad, such mechanism after all exists.

The Imperialists with the program of forcible abolition of hijab have,
in fact, implemented the same old method of victorious countries in the
countries falling under this program, though in different manner, in the
manner compatible with the twentieth century. This act was an exact
violation of our national honour. In other words, while they implemented
the abolition of hijab with the aim of effacement of Self and the
effacement of Islam, at the same time they also implemented it with the
object of injuring and violating our national honour through
dishonouring women.

Now, you can notice how superficial it is to study the problem of this
horrible! tragedy on the basis of economic analyses or on the basis of
the idea of advancement, and how much source of joy it is for
Imperialism that with a few flimsy and high-sounding analyses we should
most pathetically fail to dig deep into the causes and effects of these
violations, look to the other side of the picture and try to find out
their solutions.

It is because if the abolition of hijab has solely an economic content
and on the other hand if the hijab oriented dress is a feudal dress, we
may reach the conclusion that although the abolition of hijab has some
economic and exploitative causes, yet as the non-observation of hijab
itself belongs to the period of human evolution, it would be better to
abolish exploitation, and also to put an end to the economic domination
of Imperialism in Iran, and never return to this reactionary dress. In
view of the analysis made by us, out non-reversion to this dress would
mean the non-reversion to our national Self, namely, the Islamic Self
and secession from our Self, or, in other words, willingness to undergo
the Imperialist domination and acquisition of an artificial and Western
Self of cultural Imperialism and surrendering before an artificial and
Western Self, or acceptance of economic as well as political
subjugation.

In view of the explanation of the Indigenous mechanisms, it is not
necessary that the dress according to the hijab system in the period of
the "Tragedy of the Abolition of Hijab" may have all the scholastic
dimensions of Islam, which are now being discovered under the able
leadership of Imam Khomeini and the favourable background of the Islamic
Revolution.

Was the Muslim woman during that period exactly sacrificing, seeking
justice and combating injustice? Although the history of the Islamic
movements, during the last hundred years and even before, clearly shows
that the Muslim women wearing this completely Islamic dress have been
fighting Imperialism throughout the Muslim period, in this respect we
are not idealist, but find that in the Islamic period the meaning of
hijab system has been more developed and more profound.

Anyhow, whatever it might be, this hijab system was the manifestation of
the honour, Islamic relation and identity of our people and protector of
the supreme values and the symbol and manifestation of our Islamic
character, and with its presence beside several Islamic and indigenous
manifestations, it proved that the outward as well as inward and
spiritual impenetrable appearance of the society was self-dependent.

In this way the Western Imperialists who, after the experience of
sending the tourists and traders with the double-faced personality of
tourists and traders had not succeeded by forcible penetration of their
ideas through the intellectuals suffering from Occidentosis in
dissipating the Islamic Self, by abolishing hijab from among the Muslim
women, found the first signs of their success, in the wake of which lay
their control of the warm waters of Persian Gulf and the valuable
underground wealth of the East as well as the conquest of this
strategically important region of the globe.

This is why when we study the abolition of hijab from solely political
point of view (apart from the scholastic content of the hijab which must
be dealt with separately), we find it to be a conspiracy of the
Imperialists, which was undertaken in order to get hold of our land and
its resources. Therefore, are we not justified in adopting this dress as
the supreme stronghold for our struggle against Imperialism in order to
recapture our property and regain our honour, identity and Self?

Of course, we can use hijab as a weapon against the Imperialist
plunderers. It was exactly why the Mohammad Reza Shah regime would not
allow the women and girls observing hijab to enter the universities and
offices. This is also why the revival of this dress as an
anti-Imperialist dress excites antipathy among the organizations
associated with the USA, so that they oppose this dress in order to
appease their lords.

This opposition is actually an opposition from the US quarters, which is
being raised by the American stooges. This is why now whosoever opposes
this dress, and this opposition be aimed against the ideological
principle of adopting the Islamic dress, whether it is expressed through
demonstrations or other channels, whether it is inadvertently or
advertently in pursuance of the American orders, and whether it is
raised by the Marxists in accordance with their own ideological reasons,
their words and deeds are considered to be in line with the American
wishes. It is because as the abolition of hijab was an Imperialist plan,
opposition of the adoption of hijab is in fact an Imperialist act. Is it
justified for our indigenous forces to be in harmony with Imperialism?

During our search for the Imperialistic roots of the abolition of hijab,
we have noticed that the first aim of the abolition of hijab from the
Imperialist point of view has been the dissipation of the Islamic Self,
or in other words, our "National Self". According to another analysis,
this act was aimed at the conquest of the Muslim woman and getting hold
of her as a stronghold, a stronghold through which the Imperialists
could bombard and aim at the most distant and most important targets. Is
it not a fact that the Imperialist West has bases in all the regions
under its control, the air, naval, military and even cultural bases?

But which base can be more effective than the Eastern woman? From inside
this base, the Imperialist West made the most heinous incursions into
the divine values. As already mentioned in the preceding pages, the
conquest of woman by the Imperialists had also some indigenous
backgrounds. Of these, two main reasons were the ignorance of the women
in consequence of their age long strangulation and enervation and the
existence of indigenous laws and Muslim beliefs which not only failed to
support women but were also against them and at the same time in favour
of the male domination.

Anyhow, the Imperialist West with these two favourable backgrounds,
coincident with the forcible abolition of hijab, presented the ideas of
woman's lib, education and activity along with the so. called support of
the cause of women and equality of man and woman as the antidote for the
religious beliefs and the indigenous laws accompanied by the material
for makeup, jewellery, attractive dresses, entertaining programs of
broadcasting as well as other modern Western articles and gifts as the
initial traps for hunting the Eastern woman.

The Eastern woman fell a prey to this trap quickly and of her own
accord, firstly from the upper class, then the middle class and so on.
Now the Eastern woman is at the disposal of the Imperialists who can
exploit her in whatever way they like. We cannot realize the various
types and kinds of their exploitation unless we come to find out the
Imperialists' final aim, namely, controlling all the Eastern regions,
exploiting and plundering the natural and mineral resources.

The most important problem for the Imperialists, after the effacement of
the Self and conquest of (Eastern) woman, was how to change the position
of ambiguous, mysterious and legendary modesty and innocent piety of the
Eastern woman into a sex-oriented atmosphere. The Imperialists know
fully well that when sex overpowers a person, it kills in no time his or
her faith, reason, intellectual faculty, awakening, myth, legend, the
power of protest and revolt, honour and conscience.

The Imperialists fully realized that the great mystics propagating
(human) love, the brave heroes, the legendary women known for modesty
and freedom, noble men believing in human dignity, profound feelings,
souls having fathomless depth and high intellectual faculties considered
their glory to be indebted to the milleniums full of their national and
historically ancient teachings, culture and civilization, and in the
Islamic countries they considered themselves indebted to the Islamic
precepts, precepts that present the highest virtues to mankind. This is
why when sex fills the atmosphere of the society, intelligence, power of
revolt and awakening all disappear.

The youth, men and women, unaware of the plunder, robbery and
enslavement were happy with this opium, while the Imperialists in order
to add to the sex-orientation of this atmosphere enhanced The sex-appeal
in women through various types and kinds of scents, cosmetics, dresses
and coquetry which were the result of long researches and designings by
psychologists and sociologists.

Of course, they adopted all these methods in order to add to the
sex-appeal in women, and sex came to be the strongest driving force
among the Eastern people. There was a time when in the Eastern society
(the excessive lust for) sex was found in any person, it was considered
to be a kind of disease, a malady of the, type of leprosy or a satanic
and despicable ailment. But now under the spell of the Imperialists
those who lacked attachment with sex in the society were considered to
be abnormal and sick.

Now, that the Imperialists have presented sex as the best source of
entertainment for the brains of those falling a prey to Imperialism,
they can exploit it to their highest benefit. You know that side-by-side
with the development of technique, growth of capitalism and the birth of
multinationals (or cartels) the malady of surplus production also takes
place.

Now, what should they do with the surplus products? The capitalists
supply a lot of such junk to the naive customers of their own countries.
But what can they do with the large quantity of the products lying in
surplus in their godowns. How can they get rid of the evil of the
surplus commodities. They export them to the colonies and neocolonies of
the East.

How can they sell these articles in these countries? Through the women.
They intensify the sex-appeal of women by the use of cosmetics and
jewellery. Then they exploit this sex-appeal for the publicity of their
commodities. A washing machine is advertised along with a (half) naked
woman. The choppers, mattresses, blankets, carpets, garments, furniture
are all advertised through women, that too for a society, where the best
mental entertainment of a large number of its individuals constitutes
sexual entertainment.

This is not the only economic exploitation of the Eastern woman by the
Imperialist West. In another respect, woman, besides being a source of
publicity for the commodities, is also herself the highest customer of
these commodities, as she always buys these commodities for her own use.
She is the one who is always buying dresses and cosmetics in order to
appear more attractive and beautiful. She is the one who buys and uses
the commodities, and thus saves the capitalists from insolvency.

It is here that our pure and fighting women succeeded in finding out
exactly the Imperialistic roots of abolition of hijab, and in its wake
they also realized the Imperialistic roots of the fashions and cosmetics
and adopted for themselves the pure, simple and unostentatious dress,
the dress of the Islamic school, as the most powerful stronghold for the
struggle against Imperialism.

[^1]: Mirza Malcolm is one of the vanguards of Occidentosis and the
founder of the British Freemasonry in Iran.

[^2]: Taqizadeh is one of those who in the first term of the Majlis
(Iranian Parliament), formed after the introduction of Constitutional
government in Iran, uttered such words.

[^3]: Here by West is meant the roots of the belief under which Marxism
and Capitalism have developed.

[^4]: The author has used the word "Hindu". Perhaps she means the
Sanskritised Hindi being used in India today instead of Urdu or simple
Hindi in pre-partition days. (Translator).

[^5]: Here by Muslims' bias is meant the misconceptions imposed on Islam
as its manifestations by the ill-informed rogues in contrast with pure
Islam.


