Chapter 6: Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Writing About Islamic Sects
==================================================================

Hisham ibn Muhammad al–Kalbi (d. 206), the author of *Adyan al–Arab*, is
the first to write in this field as stated by Ibn al–Nadim in
*Al–Fihrist*. Then comes al–Hasan ibn Musa al–Nawbakhti the prominent
second century philosopher who wrote *Kitab al–Ara’ wa* *al–Diyanat* and
*Kitab al–Firaq*. He preceded people like Abu Mansur Abdulqadir ibn
Tahir al–Baghdadi (d. 429), Abu Bakr al–Baqillani (d. 403), Ibn Hazm (d.
456), Ibn Furak al–Isfahani (d. 451), Abu al–Muzaffar Tahir ibn Muhammad
al–Isfarani, who died about the same time as al–Isfahani, and
al–Shahristani (d. 548). I am not aware of any one who preceded these
people in writing about this discipline except al–Kalbi and al–Hasan ibn
Musa al–Nawbakhti. Ibn al–Nadim, al–Najashi and others have mentioned
them and their works on Islamic sects in the chapter about biographies.
We have in our possession a copy of *Kitab al–Firaq* which is about
Shi’ah sects.

Those five authors have been preceded by other Shi’ah writers on Islamic
sects some of whom are; Nasr ibn al–Sabah, the teacher of Abu Amr
al–Kashshi, the writer on biographies of narrators. The former compiled
*Kitab Firaq al–Shi’ah*. Abu al–Muzaffar Muhammad ibn Ahmad al–Na’imi
had a book with the same title. Abu al–Hasan Ali ibn al–Husayn
al–Mas’udi (d. 346), the author of *Kitab al–Maqalat fi Usul al–Diyanat*
and *Kitab al–Ibanah fi Usul al–Diyanat*. He was among the leading
Shi’ah scholars as stated by Sheikh al–Tusi in his *Fihrist* and
al–Najashi in *Kitab Asma’ al–Musannifin* *min al–Shi’ah* (Biography of
Shi’ah Authors). They both ascribe to him *Kitab al–Bayan fi Asma’
al–A’immah* and *Kitab Ithbat al–Wasiyyah fi Imamat al–A’immat al–Ithna
Ashar.*

Tajal–Din al–Subki is mistaken in claiming that al–Mas’udi was a Shafi’i
just as he was mistaken in regarding the chief of the Shi’ah, Sheikh
al–Tusi (may both of them rest in peace) as one of them. I have recorded
his detailed biography in the original version of this book.


