Chapter 8: Pioneering Position Of The Shi’ah In The Field Of Biographies (Siyar)
================================================================================

The pioneer in this field is Ubaydullah ibn Abi Rafi’, a retainer of the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his Household. He wrote
about *siyar* during the time of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali ibn
Abi Talib (‘a) to whom he was secretary. His book drew the attention of
the people. Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi declares in his *Fihrist*:
“Ubaydullah ibn Abi Rafi’, the secretary of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) wrote *Kitab Qadaya* *Amir al–Muminin* and *Kitab Tasmiyat
man Shahida ma’a Amir al–Muminin al–Jamal wa Siffin wa al–Nahrawan min
al–Sahabah* (Enumerating the Companions Who were With the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a) in the Battles of Jamal, Siffin and Nahrwan). His work
is, in any case, preferred to the work ascribed to Urwa ibn al–Zubayr.”

According to authentic sources the first to write a biography of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household, was, according to the
correct version, Muhammad ibn Ishaq al–Matlabi, the Medinan retainer of
this Household. The author of *Kashf al–Zunun* says: “The first person
to write about biographies was the leading figure known as Muhammad ibn
Ishaq, the master of those who wrote on military expeditions (*ahl
al–maghazi*). He died in 151 A. H.”. He recorded in the section under
the letter ‘*mim*’, “The discipline dealing with military expeditions
and biographies: The military expeditions of the Messenger of Allah were
first compiled by Muhammad ibn Ishaq.” It is also said that the first
person to write about it was Urwa ibn al–Zubayr.

This claim is not recognized by those who are conversant with history.
It was al–Suyuti who awarded this merit to Ibn al–Zubayr instead of Ibn
Ishaq although this is quite strange. Al–Suyuti did this because Ibn
Ishaq was a Shi’ah. Ibn Hajar has attested to his Shi’ism and so have
our companions in the books of *rijal*.


