Chapter 9: Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Compiling Islamic History
================================================================

Section One: The First to Write about This Discipline
-----------------------------------------------------

The first to write about Islamic history was Hawaban ibn Uthman
al–Ahmar, a *tabi’i* who died in 140. He wrote a voluminous book on
pre–Islamic history, military expeditions, deaths and the issue of
apostasy, as al–Najashi informs us in *Kitab Asma al–Musannifin min
al–Shi’ah*. He says that al–Ahmar was a Nawusi before but he later
joined the Imamiyyah Shi’ah. He devoted himself to Imam Abu Abdillah
al–Sadiq (‘a). He was from Basra and a client of the Bajilah tribe but
he lived in Kufa. He wrote a number of works.

Section Two: The First to Write about All the Categories of Islamic History
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first to write about all its eight categories is Hisham ibn Muhammad
ibn al–Sa’ib ibn Bishr ibn Zayd Abu al–Munzir al–Kalbi.

The first is on pacts.

He wrote *Kitab Hilf Abdul Muttalib wa Khuza’* (The Pact between Abdul
Muttalib and the Tribe of Khuza’a), *Kitab Hilf al–Fudul wa Qissat
al–Ghazal* (The Pact of Fudul), *Kitab* *Hilf Kalb wa Tamim* (The Pact
Signed by the Tribes of Kalb and Tamim), *Kitab al–Ma’ram* and *Kitab
hilf Aslam wa Quraysh* (On the Pact between Aslam and Quraysh).

The second is on history of exploits, families, conflicts and concord.

He wrote *Kitab al–Munafarat* (conflicts); *Kitab Buyutat* *Quraysh*
(families of the Quraysh); *Kitab Fada’il Qays Ghaylan*, (on the merits
of this tribe); *Kitab al–Mawaddat* (concord), *Kitab Buyutat Rabi’a;*
*Kitab al–Kuna* (agnomens); *Kitab Akhbar al–Abbas ibn Abd al–Muttalib*
(Stories about Abbas ibn Abd al–Muttalib); *Kitab Khutbat Ali alaihi
al–salam* (Sermons of Imam Ali); *Kitab Sharaf Qays ibn* *Kilab wa
Wuldih fi al–Jahiliyya wa al–Islam* (the high rank of Qays ibn Kilab and
his offspring before and after the advent of Islam); *Kitab Alqab
Rabi’a;* *Kitab Alqab al–Yaman*, (these two books deal with surnames
related to the Rabia tribe and to Yemen); *Kitab al–Mathalib*; *Kitab
al–Nawafil* (Book of allies) comprising allies of Quraysh, allies of
Kinanah, allies of Asad, allies of Taym and allies of Rabi’ah; Book on
Enumerating the people killed from among the Ad, the Thamud, the
Amalekites, the Israelites and the Jurhum Arabs, and the story of
al–Hijris and the names of their tribes; Allies of Qada’ah and Allies of
Yamen.

Others include *Kitab Iddi’a Ziyad Mu’awiyah* (About Muawiyah’s claim
that Ziyad was his son), the stories of Ziyad ibn Abih (literally: son
of his father); *Kitab Sanayi’ Quraysh* (The industries of Quraysh);
*Kitab al–Mushajarat* (Disputes); *Kitab al–Munaqalat* (Wrangles);
*Kitab al–Mu’a’tabat* (Mutual Reproach); *Kitab al–Mushaghabat*
(Strifes); *Kitab Muluk Kindah* (Book of the Kings of Kindah), *Kitab
Buyutat al–Yaman*, *Kitab Muluk al–Yaman min al–Tababi’a* (Kings of
Yemen from the tribe of Tababi’a), *Kitab Iftiraq wuld Nazzar* (Book of
the Dispersion of Nazzar’s offspring), *Kitab Tafarraq Udad wa Tasm wa
Jadis* (Book on the Dispersion of the tribes of Udad, Tasm and Jadis),
*Kitab Man Qala Baytan min* S*hi’r fa Nusiba ilaih* (Those who composed
poetry) and *Kitab al–Ma’rufat min al*–*Nisa fi Quraysh* (Famous Women
of Quraysh).

The third is on the stories of the people of the past.

On this subject Abu al–Mundhir wrote: *Kitab Hadith Adam wa Wuldih*
(Book of the story of Adam and his descendants), *Kitab Adin Al’ula wa
al–Akhirah* (Book on the people of Ad: the earlier and the later ones)
*Kitab Tafarruq Ad*, *Kitab Ashab al–Kahf* (on the sleepers of the
cave), *Kitab Raf’ Isa* (The ascension of Jesus, (‘a), *Kitab al–Musukh
min Bani Isra’il* (Book of transmutations from the Israelites), *Kitab
al–Awa’il* (Book of the predecessors), *Kitab Amthal Himyar* (Book of
parables of Himyar Tribe), *Kitab Hay al–Dahhak* (Book of the al–Dahhak
Tribe), *Kitab Mantiq al–Tayr* (Book of the Speech of Birds), *Kitab
Ghaziyya*h (Book of Ghaziyyah Tribe), *Kitab Lughat al*–*Qur’an* (Book
of the Qur’anic Terms), *Kitab al–Mu’ammarin* (Book of those Granted
Longevity), *Kitab al–Asnam* (Book of Idols), *Kitab al–Qidah* (Book of
Divining Arrows), *Kitab Asnan al–Jazur* (Book of the Feed of Slaughter
Camels), *Kitab Adyan al–Arab* (Book of the Religions of the Arabs),
*Kitab Hukkam al–Arab* (Book of the Arab Rulers), *Kitab Wasaya al–Arab*
(Book of the Testaments of the Arabs)*, Kitab Suyuf al*–*Arab* (book of
Arabian swords), *Kitab al–Khail* (Book of Horses), *Kitab al–Dafa’in*
(Book of Arab Treasures), *Kitab Asma Fuhul al–Arab* (Book of Arab
Luminaries), *Kitab al–Fida'* (Book of Redemption), *Kitab al–Kihan*
(Book of Priests), *Kitab al–Jinn* (Book of the jinn), *Kitab Akhdh
Kisra Rahn al–Arab* (Book concerning Chosroe’s taking of Hostages from
the Arabs), *Kitab ma Kanat al–Jahiliyyah Taf’aluh wa Yuwafiq* *Hukm
al–Islam* (On pre–Islamic Customs that Conform with Islamic Law) *Kitab
Abi Utab* *Rabi’ Hina Sa’alahu an al–Wasiy*, *Kitab Adiy ibn Zayd
al–Ibadi*, *Kitab al–Dusi*, *Kitab Hadith Bihas wa Ikhwatih* (Book of
Bihas and his Brothers), *Kitab Marwan al–Qarat* and *Kitab al–Suyuf*
(Book of Swords).

The fourth category is on the history of the period preceding the advent
of Islam.

In this field Hisham wrote *Kitab al–Yaman wa Amr Sayf* (Book of Yemen
and the Affair of Sayf), *Kitab Manakih Azwaj al–Arab* (Book on Arab
Marriages), *Kitab al–Wufud* (Book of Delegations), *Kitab Azwaj
al–Nabi* (S) (Book of the Prophet’s Wives), *Kitab Zayd ibn Harithah
Hibb al–Nabi* (Book on Zayd ibn Haritha the Beloved of the Prophet),
*Kitab al–Dibaj fi Akhbar al–Shu’ara* (Book of Preamble on the Stories
of the Poets), *Kitab Man Fakhara bi Akhwalih min Quraysh* (Book of
Those among the Quraysh who took Pride in their Maternal Uncles), *Kitab
Man Hajar wa Abuh* (Book on him who Migrated along with his Father),
*Kitab Akhbar al–Hurr wa Ash’arih* (Book on the Stories of Hurr and his
Poems), *Kitab Dukhul Jarir ala al–Hajjaj* (Book Recounting Jarir’s call
on al–Hajjaj) and *Kitab Akhbar Amr bin Ma’di Karib* (Book of the
stories of Amr ibn Ma’di Karib).

The fifth is on Islamic chronicles.

Hisham compiled *Kitab al–Tarikh* (Book of History), *Kitab Tarikh
Akhbar al–Khulafa* (Book of the History of the Caliphs), *Kitab Sifat
al–Khulafa* (Book on the Characters of the Caliphs) and *Kitab
al–Musallin* (Book of Worshipers).

The sixth is on the history of cities.

He wrote *Kitab al–Buldan al–Kabir* (A Major Book of Cities), *Kitab
al–Buldan al–Saghir* (A Minor Book of Cities), *Kitab Tasmiyat man bi
al–Hijaz min Ahya' al–Arab* (Enumerating Arab Tribes in the Hijaz),
*Kitab Tasmiyat al–Aradi* (Book on Naming the Lands), *Kitab al–Anhar*
(Book of Rivers), *Kitab al–Hira* (Book on the Town of Hira), *Kitab
al–Aqalim* (Book of Regions), *Kitab al–Hirat wa Tasmiyat al–Biya’ wa
al–Diyarat* *wa Nasab al–Ibadin* (Book of Hira and the Enumeration of
the Churches and Monasteries and geneology of the Ibad Tribes).

The seventh is on the history of poetry and historical events of the
Arabs before the advent of Islam. In this field Hisham compiled *Kitab
Tasmiyat ma fi Shi’r Imri ul–Qays.* (Naming the men and women and their
lineages and also the lands, mountains and waters mentioned in the
poetry of Imri ul–Qays), *Kitab Man Qala Baytan min al–Shi’r fa Nusiba*
*ilaih* (The names of those who composed poetry), *Kitab al–Mundhir
Malik al–Arab* (Book on al–Mundhir, King of the Arabs), *Kitab Dahis wa
al–Ghabra*, *Kitab Ayyam Fazarah wa Waqayi’i Bani Shayban* (Book on the
Era of Fazarah and the events of the Banu Shayban clan), *Kitab Waqayi’
al–Dabab wa Fazarah*, *Kitab Yawm Sinyu* *Kitab* *al–Kilab,* (Book of
al–Kilab) which is also referred to as the day of al–Sanabis, *Kitab
Ayyam Bani* *Hanifa*, *Kitab Ayyam Qays ibn Thu’labah* (Book of the era
of Qays ibn Thalabah), *Kitab al–Ayyam* (Book of Historical Events) and
*Kitab Musaylamah al–Kadhdhab* (Book on Musaylimah the Arch–lier).

The eighth is on the history of stories and evening chats.

He wrote *Kitab al–Fityan al–Arba’a* (Book of the Four Youths), *Kitab
al–Samar* (Book of Nightly Conversations), *Kitab al–Ahadith* (Book of
Narrations), *Kitab al–Muqatta’at*, *Kitab Habib al–Attar* and *Kitab
Aja’ib al–Bahr* (Book of the Mysteries of the Sea).

This is how Ibn al–Nadim recorded Hisham’s works in *Al–Fihrist*,
quoting from Abu al–Hasan ibn al–Kufi. As regards Hisham’s profound
knowledge of geonology and the fact that he wrote unique works on it,
the matter is too obvious to warrant mention. About this man, Ibn
Khillikan says: “He was the most knowledgeable in genealogies and among
the celebrated custodians (*huffaz*) of learning. Al–Dhahabi said: “He
memorized the holy Qur'an in three days. He was a traditionist of great
learning. He died in the year 206.”

Ibn Khillikan also said: “His (Hisham) works are more than a hundred and
fifty, the best and most useful of which are the following; *Al–Jamharah
fi Ma’rifat al–Ansab* a work on genealogy which is the best of its kind;
the book he named *Al–Manzil fi al–Nasab*, which is larger than
*Al–Jamharah*; *Kitab al–Mujaz fi al–Nasab*; *Kitab al–Farid*, which he
compiled for al–Ma’mun and *Al–Muluki*, which he wrote for Ja’far ibn
Yahya al–Barmaki. The last two were also about geneology.”

In addition to these he wrote *Jamharat al–Jamharah* related by Ibn
Sa’ad, as recorded in of Ibn al–Nadim's *Al–Fihrist*.

Section Three: The Precedence of the Shi’ah in Geography
--------------------------------------------------------

We have already seen that Hisham ibn Muhammad al–Kalbi, a disciple of
Imam al–Baqir has written *Kitab al–Aqalim* (On Regions), *Kitab
al–Buldan al–Kabir* and *Kitab al–Buldan al–Saghir*, *Kitab Tasmiyat
al–Aradin*, *Kitab al–Anhar*, *Kitab al–Hira*, *Kitab Manazil al–Yaman*
(Book of Yemeni Houses), *Kitab al–Aja’ib al–Arba’ah* (Book of the Four
Wonders), *Kitab Aswaq al–Arab* (Book of Arabian Markets) and *Kitab
al–Hira wa* *Tasmiyat al–Biya’ wa al–Diyarat* (Book of the City of
al–Hira and the Enumeration of its Churches and Monasteries). This is
all mentioned by Ibn al–Nadim under the section on al–Kalbi’s works in
*Al–Fihrist*, as we are aware. It is therefore, rather amazing that
al–Hamwi had only this to say about Hisham in his *Mu’jam al–Buldan*:
“And Hisham ibn Muhammad al–Kalbi: I know a book of his with the title
*Ishtiqaq al–Buldan*” although he claims to have explored the whole
range of Muslim geographers who sought to name the lands and kingdoms
and mention the distances along roads and highways. All the people he
mentioned came after Hisham ibn Muhammad al–Kalbi.

The men of letters who sought to list different regions of Arabia
including Bedouin settlements hardly faired any better. This fact could
not have been hidden from people like al–Hamwi and it is out of the
question that he might have meant that he mentioned only the works he
saw. This is because al–Hamawi said in another passage, “And Abu Sa’id
al–Sayrafi: I heard that he had a book on the Arabian peninsular.”

In addition, he explicitly names other books on this subject that he saw
while ignoring (due to his bias?) a number of works by Shi’ah scholars,
such as *Kitab al–Aradin* and *Kitab al–Buldan* which are written by Abu
Jafar Muhammad ibn Khalid al–Barqi who was a disciple of Imam
al–Kazim, -’aIbn al–Nadim observes in *Al–Fihrist* that the latter’s
son, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid also had a work with the title *Kitab
al–Buldan* and noted that it was larger than his father’s.

Other works on geography by Shi'ah authors include: *Kitab al–Buldan*
written by al–Yaqubi who died circa 278 A. H. It is printed in Leiden.
*Kitab al–Kharaj* (Book of Land Tax) written by Qudamah ibn Ja’far
al–Katib who died in 310. It is also printed in Leiden. *Kitab Asma
al–Jibal wa al–Miyah wa al–Awdiyah* a work of Hamdun, the teacher of
Taghlib and Ibn al–A’rabi who were second century scholars.

Besides these we have *Kitab al–Adriyah wa al–A’mal fi al–Buldan wa
al–Aqtar* (Book of Homelands and Provinces of Countries and Regions). It
is a large book. Thirty odd homelands and provinces are enumerated in
it. The author of this work was Abu al–Hasan al–Simsati, the grammarian
who was the master of our companions in the Arabian peninsular during
the third century; *Al–Masalik wa al–Mamalik* (Routes and Kingdoms)
written by al–Mas’udi, Ali ibn al–Hasan (d. 346); and lastly, *Kitab
al–Diyarat* (Book of Localities), a sizeable work also written by Abu
al–Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al–Simsati.

Section Four: Prolific Shi’ah Writers in the Field of Narrations
----------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn al–Nadim says “I read this testimony which is written in Ahmad ibn
al–Harith al–Khuza’i’s hand: The scholars have said that Abu Mikhnaf
wrote about Iraq and its annals and conquest more than any other
scholar. Al–Mada'ini enjoyed a similar position as regards Khurasan,
India and Persia while al–Waqidi was the most prolific writer on the
Arabian Peninsular and biographies. The last two shared the credit of
writing about the conquests of Syria.”

Among these writers, Abu Mikhnaf and al–Waqidi were Shi’ah. We have
already seen Ibn Khalikan’s remark that Hisham ibn Muhammad al–Kalbi was
the most learned in genealogies and his life history has also been
mentioned. Now we will recount the biographies of Abu Mikhnaf, al–Waqidi
and other similar personalities who surpassed others.

Abu Mikhnaf al–Azdi al–Ghamidi, the master of traditionists in Kufa was
among the Shi’ah and one of their eminent personalities. His full name
was Lut ibn Yahya ibn Sa’id ibn Mikhnaf ibn Salim (or Sulayman or Salim)
[the first Salim with a long vowel after the ‘s’]. His father, Yahya was
a companion of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and his grandfather
Mikhnaf was a Companion of the Holy Prophet (may Allah bless him and his
Household) and also narrated from him. After the demise of the Messenger
of Allah he joined the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and was the
standard bearer of the tribe of Azd in the battle of Siffin. He was
martyred in Ayn al–Wardah in the year 64 A. H., as related in
*Al–Taqrib*.

Abu Mikhnaf himself narrated from Imam al–Sadiq (‘a) and it is said that
he narrated from Imam al–Baqir too but scholars do not support this
claim. Those who regard him as a disciple of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) are in fact mistaken, for he has never met him. His works
include *Kitab al–Riddah* (Book of Apostasy), *Kitab Futuh al–Sham*
(Book of the Conquests of Syria), *Kitab Futuh al–Iraq* (Book of the
conquests of Iraq), *Kitab al–Jamal* (Book of the Battle of the Camel),
*Kitab Siffin* (Book of the Battle of Siffin), *Kitab Ahl al–Nahrawan wa
al–Khawarij*, *Kitab al–Gharat* (Book of Raids), *Kitab al–Harth* *ibn
Rashid wa Bani Najiyah* (Book of al–Harth ibn Rashid and the Tribe of
Banu Najiyah), *Kitab Maqtal Ali* (*a. s*) (Book on the Assassination of
Ali, -’a), *Kitab Maqtal Hijr ibn Adiy* (The mudering of Hijr ibn Adiy),
*Kitab Maqtal Muhammad* *ibn Abi Bakr wa al–Ashtar wa Muhammad ibn Abi
Huzayfah*, *Kitab al–Shura wa* *Maqtal Uthman* (On the Electoral Council
appointed by Umar ibn al–Khattab and the Assassination of Uthman),
*Kitab al–Mustawrad ibn Alqamah*, *Kitab Maqtal al–Husayn* (*a. s*)
(Book of Martyrdom of al–Husayn (‘a) *Kitab Wafat Mu'awiyah wa Wilayat*
*Ibnii Yazid wa Waq’at al–Harrah wa Hisar ibn al–Zubayr* (Book of
Mu’awiyah’s Death, the Rule of Yazid, attack on Medina and the Besieging
of Ibn al–Zubayr), *Kitab al–Mukhtar ibn* *Abi Ubaydah*, *Kitab Sulayman
ibn Sard wa Ayn al–Wardah*, *Kitab Maraj Rahit wa* *bay’at Marwan wa
Maqtal al–Dahhak ibn Qays* (Book of Marj Rahit, the Oath of Fealty to
Marwan and the Murder of al–Dahhak ibn Qays), *Kitab Mus’ab wa Wilayat*
*al–Iraq* (Musab and the Governorship of Iraq), *Kitab Maqtal Abdillah
ibn al–Zubayr* (Book of the Killing of Abdullah ibn Zubayr), *Kitab
Maqtal Sa’id ibn al–As* (Book of the Killing of Sa’id ibn al–As), *Kitab
Hadith Bakhamri aw Maqtal Ibn Al–Ash'ath* (Book on the Story of Bakhamri
or the Killing of Ibn al–Ash’ath), *Kitab Bilal al–Khariji* (Book on
Bilal, the Kharijite), *Kitab Najadat Abu Fil* (Book of the Bravery of
Abu Fil), *Kitab Hadith al–Adhariqah* (Book of the Story of the
Adhariqah (a branch of the Kharijites), *Kitab Hadith Rustaqbadh* (Book
of the Story of Rustaqbadh), *Kitab Shabib al–Khariji wa Salih ibn
Musarrih* (Book of Shabib the Kharijite and Salih ibn Musarrih), *Kitab
Mutarraf ibn al–Mu'aymir* (Book of Mutarraf ibn al–Mu’aymir), *Kitab
Dayr al–Jamajim wa Khal' Abd al–Rahman ibn al–Ash'ath* (Book of the
Monastery of Skulls and the Deposing of Abdurrahman ibn al–Ash’ath),
*Kitab Yazid ibn al–Muhallab wa Maqtalih bi al–Aqr* (Book on Yazid ibn
al–Mahlab and His Murder at al–Aqr), *Kitab Khalid ibn Abd Allah
al–Qaysari wa Yusuf ibn Hisham wa Wilayat al–Walid* (Book on Khalid ibn
Abdullah al–Qaysari and Yusuf ibn Hisham and the Rule of al–Walid),
*Kitab Yahya* (Book on Yahya), *Kitab al–Dahhak al–Khariji* (Book on
al–Dahhak, the Kharijite), *Kitab Khitbat al–Zahra' li Amir al–Muminin*
(*a. s.* )(Book on the Betrothal of al–Zahra to the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a)), *Kitab Futuhat al–Islam* (Book of Islamic Conquests),
*Kitab Akhbar Ibn al–Hanafiyyah* (Book of the Stories of Ibn
al–Hanafiyyah), *Kitab Akhbar Ziyad* (Book of the Reports on Ziyad),
*Kitab Maqtal Hasan al–Sibt* (Book on the Murder of al–Hasan al–Sibt),
*Kitab Akhbar al–Hajjaj* (Book on the Reports of al–Hajjaj), *Kitab
Futuh Khurasan* (Book of the Conquests of Khorasan), *Kitab al–Hakamayn*
(Book of the Two Arbitrators ) and *Kitab Al Mikhnaf ibn Sulaym* (Book
of the Family of Mikhnaf ibn Sulayman).

The next is al–Waqidi whose full name was Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn
Umar, a client of the Aslams, decendants of Sahm ibn Aslam. He was a
Madinite but he moved to Baghdad and took up the position of judge in
the service of al–Ma'mun at the camp of al–Mahdi. He was learned on
military expeditions, biographies and conquests and he was also
acquainted with the differences among the scholars in hadith and
jurisprudence, laws and reports, *akhbar.* Ibn al–Nadim says: “He was a
Shi'ah of good orientation who kept to dissimulation, *taqiyyah*” and
adds, “he was the one who related that Ali (‘a) was one of the miracles
of the Holy Prophet (‘a) similar to the staff of Moses and raising of
the dead by Jesus the son of Mary (peace be on them) and other such
reports”.

Al–Waqidi was born in the month of Zul al–Hijjah in 103 and died on the
evening of Monday the 19th of Zu al–Hijjah 207A. H. His works include:
*Kitab al–Tarikh wa al–Maghazi wa al–Mab'ath* (Book of History, Military
Expeditions and the Commissioning of the Holy Prophet) *Kitab Akhbar
Makka*, *Kitab al–Tabaqat*, *Kitab Futuh Sham* (Book on the Conquests of
Syria)*, Kitab Futuh al–Qur'an* (Book of Conquests Mentioned in the
Qur'an), *Kitab al–Jamal* (Book of the Battle of the Camel), *Kitab
Maqtal al–Husayn a. s.* (Book on the Martyrdom of Husayn (‘a), *Kitab
al–Sira* (Book of Biography), *Kitab Azwaj al–Nabiy* (Book of the Wives
of the Holy Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household), *Kitab
al–Riddah* (Book of Apostasy), *Kitab Harb al–Aws wa al–Khazraj* (Book
of the War Between al–Aus and al–Khazraj)*, Kitab Siffin* (Book on the
Battle of Siffin), *Kitab Wafat al–Nabiy* (Book on the Death of the
Prophet, peace and be on him and his Household), *Kitab Amr al–Habashah
wa al–Fil* (Book on the Affair of Ethiopia and the Elephant)*, Kitab
al–Manakih* (Book on Marriages), *Kitab* *al–Saqifah wa Bay'at Abi Bakr*
(Book of the Pavilion (*Saqifah*) and the Oath of Fealty to Abu Bakr),
*Kitab Dhikr al–Qur'an* (Book on the Qur'an), *Kitab Sirat Abi Bakr wa
Wafatih* (Book on the Biography of Abu Bakr and his Death) *Kitab
Mada'i' Quraysh wa al–Ansar fi al–Qatai' wa Wad' 'Umar al–Dawawin wa
Tasnif al–Qaba'il wa Maratibiha wa Ansabiha* (Book of Land Claims of
Quraysh and the Ansar and Umar’s act of introducing *dawawin* i. e. a
system of financial administration that involves the registration of the
members of tribes, their positions and genealogies), *Kitab al–Raghib fi
al–Ulum al–Qur'an wa Ghalt al–Rijal* (Book on what is desired in
Qur’anic science and pointing out the errors of the people), *Kitab
Mawlid al–Hasan wa al–Husayn wa Maqtal al–Husayn* (Book of the Birth of
al–Hasan and al–Husayn and the Martyrdom of al–Husayn), *Kitab Darb
al–Dananir wa al–Darahim* (Book of Minting *Dinar*s and *Dirham*s),
*Kitab Tarikh al–Fuqaha'* (Book of the History of Jurists), *Kitab
al–Adab* (Book of Arts)*, Kitab al–Tarikh* (Book of History), *Kitab
Ghalt al–Hadith* (Book on Errors in the hadith), *Kitab al–Sunnah wa
al–Jama'ah wa Damm al–Hawa wa Tark al–Khuruj fi al–Fitan* (Book of
Tradition and the Community, censuring dissenting tendencies and
desisting from rebellion), *Kitab al–Ikhtilaf* which is a book on
disputes that comprises the disagreement between the people of Medina
and those of Kufa on the right of pre–emption (*shuf’ah*), charity, the
right of *al–umra* (where a person transfers the ownership of a house to
another person with the condition that whoever among the two dies first
the property reverts to his family) and *al–ruqba* (similar to al–umra
but on the death of the grantor the property is owned by the grantee
and, in case the grantee dies first, it reverts to the grantor),
deposits, loans, articles of merchandise, *mudharaba* contracts
(partnership between capital and labour), usurpation, theft, fixed
punishments (*hudud*) and testimony. This book is arranged according to
the order of topics in the books of jurisprudence.

Ibn al–Nadim says “Al–Waqidi left behind six hundred receptacles of
books, *qimtar*, each of which was the load of two men. He had two
slaves writing day and night and before that two thousand dinar worth of
books were sold to him.”

Another scholar is Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al–Barqi, author of
*Al–Mahasin* and master of the science of hadith and written works,
*athar.* There are many works to his credit. Those that pertain to this
section are *Kitab al–Tabaqat* (Book of Ranks), *Kitab al–Tarikh* (Book
of History), *Kitab* *al–Rijal* (Book of Narrators), *Kitab al–Shi'r wa
al–Shu'ara'* (Book of Poetry and Poets), *Kitab al–Aradin* (Book of
Lands), *Kitab al–Buldan* (Book of Towns), *Kitab al–Jamal* (Book of
(the Battle of) the Camel), *Kitab al–Magazi* (Book of Military
Expeditions), *Kitab al–Ta'azi* (Book of Condolences) and *Kitab
al–Tahani* (Book of Felicitations). Al–Najashi has explored his writings
in his book *Asma al–musanifin min al–Shi’ah*. He died in 274 and,
according to another version in 280.

Among them was Nasr ibn Muzahim al–Minqiri Abu al–Fadl al–Kufi, master
of the scholars on annals and military expeditions. He related on the
authority of Abu Mikhnaf Lut ibn Yahya and was in the same category with
him, as reported by Ibn al–Nadim in *Al–Fihrist*. He wrote *Kitab
al–Jamal* (Book on the Battle of the Camel), *Kitab Siffin* (Book on the
Battle of Siffin (which is printed in Iran), *Kitab Maqtal al–Husayn
a.s.*(Book on the Martyrdom of Husayn, -’a), *Kitab 'Ayn al–Wardah*
(Book of Ayn al–Wardah), *Kitab Akhbar Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubaydah* (Book on
the Stories of al–Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubaydah), *Kitab al–Manaqib* (Book of
Merits), *Kitab al–Nahrawan* (Book of al–Nahrawan), *Kitab al–Gharat*
(Book of Raids), *Kitab Akhbar Muhammad ibn Ibrahim Tabataba wa Abi
al–Saraya* (Book on the Stories of Muhammad ibn Ibrahim Tabataba and Abu
al–Sarayah) and *Kitab Maqtal Hujr ibn 'Adiy* (Book of the Murder of
Hujr ibn Adiy).

Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sa’ad ibn Hilal ibn Asim ibn Sa’ad ibn Mas’ud
al–Thaqafi al–Kufi. He was formerly a Zaydi and later joined us and
upheld the belief of the Twelver Shi’ah. He died in 283. He was a master
of the annals in his time and wrote a number of books among which are
*Kitab al–Maghazi* (Book of Military expeditions), *Kitab* *al–Saqifah*
(Book of the Pavilion), *Kitab al–Riddah* (Book of Apostasy), *Kitab
Maqtal Uthman* (Book on the Assassination of Uthman), *Kitab* *al–Shura*
(Book on the Council), *Kitab Bay'at Amir al–Muminin Ali a.s.* (Book of
Fealty to the Commander of the Faithful Ali, -’a), *Kitab al–Jamal*
(Book of the Camel), *Kitab Siffin* (Book of Siffin), *Kitab
al–Hakamayn* (Book of the Two Arbitrators), *Kitab al–Nahr* (Book of
Reproach), *Kitab al–Gharat* (Book of Raids), *Kitab Maqtal Amir
al–Muminin a.s.* (Book on the Assassination of the Commander of the
Faithful, -’a), *Kitab Rasa'il Amir al–Muminin a.s. wa Akhbaruh wa
Hurubuh* (Book of the Letters, Stories and Wars of the Commander of the
Faithful, -’a), *Kitab Qiyam al–Hasan ibn Ali* (Book of the Uprising of
al–Hasan ibn Ali), *Kitab Maqtal al–Husayn a.s.* (Book on Martyrdom of
al–Husayn, -’a), *Kitab al–Tawwabin wa 'Ayn al–Wardah* (Book of the
Penitents and Ayn al–Wardah), *Kitab al–Sara'ir* (Book of Secrets),
*Kitab al–Mawaddat fi Dhi al–Qurba* (Book of Love for the Next of
Kin–the kin of the Holy Prophet), *Kitab al–Ma'rifah* (Book of
Understanding), *Kitab al–Hawd wa al–Shafa'ah* (Book of the Pool and
Intercession), *Kitab al–Jami' al–Kabir* (The Large Comprehensive Book
on Jurisprudence), *Kitab al–Jami' al–Saghir* (The Small Comprehensive
Book), *Kitab Ma Nazala fi al–Qur'an fi Amir al–Muminin* (Book on what
is revealed in the Qur’an concerning the Commander of the Faithful),
*Kitab Fadl al–Kufah wa Man Nazalaha min al–Sahabah* (Book of the Merits
of Kufa and the Companions who took up residence there), *Kitab
al–Imamah al–Kabir* (A Large Book on Leadership), *Kitab al–Imamah
al–Saghir* (A Short Book on Leadership), *Kitab al–Jana'iz* (Book on
Funerals), *Kitab al–Wasiyyah* (Book of Will), *Kitab al–Mubtada'* (Book
of Beginning), *Kitab Akhbar 'Umar* (Book of the Stories of Umar),
*Kitab Akhbar Uthman* (Book of the Stories of Uthman), *Kitab al–Dar*
(Book of the House), *Kitab al–Ahdath* (Book of Events), *Kitab
al–Hururah* (Book of Enthusiasm), *Kitab al–Istinfar wa al–Gharat* (Book
of Seeking Help and Raids), *Kitab* *al–Siyar* (Book of Biographies),
*Kitab Akhbar Yazid* (Book of the Stories of Yazid), *Kitab Ibn Zubayr*
(Book of Ibn al–Zubayr), *Kitab al–Tafsir* (Book of Exegesis), *Kitab
al–Tarikh* (Book of History), *Kitab al–Ru'ya'* (Book of Dreams), *Kitab
al–Ashriba* (*al–Kabir wa al–Saghir*)(Book of Drinks–two editions: big
and small), *Kitab Muhammad wa Ibrahim* (Book of Muhammad and Ibrahim),
*Kitab Man qutil min Al Muhammad* (Book on those who are killed from the
Household of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his Household), *Kitab
al–Khutab al–Mu’rabat* (Book of Clear Sermons), *Kitab Ma'rifat Fadl
al–Afdal* (Book on Knowing the Excellence of the Best One), *Kitab
al–Hawd wa al–Shafa'ah* (Book of the Pool and Intercession) and *Kitab
al–Muttaqin* (Book of the God–fearing).

Ibrahim died in Isfahan in 283. He moved from Kufa to Isfahan for some
reason which we mentioned in the original version of this book.

Sa’ad ibn Mas’ud, whom we mentioned among the forefathers of this
Ibrahim, was a brother to Abu Ubayda ibn Mas’ud, uncle to al–Mukhtar ibn
Abi Ubaydah whom the Commander of the Faithful appointed as governor of
al–Mada’in and it was with him that Imam Hasan, peace be on him, sought
refuge on the day of Sabat of al–Mada’in.

Another was Abdulaziz al–Jaludi, Abu Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Ahmad ibn Isa
al–Jaludi al–Basri. Ibn al–Nadim said in *Al–Fihrist*: “He was among the
elders of the Twelver Shi’ah and a transmitter of ancient works and
biographies.” Al–Jaludi was the master and traditionist of Basra. In his
work, *Al–Khulasah*, Allamah ibn al–Mutahhar considered him a reliable
narrator. The latter says “Abu Ahmad al–Jalud was a Basran, a reliable
person and an Imami (a Twelver Shi'ah).”

Jalud is a village in Bahrayn. Some mistakenly take Abu Ahmad to be a
member of the clan of Jalud of the tribe of Azd while this is unheard of
from the genealogists. Isa al–Jaludi, his great grandfather was among
the companions of Imam al–Baqir (peace be on him) and al–Jaludi, the one
in question, was among notable scholars of the third century and after.
He was ranked among people like Jafar ibn Qulawayh and Abu Ja’far
al–Kulayni.

Among his numerous works are *Kitab Musnad Amir al–Muminin a.s.* (Book
of Traditions which are traced back to the Commander of the Faithful),
*Kitab al–Jamal* (Book of (the battle of) the Camel), *Kitab Siffin*
(Book of Siffin), *Kitab al–Hakamayn* (Book of the Two Arbitrators),
*Kitab al–Gharat* (Book of Raids), *Kitab al–Khawarij* (Book of the
Kharijites), *Kitab Banu Najiyah* (Book of Banu Najiyah), *Kitab Hurub
Ali a.s.* (Book on Ali's Wars), *Kitab Ma Nazala fi al–Khamsa* (Book on
What has been revealed about the Five: Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and
Husayn, peace be on them), *Kitab al–Fada'il* (Book of Virtues), *Kitab
Nasab al–Nabiy* (*s*) (Book on the Genealogy of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his Household), *Kitab Tazwij Fatimah* (Book on the
Betrothal of Fatima), *Kitab Dhikr Ali fi Hurub al– Nabiy* (*s*) (Book
on Ali’s role in the wars of the Prophet) *Kitab Muhibbi Ali wa Dhikr
Buhayr* (Book on those who love Ali and a mention of Buhayr), *Kitab Man
ahabb Aliyan wa abghadah* (Book on those who love Ali and those who hate
him), *Kitab Hadith Dagha'in fi Sudur Qawm* (Book on the Rancour
Haboured by the Hearts of Some People), *Kitab al–Tafsir anh* (Book of
His (Ali's) Exegesis), *Kitab al–Qira'at* (Book of Recitations), *Kitab
Ma nazal fih min al–Qur'an* (Book on the Qur’anic verses revealed
concerning Imam Ali), *Kitab Khutabih* (Book on his Sermons), *Kitab
Shi'rih* (Book of his Poetry), *Kitab Khilafatih* (Book on his Rule),
*Kitab Ummalih wa Wulatih* (Book of his Officers and Governors), *Kitab*
*Qawluh fi al–Shura* (Book on what he said concerning the Electoral
Council), *Kitab Ma kana bayna Aliyin wa Uthman min Kalam* (Book on the
Dialogue between Ali and Uthman), *Kitab Dhikr al–Shi'ah wa man
dhakarahum aw man ahabbahum min al–Sahabah* (Book that mentions the
Shi’ah and the Companions who talked about them (the Shi’ah or loved
them), *Kitab Qada' Ali a.s.* (Book of Ali’s Judgements), *Kitab Rasa'il
Ali a.s.* (Book of Ali’s Letters), *Kitab Man rawa anh min al–Sahabah*
(Book on the Companions who related on Ali's authority), *Kitab
Mawa'izah* (Book of Ali’s Exhortations), *Kitab Kalamih fi al–Malahim*
(Book on what he said concerning battles), *Kitab Ma qila fih min
al–Shi'r wa min al–Madh* (Book on the Poetry and Eulogies on Ali),
*Kitab Maqtalih a.s.* (Book of his Assassination), *Kitab Ilmih* (Book
on his Knowledge), *Kitab Qasamih* (Book of his Oaths), *Kitab al–Du'a
'anh* (Book of prayers related on his authority), *Kitab al–Libas anh wa
al–Sharab wa Wasfih wa Dhikr Sharabih* (Book on what he said about
clothing and drinking, and his features), *Kitab al–Adab 'anh* (Book of
Etiquette, as related on his authority), *Kitab al–Nikah 'anh* (Book of
Marriage, as related on his authority), *Kitab al–Talaq 'anh* (Book of
Divorce, as related on his authority), *Kitab al–Tijarat 'anh* (Book of
Business Transactions, as related on his authority), *Kitab al–Jana'iz
wa al–Diyat 'anh* (Book of Funerals and Blood Money, as related on his
authority), *Kitab al–Dahaya wa al–Dhaba'ih wa al–Sayd wa al–Ayman wa
al–Kharaj* (Book of Sacrifices, Slaughtering, Game, Oaths and Land
Tax;), *Kitab al– Fara'id wa al–'Itq wa al–Tadbir wa al–Mukatabah 'anh*
(Book of inheritance, emancipation, wills stating that one’s slave will
be free upon one’s death (*al–tadbir*) and a slave’s agreement with his
master that he be freed in exchange of some consideration
(*al–mukatabah)*, as related on his authority), *Kitab al–Hudud 'anh*
(Book of Limits–i.e. punishments specified by the Islamic Law), *Kitab
al–Taharah 'anh* (Book of Purification as related from him), *Kitab
al–Salah 'anh* (Book of Prayer as related from him), *Kitab al–Sawm
'anh* (Book of Fasting as related from him), *Kitab al–Zakat 'anh* (Book
of Alms as related from him), *Kitab Dhikr Khadijah wa Fadl Ahl al–Bayt
a.s.* (Book about Khadijah and the merits of the Ahl al–Bayt, peace be
on them), *Kitab Fatimah wa Abi Bakr* (Book on what took place between
Fatima and Abu Bakr) and *Kitab Dhikr al–Husayn a.s.* (Book about
Husayn, peace be on him) and *Kitab Maqtal al–Husayn* (Book of Imam
Husayn’s Martyrdom).

The books al–Jaludi ascribed to Abdullah ibn Abbas and related on his
authority: *Kitab al–Tanzil 'anh* (Book of Revelation), *Kitab al–Tafsir
'anh* (Book of Exegesis), *Kitab al– Manasik 'anh* (Book of Rites),
*Kitab al–Nikah wa al–Talaq* (Book of Marriage and Divorce), *Kitab
al–Fara'id 'anh* (Book of Inheritance), *Kitab Tafsirih an al–Sahabah*
(His book on Exegesis, related from the Companions)*, Kitab al–Qira'at
'anh* (Book of Recitations), *Kitab al–Buyu' wa al–Tijarat 'anh* (Book
of Commerce and Transactions), *Kitab al–Nasikh wa al–Mansukh* (Book of
Abrogating and Abrogated Verses), *Kitab Ma nasahah ila al–Sahabah*
(Book on what he ascribed to the Companions), *Kitab Ma asnadah an
al–Sahabah* Book of what he traced back on the authority of the
Companions), *Kitab Ma rawah an Ra'y al–Sahabah* (Book of what he
narrated on the opinions of the Companions), *Kitab Tatimmat Qawlih fi
al–Taharah* (Book of His Remaining Words on Purification), *Kitab
al–Dhaba'ih wa al–At'imah wa al–Libas* (Book of Slaughter Animals, Food
and Clothing), *Kitab al–Futya' wa al–Shahadat wa al–Aqdiya wa al–Jihad
wa al–'Idad wa Shara'i' al–Islam* (Book of religious verdicts,
testimonies, judgments, striving in the cause of Allah (*jihad*),
preparation for war, etc and Islamic laws), *Kitab Qawlih fi al–Du'a wa
al–Uwadh wa Dhikr al–Khayr wa Fadl Thawab al–A'mal wa al–Tibb wa al–
Nujum* (Book on what he said on supplication, protections, the mention
of goodness, and virtue, the rewards on deeds, medicine and astronomy),
*Kitab Qawlih fi Qital Ahl al–Qiblah wa Inkar al–Raj'ah wa al–Amr bi
al–Ma'ruf* (Book discussing his opinions concerning fighting the
Muslims, denying the Return and enjoining what is good), *Kitab fi
al–Adab wa Dhikr al–Anbiya' wa Awwal Kalamih* (Book on literature and a
mention of the prophets), *Kitab Baqiyat Kalamih fi al–Arab wa Quraysh
wa al–Sahabah wa al–Tabi'in wa Man dhammah* (Book on the rest of what
Ali said about the Arabs, the Quaraysh, the Companions and the
generation following the Companions, including a word on those who
blamed him), *Kitab Qawlih fi Shi'at Ali a.s.* (Book of his word on the
partisans of Ali, peace be on him), *Kitab Baqiyat Rasa'ilih wa Khutabih
wa Awwal Munazir lah* (Book on the rest of his treatises, sermons and
the first person to despute with him) and *Kitab Baqiyat Munazirih wa
Dhikr Nisa'ih wa Wuldih* (Book on the rest of the disputations he
engaged in, along with a mention of his wives and children). This is the
last book of Ibn Abbas.

Also among the works of al–Jaludi are: *Kitab al–Tawwabun wa Ayn
al–Wardah* (Reports on the Tawwabun and Ayn al–Wardah), *Kitab Akhbar
al–Mukhtar ibn Abi 'Ubayda al–Thaqafih* (Reports on al–Mukhtar ibn Abi
Ubaydah al–Thaqafi), *Kitab Akhbar Ali ibn al–Husayn a.s.* (Reports
about Ali ibn al–Husayn, peace be on him), *Kitab Akhbar Abi Ja'far
Muhammad ibn Ali a.s.* (Reports on Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali, peace be
on them both), *Kitab Akhbar al–Mahdi* (Book of the Reports on
al–Mahdi), *Kitab Akhbar Zayd ibn Ali* (Book of the Reports on Zayd ibn
Ali), *Kitab Akhbar Umar ibn Abd al–Aziz* (Book of the Reports on Umar
ibn Abdul al–Aziz), *Kitab Akhbar Muhammad ibn al–Hanafiyyah* (Book of
the Reports on Muhammad ibn al–Hanafiyyah), *Kitab Akhbar al–Abbas*
(Book of the Reports on al–Abbas), *Kitab Akhbar Ja'far ibn Abi Talib*
(Book of Reports on Jafar ibn Abi Talib), *Kitab Akhbar Umm Hani* (Book
of Reports on Umm Hani), *Kitab Akhbar Muhammad ibn Abdillah* (Book of
Reports on Muhammad ibn Abdillah), *Kitab Akhbar Ibrahim ibn Abdillah*
*ibn al–Hasan* (Book of Reports on Ibrahim ibn Abdillah ibn al–Hasan),
*Kitab Man Ashiq min al–Shu'ara'* (Book of Reports on the poets who were
in love), *Kitab Akhbar Luqman ibn 'Ad* (Book of the Reports on Luqman
ibn Ad), *Kitab Akhbar Luqman* *al–Hakim* (Book of Reports on Luqman,
the Sage), *Kitab Sharh al– Fuqaha'* (Book on the Jurists), *Kitab Man
khataba ala al–Minbar bi Shi'r* (Book on those who gave speeches on the
pulpit in verse form), *Kitab Akhbar Ta’abbata–Sharran* (Book of reports
on Ta'abbata–Sharran), *Kitab Akhbar al–A'rab* (Book of Reports on the
Bedouins), *Kitab Akhbar Quraysh wa al–Asnam* (Book of Reports on the
Quraysh and the Idols), *Kitab fi al–Hayawanat* (Book on Animals),
*Kitab Qaba'il Nazzar wa Harb wa Thaqif* (Book on the tribes of Nazzar,
Harb and Thaqif), *Kitab al–Tibb* (Book on Medicine), *Kitab Tabaqat
al–'Arab wa al–Shu'ara'* (Book on the Classes of the Arabs and the
Poets), *Kitab al–Nahw* (Book of Grammar), *Kitab al–Sihr* (Book on
Sorcery), *Kitab al–Tiyar* (Book of Omens), *Kitab Zajr al–Tayr* (Book
of Presaging by Way of Exciting a Bird), *Kitab Ma Ruthiya bih al–Nabiy*
(Book of Elegies Composed in Honour of the Prophet), *Kitab al–Ru'ya*
(Book of Dreams), *Kitab Akhbar al–Sudan* (Book of Reports about Sudan),
*Kitab al–'Uwadh* (Book of Amulets), *Kitab al–Ruqa* (Book of
Incantations), *Kitab al–Matr* (Book of Rain), *Kitab al–Sahab wa
al–Ra'd wa al–Barq* (Book of Clouds, Thunder and Lightening), *Kitab
Akhbar Amr ibn Ma'dikarib* (Book of Reports on Amr ibn Ma’di Karib),
*Kitab Umayyah ibn Abi al–Salt* (Book on Umayya ibn Abi al–Salt),
*Kitab* *Akhbar Abi al–Aswad al–Du'ali* (Book of the Reports on Abu
al–Aswad al–Du’ali), *Kitab Akhbar Akhtham ibn Sayfi* (Book of the
Reports on Akhtham ibn Sayfi), *Kitab Akhbar Abd al–Rahman ibn Hasan*
(Book of Reports on Abdurrahman ibn Hasan), *Kitab Akhbar Khalid ibn
Safwan* (Book of Reports about Khalid ibn Safwan), *Kitab Akhbar Abi
Nuwas* (Book of the Stories of Abu Nuwas), *Kitab Akhbar al–Mudhnibin*
(Book of Reports about the Sinners), *Kitab al–At'imah* (Book of Food),
*Kitab al–Ashribah* (Book of Drinks), *Kitab al–Libas* (Book of
Clothing), *Kitab al–'Ujaj* (Book of Smoke), *Kitab al–Nikah* (Book of
Marriage), *Kitab Ma ja'a fi al–Hammam* (Book on the Reports about
Baths), *Kitab Akhbar Ru'bat ibn al–'Ujaj* (Book of Reports about Ru’bah
ibn al–Ujaj), *Kitab Ma ruwiya fi al–Shatranj* (Book of Reports about
Chess), *Kitab Shi'r Abbad ibn Bashshar* (Book on the Poetry of 'Abbad
ibn Bashshar), *Kitab Akhbar Abi Bakr wa Umar* (Book of Reports on Abu
Bakr and Umar), *Kitab Man awsa bi Sh'r Jama'atin* (Book on those who
recommend some people's poetry), *Kitab Man qal Sh'ran fi Wasiyyatih*
(Book on those who composed some poetry in their wills), *Kitab Khutab
al–Nabiy* (Book of the Prophet’s Sermons), *Kitab Khutab Abi Bakr* (Book
of Abu Bakr’s sermons), *Kitab Khutab Umar* (Book of Umar’s Sermons),
*Kitab Khutab Uthman* (Book on the Sermons of Uthman ibn Affan), *Kitab
Kutub al–Nabiy*(*s*) (Book on the Prophet’s Letters), *Kitab Rasa'il Abi
Bakr* (Book of Abu Bakr’s Letters), *Kitab Rasa'il Umar* (Book of Umar’s
Letters), *Kitab Rasa'il Uthman* (Book of Uthman’s Letters), *Kitab
Hadith Yaqub ibn Ja'far ibn Sulayman* (Book on the Story of Yaqub ibn
Ja’far ibn Sulayman), *Kitab al–Tibb* (Book of Medicine), *Kitab
al–Rayahin* (Book of ‘Aromata’), *Kitab al–Tamthil bi al–Shi'r* (Book of
Poetrical Imagery), *Kitab Qatayi' al–Nabi*(*s*) (Book of the Allocation
of Land by the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household), *Kitab
Qatayi' Abi Bakr wa Umar wa Uthman* (Book of the Land Allocated by Abu
Bakr, Umar and Uthman), *Kitab al–Jinayat* (Book of Crimes), *Kitab*
*al–Dananir* *wa al–Darahim* (Book of Dinars, gold coins and Dirhams,
silver coins), *Kitab Akhbar al–Ahnaf* (Book of Reports on al–Ahnaf),
*Kitab Akhbar Ziyad* (Book of the Stories of Ziyad), *Kitab al–Wufud
'ala al–Nabi*(*s*)*wa Abi Bakr wa Umar wa Uthman* (Book of Delegations
to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household, Abu Bakr, Umar
and Uthman), *Kitab Akhbar Furs* (Book of Reports about the Persians),
*Kitab Akhbar Abi Dawud* (Book of Reports on Abu Dawud), *Kitab Maqtal
Muhammad ibn AbiBakr* (*r.a.*) (Book of the Assassination of Muhammad
ibn Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him), *Kitab al–Sakha wa
al–Karam* (Book of Generosity and Kindness), *Kitab al–Iqtida'* (Book of
Exigency), *Kitab al–Bukhl wa al–Shuhh* (Book on Niggardliness and
Greed), *Kitab Akhbar Qambar* (Book of Reports on Qanbar), *Kitab
al–Alwiya wa al–Rayat* (Book of Standards and Banners), *Kitab Rayat
Azd* (Book of the Standards of Azd), *Kitab Akhbar Shurayh* (Book of
Reports on Shurayh), *Kitab Akhbar Hassan* (Book of Reports on Hassan),
*Kitab Akhbar Daghfal al–Nassabah* (Book of Reports on Daghfal
al–Nassabah), *Kitab Akhbar Sulayman* (Book of Reports on Solomon),
*Kitab Akhbar Hamza ibn Abd al–Muttalib* (Book of Reports on Hamza ibn
Abd al–Muttalib), *Kitab Akhbar al–Hasan* (Book of Reports about
al–Hasan), *Kitab Akhbar Sa'sa'a ibn Sawhan* (Book of Reports on Sa’sa’a
ibn Sawhan), *Kitab Akhbar al–Hajjaj* (Book of Reports on al–Hajjaj),
*Kitab Akhbar al–Farazdaq* (Book of Reports on al–Farazdaq), *Kitab
al–Zuhd* (Book of Asceticism), *Kitab al–Du'a* (Book of Supplications),
*Kitab al–Qisas* (Book of Retaliation), *Kitab al–Dhikr* (Book of
Remembrance), *Kitab al–Wa'z* (Book of Exhortation), *Kitab Akhbar
Ja'far ibn Muhammad*(*a.s.*) (Book of Reports on Ja’far ibn Muhammad
(‘a), *Kitab Akhbar Musa ibn Ja'far*(*a.s.*) (Book of Reports on Musa
ibn Ja’far (‘a), *Kitab Munazarat Ali ibn Musa al–Ridha’*(*a.s.*) (Book
on the Disputations of Ali ibn Musa al–Ridha’ (‘a), *Kitab Akhbar Aqil
ibn Abi Talib* (Book of Reports on Aqil ibn Abi Talib), *Kitab Akhbar
Sayyid Ibn Muhammad al–Himyari* (Book of Reports on Sayyid Ibn Muhammad
al–Himyari), *Kitab Akhbar Bani Marwan* (Book of Reports on the
Marwanides), *Kitab Akhbar al–Arab wa al–Furs* (Book of Reports on the
Arabs and the Persians), *Kitab Akhbar al–Tarahhum* (Book of Reports on
Praying for God’s Mercy), *Kitab Hadiyah ibn Hushram* (Book on Hadiyah
ibn Hashram), *Kitab al–Muhaddithun* (Book of Hadith Narators), *Kitab
Akhbar Sudayf* (Book of Reports on Sudayf), *Kitab Maqtal Uthman* (Book
of the Assassination of Uthman), *Kitab Akhbar Iyas ibn Mu'awiyah* (Book
of Reports on Iyas ibn Mu’awiya), *Kitab Akhbar Abi al–Tufayl* (Book of
Reports on Abu al–Tufayl), *Kitab Akhbar al–Ghar* (Book of Reports on
the Cave) and *Kitab al–Qurud* (Book of Monkeys) Al–Jaludi was among the
scholars of the third century.

Next we shall examine al–Yaqubi. His full name was Ahmad ibn Abi Yaqub
ibn Wadih (d. 278). He wrote a book on history known as *Tarikh
al–Ya’qubi*. It has been printed in two volumes in Leiden; the first
covering the period from Adam to the advent of Islam and the second the
history of Islam to the year 259, that is the time of al–Mu‘tamid ala
Allah. He also had *Kitab al–Buldan* which we mentioned in section
three.

Another scholar is Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Zakariyya ibn Dinar
al–Basri, a client of Banu Ghallab. He was a master of the scholars of
biographies, written works (*athar*), history and poetry. Al–Najashi
says: “He was one of the dignitaries of our companions in Basra, an
erudite traditionist who wrote many books. His works include:*Al–Jamal
al–Kabir* (A Large Work on the Battle of the Camel), *Al–Jamal
al–Saghir* (A Small Work on the Battle of the Camel), *Kitab Siffin
al–Kabir* (Book of Siffin large), *Kitab Siffin al–Saghir* (Book of
Siffin small), *Kitab Maqtal al–Husayn* (Book of the Martyrdom of
al–Husayn (‘a), *Kitab al–Nahr* (Book on Reproach), *Kitab al–Ajwad*
(Book of the Generous), *Kitab* *al–Wafidun* (Book of the Delegates),
*Kitab Maqtal Amir al–Muminin(a.s.)* (The Assassination of the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a), *Akhbar Zayd* (Reports on Zayd), *Akhbar Fatima wa
Mansha'uha wa Mawlidiha* (Reports about Fatima, her birth and growing
up) and *Kitab al–Khayl* (Book of Horses). Ibn Dinar died in the year
298 A.H.

The next is Abu Abdillah al–Hakim al–Nishapuri, who was known as Ibn
al–Bayyi’. In *Tadhkirat al–Huffaz*, Hafiz al–Dhahabi writes: “Al–Hakim,
the great one, master of traditionists, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn
Abdillah ibn Muhammad ibn Hamdawayh ibn Na’im al–Dabiy al–Tahani
al–Nishapuri, who was known as Ibn al–Bayyi’. He was a prolific writer.
He was born in the month of Rabi’ al–Awwal, in 321 and learnt the hadith
under the supervision of his father and uncle while still a youth.

“Then he travelled to Iraq at the age of twenty and also went on
pilgrimage to Mecca. He travelled throughout Khurasan and Transoxiana.
In the places he visited he listened to about two thousand masters.
Al–Khatib Abu Bakr said: ‘Abu Abdillah al–Hakim was a reliable narrator
with Shi’i inclinations.’ Abd al–Ghafir ibn Ismail said ‘Abu Abdillah
al–Hakim was the master of the traditionists of his time and well versed
in hadith’.”

Al–Dhababi adds: “He had to his credit probably a thousand parts (of
books) including extracts from *al–Sahihayn,* i.e the two compilations
of hadith by al–Bukhari and Muslim, *Tarikh Nishabur* (History of
Nishapur), *Kitab Muzakka' al–Akhbar* (Book of Reports of Established
Validity), *Madkhal ila Ilm al–Sahih* (Introduction to the Sound
Hadiths), *Kitab al–Iklil* (Book of Diadems), and *Kitab Fada'il
al–Shafi'* (Merits of al–Shafi’i). I have heard our masters relate that
even foremost personalities of his time such as al–Sa’luki and Imam ibn
Fawrak venerated al–Hakim.” Then Al–Dhahabi extolled him profusely and
concluded: “This is but a glimpse of his noble traits and rank. Whoever
regards his words as depicted in his *Al–Amali* and his opinion
concerning the sources of hadith transmission, will surely acknowledge
his great learning and the fact that he excelled over both preceding and
subsequent scholars. He led an honourable life that attracted much
praise and died leaving behind no one of his calibre.”

Then al–Dhahabi related on the authority of al–Hafiz Muhammad ibn Tahir,
that the latter asked Sa’ad ibn Ali al–Zanjani in Mecca concerning the
four *hafiz* (custodians of traditions): Al–Dartuni, Abd al–Ghani, Ibn
Mindah and al–Hakim, as to the best preserver of the hadith. Al–Zanjani
responded that al–Hakim was the best compiler. Ibn Tahir said: “I
enquired from Abu Ismail al–Ansari about al–Hakim, and he answered: ‘He
was inwardly over–zealous concerning Shi’ism but pretended to be Sunni
in regard to giving preference to the first caliphs and to their rule.
He was openly opposed to Mu’awiyah and his family and never apologised
for that.”

Surely, al–Hakim was opposed to the antagonists of Ali, peace be on him,
nevertheless, he held the two Sheikhs (i.e. Abu Bakr and Umar) with
reverence. Therefore, he was a Shi'ah and not a dissenter (*rafidi*).

Al–Hafiz Abu Musa says “Al–Hakim went for a bath to the public baths and
on coming out he suddenly cried out ‘Ah! Ah!’ and breathed his last
while still wearing only a loincloth. His funeral prayer was led by
al–Qadi Abu Bakr al–Ha’iri. He passed away in the month of Safar in the
year 405 A.H.”

In the eighth section of chapter two, we have recounted some evidences
that establish, beyond doubt, the fact that al–Hakim was a Shi'ah.

Section Five: The First Person to Write about the Predecessors (al–awa’il)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first person to write about this topic was Hisham ibn Muhammad ibn
al–Sa’ib al–Kalbi (d.205). Other scholars erroneously assert that this
position was held by Abu Hilal al–Askari (d.395), author of *Kitab
al–Sina’atayn* (the two arts) which was summarised by al–Suyuti under
the title *Talkhis Kitab al–Wasa’il fi al–Awa’il*.

In fact, Ibn al–Nadim has counted *Kitab al–Awa’il* among the books of
Hisham al–Kalbi. In any case, the Shi’ah enjoy the lead in this field
since Abu Hilal al–Askari himself was also one, as I confirmed in my
glosses on al–Suyuti’s *Al–Tabaqat*.

In the original version of this book, I have mentioned a number of
scholars of history, biographies, narrators and written works that this
concise book cannot hold.


