Chapter 10: The Pioneering Role Of The Shi’ah In Lexicology
===========================================================

Section One: The Correct View as to the Pioneer of Arabic Lexicology
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The correct view vis–à–vis the pioneer of Arabic lexicology is that the
erudite master of literature (who expounded the Arabic language) Abu
al–Safa al–Khalil ibn Ahmad al–Azadi al–Farahidi was the one and men of
letters agree on this. Al–Azhari says in the beginning of his *Tahdhib*:
“I have not come across any disagreement between the knowledgeable
people and masters of this field as regards the fact that *Kitab al–Ayn*
was initially compiled by Abu Abdurrahman al–Khalil ibn Ahmad, and that
Ibn al–Muzaffar only completed it after he collected its material from
al–Khalil. And there is no doubt that the latter has not been
anticipated in this work by anybody.”

As to the fact that al–Khalil ibn Ahmad took the lead in working on
Arabic lexicology, there is no difference of opinion; the bone of
contention is the authorship of this book that is in circulation,
namely, *Kitab al–Ayn* which is attributed to al–Khalil ibn Ahmad.
People are divided on the matter; some believing that the book was his
and others denying that. The first group is also divided on whether the
whole book was al–Khalil’s work or only part of it was his compilation.
In the original version of my work, I have cited diverse views on the
matter along with the evidences adduced in their support. After weighing
those evidences, I presented what I consider to be the truth. I have
with me a complete copy of *Kitab al–Ayn*.

There is no disagreement about the fact that al–Khalil was a Shi'ah. The
chief of the Shi’ah, Jamal al–Din ibn al–Matahhar states, in
*Al–Khulasah*: “Al–Khalil ibn Ahmad was the best lexicologist and his
work in this field is an authority. He was the originator of prosody.
His position in learning is so well-known that there is no need to
expatiate. He was a follower of the Imamiyyah school.”

Mawla Abdullah Effendi, observes in *Riyad al–Ulama*, that “al–Khalil
was a very eminent personality, the most learned person in literature
and a follower of the Imamiyyah school. He was the founder of the
science of prosody. He lived during the time of Imam al–Sadiq and even
that of Imam al–Baqir (‘a).”I have mentioned al–Khalil’s biography in
the original version of this book.

Section Two: Other Renowned Shi'ah Lexicologists
------------------------------------------------

Other renowned Shi'ah lexicologists who are known to surpass others,
include:

Ibn al–Sikkit: Abu al–Abbas Tha’lab says: “Our companions unanimously
declare that, after Ibn al–A‘rabi, Ibn al–Sikkit was the most learned in
lexicology.” He was killed by al–Mutawakkil because of being a Shi'ah, a
fact that was known to all. Ibn al–Sikkit lived to the age of
fifty–eight. His martyrdom occurred in the year 244. Other reports put
the year of his death at 246 or 243. His books include *Islah al–Mantiq*
(Reformation of Speech), about which al–Mubarrad said “Of all the books
of language that have been carried over the bridge of Baghdad, none
equals *Islah al–Mantiq*.”

His other works are *Kitab* *al–Alfaz* (Book of Expressions), *Kitab
al–Zibrij* (Book of Embellishment), *Kitab al–Amthal* (Book of
Proverbs), *Kitab al–Maqsur wa al–Mamdud* (Book of nouns ending in the
shortened form of the letter *alif* which is written on the letter
‘*ya’* (*maqsur*) and nouns ending in the letter ‘*hamzah*’ preceded by
*alif* (*mamdud*), *Kitab al–Ajnas* (Book of Genera–which is a large
book), *Kitab al–Firaq* (Book of Sects), *Kitab al–Suruj wa al–Lijam*
(Book of Saddles and Harnesses), *Kitab al–Wuhush* (Book of Wild
Animals), *Kitab al–Ibil* (Book of Camels), *Kitab al–Nawadir* (Book of
Rarities), *Kitab Ma'ani al–Shi'r* (Book of the Meanings of Poetry (two
versions: small and big), *Kitab Sariqat al–Shi'r* (Book of Plagiarism
in Poetry), *Kitab Fa'al wa Af'al* (Book of the Verb Forms *Fa’a’la* and
*Af’a’la*), *Kitab al–Hasharat* (Book of Insects), *Kitab al–Aswat*
(Book of Sounds), *Kitab al–Addad* (Book of Opposites) and *Kitab
al–Shajr wa al–Ghabat* (Book of Trees and Forests)

It is noteworthy that he wrote all these books besides what he narrated
from al–Ridha’, al–Jawad and al–Hadi (‘a).

Another was Abu al–Abbas al–Mubarrad al–Azdi, the famous Basran
lexicologist. It is stated in *Riyad al–Ulama* in the chapter on
surnames “Al–Mubarrad is Muhammad ibn Yazid ibn Abd al–Akbar, the
venerable master grammarian and philologist, the prominent Shi'ah whose
word holds authority for both sects. He was the author of *Al–Kamil* and
other works also. We have seen *Al–Kamil* in Constantinople in the
library of endowments. This book treats many important topics.
Al–Mubarrad died in 285 or 286 in Baghdad. The author of *Al–Raudat*
gives a similar account about al–Mubarrad.

Some of al–Mubarrad’s narrations from the Imams of the Ahl al–Bayt which
I mentioned in the original version of this book are a testimony to the
fact that al–Mubarrad was a Shi'ah. He was born in 220 and died in 285
A.H. Among his books are: *Kitab Ma'ani al–Qur'an* (Book of the Meanings
of the Qur'an), *Kitab Nasab 'Adnan wa Qahtan* (Book of the Genealogies
of Adnan and Qahtan), *Kitab al–Radd 'ala Sibawayh* (Book of Refutation
of Sibawayh), *Kitab Shawrh Shawahid al–Kitab* (Commentary on the
Citations from *Al–Kitab*–Sibawayh’s book on grammar); *Kitab* *Darurat
al–Shi’r*, a book on what permits the violation of grammatical rules in
order to conform to poetic metre (*darurat al–shi’r*); *Kitab al–'Arud*
(Book of Prosody) *KitabMan ittafaqa lafzuh wa ikhtalaf ma'nah*, a book
of words with the same pronunciation but carrying different meanings)
and *Kitab Tabaqat al–Basriyyin* (Book of the Classes of the Basrans),
e.t.c.

Among them was Abu Bakr ibn Durayd al–Azdi, a master of lexicology. He
held a leading position in learning for sixty years. He was born in
Basra in 223 A.H. and he grew up there but when the Blacks (*al–Zinj*)
overtook it he fled to Amman. After twelve years he returned to his
country and later left for Persia where he resided with the Banu Mikal,
who soon noticed Ibn Duraid’s eminence. He worked as head of the
*diwan*, the treasury department. When the Banu Mikal were deposed, he
returned to Baghdad in the year 308 where he eatablished contact with
Ibn al–Furat, al–Wazir of Al–Muqtadir bi Allah. The latter received Ibn
Duraid warmly and appointed him a post that earned him about fifty
*dinars* (gold coins) monthly. He spent the rest of his life honoured
and venerated till he died in the month of Sha’ban in 321 A.H., having
lived for ninety–eight years.

The works of Ibn Durayd include: *Kitab al–Suruj wa al–Lijam* (Book of
Saddles and Harnesses), *Kitab* *al–Muqtabas* (Book of Adaptations),
*Kitab Zuwwar al–'Arab* (Book of Visitors of the Arabs), *Kitab
al–Silah* (Book of Arms), *Kitab Gharib al–Qur'an* (Book of Unusual
Qur’anic Terms), *Kitab* *al–Wishah* (Book of Sashes) and *Kitab*
*al–Jamharah* *fi al–Lughah* (The Lexicon) in six parts, each of which
makes up a whole volume. I remember seeing copies of the third and forth
parts which have been written during the days of the author. He also has
a collection of well–constructed pieces in verse form such as the poem
on the *maqsur* and the *mamdud*. He has another poem ending in the
*maqsur* consisting of words of wisdom and etiquette to the commentary
of which the scholars eagerly devoted themselves.

Sheikh Rashid al–Din ibn Shahrashub al–Mazadarani counts this scholar
among the poets of the Ahl al–Bayt, who strove for their cause, as
recorded in *Ma’alim al–Ulama*. The following verses are a sample of his
poetry on allegiance to the Ahl al–Bayt (‘a):

*“My devotion is to Prophet Muhammad, His trustee and pure Batul, and
her two sons; those who deserve loyalty.*

*On fidelity to this blessed Household, rests my hope for salvation and
felicity.*

*Love for their partisans is, indeed, a protection against deviating
ways.*

*By allegiance to them do I expect, the Lord’s pleasure when all shall
stand before Him.”*

The authors of *Riyad al–Ulama*, *Ma’alim al–Ulama* and *Amal al–Amil*
have all declared that Ibn Duraid was a Shi'ah, and so did al–Qadi
al–Mar’ashi in his *Tabaqat al–Shi’ah*. I have recorded their words in
the original version. Another scholar is Abu Amr al–Zahid. Al–Tannukhi
says: “I have never seen a person who memorises knowledge like him. He
has dictated thirty thousand sheets of paper from memory.” He was born
in 261 A.H and died in 345 A.H.

His works include *Kitab Manaqib Ahl al–Bayt* (Book of the merits of the
Ahl al–Bayt), which was summarised by Ibn Tawus who cited in *Sa’d
al–Sa’ud*, a number of hadiths on the merits of the Ahl al–Bayt on the
authority of Abu Amr al–Zahidi. Likewise, the author of *Tuhfat
al–Abrar*, Sayyid al–Sharif al–Husayn ibn Musa’id al–Husayni, has
related about the merits of the Ahl al–Bayt from the book of al–Zahid,
the lexicologist and grammarian. Al–Husayni also attests to the fact
that al–Zahid was a Shi'ah. Al–Zahid also wrote *Kitab al–Shura* (Book
of counsel), as recorded in *Kashf al–Zunun*, *Kitab al–Yawaqit* (Book
of ‘Rubies’), *Sharh* *al–Fasih*, *Fa'it* *al–Fasih*, *Ghrib Musnad*
*Ahmad*, *Marjan al–Muwashshah* (Book of adorned pearls), (Explaining
the the names of poets) *Tafsir Asma' al–Shu'ara', Fa'it* *al–Jamharah*;
*Fa'it* *al–Ayn*, *Ma ankara al–A'rab 'ala Abu 'Ubaydah* (The Bedouins'
criticism of Abu Ubaydah) and *Al–Madkhal* (The Introduction).

It is stated in *Riyad al–Ulama* that Abu Amr was among the Imamiyyah
scholars and that he wrote *Kitab al–Lubab*. Ibn Tawus quotes a great
deal of reports from this book and from *Kitab al–Manaqib* (Book of
merits) as well. Some later scholars quote from him narrations on the
merits of the Ahl al–Bayt. As regards his religious persuasion, there is
no doubt that Abu Amr was a Shi'ah. He was a Tabari and they addressed
him as the companion of (the tribe) of Taghlib or the retainer of
Taghlib, but I have not ascertained this claim. There is a detailed
biography of this man in *Bughyat al–Wu’at*.

Another scholar of language is Ahmad ibn Faris ibn Zakariya ibn Muhammad
ibn Habib Abu al–Husayn, the renowned lexicologist of the Kufa school.
He was the author of *Al–Mujmal fi al–Lughah* and *Fiqh al–Lughah*, a
work known as *Al–Sahibi* because it was dedicated to al–Sahib ibn
'Abbad. His biography occurs in *Al–Wafayat* and *Bughyat al–Wu’at*.
Al–Suyuti was mistaken when he said that “He was a Shafi’ite and later
he became a Malikite.” In fact, he was of the Imamiyyah Shi'ah school,
as declared by Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi in his *Fihrist* of Imamiyyah
writers. The works of Abu al–Husayn have been mentioned by al–Tusi,
Mirza al–Astrabadi (in his large work *Manhaj al–Maqal*), Allamah
al–Bahrani and Sayyid Hashim al–Tubali, in *Raudat al–'Arifin bi Wilayat
Amir al–Muminin* *(a.s.)*. The author of *Thaqib al–Manaqib* has also
mentioned Abu al–Husayn and it is on his authority that the story of
Sheikh al–Hamadani’s meeting our master the Awaited Mahdi, the son of
al–Hasan al–Askari is related. In any case, there is no doubt that Abu
al–Husayn was a Shi'ah. Perhaps he was only disguising as a Shafi’ite or
a Malikite. He passed away in 395 A.H.

Another prominent lexicologist was al–Sahib ibn 'Abbad the vizier of
Fakhr al–Daulah. He was a most competent scholar. He is the author of
*Al–Muhit bi al–Lughah*, a ten volume work of lexicology arranged in
alphabetical order. It mostly deals with terminologies, presenting few
citations. Another lexicon by Al–Sahib is *Jawharat al–Jamharah*. Both
are in our possession. His books on literature include *Al A'yad* (Book
of holidays), *Al–Wuzara'* (Book of ministers), *Al–Kashf 'an Masawi'
al–Mutanabbi'* (Book of revealing the misdeeds of al–Mutanabbi) and some
treatises on the art of writing which contain fifteen chapters. Also to
his credit is a collection of poems. On theology, he wrote *Kitab Asma'
Allah wa Sifatih* (Names and attributes of Allah the Exalted), *Al–Anwar
fi al–Imamah* (Book of lights on the Imamate) and *Kitab al Ibanah 'an
al–Imam* , a book giving a vivid picture of the Imam.

Ibn 'Abbad was the first prime minister to be given the title of
al–Sahib.A hundred thousand Arabic and Persian poems (*qasidah*s) were
composed to eulogize him. The poets of *al–Yatimah* are among those who
praised him. Al–Hasan ibn Ali al–Tabarsi relates that Sahib ibn 'Abbad
composed ten thousand verses in praise of the Ahl al–Bayt (‘a). This
scholar was born in the month of Zu al–Qa’dah in the year 324 A.H. He
learnt literature from Ibn Faris and Ibn al–'Amid. He held the post of
prime minister for eighteen years and one month in the service of
Mu’ayyid al–Dawlah and his brother Fakhr al–Dawlah ibn Ruknuddin ibn
Buwayh. Ibn 'Abbad died on Thursday night, the 24th of Safar 385 A.H.
Al–Sharif al–Radi elegized him.

Another renowned master of the Arabic language was Ibn Khalawayh
al–Hamadani, a peerless scholar who was adept in all fields of
literature and learning and the focus of students from all countries. He
was the author of *Kitab Laisa* throughout which he recorded what is not
found in the Arabic language, saying ‘such and such is not found in
Arabic’. He went to Baghdad in the year 314 A.H in search of knowledge.
He studied grammar and literature from Ibn Duraid and Abu Amr al–Zahid,
among others.

Ibn Khalawayh wrote a number of books such as *Kitab al–Jumal fi
al–Nahw*, *Kitab al–Ishtiqaq* on etymology, *Kitab Atraghashsh fi
al–Lughah* (Book of ‘rain’ on language [rain signifies succour and
help]), *Kitab* *al–Qira'at* (Book on Recitations), a commentary on the
*Al–Maqsurah* of Ibn Duraid, *Kitab al–Maqsur wa* *al–Mamdud*, *Kitab*
*al–Alghaz* (Book of Mysteries), *Kitab al–Muzakkar wa al–Mu'annath*
(Book of Masculine and Feminine) and *Kitab al–Al* (Book about the
Household of the Prophet) in which he mentioned the leadership
(*Imamah*) of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and the eleven Imams
from his descendants, as reported by al–Najashi. In *Mir’at al–Jinan*,
al–Yafi’i says: Also to his credit is a fine book which carries the
title *Kitab al–Al* (Book of the Household). In the beginning of it, he
elaborates on the meanings of the word *al–al* (household) and then he
introduces an account of the twelve Imams from the family of Muhammad
(‘a), including their dates of birth and death and their fathers and
mothers.”

Ibn Khillikan writes: “The reason why he mentioned them is that he
counted the Banu Hashim among the group of *al–al*, i.e. *Al* (family)
of Muhammad.” Ibn Khillikan did not recognise Ibn Khalawayh as a Shi'ah,
perhaps because he confused him with another person because the agnomen
‘Ibn Khalawayh’ was born by a number of people.

In this regard, the author of *Riyad al–Ulama* observes: “The name Ibn
Khalawayh is shared by a number of people among whom was Sheikh Abu
Abdullah al–Hasan, a Shafi’ite Sunni who narrates from al–Shafi'i by two
intermediaries and was the author of *Kitab al–Tariqah*. Another was Abu
Abdillah al–Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn Khalawayh al–Hamadani, the Imamiyyah
Shi’ah grammarian who lived in Aleppo and was contemporary with al–Sahib
ibn 'Abbad and his peers. Sometimes this surname refers to Sheikh Abu
al–Hasan, Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Mahjur al–Farisi who was an
Imamiyyah Shi'ah.”

Scholars like Abu al–Abbas al–Najashi, Sheikh al–Tusi and Allamah ibn
al–Mutahhar al–Hilli (in *Al–Khulasah*) have declared that the Ibn
Khalawayh under discussion was an Imamiyyah Shi'ah.

Section Three: The Precedence of the Shi’ah in the Art of Writing and Composition
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first person to compose the *maqamat*, a genre of Arabic rhythmic
prose, and develop it into a special field of literature was Abu
al–Husayn Ahmad ibn Faris, the lexicologist mentioned previously. He
composed some treatises, the style of which was adopted by other
scholars like his student Badi’ al–Zaman al–Hamadani who is mentioned in
section four.

Taking after his master, al–Hamadani prepared the first set of
*maqamah*s in Arabic literature. He was also a Shi'ah. Also among the
masters of this field who were Shi’ah are Ibn al–Amid, al–Sahib ibn
'Abbad and Abu Bakr al–Khwarizmi and others whom we will mention in the
next section.

Section Four: The Pioneering Position of the Shi’ah as Scribes of the Islamic State
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first scribes of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
were Shi’ah. Khalil ibn Sa’id ibn al–As was his first scribe whom Sayyid
Ali ibn Sadr al–Din al–Madani counts, in *Al–Darajat al–Rafi’ah fi
Tabaqat al­ Shi’ah*, among the first category of Shi’ah. Sayyid
al–A’raji mentioned him in *Iddat al–Rijal fi al–Shi’ah min al–Sahabah*
(The number of Shi’ah among the Companions), so did al–Qadi Nurullah
al–Mar’ashi in *Tabaqat al–Shi’ah.* Allamah al–Nuri recorded in his
*Al–Mustadrak*: “A noble man of the Banu Umayyah who was among the
earlier devoted partisans of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a).

The Messenger of Allah (S) commissioned him to gather the alms
(*sadaqat*) of the people of Yemen. He continued in this post till the
time he learnt that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
Household, had died, when he resigned this appointment and returned to
Medina to join Imam Ali (‘a). Initially, Khalid refused to pay
allegiance to AbuBakr but when Ali (‘a) commanded otherwise, he
unwillingly took the oath of fealty. This man was among the twelve
people who criticised Abu Bakr and out–witted him one Friday while he
was giving a sermon from the pulpit, an episode which is related in a
noble hadith narrated in *Al–Khisal* and *Al–Ihtijaj*.” This report is
also given by Sheikh Abu Ali in his *Muntaha al–Maqal fi Ahwal
al–Rijal*.

The first person to serve as scribe to the Commander of the Faithful Ali
ibn Abi Talib (‘a) was Ubaydullah ibn Abi Rafi’, a retainer of the
Messenger of Allah. In *Al–Ma’arif*, Ibn Qataybah writes: “He continued
to work as secretary to Ali ibn Abi Talib throughout his rule.” Ibn
Hajar observes in *Al–Taqrib* that “He was Ali’s scribe, reliable and of
the third category of scholars”. While discussing the biography of Abu
Rafi’, al–Najashi declares: “And his two sons Ubaydullah and Ali were
scribes of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a)”. As the reader is aware,
we have already talked about these two in detail.

State officials designated as *katib*s (scribes) during the era
preceding the Abbasid dynasty were entitled to be called *wazirs*
(viziers or prime ministers) in Abbasid governments. In fact, a number
of Shi'ite scribes became viziers because they earlier held the post of
*katib*.

The first vizier of the first Abbasid caliph was Abu Salmah al–Khilal
Hafs ibn Salman al–Hamadani al–Kufi. He was eloquent and fully
conversant with reports, poetic compositions, biographies, dialectics
and exegesis. He was also quick–witted and a well–to–do plain man with
chivalrous disposition. When al–Saffah assumed leadership he appointed
Abu Salmah his prime minister and gave the latter wide powers in dealing
with state affairs. The bureaux (*dawawin*) were put under his control
and the title of Premier of Muhammad’s Family was conferred on him
albeit with ulterior motives. So when the real conditions of the
Abbasids dawned on al–Wazir he decided to abandon them and go over to
the Alids, for which purpose he entered into correspondence with three
of their chiefs. Consequently, al–Saffah murdered him because of his
Shi’ah beliefs.

Another vizier was Abu Abdullah Yaqub ibn Dawud, al–Wazir of al–Mahdi
the Abbasid caliph. Al–Suli says, “His father, Dawud, and his brothers
were secretaries to Nasr ibn Sayyar, the governor of Khurasan. Yaqub was
of Shi’ah persuasion and he showed a leaning toward the sons of Abdullah
ibn al–Hasan on account of which he faced many calamities to the extent
that al–Mahdi jailed him in a dungeon because of his loyalty to Shi’ism.
He remained there until the time of al–Rashid who ordered his release.
Yaqub then left for Mecca and took up residence there but after a short
time he died there in the year 186 A.H.

Among the viziers of al–Ma‛mun were the sons of Sahl, the first being
al–Fadl ibn Sahl who held the two offices (military and civil) for he
was both militarily able and skilful with the pen. When al–Ma’mun
relinquished the caliphate in favour of the Alids, al–Fadl was holding
that dual post and handling it well.

The opposition of the Abbasids to al–Ma’mun’s decision was so serious
that they deposed the latter and took the oath of fealty to his uncle
Ibrahim. Having seen the gravity of the situation al–Ma’mun was very
agitated so he conspired against al–Fadl and had him murdered in the
baths, and thereafter, poisoned Imam al–Ridha’ (‘a) to death. He then
wrote to his kinsmen in Baghdad saying: “What you reproached me for
regarding Ali ibn Musa, no longer exists.” This affair took place in 204
A.H.

Subsequently, al–Ma’mun appointed al–Hasan ibn Sahl but he was stricken
by melancholy due to his anguish over the death of his brother al–Fadl.
So he confined himself to his house for treatment while one of his
scribes: Ahmad ibn Abi Khalid or Ahmad ibn Yusuf deputised for him.
Al–Hasan passed away in the year 236 during the rule of al–Mutawakkil.

Ibn Abi al–Azhar Muhammad ibn Mazid ibn Mahmud al–Nawshaji was among
such scholars. He was one of the scribes of al–Muntasir and the author
of *Kitab al–Haraj wa al–Maraj*, a book discussing the reports
concerning al–Musta’in and al–Mu’tazz and the stories of ‘Sane
Lunatics’. Our masters mention him among the companions of al–Ridha’,
al–Jawad and al–Hadi (‘a). Ibn Abi al–Azhar died in 230 A.H. having
lived ninety odd years.

Another was Abu al–Fadl Ja’far ibn Mahmud al–Iskafi, a vizier of
al–Mutazz and al–Muhtadi.

Among them also is Abu al–Hasan Ali ibn al–Furat. He held the post of
premier three times under al–Muqtadir. Al–Suli writes: “And the sons of
al–Furat were the most eminent men as regards learning, generosity,
nobility, fidelity and chivalry. His time was a period of great
festivity. Abu al–Hasan served as vizier repeatedly and in his third
tenure he was arrested and killed in the year 312 A.H.”

Another vizier of al–Muqtadir from the sons of al–Furat was Abu al–Fadl
Ja’far who was prime minister when the former was assassinated. Next
came Ja’far’s son, Abu al–Fadl ibn Ja’far ibn al–Furat who was vizier to
Caliph al–Radi Billah. Another of their kin is Abu Shuja’ Zahiruddin
Muhammad ibn al–Husayn al–Hamadani who was a vizier to al–Muqtadir and,
because of his Shi’ism, dismissed on the request of Jalal al–Dawlah
Malikshah. Abu al–Fath then turned to asceticism and settled in Medina
and died there in 513 A.H.

Abu al–Ma’ali Hibatullah ibn Muhammad ibn al–Muttalib the vizier of
al–Mustazhir, was one of the excellent scholar–viziers. The author of
*Jami’ al–Tawarikh* attestes to his Shi’ism, adding, “It is on that
account that Muhammad ibn Malikshah would not accept his premiership. So
he wrote to the caliph: 'How could the vizier of the caliph of the time
be a dissenter (*rafidi*) i.e. a Shi'ite? He wrote repeatedly and
al–Mustazhir dismissed Abu al–Ma’ali. So the latter visited Sultan
Muhammad ibn Malikshah through the intercession of Sa’ad al–Malik
al–Awji, his vizier, in order to appease him. The Sultan obliged him on
the condition that Abu al–Ma’ali should stick to the way of the Sunnis
in official matters. He then wrote to al–Mustazhir requesting that Abu
al–Ma’ali be restored to his post and it was granted. Later, the caliph
changed his attitude towards him, so he went to Isfahan where he worked
in the bureau (*diwan*), of Sultan Muhammad Malikshah until he died.”

Among such viziers was Anushirwan ibn Khalid ibn Muhammad al–Qasani, the
vizier of al–Mustarshid. Ibn al–Taqtaqi writes: “He was among the most
eminent and distinguished people. He served as premier for the kings and
caliphs. Ibn Kathir states in his *Tarikh* that Anushirwan was a Shi'ah
and observed, “Ibn al–Hariri composed *Al–Maqamat al–Haririyyah* for him
and wrote many *qasida*s in his praise.” In *Tarikh al–Wuzara'* Ibn
Kathir writes, “He was a unique authority on different branches of
learning and well–versed in Arabic dialects. He devoted his time to
studying both the intellectual and transmitted sciences. He died in 532
A.H.”

Mu’ayyid al–Din Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Abdulkarim al–Qummi, an
Imamiyyah Shi'ah from the descendants of al–Miqdad ibn al–Aswad is
another. He was vizier to al–Nasir, al–Zahir and al–Mustansir, and he
held this post until he died in 629 A.H.

Another is Mu’ayyid al–Din Abu Talib Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al–'Alqami
al–Asadi who was the vizier of al–Mu’tasim. Al–Saghani, the philologist
composed for him *Al–Ubab* which is an excellent work on lexicology,
while Izzuddin ibn Abi al–Hadid wrote a commentary on *Nahj al–Balaghah*
in his name. The vizier rewarded both of them with handsome awards. He
was also praised by the poets and the learned enjoyed his company.

Some non–Shi’ah unjustly accused Ibn al–'Alqami of treachery. Regarding
the charges of omission and dereliction of duty in respect to
al–Mu’tasim’s security, Ibn al–Taqtaqi had this to say: “His vizier
Mu’ayyid al–Din ibn al–Alqami knew the real situation and used to write
to al–Mu’tasim calling his attention, warning and counselling him to be
vigilant and to take the necessary precautions but to no avail.
Al–Mu’tasim was completely heedless while his closest companions were
giving him the impression that there was no serious danger and
therefore, no cause for alarm; the vizier was only exaggerating reports
in order to enhance his position and that more money might be disbursed
for preparing the soldiers, thereby enabling him to misappropriate some
funds for himself.” This was Ibn al–Taqtaq’s reading of those events in
his position as contemporary with the actors and as a notable
personality of those times.

Among them was Muhammad ibn Ahmad al–Wazir the son of Muhammad al–Wazir,
Abu Sa’ad al–'Amidi. He headed the bureau of letters in Egypt twice and
is considered one of the leading lexicologist and grammarians. Yaqut
says: “(He was) a grammarian, a lexicologist and well–versed in many
fields. He resided in Egypt and was in charge of the bureau (*diwan*)
for some time then he was dismissed and later reinstated. He wrote
*Tanqih al–Balaghah* (on rhetoric), *Al–Urud* (on prosody) and
*Al–Qawafi* (on poetic metre), and other works. He died on Friday the
5th of Jumada al–Akhirah, 433 A.H.”

Ibn Muntajab al–Din ibn Babawayh has mentioned this man in his *Fihrist*
about Shi'ah authors. It is recorded in *Kashf al–Zunun*, in the section
where *Tanqih al–Balaghah* was mentioned, that he passed away in 423.

Another Shi'ah who held this post is Abu al–Qasim al–Husayn ibn Ali ibn
al–Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Yusuf, the Morrocan vizier, a descendant of
Bilas ibn Bahramkur. His mother was Fatima, the daughter of Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ja’far al–Numani, the author of *Kitab
al–Ghaibah* (Book of occultation) as stated by al–Najashi and Ibn
Khillikan in *Kitab Asma al–Musannifin min al–Shi’ah* and *Al–Wafayat*,
respectively. The two also mention a number of works to his credit. Abu
al–Qasim was born in 307 A.H. He served as vizier under Mu’tamid
al–Dawlah in Mosul, then under Sharaf al–Dawlah, the Buwayhid caliph, in
Baghdad. Then he served Ahmad ibn Marwah the sultan of Diyar Bakr in a
similar position and stayed with the latter until his death in 418 A.H.
His bier was carried to the holy city of Najaf according to his will, as
recorded in *Wafayat al–A’yan*, which contains a good biographical
account of him.

Another is the vizier Ibn al–'Amid Muhammad ibn al–Husayn Abu al–Fadl,
the famous scribe. He served as prime minister under Rukn al–Dawlah, the
Buwayhid. He died in 360 (or 359). His detailed biography is found in
the books of our companions as well as those of others.

Another one of them is the son of Ibn al–'Amid Dhu al–Kifayatayn (the
one with the two qualifications), Abu al–Fath Ali. He was vizier to Rukn
al–Dawlah ibn Hasan ibn Buwayh after his father. *Al–Yatimah* carries a
good biographical account of Abu al–Fath.

Al–Sahib Abu al–Qasim Isma'il ibn 'Abbad, the most competent of the
competent, whom we previously mentioned, is another.

“From great forefathers he inherited viziership, which passed on
uninterrupted from one dignitary to another.

The viziership fell to the lot of 'Abbad from al–Abbas, and from 'Abbad
to Ismail.”

Among them is Abu al–'Ala' ibn Battah. Abduljalil al––Razi says: “Abu
al–'Ala' ibn Battah the vizier of 'Adud al–Dawlah was a devout Shi'ite.
He composed a *qasidah* in praise of the Ahl al–Bayt which opens thus:

Abu Turab (Imam Ali) will intercede for Ibn Battah,

On the day the earth devours him.

Al–Hasan ibn Mufaddal ibn Sahlan Abu Muhammad al–Ramarzi, the vizier of
Sultan al–Dawlah al Daylami. He was the one who erected the wall around
the mausoleum of Imam al–Husayn (‘a) as reported by Ibn Kathir in his
*Tarikh*. He was killed in 412 A.H.

‘Amid al–Mulk Abu Nasr al–Kindi was the vizier of Tughrul Beg. He was
among the Imamiyyah Shi'ah, as Ibn Kathir informs us in *Tarikh*.

Another is Sa’ad al–Mulk, the premier of the Seljuk Sultan Muhammad.

Taj al–Mulk Abu al–Ghana’im al–Qummi, an Imamiyyah Shi’ah, was the
vizier of Malikshah and so was Sharaf al–Din Abu Tahir ibn Sa’ad
al–Qummi.

Another Shi'ah premier is Abu al–Hasan Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Fatir
al–Katib, the famous vizier. Ibn Kathir states that he was one of
vizier–scribes in Iraq who were Shi’ah, adding: “And when it became
known that he was a Shi'ah a man came to him and said ‘I have seen the
Commander of the Faithful, Ali ibn Abu Talib (‘a) in a dream and he told
me to come to you and request ten *dinar*s (gold coins)’. Ibn Fatir
enquired, ‘When did you see the dream?’ The man answered ‘In the first
half of the night.’ On hearing this, Ibn Fatir believed him and
observed, ‘You have told the truth, because I myself saw him in a dream
in the second part of the night and he commanded me to oblige when a
needy person of such and such description comes to me asking for
help.’”Ibn Kathir recounted the whole story. I have quoted it from him
indirectly on the basis of al–Qadi al–Mar’ashi's *Kitab Tabaqat* which
is written in Persian.

Also among them were Mu’inuddin Abu Nasr Ahmad al–Katib al–Kashi, one of
the viziers of Sultan Mahmud ibn Muhammad ibn Malikshah, his son
Fakhruddin who became the vizier of Sultan Alp Arslan ibn Tughrul ibn
Muhammad ibn Malikshah and then Mu’inuddin the son of Fakhruddin, who
occupied that position after his father.

The family of Juwayn produced a number of premiers. Al–Sahib al–A’zam
(the great vizier) Shamsuddin Muhammad al–Juwaini who was designated
‘the Master of the Bureau’ for Sultan Muhammad Khwarizmshah and Sultan
Jalal al–Din, his brother Ala’uddin Ata' al–Malik al–Juwayni and
Al–Sahib al–Mu'zam Bahauddin Muhammad the son of Sahib al–Diwan served
in that capacity. It was to him that the great scholar Sheikh Maytham
al–Bahrani dedicated his commentary on *Nahj al–Balaghah*. Sheikh
al–Hasan ibn Ali al–Tabarsi also compiled *Al–Kamil fi al–Tarikh* in
Baha’uddin’s name, giving it the title *Al–Kamil al–Baha’i*. Next is
Sahib Sharaffuddin Harun Sahib al–Diwan al–Juwayni, Baha’uddin's brother
and successor who was an erudite scholar and master of all fields of
knowledge including music, as recorded in al–Mar’ashi's *Majalis
al–Muminin*.

Another category of eminent Shi'ah scribes:

Ahmad ibn Yusuf ibn Ibrahim al–Katib whom Ibn Shahrashub has mentioned
in *Shu’ara Ahl al–Bait* and about whomYaqut has written a detailed
biographical account in *Mu’jam al–Udaba'*. Ahmad’s father, Abu Yaqub,
Yusuf ibn Ibrahim was also a respected scribe who worked for Ibrahim ibn
al–Mahdi, the Abbasaid caliph. Abu Yaqub studied under Ismail ibn Abi
Sahl ibn Nubakht the chief of the Imamiyyah, and author of the
theological work *Al–Yaqut fi al–Kalam*.

Abu al–Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Thawbah ibn Khalid al–Katib lived in
the time of al–Mahdi. In *Mu’jam al–Udaba*, Yaqut attests to his
Shi’ism. Abu al–Abbas died in 277(or in 273 according to other
authorities). The *Mu’jam* contains a long biography of him.

Abu Ahmad Ubaydullah ibn Abdillah ibn Tahir ibn al–Husayn ibn Mus’ab ibn
Zariq ibn Maha al–Khuza’i, the Baghdadi prince who was an Imamiyyah
Shi'ite is another. He served as governor of Baghdad and Khurasan. He
was a very learned man, a proficient poet and a skilled scribe, and this
is no wonder because he took after his father and his grandfather,
Tahir. Writing about his father Ahmad, the above–mentioned, al–Khatib
said: ‘He was a learned literary figure and an eloquent poet. His
father, Abdullah was a good poet and a very generous man. As for his
grandfather, Tahir, there is no need to describe his excellence for he
was one of the three to whom al–Ma’mun referred when he said: "The
greatest temporal and religious kings who have ever governed are
Alexander the great, Abu Muslim al–Khurasani and Tahir.” Al–Katib adds
that he was a Shi'ah like the aforementioned grandson of his and states
that Abu Ahmad died on the night of Sunday the 18th of Shawal, 300 A.H.
Diya’uddin relates this report in *Nasmah al–Sahr* from al–Khatib.

Another is Abu al–Abbas Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al–Dabiy. In *Ma’alim
al–Ulama*, Rashid al–Din al–Mazandarani observed that he was one of the
eminent scribes.

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyad al–Saymari, a son–in–law of Jafar ibn Mahmud
al–Wazir, that is, the husband of the latter’s daughter Umm Ahmad. He
was a reliable and distinguished Shi'ah who occupied a prominent
position as a scribe and a man of literature and knowledge. Al–Mas’udi
has counted him in *Ithbat al–Wasiyyah* as one of the writers of the era
of al–Musta’in, the Abbasid Caliph.

Among them is Ahmad ibn Alawiyah, known as Abu al–Aswad al–Kitab
al–Karani al–Isfahani. Yaqut states: “He was a lexicologist who pursued
literature as well and composed excellent poetry. He was among the
companions of Lufzah but later joined the associates of Ahmad Abu
Dalaf…He wrote precious books including one on the greyness of the hair
and applying henna, and a thousand–verses (*qasidah*s) on Shi’ism. This
*qasidah* was shown to Abu Hatim al–Sijistani who marvelled at it and
remarked: “Oh people of Basra! The Isfahanis have done better than you.”
Abu al–Aswad lived for more than a hundred years and died in 320 A.H.

Ibrahim ibn Abi Ja’far, Abu Ishaq al–Katib. Al–Najashi writes in *Asma
al–Musannifin min al–Shi‘ah* where he lists Shi'ah authors, that he was
a prominent companion of Abu Muhammad al–Hasan al–Askari. Therefore, he
must be among the scribes of the third century because al–Askari passed
away in 260 A.H.

Another is Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Sayyar Abu Abdillah al–Katib al–Basri
one of the scribes of the Tahirs, and known as al–Sayyari. We have
already mentioned him in the section on the precedence of the Shi’ah in
Qur’anic sciences, where we stated that he was among the companions of
Imam Ali al–Hadi and his son Imam al–Hasan al–Askari, (‘a). Ishaq ibn
Nawbakht al–Katib who saw the awaited Imam. He was the son of Isma’il,
the author of *Al–Yaqut* who was the son of Ishaq ibn Nawbakht. Ishaq,
the one under discussion, was among the companions of Imam al–Hadi (‘a)
during the time of al–Mutawakkil and after that period and kept
accompanying him until the beginning of the fourth Hegiri century.

Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ja’far Abu Abdillah al–Katib al–Numani, whom we
previously mentioned in the section on Qur’anic exegetes is among them.

Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Abdillah (some say) Muhammad ibn Ahmad
al–Katib al–Basri, poet and grammarian who was known as al–Mufajji’ (the
grieving one) He was given this epithet as a result of the large amount
of poetry about the Ahl al–Bayt that he composed expressing his deep
sorrow over their assassinations. The fact that he was a Shi'ah is
confirmed by Ibn al–Nadim in *Al–Fihrist*, Yaqut in *Mu’jam al–Udaba*,
al–Suyuti in *Al–Tabaqat* and al–Najashi in *Asma al–Musannifin*. Among
the works of al–Mufajji’ are *Kitab al–Marjan* *fi Ma‘ani al–Shi‘r*;
*Kitab al–Munqid fi al–Iman* which is similar to *Al–Malahin* of Ibn
Durayd, one of his contemporaries; Q*asidat* *al–Ashbah* in which he
praises the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and mentions the similarities
between him and the prophets; *Kitab Suqat al–Arab*; *Kitab* *Ghara’ib
al–Majalis* (a book of unusual stories in gatherings); *Kitab*
*al–Turjuman* (a book of the interpreter); *Kitab* *Sa‘d al–Madih* (a
book of the good fortune in eulogy); *Kitab* *Had al–Bukhl* (a book on
the limits of miserliness); *Kitab al–Hija’* (a book of satire); *Kitab*
*al–Mataya* (a book of riding animals); *Kitab* *al–Shajar wa al–Nabat*
(a book of trees and plants); *Kitab al–A‘rab* (a book of the Bedouins);
*Kitab al–Lughah* (a book of language); *Kitab al–Ash‘ar al–Harb* (a
book of war songs); *Kitab ‘Ara’is al–Majalis* (a book of ‘the brides’
of assemblies); *Kitab Gharib Shi‘r Zayd al–Khayl* (a book of oddities
in the poetry of Zayd al–Khail); *Kitab* *Sharh Qasidat Naftawayh fi
Gharib al–Lughah* (a commentary on Naftawayh’s *qasidah* about odd
terms) and *Kitab Ash ‘ar al–Hawari wa Shi‘r Zayd al–Khayl* *al–Ta’i* (a
book of al–Hawari’s poems and the poetry of Zayd al–Khayl al–Ta’i).
Al–Mufajji’ died in the year 320 A.H.

Another scribe is Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr Hamman ibn Sahl known as
al–Katib al–Iskafi, one of the Shi'ah sheikhs. He was a pioneer in all
branches of knowledge, and wrote about all fields. Our companions’ work
on *rijal* carry a detailed biography of this scholar. He was born on
Monday, the 7th of Zu al–Qi‘dah, 258 A.H., and died on Thursday the 11th
of Jumada al–Akhirah, 336 A.H.

Among them is Al–Khazin, Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Muhammad al–Katib
al–Isfahani, the well–known poet. He was al–Sahib ibn ‘Abbad’s treasurer
and scribe. *Nasamat al–Sahr* contains a nice biographical account of
al–Khazin in the section on the Shi’ite poets.

Among them is Abu Bakr al–Suli al–Katib who was a famous chess player.
In *Riyad al–Ulama*, it is stated that he was a Shi'ah. Ibn Khillikan’s
*Tarikh* carries a nicely written biography of al–Suli. Ibn Khillikan
says: “Al–Suli died in 335 (some say 336)in Basra where he lived in
disguise because he had related a narration in favour of Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a) and, as a result, he was wanted and pursued by all. They
wanted to kill him but could not capture him.” This corroborates Rashid
al–Din ibn Shahrashub al–Mazandarani’s statement in *Ma’alim Ulama
al–Shi’ah* that al–Suli practiced dissimulation (*taqiyyah*) in his
poetry about the Ahl al–Bayt.

Among them is Ibrahim ibn al–Abbas ibn Muhammad ibn Sultakin al–Suli, an
uncle of to Abu Bakr al–Suli’s father, Muhammad Yahya ibn Abdillah ibn
al–Abbas. He was the best of those who described epochs and people, and
was biased towards no one. He surpassed his fellow scribes in composing
poetry. Ibn Shahrashub has named him in *Ma’alim al­ Ulama* in the list
of poets who are reluctant in praising the Ahl al–Bayt. Ibn Khillikan
relates from *Kitab al–Waraqah* that he (Ibrahim ibn al–Abbas) met
al–Fadl ibn Sahl ‘the possessor of two offices’. He held different posts
(and bureau) for the Sultan and before he died he was in charge of the
bureau of estates and state provisions. He passed away in Samarra in
mid–Sha’ban in 243 A.H. Di’bil ibn Ali al–Khuza’i said, “Had Ibrahim ibn
al–Abbas sought wealth through his poetry, he would have deprived us of
everything.’

Among them is Abu al–Abbas Ahmad ibn Ubaydullah ibn Muhammad ibn Ammar
al–Thaqafi al–Katib. He served for al–Qasim ibn Ubaydullah and for his
son. He also accompanied Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn al–Jarrah and
narrated on his authority. He was a narrator and he held a number of
deputations. Al–Khatib states in *Tarikh Baghdad* that Abu al–Abbas was
a Shi'ah and was known as ‘Ezra’s donkey’. Yaqut, on his part, presented
a lengthy biographical account of Abu al–Abbas including reports about
his personal life and his disputations. In *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim
states that he died in 319 A.H. while Yaqut maintains that he died in
314 A.H.

Al–Abbas’s works include *Al–Mubayyadah fi Akhbar Maqatil Al Abi Talib*,
a book about reports on the assassinations of the members of the family
of Abu Talib; *Kitab al–Anwa’* (a book of tempests) *Kitab Mathalib Abi
Kharash* (a book on the short comings of Abu Kharash); *Akhbar Sulayman
ibn Abi Shaykh* (a book on the reports on Sulaiman ibn Abi Sheikh);
*Kitab* (a book of excesses in the stories of viziers); *Kitab* *Akhbar*
*Hujr* *ibn Adiy’* (a book of the stories of Hujr ibn Adiy’); *Kitab
Risalat* *Hujr fi Bani Umayyah* (Hujr’s treatise about the Umayyads);
*Akhbar* *Abu Nuwas* (Stories of Abu Nuwas); *Akhbar* *Ibn al–Rumi wa
al–Ikhtiyarat min Shi‘rih* (Stories of Ibn al–Rumi and some selections
of his poetry); *Risalat Ibn al–Rumi fi Tafdil Bani Hashim wa Awliyaahum
wa Dham Bani Umayyah wa Atba‘ahum* (Ibn al–Rumi’s book on preferring the
Hashimites and their supporters and criticism of the Umayyads and their
allies); *Risalat Ibn al–Rumi fi Amr Ibn al–Muhriz al–Muhaddith* (Ibn
al–Rumi’s book about Amr ibn al–Muhriz, the traditionist); *Akhbar* *Abi
al–Utahiyah* (Stories of Abu al–Utahiyah); *Kitab al–Munaqadat* (a book
about contradictions); *Akhbar* *Abdullah ibn Mu’awiyah ibn Ja’far* (a
book of the reports about Abdullah ibn Mu’awiyah ibn Ja’far).

Another scribe is Abu al–Qasim Ja’far ibn Qudamah ibn Ziyad al–Katib,
the master of scholars and scribes. He was well versed in literature and
knowledge. He died in 319 A.H. In the section on the science of literary
style (*badi’)* we shall present an account of his son Qudamah ibn
Ja’far al–Katib.

Sheikh Abu Bakr al–Khwarizmi Muhammad ibn al–Abbas, the master of
literature and most learned person in different branches of Arabic in
his time: In *Al–Yatimah*, al–Tha’alabi states that he was the most
outstanding genius of his time and master of literature, prose and
poetry whose work was characterised by elegance, refinement, fluency and
eloquence. He gave speeches on past events in the history of the Arabs
and their works of poetry. He taught books of literature, grammar and
poetry. His speeches were adorned with rare expressions and fine terms
and he used all sorts of styles. Abu Bakr died in the month of Ramadan
in 383 A.H. The following are some verses of his poetry in *Mujam
al–Buldan* under the entry ‘*Amil*’ we present this sample:

*From Amil I hail, Banu Jarir are my maternal kin,*

*A man can imitate his mother’s side as well.*

*I am a Shi'ah by inheritance,*

*While others acquire Shi’ism after much exertion.*

Among them is Abu al–Fadl Badi’ al–Zaman Ahmad ibn al–Husayn ibn Yahya
ibn Sa’id al–Hamadani, one of the most prominent figures of all times.
He is so famous that there is no need to quote what scholars have
written about him. Sheikh Abu Ali states in *Muntaha al–Maqal*, that
Badi’ al–Zaman was a Shi'ah of the Imamiyyah school and he was the first
to introduce the *maqamat* genre of Arabic literature. He died in 378
A.H.

Al–Qanani, Abu al–Hasan al–Katib, an authority on lexicology, grammar
and literature is another. He wrote *Nawadir al–Akhbar* a book of rare
reports and a book on the chains of transmission of the hadith of
*wilayah* (leadership of Imam Ali) which he related through four hundred
and thirteen ways. In the *Fihrist* of Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi and
al–Najashi’s *Fihrist* there is a good biographical account of him. I
have mentioned it in the original version of this book.

Another is Fakhr al–Kuttab Abu Ismail al–Husayn ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
Abd al–Salam al–Isfahani al–Katib who is known as Tughra’i for he used
to write the *Tughrah* (signature of Turkish sultans) in the preamble of
royal decrees while he was vizier of Sultan Mas’ud ibn Muhammad, the
Seljuk in Mosul. A brother to this sultan murdered Abu Ismail in the
year 515 A.H.

The books of our scholars such as *Riyad al–Ulama*, al–Mar’ashi’s
*Tabaqat al–Shi’ah* and Sheikh al–‘Amili’s *Amal al–Amil* contain
lengthy biographies of this man. He wrote *Lamiyat al–‘Ajam*, which he
composed in Baghdad in 505 A.H while he was fifty–seven. Ibn Khillikan
has cited this poem in his biography of Abu Isma’il while its
commentaries are included in our unabridged version of this work.

Sa’ad ibn Ahmad ibn Makki al–Nili, a renowned man of principles, who was
a great poet and master of literature, grammar and philology is among
them. Referring to him, al–Imad al–Katib states: “And he had extreme
Shi'ah views and was very fanatical. He was well–known for his piety, an
authority on literature and a teacher in Qur’anic schools. He lived to a
great age until he lost his eyesight and became senile. The last time I
saw him was at Darb Salih in Baghdad in 592 A.H. when he was over ninety
years old.” Al–lmad has quoted some of his poetry.

Another is Abu Talib Yahya ibn Abi al–Faraj Sa’id ibn Hibatullah ibn Ali
ibn Qaz Ali Ziyadah al–Shaibani al–Katib al–Baghdadi. Ibn Khillikan
says: “He was among the ideal and prominent personalities, who was very
skilled in the art of writing and arithmetic and had contributions in
jurisprudence, principles of jurisprudence, and other disciplines.” He
is referred to as a Shi‘ite poet and commended profusely in *Nasamah
al–Sahr*. He died in 574 A.H. and was buried near the tomb of Imam Musa
al–Kazim, as recorded by Ibn Khillikan. Ibn Ziyadah was born in the
month of Safar, 522 A.H.

Ali ibn Isa Baha’uddin al–Arbali, a proficient secretary and writer: In
*Fawat al–Wafayat*, Ibn Shakir describes him and says: “He composed some
poetry, engaged in correspondences and was a pioneering figure. He
served as scribe for Ibn Salabah, the governor of Arbal and later went
to Baghdad and took charge of the bureau of letters during the days of
Ala’uddin, the head of the registry. He died in 692.” Ali al–Arbali is
the author of *Kashf al–Ghummah fi Imamat al–A’immah* which was printed
in Iran. His grave is in the western side of Baghdad and attracts
visitors.

Among them is Ali ibn al–Muzaffar ‘Ala’uddin al–Kindi, the author of
*Al–Tadhkirah*, a fifty–volume work. He is mentioned in *Nasamat
al–Sahr* as a Shi‘ite and as a poet in *Fawat al–Wafayat*, Ibn Shakir
describes him as a proficient literary figure, reciter of the Qur'an, a
traditionist and scribe, adding that he was Ibn Wida’ah’s scribe and was
known as al–Wida’i. He was born in 640 and died in 716 A.H. Ibn Shakir
also stated that al–Kindi was a Shi'ah and so did al–Safadi.


