Chapter 12: The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Prosody
===================================================

Section One: The Pioneer in This Field of Arabic Literature
-----------------------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that Khalil ibn Ahmad al–Farahidi, the scholar
previously–mentioned in the chapter on lexicology is the first to invent
*al–a’rud*, prosody whereby he fortified Arab poetry, and as a result is
known as *al–A’rudi* (the prosodian). An attempt to count instances
where the scholars declared this fact will no doubt lengthen our book.
However, we have cited some in the original version of this book.

There is a claim by Ibn Faris in *Al–Sahibi* that prosody was an ancient
science forgotten over time so that its circulation among the people
decreased. Later on, this discipline was revitalized by al–Khalil. Ibn
Faris cites the saying of al–Walid ibn al–Mughirah concerning the Holy
Qur'an, ‘I have compared what Muhammad recites with the recitation of
poetry, both its *hajaz* and its *rajaz* (two types of poetical metres)
and found that its does not resemble it at all’.

No historical document corroborates this allegation nor could it be
backed by any plausible inference. It appears that the assumption of Ibn
Faris was nothing more than personal conjecture, which is not acceptable
to those who are learned in historical reports. It will be noted that
al–Walid was cognizant of poetic rhymes by mere natural disposition, the
same way he knew the Arabic language itself.

Obviously this is different from the discipline which al–Khalil has
systematised and in which he classified the Arabic verse into five types
(*da’irahs*) consisting of fifteen metres altogether. In *Kitab
al–Tanbih*, Hamzah ibn al–Hasan al–Isfahani was explicit on the matter:
“The Islamic state has not produced the like of al–Khalil in inventing
disciplines which were, hitherto unknown to Arab scholars. The best
proof of this is the science of prosody which was the brain child of
al–Khalil, for neither did he learn it from some sage nor did he emulate
a preceding scholar...”.

A full account of this issue is quoted in the original version of this
book. Abu al–Faraj Ibn al–Nadim also says: ‘And he (al–Khalil) was the
initiator of prosody and thereby preserved the purity of Arabic poetry.’
Ibn Qutaybah says about al–Khalil:“ He was the originator of prosody.”
Abu Bakr al–Zubaydi states in the opening part of *Istidrak al–Ghalat*:
“Al–Khalil ibn Ahmad was the most distinguished scholar of his time, one
of the geniuses of the nation and the master of the intelligent ones,
the like of whom the world has never known.... Then from his own
invention he wrote a book on prosody named. *Al–Farsh wa al–Mithal fi
al–‘Arud*, in which he compiled all the poetic metres, organising
similar forms into their specific classes thus, forming the *da’irah*s.
This brilliant feat rendered the minds helpless, dazzled and
overwhelmed.”

In *Maratib al–Nahwiyyin*, Abdulwahid says, “al–Khalil introduced a
number of novelties… and he invented prosody. He created other forms of
verse apart from the known metres of Arabic poetry.” In his biography,
Ibn Khillikan observes: “He was the one who contrived the science of
prosody and brought it to light…”Allamah Jamal al–Din al–Hasan ibn Yusuf
ibn al–Mutahhar al–Hilli says in *Al–Khulasah* that al–Khalil ibn Ahmad
was the most skilled master in literature and his word in it was
authoritative. He invented prosody and his distinction is very obvious.
He was a follower of the Imamiyyah School”.

The comments cited so far suffice our aim for if we were to quote all
that the scholars of literature have said about al–Khalil this section
would be unduely long.

Section Two: The First to Write about Prosody After al–Khalil
-------------------------------------------------------------

The first person to write about prosody after al–Khalil was Abu Uthman
Bakr ibn Habib al–Mazini the grammarian who died in 248 A.H. Abu
al–Abbas al–Mubarrad states that al–Mazini was among the servants of
Isma’il ibn Maytham, a master of those who elaborated on Shi’ism.
Al–Najashi observed in his *Asma al–Musannifin min* *al–Shi’ah* that he
was the chief of the masters of grammar, lexicology and other branches
of Arabic studies in Basra and he had well-known precedence in this
field”

Jamal al–Din ibn al–Mutahhar gives a similar account about him in
*Al–Khulasah*, adding that he was one of the Imamiyyah scholars. On his
part, al–Suyuti records in *Al–Tabaqat*: “He was a master of Arabic,
whose narrations were profuse. He believed in the return (*al–raj’ah*).
Whoever disputed with him was silenced because al–Mazini had exeptional
fluency. He disputed with al–Akhfash on some issues and confuted him”.
Al–Mubarrad says: “Apart from Sibawayh, Abu Uthman was the most learned
grammarian of all”.

Abu Uthman wrote a number of books such as *Kitab fi al–Qur'an* (a book
on the Qur’an), *Kitab 'Ilal al–Nahw* (a book on the problematic cases
of grammar), *Kitab al–Tafsir* (a book on exegesis), *Kitab Sibawayh*
(the book of Sibawayh), *Kitab Ma yalhan fih al–'Ammah* (a book on
popular solecisms), *Kitabal–Alif wa al–Lam* (a book about ‘*alif*’ and
‘*lam*’ i.e.the definite article) *Kitab al–Tasrif* (a book on
morphology), *Kitab al–'Arud* (a book on prosody), *Kitab al–Qawafi* (a
book on rhymes) and *Kitab al–Dibaj* (a book on style). Ibn al–Nadim,
al–Suyuti, al–Hamawi and other scholars have confirmed that he wrote
these books. *Kashf al–Zunun* also mentions al–Mazini’s *Kitab al–'Arud*
.

Section Three: Other Books on Prosody Written by Shi'ah scholars
----------------------------------------------------------------

*Kitab al–Iqna' fi al–'Arud* (a book on prosody) which is written by the
most efficient scholar, al–Sahib ibn 'Abbad, who was previously
mentioned and *Kitab Sina'at al–Shi'r fi al–Arud wa al–Qawafi* (a book
on prosody and rhymes) written by al–Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Ja’afar ibn
Muhammad ibn al–Husayn al–Rafi’i who was known as al–Khali’. Al–Rafi’i
died in the fourth century. In our original book we have presented a
detailed biography of him. He was an Imamiyyah Shi'ah. Others are *Kitab
'Iyar al–Shi'r* (the book on the standard of poetry), *Kitab Tahdhib
al–Tib'* (book on refining the character) and *Kitab al–'Arud* (a book
of prosody), all of which are written by Sharif Muhammad ibn Ahmad
al–Tabataba’i al–Isfahani, as stated in Nasamat al–Sahrfi Dhikr Man
Tashayya' wa Sha'ar. He was born in 322 A.H. The author of *Ma’ahid
al–Tansis* praised him and ascribed to him *Kitab al–'Arud* (a book of
prosody), adding: “No one preceded him in that. He is the author of the
famous lines on good justification (tabrir) which are as follows:

*Oh you whose generosity water emulates,*

*While your heart is as hard as stone.*

*Would that my fortune equals what your body,*

*Apportions to your shirt, oh unique one of humanity!*

*Nor is your shabbiness cause for bewilderment,*

*Since by the moon, hangs your tarboosh.*

Other works on prosody are: *Kitab al–'Arud wa al–Qawafi* by the
previously–mentioned Muhammad ibn Ahmad al–Wazir, *Kitab al–Kafi fi Ilm
al–'Arud wa* *al–Qawafi* and *Kitab Nazm al–'Arud* both of which were
written by Sayyid Abu al–Ridha’ Fadlallah al–Rawandi, may Allah be
pleased with him , who was living in the year 548. *Al–Darajat
al–Rafi’ah* contains a good biographical account of him.

Another work on prosody is *Risalah al–'Arud wa al–Qawafi*, a book
written by the poet al–Hakim al–Anwari who died in the year in which the
Abbasid dynasty fell.

*Kitab al–Arud* by Malik al–Nuhat, the author of *Al–Umdah fi al–Nahw*
which is mentioned in *Kashf al–Zunun* which declares that he was a
Shi'ah. We shall talk more about him in the section on the leading
grammarians.

*The books* Al–Iklil al–Taji*,* Qurrat ‘Ayn al–Khalil *(which is a
commentary on Ibn al–Hajib’s* Al–Nazm al–Jalil*)* and a commentary on
Sadr al–Din al–Sawi’s Qasidah were written by Sheikh Taqiy al–Din
al–Hasan ibn Ali ibn Dawud al–Hilli, the author of *Kitab al–Rijal*. He
is popularly known as Ibn Dawud, the student of Sayyid ibn Tawus, both
of whom are mentioned in the section on masters of defamation and
authentication (al–jarh wa al–ta’adil).


