Chapter 13: The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Various Genres Of Poetry
====================================================================

The Shiah founded new techniques which gained the appreciation of poets
who then, took after them. The first and foremost genius among Muslim
poets is al–Farazdaq about whom Jarir said that he owned the spring of
poetry, meaning the most competent of the Muslim poets. It is worth
noticing that some Shi'ah poets like al–Nabighah al–Ju’adi came even
before him. The latter composed the following verses about Siffin:

*It is known to Iraq, Egypt and Syria,*

*That Ali is their paragon of freedom.*

*Magnanimous, hospitable, light in complexion,*

*His mother, the lady with ample dowry.*

*Most generous of those to whom others hold fast,*

*The first band had met you, thereafter, may they never stir!*

*They have a turn and you have a turn , as well,*

*Of which people are cognizant.*

*To guidance you did drive the folk,*

*But your foes called to unworthiness.*

*Another Shi'ah poet is Ka’ab ibn Zuhayr, the composer of Banat Su’ad in
which he says:*

*The Prophet’s son in–law, the best of all people,*

*Whoever vied with him for glory is surpassed.*

*Along with the Unlettered One, he was the first to pray,*

*While the people were still heathens.*

Others who preceded al–Farazdaq were: Labid ibn Rabi’ah al–‘Amiri whom
the author of *Riyad al–Ulama* referred to as one of the Shi'ah poets;
Abu al–Tufail ‘Amir ibn Wa’ilah, the famous poet and one of the
companions whom Abu al–Faraj al–Isfahani considers one of the prominent
Shi’ah; Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali, about whom Ibn Bitriq states in
*Al–Umdah*: “he was one of the best and most eloquent men from the first
category of Muslim poets and partisans of Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a); the
most well-known al–Hasan Abu Nu’as and then Abu Tammam, Habib and
al–Buhturi who have, in reality, eclipsed five hundred skilled poets who
were their comtemporaries. This fact is recorded in the *Umdah* of Ibn
Rashiq. A poet captures this situation in the following verses:

*If you want to be a knight be like Ali,*

*If a poet, emulate Ibn Hani.*

The first poet whose poetry was named ‘the golden chain’ is al–Buhturi.
The first one who earned the epithet ‘polisher of meanings’ is Abu
Tammam and he was the first to classify his selections of Arabic poetry
into eight kinds, the first of which was about enthusiasm (*hamasah*).
The third most famous poet is Ibn al–Rumi. All of them were Shi’ites. We
have mentioned their biographies in the unabridged version of this work.

In the rank of people like Abu Nuwas there is a number of notable poets
among the Shi’ah like Abu al–Shis, al–Husayn ibn al–Dahhak, al–Khali’
and Di’bil. And in the category of Habib and al–Buhturi we have Shi'ah
poets such as Dik al–Jinn, who was named the poet of Syria. Di’bil
al–Khuza'i went to see him but he concealed himself for fear of Di’bil’s
severe criticism and obstinacy. So, Di’bil said: “Why does he hide
himself while he is the best poet of jinn and men? *Is he not the one
who said:*

*Still not bored by her, raise the veil,*

*And serve her wine from evening till daybreak.*

*And with those large posteriors, commit such vice,*

*The retribution of which alarms the guardian angels.”*

*On hearing this, Dik al–Jinn appeared, apologized and attended to him.*

These two poets were among the literary figures who did not seek through
their poetry the approval of caliphs, princes or other personalities.
This noble trait raised them above their peers.

As regards post–classical authors, Ibn Rashiq reports: “According to the
words of al–Hadhdhaq, Abu Tammam and Ibn al–Rumi are the most remarkable
post–classical authors as far as invention and originality are
concerned”.

Indeed Abu Tammam used to polish up meanings while Ibn al–Rumi employed
new meanings that were unheard of before by digging deep in search of
rare ones and bringing out other thematic imports beautifully. When he
took up a theme he would never leave it without exhausting it. He was
famous for the originality of his poetry. He was born in Baghdad in 221
A.H. and died in 283 A.H.

Another poet of the same era is al–Kumayt ibn Zayd al–Mudari al–Asadi.
Ibn Ikrimah al–Dabiy says: “Had it not been for al–Kumayt’s poetry,
neither the Arabic language nor rhetoric would have been intelligible”
When Abu Muslim al–Harra was asked about al–Kumayt he answered: “That
one is the best of the earlier and later poets”. In fact his
*Hashimiyyat* which has been recently been printed in Egypt is clear
proof of that.

The pioneer in lengthy panegyrics is Kathir. Ibn Rashiq informs us that
Ibn Abi Ishaq, a well–known literary critic used to say: “The most
accompolished poet of the pre–Islamic era is Mushriq and among the
Muslims is Kathir. Ibn Rashiq considers this a too extreme view
althought all scholars agree that he was the first person to compose
lengthy panegyrics”. This proves that the Shi’ah took the lead in this
type of poetry.

The first poet to compose much poetry about a single theme was al–Sayyid
al–Himyari. Ibn al–Mu’tazz states in *Al–Tadhkhirah* that al–Sayyid
al–Himyari had four daughters, and each one of them committed to memory
four hundred *qasidahs* composed by her father. He versified whatever he
heard of Ali’s merits and feats similar to his versification of the
hadith. All his *qasidah*s were long. He was a Shi'ah who openly
declared his stand although his parents were not of the same persuasion.
He hailed from Himyar in Syria. Once he said: ‘Mercy has been abundantly
poured on me so that I became like the believer of the people of the
Pharoah’ ”. He died in 173 (some say in 193 and others say in199 A.H).

I have mentioned in the original version of this book the names of
ancient and recent Shi'ah poets who composed poetry only on extolling
the Ahl al–Bayt versifying their virtues.

Some poets took up unreserved poetry and were their time’s masters for
this invention. Ibn al–Hajjaj al–Husayn ibn Ahmad al–Katib al–Baghdadi
was a in pioneer in this field. His poetry is characterized by a unique
style, sweet ness and spontaneity. A collection of his poetry runs into
ten volumes from which al–Sayyid al–Sharif al–Radi selected the
anthology he called *Al–Hasin min Shi‘r al–Husayn*. Hibatullah ibn Hasan
al–Asturalabi, the poet who was also proficient with the astrolabe has
arranged Ibn Al–Hajjaj’s work into a hundred and forty–one chapters,
each dealing with a specific style of poetry giving it the title *Durrat
al–Taj fi Shi’ir* *Ibn al–Hajjaj*. Ibn al–Hajjaj died in 391 and was
buried somewhere near the mausoleum of Imam Musa al–Kazim (‘a).
Al–Asturalabi died in 434 A.H.

The first to invent the *muwashshah al–mudhamman* which is a form of
poetry in stanzas, was Safiyuddin al–Hilli, a unique poet who died in
the year 750. He himself collected his *diwan* in three volumes
containing good poetry. His *diwan* is among the excellent ones.

The first proficient poet who wrote profusely is al–Sayyid al–Sharif
al–Radi, al–Murtada’s brother. He was the first to be named the best
poet of the Quraysh and the Talibis (the descendants of Abu Talib). Of
the earlier or the later poets no one was at par with him.

Mehyar al–Dailami, a servant of al–Sharif al–Radi, is counted among the
merits of the latter. He was among the unique personalities of his time.
His *diwan* consists of four volumes of excellent unequalled poetry.
Al–Dailami had a son who took after him in learning, as mentioned in
*Dumyat al–Qasr*. He was the composer of *Al–Ha’iyyah* (verses which end
in the sound ‘*ha*’) in which he says:

*Oh silent gentle breeze blowing from Kazimiyyah*

*What burning passion and desire you have stirred up!*

His name was Abu Abdillah al–Husayn ibn Mehyar ibn Marzawaih al–Kisrawi.
He died in 428 A.H.

Among them is someone whose prominence al–Mutanabbi acknowledged and
confessed that he did not have the audacity to compete with him, that is
Abu Firas al–Harath ibn Hamdan. No poet apart from Abu al–Tayyib
al–Mutanabbi can be compared to him. We have just heard al–Mutanabbi’s
word in favour of him as recorded in *Al–Yatimah*. Al–Sahib ibn Ubbad is
related to have said: “Poetry started with a king and closed with a
king”, meaning Imri’u al–Qays and Abu Firas respectively. The latter
passed away in 320 A.H.

Among them is the single most accomplished poet of the western Islamic
lands, as attested to unanimously, that is, Abu al–Qasim Muhammad ibn
Hani al–Andalusi al–Maghribi, the Morroccan Imamiyyah Shi'ah who was
killed in 362 A.H. Ibn Khillikan said: “In the western Islamic lands no
one among the earlier or latter poets equalled him in rank. Indeed he
was absolutely their best who was to them what his contemporary
al–Mutannabi was to the people of the east”.

Another is the poet nicknamed Kashajim. His name was Abu al–Fath (or Abu
al–Futuh) Mahmud (or Muhammad) ibn al–Hasan (or al–Husayn) ibn al–Sindi
ibn Shahik, author of Al–Masa’id wa al–Matarid. His nickname is derived
from four words katib, sha’ir, mutakallim and munajjim (writer, poet,
theologian and astrologer). He was accomplished in all fields and most
prominent in the art of description in his time. He was a Shi'ah. In
Ma’alim al–Ulama, Rashid al–Din counts him among the panegyrists of the
Ahl al–Bayt. Kashajim’s case is a confirmation of Allah’s words: “He
brings forth the living from the dead” because he was among the
offspring of al–Sindi who poisoned Imam Musa ibn Ja’afar (‘a) while the
latter was in his custody. Kashajim died in the year 350 A.H.

The first poet to be called al–Nashi (the one who grows up) was Ali ibn
Abdillah ibn Wasi, the poet. Al–Sam’ani says: “Nashi referred to someone
who devotes his youth to a particular style of poetry and earns a
reputation in it” He adds: “The one who was known by this epithet is Ali
ibn Abdillah, the renowned poet who lived during the days of
al–Muqtadir, al–Qadir and al–Radi, among others. He hailed from Baghdad
and lived in Egypt”. Ibn Kathir al–Shami declares in his Tarikh that
al–Nashi was a Shi'ah theologian. Likewise, Ibn al–Nadim counts him
among the Imamiyyah theologians. Ibn Khillikan considers him an eminent
Shi'ah personality and the author of Nasamah al–Sahar prefers him to
al–Mutanabbi, observing that the latter had adopted al–Nashi’s poetry
and adds that the concise style of al–Nashi and his precedence have
exposed al–Mutanabbi.

Ibn Khillikan has mentioned the *qasidah* (poem) from which al–Mutanabbi
plagiarized to praise Saif al–Daulah. It opens thus:

*Through the family of Muhammad is rightness known,*

*In their noble apartments, the Book descended.*

*They are the proofs of the Lord against the people,*

*About their station and their patriarch’s none can argue.*

*Particularly Abu al–Hasan Ali,*

*Whose venerable position of honour is distinct.*

*His sword’s food is the foe’s throat*

*And their flowing blood is what it sips*

*As though its tip were in nature, a heart,*

*It aims at nothing but the hearts.*

*His spear desires naught but the necks,*

*Like their pledge to him at Khumm.*

*At prayer niche by night he weeps and winces excessively*

*And in the thick of battle he regularly laughs.*

*He is the great tiding, the ark of Noah,*

*The gate of Allah and that is that!*

Al–Nashi was born in 271 and died in 366 A.H. at the ripe age of
ninety–five.

The first to flourish in all styles of poetry is Ali ibn Ishaq ibn
Khalaf who came to be known as *al–Zahi*, (the flourishing one). This
Baghdadi poet was one of the unique personalities of his time.
Al–Khatib, Abu Sa’id ibn Abdurrahim in *Tabaqat al–Shu’ara*, Ibn
Khillikan in *Al–Wafayat*, al–Qadi in *Tabaqat al–Shi’ah* and Ibn
Shahrashub in *Ma’alim Ulama al–Shi’ah* recorded the biography of
al–Zahi. Ibn Shahrashub said: “He used to praise the Ahl al–Bayt
openly”. Al–Zahi was born in 318 A.H. and died in 352 A.H. and was
buried near the tomb of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (‘a), in the Quraysh
Cemetery.

The first illiterate to be endowed with miraculous talent in poetry is
Nasr ibn Ahmad al–Khub Dharzi Abu al–Qasim, who was famous for his love
of poetry and who was known far and wide. All historical books and
biographies wrote about him. The author of *Al–Yatimah* cites some of
his verses and says that he was a Shi'ah. Ibn Khillikan says that he
died in the year 317 A.H.

Another illiterate poet is Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Hamdan known as
al–Khabbaz al–Baladi with the agnomen Abu Bakr who was a famous poet. In
Al–Yatimah al–Tha’alibi considers him one to the gifts of the world. He
also writes “What is peculiar about him is that he was illiterate but
his poetry was full of exquisite pieces and anecdotes. His poems
(maqtu‘s) never lack beautiful expressions or frequently used proverbs.
He learnt the Qur’an by heart and draws on it for his poetry …. And he
was a Shi'ah. He plainly expresses his loyalty to the Shi’ah School of
thought in his poetry”. Al–Tha’alibi cites examples of these kinds of
verses.

The first poet to open the door to allusion (al–tauriyyah) and succeed
in employing it with remarkable ease and harmony is Alauddin al–Wada’i
al–Kindi whose full name is Ali ibn al–Muzaffar ibn Ibrahim ibn Umar ibn
Zayd. He is the author of the famous Al–Tadhkhirah which is known as
Al–Tadhkirah al–Kindiyyah. It comprises of fifty volumes treating
several branches as recorded by the author of Nasamat al–Sahar, who also
quotes what Sheikh Taqiyuddin mentioned about al–tauriyyah in his Kashf
al–Litham and says that Ibn Nabatah has adopted from al–Wadi’i’s poetry.
Then he observed: “And the merits of Sheikh Ala’uddin can fill a whole
volume”. In short, the famous Ibn Nabatah actually depended on
al–Wada'i. In Fawat al–Wafayat there is a nice biographical account of
the latter which confirms that Ala’uddin was a Shi'ah. I have
incorporated it in the original version of this book. Al–Hafiz
al–Dhahabi has also given the same account. Al–Kindi died in the year
716 A.H.

Referring to Sibt ibn al–Ta’awidhi, a well-known poet, Ibn Khillikan
reports that during the two hundred years preceding him no one produced
anything comparable to his work. His full name is Abu al–Faraj Muhammad
ibn Ubaydullah al–Katib. Ibn Khillikan adds that al–Ta’awidhi was the
master poet of his time who combined eloquence and the sweetness of
expression with subtlety and depth of import. I believe that during the
two centuries that preceded his time no one produced anything that
resembled his work”.

The author of *Nasamat al–Sahar* says: “I have seen his *diwan* and he
deserves Ibn Khillikan’s extolling. He was among the eminent Shi’ite
personalities”. Al–Sam’ani says: “When I asked him about his birth he
answered that it was in al–Karkh in 476. He died in Jumada al–Ula, 553
A.H.”

Similar to him is Sharif Abu al–Hasan Ali al–Hammani, an outstanding
poet whose forefathers Sharif Muhammad, Ja’far and Muhammad were all
poets. Muhammad is the son of Zayd ibn Ali ibn al–Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a). He is mentioned and highly praised in *Nasamat al–Sahar*.
Yaqut says: “In poetry, culture and traits al–Hammani among the Alids
resembles the renown of Abdullah Ibn al–Mu’tazz among the Abbasids. He
used to say: “I am a poet and so were my father and grandfather, down to
Abu Talib”.

No doubt, al–Hammani was the most outstanding poet of the time of the
Abbasid caliph al–Mutawakkil as Imam Ali al–Hadi (‘a) attests in a
hadith related by al–Baihaqi in Al–Mahasin wa al–Masawi in the chapter
about the merits of taking pride in the Prophet and his family. I have
mentioned him and cited a piece of his verses in the original version of
this book. He is one of the poets discussed in Al–Yatimah and Al–Aghani.
Abu Tamam has mentioned some of his verses on hamasah, and Sayyid
al–Murtad has mentioned him in Al–Mushfi, citing some of his verses as
well.

Among the Hashimite poets is al–Fadl ibn Abbas ibn Utbah ibn Abu Lahab
whom al–Sayyid al–Madani, in *Al–Darajat al–Rafi’ah*, and the author of
*Nasamat al–Sahr* have mentioned and a biographical account of whom is
presented by Abu al–Faraj in *Al–Aghani*.

Among the Qurayshite Shi'ah poets, as reported in Al–Husun al–Mani’ah is
Abu Duhbul Wahb ibn Rabi’ah al–Jamahi. He is mentioned by ibn Qutaybah
in Kitab al–Shi’ir wa al–Shu’ara, al–Murtada in his Al–Amali and
al–Zubayr ibn Bakkar. He is one of the poets whom Abu Tammam included in
Diwan al–Hamasah (a selection of poetry on enthusiasm). I have cited, in
the unabridged version some of his elegies on Abu Abdillah al–Husayn
(‘a) and presented the biographies of the aforementioned poets as well
as that of other Shi'ah poets.


