Chapter 14: The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Arabic Morphology
=============================================================

Section One: The First to Introduce This Discipline for the Arabs
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The person who originated this branch of Arabic studies is Abu Muslim
Ma’adh al–Harra’ ibn Muslim ibn Abi Sarah al–Kufi, a client of the
Ansar, a well-known grammarian as reported by Jalal al–Din al–Suyuti in
the second volume of his *Al–Mazhar* and also in *Bughyat al–Wu’at* in
the section about the biography of Muslim al–Harra’. Al–Suyuti observes
that he was in charge of training Abdulmalik ibn Marwan and he was a
Shi'ite. In *Al–Wasa’il fi al–Awa’il* al–Suyuti says: “The first person
to introduce morphology is Ma’adh al–Harra’. ” In *Al–Bulghah*, Allamah
al–Bahrani states: “Mu’adh al–Harra was the inventor of morphology as
declared by several literary masters including Khalid al–Azhari.”

Al–Kasa’i and others took after al–Harra and wrote about morphology.
Apart from being a pioneer in this field, al–Harra compiled a number of
books on grammar and hadith. The indexes of authors written by our
companions carry a detailed biography of this scholar. Ibn Khillikan
tells the story of al–Harra’s encounter with the poet al–Kumayt ibn Zayd
indicating the brotherly ties of the two and says that al–Harra’ was a
Shi'ite. In fact, he was among the chief companions of Abu Abdillah
al–Sadiq (‘a) as stated in al–Mufid’s Al–Irshad, among others. He died
in 187 A.H. As an aged man he used to fasten his teeth with gold.

Section Two: The First Scholar to Write about Arabic Morphology
---------------------------------------------------------------

Abu Uthman al–Mazini preceded all others in this respect. This is what
is construed from Abu al–Khair’s assertion, as quoted in *Kashf
al–Zunun*, that Abu Uthman al–Mazini was the first to write about the
science of morphology (*sarf*) which was hitherto treated as part of
grammar (*nahw*). In *Fihrist Musannifi al–Shi’ah*, al–Najashi says:
“Abu Uthman al–Mazini, Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn Habib ibn Baqiyyah from
Mazin a clan of Shayban ibn Dhuhal ibn Tha’labah ibn ‘Ukamah ibn Mis’ab
ibn Ali ibn Bakr ibn Wa’il. He was the master of the scholars of
grammar, lexicology and other branches of Arabic in Basra. His lead in
these disciplines is widely known”.

Abu al–Abbas Muhammad ibn Zayd al–Mubarrad says: “Among the Imamiyyah
scholars is Abu Uthman Bakr ibn Muhammad who was one of the servants of
Isma’il ibn Maytham, one of the leading theologians of Shi’ah”.
Al–Allamah ibn al–Mutahhar al–Hilli also has made a mention of al–Mazini
in *Al–Khulasah*, giving a similar account to that of al–Najashi. We
have already mentioned his works.

Section Three: The Books Written on Morphology by Shi’ah Scholars in Ancient Times
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Kitab al–'Ishtiqaq* (a book on etymology) by Ibn Khalawayh; *Kitab
al–Tasrif* (a book of morphology) by al–Tabari; *Kitab 'Ilm al–Sarf* (a
book on the science of morphology) by the Moroccan vizier; *Kitab
al–Tabyin fi al–Tasrif* (a book on the exposition in morphology) by
Sheikh Ahmad ibn Ali al–Mahabadi; *Kitab al–Muqtasid fi al–Tasrif* (a
book on morphology) by Malik al–Nuhat; a commentary on *Al–Shafiyah* on
morphology by Najm al–A’immah Muhammad ibn al–Hasan al–Istarabadi; a
commentary on *Al–Shafiyah* by al–Sayyid Jamal al–Din Abdullah al–'Ajmi
al–Nuqrakar, about whom al–Muhaqqiq al–Karaki declares in *Hashiyat
al–Dhikra’*, that he was among the scholars of the Shi’ah; and lastly, a
commentary on the *Al–Shafiyah* of Kamal al–Din Muhammad ibn Mu’in
al–Din al–Nasa’i in which the glosses are skilfully intertwined with the
text. It is the best of its kind. Other such famous books are mentioned
in the *fihrist*s (indexes) of the names of writers.


