Chapter 15: The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Arabic Grammar
==========================================================

Section One: The Pioneer of This Discipline
-------------------------------------------

The person who invented Arabic grammar and dictated its priciples and
broad outlines was the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a).
There is a consensus of expert opinion on this issue as reported by
Jamal al–Din Ali ibn Yusuf al–Qafti in his *Tarikh al–Nuhat* and by
al–Marzibani in *Al–Muqtabas*. In the chapter on the truthfulness of
narrators in *Al–Khasa’is*, Ibn Jinni states: “First, you should know
that the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was the first to introduce
grammar and drew the people’s attention to it”. Abdulhamid ibn Abi
al–Hadid noted: “This fact is known to everyone”.

This issue is treated by the scholars as an indisputable fact. In the
original version of this book, I have cited their explicit statements
which indicate that the claim of consensus was accurate, simultaneously
reputing as weak, the view that the inventor of grammar was Abdurrahman
ibn Hurmuz. In reality, this man learnt grammar from Abu al–Aswad, and
some say, from Maimun al–Aqran who himself learnt from Abu al–Aswad.
Another reason why Abdurrahman could not have enjoyed that position is
that all narrations about the issue end up with Abu al–Aswad who in turn
links them to Ali (‘a). In the unabridged version of this book I have
cited Abu al–Aswad’s narration to that effect through numerous links
that are continuously transmitted (*mutawatir*). We shall mention some
of them in due course.

Section Two: The First to Systematize Grammar Studies
-----------------------------------------------------

Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali is the one who founded and systematized the study
of grammar. His surname al–Du’ali is derived from al–Du’al ibn Bakr ibn
Abdumanaf ibn Kinanah. Abu Ali al–Ghiya’i states in *Kitab al–Qari’*
that the grammarians al–Asma’i, Sibawaih, al–Akhfash, Ibn al–Sikkit, Abu
Hatim, al–Adawi and others, say that ‘al–Du’il’ should be pronounced
with the vowels ‘u’ and ‘i’ after the letters ‘*dal*’ and ‘*hamzah*’,
respectively (i.e. Du’il). The *hamzah* carries an ‘a’ vowel only in the
form denoting descent or origin (i.e Du’ali meaning descending from
Du’il) just as in the case of *nimr* and *al–nimari*; *salim* and
*al–salami*. Al–Asma’i said that Isa ibn Amr preserves the ‘i’ vowel on
‘*hamzah*’ even in the form denoting decent, thereby violating the rule
of conjugation. Abu Ali says “Al–Kasa’i, Abu Ubaydah and Muhammad ibn
Habib used to say that Abu al–Aswad was related to al–Dil [i.e ‘*dal*’
will have the vowel ‘i’ and ‘*hamzah*’ gives way for ‘*ya*’ with no
vowel where in effect the ‘*ya*’ serves as a prolongation of the ‘i’
vowel of ‘*dal*’]. His name was Zalim ibn Zalim and the dimunitive form
for both names (Zuwaylim ibn Zuwaylim). Others say he was known as Amr
ibn Uthman ibn Amr or Zalim ibn Umar ibn Zalim. Still others say he was
a descendant of Sufyan ibn Amr ibn Khulais ibn Nafa’t ibn Adiyy ibn
al–Du’il ibn Bakr ibn Kinanah.

The most correct pronounciation of the name is Du’ali, the form what
denotes descent from Du’il, the change to Du’al [with ‘a’ before ‘l’,
rather than ‘i’], this being the form denoting origin or descent. Most
scholars think that Abu al–Aswad’s name was Zalim ibn Amr al–Du’ali a
descendant of al–Du’il ibn Bakr ibn Abdumanaf ibn Kinanah. He was one of
the chiefs of the *tabi’i*s and among the most faithful companions of
the Commander of the Faithful (‘a).

Abu al–Tayib, the lexicologist who died in 351 A.H. wrote in *Maratib
al–Nahwiyyin* that the first person to chart the course for the study of
grammar was Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali who learnt it from the Commander of
the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) In *Kitab al–Ma’arif*, Ibn Qutaybah
states that: “Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali’s name was Zalim ibn Amr ibn Jandal
ibn Sufyan ibn Kinanah and his mother came from the clan of Abduddar ibn
Qusayy. Abu al–Aswad was intelligent and resolute but mean. He was the
first person to record the rules of Arabic and he was a proficient
poet”. The author of *Al–Shi’ir wa al–Shu’ara* says “He is counted as
one of the poets, the *tabi’is*, the traditionists, the niggards, the
semi–paralyzed ones, the lame and the grammarians. He was the first
person to write a book on grammar, having adopted it from Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a). He was appointed by Ibn Abbas Abu al–Aswad as governor of
Basra when the former went to participate in one of the battles fought
by the Commander of the Faithful (‘a). Abu al–Aswad died there, a very
old man”.

In *Al–Isabah*, al–Hafiz ibn Hajar writes about Abu al–Aswad: “Abu Ali
al–Qali relates from Abu Ishaq al–Zajjaj on the authority of Abu
al–Abbas al–Mubarrad who said: The first person to record (the rules of)
the Arabic language and assign the dots to (some letters of) the Holy
Qur’an was Abu al–Aswad. When he was asked as to who paved the way for
him, he answered: Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a). Amr ibn Shubbah relates
through his chain of transmission that Asim ibn Bahdalah said: ‘The
first person to record grammar was Abu al–Aswad’.”

Al–Jahiz is reported to have said that Abu al–Aswad was considered to be
among the *tabi’i*s, the jurists, the traditionists, the poets, the
nobles, the knights, the princes, the grammarians, the shrewd, the
quick–witted and the niggardly. He was also counted among the ‘bald
noblemen’ and had foul breath.He was also a Shi'ah. Al–Jahiz’s report is
related by both Abu al–Faraj in *Al–Aghani*, and al–Suyuti in *Bughyat
al–Wu’at*. Similarly, al–Raghib states in *Al–Muhadarat* in his account
on Abu al–Aswad that he was the first to furnish (some of the letters
of) the Holy Qur’an with dots and he also established the discipline of
grammar under the supervision of Ali (‘a). He was among the most
accomplished people in judgment and intellect and he was a Shi'ah, a
poet, a quick–witted man, reliable in what he relates…”

Al–Yafi’i records in *Mir’at al–Jinan* that Zalim ibn Amr, Abu al–Aswad
al–Basri was among the most eminent *tabi’i*s and a companion of the
Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) with whom he
participated in the battle of Siffin. He was among Ali’s best supporters
who were endowed with sound judgment and mature intellect. He was the
first to record Arabic grammar by the direction of the Commander of the
Faithful”.

Imam al–Baihaqi writes in his book *Al–Mahasin wa al–Masawi* that Yunus
ibn Habib, the grammarian has said “The pioneer of Arabic studies who
opened up the gates to this discipline and trod its path is Abu al–Aswad
al–Du’ali whose name is Zalim ibn Amr”.

Abu al–Barakat, Abdurrahman ibn Muhammad al–Anbari records in the
beginning of his book *Nuzhat al–Albab* that Abu ‘Ubaydah Mu‘mar
al–Muthanna and others, relate that he learnt grammar from Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a). Abu Hatim al–Sajistani says that Abu al–Aswad was born in
the pre–Islamic era and learnt Arabic grammar from Ali ibn Abi Talib
(‘a). Abu Salamah Musa ibn Isma’il narrates from his father who said:
“Abu al–Aswad was the first person to introduce grammar and it was in
the city of Basrah”. Ibn Al–Anbari observes: “Indeed, the founder of
Arabic studies who defined its broad outlines and rules was the
Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) and Abu al–Aswad
al–Du’ali took after him”.

Ibn Jinni records in *Al–Khasa’is* in the chapter about the truthfulness
of transmitters the Commander of the Faithful was the one who started it
(grammar), drew people’s attention to it and caused its spread. Then Ibn
Abbas actualized it while Ali (‘a) entrusted Abu al–Aswad with its
development”.

In *Kitab al–Awa’il*, Abu Hilal Hasan ibn Abdillah al–‘Askari had this
to say: “The founder of grammar was Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a).” This fact
is recorded by al–Zajjaji in his *Amali* on the authority of
al–Mubarrad.

Abu Ubaydah says: “The first to write about the Arabic language was Abu
al–Aswad, followed by Maimun al–Aqran, then Anbasat al–Fil and then
Abdillah ibn Ishaq”. It is obvious that these people adopted it from Ali
(‘a) because Abu Ubaydah himself attested to that, as we saw in Ibn
Al–Anbari’s quotation.

In the same vein, Ibn Abi al–Hadid declares in his commentary on *Nahj
al–Balagah*, that it was invented by Ali ibn Abi Talib who dictated its
broad outlines to Abu al–Aswad. Abu al–Fadl ibn Abi al–Ghana’im wrote in
*Sharh al–Mufassal* that Abu al–Aswad reported to have acquired the
knowledge of grammar from Ali (‘a) who directed him to apply it to the
speech (of the Arabs). Abdulqadir al–Baghdadi records in *Khazanat
al–Adab* in his account about Abu al–Aswad, that he was the founder of
grammar by Ali’s instruction. Likewise al–Damiri mentions in *Hayat
al–Hayawan* while commenting on the word Da’il, that Abu al–Aswad was
the first to write about grammar according to the directives of Ali ibn
Abi Talib (‘a).

In *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim quotes Abu Ja’far ibn Rastum al–Tabari as
saying “The reason why *nahw* is given this name is that, on receiving
some principles of grammar from Ali (‘a), Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali sought
his master’s permission to follow his example (*nahw*). This is why this
branch of knowledge is named *nahw*. Ibn al–Nadim adds: “I have come
across a proof which confirms the idea that grammar was first recorded
by Abu al–Aswad. I found four pieces of paper of Chinese origin, I
suppose the title of whose content reads: “These papers contain Abu
al–Aswad’s discussions on subject (*fa‘il*) and object (*maf‘ul* )in
Yahya ibn Ya’mur’s handwriting”. Under this was an old line reading
“This is the hand–writing of al–Nadr ibn Shumayl’.

Ibn Khillikan and Ibn al–Anbari report that Abu Harb the son of Abu
al–Aswad al–Du’ali said: The first chapter which my father wrote was
about words expressing wonder and admiration (*ta’ajjub*). Ibn al–Anbari
observes that Abu al–Aswad compiled the concise book ascribed to him
after he had furnished the Holy Qur’an with dots, an exercise which he
accomplished during the time of Ziyad.

Ibn al–Anbari observes in *Al–Nuzhah*: “The truth is that, Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a) was the one who invented grammar because all the reports
ascribe this subject to Abu al–Aswad who confesses that it is ascribed
to Ali. It has been related that Abu al–Aswad was asked one day about
the source of his knowledge of grammar and he answered ‘I acquired its
outlines from Ali ibn Abi Talib and built on that’.

Imam Fakhr al–Razi states in *Kitab Manaqib al–Shafi’i* that al–Khalil
ibn Ahmad studied under Isa ibn Umar who learnt from Abu ‘Amr ibn
al–‘Ala’ from Abdullah ibn Ishaq al–Hadrami from Abu Abdillah Maimun
al–Aqran form Anbasat al–Fil from Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali from Ali (‘a).
Similarly, Rashid al–Din ibn Shahrashub al–Mazandarani records in *Kitab
al–Manaqib* that al–Khalil ibn Ahmad relates from Isa ibn ‘Amr
al–Thaqafi from Abdullah ibn Ishaq al–Hadrami from Abu ‘Amr who was
known as ‘Alam al–Nahw and Ibn al–‘Ala’ from Maimun al–Aqran from
Anbasat al–Fil from Abu al–Aswad from Ali (‘a).

Other notable scholars such as al–Azhari, in his *Tahzib al–Lughah*, Ibn
Makram in *Lisan al–Arab*, Ibn Sayyidah in *Al–Muhkam* and Ibn
Khillikan, in *Al–Wafayat,* corroborated that report. In the same way,
Ruknuddin Ali ibn Abu Bakr al–Hadithi writes in *Kitab al–Rukni* that
the first person to found grammar was Abu Al–Aswad al–Du’ali, the
teacher of al–Hasan and al–Husayn. He learnt grammar from Ali ibn Abi
Talib and subsequently five people studied it from him. They are his two
sons, ‘Ata and Abu al–Harith, Anbasah, Maymun and Yahya ibn al–Numan.
Abu Ishaq al–Hadrami, ‘Isa al–Thaqafi and Abu ‘Amr ibn al–‘Ala, in turn,
acquired it from these five. Al–Khalil ibn Ahmad studied Arabic grammar
under ‘Isa al–Thaqafi and excelled in it. He taught Sibawayh and later
al–Akhfash. Thereafter, two literary schools, the Kufi and the Basri,
took shape.

Al–Kaf’ami, an Imamiyyah scholar wrote in his *Mukhtasar Nuzhat Ibn
al–Anbari* that Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali was the founder of Arabic
studies, having learnt it from Ali (‘a).

These citations are sufficient to ascertain this fact.

Here, an objection by Ibn Faris in this regard is worth discussing. In
his book, *Al–Sahibi* subtitled *Fiqh al–Lughah* says: “If it is said
that there are successive reports that confirm that Abu al–Aswad was the
first to record the rules of Arabic while al–Khalil was the founder of
prosody, the answer will be that we do not deny this but it should be
noted that these two disciplines are ancient branches of Arabic studies
that were neglected over time and revived by these two masters”.

This argument sounds like the speech of the deranged because the Arabs
of the pre–Islamic period did not stand in need of the knowledge of
grammar because they spoke Arabic naturally; they could not have
deviated from the correct form, not to mention needing a set of rules by
which their speech would be corrected. In fact the narrations, which Ibn
Faris acknowledges are successively transmitted, indicate the reason why
the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) invented this field and Abu al–Aswad
followed in his footsteps.

It was the corruption noticeable in the language of the Arabs who were
born of Nabatean and Persian mothers during and after the days of the
Prophet. Apprehensive that these corrupt usages might spread and spoil
the language, they founded the grammar to preserve what was, hitherto
protected by virtue of the natural disposition of its speakers.

On the whole, both facts of history prove the opposite of what this
scholar claims. It was a presonal view of his which he upheld without
realizing that it would be liable to objection. We, therefore, take what
he narrates and ignore what he thinks. As for the supposition that
prosody was an ancient discipline in Arabic, it has already been
refuted.

Section Three: Imam Ali Set up the Principles of Grammar
--------------------------------------------------------

The people are divided on both issues. Concerning the first, a number of
views were put forward. The first is cited by Ibn al–Anbari in the
preface of the commentary on Sibawaihi’s book. It reads: “One day the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his Household, heard someone
reciting the Qur’anic verse ***‘…Allah and His Messenger are free from
liability to the idolators…’ (Chapter 9 verse 3)*** and read the word
*rasul* (messenger) with the *kasrah* i.e. /i/ vowel.

The Prophet was angerd by this blasphemy so he directed the Commander of
the Faithful Ali (‘a) to set up the grammar (*nahw*) and prepare its
rules to prevent this type of solecism”. [*Rasul* (messenger), as a
grammatical conjoint with the word ‘Allah’ in the above verse is also a
subject of the verb ‘*bari*’ and its last letter must therefore have
*dammah* i.e./u/ vowel. A *kasrah* at the end of the word *rasul*
(messenger) makes it the object of that verb and this is blasphemous
because it will then mean that Allah denounces His messenger.]

So the Commander of the Faithful summoned Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali and
taught him the *awamil* (expressions that govern the condition of other
words in the same sentence) and the conjuctions. He also compiled
aspects of the Arabic language and enumerated the marks of declinable
(*i’rabiyyah*) and indeclinable (*bina’iyyah*) words.

The intelligent Abu al–Aswad promptly noted everything down and whenever
he encountered a problem he consulted the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a). Hence, after organizing and putting together some constructions,
he brought them before Ali (‘a) who gave his approval saying “The way
you have taken (*nahaw*) is excellent, indeed’. Abu al–Aswad considered
this comment a good omen and named this discipline *nahw*”.

From the above account it is clear that the first to use the word *nahw*
was the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household, not Ali (‘a), as
stated by Ibn al–Anbari. What the scholars consider to be the reason why
Arabic grammar is called *nahw* is what Ibn al–Anbari held, not what is
contained in this story that sounds like the tales of story–tellers, for
those conversant with the annals deny that what it purports really took
place during the time of the Prophet. As far as I know, Ibn al–Anbari
was the only narrator of this report because I have not come across
anyone who preceded him, although some later scholars whom I mentioned
in the original version of this book relate it from him.

The second view is what Ibn Shahrashub mentions in *Kitab al–Manaqib*
and that is, the reason why the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) founded
the grammar is that the Quraysh were marrying from among the Nabateans
and having children whose tongues become corrupted. For instance, a
daughter of Khuwailid al–Asadi who was married to a Nabatean once said:
“*Inna abuya mata wa taraka alayya malan kathira* (my father died and
left behind much wealth for me) [The solecism is evident in *abuya* and
the wrong preposition *alayya*].

When Ali (‘a) saw how corrupt her language was, he decided to found the
grammar. Another account reported in *Kitab al–Rukni* a work written by
Ruknuddin Ali ibn Abu Bakr al–Hadithi says that the reason is that a
lady went to Mu’awiyah during the time of Uthman and said: “*Abuya mata
wa taraka malan*”. Mu’awiyah considered her speech repugnant. When Ali
(‘a) heard her story he wrote for Abu al–Aswad a piece of paper in which
he outlined the principles of grammar. These two reports do not seem to
contradict each other.

The third view is that one day a Bedouin heard someone among the common
people reciting the verse: ‘Allah and His Messenger are free of
liability to the idolaters…’ (with repugnant solecism) so he hit him on
the head. The assailant then sued his victim before the Commander of the
Faithful for committing blasphemy while recitating the Qur’an. Ali (‘a)
replied that it was an inadvertent slip. Then he wrote down the
principles of grammar on a piece of paper and gave it to Abu al–Aswad.
This report has been recorded by Rashid al–Din.

In his *Al–Rashad*, a commentary on Allamah al–Taftazani’s *Al–Irshad*
Shamsuddin Muhammad ibn Sharif al–Jurjani writes about the reason why
grammar was called *nahw*, and states that Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali heard
someone reciting the verse”: ‘Allah and His Messenger are free of
liability to the idolators’ and read the letter at the end of *rasul*
(messenger) with *kasrah* i.e./i/ vowel instead of *dammah*, i.e. /u/
vowel. Al–Du’ali reported the matter to the Commander of the Faithful
Ali (‘a) who ascribed what had happened to their intermingling with the
non–Arabs and pointed out that Arabic words are of three classes: noun
(*ism*) verb (*fi’l*) and particle (*harf*).

Imam Maytham al–Bahrani wrote in *Bidayat al–Amr* that Abu al–Aswad
heard a man reciting: ‘Allah and His Messenger are free of liability to
the idolaters’ and pronounced the letter at the end of the word *rasul*
with the vowel /i/. So he disapproved of that and said ‘we seek refuge
with Allah from reverting to a state of weak faith’. Then he consulted
Ali (‘a) on it. The Imam declared ‘I am preparing a standard for the
people to enable them to speak correctly’. Then our master (‘a) dictated
to him: ‘Words are of three classes: noun, verb and particle. The noun
is…’ and went on explaining the details. After that he directed Abu
al–Aswad to follow this outline and taught him how to do it.

There is no contradiction between these reports except for the
difference as regards the one who heard the recitation of the Qur’anic
verse in question.

The fourth view is: Ibrahim ibn Ali al–Kaf’ami al–Shami said that it has
been narrated that the reason behind Imam Ali’s decision to write down
the grammar is that he heard a man reciting the verse: ***‘None shall
partake of it except the wrongdoers (Qur’an: Ch 69: v 37).*** Instead of
saying khati’un, the reciter said khati’in, which is grammatically wrong
here.

The fifth view is: Rashid al–Din states that the cause is that one day
Abu al–Aswad was walking behind a bier when a man asked him: “who is the
dead person?” [The questioner said *mutawaffi* i.e the one who causes
people to die instead of *mutawaffa* i.e the one who died]. Abu al–Aswad
replied: “Allah”, and later informed Imam Ali about this incident. So
Imam Ali drew up the rules of grammar and passed them in a paper to Abu
al–Aswad saying, ‘How excellent this way (*nahw*) is! Fill in the
relevant issues (in their sections)’. So it was called *nahw*.

The sixth view is: In *Fusul al–Mukhtarah*, al–Sayyid al–Murtada who
relates from *Kitab al–Uyun wa al–Mahasin* by Sheikh al–Mufid also known
as Ibn al–Mu’allim, says: Sheikh Abu Abdullah, may Allah perpetuate his
honour, informed me on the authority of Muhammad ibn Salam al–Jamahi,
that Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali went one day to the Commander of the
Faithful, Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) and the latter tossed a sheet of paper
to him.

In it, was written: ‘In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the
Compassionate. The parts of speech are three: noun, verb and particle
which carries some meaning. A noun is that which denotes something or
someone, a verb denotes the motion or action of somebody or something
and a particle is that which give meaning to other than itself’. ‘This
speech is beautiful’ observed Abu al–Aswad, ‘what do you command me to
do about it. I have learnt a great deal by acquiring it’.

The Commander of the Faithful replied, ‘I have heard awful solecism
being committed in your city and I decided to write a book so that
whoever reads it will be able to distinguish between the speech of the
Arabs and that of these people. So follow this example, that is, the
speech of the Arabs’. Abu al–Aswad remarked, ‘May Allah give us success
to achieve what is proper through your guidance, O Commander of the
Faithful’.

Relating from Ibn Salam al–Jamahi, Rashid al–Din says: ‘Ali (‘a) wrote:
It is written by Ali ibn Abu Talib’ (‘a) [with Abu ending with /u/
instead of /i/] a construction which the people did not understand. Some
said that Abu Talib was both the name as well as the surname of his
father. Others explained that (Abu Talib) was a compound name like
Darahinna and Hadramaut. Al–Zamakhshari states in *Al–Fa’iq* that the
normative form (*raf’*) is maintained even in the genetive case (*jarr*)
of the word (Abu ) because it is so well-known in this way that it is
treated like a phrase which does not change.

Abu al–Qasim al–Zajjaj writes in his *Al–Amali*: On the authority of Abu
Ja’far al–Tabari from Abu Hatim al–Sajistani from Yaqub ibn Ishaq
al–Hadrami from Sa’id ibn Muslim al–Bahili from his father from his
grandfather from Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali who said: I went to Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a) and saw him looking down thoughtfully. I asked: ‘Oh Commander
of the Faithful what are you thinking about?’ ‘I heard grammatical
errors in the speech of the people of this city of yours and I intend to
compile a book on the principles of Arabic’, was his answer.

So we said: ‘If you do that you will revive us and this language will
remain safe and sound with us’. Then I went to him three days later and
he gave me a pamphlet in which these words were written: ‘In the Name of
Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Language can be classified into
noun, verb and particle. A noun is what speaks of a thing that has a
name, a verb denotes the motion of the noun while a particle is that
which carries a meaning and it is neither a noun nor a verb’.

Then he instructed me saying: ‘Follow this way and add to this outline
whatever comes to your mind. Oh Abu al–Aswad know that things are of
three classes; apparent (*zahir*), implied (*mudmar*) and a third which
is neither this nor that’. Abu al–Aswad said, ‘So I compiled and
presented to him some material among which were the particles that
govern the accusative and subjective forms (*nasb*) mentioned *anna*,
*an*, *laita*, *la’alla*, *ka’anna*, but I did not include *lakinna*.
The Imam asked me why I left it out, to which I replied that I did not
consider it among the particles. He said that it was, so I added it to
the others.

Now on studying the aforementioned viewpoints concerning the reason why
*nahw* was initiated, we will reach the conclusion that the solecisms
observed among those whose tongues had been corrupted as a result of
intermingling with the non–Arabs was the reason which prompted the
Commander of the Faithful to invent this branch of knowledge and direct
Abu al–Aswad to take up this task. All these views render Ibn Faris’
claim untenable, as we stated previously.

As for the narrations on the reason why Abu al–Aswad drew up the rules
of Arabic grammar, we observe that there is no contradiction between
them to that effect. Abu Sa’id has related that once Sa’ad, a Persian
from Zandkhan came to Basrah with some members of his family. They
approached Qudamah ibn Maz’un and claimed that they accepted Islam at
his hand and therefore they considered themselves his clients
(*mawali*). One day while Sa’ad was leading his horse he passed by Abu
al–Aswad. The latter asked him: Oh Sa’ad, why do you not ride?’ Sa’ad
answered ‘*Inna farasi dhali’an*’ [instead of *dhali’un*] ‘My horse is
balky’. Some of those who heard him laughed. Abu al–Aswad said ‘These
clients have in fact embraced Islam willingly; therefore, they are our
brothers. We better help them acquire the language.’ So he wrote a
chapter about subject and object.

Another story says that one day a lady called on Mu’awiyah during the
time of Uthman and said to him: “Abuya mata wa taraka malan”, meaning:
(My father died and left some assets). Mu’awiyah considered it repugnant
[because she should have said ‘abi’ not ‘abuya’]. When Imam Ali heard
this story he set up the rules of grammar and had Abu al–Aswad compile
them. The latter first wrote a chapter on the letter (ya) and the
genitive case (al–idafah). Abu al–Aswad also heard a man reciting ‘Allah
and His Messenger are free from liability to the idolaters’ and read the
letter at the end of the word rasul with /i/ vowel. So he wrote the
chapters about conjoints (atf) and adjectives (na’t). According to
another story his daughter one day said: “Father, what is the most
beautiful thing in the sky?”(Ma ahsanu al–sama?) with /u/ vowel at the
end of ahsanu. Abu al–Aswad answered: ‘Its stars’. She said ‘I only
meant to express my wonder at its beauty’. So her father remarked: ‘You
should say: ma ahsana al–sama, with the vowel /a/ at the end of ahsana’.
Then he wrote the chapters on ta’ajjub and istifham, the forms for
expressing wonder and the interrogative, respectively. The reader is
aware that there is no contradiction between these narrations because
each of them expresses the reason for writing a particular chapter on
grammar.

As for Ibn al–Nadim’s view in Al–Fihrist and Sheikh Abu al–Hasan Salamah
ibn Iyan (who was a Syrian grammarian) in the beginning of Al–Misbah fi
al–Nahw, it refers to a different question altogether. Ibn al–Nadim
says: “The people differ as to what prompted Abu al–Aswad to draw up the
rules of grammar. Abu Ubaydah says: ‘Abu al–Aswad learnt grammar from
Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) and at the beginning he would not reveal anything
from what he learnt until Ziyad sent him a directive asking him to
prepare a work that would help the people understand the Book of Allah.
Abu al–Aswad requested that he should be relieved of this task. But when
he heard someone recite ‘Allah and His Messenger are free from liability
to the idolators’ with the vowel /i/ at the end of rasul, he said: ‘I
have never imagined the situation to be as terrible as this’. So he went
back to Ziyad and said: ‘I will discharge what the Prince commanded, and
I want a clever scribe who will do what I say’. So a scribe from the
tribe of Abd al–Qays was brought to Abu al–Aswad but he was not
satisfied with him and another one was brought to him. Abu al–Abbas
al–Mubarrad thinks he was also from the same tribe. Abu al–Aswad said to
the new secretary: ‘Whenever you see me open my mouth while pronouncing
a letter, put a dot on top of it, whenever you see me protrude my mouth,
put a dot after the letter and when you see me pronounce a letter with a
‘flagging tone’ (kasartu), put a dot below it’. This is the principle
according to which Abu al–Aswad arranged the dots.’ ”

This story has no bearing on the issue in question because the subject
of discussion is the reason for starting grammar not the writing of the
Qur’an. What is amazing is that these two scholars mention this story to
show the reason why nahw was drawn up. Is this point not worth pondering
over?

To sum up, the literal meaning of al–nahw and al–Arabiyyah is expressed
by the Imam’s saying: inha nahwah or usluk tariqah that is, act
according to it. Al–Baihaqi says: “Al–nahw means uprightness
(al–istiqamah). Al–nahw used to denote the way by which the Arabic
language is put right. Some say that al–nahw means the direction. Abu
Uthman al–Mazini says al–nahw is a certain direction (nahiyah) of
language. Al–nahw also means pattern (al–mithal) and if we say ‘this
follows a certain nahw’ it means ‘this follows a certain mithal
(pattern)’.

Al–Khalil says: “Al–nahw means direction because when Ali (‘a) heard a
man committing grammatical errors in his speech he said to Abu al–Aswad
al–Du’ali: ‘Set up standards for the Arabic language because the number
of the Nabateans and the arabicised people is increasing’. When
al–Du’ali wrote it the Commander of the Faithful commended him by saying
‘How excellent is the nahw you produced’ By nahw he meant the direction
and the way. He then said to the arabicised people: (inhu nahwah) i.e.
follow its direction (qasdah) and take its way”.

*Al–nahw* denotes the direction which one seeks. *Naha nahwah* means he
sought a certain direction. What the Commander of the Faithful meant by
*inhu*…is follow the rules, patterns and marks (*al–i’rab*) of Arabic.

*Al–Arabiyyah* is the name given to the language. It is said, ‘it is the
Arabic language’ meaning that is the excellent, eloquent and perspicuous
one. And an Arab is thus called because he makes himself clear in speech
(*a’rab*). Al–Asma'i says: ‘A man once said to his sons: My sons! Let
your speech be correct because when a difficult situation befalls a man
in which he needs to adorn himself, he can simply borrow garments from
his brothers or his father, but nobody can lend him his speech’.

Section Four: The First Person to Learn the Grammar from Abu al–Aswad
---------------------------------------------------------------------

As recorded by Abu Hatim al–Sajistani and Abu Tayyib, the philologist,
in his *Maratib al–Nahwiyyin*, the first student whom Abu al–Aswad
taught grammar was his son Ata ibn Abi al–Aswad followed by Yahya ibn
Ya’mar al–Udwani*.* These two were masters of grammar after Abu
al–Aswad. Ibn Qutaybah states in *Al–Ma’arif* that Abu al–Aswad had two
sons ‘Ata’ and Abu Harb. After Abu al–Aswad, ‘Ata’ and Yahya ibn Ya’mur
developed the study of Arabic.

‘Ata’ did not have any offspring. Abu Harb, the other son of Abu
al–Aswad, was a wise man and a poet”. This acount is recorded in
*Al–Ma’arif*, but it is doubtful if ‘Ata’ and Abu Harb were two
different persons. In *Fihrist Musannifi al–Shi’ah* by al–Najashi who
was an authority on geneology, we read: ‘Abu Harb, Ata ibn Abu al–Aswad
al–Du’ali was the teacher of al–Asma’i and Abu ‘Ubaydah’. *In Al–Taqrib*
Ibn Hajar says: ‘Abu Harb ibn Abi al–Aswad al–Du’ali al–Basri was a
reliable narrator. Some say that his name is Mahjan and others say
‘Ata’. He died in the year 108 A.H. Ruknuddin Ali ibn Abu Bakr writes in
his book *Al–Rukni fi al–Nahw* that five people had learnt grammar from
Abu al–Aswad: his two sons ‘Ata’ and Abu al–Harith…’

Section Five: The Pioneers in Basra and Kufa on Nahw
----------------------------------------------------

The pioneers in Basra and Kufa to expatiate on *nahw*, give it a sound
footing, define its various principles, bring out its meanings and
furnish the arguments in support of their opinions.

In Basrah, it was Abu al–Fadl al–Khalil ibn Ahmad, a great scholar, an
authority on literature and an exponent of the Arabic language. He
refined this discipline and through his work, it reached advanced
stages. His clear–sightedness, subtle wisdom and intellectual
accomplishment inspired Sibawayh to compile his famous book, the like of
which no one before or after him could produce. Some accounts indicate
that al–Khalil himself did not produce any work on grammar although Ibn
Khillikan and others ascribe *Kitab al–Awamil* to him and al–Suyuti says
that *Kitab al–Jumal* and *Al–Shawahid* are his works. These scholars
say that Sibawayh related from al–Khalil as much as a thousand pages on
grammar as stated in al–Suyuti’s biography of Sibawayh in *Al–Tabaqat*.

The pioneer in Kufa is the erudite scholar, Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn
al–Hasan ibn Abi Sarah al–Rawwasi, a chief of the Kufis and one of the
Kufi grammarians. Jalal al–Din al–Suyuti states in his biography in
*Al–Tabaqat*: “He was the first Kufi to compile a book on grammar. He
taught al–Kasa’i and al–Farra. Al–Khalil sent someone to al–Rawwasi
requesting for the latter’s book. The request was granted and al–Khalil
was able to read the book.

Whenever Sibawayh’s book states:‘Al–Kufi said such and such’, it refers
to al–Rawwasi and his book. According to *Al–Mazhar*, the title of the
book was *Al–Faysal*. Al–Rawwasi was among the Shi'ite chiefs. The
*Fihrist*s of Imamiyah writers present his biography and works. He was a
companion of Imam al–Baqir and Imam al–Sadiq (‘a). Al–Rawwasi came from
a family known for learning and culture. The original version of this
book contains a detailed biography of the man.

Section Six: The Famous Shi'ah Masters of Grammar
-------------------------------------------------

‘Ata’ ibn Abu al–Aswad whom we mentioned in section four, is one of
them.

Another is Yahya ibn Ya’mur al–‘Udwani al–Wasqi al–Mudari al–Basri whose
lineage goes back to Adnan ibn Qays ibn Ghaylan ibn Mudar. He was from
the clan of Banu Layth ibn Kinanah. He was one of the reciters of Basra
and it is from him that Abdullah ibn Ishaq learnt the recitation of the
Qur’an. Ibn Khillikan says: “He was well versed in the Qur’an, grammar
and Arabic dialects. He studied grammar under Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali. He
was one of the early Shi’ah who subscribed to the superiority of the Ahl
al–Bayt (‘a) without disparaging the venerable people who were not from
them”.

Al–Hakim has praised al–‘Udwani profusely in *Tarikh Nishapur*. I have
mentioned part of this eulogy in the original version of this book, as
well as his disputations with al–Hajjaj that are presented in *Al–Raud
al–Zahir* in which he demonstrated that al–Hasan and al–Husayn were the
sons of Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his Household.
Al–‘Udwani gives solid evidence by quoting the Qur’anic verse ***“And We
have given him Isaac and Jacob….and Jesus and Elias…”(Qur’an ch. 6 vs
84–85).***

In his diaputation with al–Hajjaj, Yahya ibn Yamur al–‘Udwani posed the
question:‘Who was Jesus’s father? For Allah has included him among the
offspring of Abraham, not to mention the interval between Jesus and
Abraham was far greater than that between al–Hasan and al–Husayn and
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his Household”. Hajjaj answered: “You
have indeed introduced a solid proof and expressed your idea very
clearly…”. The author of *Bughyat al–Wu’at* writes that al–‘Udwani
passed away in the year 129. It is recorded in *Al–Taqrib* that he died
before the close of the first century and, according to another view,
after that.

Another is Muhammad ibn al–Hasan ibn Abi Sarah al–Rawwasi who was a
client of the Ansar. He was the chief of the Kufi master of the Arabic
language. He is also the first Kufi to write a work on grammar, as we
already mentioned in section five. He died after the first century. His
biography and a list of his works are mentioned in the original version
of this book.

Another famous Shi'ite grammarian is al–Farra, Yahya ibn Ziyad al–Aqta’
al–Kufi. The hand of Ziyad, Yahya’s father, was cut in the battle of
Fakh while he was fighting on the side of al–Husayn ibn Ali ibn al–Hasan
al–Muthallath ibn al–Hasan al–Muthanna ibn al–Hasan al–Sibt. It is
stated in *Riyad al–Ulama* that “the assertion of al–Suyuti that
al–Farra had an inclination to Mutazilism was perhaps the result of
confusing Shi'ah theological principles with those of the Mu’tazilites,
for he was definitely an Imamiyah Shi'ah as previously observed”.

It has been related from Abu al–Abbas Taghlib that he said: “had it not
been for al–Farra, the Arabic language would not have existed because he
was the one who purged it of corruptions and made it perfect.” Abu
al–Abbas observes that Arabic would have crumbled because it was subject
to disputes; each party claimed authority and the way it was spoken was
at the mercy of the people’s level of knowledge and their natural
disposition. I have recorded in the original version of this book, a
biographical account suitable for his position, and also mentioned his
works. He died at the age of sixty–three in the year 207 while he was on
his way to Mecca.

Among them is Abu Uthman Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn Habib ibn Baqiyyah
al–Mazini from the clan of Banu Mazin, a branch of the tribe of Shayban
ibn Zahl ibn Thalabah ibn ‘Ukabah ibn Sa’ib ibn Ali ibn Wa’il. He was a
master of the scholars of grammar, language and lexicology in Basra and
his superiority in this regard is known to all. He was also one of the
Imamiyah scholars. We have already talked about him in the section on
morphology. According to the most authentic account, Bakr died in 248
A.H.

Another is Imam ibn Hamdun al–Katib al–Nadim who was a famous
grammarian. His full name was Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Isma’il ibn Dawud
ibn Hamdun, the famous scribe and grammarian. Yaqut says: “Abu Ja’far
al–Alawi has mentioned him among Imamiyah authors and declared that Ibn
Hamdun was the most eminent master of lexicologists. Abu al–Abbas
Taghlib studied and graduated under him before Ibn al–A‘rabi”. An
account of him is found in al–Tusi’s *Fihrist Musannifi al–Shi’ah* and
also in al–Najashi’s *Asma al–Musannifin min al–Imamiyyah*, as stated by
Yaqut. I mentioned further information about him in the original version
of this book.

Among them is Abu al–Abbas al–Mubarrad Muhammad ibn Yazid ibn Abd
al–Akbar ibn Umayr al–Thumali al–Azdi, the famous Basri grammarian and
lexicologist. He was the authority on Arabic of his time. He studied it
from Imam Abu Uthman al–Mazini. A report on his being Shi’ite and the
dates of his birth and death has already been mentioned.

Another scholar is Tha’labah ibn Maymun Abu Ishaq, a client of Banu Asad
who was later allied to the Banu Salmah. He was an authority on grammar
in Kufa. He was a beneficent man, a persevering worshipper and an
ascetic as stated by al–Najashi in *Asma al–Musannifin* where he also
relates Abu Ishaq’s story about the arrival of the Abbasid caliph Harun
al–Rashid in Kufa. Al–Najashi also informs us that this grammarian
transmitted hadiths from Abu Abdillah al–Sadiq and al–Kazim (‘a) and
also compiled a work on hadith. I have cited al–Najashi’s detailed
account about this scholar in the original version of this book.

Abu al–Qasim al–Jurji al–Kufi is another famous grammarian. His name is
Sa’id ibn Muhammad ibn Sa’id. Al–Sam’ani writes in *Al–Ansab,* that he
(al–Jurji) was one of the masters of grammar, and he was a trustworthy
man and a fanatical Shi'ah”.

Another is Yaqub ibn Sufyan who was one of the pillars of literature. He
excelled in all Islamic disciplines especially Arabic studies. In
*Al–Kamil*, Ibn al–Athir says that Yaqub was among the eminent Shi'ah
scholars”. He passed away in 277 A.H.

Among the authorities on grammar and lexicology is Qutaybah al–Ju’fi
al–Kufi. Al–Najashi describes him in *Asma Musannifi al–Shi‘ah* as the
accomplished A’sha and calls him by the surname Abu Muhammad al–Muqarri,
a client of Azad. Al–Suyuti also mentions Qutaybah in *Al–Tabaqat* and
states that al–Zubaydi counts him among the masters of Kufi grammarians.

He also states that al–Zubaydi once said ‘Al–Mahdi’s scribe landed in
some Arab villages (*quran*) pronouncing the word *quran* with
‘nunation’, i.e. with an /n/ sound at the end. Shabib ibn Shaybah
disapproved of that. So he asked Qutaybah concerning it. The latter
answered: “If one uses the word *quran* to refer to the villages of
Hijaz it should be without ‘nunation’ because the word is not completely
declinable in that case but if it is used to refer to the villages of
Sudan it accepts ‘nunation’ because it would be completely declinable
then.”

Another is Abu Abdillah Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Sayyar al–Sayyari who was
a Basri scribe, lexicologist, grammarian, poet, and a great literary
figure. Al–Najashi writes that he was al–Tahir’s secretary during the
time of Imam Hasan al–Askari (‘a). Al–Sayyari wrote a number of books,
the titles of which have been listed in the original version.

Abu Bakr al–Suli is another outstanding grammarian. As we previously
mentioned, al–Suli studied grammar under al–Mubarrad.

Another grammarian is Abu Ja’afar Muhammad ibn Salmah ibn Nabil
al–Yashkuri. He was an eminent Shi'ah from Kufa and he was a jurist,
lexicologist and grammarian. He stayed in the desert for some time and
mixed with the Bedouins in order to learn from them. In turn, Yaqub ibn
al–Sikkit and Muhammad ibn Abdah al–Na’ib studied under him. Al–Najashi
says: “The household of al–Yashkuri in Kufa was famous for the learned
and distinguished figures it had. Some of its members have been
secretaries”. He also mentions the works of al–Yashkuri to which I have
referred in the original version of this book.

Abu Ja’afar Ahmad ibn ‘Ubayd ibn Nasih ibn Balanjar, a client of Banu
Hashim is another prominent grammarian. He was known as Abu ‘Asidah. He
hailed from Dailam and lived in Kufa. He was an authority on Arabic
language. He trained al–Mu’tazz, the son of al–Mutawakkil. Abu ‘Asidah
studied under al–Asma’i and his peers. He transmitted the hadith from
al–Waqidi and al–Qasim al–Anbari and others related from him. Abu
‘Asidah narrated from al–Waqidi and others about the merits of the Ahl
al–Bayt. In *Tabaqat al–Shi’ah,* Nurullah al–Mar’ashi relates a story in
the biography of Abu Asidah about what transpired between him and
al–Mu’tazz on the day the latter wanted to kill al–Mutawakkil.

The master of literature, Abu Ali al–Farisi is another Shi’ite
grammarian. His name is al–Hasan ibn Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abdulghaffar ibn
Muhammad ibn Sulayman ibn Aban al–Faswi. He was a leading authority on
grammar in his time. Accordingly, it is said that grammar started in
Persia and ended there. That is, it started with Sibawayh and was sealed
at Abu Ali al–Farisi’s hands. He visited Sayf al–Daulah at Aleppo in 331
A.H. and stayed with him for some time. Later he left him and joined
Adud al–Daulah ibn Buwayh in Persia where he was received well and given
a high position*. Riyad al–Ulama* and other sources declare that
al–Farisi was an Imamiyah Shi'ite. Those who took him for a Mutazilite
were clearly mistaken. We have recorded his detailed biography and a
full list of his works in our original version of this book. Al–Farisi
was born in 288 A.H. and passed away on Sunday, 17th Rabi al–Thani, 377
A.H.

Another grammarian is Faris ibn Sulaiman Abu Shuja’ al–Arjani.
Al–Najashi says “He was a chief among our companions who was steeped in
literature and hadith. He was a companion of Yahya ibn Zakariya
al–Tarmashiri and Muhammad ibn Bahr al–Rahbi and also their student. He
compiled a book entitled *Musnad Abu Nuwas wa Hujr wa Ash’ab* *Bahlul wa
Ja’faran*.

Among them is Ibn al–Kufi, Ali ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ubayd ibn al–Zubayr
al–Asadi, an Imamiyah Shi'ah. He was one of the famous companions of the
Taghlib and a leading Kufi authority on Arabic. Al–Najashi mentioned him
in *Asma al–Musannifin* and praised him, and so did Sayyid Bahr al–Ulum
in his *Al–Fawa’id al–Rijaliyyah*. Both Yaqut and Al–Suyuti have written
accounts of his biography in *Al–Mu‘jam* and *Al–Tabaqat*, respectively.
I have also written about him in the original version. Among Ibn
al–Kufi’s works are *Al–Fara’id wa al–Qala’id* (Gems and exquisite
pieces) on language, *Kitab Ma’ni al–Shi’r* (Book of the meanings of
poetry) and *Kitab al–Hamz* (Book of slander). He was born in 254 and
died in the month of Zu al–Qi‘dah 348 A.H.

Al–Akhfash the first, who died before the year 250 A.H., was another
prominent grammarian. His name was Ahmad ibn Imran ibn Salamah
al–Alhani. He was also called by the agnomen Abu Abdillah al–Nahwi.
After presenting his biography, Yaqut added states that he had written
many poems about the Ahl al–Bayt and these verses are an example:

*Indeed the descendants of the blessed Fatima,*

*The ones noble in descent and disposition.*

*Are all like meadows after heavy rains,*

*And our spring is drought–stricken.*

Sayyid Bahr al–Ulum al–Tabataba’i mentioned in *Kitab al–Rijal* that
al–Akhfash was among the poets who wrote about the Ahl al–Bayt and that
he was loyal to the family of the Prophet. He was originally form Syria
and then he migrated to Iraq. Later he traveled to Egypt and then to
Tabariyah and he stayed there in the company of Ishaq ibn ‘Abdus and
assumed the task of educating his children.

Another grammarian is Marzakkah whose name was Zayd. He hailed from
Mosul and was one of the Shi’ah masters of grammar. Al–Suyuti has
mentioned him in *Tabaqat al–Nuhat.* Al–Safadi writes that he was a
grammarian, a poet, and a man of letters and a Shi'ite (*rafidi*). Ibn
al–Nadim has also mentioned Marzakkah among Shi’ah poets and
theologians.

The outstanding Shi'ah scholar and well–known grammarian, Ibn Abi
al–Azhari was also among them. His biography and a list of his works are
found the in the bibliography of Shi'ah authors. He has been mentioned
by biographers, al–Khatib in *Tarikh Baghdad* and others. Al–Azhari died
in the year 325 at the age of ninety.

Another is Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Abdillah, the Basri scribe,
grammarian and poet. He was known as al–Mufaji‘ whom we previously
mentioned. Yaqut says: “He was a great master of grammar, a marvelous
poet and a Shi'ah”. Al–Najashi describes him as one of the eminent and
notable scholars of language, literature and hadith”. In the original
version I have presented a long biography of this man and a list of his
works and have also stated that he died in 320 A.H.

Among them is Ibn Khalawayh, who was a master of language, philolophy
and other literary disciplines. We have previously mentioned him. The
original version contains a precise biography and a list of his works.
He died at Aleppo in 307 A.H..

Among them is al–Khali‘al–Nahwi. His name was Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn
Ja’afar ibn Muhammad ibn al–Husayn al–Rafi’i. Al–Safadi writes: “He was
a great scholar of grammar who studied under al–Farisi and al–Sirafi”.
In *Asma al–Musannifin*, al–Najashi has mentioned him and, to his
credit, recorded a number of books such as *Kitab San‘at* *al–Shi‘r* (a
book about poetry), *Kitab al–Darajat* (a book about grades), *Kitab
Amthal al–'Ammah* (a book of popular sayings), *Kitab*
*Takhayyulatal–'Arab* (a book of Arab fancies), *Kitab Sharh Shi'r Abi
Tammam* (a commentary on Abu Tamam’s poetry and *Kitab al–Awdiyah wa
al–Jibal wa al–Rimal* (a book about valleys, mountains and sands). By
the eighties of the fourth century A.H. he was still living.

Al–Marzabani Muhammad ibn Imran, the Baghdadi scribe whom we previously
mentioned is among them. He was a master of literature who studied under
Ibn Durayd and Ibn al–Anbari and from whom Abu Abdillah al–Saymari, Abu
al–Qasim al–Tannukhi, Abu Muhammad al–Jawhari and others learnt. In the
original version of this book, there is a list of all his works.

Another Shi‘ite grammarian is Abu al–Fath Muhammad ibn Ja’afar Ibn
Muhammad al–Hamadani al–Maraghi. Yaqut says: “He was a grammarian who
was known for his eloquence and good memory”. Al–Tawhidi writes: “He was
a leader in grammar and literature when still a youth. I have not seen
the like of him”. And in *Kitab Musannifi al–Shi‘ah*, al–Najashi
introduces al–Fath as “an outstanding scholar of grammar and language in
Baghdad who had a retentive memory and was an authentic narrator. He was
also interested in theology. He died in 371 A.H.” I have mentioned his
works in the original version.

Another is al–Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Ali al–Azdi, Abu Abdillah the Kufi
grammarian. Al–Najashi says “He is one of our reliable companions who
were more interested in biographies, literature and poetry”. He wrote
*Kitab Wufud al–Nabi*, a book of the delegations to the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his Household, and a book about the the personal
life of Ibn Abi ‘Aqab and his poetry. Abu Abdillah died at the end of
the third century”.

Ahmad ibn Isma’il ibn Abdillah, Abu Ali al–Bajali, the lexicologist who
is known as Samkat al–Qummi. He was the teacher of Ibn al–‘Amid who was
a master of literature and grammar. Al–Bajali studied under Ahmad ibn
Abu Abdillah al–Barqi and others. Al–Najashi says that he had a number
of matchless books, the like of which no one has ever written and he
mentioned them. I have also listed al–Bajali’s works in the original
version.

Abu al–Hasan al–Samsati is another Shi‘ite grammarian who was a peerless
master of all branches of literature and Arabic language during his
time. He wrote about all subjects. I have enumerated his works in the
original version. Al–Najashi writes: “He was our chief in the Arabian
peninsula, the most learned and foremost literary figure of his time”.
Then he mentioned his works. Al–Samsati entered into correspondence with
Saif al–Daulah; therefore, he must have been in the same period of
people like al–Kulayni.

Among them is Sheikh Ibn Abdun who was known during his time as Ibn
al–Hashir and his name is Ahmad ibn Abdulwahid ibn Ahmad al–Bazzaz and
his agnomen was Abu Abdillah. He was a master of the scholars of
literature, Islamic jurisprudence and hadith. He devoted a lot of time
to attending lectures and narrating.

Al–Najashi writes: “Our master, who was known as Ibn Abdun was
well–versed in literature. He read books of literature under great
literary masters. He met Abu al–Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al–Qurayshi, who
was known as Ibn al–Zubayr. He enjoyed a high position at that time. He
wrote a number of books such as: *Akhbar al–Sayyid Ibn Muhammad* (on the
reports about Sayyid Ibn Muhammad), *Kitab al–Tarikh* (a book of
history), *KitabTafsir Khutbat Fatima* (*a.s.*) (a commentary on the
sermon of Fatima (‘a), *Kitab al–Jum'ah* (a book on Friday congregation)
and *Kitab al–Hadithayn al–Mukhtalifayn* (Book of the 'Two Conflicting
Hadiths')”. Ibn Abdun also wrote *Kitab* *Adab al–Khulafa'* (a book on
the etiquettes of caliphs). He died in 323 A.H. Sheikh Abu Ja’far
al–Tusi attended to his lectures and attested to the authenticity of all
that he narrated.

Among them is Ibn al–Najjar, a Kufi grammarian. His name is Muhammad ibn
Ja’far ibn Muhammad ibn Harun ibn Fuqah Abu al–Husayn al–Tamimi, the
author of *Al–Mukhtasar fi al–Nahw*, and *Kitab al–Mulah wa al–Nawadir*.
In Yaqut’s account we read: “He was born in Kufa in 303 (some say 311).
He went to Baghdad and transmitted the hadith on the authority of Ibn
Durayd and Naftawayh. He was a reliable narrator and an efficint reciter
of the Qur’an”. Ibn al–Najjar was one of the masters of al–Najashi the
author of *Al–Fihrist fi Musannifi al–Shi‘ah* where he extolled him and
also enumerated his works including *Tarikh al–Kufah*.

It should be noted that the surname Ibn al–Najjar refers to the person
in question and also to Muhibbuddin Muhammad ibn Mahmud ibn al–Hasan ibn
al–Najjar, the author of *Al–Tahsil* *wa al–Tadhyil ala Tarikh
al–Khatib* (the Summary and Suppliment to the *Tarikh* of al–Khatib) who
was a Sunni scholar while the one we are writing about here was a
Shi'ite. He passed away in 420 A.H. or 460 A.H., according to other
accounts.

Abu al–Faraj al–Qinani al–Warraq, a Kufi grammarian and copyist.
Al–Najashi has mentioned him in *Fihrist Asma al*–*Musannifi al–Shi’ah*
and also listed his books. He was among the masters of al–Najashi. In
the unabridged version of this book, I have mentioned him in the section
about the fourth century scholars.

Another is Abu al–Faraj Muhammad ibn Abi Imran Musa ibn Ali ibn ‘Abd
Rabbih al–Qazwizi, a Kufi scribe and grammarian. Al–Najashi has
mentioned him. Although he was contemporary with Abu al–Faraj,
al–Najashi did not attend his lectures. He was among the scholars of the
fourth century.

Abu al–Hasan al–Rub‘i, the grammarian is among them. His name is Ali bin
Isa bin al–Faraj bin Salih al– Rub‘i. The Syrian scholar, Ibn Kathir,
writes in his *Tarikh*: “In the beginning he studied Arabic disciplines
under al–Sirafi and then under Abu Ali al–Farisi to whom he fully
dedicated himself for twenty years until he attained mastery and
surpassed the others….One day while he was walking along the bank of the
Tigris he saw al–Sharif al–Murtada and al–Sharif al–Radi in a boat and
Uthman Ibn Jinni Abu al–Fath was with them. Ali ibn Isa said to the two
“What a strange thing it is that Uthman should be with you while Ali is
far away from you, walking along the banks of the Tigris!”Al–Rub‘i died
in 420 A.H.

Another is Abu Ishaq al–Rifa’i, Ibrahim ibn Sa’ad ibn al–Tayib, the
grammarian. Abu Ghalib Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Sahl ibn Bishran, a
master of grammar, says: “I have never seen a person more knowledgeable
than Abu Ishaq al–Rafi’i. He was blind. He studied under al–Sirafi who
also taught him his commentary on Sibawaih’s *Al–Kitab*. In addition he
attended his master’s classes on literary texts and anthologies of
poetry, *diwans*. Later al–Rafi’i left Baghdad for Wasit which he had
visited and learnt the Qur’an under Abdulghaffar al–Hisni, prior to his
stay in Baghdad. In Wasit, al–Rafi’i would sit in the front in the
mosque and teach the Qur’an”. In his account about him Yaqut says: “Then
he settled down in Al–Zaydiyah where Rafidis (Shi’ah) and Alids lived.
Therefore, people considered him a follower of their sect, as a result
of which they hated and shunned him. Al–Rifa’i died in the year 411 A.H.

Another grammarian is Abdulsalam ibn al–Husayn, Abu Ahmad al–Basri.
Al–Najashi refers to him as the chief master of literature in Basra. He
was among the literary masters in Kufa, as well.

Al–Sharif Yahya ibn Muhammad ibn Tabatabai al–‘Alawi was also one of
them. His agnomen was Abu al–Mu’izz and Abu Muhammad. He was a student
of al–Rab’i and al–Shammas and Ibn al–Shajari was his student. Yaqut
says: “Ibn al–Shajari was proud of him”. In *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim
writes: “Yahya al–‘Alawi, Abu Muhammad al–Nishapuri, the theologian had
some books to his credit. I have met a group of people who had seen him
and studied under him”. Al–Suyuti relates in *Tabaqat al–Nuhat* that he
was a Shi'ite. The chief of the Shi’ah al–Allamah ibn al–Mutahhar has
mentioned al–Sharif Yahya in *Al–Khulasah* and observed that he was a
learned man, a jurist and a theologian who lived in Nishapur.
Al–Najashi, Ibn Dawud and other scholars gave the same account. I have
recorded their words in the original version.

Another is Thabit ibn Aslam ibn Abdulwahhab, Abu al–Hasan al–Halabi.
Al–Suyuti writes in *Al–Tabaqat*: “Al–Dhahabi says: ‘He was an
outstanding grammarian and a Shi'ah. He wrote a book about the grounds
of Asim’s method of reciting the Holy Qur’an. He also headed the library
in the service of Saif al–Dawlah in Aleppo. The Isma’ilites accused Abu
al–Hasan of corrupting their kingdom because he wrote a book exposing
their faults and the way their movement started. So he was taken to
Egypt where he was crucified around 460 A.H.

Abu al–Qasim al–Tannukhi, Ali ibn al–Muhsin ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Abi
al–Jahm is another master of grammar: In *Nasamat al–Sahar fi man
Tashayya’ wa Sha’ar*, he is described as ‘a learned man, a poet and a
man of letters like his father and grandfather. He studied the Arabic
language under Abu al–Ala al–Ma’arri. He related a large volume of
poetry. He served as a judge in a number of cities’. Then the author
enumerated them. Al–Tannukhi studied under Sayyid al–Murtadha. In *Fawat
al–Wafayat*, Ibn Shakir observes: “He was a Mutazili Shi'ah”. But this
view is baseless, for he was in fact an Imamiyyah Shi'ah. This scholar
was born on Tuesday mid–Sha’aban in the year 355 A.H. and passed away in
447. Al–Qadi al–Mar’ashi declares in *Tabaqat al–Shi’ah* that Ali, his
father al–Muhsin and his grandfather al–Qadi al–Tannukhi were all
Shi’ah.

Another grammarian is Ali ibn Ahmad al–Fanjakri (The surname denotes
that he hailed from Fanjkard a village near Nishapur) who was a writer.
He authored *Taj al–Ash’ar* and *Salwat al–Shi’ah* which is a collection
of poems written by the Commander of the Faithful. Al–Maydani wrote a
book in Persian entitled *Al–Sami fi al–Asami*, which was on the Arabic
language, and he dedicated it to al–Fanjakri. In it he praised
al–Fanjakri and described him as a great scholar and man of letters.
Al–Qadi al–Mar’ashi records in *Tabaqat al–Shi’ah* that he was an
intelligent scholar with firm faith. He composed magnificent poems about
the Ahl al–Bayt. He cites a sample of his poems. In a similar way,
al–Suyuti writes: “The author of *Al–Siyaq* says: ‘(Al–Fanjakri was) a
proficient and well versed writer, whose prose and poetry were devoted
to the descendants of the Ahl al–Bayt. He studied the Arabic language
very well under Yaqub ibn Ahmad who was also a man of letters”. It is
written in *Al–Wishah* that he was given the titles ‘Chief of the
scholars’, ‘Wonder of his time’, and ‘Miracle among his peers’.
Al–Fanjakri died in 512 at the age of eighty. In *Al–Siyaq*, it is
reported that he died on the 13th of Ramadan, 503. I have presented a
sample of his poems in the unabridged work. He was contemporary with
al–Zamakhshari and concerning the two some anecdotes have been reported.

Malik al–Nuhat, al–Hasan ibn Safi ibn Nazzar ibn Abi al–Hasan: It is
stated in *Kashf al–Zunun* that his surname was Abu Nazzar. Under the
letter ‘*ain*’, the author writes: “The pillars of grammar was Abu
Nazzar, the king of the dissenters (*al–rawafid*) [a derogatory name
given to the Shi’ah] and the grammarians, Hasan ibn Safi Bardun
al–Turki, who died in 798”. The date of his death given by the author of
*Kashf al–Zunun* like the dates of his birth and death given by
al–Suyuti are not correct.

The latter said that Malik al–Nuhat died in Damascus on Tuesday, 9th
Shawwal, 568 and he was born in 489, but he, may Allah be pleased with
him, died in 463 as recorded in *Al–Hulal al–Sundusiyyah* and Ibn
Khillikan attests to its correctness. Malik al–Nuhat studied grammar
under al–Fasihi the Imamiyyah scholar, until he attained proficiency. He
wrote *Al–Hawi* and *Al–‘Umdah* on grammar, *Al–Maqsad* on morphology, a
book of prosody, *Kitab al–Tadhkirah al–Sanjariyyah*, *Al–Maqamat*, the
Ten Puzzling Isssues and a *Diwan* of poetry. He was born in Baghdad. He
travelled to Iran, Khurasan, Kerman and Ghaznah. Finally, Malik al–Nuhat
went to Syria and stayed there until he died. I have quoted some of his
verses in the original version.

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abi Zayd al–Fasihi (thus known because he
read the book al–Fasih repeatedly): He came from Astarabad in Jurjan
province. He studied grammar under Abdulqadir al–Jurjani and in turn,
Malik al–Nuhat learnt from him. He was a master of all Arabic
disciplines. He taught grammar at the Nizamiyyah school in Baghdad after
the tenure of al–Khatib al–Tabrizi. When his Shi’ism became known and he
was questioned about that, al–Fasihi replied “I do not deny that I am a
Shi’ah from head to toe”. So he was dismissed and replaced by Abu Mansur
al–Jawaliqi. Al–Fasihi died in Baghdad on Wednesday 13th Dhu al–Hijjah
516 A.H.

Ibn al–Shajari, the teacher of Ibn al–Anbari was peerless in his age
surpassing all in Arabic language, lexicology, and the poetry and
history of the Arabs. He was well versed in literature and an immensely
erudite man. This is al–Suyuti’s account. Ibn Khillikan, Yaqut and Ibn
al–Anbari also gave a similar one. Among our companions, Sheikh Muntajab
al–Din has mentioned him in *Fihrist Asma Ulama al–Shi’ah* which is
about the Shi'ah scholars who came after Sheikh al–Tusi. Sayyid Ali ibn
Sadr al–Din al–Madani has also mentioned Ibn al–Shajari in *Al–Darajat
al–Rafi’ah* *fi Tabaqat al–Shi’ah.* Al–Suyuti’s account about the noble
lineage of this man was incorrect.

Likewise, Yaqut’s account about al–Shajari was wrong. To put the record
straight, this scholar was Hibatullah ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Hamza ibn
Ahmad ibn Ubaydullah ibn Muhammad ibn Abdurrahman al–Shajari (Shajar is
a village in the district of Medina) ibn al–Qasim ibn al–Hasan ibn Zayd
ibn al–Hasan al–Sibt ibn, Ali ibn Abi Talib the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a). Ibn al–Shajari passed away in the year 537. I have
mentioned his works in the original version of this book.

Yahya ibn Abi Tay’ Ahmad ibn Zahir al–Ta’i al–Kalbi al–Halabi known as
Abu al–Fadl al–Nahwi: Yaqut writes: “He was one of those scholars who
were learned in literature and jurisprudence according to the Imamiyah
school. He wrote a number of books on various disciplines. He lived
around the year 600…” We read also in *Kashf al–Zunun*: “Ibn Abi Tay’
Yahya ibn Hamidah al–Halbi, who died in the year 335 wrote *Akhbar
al–Shu‘ara’ al–Sab‘ah*. It was arranged alphabetically”. I think he had
missed the right date because Ibn Abi Tay’ was born in the month of
Shawwal of the year 575.

Among the outstanding grammarians is Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ma‘qil, Abu
al–Abbas al–Muqri al–Azdi al–Muhlabi a peerless scholar of Arabic
language and literature who hailed from Hims. Al–Suyuti writes about him
saying: “Al–Dhahabi says: He was born in the year 567. He migrated to
Iraq and adopted Shi’ism from a group of people at al–Hillah. He studied
grammar in Baghdad under Abu al–Baqa’ al–‘Akbari and al–Wajih al–Wasiti
and under Abu al–Yaman al–Kindi in Damascus. Al–Muqri excelled in the
Arabic language and prosody and also wrote about the two. He composed
excellent poetry and nicely versified *Al–Idah* and *Al–Takmilah* in
Persian. He gained access to al–Malik al–Amjad and enjoyed his favours.
As a result the Shi’ah of that area attained their welfare. Al–Muqri was
a very intelligent man who held extreme Shi’ah views. He was very
religious and ascetic. He died on 25th Rabi’ al–Awwal, 644 A.H.”

Ahmad ibn Muhammad, Abu al–Abbas al–Ashbili al–Azdi, known as Ibn al–Haj
is another master of language and grammar. Ibn al–Haj studied under
al–Shalubin and the like till he became a great master of Arabic and a
custodian of various dialects and he took the lead in prosody. In
*Al–Badr al–Safir* it is said “he was so proficient in the Arabic
language that no one has ever surpassed or even equalled him”. In
*Al–Bulghah*, Majduddin reports: “He used to say: ‘When I die, let Ibn
Usfur do whatever he likes to Sibawayh’s book’ ”.

Ibn al–Haj dictated a commentary on the book of Sibawayh, and wrote a
good book about *imamah* (leadership) in which he established the right
of the leadership of the twelve Imams. This is reported in *Ma’alim
al–'Ulama*. He also wrote about Qur’anic sciences and he wrote books
including *Mukhtasar Khasa'is Ibn Jinni* (a summary of Ibn al–Jinni’s
*Al–Khasa’is*), a book on the rule of listening (*hukm al–sima’*), a
summary of al–Ghazzali’s *Al–Mustasfa* on principles of jurisprudence,
glosses on the problems of *Al–Mustasfa*, glosses on *Sirr al–Sina’ah*
and on *Al–Idah*, *Kitab al–Nuqud 'ala al–Sihah* and *Al–Iradat ala*
*al–Mughrib*”. Ibn al–Haj died in 647 A.H. Ibn Abdulmalik holds that it
was in 651 but the first view is more reliable.

Najm al–A’immah al–Radi al–Astarabadi is another famous grammarian.
Al–Suyuti describes him in *Al–Tabaqat* in these words: “Al–Radi, the
renowned master, author of the commentary on Ibn al–Hajib’s
*Al–Kafiyah*, the like of which is not written about this book or on
most other books of grammar for that matter. The singular worth of this
book stems from the level of its comprehensiveness and the quality of
research and the proofs it contains. The people showed great interest in
reading it and it was well circulated. The masters of the time referred
to it. His title was Najm al–A’immah but I could not find his name or
his biography”.

Al–Fadil al–Baghdadi writes in the introduction to *Khizanat al–Adab*, a
commentary on *Sharh* *Shawahid Sharh al–Radi*: “I have seen the
following account written at the end of an old copy of these
commentaries: He is the master, erudite scholar, king of scholars and
most eminent of the learned, mufti of the sects and great jurist, who is
known as Najm al–Millah wa al–Din (The Star of the Creed and the
Religion) Muhammad ibn al–Hasan al–Astarabadi. He dictated this
commentary at the noble Gharawi precincts (i.e. in Najaf) in the month
of Rabi al–Akhir of the year 688 A.H.” I have also seen, in the
handwriting of al–Fadil al–Isfahani, known as al–Fadhil al–Hindi, the
following words written on the cover of al–Radi’s commentary on
*Al–Shafiyah fi al–Sarf*: A commentary on *Al–Shafiyah* by Sheikh
al–Radi, the star of the creed, the truth and the religion,
al–Astarabadi, the gems of whose speech are more brilliant than heavenly
stars, and to pursue them is easier than to seek the pearls in the sea.
When he talks he moves the hearts and his speech rouses the desire to
listen. He was like a king among the masters; he was obeyed by friend
and foe throughout the lands”.

At the end of his commentary on *Al–Khifayah*, before the section on the
rules of the ‘*ha*’ that requires pausing, he says: “This is the end of
the commentary on the preface. Praise be to Allah for His bounties by
which the book reached completion. May His blessings be on Muhammad and
his noble family. The book is completed in Shawwal, 686 A.H. in the
noble Gharawi precincts. May the best greetings and peace of the Lord of
Glory be on the one who has ennobled this area.

Sayyid Ruknuddin, the author of *Al–Mutawassit* was another grammarian.
He wrote three commentaries on the *Muqaddimah* of Ibn al–Hajib, the
*Al–mutawassit* being the most well-known. Al–Suyuti says: “At the end
of *Tarikh Baghdad*, Ibn Rafi writes: ‘(Sayyid Ruknuddin) came to
Baghdad and studied under our master, Nasiruddin al–Tusi. Noticing his
remarkably high intelligence, al–Tusi promoted Ruknuddin and made him
the head of the students in Maraghah. The latter was very brilliant in
philosophy and wrote glosses on *Al–Tajrid* and other works. He also
compiled a commentary on al–Tusi’s *Qawa’id al–Aqa’id* for his master’s
son. When al–Tusi left for Baghdad in 672, Ruknuddin maintained his
company until his master’s death which took place the same year.

After his master’s death, Sayyid Ruknuddin moved to Mosul and settled
there. He taught at the Al–Nuriyyah school where he was charged to run
its endowments also. He wrote three commentaries on Ibn al–Hajib’s
*Muqaddimah*, the best known of which is *Al–Mutawassit*. He also gave
lectures on the principles of Islamic jurisprudence. He studied the
*Al–Shafiyah* under Saif al–Amudi who later commissioned him to teach it
at the Al–Sultaniyyah school.

Al–Safadi writes: “He (Ruknuddin) was extremely humble; he rose for
everyone including water carriers. He was very clement. The Tartars held
him in great esteem. He wrote a commentary on the original *Mukhtasar*
of Ibn al–Hajib and another on *Al–Shafiyah fi alTasrif*. Rukhnuddin
lived for more than seventy years”. It is recorded in *Riyad al–Ulama*:
“Al–Sayyid ibn Sharafshah is al–Sayyid Ruknuddin al–Astarabadi, that is
Abu Muhammad al–Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn Sharafshah al–Husayni. He wrote
*Manhaj al–Shi’ah fi Fada’il Wasiyyi Khatam al–Shari’ah*, (The Shi’ah
approach to the merits of the legatee (Imam Ali) of the seal of the
Islamic creed (i.e. the Holy Prophet). This work was dedicated to the
Sultan Uways Bahadar Khan. We have in our possession his commentary on
*Qawa’id al–Aqa’id*, by his teacher Khwajah Nasiruddin.” The author of
*Al–Rawdah* says: “He was among the Shi'ite figures. A group of scholars
confirm that he was a Shi'ah”. He also mentioned his works, counting
*Manhaj al–Shi’ah* among them.

Ruknuddin died in the year 718, although some say that he died on 14th
Safar, 715.

\*\*\*

The book is completed by its author, the servant who longs for the
kindness of his Gracious Lord, Abu Muhammad al–Hasan, known as Sayyid
Hasan Sadr al–Din, the son of Allamah Sayyid al–Hadi al–Kazimi, on
Saturday, the 15th of Jumada al–Akhirah, in the year 1330 A.H.


