About The Author
================

[This section has been written by Allamah Sayyid Abdul Husayn Sharaf
al–Din, the author of *Al–Muraja’at* (*Sunni–Shi’ah Dialogue*)].

His Birth and Early Life
------------------------

He was born–may Allah exalt his station–in the city of Kazimiyyah at
noon on Friday, the 29th of the blessed month of Ramadan in the year
1272 A. H. Indeed he was raised in the household of wisdom and piety
under his saintly father, who made every effort to educate his son. He
succeeded in placing his son on a firm intellectual footing and raising
him to reach the peak of guidance. He first taught him the various
branches of Arabic. Our author hardly clocked fifteen before mastering
grammar, rhetoric and making good progress in logic. He was tutored by
pious and accomplished professors from among the scholars of Kazimiyyah,
chosen by his father who supervised the studies of his son. This
honorable father would spare no effort in stimulating him and
strengthening his resolve to attend to his studies.

In his early life he had loftiness for mind and always aspired for
perfection. Thus he engaged himself in learning and distinguished
himself among his peers, finishing the *sutooh* (levels) in *fiqh* and
*usul* (jurisprudence and its principles) at the early age of eighteen.
He studied both subjects and mastered them under the supervision of his
father. Sometimes he would attend the classes of other professors of
Kazimiyyah also, and, as a result, became known to all the people as a
keen student. He became famous for his exceptional intellect, moral
excellence and sound views; he was a real model for the youth, both in
outward behaviour and inner uprightness.

In the Holy City of Najaf
-------------------------

Since the time the sheikh of the sect, Imam Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn
al–Hasan al–Tusi (448 A. H.) migrated to Najaf, it has been the center
of learning that attracts the scholars and to this day it remains the
source of all branches of knowledge. Najaf is indeed the greatest center
of Islam, especially the Imamiyya school of thought. It is like a great
university where both the intellectual and transmitted sciences are
acquired yielding thousands of masters of religious knowledge. These
graduates, then carry good tidings and warn mankind everywhere,
reminiscent of the apostles from among the Children of Israel.

The author was one of those luminaries. He left for Najaf at his
father’s bidding in the year 1290 A. H., fully prepared for the race to
attain perfection and devoted himself wholeheartedly to jurisprudence,
its principles and other disciplines of the Ahl al–Bayt, by attending
the lectures of great Muslim religious scholars. He learned philosophy
and theology from al–Mawla Muhammad Baqir al–Shakki and after his death,
the author joined Sheikh Muhammad Taqi al–Kul Baykanri and Sheikh
Abdunnabi al–Tabarisi to complete his studies in these fields.

Hence, he continued his intellectual life with full enthusiasm;
learning, teaching, writing, lecturing and engaging in debates until he
left for Samarra, highly commended by his teachers who openly testified
to the fact that our author had reached the level of *ijtihad* and was
now capable of deducing secondary rules of jurisprudence from the
sources of Islamic law. Thus, did he bid Najaf farewell, as a successful
student. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

In Samarra
----------

When the master of the Shi’ah, the reviver of the *shari’ah*, the great
Imam al–Shirazi left Najaf for Samarra in 1291 A. H, the elites of his
school hastened to join him there. They rallied around him, forming a
formidable circle. Like these scholars, he too had girded himself (may
Allah raise his station) for the task of serious studies. They would
spend long hours day and night without getting weary, and how could they
have grown weary while they were supported by his holy spirit which
sharpened their inquiring nature and polished their minds.

Their retentive hearts were receptive to his words of wisdom and to
various intellectual and transmitted disciplines. As a result, religious
studies flourished and reached their peak in Samarra, surpassing all
other centres of learning. The author was one of the authorities among
the scholars of religion who drank from that wholesome fountain.

He left Najaf for Samarra in the year 1297 A. H. ready to absorb what
that highly gifted Imam and reviver had to give. Along with the other
scholars around the Imam, our author devoted himself to his studies with
unflagging commitment. In return, the Imam took special care of him,
reposing his trust in this student who proved true to his master’s
expectations.

Between the master and his students there grew firm ties of love,
harmony and brotherhood. Through mutual compassion, they diligently
pursued their academic work, their sole concern. They delved into the
depths of the disciplines in order to reveal their subtleties and fully
comprehend their fundamentals and branches. Sometimes the studies were
conducted under the supervision of the master during the lessons or
outside class, and in the form of debates among students. This was the
situation of our author and his peers throughout their stay in Samarra.

He spent about seventeen years there engaged in incessant academic
pursuit. He followed closely in the footsteps of the Imam and those of
his other eminent teachers, retracing the steps of the leaders of the
seminary at Samarra. He explored the methods of research employed by
great Imamiyyah scholars deliberating on their procedures of
confirmation and revocation of proofs during the process of deduction so
that he could adopt the best and most balanced methodology. Thus, he
acted according to these verses of the Holy Qur’an:

“Those who listen to what is said and follow the best thereof. Those are
the ones guided by Allah and those are men of understanding.”

Our author’s time was spent in attending the classes of his master,
taking part in discussions with his learned peers, delivering lectures
to his students, writing and worship. He had special discussions daily
with his master, the great researcher, al–Muqaddas Mirza Muhammad Taqi
al–Shirazi. This practice continued for twelve years. Having spent a
very active period both intellectually and practically, he left for
Kazimiyyah, his birth place, two years after the demise of his master.

A Brief Biography of his Teacher
--------------------------------

**A Brief Biography of his Teacher**[^1]

He was the Imam, the reviver[^2] of religion, ‘the proof’[^3] of Islam,
the honorable Sayyid Muhammad Hasan ibn Mirza Mahmud ibn Ismail
al–Husayni al–Shirazi, who came from a noble family in Shiraz. He was
born in Shiraz in mid–Jumada al–Ula, 1230 A. H. and started his studies
there. He later went to Isfahan during the time of the two noble
scholars Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al–Rashti and Sayyid Sadr al–Din al–Amuli
and met pious and accomplished teachers[^4] and studied under them. Then
he migrated to the holy city of Najaf in 1250 A. H. where he applied
himself to studies under the guidance of its notable scholars until his
main teacher Imam Sahib al–Jawahir testified to the fact that he had
reached the level of absolute *ijtihad*. [^5]

He then continued his studies and research exclusively under the
supervision of the grand master, Sheikh Murtada al–Ansari, surpassing
all other disciples. When the latter died and, as a result, the people
became confused as to who should be recognized as the next *marja amm*,
(source of emulation for all), the opinion of prominent scholars[^6]
among the disciples settled on Mirza al–Shirazi.

In the year 1288 A. H he went on pilgrimage to Mecca and also visited
Medina, may Allah's blessings be on the one who ennobles it. In the year
1291 he migrated to Samarra where he lived with a large number of his
disciples and graduates whose presence made the city a fountain of
knowledge. The scholars who learnt from him are too many[^7] to be named
here. Under his supervision, they graduated firm in knowledge, their
condition befitting this line:

Scholars, leaders, men of wisdom; by whose path, the stars are guided.

They spread his knowledge from the pulpits and through their glorious
writings. May their recompense lie with Allah! This great Hashimi Imam
was entrusted with the leadership of the Imamiyah sect because his
piety, knowledge, forbearance and refulgent wisdom had earned him the
respect of eminent personalities. His authority, *marja’iyyah,* was
accepted by all.

The people turned to this benevolent father for *taqlid,* (imitation in
religious laws), and sought his opinion even in private affairs. He was
a wise custodian of Islam and the Imamiyah sect and was always alert and
ready for the service and defence of both. Through his intellect,
vigilance and foresight he took great care of his community. He was
noble in demeanour, forbearing, generous, ascetic and desirous of
nothing but Allah’s rewards. He was a towering figure whom tyrants
feared and to whom powerful kings submitted. He was described by one
Sayyid as follows:

“The rulers you led, as you would horses and freed the people for the
service of the Lord.

The rulers bowed grudgingly though, lest recalcitrance makes them face
your chastisement.

Let them now cheer up and wallow now that you have taken repose, for
they are now free.”

The case of the tobacco monopoly conceded to Great Britain by the
government of Iran during the reign of the Qajari king, His Majesty
Nasrudeen Shah was clear testimony to what we have said. The vigilant
Imam was apprehensive for the independence of Iran so he issued a timely
*fatwa* forbidding the use of tobacco, at the same time expressing his
anger with both governments, because of the infamous contract. In the
wake of the great agitation engendered by the *fatwa* the whole Iranian
nation renounced the use of tobacco, considering it what the pious
considered wine!

This situation persisted so that the two governments had no other choice
except to revoke the contract and terminate the monopoly despite heavy
material losses and the moral blow they suffered. [^8] “Allah has turned
back the unbelievers in their rage; they did not obtain any advantage,
and Allah suffices the believers in fighting, and Allah is Strong and
Mighty.” This virtuous act earned widespread praise both verbal and
written, therefore there is no need to expatiate on that.

Indeed Allah opened for the Imam the gates of wealth so that
considerable amounts of money were at his disposal. But his saintly soul
rose above it in asceticism preferring to undertake projects of common
good. [^9]

In his financial support the Imam used to give priority to two groups of
people: the religious students who wanted to continue their studies,
graduate from the seminaries and become leaders who invite to the true
path; and the weak such as orphans, widows, the poor, the destitute and
the needy travellers among the Shi’ah who came from different parts of
the world to visit him. He was responsible for the keep of all these
people and they were amply provided for.

For those among the two groups who resided in other cities or countries
monthly allowances were arranged and they received it wherever they
lived unceasingly. Apart from these, innumerable delegations often
called on the Imam expectantly and he gave them abundantly so that they
always left contented and grateful. I saw this great man when I migrated
to Samarra in 1310 A. H. to study there. In those days the conditions
were most conducive for learning and religion. The relations of the Imam
and his students with the community were at their best.

I have personally witnessed myself most of what I am recording
concerning his qualities and heard the rest from celebrated scholars,
‘the proofs’ of Islam and other informants. Orators commended him and
poets chanted his praises. If such works were to be collected they would
surely run into volumes. Here we will be contented with an elegy written
by one of the Sayyids:

“Delegations come in, confident that your vale shall rain heavily.

At your place, they aimed, from distant lands, by land and by sea they
are shipped.

At your splendid courtyard they alight as they would, in their ripe
fields.

Here they disembark on fertile ground and with gratitude do they leave.

Neither is their honor wounded nor does misery or pride mar your gift.

As though the orphans of all of the by–gone had, in Samarra, guarded
treasures.

They receive your provisions effortlessly like verdure watered by the
rain.”

The Imam was fortunate to have as ministers, outstanding members of his
seminary who were known for their perceptive intellects, and sharp
hearts. Abu Muhammad Hasan al–Sadr (the author) was indeed the best of
them. Their master, the Imam, had tested and found them to be honest,
faithful and compassionate councellors. So he entrusted them with key
positions to help him in the great responsibility he shouldered and they
discharged their duties with the sincerity it deserved. Religious and
worldly affairs were harmonized thanks to their wise counsel.

Our author was the closest companion of the Imam who had great love and
high regard for him. Because of his trust in the author, known for his
sound judgement, the Imam would first confide to him his affairs and
subsequently present the matter before the council without which no
judgement concerning the general public was executed. It seemed as
though this verse of the Qur’an had descended about them:

“And those who respond to their Lord and establish prayer, and their
affair is by consultation, and they spend from what we have given them.”

This is how he was in the days of his leadership and this is how his
pious companions were. They remained sincere to Allah, the Glorious, the
Powerful, until they returned to Him as true believers.

He died in Samarra on Tuesday night the 24th of Shaban 1312 A. H. He was
carried on the shoulders from Samarra to Najaf, a distance of eight
stages for riders (a stage is a day’s journey). The people of Samarra,
Najaf and the towns and villages in between, took part in the funeral
procession generating a congregation never seen before.

They took turns in transporting his body; tribe after tribe, district
after district, city after city and village after village. They competed
in getting blessed and honoured by carrying his body and crying
‘loyalty, loyalty!’, the way the thirsty call out for water. The people
took his body to the holy shrines of the Imams and sacred Muslim leaders
(as a token of) renewing his fealty (to the Imams) and then prayed over
it at the four mausoleums, at Samarra, Kazimiyyah, Karbala and Najaf.

The emotion showed by the people in Baghdad and the cities of these
mausoleums was too immense to be described. His remains were laid to
rest on Thursday, the 2nd of Ramadan, in his school by the side of the
glorious courtyard of Imam Ali (‘a). His student Abu Muhammad Hasan
al–Sadr, our author went into the grave to lay him to rest. He was also
the foremost personality in the funeral procession which was attended by
scholars, leaders, tribal heads and people from all walks of life. My
father who was on a visit to his pure forefathers, on whom be peace,
helped him in interring the body of the holy man. [^10]

His Return to Kazimiyyah
------------------------

The author returned to his birth place, Kazimiyyah, in 1314[^11] and his
first stop was the courtyard of his ancestor, the gate of requests, Imam
Musa al–Kazim (‘a). His time was spent in his prayer niche, the library
or the classroom; and on writing, conducting research and guiding the
people.

When he stood in prayer before the Lord of lords he resembled Imam Ali
ibn al–Husayn, the ‘Adornment of the worshippers’ and master of those
who prostrate themselves before Allah and his meekness before Allah the
Mighty and Glorious, pervaded his heart, hearing, sight, and all his
senses and limbs. He was often found in his library, which was packed
with valuable books, examining the works of earlier and later scholars,
and reflecting on the subtleties to discover the lofty aims of those
masters. His teaching was unique and his writing of the highest order.
When he took up research work he used to dig deep into the subject
bringing forth its hidden ideas and full import, removing all
ambiguities and clarifying the facts.

On his return to Kazimiyyah and joining his saintly father they found
renewed impetus for discussion and treating difficult issues as they
were used to whenever they found themselves together. When they met they
were always relaxed in spirit and full of vigour for learning; they
missed no opportunity that their reunion presented.

When he took to preaching and guiding the people, words of wisdom flowed
out from his lips and, as a result, he captured the hearts, returned the
dissenters to the right way, bridled obstinate desires and reformed
deviating souls. Consequently, his listeners’ eyes and hearts lowered in
submission. After returning to Kazimiyyah he hardly spent two years
before his dear father passed away, a calamity too heavy for him to
endure. He took over all the responsibilities of his deceased father.

When his great teacher died and the people wanted to imitate him in
religious duties, i. e. follow him as *marja’ taqlid* he referred them
to his uncle’s son, the saintly Sayyid Ismail al–Sadr. It was on the
latter’s death in 1338 A. H. that he assumed this office. His book on
practical laws of Islam, *Ru’us al–Masa’il al–Muhimmah*, was published
and he wrote annotations on the *Tabsirah* of Allamah al–Hilli, *Najat
al–Ibad* and *Urwat al–Wuthqa* which transformed these books into
special sources according to which his followers observed their
religious behaviour.

During his tenure as *marja’ taqlid* and even before that, the author
was one of the most able supporters of the Ahl al–Bayt’s cause. He was
very cautious in the process of espousing their laws and most
compassionate towards their orphans (i. e. the Shi’ah). He took up the
task of promoting the mission of the Ahl al–Bayt and devoted his life
for that. He would never miss a single chance to support it till he
joined them in the abode of the hereafter.

His Sermons
-----------

His sermons were in fact schools from which guidance could be sought and
in which was available whatever is desired to make a perfect human
being; different types of knowledge, all sorts of wisdom and admonition
which would uplift one to the level of the angels in heaven, as the poet
said,

“In the earth is the ephemeral substance of his body, while his mind
resides in the high heavens.”

He spoke with a lucid style and with grand and elegant terminology. He
would bare his heart with clear, exquisite eloquence. His speech found
its way to the inner recesses of the heart. He addressed both the elite
and ordinary people with singular tenderness, taking into account their
feelings and level of knowledge and understanding. Those who attended
his assemblies returned with the prize they anticipated; they learnt
rare pieces of wisdom and numerous intellectual and practical lessons.

His Intellectual Attainments
----------------------------

He reached the peak both in knowledge and action. He was a master of
jurisprudence, with which he had been exceptionally endowed and by which
he became a guide and an established authority. He was indeed a
sanctuary for the religious, including those who held key positions of
authority in religious law and he was a source of emulation, *marja*. He
was a reliable transmitter of traditions, an authority in hadith and a
scholar of historical issues. He was master of the principles of
jurisprudence, biographical sciences, the evaluation of traditionists,
(*rijal*) the science of the contextual study of hadith (*al–dirayah*)
and the genealogies of the Quraysh and other Arabs, especially the
Hashimites. He was well versed in exegesis and other sciences of the
Book (i. e. the Qur’an) and the Sunnah (traditions of the Prophet and
his family, the *Ahl al–Bayt* p.b.o.th.) in addition to other branches
of knowledge such as grammar, rhetorics and lexicology. He was counted
among the competent scholars in logic and philosophy, and was also well
grounded in theology, astronomy and arithmetic. As for ethics, the
author was a fathomless ocean with whom no one can compete.

His Debates in Defence of the Truth
-----------------------------------

I have never seen a persistent person like him in his argument in
support of Islam or in his support for the Imamiyyah school. He was
indefatigable, with a very eloquent and, somewhat sharp tongue and was
very persevering. Capable of deriving proof even from seemingly remote
sources, he would silence the contender by refuting his false arguments
and putting him to rout. Never have I heard a speaker so economical with
words but still capable of establishing the truth; he was concise and
through maxims communicated what he desired.

His Competence in Literature
----------------------------

He was indeed a venerable custodian and a true critic of Arabic
literature. Although endowed with acuteness and being sharp–witted, the
quality of poetry he had aspired for was not feasible, because he had
concentrated on his studies in his chosen fields from his early youth
till the end of his life. What the circumstances permitted did not earn
his pleasure, for his very high aspirations would not accept anything
less than the best in all fields. Therefore no poem has been related to
his credit. He was like al–Khalil ibn Ahmad, the famous Arabic
grammarian, who shunned poetry and did not write a single verse. When
asked about the reason, he answered: “Neither can I compose what I want,
nor do I want what I can compose”. Al-Asma’i (another grammarian) also
did not write any poetry. When he was asked, “What prevents you from
composing poetry?” “My acute insight in it”, was his answer.

His Works
---------

He–may Allah exalt his station–was a writer of exceptional distinction
who was both prolific and meticulous. He wrote about different subjects
of various disciplines and each one of his works was a real
treasure–information properly and uniformly presented. The following is
a list of what I readily recall from his works:

### On the Fundamentals of Religion (Usul al–Din)

(1) *Al–Durar al–Musawiyyah fi Sharh Aqa’id al–Ja’fariyyah* (Musawi’s
Gems: A Commentary on Jafari Beliefs). The original text is *The Book of
Beliefs* written by the great Sheikh Kashif Al–Ghita. The Sheikh has
given proofs on the Oneness and Justice of Allah by citing Qur’anic
verses and pointing to the wonders of creation observable in nature such
as the creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation of night
and day, etc. These are discussed verse by verse leaving the task of
elaboration for other scholars. Therefore the merit of our author’s
commentary lies in his expatiation of the circumstances of revelation of
those clear verses, the legal opinions that could be derived from them,
and the subtle meaning they contain.

Furthermore, the importance of this work lies also in the simplified but
technical language which is employed to show how these Qur’anic verses
present more proof for the Oneness of the Almighty and Omnipotent God
than the brilliant sun does for daytime. In the chapter on *Imamah*
(leadership) he substantiated his views about the Imams, peace be on
them, based on sources of the opponents.

(2) *Sabil al–Salihin fi al–Suluk wa Tariq al–Ubudiyyah* (The Path of
the Righteous in Wayfaring and Servitude). He mentioned seven paths
thereof.

(3) *Ilya’ al–Nufus bi Adab Ibn Tawus*. (Reviving the Souls through the
Etiquettes of Ibn Tawus). He composed it from the words of Sayyid Jamal
al–Din Ali Ibn Tawus al–Hasani that are scattered in his writings. It is
arranged into three categories; the first is on the relationship between
the servant and his Exalted Lord. The second is on his relationship with
his masters, the proofs of Allah, the Almighty, the Exalted i. e. the
Imams, and the third is on the relationship of the servant with the
angels and fellow humans.

### On Jurisprudence

(4) *Sabil al–Rashad fi Sharh Najat al–Ibad* (The Path of Guidance: A
Commentary on the Deliverance of the Servants). The style is that
employed in deduction and inference in legal issues. A big volume
treating issues about water and toilet rules has appeared.

(5) *Tabyin Madarik al–Sadad li al–Matn wa* *al–Hawashi min Najat
al–Ibad*

(Explaining the sources of both text and glosses of *The Deliverance of
Servants*). Most of the topics on cleanliness and prayer have appeared.
What is meant by glosses here is the two glosses written by Sheikh
Murtada al–Ansari and his teacher, Sayyid Mirza al–Husayni al–Shirazi.

(6) *Tahsil al–Furu’ al–Diniyyah fi Fiqh al Imamiyyah* (Acquiring the
Religious Laws according to Imamiyyah Jurisprudence). A book useful to
both *muhtat* (one who is knowledgable enough in jurisprudence to
determine the precautionary way of conducting his or her religious
obligations without having to refer to a particular religious authority)
and the *muqallid* (a layman in jurisprudence who has to imitate a
particular religious authority). The book of purification and prayer
have appeared. In the introduction, the author dealt with the issues of
*taqlid* (what a *muqallid* does) in detail.

(7) *Al–Masa’il al–Muhimmah* (Important Issues). It is a valuable book
on religious observances for use by *muqallid*s.

(8) *Al–Masa’il al–Nafisah* (Precious Issues). It is a book that
discusses problematic issues in jurisprudence and its less familiar
situations.

(9) His glosses on *Urwat al–Wuthqa*, *Ghayat al–Quswa*, *Najat al–Ibad,
Al–Tabsirah* and *Al–Fusul al–Farisiyah*.

(10) *Al–Gayah li Ahl al–Andhar al–Aliyah* (The Ultimate Purpose for
those with a Lofty Vision). It discusses the unlawfulness of shaving the
beard. It is written in Arabic and Persian.

(11) *Tabyin al–Rashad fi Lubs al–Sawad ala A’immat al–Amjad*
(Justifying Wearing Black Clothes to Mourn the Imams). It is written in
Persian.

(12) *Nahj al–Sadad fi Hukm Aradi al–Sawad* (The Right Way as Regards
the Law of Tenure of the Lands of Iraq)

(13) *Al–Durr al–Nazim fi Mas’alat al–Tatmim* (An Array of Pearls about
the Issue of Completion). It is a book on the completion of *kurr* (i.
e. a certain volume of water having special rules in purification) with
impure water.

(14) *Luzum Qada' ma fat min al–Sawm fi Sanat al–Fawat* (The Necessity
to Compensate for Missed Fasts in the year they are missed).

(15) *Tabyin al–Ibahah* (Clarifying Permissibility). It is a book on the
permissibility of praying with parts of an animal, the lawfulness of the
flesh of which is doubtful.

(16) *Ibanat al–Sudur* It is written to shed light on the issuance of a
*hadith* from the Imams and the Holy Prophet. It deals with the
*mawqufah* (a hadith, in which the chain of narrators does not reach the
source) of Ibn Uzaynah which deals with the issue of the inheriting of
houses by a woman who has a child by the deceased.

(17) *Kashf al–Iltibas 'an Qa’idat al–Nas* (Removing the Ambiguity about
the Rule of ‘the People’), that is the jurisprudential rule stating that
‘The people have control over their possessions’.

(18) *Al–Gurar fi Nafy al–Dirar wa al–Darar* (The Best Presentation on
the Rule of Prohibiting the Occurrence of Damage or causing it). It is a
valuable book comprising some investigations like the meanings of
*al–hukumah* (a case whereby the subject of a legal proof, *dalil
shara’i,* is eliminated by another proof) and *al–wurud* (a case whereby
the subject of a legal proof is defined and delimited by another proof).

(19) *Ahkam al–Shukuk al–Ghayr Mansusah* (The Rules Regarding Doubts
that are Not Stipulated). It is a book in which deductive reasoning is
used to study the hadith indicating (the necessity) of acting on the
assumption that one has performed the greater number of *raka’at*s when
one is in doubt as to which number of *raka'at*s one has already
performed.

(20) A book on the Stipulated Rules in case of being in Doubt Concerning
the Actions during Prayer.

(21) *Al–Rasa’il fi Ajwibat al–Masa’il*. It is a book comprising a
number of legal opinions, (*fatwa*s), which answered his followers’
questions about religious laws.

(22) *Sabil al–Najat fi al–Mu’amalat* (The Path of Safety in
Transactions).

(23) An annotation on Sheikh al–Ansari's verdicts on dissimulation,
*taqiyah*.

(24) An annotation on the issues relating to water taken from the book
of purification by Sheikh al–Ansari (may his soul be sanctified).

(25) *Al–Risala fi Hukm ma' al–Ghusalah* (A Book on the Rules of wash
water, *ghusalah*)

(26) A Book on the Rules of Purifying Water.

(27) A Book Concerning the Fact that a Higher Body of Water Maintains
its Purity by Virtue of Being Conjoined with a Lower One.

(28) A simplified annotation on the book Sheikh al–Ansari wrote about
congregational prayer.

(29) A study on the conditions for testifying to the fact that a person
has been suckled by a particular woman.

(30) A study on some issues on endowment, *waqf.*

(31) A Book on the Rules Pertaining to Water that is Used in Cleaning
after Relieving Oneself, *isntinja.*

(32) A Book on Water that is Mixed with Something, *al–ma' al–mudaf*.

(33) A short study dealing with the hadith on inaudibility *(ikhfa)*’ in
saying the glorifications (*tasbihat*) in the third and fourth
*raka’at*s of prayer.

(34) *Muna al–Nasik fi al–Manasik* (Desires of the Worshippers
Pertaining to the Rites of Hajj). It is a rich book devoted to the rites
of major pilgrimage, *hajj* and minor pilgrimage, *umrah,* and the
etiquette of visiting the two holy sanctuaries, the Sacred House of
Allah and the shrine of His messenger (may Allah's blessings be on him
and his Household). It is printed in Baghdad in 1341.

### On Hadith

(35) *Sharh Wasi’il al–Shi’ah ila Ahkam al–Shari’a* (a commentary on the
famous book *Wasa’il al–Shi’ah*). It is a book the like of which has
never been written. The author discusses each hadith under a number of
headings; text, terminology, chain (of narrators) and import of the
hadith. In the section about the text, he mentions the differences among
the various copies and ascertains the correct reading of words. The
section on terminology consists of a lexical discussion on the words of
the hadith. In the section about the chain of transmission, he talked
about the narrators, as is obvious.

When he comes to import he looked into the meanings conveyed by the
hadith to see whether or not a given rule could be established by it. He
then talks on what other evidences there were that might contradict its
import and a possible way of reconciling the two or preferring one over
the other. He evinces unprecedented skill in this art. This commentary
is, in its own right, a book on jurisprudence, hadith, *usul*
(principles of jurisprudence) and *rijal* (the science of the biography
and criticism of narrators). Several volumes of this work have appeared.

(36) *Kitab Tahiyyat Ahl al–Qubur bi al–Ma’thur* (It is about the
prescribed formulas of sending greetings to the dead when visiting the
graves). It comprises of ten chapters and an epilogue.

(37) *Kitab Majalis al–Muminin fi Wafayat al–A’immat al–Ma’sumin* (It is
about the sessions which the faithful hold to commemorate the demise of
the Infallible Imams). For each Imam he assigns a discourse comprising
his merits, miracles and the circumstances of his demise, while leaving
out the chain of narrators. He constructs the discourses in the form of
sermons with the appropriate tone suitable for reciting on the pulpits
on the days of commemorating the Imams’ demise. Each discourse ends with
a mention of the Imam’s wives and children.

(38) *Miftah al–Sa’adah wa Maladh al–Ibad* (The Key to Bliss and the
Refuge of Worshippers). The book comprises the recommended religious
observances for the day and night, and those done weekly, monthly or
yearly. Besides, it contains the prayers to be recited while visiting
the Imams and other holy personages as well as the relevant etiquette to
be observed.

(39) *Ta’rif al–Jinan fi Huquq al–Ikhwan.* (Directing the Hearts to the
Rights of Brothers in Faith) It is an important book containing topics,
advice and lessons which can hardly be found in other works.

(40) *Risalah fi al–Manaqib*. It is a book on excellent qualities
extracted from al–Suyuti’s *Al–Jami al–Saghir* and arranged in
alphabetical order.

(41) *Al–Nusus al–Ma’thurah* (Transmitted Texts) It is written about
‘the Proof’, al–Mahdi –may Allah hasten his reappearance–as recorded in
the books of the Sunnis. It has not been completed. Perhaps it is the
book, *Akhbar al–Ghaybah,* which is mentioned by Agha Bozorg Tehrani on
page 38 of the fifth part of his *Al–Dhari’ah*.

(42) *Sahih al–Khabar fi al–Jam’ Bayn al–Salatayn fi al–Hadar* (Sound
traditions about combining two prayers when at home). This presentation
is confined to the accounts in the six *Sihah* in regard to the fact
that the Holy Prophet, blessings of Allah be on him and his Household,
sometimes performed two prayers successively when at home not because of
rain or other such reasons. The author mentions the views of Sunni
scholars who agree with our view.

(43) *Al–Haqa’iq fi Fada’il Ahl al–Bayt alaihim al–salam min Tariq
al–Jamhur* (The Facts Pertaining to the Virtues of the Household (Ahl
al–Bayt) –peace be on them– in Sunni sources.

(44) *Ahadith al–Raja’a* (Hadiths about the Return).

(45) *Hidayat al–Najdayn wa Tafsil al–Jundayn* (Indicating the Two Ways
and Outlining the Two Armies). It is a book commenting on the hadiths of
the army of reason and that of ignorance, as reported in *Al–Kafi*.

### On the Science of the Context of Hadith (al–dirayah)

(46) *Nihayat al–Dirayah* (The Ultimate In Knowing) It is a commentary
on *Al–Wajizah* of Sheikh al–Baha’i in a simplified discourse. He
examines the various issues of this discipline including the types of
hadith and the topics defamation, *jarh,* and authentication, *ta’dil*.

### On the Ways of Transmitting the Hadith

(47) *Bughyat al–Wu’at fi Tabaqat Mashayikh al–Ijazat* (Aspiration of
the Attentive Concerning the Classes of Masters who Give Permission for
Transmitting the Hadith). It comprises ten classes and a very beneficial
preface in which he authorized Sayyid Muhammad Murtada al–Jahanburi
al–Hindi to transmit the hadith. It is for the latter that Allamah
al–Nuri wrote *Al–Lu’lu’ wa al–Marjan*. The author also granted
permission to a number of his contemporaries. Some of these texts of his
permission were long while others were short.

### On the Science of the Biography of Narrators

(48) *Mukhtalaf al–Rijal* (Narrators About whom there is Difference of
Opinion). This book deals with this discipline (*ilm al–rijal*)
according to the methods usually followed in other sciences discussing
its definition, subject, aims, conceptual foundations (*mabadi
tasawwuriyah*) and principles of judgment (*mabadi tasdiqiyah*). It also
gave an account of the narrators about whom there was difference of
opinion.

(49) *Uyun al–Rijal* (Prominent Narrators). It is a book in which he
mentions the narrators who enjoyed general credibility and indicates
their classes and recounts their biographies. He added an appendix
consisting of three classes of narrators and a detailed permission,
*ijazah*, to some notable scholars who were Sayyids. At the end of the
book he listed most of his works.

(50) *Nukat al–Rijal* (Anecdotes of Traditionists). It is a compilation
of his uncle, Sayyid Sadr al–Din’s glosses on the *Rijal* of Sheikh Abu
Ali. Therefore, it is in fact one of his uncle’s works.

(51) *Intikhab al–Qarib min al–Taqrib* (Selecting the Proximate from
*Al–Taqrib*). It is devoted to the traditionists whom Ibn Hajar
al–Asqalani has explicitly described as Shi’ah in his *Al–Tarib*.

(52) A book concerned with the biography of the pious scholar Hasan
al–Husayni al–Raji, the author of *Al–Maqsud*. This book is titled
*Dhikra al–Muhsinin* (A Memoir of the Righteous).

(53) *Bahjat al–Nadi* (The Delight of Association). It is a memoir of
his father Abu al–Hasan al–Hadi.

(54) *Takmilat Amal al–Amil.* (A Suppliment on *Expectation of the
Hopeful*).

The original is also known as *A’yan al–Shi’ah.* This supplement is
unique. In it, is mentioned such narrators that were not covered by
*Amal al–Amil* whether they lived before, during or after its
compilation. It appeared in two parts, consisting of three volumes. The
first volume covers the first part and discusses Amilah scholars while
the second and third volumes that make up the second part, talk about
scholars from other countries. The method of compilation used in the
original version of this book is also adopted here.

(55) *Al–Bayan al–Badi’.* It is a marvellous account on the fact that
Muhammad ibn Isma'il with whom *Al–Kafi’*s chain of narrators starts,
was indeed the man known as Bazi’a.

(56) *Al–Ta’liqah ala Muntaha al–Maqal* (A gloss on The Ultimate Word).

### On Indices

(57) *Ta’sis al–Shi’ah al–Kiram li Ulum al–Islam* (Founding Islamic
Sciences by the Honourable Shi’ah). This book is considered an
unprecedented achievement. Here he painstakingly listed the Islamic
sciences conducting a full investigation to ascertain the founders and
the classes of contributors. He was able to prove that the Imamiyah
Shi’ah took precedence in all Islamic disciplines, a fact which has not
been demonstrably established before.

(58) *Al–Shi’ah wa Funun al–Islam* (The Shi’ah and Islamic Disciplines)
and a book of great worth and is a summary of his previous book*, Ta’sis
al–Shi’ah*.

(59) *Fasl al–Qada fi al–Kitab al–Mashhur bi Fiqh al–Ridha’* (Settling
the Matter Concerning the Book known as The Religious Jurisprudence of
al–Ridha’). He reveals the reality of this book and proves that it is,
in fact, *Al–Taklif* by Ibn Abi al–Azaqir al–Shalmaghani and points out
the causes of confusion over its authorship.

(60) A book showing that the author of *Misbah al–Shari’ah* was in fact
Sulaiman al–Sahrishti, a student of Sayyid al–Murtada. It is a summary
of Shaqiq al–Balki’s book.

(61) *Al–Ibanah an Kutub al–Khizanah* (Clarifying the Contents of the
Bookcase), that is, his own bookcase. A fine book in which he examines
the books in his possession, prepares a list of the titles according to
the disciplines. What was unusual or not in circulation was indicated by
highlighting with the quill of his pen. The book was started with a
beautiful introduction stressing the importance of writing and book
collection. He also points out the high position of knowledge and
scholars, indicating the noble impact they could have on the people,
especially the youth.

### On Ethics

We have already mentioned that he wrote *Ihya' al–Nufus* and *Sabil
al–Salihin* which are both on ethics.

(62) A brief work on observing and assessing one’s spiritual life,
*al–muraqabah.*

(63) Another book on conduct.

### On Debating

(64) *Qati’at al–Lajaj fi Tazyif Ahl al–I’wijaj* (Terminator of
Obstinacy Concerning the Forgery of the Deviated). He was alluding to
the *akhbari*s, (‘the traditionists’) who deny *ijtihad* and *taqlid*
claiming that all the narrations which have been ascribed to the Pure
Imams undoubtedly came down from them and that their import was
conclusive.

(65) *Al–Barahin al–Jaliyyah fi Dalal Ibn Taymiyya* (Evident Proofs on
the Deviation of Ibn Taymiyya). It is a big book in which the author
presents evidence on Ibn Taimiyyah's misguidance, a fact which is
confirmed by his own words and deeds, and the testimony of Sunni ulama.
The author enumerates the evil deeds of this man and how he contradicted
the Muslim nation, *millah,* and went on to mention Ibn Qayyim and the
Wahhabis, laying bare their real identity and deviation.

(66) *Al–Firqah al–Najiyah* (The Sect that Attains Salvation). It is a
book which proves that that sect is none other than the Twelver
Imamiyyah.

(67) *Umar wa Qawluh 'hajar’* (Umar and his Saying: ‘He was Delirious’).
A book devoted for discussing a sound hadith reported on the authority
of Ibn Abbas in which he said: “Thursday, what a Thursday it was!” He
then wept bitterly adding, “On one Thursday when the sickness of Allah’s
messenger became critical and his pain was aggravated he said ‘Bring me
some writing material so that I may write for you a document after which
you shall never go astray.’ Then they disputed with one another ignoring
that it was improper to dispute in the presence of a prophet. They said,
‘The Messenger of Allah is delirious’, upon which he retorted, ‘Leave me
alone….’.”

(68) A nice book refuting the *fatwa*s of the Wahhabis, who consider it
forbidden to erect buildings over the graves of holy people and claim
that it is neccesary to demolish the structures erected by the Muslims
on such places. This study was a most excellent piece in this regard.
Whenever I read it I find myself compelled to recite [the Quranic verse]
“The truth has come and falsehood has vanished. Surely falsehood is
bound to vanish.”

### On Principles of Religious Jurisprudence

(69) *Al–Lawami’* (The Brilliant Notes). It is a book on the principles
of jurisprudence, *usul al–fiqh*, in which he drew up a synthesis of the
thoughts of the two scholars al–Ansari and al–Shirazi and those of their
prominent students among whom our author’s contribution was of paramount
importance.

(70) An annotation on the *Rasa’il* of Sheikh Murtada al–Ansari.

(71) *Al–Lubab fi Sharh Risalat al–Istishab* (The Quintessence: A
Commentary on the Book about *Istishab* (continuation of a given
situation ). It is a big volume.

(72) *Risalah fi Ta’arud al–Istis’habayin* (A Book on the Mutual
Contradiction of *istishab*s).

(73) *Hada’iq al–Usul* (Gardens of the Principles of Jurisprudence). In
this book miscellaneous issues on the problems of *usul* are discussed.

(74) *Al–Ta’adul wa al Ta’arud wa al–Tarjih* (Equivalence of Two
Evidences, their Mutual Contradiction and Preferring One over the
Other). The glosses on the *Risa’il* of Sheikh apart, this is a book in
its own right.

### On Arabic Grammar

(75) *Khulasat al–Nahw* (A Summary on Grammar). A book in which he
summarized this discipline according to the arrangement of the *Alfiyah*
of Ibn Malik.

### On History

(76) *Nuzhat Ahl al–Haramayn* (A Recreation for the Residents of the Two
Sanctuaries). A book dealing with the history of building the mausoleums
of the Commander of the Faithful and Imam Husayn –peace be on them. In
it, he mentions the first people to erect these sanctuaries, those who
rehabilitated them, the dates of construction and rehabilitation and the
names of those responsible for the restoration. He also mentions the
first descendants of Fatima to live in al–Ha’ir, that is, Karbala.

(77) *Wafayat al–A’alam min Shi’ah al–Kiram* (Demise of the Honorable
Shi’ah Dignitaries). The subject of this book is obvious from the title.
It is chronologically arranged and the classes of the personalities are
taken into account. What has appeared of this book covers the first four
centuries.

(78) *Muharibu Allah wa Rasuluh* (Adversaries of Allah and His
Messenger). It is a book devoted to enumerating the people mobilized for
fighting Imam Husayn, the lord of the martyrs on the day of Taff. He
showed that they were thirty thousand odd.

(79) *Al–Mata’in* (Defamatory Cases). It is a book that cites cases
where some Sunni *ulama* defame one another.

(80) *Al–Nasi'* (The Deferment). It is a study disclosing the essence of
deferment of the months, *nasi*', that was in practice during the days
of ignorance before the advent of Islam which Allah declared to be a
sign of disbelief. In this book there is a rebuttal of the doubts raised
concerning the birth of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his Household, in the month of Rabi’ al–Awwal and his conception wich
took place within the nights of *tashriq* (eleventh, twelfth and
thirteenth of the month of Zu al–Hijjah).

(81) *Kashf al–Zunun an Khiyanat al–Ma’mun* (Removing the Doubts
Concerning Ma’mun’s Treachery). It is a book proving Ma'mun's hideous
treachery carried out in the name of al–Ridha’, peace be on him.

(82) *Mahasin al–Rasa’il fi Ma’rifat al–Awa’il* (Beautiful Pamphlets on
Introducing the Predecessors) in fifteen chapters.

His Library
-----------

Since the time of his youth the author was very fond of collecting
books, a trait which continued till his last days. He took great care in
this pursuit and was very successful in gathering precious books on all
fields of learning, both transmitted and rational.

There is little wonder in his success considering the fact that he would
prefer this acquisition to meeting daily needs, sometimes even necessary
belongings were sold out for the sake of this pursuit. Consequently, he
gathered a large number of printed books and manuscripts.

His library has a range of rare manuscripts not possessed by most large
libraries and perhaps some precious books are not found elsewhere. The
fame of this library stems from here. In his survey of the libraries of
Iraq in his book *Tarikh Adab al–Lughat al–Arabiyyah* (The History of
Arabic Literature), the famous scholar George Zaidan considered this
library one of the best.

The author paid special attention to this library and prepared an index
for it wich he gave the title *Al–Ibanah an Kutub al–Khizanah*. This was
done with great skill as noted when we mentioned the title *Al–Ibanah*
in the section about his works. But this book (the index) was the focus
of further care; it was constantly re–examined and thoroughly revised.

His trustworthy and confidential student and nephew (a son of his
sibling sister), Sheikh Murtada Al Yasin, when writing his biography,
had this to say: “I have heard about Sayyid, the author that he was
assiduous in his studies in the prime of youth and he hardly slept at
night or took a siesta. During his old age I witnessed it myself, not to
talk of hearing it from others. His habit of frequenting his library day
and night with a pen in his right hand and a sheet of paper in his left
is clear testimony to the fact that the eye which used to stay open at
night would not close even during the day.’Sleep could not overcome it
except for a while’.”

His Authorities in Transmitting the Hadith
------------------------------------------

In transmitting the hadith he related from two classes of scholars:
those from whom he related what he heard and read without acquiring the
formal permission, *ijazah*, and those from whom he related after
receiving their general permission, *ijazah ammah.*

Among the first group were Hujjatul Islam Mirza Muhammad al–Shirazi
al–Gharawi al–Askani (d. 1312) (who was the greatest of them), Sheikh
Hajj Mirza Habibullah al–Rashiti al–Gharawi (d.1313) the author of
*Bada’i al–Usul*, Sheikh Muhammad Hasan ibn Sheikh Hashim al–Najafi(d.
1308) who wrote a commentary on *Al–Shara’i*, Mawla Muhammad al–Irawani
al–Najafi who died in the beginning of the forteenth century, Sheikh
al–Islam Sheikh Muhammad Hasan Al Yasin (d. 1308), the author of *Asrar
al–Faqaha* and our author’s honorable father Sayyid al–Hadi (d. 1316).

The second group includes a number of scholars such as: Sheikh Mullah
Ali ibn al–Mirza Khalil al–Razi al–Gharawi (d. 1297), Sayyid Mahdi
al–Qazawini al–Hilli al–Gharawi, the prolific writer who died in 1300
and Mawla Mirza Muhammad Hashim ibn Zayn al–Abidin al–Isfahani who died
in the holy city of Najaf in the year 1318.

The author has included, in his lengthy works on permissions detailed
biographical accounts of the aforementioned scholars, leaving nothing
unsaid.

His Physical Constitution and Appearance
----------------------------------------

Allah, the Mighty and Powerful, made him a model of perfection and
endowed him with great splendor. He was among the most handsome of men,
the most elegant in appearance and characterized by unimpaired natural
disposition. He was of a very firm built, strong in sinew, sturdy and
had a robust chest. He had thick shoulders, rounded muscular arms. His
cheeks were smooth, his nose and eyebrows fine and eyes large and white
with bushy eyelashes. He had a bright and clear complexion and a
delicate skin. His senses were sharp, quick and extremely acute. He was
indeed clad in elegance and Allah had made him lovable to all. His smile
that showed a set of teeth as white as hail stones delighted whoever
cast an eye on him. His grey beard that covered his chest inspired awe.
Glory is to Him who bestowed on this man abundant knowledge and
physique, taught him eloquence and endowed him with the proof! Blessed
be Allah the best Creator.

His Natural Disposition and Traits
----------------------------------

Allah created him from sacred stuff, molded him with the material of
nobleness, and brought him forth from noble origins. In him are combined
all the traits of nobility which are expressed through his virtuous
manners. Chivalry was embodied in his word and deed. I have never seen
anyone with more honorable manners or a nobler disposition. He was
always composed and courageous. He was a defender of the truth and one
who extirpates rancor.

He was very generous and liberal. And no wonder about that for he came
from a people from whose hands spring of generosity gushed forth, the
ultimate in liberality.

He was sharp in mind lively at heart, fine in sensibility and possessed
acuteness of the faculties and presence of mind. To the believer he was
very compassionate but, in respect of Allah’s enemies, he was stern and
in the cause of Allah, he was indifferent to blame. He had a lofty goal
and a high–minded nature that raised him to noble things and position of
greatness.

His Biography
-------------

During his lifetime, a number of scholars wrote the author’s biography.
Among them was Allamah Sheikh Murtada Al Yasin who has beautifully
depicted his unique personality. This account, in essence, urges the
scholars to wake up to the issues necessary for attaining perfection.
There is also a biography of the author in *A’yan al–Shi’ah*. The
numerous works he authored will remain a living memory of him, by the
will of Allah. The fact that he was one of the masters who granted
permission for transmitting the hadith, *shuyukh al–ijazat,* of the
century in which he lived and, therefore, one of the authorities on
hadith till the end of time, also serves to immortalize him. The great
saintly scholar, Sheikh Abbas ibn Ridha’ al–Qummi has also written about
him in his biography of Sharaf al–Din al–Amuli, the grandfather of the
author. Even foreign writers like the Lebanese scholar, Amin al–Raihan,
and some orientalist tourists wrote about him.

After his death the eminent researcher, Sayyid Ali Naqi al–Naqawi wrote
a detailed biography of the author. It is actually a gloss on an
excellent *ra’iyyah* (a poem whose verses end in the letter *ra’*) in
which he elegizes the deceased author. The elaborate commentary of this
ingenious poem depicts the various stages of his intellectual life
coupled with his practical career from his birth to his eternal rest. It
also refers to his forefathers, namely, Sharaf al–Din, his father Zayn
al–Abidin, his grandfather Ali Nur al–Din and his great grandfather
Husayn ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Abi al–Hasan Taj al–Din al–Musawi. It
then recounts the rest of the heroes of this family including the
earlier and later ones who lived in Jabal Amil and Iraq, pointing out
the eminent religious and worldly positions and the dates of death of
these personalities.

In addition, this biography gives a picture of the author’s high social
standing and his special position in the Muslim community. It listed his
masters, his students, and his works which cover various disciplines. It
also includes the circumstances of his death, his funeral procession and
the commemorations in his honour that took place in Iraq, Lebanon, Iran,
India, etc. The following two sections have been quoted from this
biography.

Those Whom he Granted Ijazah
----------------------------

Sayyid al–Naqawi said: He –may Allah exalt his position–was a great
authority on transmitting the hadith and a link to the contemporary
categories of narrators.

Among the numerous narrators who related from him were a group of
‘proofs’ (*hujaj*), of the Shi’ah sect and its distinguished scholars
such as Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Abu al–Hasan al–Isfahani al–Najafi (may
Allah prolong his life), Sheikh Muhammad Kazim al–Shirazi, Hadi Al
Kashif al–Ghita, Muhammad Ridha’ Al Yasin, Ali al–Qummi, Sayyid Ridha’
al–Hindi, Mirza Hadi al–Khwansari of Holy Karbala; Sheikh Muhsin of
Samarra who is known as Agha Bozurg Tehrani, the author of *Al–Dhari’a
ila Tasanif al–Shi’ah* and other works; Sayyid Abdul al–Husayn Al Sharaf
al–Din of Jabal Amil; Sheikh Agha Ridha’ al–Isfahani, the writer of
*Naqd Falsafat Darwin* (A Critique of Darwin’s Philosophy); Sayyid
Sadruddin al–Sadr of Mashhad, the city of Imam al–Ridha’ (‘a), my father
Allamah Sayyid Abd al–Hasan al–Naqawi of Lucknow; Allamah Sayyid Shabir
Hasan of Faydabad and others. I myself relate from him according to a
permission, *ijazah*, he wrote for me on 11th Shawwal, 1346 A. H. He was
the first master in hadith I sought *ijazah* from and he granted me a
general permission that includes all our books on hadith, exegeses of
the Qur’an and other branches of knowledge.

His Death, Funeral and Commemorations
-------------------------------------

Sayyid al–Naqawi said: He died in the capital of Iraq, Baghdad, where he
was staying for a number of days for treatment in mid–Rabi’ al–Awwal,
1354 A. H. [To be specific: in the afternoon of 11th Rabi ' al–Awwal
1354 A. H. equivalent to 12th June, 1935]. His demise had a profound
impact on all and his funeral procession to Kazimiyyah, his birth place,
was attended by about a hundred thousand people from all walks of life,
even His Majesty, King Ghazi, sent a delegation on his behalf. The prime
minister, his ministers, members of parliament and tribal Sheikhs were
also among the participants. At the head of this endless procession were
the *ulama* of both Sunni and Shi’ah who followed the bier in humility
till they entered Kazimiyyah. He was buried near his ancestor, Imam Musa
ibn Jafar (‘a). The news of his death soon spread to other parts of
Iraq, especially the holy city of Najaf. In consequence, funeral
ceremonies were held, the biggest of which was the three–day funeral
ceremony of the leader of the Shi’ah, Ayatollah Sayyid Abu al–Hasan
al–Isfahani which was held in Najaf.

He added: No doubt his death resounded through the Muslim world
especially in Syria and Jabal Amil (southern Lebanon) from where he
hailed and in which his family lived for a long time. His death was felt
most intensely in the district of Tyre, the town of the family of Al
Sharaf al–Din and their head Hujjat al–Islam Sayyid Abdul Husayn Sharaf
al–Din. This scholar is a nephew to the deceased. A crowded funeral
ceremony characterized by intense grief was conducted in Tyre for seven
days throughout which the sadness persisted. In connection with those
gatherings we recieved a printed invitation card indicating that a
funeral ceremony was to be held at the new mosque at two o’clock in the
afternoon of Sunday, 12th Rabi’ al–Awwal, 1354, equivalent to 13th June,
1935. It carried the names of speakers of high calibre like Hujjat
al–Islam Sheikh Abd al–Husayn Sadiq, Hujjat al–Islam Sayyid Abd
al–Husayn Nur al–Din, the scholar Khayr al–Din Beg al–Ahdab, Sheikh
Ahmad Ridha’ and other proficient men of letters. In India, too, a
similar ceremony was conducted while the papers carried the news of his
death with a most grief–inspiring tone. A similar thing happened in
other parts of the Muslim world. It is no wonder though, for when a
scholar (*alim*) dies, a cleft appears in the Islamic edifice that
nothing can fill till the Day of Judgment.

His Commemoration in the Iraqi Press
------------------------------------

A good example of what Iraqi papers wrote in this regard is the report
which the Karkh newspaper carried on 30th Rabi’ al–Awwal 1354 (1st July
1935), (Number 312, Year 7) which reads:

The Unique Personality of Imam Sayyid Hasan al–Sadr
---------------------------------------------------

Some eminent resident of Najaf sent us this short account of the life
history of the late great Hujjat al–Islam Sayyid Hasan Sadr al–Din, may
Allah be pleased with him, and we publish it verbatim.

“It is a futile exercise to attempt to describe the extent of loss which
befell the Islamic community as a result of the demise of its great
leader, Imam Ayatollah Sayyid Hasan Sadr. It is, in fact, a grave
misfortune, the calamity of which is most painful to the Muslims,
considering his position as their great leader and scholar, the foremost
authority they referred to in both religious and worldly matters and the
safe refuge to which they often resorted.

“The Imam –may Allah have mercy on him– was indeed a unique intellectual
personality the like of whom is unknown to modern history. He was
exemplar of learning and virtue during the three stages of his life:
youth, age of maturity and old age. In the first he was the brilliant
youth who occupied the foremost position in diligence and intelligence.
During the second, he had a unique status among scholars and
personalities of distinction. In his old age, he was the greatest
religious authority to whom the community entrusted its affairs and
referred in all issues of moment.

“The Imam had a cheerful look and a shining forehead. He was strong in
furnishing his evidence and was very eloquent; his speech was a smooth
flow uninterrupted by faltering or hesitation. He often rebutted the
proof of his adversary by more cogent evidence. He made simple the
difficult and ambiguous topics so that his listener might find it plain
even though it was not. In fact, it was his eloquence, his power of
demonstration and his charming mode of speech that makes such topics
seem pleasant and simple to the audience.

“His sermons were excellent classes overflowing with knowledge and
dealing with culture and all sorts of subjects that may be desired. The
topics of discussion usually varied according to the type of audience
and their needs. He expresses his ideas so vividly that the listener
imagined the scene; when he talked about the angel Gabriel (peace be on
him) descending with the revelation you felt as if you had seen and
heard him; when he talked about the Holy Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his Household, you had the impression that you were present when he
received the message and presented his miracles and that you beheld the
books of his hadiths and judgements. When he changed the subject of
discussion this feeling persisted due to his power of imagination and
expression. At the end of the sermon one would leave with a polished
mind and a wealth of information.

“This is what Al–Farikah, the author of *Muluk al–Arab* had to say about
the Imam: ‘I visited Sayyid Hasan Sadr al–Din in his home in Kazimiyyah
and found that he was man of great physique and excellent manners. He
had a high luminous forehead, a thick white beard, and spoke like the
prophets did. His eyes were bright and his cheeks rosy. He was tall,
sturdy and broad–shouldered. He wore a big black turban, and his shirt
was wide, open at the chest, with wide sleeves so that when he pointed
with his hand as he spoke his forearm showed. Throughout my journeys in
Arab lands I have never seen a person who reminded me of the prophets as
they are portrayed in historical accounts or described by poets and
artists, the way this great Shi’ah scholar did. How graceful his simple
ascetic life was! As I entered his house I thought that I was passing
through one of his servants’ quarters before reaching him. When I saw
him sitting on a mat in a room which had no furniture except for the mat
and some cushions (I knew that more than two million people obeyed his
*fatwa*s and millions of rupees were sent in by the faithful from India
and Iran to be spent for charitable purposes while he himself lived his
ascetic life spending not a single rupee for other purposes). I realized
how great the man was. How I wish our religious leaders strutting in
their purple robes with all sorts of deeds to their credit except
charity, could boast of a few persons like this man’.

“Another scholar Amin al–Raihani described this unique personality in
the same vein. This is, in fact, nothing but the reality, which a study
of this man reveals and clear conscience dictates. Those who hold the
same view as that of al–Raihani are many, for orientalists and other
scholars often visited the Imam and asked about issues that were
difficult to solve. He would immediately answer them with convincing
proofs, for which they would express gratitude and commendation. They
were amazed at how he treated those questions so naturally and adduced
ready historical proofs on ambiguous topics on which they spent a
lifetime without finding the solution.

“In general the deceased Imam was a great authority to whose judgement
Muslims and non Muslims alike, from the east and the west submitted. As
a leader, he was preferred to other contemporary scholars in the fields
of religious jurisprudence and its principles, Qur'anic exegesis,
hadith, biography of hadith transmitters and other Islamic disciplines.
During the lifetime of Imam Sayyid Muhammad Hasan al–Shirazi, his
master, he was well–known for learning and scholarship. One day the
master wanted him to make a study about some difficult intellectual
issues to which he responded and wrote a book on those questions and
presented it to his master. The master hardly finished reading his
write–up before he stretched his hands out in prayer for him and
observed: ‘If I should die today I will leave with a peaceful mind
because there is someone among my students, whose work reminds me of
that of Bahbihani, the researcher’. The latter was the teacher of
Ayatollah Sayyid Mahdi Bahr al–Ulum who was famous for his studies and
research. This glorious testimony gives us a true picture of the
greatness of the deceased Imam and his intellectual standing. He was as
one poet says:

He is a leader who but for there is no…[^12]

Deserves the title: A divine prophet

Indeed, the Imam has been immortalized by his righteous deeds and
glorious works that number up to a hundred and could be counted among
the best pieces ever produced by any scholar. Perhaps we shall write
about these works in future, if Allah wills.

“His name is also perpetuated by his two eminent sons who are themselves
scholars: Sayyid Muhammad al–Sadr, the leader of the honorable house of
Senate and Sayyid Ali al–Sadr. The former was a beloved leader of Iraq
and her think tank, and an outstanding figure in learning and politics.

To him leadership came submissively,

In spite of itself, contemptibly

Leadership approached him in all humility,

He alone deserves it; to him alone does it fit.

Sayyid Ali on his part assumed the mantle of religious leadership after
the death of the Imam and so he was strongly supported by the people.
They followed his guidance and drank from his fountain of knowledge. May
Allah lengthen the lives of both of them, inspire them with perseverance
and grant them ample reward.”

The Iraqi press maintained this tone throughout the period of the
obsequies in Iraq. Similarly, the press of Iran, Afghanistan, India,
Syria and Egypt expressed great sorrow for his death and mourned him
reverently.

The Lebanese Press
------------------

Lebanese papers adorned their first pages with the portraits of the
Sayyid and published the commemorative speech given by the organizing
committee[^13] of the obsequies conducted in Tyre. We reproduce it here
verbatim:

“The death of Imam al–Sadr–A calamity for Islam: A summary of his
biography, his traits, his intellectual attainment and his personality.

With lips hardly able to move and with great uneasiness and anxiety we
bring to the notice of the Muslim community the bereavement of Iraq,
Islam, and indeed the whole Arab world on the demise of their leader,
the great Imam– Sayyid Hasan al–Sadr. He has departed to the proximity
of his Lord leaving behind a condition of helplessness and confusion,
that could hardly be rectified until Allah blesses us with a similar
leader who will look after the community (*ummah*) and work for its
interest with similar urbanity and awareness as that of the deceased in
all matters; in learning, in action in opinion and in the desire for
reviving spirituality, cultivating the intellect and implanting into the
hearts, the doctrines of religion and human principles through liberal
and inspiring policies.

“More than anyone else the Islamic community, the Arabs, the Muslims and
literary circles suffer the anguish of this loss so that little sleep
comes their way, in consequence of the calamity which befell them; i. e.
the loss of the last reformer who symbolized Allah’s greatness in the
hearts of the believers and was a living portrait of the Prophet and the
righteous by virtue of his sincerity, righteousness and perfection of
the highest degree.

“We pray that Allah the Most High will compensate the *ummah* its great
loss with a guide in the way of goodness and charity, one who would work
for the progress of the community, for the promotion of learning and
rebirth of thought. It is imperative to give a glimpse of his life
history, as a part of our obligation towards our saintly Imam, may Allah
be pleased with him.”

His Birth
---------

“He was born on Friday, 29th Ramadan of the year 1272, in Kazimiyyah,
the place where his ancestors, Imam al–Kazim and Imam al–Jawad, peace be
on them were buried. The city of Kazimiyyah is located on a pleasant
site less than a league to the north of Baghdad.

His Name and Lineage
--------------------

‘When a thing excels it becomes self–subsisting,

It is pointless to describe the sun as bright.’

In fact, the desceased excelled to the extent that he became
self–sufficient; he was, in his own right, an illustrious lineage and he
has achieved great feats. However, it is the tradition of biographers to
mention the lineage of all, whether great or otherwise. Anyhow, the
deceased Imam enjoys an outstanding lineage which is the noblest of all.
His genealogy surpasses that referred to in this verse:

‘A lineage as though it was the brilliance of forenoon, with vertical
beams of daybreak.’

“He was Imam Abu Muhammad al–Hasan son of Sharif al–Hadi son of Sharif
Muhammad Ali, son of Sharif Saleh, son of Sharif Muhammad, son of Sharif
Ibrahim who was known as Sharaf al–Din, son of Zayn al–Abidin, son of
Muhammad, son of Hasan, son of Ali, son of Muhammad, son of Taj al–Din
who was known as Abdul Hasan, son of Muhammad, son of Abdullah, son of
Ahmad, son of Hamza, son of Sa’dullah, son of Hamza, son of Muhammad,
son of Abdullah, son of Muhammad, son of Ali, son of Abdullah, son of
Muhammad, son of Tahir, son of Husayn, son of Musa, son of Ibrahim
al–Murtada, son of Imam Musa al–Kazim, son of Imam Abu Abdillah
al–Sadiq, son of Imam Abu Jafar al–Baqir, son of Imam Zayn al–Abidin
Ali, son of Abu Abdillah Husayn, the lord of the martyrs, the grandson
of the master of the prophets whose father was the Commander of the
Faithful (Imam Ali) and whose mother was al–Zahra, the best of all
women. These dignitaries of the community, the leaders of the Muslims,
who were respected by all, were the ancestors from whom he descended.
Thus he was a pure one originating from purity itself!”

How he Grew up and a Word on his Talents
----------------------------------------

“Allah created the Imam in a rare form and fashioned him in the best way
the Most Merciful chooses for any person below the level of
infallibility, *ismah*. He was of sound disposition, perspicacious,
sharp in comprehension and very lively. He was also endowed with acute
presence of mind, a high degree of self-respect and formidable
intellect. In addition, he had very obliging manners, eloquence of
speech, power of demonstration and sound reasoning. His language was
very attractive and exhibited a skilful spirit that carries the listener
along with it. He knew how to steer the hearts and subdue the minds with
his saintly words which were saturated with his lively spirit. He was
never satisfied with the superficial aspects of things but always delved
into their essence and chose what was most congenial to his elegant
taste and natural disposition.

“He grew up in the way that his Lord wanted him to be. It is quite
natural for him to have achieved this level of greatness and glory
because those perfect traits and that mood which was free from all sorts
of aberration could only spring from a house like that of Imam Hadi, his
father. That house resembled an institute of learning or an accomplished
college that subjects its students to a rigorous regime of virtue,
morals, sincerity and faith. Renowned psychologists and educationists
hold that the home is the foundation on which the life of a person is
built. It is, therefore, imperative to exercise wisdom and expertise in
establishing this foundation to ensure that the young ones grow up with
strength, beauty and splendor as a result of a harmonious training
program.

In this way, the youth develop step by step by virtue of their natural
capabilities and the knowledge they acquire till they attain the
exemplary station. Thus, they advance from one stage to another until
they become prosperous, enlightened and free from want and ignorance.
And who could have laid that foundation more firmly than Sharif Hadi?
And who had such a disposition more attuned to receive those
instructions and guidelines for a successful life than that of the
deceased? Therefore it is only natural that our master should ascend to
that high status and reach the positions of the righteous and the
leaders.”

His Personal Qualities
----------------------

He was very kind and always very careful about the common good. He would
not draw near him anyone for emotional reasons, just because he loved
them nor distance others because he disliked them, nor respect people
because of their power. For him the only yardstick was faith and
goodness. The philosopher, al–Farikah Raihani once visited him and later
described him in his book *Muluk al–Arab*. From his short account you
can realise the special position which the Imam enjoyed in Arab
countries and the entire Islamic world. Also, equally perspicuous was
his asceticism, piety and the purely spiritual way he regarded the
fleeting world as the prophets and the pious used to do.”

His Learning and Works
----------------------

“The deceased master is regarded as the greatest genius and leader of
thought in the twentieth century. People who become extraordinary
scholars usually go for specialization in one discipline, so that each
would take the necessary preparations to train as a philosopher or a
jurist or a man of letters, or any other profession of their choice.

Each would prepare for his chosen field. The student of philosophy, for
instance, would devote himself to the study of philosophical pamphlets,
the jurist would devote his time exclusively to studying the books of
inheritance, transactions and other such other topics, or to the
learning of jurisprudential principles and studying such issues as the
principles of exemption, (*bara’a*) continuance of a previous condition,
(*istis’hab*) established obligation (*ishtighal*) equality of evidences
(*ta’adul*) and preferring one evidence over another (*tarajih*) and
such themes as certainty (*qat’*) and presumption, (*dhann*) and other
verbal (*lafziyyah*) and rational (*aqliyyah*) principles.

The man of letters would be concerned with Arabic literature and its
history, and study literary texts by citing some poems of the
pre–Islamic, Umayyad and Abbasid periods. He would try to get acquainted
with the literary figures that lived in those eras and to attain a
position of distinction in one of these areas of learning and culture,
working diligently to fulfill some of the aims of these arts.

“However, our master’s aspiration was limitless. He turned his bosom
into an encyclopedia that encompasses the subtleties of various sciences
and he really worked hard for that. He turned out to be a custodian of
the keys to all branches of knowledge through which he was able to bring
out glittering pearls from the treasures of intellectual and transmitted
sciences.

“One will marvel at the quality of his works, which are more than a
hundred in number and some of them run into several volumes. After
perusing each of them one will come to the conclusion that this great
scholar was a specialist who was so well acquinted with the different
aspects of these disciplines as if he was their founder. We shall
prepare a special book on his life history and expound on his tireless
efforts in writing and rendering services to the Muslim community and to
the sciences. As a tribute to him and a service to both the Muslim
community and the sciences we pray that Allah be pleased with him and
appoint a successor who will be able to continue those services
successfully.”

He passed away on 11th Rabi’ al–Awwal, 1354. The news of his death
plunged into confusion the people of Iran, India, Afghanistan, Iraq,
Jabal Amil (a district in southern Lebanon) and other Islamic countries.
Funeral ceremonies were held in his honor in Islamic capitals and other
cities and villages. In Tyre a crowded funeral was conducted for seven
days amidst unabating grief. We pray to Almighty Allah to give the
*ummah* the power to bear this loss and we express our sincere
condolences to his successor, our honorable master and head of the Iraqi
Senate and to all the members of this noble family. May Allah grant them
long lives and prosperity.”

Lastly, we urge the Muslim community to derive lessons from the life of
the deceased and emulate his example so that they may be granted sincere
and trustworthy descendants who will be standard–bearers for the
community and who will work for the establishment of a life
characterized by sound awareness.”

The Date of his Death in Verse
------------------------------

*Your absence threw the hearts in anguish,*

*And grief that made the eye sleepless.*

*Would that when I parted with my refuge,*

*My soul forsook my body.*

*Take delight in the eternal abode,*

*It is, by Allah, the most excellent dwelling!*

*My eyes see you no more,*

*But yours behold the eyes of Time.*

*Guidance laments you since you left;*

*Write down the date the pure comely one has left.*

[^1]: .The Mirza, is only too well-known leaving no need for any
introduction. We mention his life solely to bless this book.

[^2]: It is known in Islamic tradition that at the end of every hundred
years, Allah, the Mighty and Glorious, will raise a reviver for this
religion. Perharps the source of this belief is the prophetic tradition
(hadith) recorded by Abu Dawud in his Sahih, through a broken chain of
transmission, which was sound (according to Sunni standards of accepting
hadith). The Messenger of Allah, (S) said; “At the end of every hundred
years, Allah will raise someone who shall revive the religion of this
nation, ummah.” Ibn Al–Athir has reported this hadith in the section on
prophethood in his comprehensive work Jami’ al–Usul fi Ahadith al–Rasul.
In his explanation of the unusual hadiths of this section, this scholar
mentioned a number of people regarded to be among such revivers. Among
the followers of the Imamiyyah school, he named al–Baqir for the first
century, Ali ibn Musa al–Ridha’ for the second, Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn
Yaqub al–Kulayni for the third and al–Sharif al–Murtada al–Musawi for
the forth. Now it could be that this issue of sending a reviver is an
established idea that deserves to be accepted. In that case, the reviver
for the beginning of the forteenth century is none other than this great
master who deservingly occupied the position of religious authority.

[^3]: . He was the first to be addressed as ‘Proof of Islam’ Hujjat
al–Islam in Iraq, and he surely deserved it. If only this magnificent
title was confined to the likes of him!

[^4]: . Among them was Allamah Sayyid Hasan Mudarris and Allamah Sheikh
Muhammad Ibrahim ibn Muhammad Hasan al–Kalbasi.

[^5]: . This is contained in a letter sent by Sahib al–Jawahir to
certain rulers in Iran.

[^6]: . Among them were Mirza Hasan al–Ashtiyani, Mirza Habibullah
al–Rashti, Sheikh Abdullah ibn Ali Ni’mah al–Amuli and Sheikh Ja’far
al–Shushtari, Ali Hasan Tehrani, Mirza Abdurrahim al–Nahawandi and
others of their rank. These scholars were indeed oceans of knowledge and
pillars of the world.

[^7]: . It suffices to mention the following: His paternal cousin Mirza
Isma’il al–Husayni al–Shirazi, Sayyid Isma’il Sadr al–Musawi al–Amuli,
Sayyid Muhammad al–Husayni al–Fashariki Sayyid Kazim al–Tabataba’i,
Sayyid Hassan Hadi Sadr al–Amuli al–Kazimi (the author) Sayyid
Abdulmajid al–Husayni al–Karusi, Sayyid Ibrahim al–Darudi Aga Mir Sayyid
Hasan al–Quini, Mirza Muhammad Taqi al–Shirazi, Akhund Kazim
al–Khurasani, Sheikh Aga Ridha’ al–Hamadani, Sheikh Mirza Husayn
al–Nuri, Sheikh Fadlullah, Sheikh Nuri, Sheikh Mulla Fath Ali
Sultanabadi, Sheikh Hasan Ali Tehrani, Sheikh Mirza Ibrahim al–Shirazi
Mullah Ali al–Nahawandi, Sheikh Isma’il al–Tustari, Sheikh Mirza
AbdulfadI al–Tehrani, Sheikh Mirza Hasan al–Sabzawari, Sheikh Muhammad
Taqi al–Quini, Sheikh Hasan al–Karbala’i, Mirza Husayni al–Na’ini and
their likes. The type of scholars that graduate from their seminaries
and the value of their writings are a clear testimony to their
excellence. These are the products of Imam Mirza al–Shirazi who trained
under his personal care, may Allah reward him with the best of rewards.

[^8]: . When the contract was revoked Imam al–Shirazi announced that the
prohibition of tobacco in all forms: planting, selling, buying, smoking
and otherwise was not an original one but only an expedient move; as
soon as the danger was over the fatwa terminated and the people could
revert to their previous ways.

[^9]: Such as building schools and mosques. He constructed two large
schools in Samarra and spent hugely on them. A bridge over the Tigris
also cost ten thousand or more Ottoman liras in gold but when it was
taken over by the Ottoman government, it could not maintain it. Now the
bridge is in shambles. As a result, pilgrims visiting the shrine of Imam
al–Askari are once again in danger. We are from Allah and to Him shall
we return!

[^10]: . This is just a glimpse of the procession. For more information
on the spectacular occasion the reader can refer to the book written by
Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Ridha’ Ali Fadlullah al–Husayni al–Amili.

[^11]: . His paternal cousin Sayyid Imam Isma’il had left Samarra in the
same year and he was accompanied by a large number of pious scholars,
among whom was the author.

[^12]: . This verse was taken from a poem written by the famous Amir
al–shu’ara (Prince of the poets) and the sultan of the ulama Hujjat
al–Islam Sheikh Abd al–Husayn Sadiq al–Amuli. The expression “There is
no...” alludes to a famous saying of the Holy Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his Household, “There shall be no other prophet after me.”

[^13]: . This committee is headed by notable scholars who are experts in
their respective fields: religious sciences and modern academic
disciplines. They are men of letters who are renowned authors in their
respective fields and also members of active and respectable guilds.
They published this speech in the papers and read it at the
commemoration. It was previously printed as a separate pamphlet and
distributed at the ceremony on the fortieth day after the death. This
gathering was well–attended by scholars, men of letters and political
leaders, among whom were representatives of the Lebanese and French
governments, and delegations from different groups and sects. In
attendance also, were people from Damascus, Ba’labak, Beirut, Siddon,
Palestine and Jabal Amil, a district of southern Lebanon. A well
arranged assembly, it was the epitome of tranquillity and splendour,
crowned with a literary contest where orators and poets participated. We
decide to include the speech of the organizing committee in compliance
with the desire of its writers, its admirers and all those who heard it
being read. I therefore incorporated it verbatim although this prolongs
our write up.


