Preamble
========

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

Praise be to Allah for opening the gates of knowledge for us to
establish the Islamic sciences and single us out as the Imamiyyah
Shi’ah, a praise by which we precede those who take precedence in
attaining His pleasure. Blessings and peace be on the most excellent and
outstanding of His creatures, Muhammad, the master of His messengers,
the founder of His creed (*shari’a*), the one who is sent with the
noblest of His books, the seal of what has preceded and opener of what
is to come and on his noble Household, who are the keys to Islam.

When I wrote my book *Ta'sis al–Shi’ah al–Kiram li Funun al–Islam*
(Founding the Islamic Sciences by the Honourable Shi’ah), I arranged the
chapters according to chronological order of the birth of these Islamic
disciplines instead of following the alphabetical order of their names.
I also mentioned the categories of their pioneers in a similar way as a
tribute to those dignitaries who excelled in those fields of knowledge,
thereby, giving seniority due recognition.

In that book, each chapter comprises of the disciplines in which the
Shi’ah are pioneers, with sections about the first people who founded
each of these disciplines, the first to write on them, the first to
contrive and compose a new discipline by incorporating parts of an
earlier one, the first to coin a concept which others followed, the
first to isolate a class of disciplines and treat the works written on
that class and so forth. Besides, every chapter includes a section about
the celebrated masters of each field.

The fact that no one has preceded me in taking up this topic i. e. the
precedence of the Shi’ah's contribution to Islamic disciplines, is
undeniable. “So when we recite it, follow its recitation. And its
explanation rests with us.” The book was voluminous because it included
biographies of the authors of various categories and also some rarities
(*nawadir*)*.*

Therefore, a respectable member of my family requested me to prepare a
summary that might serve better the purpose for which the book was
written. He also proposed that the title of the abridged version should
be *Kitab al–Shi’ah wa Funun al–Islam* (The Shi’ah and Islamic
Disciplines). So I prayed to Allah through *istikharah* to choose for me
what is best on whether to accept this suggestion or not and the
*istikharah* showed that the matter was auspicious. I, therefore,
prepared the abridged version but instead of following the original
order in the arrangement of chapters, I arranged them according to the
prominence of the disciplines.


