Chapter 1:The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Quranic Sciences
==========================================================

This chapter comprises several sections but it is necessary to note that
the Commander of the Faithful, Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be on him, was
the first to classify Qur’anic sciences. He dictated sixty categories
thereof, illustrating each through an example. This is found in a book
which we relate, on his authority, through several chains of narration.
It is the first source for all that is subsequently written on Qur’anic
sciences. We still have a copy of this book.

The first compilation of the whole Qur’an in the chronological order of
revelation which was done after the Prophet's demise is that of the
Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be on him. The narrations that
came down to us from the Household of the Prophet to that effect are
widely transmitted (*mutawatirah*) while the Sunnis' reports in this
respect are extensive (*mustafidah*). We have cited some of them and
have reviewed Ibn Hajar Asqalani’s view in the unabridged version.

Section One: The First Writers about Qur’anic Exegesis
------------------------------------------------------

The first person to write on this subject was Sa’id ibn Jubayr who was a
*tabi’i* (i. e. a Muslim who lived in the generation following that of
the Companions of the Prophet). He was the most learned *tabi’i* in
exegesis (*tafsir*) as al–Suyuti related in *Al–Itqan*, on the authority
of Qatadah and mentioned his work on *tafsir*. Ibn al–Nadim also
mentioned him in *Al–Fihrist* while listing the works written on
*tafsir* and showed that none was earlier than Ibn Jubair’s. His
martyrdom took place in the year 94 A. H.

The fact that Ibn Jubair was among the sincere Shi’ah has been attested
by our scholars in their books on the biographies of transmitters of
hadith (*rijal*). Allamah Jamal al–Din ibn al–Mutahhar in *Al–Khulasah*
and Abu Amr al–Kishshi, in his book on *rijal*, were among those who
attested to that. The latter also related some hadiths from the Imams in
his praise, about his being a Shi’ah and his perseverance. Al–Kishshi
said: ‘The only reason why Hajjaj killed him was this affair i. e. his
being a Shi'ah. He was killed in the year 94 A. H. ’

Another group of *tabi’i*s from among the Shi’ah also wrote books on
tafsir after Ibn Jubair. Among them was Abu Muhammad, Ismail ibn
Abdurrahman al–Kufi al–Qarashi who was known as al–Suddi, the senior (d.
127 A. H). Al–Suyuti says in *Al–Itqan*: ‘The ideal *tafsir* is that
written by Ismail al–Suddi. Masters of *tafsir* such al–Thawri and
Shu'bah related from him. ’ Al–Najashi has mentioned him and also his
*tafsir* and so did Sheikh Abu Jafar al–Tusi in his list of Shi’ah
authors. Ibn Qutaybah explicitly stated in *Al–Ma’arif* and al–Asqalani
in *Al–Taqrib* and *Tahdhib al–Tahdhib* that he (al–Suddi) was a Shi’ah.
He was a disciple of Ali ibn al–Husein, al–Baqir and al–Sadiq, peace be
on them.

Another one was Muhammad ibn al–Sa’ib ibn Bishr al–Kalbi, the author of
a famous *tafsir*. Ibn al–Nadim has mentioned him when he listed the
books compiled on Qur’anic exegesis. Ibn Adiy says in his *Al–Kamil*:
“Al–Kalbi has many sound hadiths to his credit especially those related
on the authority of Abu Salih. He was also well-known for his exegesis.
No one has a lengthier and more elaborate exegesis than his”. Al–Sam’ani
says “Muhammad ibn al–Sa’ib, the exegete, was from Kufa and believed in
the returning, *al–raj’ah*. His son, Hisham had a respectable lineage
and he was an extremist Shi’ah.” He was among the special partisans of
Imam Zayn al–Abidin and his son al–Baqir. He died in the year 146 A. H.

Among them was also Jabir ibn Yazid al–Ju'fi who was an authority on
exegesis. He learnt it from Imam al–Baqir to whom he had devoted
himself. He died in 127 A. H. The commentary by al–Ju'fi is not the same
as that ascribed to Imam al–Baqir, which Ibn al–Nadim mentioned in his
list of the works on exegesis. He said: “The book of al–Baqir, Muhammad
ibn Ali ibn al–Husayn…. was related from him by Abu al–Jarud, Ziyad ibn
al–Mundhir, the head of Jarudiyyah, a branch of the Zaydiyyah.” A group
of reliable Shi’ah scholars such as Abu Basir, Yahya ibn al–Qasim and
al–Asadi had transmitted the commentary of Imam al–Baqir on the
authority of Ibn al–Jarud before he joined the Zaydiyyah.

Section Two: The First Writers of the Recitation of the Qur’an and the First Compilers of the Different Recitations
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The pioneer in this field was Aban ibn Taghlib al–Rab'i (Abu Sa’id)
while others believe that it was Abu Umaymah al–Kufi. Al–Najashi wrote
in his index of Shi’ah writers: ‘Aban, may Allah have mercy on him, was
a pioneer in all the disciplines pertaining to the Qur’an, jurisprudence
and hadith. He followed a unique method of recitation that is well-known
among the scholars of recitation.’ Then he (al–Najashi) linked his chain
of transmission in the narration of the book to Muhammad ibn Musa ibn
Abi Maryam, the author of *Al–Lu’lu’*, on the authority of Aban, and
added, ‘It opens with: The *hamzah* is a difficult letter…. ’

In *Al–Fihrist,* Ibn al–Nadim has mentioned Aban’s works on recitation
saying: “Among his books are *Ma’ani al–Qur'an* (Meanings of the Qur’an)
which is a nice book, *Kitab al–Qira’a* (Book of Recitation) and a book
on the principles of transmitting hadiths according to the Shi'ah
school.”

After Aban, Hamza ibn Habib, one of the seven famous reciters, wrote
*Kitab al–qira’a* (Book of Recitation). In *Al–Fihrist,* Ibn al–Nadim
writes: “*Kitab al–Qira’a* was written by Hamza ibn Habib who was one of
the seven disciples of al–Sadiq , peace be on him.” In *Kitab al–Rijal*,
Sheikh Abu Jafar al–Tusi also counted him among the disciples of
al–Sadiq (‘a). A document in the handwriting of Sheikh al–Shahid
Muhammad ibn Makki related on the authority of Sheikh Jamal al–Din Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn al–Haddad al–Hilli, reads: “Al–Kasa’i learnt the
recitation of the Qur'an from Hamza, and he from Abu Abdillah, al–Sadiq
who learnt it from his father (al–Baqir) who learnt it from his father,
Zayn al–Abidin who learnt it from his father, al–Husayn who learnt it
from the Commander of the Faithful, Ali.”

This person, Hamza, learnt the recitation from al–A’mash also and the
latter from Hamran ibn A’yun who were both among the Shi’ah masters as
we will see in due course. No one is known to have written about the
methods of recitation before Aban and Hamza. Al–Dhahabi and others who
wrote about the classes of reciters declare that the first person to
write about the methods of recitation was Abu Ubayd al–Qasim ibn Salam
who died in 224 A. H. There is no doubt that Aban preceded Ibn Salam
because both al–Dhahabi in his *Al–Mizan*, and al–Suyuti, in his
*Al–Tabaqat* have explicitly stated that Aban died in 141 A. H. This
means that he passed away eighty three years before Abu Ubayd. Likewise
Hamza ibn Habib who, as they mentioned, was born in 80 A. H. and died in
154, 156 or 158 A. H., the last date being mere conjecture. In any case,
the Shi’ah are the pioneers in the field of recitation. Al–Dhahabi and
al–Suyuti were not unaware of that. They wanted to say that Abu Ubayd
was the first Sunni to write about this subject.

Apart from those we mentioned, other Shi’ah scholars also preceded Abu
Ubayd. Among them were: Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Sa’dan, the blind.
Counting him among the Shi’ah reciters in *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim
says “He used to teach the Sunnis. In the beginning, he followed the
recitation of Hamza but later he followed his own way. He was born in
Baghdad but subscribed to the Kufi school. He died on the day of Arafa
(9th Zu al–Hijjah) in 231 A. H. He is the author of *Kitab al–Qira’a*
and *Kitab Mukhtasar al–Nahw.*

Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn al–Hasan ibn Abi Sarah al–Rawwasi al–Kufi, the
teacher of al–Kasa’i and al–Farra', one of Imam al–Baqir’s devoted
followers, also preceded Abu Ubayd. Abu Amr al–Dani has mentioned him in
*Tabaqat al–Qurra*' thus: “He (Abu Ja’far) related the ‘letters’on the
authority of Abu Amr and attended the lessons of al–A’mash. He followed
the Kufi school. He had a particular way of recitation which has also
been reported. Khallad ibn Khalid and Ali ibn Muhammad al–Kindi heard
the ‘letters’ from him, while al–Kasa’i and al–Farra narrated from him.
He died a short time after the end of the first century. He wrote *Kitab
al–Waqf* *wa al–Ibtida* (A Book on Pausing and Restarting) in two
versions: big and small and *Kitab al–Hamzah,* as recorded in the
indices of al–Najashi and others.”

Another author was Zayd al–Shaheed born in 80 A. H. He preserved the
recitation of his (great) grandfather, the Commander of the Faithful,
which has been related by Umar ibn Musa al–Rajhi. In the beginning of
the book on Zayd’s recitation, al-Rajhi says: “I have heard this
recitation from Zayd ibn Ali ibn al–Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace
be on them. I have not seen a person who is more knowledgeable than him
in the Book of Allah, its abrogating and abrogated verses, its
problematic topics and its grammar”. Zayd was martyred in 122 A. H. at
the age of forty–two during the reign of Hisham ibn Abdulmalik, the
Umayyad king.

All these peoples' works on recitation were accomplished earlier than
that of Abu Ubayd al–Qasim ibn Salam. This confirms the precedence of
the Shi’ah in writing about the science of recitation.

Section Three: The first to write about Qur’anic laws
-----------------------------------------------------

The first to write about this discipline was Muhammad ibn al–Sa’ib
al–Kalbi, one of the aforementioned disciples of al–Baqir (‘a). In the
chapter about the books on Qur’anic laws in *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim
says: “*Kitab Ahkam* *al–Qur’an* is written by al–Kalbi, who related it
from Ibn Abbas.” Since Al–Kalbi died in 146 A. H. and al–Shafi’i in 204
A. H. (aged fifty–four), al–Suyuti’s claim that the latter was the first
person to compile a work on Qur’anic laws is inaccurate.

He also recorded in *Tabaqat al–Nuhat* that the first to write on this
field was al–Qasim ibn Asbagh ibn Muhammad ibn Yusuf al–Bayani
al–Qurtubi, the Andalusian narrator of hadith and lexicographer. This
too, is flawed as al-Qurtubi died in 340 A. H. at the age of 93 years
and some days.

Section Four: The First to Write about the Peculiarities of the Qur’an (Gharib al–Qu’ran)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The pioneer in this branch of learning was one of the sheikhs of the
Shi’ah, Aban ibn Taghlib. Shi’ah scholars have confirmed this fact and
so have Yaqut al–Himawi, in *Mu’jam* *al–Udaba*' and Jalal al–Din
al–Suyuti in *Bughyat al–Wu’at*. They declared that he died in 141 A. H.

Al–Suyuti mentioned in *Al–Awa'il* that the first person to write about
the peculiarities of the Qur’an was Abu Ubaydah Ma’mar ibn al–Muthanna,
recording as others did, the date of his death which is either 208, 210
or 211 A. H. I do not think that al–Suyuti forgot what he, himself had
written about Aban that he had a book about the peculiarities of the
Qur’an, rather he meant that Abu Ubaydah was the first writer in the
field among the residents of Basra and not the first among the Sunnis
because that would have meant Abu Ubaydah, the Safuri Kharijite.
Al–Jahidh was explicit on the fact that the latter was a Kharijite as
stated in *Kitab al–Hayawan*, recently published in Egypt.

It is pertinent to know that those who wrote about this topic after Aban
were a group of the Shi’ah among whom were Abu Ja’far al–Rawwasi who
also preceded Abu Ubaydah, Abu Uthman al–Mazini (d. 248), al–Farra' (d.
207), Ibn Durayd al–Kufi the lexicographer (d. 321) and Ali ibn Muhammad
al–Simsati. Their biographies and the evidence of their being Shi’ah
will come later in the chapter on grammar and that on lexicology.

Section five: The Shi’ah Pioneers in Writing about the Different Meanings of the Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first Shi'ah to write a book on the meanings of the Qur’an was Aban
ibn Taghlib (d.141). His book has been mentioned by Ibn al–Nadim in
*Alfihrist*, al–Najashi in *Asma' al–Musannifi* *al–Shi’ah* and others.
I have not found even a trace of anyone who had anticipated him. For
sure, from among us, al–Rawwasi and al–Farra' have compiled some works
on the subject. Ibn al–Nadim says: “…. the book *Ma’ani al–Qur’an* was
written by al–Rawwasi, the book *Ma’ani al–Qur’an* was written by
al–Farra who dedicated it to Umar ibn Bakr. Both were Shi’ah.”

The first to write a book about abrogating and abrogated verses
(*al–nasikh wa* *al*–*mansukh*) is Abdullah ibn Abdulrahman al–Asamm
al–Musma’i al–Basri, one of the Shi’ah sheikhs and a disciple of Abu
Abdillah al–Sadiq, peace be on him. The next is Darim ibn Qubaysah ibn
Nahshal ibn Majma', Abu al–Hasan al–Tamimi al–Darimi, a Shi'ah sheikh of
the early period. He lived so long that he met Imam al–Ridha’ and died
at the close of the second century. To his credit is *Al–Wujuh* *wa
al–Naza’ir* and *Al–Nasikh wa al–Mansukh*. Al–Najashi has mentioned
these books in his *Asma' al–Musannifin min al–Shi’ah*. Then al–Hasan
ibn Ali ibn Faddal (d. 224A. H. ), who was a disciple of Imam Ali ibn
Musa al–Ridha’ and grand sheikh Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa al–Ash'ari
who hailed from the city of Qum. He was also a disciple of al–Ridha’ and
he lived till the time of Abu Muhammad al–Hasan al–Askari.

What Jalal al–Din Al–Suyuti says about Abu Ubayd al–Qasim ibn Salam (d.
224), shows that the latter who was contemporary with al–Hasan ibn Ali
ibn Faddal (who himself wrote about the subject), was the first to write
about this topic. It is worth noting that Ibn Faddal lived a long time
after al–Masma’i and even Darim ibn Qubaysah. In any case, the Shi’ah
preceded all others in this respect.

The rarities (*nawadir*) of the Qur’an first came to light through the
work of Ali ibn al–Husayn ibn Faddal, a Shi'ah sheikh of the third
century. Ibn al–Nadim states in *Al–Fihrist*: “Also the book on the
rarities of the Qur’an by Sheikh Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, who was a
Shi'ah; the book of Ali ibn al–Hasan ibn Faddal who was also a Shi'ah
and the book of Abu al–Nasr al–Ayyashi.” Ahmad ibn Muhammad al–Sayyari,
the Basri author also had a book on *nawadi al–Qur'an*. Al–Sayyari was
writing for al–Tahir during the lifetime of Imam al–Askari. Another
author, Abu al–Hasan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad who was known as
al–Harithi wrote *Nawadir ilm al–Qur'an.* Concerning him, Al–Najashi
observes, “He was among our prominent companions (the Shi’ah) and a
reliable person.”

When we turn to metaphorical passages (*mutashabih*) of the Qur’an we
find that Hamza ibn Habib al–Zayyat al–Kufi, was the first to write
about this subject. He died in Hulwan in 156 A. H. Ibn al–Nadim reports:
“…and the book *Mutashabih al–Qur’an* by Hamza ibn Habib, one of the
seven disciples of al–Sadiq.” Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi also counted him
among the disciples of al–Sadiq. Ibn Uqdah preceded both of them in
stating this fact in his *Rijal*. A group of our companions who have
also taken up this topic include Muhammad ibn Ahmad al–Wazir (a
contemporary of Sheikh al–Tusi and the author of *Kitab Mutashabih*
*al–Qur’an*) and Sheikh Rashid al–Din Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Shahrashub
al–Mazandarani (d. 588).

Sheikh Hamza ibn Habib was the pioneer in writing about *al–maqtu wa
al–mawsul* (places of pausing and joining in the recitation of the
Qur’an). Ibn al–Nadim, Muhammad ibn Ishaq, says in his *Al–Fihrist*
“*Kitab Maqtu al–Qur'an wa Mawsulah* was written by Hamza ibn Habib one
of the seven disciples of al–Sadiq”

The first scholar to use dots in writing the letters of the Qur'an,
define its vowel signs (*i’rab*) and save it from phonetic alterations
found in most early copies of the Qur'an was Abu al–Aswad. Some scholars
are of the view that this credit goes to his student Yahya ibn Ya’mar
al–'Udwani but the first view is more accurate. It makes no difference
though for all agree that both of them were Shi’ah. We have given many
proofs to that effect in the original version of this book.

The first to write on the field of metaphoric usage (*majaz*) in the
Qur'an, as far as I know, is Yahya ibn Ziyad al–Farra' (d. 207) to whom
we will refer in the chapter about the authorities of Arabic grammar.
Al–Mawla Abdullah Efendi has declared in his *Riyad al–Ulama* that he
was a Shi'ah and added “al–Suyuti’s claim that al–Farra' had Mutazilite
leanings perhaps originated from the fact that a large number of Sunni
scholars confuse Shi’ah and Mutazilite principles. In fact, he was a
Shi'ah of the Imammiyah sect.” A number of people also wrote about
metaphorical usages in the Qur’an (*majazat*). The best of these works
is *Kitab* *Majazat al–Qur’an* by Sayyid Sharif al–Radi al–Musawi, the
brother of Sayyid al–Murtada.

The first to write on Qur’anic parables (*amthal*) was the venerable
Sheikh Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al–Junayd. At the end of the list of
the works about Qur’anic sematics in his *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim
writes: “The Book of Parables by Ibn al–Junaid…..” I have not come
across an earlier author whose works are as good as his.

The pioneer in writing about the merits (*fada’il*) of the Qur’an is
Ubay ibn Ka’b al–Ansari, a companion of the Prophet, as Ibn al–Nadim has
stated in *Al–Fihrist*. It seems that Jalal al–Din al–Suyuti was not
aware of the precedence of Ubay in this field when he said: “The first
to compile a book on the merits of the Qur’an was Imam Muhammad ibn
Idris al–Shafi’i who died in 204.” Also Sayyid Ali ibn Sadr al–Din
al–Madani, the author of *Al–Salafah* has observed in *Al–Darajat
al–Rafi’ah fi Tabaqat al–Shi’ah* that Ubay ibn Ka’ab was a Shi’ah,
giving many proofs and citations. I have also included more evidences in
the original version of this book.

A group of our companions who have also written about the subject
include al–Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abi Hamza al–Bata’ini and Muhammad ibn
Khalid al–Barqi. Both lived during the time of al–Ridha’. Others are
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al–Sayyati Abu Abdillah, the Basri author who was
contemporary with al–Zahir and Imam al–Askari; Muhammad ibn Mas’ud
al–Ayyashi; Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim (Sheikh al–Kulayni); Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn 'Amr Abu Ali al–Kufi who died in 346 and other sheikhs from
among our companions.

The first to write a book about dividing the Qur’an into seven parts and
delimiting its verses was Hamza ibn Habib al–Zayyat al–Kufi who was one
of the seven authorities on recitation and a Shi'ah, as we have already
quoted from a number of sheikhs. The books *Asba al–Qur’an* and *Hudud
ay al–Qur’an* have been mentioned by Ibn al–Nadim who attributed them to
this man. I have not come across anyone who has precedence over him in
this subject.

Section Six: Shi'ah Authorities on the Qur’an
---------------------------------------------

Abdullah ibn Abbas was the first among the Shi’ah to write a commentary
of the Qur’an. All our scholars attest to his being a Shi’ah. In his
book *Al–Darajat al–Rafi’a fi* *Tabaqat al–Sh’iah*, al–Suddi has given a
beautiful biographical account of him. I have also written a detailed
account on that in the original version of this book. Ibn Abbas died in
67 A. H. in Ta'if. When he was about to die he prayed: “O Allah I seek
nearness to You through my loyalty to Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be on
him.”

Among them is Jabir ibn Abdullah al–Ansari, a Companion of the Prophet.
In Abu al–Khayr’s *Tabaqat al–Mufassirin* he was rated among the best
interpreters. Al–Fadl ibn Shadhan al–Nishapuri, a disciple of al–Ridha’
says: Jabir ibn Abdullah al–Ansari (may Allah be pleased with him) was
among the first supporters of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali ibn Abi
Talib, peace be on him. Ibn Uqdah has described Jabir as “devoted to the
Ahl al–Bayt” and I have elaborated this point in the unabridged version
of this book. He died in Medina after the year 70 A. H. at the age of
ninety–four. Ubay ibn Ka’b is counted among the first category of
commentators of the Qur’an from among the companions. As the reader
knows, Ubay was a Shi'ah. There is a detailed account of his biography
in *Al–Darajat al–Rafi’ah* and in the our unabridged version.

Following these Companions come the *tabi’i*s such as Sa’id ibn Jubayr
who was the most learned *tabi’i* in the field of the commentary of the
Qur’an according to Qatadah’s testimony as recorded in *Al–Itqan*. We
have previously mentioned him, noting the fact that he was a Shi'ah.
Among them was also Yahya ibn Ya’mur, a *tabi’i* and a notable Shi’ah
authority on the Qur’an. Ibn Khillikan reports: “He was among the
reciters of Basra from whom Abdullah ibn Ishaq learnt the recitation. He
was knowledgeable in the Qur’an, grammar and Arab dialects. He learnt
grammar from Abu al–Aswad al–Du’ali and was one of the early Shi’ah who
preferred the Ahl al–Bayt without degrading the good people from other
sects.”

Among them also is Abu Salih who was known as the “Student of Ibn Abbas
in exegesis”. His name was Mizan al–Basri and was a Shi'ah *tabi’i.* In
his *Al–Kafiyah fi Ibtal Taubat al–Khati’ah*, Sheikh al–Mufid, Muhammad
ibn al–Numan attested to his being a Shi'ah after relating a narration
from him on the authority of Ibn Abbas. Abu Salih died at the close of
the first century.

Another authority on Qur'anic exegesis was Abu Abdillah Tawus ibn Kaysan
al–Yamani. He learnt the commentary of the Qur’an from Ibn Abbas. Sheikh
Ahmad ibn Taimiyyah counted him among the most learned in exegesis as
recorded in *Al–Itqan*. Ibn Qutaybah attested to his Shi’ism in
*Al–Ma’arif.* On page two hundred and six of the Egyptian edition we
read: “Those who are Shi’ah are al–Harth al–A’war, Sa’sa’a ibn Sawhan,
al–Asbagh ibn Nabatah, Atiyyah al–Aufi, Tawus and al–A’mash. Tawus
passed away in Mecca in 106 A. H. He was a devoted follower of Ali ibn
al–Husayn al–Sajjad (‘a)”

Among them was al–A’mash al–Kufi i. e. Abu Muhammad Sulayman ibn Mahran
al–Asadi. Ibn Qutaybah’s testimony to his Shi’ism has already been
stated. Al–Shahristani, in his *Al–Milal wa al–Nihal*, and others say
the same thing. Al–Shahid al–Thani Zayn al–Din, in *Hashiyat*
*al–Khulasah* and Muhaqqiq al–Bahbahani in *Al–Ta'liqah* and al–Mirza
Muhammad Baqir al–Damadi in *Al–Rawashih* all confirm that he was a
Shi'ah. I have elaborated this point in the original version of this
book and added other citations. Al–‘Amash died in 148 at the age of 88.

Another authority on exegesis is Sa’id ibn Musayyab. He learnt it from
the Commander of the Faithful and Ibn Abbas and was trained by the
former with whom he participated in all his wars. Both Imam al–Sadiq and
Imam al–Ridha’ declared that he was a Shi’ah, as reported in the third
volume of al–Himyari’s *Qurb al–Isnad*. He was the leader of the
reciters of Medina. Ibn al–Madaini reports: “I have never come across a
person among the *tabi’i*s who is more knowledgeable than him.”

Another person is Abu Abdirrahman al–Salmi, the pioneer in Asim’s
recitation. Ibn Qutayba says, “He was among the disciples of Ali peace
be on him, and a teacher of recitation and jurisprudence” Abu Abdirraham
learnt from the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him as reported
in al–Tabrasi’s *Majma al–Bahrain*. In his *Kitab al–Rijal* al–Barqi
counts him among Ali’s closest companions from the tribe of Mudar. He
died after the age of 70.

Al–Suddi the senior, the author of the exegesis previously mentioned in
section one, is also among them. Another authority is Muhammad ibn
al–Sa’ib ibn Bishr al–Kalbi, the writer of *Al–Tafsir al–Kabir* already
mentioned in section one.

Hamran ibn A’yun a brother of Zurara ibn A’yun al–Kufi, client of the
Shayban clan, is one of those who mastered the Qur’an. He learnt from
Imam Zayn al–Abidin and Imam al–Baqir. He died after the end of the
first century.

We have already mentioned Aban ibn Taghlib who took the lead in every
field of knowledge. He learnt recitation from al–A’mash. He was a
disciple of Imam al–Sajjad (Ali ibn al–Husayn) and Imam al–Baqir, peace
be on them both. He died in 141 A. H.

And among them was Asim ibn Bahdalah, one of the Seven (i.e the seven
famons reciters of the Qur’an). He read from Abu Abdurraham al–Salmi who
read from Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. This is
why the recitation of Asim is preferred by our scholars. The venerable
Sheikh Abduljalil al–Razi (d. 556) attested in his book *Naqd
al–Fada’ih* that Asim was an exemplary Shi’ah. Asim died in the year 128
in Kufa. Another report has it that he died in Al–Samawa on his way to
Syria and he was buried there. Like al–A’mash, he was blind. Al–Qadi
Nurullah al–Mar’ashi, in *Majalis al–Muminin*, a book on the ranks of
the Shi’ah, reports that Asim was one of the Seven.

Next we shall look at the generation after that of the *tabi’i*s.

Among them is Thabit ibn Dinar Abu Hamza al–Thumali who was the chief of
the Shi’ah in Kufa. Abu al–Faraj Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Abi Yaqub
al–Nadim, in *Al–Fihris* refers to “a book on exegesis by Abu Hamza
al–Thumali who was a disciple of Ali ibn al–Husayn, peace be on him. He
was a noble and reliable man and one of the disciples of Abu Jafar.” Abu
Hamza died in 150 A. H.

Among them was Abu al–Jarud, Ziyad ibn al–Mundhir. He transmitted Imam
al–Baqir’s book on commentary of the Qur’an before he became a Zaydi. As
previously said Abu Basir has related it from him. Abu al–Jarud died in
150 A. H.

Another authority was Yahya ibn al–Qasim, Abu Basir al–Asadi. He was of
foremost position in jurisprudence and exegesis. He had a famous work on
exegesis as reported by al–Najashi who traced his chain of transmission
to the author. He (Abu Basir) died during the lifetime of Abu Abdillah
al–Sadiq, peace be on him, who passed away in 148 A. H.

Also, among them is al–Bata’ini Ali ibn Salim who is known as Ibn Abi
Hamza Abu al–Hasan al–Kufi, a client (*mawla*) of the Ansar. He had
*Kitab Tafsir al–Quran* in which he relates on the authority of Abu
Abdillah al–Sadiq and Abu al–Hasan Musa al–Kazim and Abu Basir whom we
previously mentioned.

Among them is al–Hasan ibn Mukhariq Abu Junadah al–Sululi. Ibn Nadim
says: “He was one of the early Shi’ah. Among his works are *Kitab
al–Tafsir* and *Kitab Jami’ al–Ulum*” Al–Najashi also ascribed to him
*Kitab al–Tafsir* *wa al–Qira’at* and other large works.

Another authority is Ahmad al–Kisa’i, one of the Seven: various merits
were to his credit. He was the most knowledgeable in grammar and the
foremost scholar in the peculiarities of the Qur’an *gharib*
*al–Qur’an.* He descended from a Persian family from rural Iraq. I have
mentioned, in the original version of this book, his lineage and those
who attested to his being a Shi’ite. He died in Ray or Tus while in the
company of Caliph al–Rashid, in the year 189, 183, 185 or 193, the first
being more accurate. He lived for seventy years.

After these people we shall proceed with another category. Ibn Sa’dan,
the blind man: Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Sa’dan ibn al–Mubarak, a Kufi
grammarian. He was an accomplished leader and the author of *Al–Jami*,
*Al–Mashjar* and other works. His method of recitation conforms to the
common way (*mashhur*). He was honest and reliable. He wrote on the
Arabic language and the way of recitation. We have previously cited Ibn
al–Nadim’s remark about him in *Al–Fihrist*. He mentioned him among the
Shi’ah reciters and declared that he was born in Baghdad but followed
the Kufic school. He died in 231 on Arafa day. Both Yakut and al–Suyuti,
in *Al–Mu’jam* and *Al–Tabaqat* respectively wrote a detailed account of
him. Yaqut says that he was born in 161 and died on the day of sacrifice
(10th of Dhu al–Hijjah) in 281. He had a son called Ibrahim. Yaqut says:
“He authored some works and corrected, studied, examined and transmitted
others. He wrote good books such as *Kitab Huruf al–Qur’an*.”

A group of authors who wrote about the commentary of the Qur’an and were
disciples of Imams al–Kazim and al–Ridha’ (peace be on them) are in this
categrory. They include Wuhayb ibn Hafs Abu Ali al–Hariri of the Asad
tribe, Yunus ibn Abdurrahman Abu Muhammad, the chief of the Shi’ah of
his time and Abu Muhammad Husayn ibn Sa’id ibn Hammad ibn Mihran
al–Ahwazi, a retainer (*mawla*) of Ali ibn al–Husayn. We have written
their biographies in the original version of this book.

Others include Abdullah ibn al–Salt Abu Talib al–Taimi of the Taym
tribe, an authority on exegesis who wrote *Kitab Tafsir al–Qur’an* and
narrated the hadith from al–Ridha’; the exegete Ahmad ibn Sabih; Abu
Abdillah al–Asadi al–Kufi; Ali ibn Isbat ibn Salim Bayya’ al–Zati Abu
al–Hasan al–Muqarri al–Kufi; and Ali ibn Mahzyar al–Ahwazi, who was one
of the leading figures of learning, especially in the hadith and
commentary of the Qur’an. He wrote books on both.

Another group of writers includes Muhammad ibn Khalid al–Barqi. He wrote
*Kitab al–Tanzil* and *Kitab al–Tafsir*. He met Imam al–Kazim and
al–Ridha’ and was among their reliable companions. His brother al–Hasan
ibn Khalid al–Barqi wrote a number of books such as his *Al–Tafsir
al–Kabir* that runs into one hundred and twenty volumes, which was
dictated by Imam al–Askari, as Rashid al–Din ibn Shahrashub
al–Mazandarani states in his *Ma’alim al–Ulama.*

In the third century too, a number of people wrote on exegesis. Some of
them are:

Ali ibn al–Hasan ibn Faddal, Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Hilal
ibn Asim ibn Sa’id ibn Mas’ud al–Thaqafi al–Kufi (d. 383) and Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim al–Qummi the chief of the Shi’ah of his time. His
commentary has been printed. Ali ibn al–Husayn ibn Musa ibn Babawayh
al–Qummi wrote *Kitab al–Tafsir* which a large section of our companions
attributed to him; Sheikh ibn al–Walid Muhammad ibn al–Hasan ibn Ahmad
ibn al–Walid Abu Ja’far, the master of Sheikh Babawayh who died in 343;
and Sheikh Furat ibn Ibrahim ibn Furat al–Kufi who lived during the time
of Imam al–Jawad, the son of al–Ridha’. He wrote a large commentary
which is well-known to us. Ibn Duwal al–Qummi (d. 350) who wrote a
number of books among which is *Kitab al–Tafsir* as mentioned by
al–Najashi. Salman ibn al–Khattab Abu al–Fadl al–Qummi, the author of
*Al–Tafsir an Ahl al–Bayt* lived during the time of al–Ridha’ and
al–Jawad.

Next comes Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Jafar Abu Abdillah al–Katib
al–Nu’mani whose book is known as *Tafsir al–Nu’mani* whose was the
narrator of what the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him,
dictated about the classes of Qur’anic sciences. He named in it sixty
kinds citing an example for each. We have a copy of it. He was also the
narrator of *Al–Kafi* on the authority of al–Kulayni. Muhammad ibn
al–Abbas ibn Ali ibn Marwan who was known as Ibn al–Hajjam whose surname
was Abu Abdullah. He had a number of works such as *Ta’wil ma Nazala fi
al–Nabi* (*s*), *Kitab Tawil ma Nazala fi Ahl al–Bayt wa ma Nazala fi
Shi’atihim*, *Kitab Tawil ma Nazala fi 'ada'ihim, Kitab al–Tafsir
al–Kabir*, *Kitab al–Nasikh wa al–Mansukh*, *Kitab Qira’at Amir
al*–*Muminin*, *Kitab Qirat Ahl al–Bayt*. Harun ibn Musa al–Tala’kbari
attended Ibn al–Hajjam's lectures in the year 328 and received his
permission *ijazah*.

Those who wrote about the kinds of Qur’anic sciences are many. Some of
them are Muhammad ibn al–Hasan al–Shaybani, the teacher of Sheikh
al–Mufid. He wrote *Nahj al–Bayan an Kashf Ma’ani al–Qur’an* and
classified Qur’anic sciences into sixty classes. The book was dedicated
to the Abbasid caliph al–Mustansir. Al–Sayyid al–Murtada quotes him in
*Kitab al–Muhkam wa al–Mutashabih*. Another is Sheikh al–Mufid, Muhammad
ibn Muhammad ibn al–Nu’man who was known in his time as Ibn al–Mu’allim
(Son of the Teacher). He was the master of the Shi’ah and held the
professorial chair. He authored a number of books as recorded in the
index of his works*. Kitab al–Bayan fi Anwa’ Ulum al–Qur’an* is one of
them. In *Tarikh Bagdad*, Al–Khatib says that he died in the month of
Muharram in 409. Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Salim Abu al–Fadl
al–Suli al–Ju’fi al–Kufi who was known as al–Saburi, the author of
*Al–Fakhir fi al–Lughah*, *Kitab Tafsir Ma’ani al–Qur'an* and *Tasmiyat
Asnaf Kalamih al–Majid.* He is one of the masters from among our
companions. He lived in Egypt and died there in 300 A. H.

Section Seven: The First Commentaries on All Qur'anic Sciences
--------------------------------------------------------------

The first commentary comprising all the Qur’anic sciences is *Kitab*
*al–Raghib fi Ulum al–Qur’an* by Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Umar
al–Waqidi. Ibn al–Nadim has mentioned him in his *Al–Fihrist* and
attested to his being a Shi’ah. The next is *Kitab al–Tibyan al–Jami'*
*li Kul Ulum al–Qur’an* which runs into ten large volumes written by the
chief of the sect, Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn al–Hasan ibn Ali al–Tusi. He
was born in 385 and passed away in al–Ghari (Najaf) in the year 460. In
the beginning of the book, he mentions that he was the first to compile
all Qur’anic sciences.

Another book is *Kitab Haqa’iq al–Tanzil wa Daqa’iq al–Tawil* equal in
size to *Al–Tibyan*. It was written by Sayyid al–Sharif al–Radi, the
brother of al–Murtada. In this book, peculiarities of the Qur’an
(*ghara’ib*), its marvels, secrets and obscure aspects have been
revealed and its mysteries and intricate reports clarified. The author’s
thoroughness in examining Qur’anic facts and scrutinizing its
interpretation makes it an unprecedented achievement. Nevertheless, this
work does not cover all the Qur’anic sciences.

Al–Sayyid al–Radi also wrote *Kitab* *al–Mutashabih fil al–Qur’an* and
*Kitab Majazat al–Qur’an*. He accomplished this feat although he lived
for only forty–seven years. We have provided a nice biography of al–Radi
in the original version of this book. He passed away in 406. Another
book is *Rawd al–Jinan fi Tafsir al–Qur'an* in twenty volumes. It was
written by the master, Sheikh Abu al–Futuh, Husayn ibn Ali ibn Muhammad
ibn Ahmad al–Khuza’i al–Razi al–Nishaburi. He died after the end of the
fifth century. This comprehensive work was produced after the time of
Sheikh al–Tusi.

Another book of this nature is *Kitab Majma al–Bayan fi Ulum al–Qur'an*
in ten volumes written by Sheikh Aminuddin Abi Ali, al–Fadl ibn al–Hasan
ibn al–Fadl al–Tabrisi (d. 540 A. H). It comprises all those disciplines
but the author acknowledges, in the very beginning, his dependence on
Sheikh al–Tusi’s *Al–Tibyan*. Lastly, comes the twenty volume *Khulasat
al–Tafsir* by Sheikh Qutbuddin al–Rawandi. Replete with facts and
subtleties, it is one of the best commentaries written after the time of
Sheikh al–Tusi.


