Chapter 2: The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In The Sciences Of Hadith
=================================================================

This chapter comprises of a number of sections.

Before we start it is pertinent to point out that the Shi’ah have
precedence in this field. There existed sharp differences between the
predecessors from among the Companions and the *tabi’i*s as regards the
issue of reducing knowledge to writing. Many of them were averse to it
while a group considered it permissible and actually embarked on
recording it. Of the latter group were Ali and his son Hasan, as stated
in al–Suyuti’s *Tadrib al–Rawi.*

In fact, Ali peace be on him, had compiled, in a large scroll, what the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his Household, dictated to
him. Al–Hakam ibn Uyaynah saw it with Imam al–Baqir when they disagreed
on some issue, where upon the latter brought out the book and located
the issue saying to al–Hakam: “This is Ali’s handwriting dictated to him
by the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his Household”.

It was the first book of knowledge which was compiled during the
lifetime of the Prophet. This inspired the Shi’ah who perceived the
importance of recording and organizing knowledge. Therefore, they
embarked on it following the example of their Imams, whereas the
non–Shi’ah who held that writing was prohibited remained behind.

Al–Suyuti mentioned in *Tadrib* that during the time of the Companions
and notable *tabi’i*s, works were not recorded or organized for a number
of reasons: they were endowed with intelligence and enjoyed retentive
memories, they had been forbidden from writing, as declared in *Sahih
Muslim*, for fear that their works might mix with the Qur’an and lastly,
because most of them were not good at writing. But it might be objected
that these only affected the companions and *tabi’i*s who were not, for
the Shi’ah among them actually recorded and systematized the sciences
following the example of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him.

Section One: The First Compilers and Arrangers of Hadīth
--------------------------------------------------------

The first among the Shi’ah Companions was Abu Rafi, a retainer of the
Messenger of Allah, blessings of Allah be on him and his Household. In
*Firhist Asma al–Musanifin min al–Shi’ah*, al–Najashi states: “Abu Rafi,
a retainer of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
Household, wrote *Kitab al–Sunan wa al–Ahkam wa al–Qadaya*” and
mentioned his chain of transmission of each subject including prayer,
fasting, pilgrimage, *zakat* (alms) and judgements.

Al–Najashi says that Abu Rafi’ embraced Islam early in Mecca, migrated
to Medina and was often in the Prophet’s company. After the demise of
the Prophet Abu Rafi’ attached himself to the Commander of the Faithful,
being among the best of his supporters. He also participated in the
battles with him and served as his treasurer in Kufa. Al–Najashi
mentions other details about him. Abu Rafi’ died in 35 A. H., as
reported by Ibn Hajar in *Al–Taqrib*, considering only the reports which
say that he died in the early days of Ali’s rule as right.

This shows that it is unanimously agreed upon that he was not preceded
by anyone in compiling the hadith and arranging it into chapters, for
those described as pioneers in the field belong to the second century.
Al–Suyuti testifies to this fact in his *Tadrib* and relates on the
authority of Ibn Hajar’s *Fath al–Bari* that the first to compile the
hadith was Ibn Shihab al–Zuhri by order of Umar ibn Abdilaziz. In that
case, it must have taken place towards the end of the first century
because Umar’s rule started in 98 or 99 A. H. and he died in 101A. H.
Nevertheless, we have some reservations about what Ibn Hajar says, as
pointed out in the original version of this book.

Section Two: The First Persons to Compile Similar Hadiths under One Topic
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Among the Companions, the first persons to compile similar hadiths under
one topic and one chapter were the Shi’ah.

They are Abu Abdillah Salman al–Farisi and Abu Dharr al–Ghifari (may
Allah be pleased with them) as stated by Rashid al–Din ibn Shahrashub in
his *Ma’alim Ulama al–Shi’ah.* While listing the names of Shi’i authors
Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi and Sheikh Abu Abbas al–Najashi mention in
their books a book by Salman and another by Abu Dharr and traced their
chains of transmission. The title of Salman’s book is *Kitab Hadith
al–Jathliq* and that of Abu Dharr’s is *Kitab al–Khutbah.* In his book,
the latter explained the events that happened after the Prophet,
blessing and peace of Allah be on him and his Household.

In *Al–Rawdah fi Ahwal al–Ulama wa al–Sadat*, Sayyid Khwansari relates
from the third volume of Abu Hatim’s *Kitab al–Zina* that, during the
time of the Holy Prophet, the title *al–shi’ah* was attributed to four
Companions: Salman al–Farisi, Abu Dharr al–Ghifari, Miqdad ibn al–Aswad
al–Kindi and Ammar ibn Yasir. *Kashf al–Zunun* mentions *Kitab al–Zina*
by Abu Hatim Sahl ibn Muhammad al–Sajistani who died in 205.

Section Three: The First Among the Tabi’is to Compile the Hadith
----------------------------------------------------------------

These people wrote during the same period so it is unclear as to who
preceded the others in this field. They are: Ali ibn Abi Rafi’, a
companion of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, and his
treasurer and secretary. In his book on the names of Shi’ah writers
under the first category where he mentioned Ali ibn Abi Rafi’,
al–Najashi says: “He was a *tabi’i* and an excellent Shi’ah. He enjoyed
the company of the Commander of the Faithful and was his scribe. He
memorized a great deal and compiled a book on different topics of
jurisprudence like ritual ablutions, prayer and so on.” Then he retraced
the chain of transmission of the book.

Ali’s brother Ubaydullah ibn Abi Rafi’, a scribe of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a), had a book titled Q*adaya Amir al–Muminin* (*a. s*) and a
book listing the names of the Companions who accompanied him in the
battles of the Camel, Siffin and Nahrawan as recorded in the *Fihrist*
of Sheikh Abu Jafar al–Tusi (may his soul be sanctified). Ibn Hajar says
in his *Taqrib*: “He was Ali’s scribe and confidant.”

Asbagh ibn Nabatah al–Majashi’i, a close companion of Ali (peace be on
him) lived long after him. He related the covenant which Ali (‘a) had
written to Malik Ashtar. Al–Najashi observes “It is a well-known book.”
Asbagh also related Imam Ali’s testament to his son Muhammad ibn
al–Hanafiyah. Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi says in his *Fihrist* that
Asbagh wrote *Kitab Maqtal al–Husayn ibn Ali* (*a.s*), as related by
Al–Duri.

Sulaym ibn Qays al–Hilali, Abu Sadiq, was a companion of the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a). He wrote a magnificent book in which he narrated
from Ali, Salman al–Farisi, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, Ammar ibn Yasir and a
group of prominent companions. Sheikh Abu Abdillah al–Nu’mani, whom we
already mentioned when listing the names of the masters of Qur’anic
exegesis, has recorded in his book on occultation, *Al–Ghaybah*, after
quoting a hadith from the book of Sulaym ibn Qays, “All the Shi’ah who
learnt and transmitted from the Imams agree that the book of Sulaym ibn
Qays al–Hilali is the oldest source (*asl*) to be related by scholars
and transmitters of the hadith of the Ahl al–Bayt. Besides, it is one of
the sources to which the Shi’ah refer and on which they depend” Sulaym
died in Kufa in the early days of al–Hajjaj ibn Yusuf’s rule.

Maytham ibn Yahya Abu Salih al–Tammar was a close companion and
confidant of the Commander of the Faithful. He compiled a magnificent
work on hadith which is extensively quoted by al–Tusi, Sheikh Abu Amr
al–Kashi and al–Tabari in his *Bisharat al–Mustafa.* Maytham was
murdered in Kufa by Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad for being a Shi'ah.

Muhammad ibn Qays al–Bajali to whose credit is a book which he relates
from the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. The masters of
biography counted him among the Shi'ah *tabi’i*s, and also wrote about
his book. Sheikh al–Tusi, in his *Fihrist* relates from Ubayd ibn
Muhammad ibn Qays that he said: “We showed this book to Abu Ja’far
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al–Husayn, peace be on him and he observed: ‘These
are the words of Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be on him.’ ”

Yu’la ibn Murra also had a book in which he relates from the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a). In *Al–Fihrist*, al–Najashi traces back a
continuous chain by which the book is related.

Ubaydullah ibn al–Hurr al–Ju’fi, a Kufan *tabi’i* who was a poet and a
brave warrior compiled a book which he transmitted from the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a). He died during the time of al–Mukhtar. Al–Najashi
mentioned him in the first category of Shi’ah authors.

Rabi’a ibn Sami had a book on the *zakat* (alms) of livestock.
Al–Najashi counted him among the first category of Shi’ah writers and
indicated that he was a notable *tabi’i*.

Al–Harth ibn Abdillah al–A’war al–Hamadani, a companion of the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a) had a book in which he mentions the information
which the latter imparted to a Jew. ‘Amr ibn Abi al–Miqdam narrates
those issues on the authority of Abu Ishaq al–Sabi’i from al–Harth
al–Hamadani from the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) as reported in
Sheikh al–Tusi’s *Fihrist.* Al–Harth died during the rule of Ibn
al–Zubayr.

Al–Ghazzali expressed a different view which Ibn Sharhrashub quoted and
refuted in the beginning of his book *Ma’alim al–Ulama*. He contradicted
the view of al–Ghazzali which says: “The first book compiled in Islam is
the book of Ibn Jurayj on traditions and letters of exegesis which was
written in Mecca and transmitted on the authority of Mujahid and Ata’,
then the book of Mu’ammar ibn Rashid al–San’ani in Yemen, then
*Al–Muwatta* of Malik ibn Anas, then the comprehensive work (*jami’*) of
Sufyan al–Thawri.” This is Ibn Shahrashub’s answer, verbatim: “The
correct view is that the first person to write in Islam was the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a), followed by Salman al–Farisi, then Abu
Dharr al–Ghifari, then Asbagh ibn Nubata, then Ubaydullah ibn Abi Rafi'
and then [the author of] *Al–Sahifah al–Kamilah*, which is related on
the authority of Zayn al–Abidin (‘a)

Like Sheikh Abu Jafar al–Tusi, Sheikh al–Najashi mentions the first
category of authors as we already said, but he does not identify the
pioneers or the order of precedence. Perhaps Ibn Shahrashub had found
some documents that the other two had no idea about. Allah the Glorious
is the Grantor of success.

Note: Al–Hafiz al–Dhahabi observes in his biographical account of Aban
ibn Taglib that Shi’ism, along with religiosity, abstinence and
truthfulness, was widespread among the *tab’i*s and the generation that
followed them. Then he adds “Were the hadiths related by these people to
be rejected, a great deal of the prophetic traditions would have been
lost. This would have been an obvious cause of corruption.” A moment’s
reflection on the words of this prominent *hafiz* will reveal the
significance of the lead enjoyed by the Shi’ah *tab’'i*s and their
followers whom we have mentioned and those we are going to mention
later.

Section Four: The Shi’ah of the Second Century who Compiled the Hadith in the Form of Sources (usul) and Sections (ajza’)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This section deals with the Shi’ah of the second century who compiled
the hadith in the form of sources (*usul*) and sectors (*ajza’*),
relating from the Ahl al–Bayt. They were contemporaries with those
described as the first to compile traditions among the Sunnis. They
transmitted the hadith on the authority of Imam Zayn al–Abidin and his
son Imam al–Baqir (p. b. o. t). Aban ibn Taglib transmitted thirty
thousand hadiths on the authority of Abu Abdillah al–Sadiq (‘a). Jabir
ibn Yazid al–Ju’fi related seventy thousand hadiths from Abu Ja’far
al–Baqir, from his forefathers, from the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his Household.

Jabir is reported to have said: “I know fifty thousand hadiths that talk
about every topic, out of which I have not revealed anything. They are
all related from the Ahl al–Bayt.” Others who compiled equally copious
works were Abu Hamza al–Thumali, Zurara ibn A’yan, Muhammad ibn Muslim
al–Ta’ifi, Abu Basir Yahya ibn Qayn al–Asadi, Abdulmumin ibn al–Qasim
ibn Qays ibn Muhammad al–Ansari, Bassam ibn Abdullah al–Sayrafi, Abu
Ubaydah al–Hazza’ (Ziyad ibn Isa Abu al–Raja) al–Kufi, Zakariya ibn
Abdillah al–Fayyad (Abu Yahya), and Thawr ibn Abi Fakhitah (Abu Jahm).

A group of narrators related from him. He wrote a unique book in which
he narrates from al–Baqir (‘a). Others are Jahdar ibn al–Mughira
al–Ta’i, Hijr ibn Za’idah al–Hadrami (Abu Abdillah), Mu'awiya ibn Ammar
ibn Abi Mu’awiya Khabbab ibn Abdillah, Muttalib al–Zuhri al–Qarashi
al–Madani and Abdullah ibn Maimun ibn al–Aswad al–Qaddah.

In the original version of this book, I have written a historical
account of these narrators and mentioned their works.

Section Five: The Subsequent Shi’ah Compilers of Hadiths
--------------------------------------------------------

The hadiths which they transmitted from Imam al–Sadiq were compiled in
four hundred works known as the sources (*usul*). Sheikh Abu Ali al–Fadl
ibn al–Hasan al–Tabirisi says in *A’lam al–Wara* “It is certain that the
number of the well-known scholars who transmitted the hadith from Abu
Abdillah Ja’far ibn Muhammad al–Sadiq (‘a) is four thousand and also
four hundred books relating on his authority, which the Shi’ah call the
sources, have been written. They were related by the companions of Imam
al–Sadiq and those of his son Imam, Musa (‘a).

Abu al–Abbas, Ahmad ibn Uqdah devoted a whole book to mention the names
of those who learnt from al–Sadiq (‘a) along with their works. The title
of the book is *Kitab Rijal man Rawa an Abi Abdillah al–Sadiq*. Sheikh
Abu Jafar al–Tusi enumerated them and their works in the chapter about
the companions of al–Sadiq (‘a) in his book on *rijal,* each chapter of
which is about the companions of one of the twelve Imams.

Section Six: Works Compiled by the Imamiyah Shi’ah on Hadith
------------------------------------------------------------

This section is about the number of works compiled by the Imamiyah
Shi’ah on hadith as related through the way of the Ahl al–Bayt, from the
time of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) to the era of Abu Muhammad
al–Hasan al–Askari (‘a).

The number of these works exceeds sixty–six hundred as verified by
Sheikh Hafiz Muhammad ibn al–Hasan al–Hurr the author of *Al–Wasa’il*.
He mentioned this fact at the end of the fourth note (*fa’idah*) in his
comprehensive hadith work *Wasa’il al–Shi’ah ila Ahkam al*–*Shari’ah*.
In my *Nihayat al–Dirayah* on of the science of hadith, I have
corroborated this view.

Section Seven: Masters of the Science of Hadith
-----------------------------------------------

This section enumerates some of the later masters of the science of
hadith and authors of extensive and comprehensive works which the Shi’ah
consider as sources of religious laws.

The first three scholars all bearing the name of Muhammad are the
authors of the four most famous comprehensive works. They are: Abu
Ja’far Muhammad ibn Yaqub al–Kulayni (d. 328), the author of *Al–Kafi*
in which he recorded sixteen thousand and ninety–nine hadiths along with
their chains of transmission; Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al–Husayn ibn Musa
ibn Babawayh al–Qummi (d. 381), known as Abu Ja’far al–Saduq who had
four hundred books to his credit, (the most magnificent, of which is
*Kitab Man la Yahduruhu al–Faqih* which contains nine thousand and
forty–four hadiths on Islamic laws and the practices of the Holy
Prophet) and Muhammad ibn Hasan al–Tusi, the chief of the sect and the
author of *Kitab Tahzib al–Ahkam* (which is divided into three hundred
and ninety–three sections consisting of thirteen thousand five hundred
and ninety hadiths). His other work *Al–Istibsar* which is divided into
nine hundred and twenty sections contains five thousand five hundred and
eleven hadiths. These four books are the main sources for the Shi’ah.

Then come another group of three scholars who also bear the name of
Muhammad. They are the authors of comprehensive works of hadith
including Imam Muhammad Baqir Taqi known as al–Majlisi, the author of
*Bihar al–Anwar*, a work which runs into large volumes and essential for
the Shi’ah because of its comprehensiveness.

Thiqat al–Islam Allamah al–Nuri wrote a book about some aspects of the
life of this great scholar. This book has been printed in Iran, along
with the *Bihar*. Sheikh Muhammad ibn Murtada ibn Muhammad known as
al–Fayd al–Kashani, a well–versed scholar, an authority on both
transmitted and intellectual sciences was the author of *Al–Wafi fi Ilm
al–Hadith* which runs into fourteen parts each of which forms a separate
book. He recorded the hadiths contained in the four previously mentioned
books under such topics as the fundamentals of religion (*usul*), the
branches (*furu*’), practices (*sunnah*) and religious laws. He wrote
about two hundred books on various disciplines. He lived to the age of
eighty–four and died in 1091.

The third is the sheikh of sheikhs, the authority on hadith, Muhammad
ibn Hasan al–Hurr al–Shami al–Amili al–Mishghari, the writer of *Tafsil
Wasa’il al–Shi’ah ila Tahsil Ahadith al–Shari’ah* which is arranged
according to the traditional method of compiling *fiqh* books. This work
is one of the most useful compendia of hadiths, which the author
extracted from eighty books that were in his possession and from seventy
others through intermediaries. It is a very essential reference for the
Shi’ah. It was printed several times in Iran. Sheikh al–Hurr was born in
the month of Rajab of the year 1033 and passed away in Tus, Khorasan
province in the year 1104.

Sheikh Husayn, the son of Allamah al–Nuri, has written *Mustadrak
al–Wasa’il wa Mustambad al–Mas’il*. It is similar to Al–Wasa’il as far
as layout and method of compilation are concerned. It is, in fact, one
of the greatest works on hadith of the Shi’ah school. Sheikh Hasan
finished his work in 1319 and passed away in al–Ghari on 28th of Jumada
al–Akhirah, 1320.

There is another category of hadith compendia written by pious
outstanding scholars and authorities of this discipline among which are
the following:

The hundred–volume *Al–Awalim* which was written by the erudite master
of hadith, Mawla Abdullah ibn Nurillah al–Bahrani, who was contemporary
with Allamah Majlisi, the author of *Bihar al–Anwar.*

*Kitab Sharh al–Istibsar fi Ahadith al–A’immat al–At’har* which runs
into several large volumes similar to those of *Bihar*. It was written
by Sheikh Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Jawad, known as Ibn al–Wandi and
al–Faqih al–Kazimi. He lived in the time of Sheikh Muhammad ibn Hasan
al–Hurr, the writer of *Al–Wasa’il*. He was among those who studied
under the supervision of my (great) grandfather the great scholar Sayyid
Nuruddin the brother of Sayyid Muhammad, the author of *Al–Madarik.*

*Jami al–Akhbar fi Idah al–Istibsar* an extensive work consisting of
many volumes which is written by Sheikh Abdullatif ibn Ali ibn Ahmad ibn
Abu Jami’ al–Harithi al–Hamadani al–Shami al–Amili. He was trained by
the astute researcher, Sheikh al–Hasan Abi Mansur, son of the martyr
Sheikh Zayn al–Din al–Amili who was the author of *Al–Ma’lim* and
*Al–Muntaqa*. He lived in the tenth century.

The large compendium called *Al–Shifa fi Hadith al–Mustafa*, consisting
of several volumes, was written by the well–versed scholar of hadith,
Sheikh Muhammad al–Ridha’ ibn Sheikh Abdullatif al–Tabrizi. He completed
it in 1105.

*Jami’ al–Ahkam* was written by Sayyid Abdullah ibn Sayyid Muhammad
al–Ridha’ al–Shubbari al–Kazimi. He was the chief of the Shi’ah of his
time and a unique writer of his age. After Allamah Majlisi no one from
the subsequent writers wrote more books than him. He passed away in 1242
in Kazimiyyah.

Section Eight: The Precedence of the Shi’ah in Founding the Science of the Contextual Study of Hadith (dirayah) and its Classification into Common Categories
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first person to undertake this work is the famous Abu Abdullah
Muhammad ibn Abdullah al–Hakim al–Nishapuri (d. 405 A. H). He wrote a
book on this topic called *Ulum al–Hadith* in five volumes. He
classified hadith into fifty kinds. The author of *Kashf al–Zunun*
confirms that al–Hakim is a pioneer in this field, saying, “The first
person to undertake this work was al–Hakim followed by Ibn al–Salah”.

What al–Hafiz al–Suyuti states in his book *Al–Wasa’il fi al–Awa’il* is
that the first to systematize and classify the hadith into the commonly
known kinds is Ibn al–Salah (d. 643) in his famous *Mukhtasar* and this
does not contradict our assertion because what al–Suyuti meant by the
first was the first from among the Sunnis while al–Hakim was a Shi’ite,
a fact on which both sects agree.

Al–Sam’ani in his *Al–Ansab*, Sheikh Ahmad ibn Taimiyya and al–Hafiz
al–Dhahabi in his *Tadhkirat al–Huffaz* attested to his being a Shi’i.
In his book, al–Dhahabi relates on the authority of Ibn Tahir that the
latter said: “I asked Abu Ismail al–Ansari about al–Hakim. ‘Reliable in
hadith but a wicked *rafidi* (meaning Shi’ah)’, was his answer.”
Al–Dhahabi says, “Ibn Tahir added: ‘Covertly, Al-Hakim was a very
fanatical Shi’ah but publically portrays Sunni ideas as regards the
precedence of the three Caliphs and the caliphate. He did not conceal
his animosity towards Mu’awiyah and his family and openly spoke against
him and never apologized for it”.

Al–Hakim’s loyalty to Shi’ism was also attested to by our companions
such as Sheikh Muhammad ibn al–Hasan al–Hurr at the end of *Al–Was’il.*
In *Ma’alim al–Ulama’* in the chapter on surnames (*al–kuna*), it is
related that Ibn Shahrashub counts him among the Shi’ah authors and
ascribes to him *Al–Amali* and another book on the merits of al–Ridha’
(‘a). They also ascribed to him *Kitab Fatimat al–Zahra* (*a.s*)*.*
Mawla Abdullah Efendi presented a detailed biography of al–Hakim in the
first section of his *Riyad al–Ulama*, which is especially concerned
with Imamiyah Shi’ah.

He also mentioned him in the chapters on titles and surnames, attesting
to his loyalty to Shi’ism and ascribing to him *Kitab Usul ilm
al–Hadith* and *Kitab al–Madkhal ila Ilm al–Sahih*. He said “He
supplemented *Sahih al–Bukhari* with some hadiths about the Ahl al–Bayt,
such as that of the roasted bird and the one which reads: ‘He to whom I
am his master...’, [alluding to the hadith of Imam Ali’s investiture]”

After al–Hakim a number of Shi’ah authorities on science of hadith
compiled several works on this subject: Jamal al–Din Ahmad ibn Tawus
coined new technical terms for the Imamiyah for the classification of
hadiths such as sound (*sahih*), good (*hasan*), reliable (*muwaththaq*)
and weak (*da’if*). He passed away in 673 A. H. Others are Allamah Ali
ibn Abdulhamid al–Hasani who wrote *Sharh Usul Dirayat al–Hadith* and
relates from Allamah Ibn al–Mutahhar al–Hilli. Sheikh Zayn al–Din known
as al–Shahid al–Thani who has to his credit *Al–Bidaya fi Ilmi
al–Dirayah* and its commentary *Al–Dirayah*, Sheikh al–Husayn ibn
Abdissamad al–Harithi al–Hamadani wrote *Wusul al–Akhyar ila Usul
al–Akhbar*, Sheikh Abu Mansur al–Hasan ibn Zayn al–Din al–Amili wrote
*Al–Muntaqa* and mentioned the fundamentals of the science of hadith in
its introduction and Sheikh Bahauddin al–Amili wrote *Al–Wajizah fi Ilm
Dirayat al–Hadith* on which I commented producing *Nihayat al–Dirayah*.
This book has been printed in India and used as a text book.

Section Nine: The First who Wrote about the Science of the Biography of Transmitters of Hadith (ilm al–rijal)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Indeed, the pioneer in this field is Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Khalid
al–Barqi al–Qummi. He was one of the companions of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far
al–Kazim as recorded in the *Rijal* of Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi. Abu
Al–Faraj ibn al–Nadim has mentioned al–Barqi’s work on the biography of
narrators in *Al–Fihrist* in the beginning of the section on the fifth
discipline (sixth treatise) where he talked about Shi’ah jurists. He
says: “Among his books are *Kitab al–Awis*, *Kitab al–Tabsirah* and
*Kitab al–Rijal*, in which he mentions those who narrated from the
Commander of the Faithful, may Allah be pleased with him.”

The next person to write in this field is Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn
Jiblah ibn Hayyan ibn Ibhur al–Kinani who compiled *Kitab al–Rijal*. He
died in 219 after living a long life.

Al–Suyuti declared in his *Kitab al–Awa’il* that “the first to write
about narrators was Shu’bah.” In reality, he came after Ibn Jiblah
because Shu’bah died in the year 260 A. H. Furthermore, some of our
scholars, apart from Ibn Jiblah had preceded him. One of them is Abu
Jafar al–Yaqtini, a companion of Imam al–Jawad Muhammad ibn Ali who
compiled *Kitab al–Rijal* according to the *Fihrist*s of al–Najashi and
Ibn al–Nadim. Another scholar who preceded Shu’bah is Sheikh Muhammad
ibn Khalid al–Barqi who was among the companions of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far
and Imam al–Ridha’ and he lived until the time of Imam Abu Jafar
Muhammad al–Jawad (‘a). His book is still in our possession. Those who
narrated on the authority of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and on
the authority of subsequent Imams, are mentioned in it. Like other
similar works this book includes defamation (*jarh*) and authentication
(*tadil*) of narrators.

Another author is Abu Ja’far Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al–Barqi, who
wrote *Kitab al–Rijal* and *Kitab al–Tabaqat* and died in 273 A. H.
Sheikh Abu al–Hasan Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Dawud ibn Ali al–Qummi known
as Ibn Dawud, a chief of the Shi’ah wrote *Kitab al–Mamduhin wa
al–Madhmumin*, a book on commendable narrators and blameworthy ones. He
died in 368 A. H.

Also Sheikh al–Saduq compiled works on *rijal, Kitab ma’rifat al–rijal*
and *Al–Rijal al–Mukhtarin min As’hab al–Nabi* (*S*)*.* He passed away
in 381 A. H. Another is Sheikh Abu Bakr al–Ja’ani whom Ibn al–Nadim
describes as “One of the exalted Shi’ah.” He wrote *Kitab al–Shi’ah min
As’hab al–Hadith wa Tabaqatihim*. Al–Najashi says: “It is a big book”.
Sheikh Muhammad ibn Battah wrote *Kitab Asma Musannifi al–Shi’ah*. He
died in the year 270 A. H. Sheikh Nasr ibn al–Sabah Abu al–Qasim
al–Balkhi, the master of Sheikh Abu Amr al–Kishshi was the author of
*Kitab Ma’rifat al–Naqilin min Ahl al–Mi’at al–Thalithah* on the
transmitters of the third century, in which he himself died.

Ali ibn al–Hasan ibn Faddal wrote *Kitab al–Rijal*. He was also of the
same class as the previous writer. Sayyid Abi Ya’la Hamza ibn al–Qasim
ibn Ali ibn Hamza ibn al–Hasan ibn Ubaidillah ibn al–Abbas ibn Ali ibn
Abi Talib (peace be upon him) compiled *Kitab* *Man Rawa an Ja’far ibn
Muhammad min al–Rijal*, which is about the people who related from Imam
Ja’far. Al–Najashi observes: “It is a good book from which al–Tala’kbari
narrated by permission (*ijazah*).” He was among scholars who lived in
the third century. Another scholar of the same century was Sheikh
Muhammad ibn al–Hasan ibn Ali Abu Abdillah al–Muharibi who authored
*Kitab* *al–Rijal.*

Al–Musta’tif, Isa ibn Mihram, one of the earlier scholars, wrote *Kitab
al–Muhaddithin* as recorded by al–Tusi in *Al–Fihrist*. I have
mentioned, in the original version, the works of al–Tusi al–Najashi,
al–Kishshi, Allamah Ibn al–Mutahhar al–Hilli, Ibn Dawud and the classes
of scholars who wrote on *rijal.* To this day, scholars rely on their
books for defamation and authentication of narrators. Al–Najashi’s
teacher Abu al–Faraj al–Qanani al–Kufi wrote *Kitab Mu’jam Rijal
al–Mufaddal* which he arranged in alphabetical order.

Section Ten: The First to Write about the Categories (tabaqat) of Transmitters
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The pioneer in this field is Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Umar al–Waqidi
who was born in 103 A. H and lived to the age of seventy–eight. His
compilation of *Al–Tabaqat* is mentioned in Ibn al–Nadim’s *Al–Fihrist*
as we shall see later in a detailed account in chapter eight, section
four, when referring to his biography. Ibn al–Ja’abi al–Qadi Abu Bakr
Amr ibn Muhammad ibn Salam ibn al–Barra' had *Kitab al–Shi’ah min As’hab
al–Hadith wa Tabaqatihim* which is a voluminous book, *Kitab al–Mawali
wa al–Ashraf wa Tabaqatihim* (On the Clients and the Nobles), *Kitab Man
Rawa min Bani Hashim wa Mawalihim* (On the Narrators from Among Banu
Hashim and their Clients), *Kitab Akhbar Al Abi Talib*, (An Account
about the Family of Abu Talib) and *Kitab Akhbar Baghdad* (Annals of
Baghdad) with an account about the hadith scholars of that city and
their various classes. In *Al–Fihrist*, Ibn al–Nadim says: “He was among
the best Shi’ah. He called on Saif al–Daulah who gave him a warm
reception and honoured him.” A number of scholars such as Sheikh
al–Mufid transmitted on his authority. He died in 355 A. H.

Sheikh Abu Ja’far Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al–Barqi, the author of
*Al–Mahasin* compiled *Kitab al–Tabaqat*, *Kitab al–Ta'rikh* and *Kitab
al–Rijal*. He died in 274 or, according to other sources, in 280.


