Chapter 3: The Precedence Of The Shi’ah In Islamic Jurisprudence
================================================================

Section One: The First to Compile and Systematize Islamic Jurisprudence
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The first person to write on jurisprudence is Ali ibn Abi Rafi’, a
retainer (*mawla*) of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his Household. In the section on the first category of the compilers who
were partisans of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) Al–Najashi says
that Ali ibn Abi Rafi’, a retainer of the Messenger of Allah, was a
*tabi’i* and among the best Shi’ah. He enjoyed the company of the
Commander of the Faithful and was his scribe. He trained as a jurist
under his supervision and compiled his works during the lifetime of his
master. He memorized a great deal and compiled a book about various
topics in jurisprudence such as ritual ablution, prayer and others.

Al–Najashi adds, “They used to hold this book dear because it is the
first work compiled by the Shi’ah.”

Al–Suyuti says that the first person to write about jurisprudence is
Imam Abu Hanifah. But this must mean the first one among the Sunnis
because Ali ibn Abi Rafi’s compilation took place during the days of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a), a long time before Abu Hanifah was born.
Furthermore, there are other Shi’ah jurists who had written about
jurisprudence before him, such as al–Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, a
*tabi’i* and Sa’id ibn al–Musayyab, a Qurayshite who was one of the six
famous jurists of Medina. Ibn al–Musayyab passed away in 94 A. H. He was
born during the days of Umar ibn al–Khattab (r. a).

Another jurist who preceded Abu Hanifah is al–Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu
Bakr (r. a) who, according to an authentic account, died in 106 A. H. He
was the maternal grandfather of our master al–Sadiq (his mother Umm
Farwa was al–Qasim's daughter). He married the daughter of Imam Zayn
al–Abidin Ali ibn al–Husayn, peace be on them both. In *Qurb al–Isnad*,
Abdullah al–Himyari observes: “Al–Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr and
Sai’d ibn al–Musayyab were once mentioned in the presence of al–Ridha’
peace be upon him who said: ‘They were on this affair’ meaning that they
were Shi’ah.”

In *Al–Kafi* in the chapter about the birth of Abu Abdullah al–Sadiq,
Al–Kulayni relates: “From Yahya ibn Jarir who said ‘Abu Abdillah
al–Sadiq said: Sai’d ibn al–Musayyab, al–Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr
and Abu Khalid al–Kabuli were among the people whom Ali ibn al–Husayn
trusted.’ They are also said to be among the disciples (*hawari*) of Ali
ibn al–Husayn (‘a).

Section Two: The Famous Jurists Among the Shi’ah of the very Early Period
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

In his *Rijal*, Sheikh Abu Amr al–Kashshi, who was contemporary with Abu
Jafar al–Kulayni, has considered the jurists among the companions of Abu
Ja’far and Abu Abdillah (‘a) to be among the scholars of the third
century. Naming them, he wrote: Our scholars were unanimous in regard to
the truthfulness of these early companions of Abu Ja’far and Abu
Abdillah (‘a) and they regarded them as great jurists. They say: There
are six foremost jurists of the earlier generations: Zurarah, Ma’ruf ibn
Kharbudh, Buraid, Abu Basir al–Asadi, Al–Fudayl ibn Yasar and Muhammad
ibn Muslim al–Ta'ifi, Zurarah being the most well–versed of them in
jurisprudence. In place of Abu Basir al–Asadi, some mention Abu Basir
al–Muradi whose full name was Laith ibn al–Bukhtiri.

Then he adds “In mentioning the names of jurists from among the
companions of Abu Abdillah al–Sadiq (‘a) scholars are unanimous that
whatever is reported from these jurists is authentic. They regard their
word as credible and they acknowledge their competence in jurisprudence.
There are also six others like those whom we previously named. They are
Jamil ibn Darraj, Abdullah ibn Maskan, Abdullah ibn Bukayr, Hammad ibn
Isa, Hammad ibn Uthman and Iban ibn Uthman. Abu Ishaq al–Faqih Thalaba
ibn Maimun claims that the most competent of them was Jamil ibn Darraj.
They were among the youthful narrators and companions of Abu Abdillah
(‘a).”

Then al–Kishshi adds: “As for the jurists among the disciples of Abu
Ibrahim (al–Kazim) and Abu al–Hasan (al–Ridha’) (peace be on them) our
companions unanimously regard that which is definitely reported from
them as authentic, believe in their integrity and acknowledge their
competence in jurisprudence and learning. They are six in number: Yunus
ibn Abd al–Rahman, Safwan ibn Yahya Biyya’ al–Sabiri, Muhammad ibn Abi
Umayr, Abdullah ibn al–Mughirah, al–Hasan ibn Mahbub and Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr. These were apart from the aforementioned six who
were among the companions of Abu Abdillah (‘a). Some sources mention
al–Hasan ibn Ali ibn Faddal and Fadalah ibn Ayub. And others mention
Uthman ibn Isa in place of Fadalah. The most competent in jurisprudence
among them was Yunus ibn Abd al–Rahman and Safwan ibn Yahya.”

Section Three: The Earlier Generations who Produced Works According to the Ja’fari School
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the fact that the jurists of the earlier generations who produced
works according to the school of Imam Jafar ibn Muhammad al–Sadiq peace
be on him were numerous.

In the early part of his book *Al–Mu’tabar*, where he mentions Imam Abu
Abdillah al–Sadiq (‘a) Sheikh Abu al–Qasim Jafar ibn Sa’id who was known
as ‘al–Muhaqqiq’ says: “Through his teaching, a large number of notable
jurists reached distinguished stations and four hundred books were
compiled on the answers he gave.”

In reality, these books represent the works of the prominent scholars,
because Sheikh Shamsuddin Muhammad ibn Makki, al–Shahid, has recorded in
his *Al–Dhikra* that four thousand people who came from Iraq, Hijaz,
Khurasan and Syria have written about Abu Abdullah al–Sadiq’s answers to
questions. Their works have been mentioned in different *Fihrist* books
that are written by Shi’ah scholars, such as Sheikh Abu al–Abbas
al–Najashi, Sheikh Abu Jafar al–Tusi, Sheikh Abu al–Faraj ibn al–Nadim,
and what is stated in the book of al–Uqayli and the book of Ibn
al–Ghada'iri. In his *Al–Irshad* in the section about Imam al–Sadiq
(‘a), Sheikh al–Mufid wrote: On his authority, people transmitted
learning far and wide, thereby making his name to be known in many
regions. Scholars have not narrated as much from any member of his
family as they related from him. Hadith narrators have indeed related
four thousand names of reliable persons of different schools of thought
who transmitted on the authority of Imam al–Sadiq.

Sheikh Abu al–Abbas Ahmad ibn Uqdah al–Zaydi has enumerated these four
thousand men in *Al–Tasnif*. Sheikh Abu Ja’far al–Tusi has done the same
in *Al–Rijal* at the beginning of the chapter on the companions of
al–Sadiq*.* The reader may refer to it.

Section Four: Some Extensive Compendia on Jurisprudence (fiqh) by the Disciples of the Imams of the Ahl al–Bayt From Among the Generation That came After the Tabi’is
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Jami’ al–Fiqh* by Thabit ibn Hormuz, Abu al–Miqdam which he wrote on
the authority of Imam Zayn al–Abidin Ali ibn al–Husayn (‘a). *Kitab
Sharayi’ al–Ayman* by Muhammad al–Mu’afa, Abu Ja’far, a retainer
(*mawla*) of Imam al–Sadiq (‘a). He died in 265 A. H. He related it from
Imam al–Kazim and Imam al–Ridha’ (‘a). *Jami' Abwab al–Fiqh* by Ali ibn
Abi Hamza, a student of Imam al–Sadiq (‘a). Abdullah ibn al–Mughirah had
thirty books on *fiqh* topics to his credit as recorded in the *Fihrist*
of Al–Najashi. He was a disciple of Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (‘a). *Kitab
al–Fiqh wa al–Ahkam* by Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al–Thaqafi (d. 283). A book
*Al–Mubawwab fi* *al–Halal wa al–Haram* on the permissible and the
prohibited by Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Yahya al–Madani al–Aslami (d.
184). *Kitab al–Jami' fi Abwab al–Fiqh* (discussing various issues of
jurisprudence) by al–Hasan ibn Ali Abi Muhammad al–Hajal. The prolific
writer, Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Shirah al–Qasani compiled *Kitab al–Jami'
al–Kabir*. Sufwan ibn Yahya al–Bajali who died in 210 wrote a book and
arranged it according to the traditional order of *fiqh* books. *Kitab
al–Mashyakhah* by al–Hasan ibn Mahbub Abu Ali al–Sarrad (d. 223) who was
one of the chiefs of the Shi’ah and a disciple of Imam al–Ridha’ (‘a).
And lastly, *Kitab al–Rahmah* which is an extensive book on all branches
of jurisprudence. The contents of the book is based on Ahl al–Bayt
narrations.


