Chapter 5: Precedence Of The Shi’ah In The Principles Of Jurisprudence (Usul)
=============================================================================

The pioneer in this field is The Splitter of Knowledge, Imam Abu Jafar
Muhammad al–Baqir and his son Abu Abdillah al–Sadiq. They dictated the
principles of this discipline and other relevant issues to a group of
their students who collected and passed them over to the later
generations who compiled and arranged them according to their topics
into books, such as *Kitab Usul Al al–Rasul*, *Kitab al–Fusul*
*al–Muhimmah fi Usul al–A’immah* and *Kitab al–Usul al–Asilah*. All
these books consist of authentic narrations related by reliable scholars
from the Ahl al–Bayt through continuous chains of transmission.

The first person to devote time for writing about specific topics on
*usul* was Hisham ibn al–Hakam, the master of theologians and a student
of Abu Abdillah al–Sadiq (‘a). He wrote *Kitab al–Alfa wa Mabahithiha*.
It is the most important work written in this field. Then comes Yunus
ibn Abdurrahman, a client of Al Yaqtin and a student of Imam al–Kazim,
Musa ibn Ja’far (‘a). He wrote *Kitab Ikhtilaf al–Hadith* which deals
with the contradiction (*ta’arud*) between evidences, the equivalence
(*ta’adul*) between them and the preference (*tarjih*) of one over the
other.

Al–Suyuti recorded in *Kitab al–Awa’il* that “All the scholars of the
Sunni school agree that Al–Shafi’i is the first to write about the
principles of jurisprudence.” It is similar in size and method of
treatment is *Kitab Usul al–Fiqh* by Sheikh al–Mufid, Muhammad ibn
Muhammad ibn al–Nu’man known as Ibn al–Mu’allim. Both works have been
printed.

The most extensive book on the principles of jurisprudence of the
earlier period is the comprehensive two–volume *Kitab al–Dhari’ah fi Ilm
usul al–Shari’ah* by Sharif al–Murtada. He wrote numerous books on this
subject, the best and most extensive of which is his *Al–Dhari’ah*.
Better still, is Sheikh al–Tusi’s *Al–Uddah,* an unprecedented
magnificent work characterised by accuracy of exposition and depth of
treatment. It is worth mentioning that the Shi’ah have reached the peak
of rigorous examination in this discipline and the issues related to it
through the continuous efforts of successive generations. Some scholars
were able to compile extensive treatises on particular issues in
addition to the comprehensive works. The masters of this science are
innumerable and thus, it is difficult to list even a single category of
them.


