Introduction
============

The Ghadir event and its significance Seventy days before his demise,
when Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF)

1 was returning to Medina after his last pilgrimage to Mecca, he
reached the pond of Khum (Ghadir Khum) near Juhfa. It was the 18th of
the month of Dhul-Hijja of the year 10 AH (March 15, 632 AD).

By this time, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) had conveyed all of the divine
commandments to his nation except for the formal and explicit public
announcement of his divinely appointed successors as the leaders,
guardians, and guides for the believers for all days to come.

By the order of Allah, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) stopped at the pond of
Khum, gathered the crowd of pilgrims, and delivered his last universal
speech.

In this sermon, he presented his last religious instruction which
finalized the last divine religion and made Islam the perfect religion
in the sight of Allah. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (PBUH), the fifth Imam and
successor of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) said:

1 The acronym “PBUH&HF” refers to phrase “peace be upon him and his
family.”

“The last obligatory duty that Allah sent down was al-Walaya (adherence
to the guardian assigned by Allah). Then, He sent down the verse:
‘Today, I completed your religion…’1 once the Messenger of Allah
established it in Juhfa area.”2

This message was the most unique in the entire mission of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) due to the revelation of Verse 67, Chapter 5 of the Holy Quran
before his speech.

In this revelation, Allah warned His Messenger that failing to deliver
this last message would nullify his entire mission. This unprecedented
warning proves that this last message contained the most important
religious commandment of Allah for the Muslim nation.

Moreover, the contents of this last message were so crucial to the
faith that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) emphatically required all those who
directly or indirectly heard the sermon of Ghadir Khum to convey it to
people who were not aware of its details, and parents to convey it to
their children for all generations to come. Hence, this sermon addresses
all Muslim generations of the world until the

1 Chapter 5, Verse 3 of the Holy Quran
2 al-Tafsir, Ali Ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi, vol. 1, p. 162, under the
commentary of Verse 5:3; al-Tafsir, al-Ayyashi, vol. 1, p. 292, under
the commentary of Verse 5:3; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 37, p. 112, Hadith 5,
vol. 37, p. 138, Hadith 27.
3 Day of Judgement. This emphasis naturally implies that the content of
this message has a vital role in the future of the Muslims, their
spiritual health, and their felicity in the Hereafter.

The main issue that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) addressed in his speech in
Ghadir Khum was that Allah appointed Ali Ibn Abi Talib (PBUH) as the
guardian (Wali), the master (Mawla), the leader (Imam), and the
commander (Amir) of all believing men and women, the deputy and the
executor of his affairs (Wasi), and his successor (Khalifa).

His sayings and commands should be preferred over the opinions of all
others in every matter. Obeying him is obeying Allah, and disobeying him
is disobeying Allah.

Whoever follows him (and his sayings) is a believer under the
guardianship of Allah, and whoever turns away from him (or his sayings)
is a disbeliever under the guardianship of Satan.

Guardianship (al-Walaya) expresses a bilateral relation between the
guardian and the people. Observing al-Walaya by people means adhering to
the guardian and acknowledging his authority by heart, tongue, and
action.

On the other hand, the action of al-Walaya by the guardian means
offering protection from evil, spiritual assistance, care, support, and
guidance for his adherents. A divinely appointed guardian guards his
adherents from misguidance, spiritual destruction, wrongdoing, and sin
as much as they adhere to him and his commands.

Establishing al-Walaya has been the ultimate goal of

religion and the fruit of the entire efforts of Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH&HF) during his mission.

One who submits to Allah’s representative and adheres to him has indeed
acknowledged Allah’s authority and guardianship and is a true monotheist
in obeying Allah.

Acknowledging the guardianship of the leaders that Allah appointed and
submitting to them is the greatest pillar of faith. It safeguards the
followers from the wrath and punishment of Allah. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(PBUH) said:

“Islam is established by five things: prayer, charity, fasting,
pilgrimage, and al-Walaya (adhering to the guardians authorized by
Allah).

None (among them) was called for as (emphatically as) al-Walaya was
called for. However, people accepted the first four and abandoned
al-Walaya.”1

People who refused to submit to the leaders that Allah appointed
resemble the Satan who refused to submit to the viceregent of Allah,
Adam (PBUH), and consequently, became an outcast and went under the
curse of Allah 1 al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 18, Hadith 3.

forever as mentioned in the Holy Quran.1 It is narrated that Imam
al-Ridha (PBUH) said:

“The similitude of the believers in accepting the guardianship of the
Commander of the Believers (Ali) on the day of Ghadir Khum is that of
the angels in prostrating before Adam (i.e., submitting to him), and the
similitude of those who turned away from the guardianship of the
Commander of the Believers on the day of Ghadir is that of the devil
(Iblis).”2

In one of his speeches on the anniversary of the day of Ghadir, Imam
Ali (PBUH) said:

“Allah does not accept the faith (of an individual) except after he
acknowledges the guardianship of whom He required. He does not arrange
the means of His obedience (for an individual) except after he adheres
to His ropes and the ropes of His authorized people.

Thus, Allah sent down to His Prophet (PBUH&HF) on the day of the large
trees1 that which explained His will for His sincere and chosen
servants.

Allah commanded him to convey (the message) without being concerned
about the hypocrites or the deviants, and guaranteed him protection
against their evil... By that, Allah completed His religion, and
delighted the eyes of His Prophet (PBUH&HF), and the believers.

Some of you witnessed this event and some received its news. This
(appointment) concluded the beautiful word of Allah for those who
observe patience… ”2

1 This phrase refers to the day of Ghadir Khum as there had been some
large trees beside the pond at the time.

2 Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 94, p. 115, Hadith 8.


