What Does the Sermon Establish For Ali (pbuh)?
==============================================

Does successorship only refer to political authority? Some people do
terrible injustice to the event of Ghadir by portraying it as a matter
of transferring political power.

They unwittingly borrow the Sunni understanding of the term Khalifa,
interpreting it as پga ruling successorپh. They state that the main goal
of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) in Ghadir Khum was to establish Imam Ali (PBUH)
as a political leader after his departure.

Were it truly so, the matter would have been a historical matter, and
it would be meaningless to quarrel over the right of Imam Ali (PBUH) to
rule after passing 1400 years.

It is almost fourteen centuries too late to decide whether Ali (PBUH)
should have been the first or the fourth ruling governor after the
departure of the Prophet (PBUH&HF).

Were there a mistake during the upheaval after his departure, it should
not be stressed, because no one can change the past, and believing that
Ali (PBUH) should have been the first ruler instead of the fourth would
have no consequence in todayپfs life.

This viewpoint ultimately led some to believe that the differences
between the Shia and the Sunnis are limited to some minor historical
disagreements, which do not have any bearing on their salvation in the
Hereafter, and that their beliefs are the same; thus, they should
abandon their differences for the sake of their prosperity in the life
of this world.

By considering the issue of successorship to be a matter of political
rule, they have unknowingly belittled the goals and the achievements of
Allahپfs Messenger and his successors, peace be upon them, for
historical records show that, due to a lack of sincere supporters, they
were unable to implement their ideal divine government.

Besides, most of the Shia Imams (PBUT) never attempted to implement
their own government and used to refer those who questioned their
stance1 to Imam Mahdi (PBUH) who will appear at the end of time and will
establish the Kingdom of Justice on earth.

On the other hand, a brief look at the sermon of Ghadir shows that the
Prophet (PBUH&HF) wanted to pass on much more than political authority
to Imam Ali (PBUH) and the Imams after him. An examination of his words
shows that they are the guardians that Allah appointed, and people must
acknowledge their authority inside their hearts and follow them in all
aspects of life.

People will benefit from them as their Imams and will be rewarded by
Allah only if they accept them willingly and not through political
dominion. Whether or not the guardians that Allah appointed become a
ruling authority, the believers of all generations have a duty to abide
by their instructions.

Therefore, it is not too late to follow their commands, accept them as
guardians, submit to them, prefer their sayings over oneپfs own and
otherپfs opinions, consider 1 See for instance, al-Kafi, vol. 1, pp.
341-342, Hadith 25, 26, and 27; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 132, Hadith
1, and p. 109, Hadith 1.

them as the center of truth, evaluate everything by their standard, and
keep aloof from their enemies who opposed their commands.

It is also interesting to observe that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) mentioned
the titles Wali, Mawla, and Imam for Ali (PBUH) in his sermon over 27
times, whereas he used the word Khalifa for him only three times. Even
under the Sunni implication of the word Khalifa (successor).

which limits it to political rule.it is clear that the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) stressed spiritual leadership in his speech, which would
guarantee the salvation of those who follow the Imam, and would lead
them towards Paradise. Worldly issues never took priority for the
Prophet (PBUH&HF) and his successors. Imam Ali himself has said:

By Allah, this world of yours is more despicable in my eyes than a pig
bone in the hand of a Certainly, had the majority of people followed the
sayings of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) concerning the divinely appointed
guide, he would have naturally come to power.

Thus, Imam Aliپfs exclusive qualification for political rule is only
one of the natural outcomes of the guardianship (Walaya) that the
Prophet (PBUH&HF) established for him on behalf of Allah on the day of
Ghadir. In this manner, the spiritual 1 Nahj al-Balagha, Maxim 236. Also
refer to Sermon 3 (known as al- Shiqshiqiyya) for another similar
statement.

authority of Imam Ali (PBUH) and his pure descendants is still
effective over the remaining believers until the Day of Judgement,
irrespective of the support of the majority of people for them or their
political authority.

Believing in the Imamپfs virtues in oneپfs heart and adhering to his
words in disguise (al-Taqiyya) under tyrannical rule are not only
sufficient for salvation in the Hereafter but also rewarded many-fold,
because observing faith is more difficult at times of terror and fear.

According to the traditions, worship during the days of tyrannical
government is more rewarding for the believers than worship during the
time of the just government, though this fact should not prevent the
believers from praying to Allah for the manifestation of the Kingdom of
Justice on earth by Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH).1

The rights and virtues of Imam Ali and other Imams The sermon of Ghadir
Khum confirms the following rights and virtues of Imam Ali (PBUH) and
the Imams after him:

1- Allah has decreed absolute authority for them over the believers,
and thus, just like the Prophet (PBUH&HF), all their commands must be
obeyed unconditionally.

2- Like the Prophet (PBUH&HF), they have priority over people, and they
have more rights over the believers 1 cf. al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 333,
Hadith 2, also Hadith 1; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 127, Hadith 20,
also p. 145, Hadith 67. Another related tradition can be found at:
al-Ikhtisas, p. 20, Hadith; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 144, Hadith
62.

than what they have over their own souls. They should be preferred over
others (in position, sayings, ideas, commands, etc.) for Allah has
preferred them.

3- Allah has made them the leaders of the believers and the medium of
divine guidance after the Prophet (PBUH&HF). They guide people towards
the pleasure of Allah, keep them from His disobedience and His wrath,
and lead them to Paradise.

4- Allah has made them the guardians of the faithful, who protect their
close adherents from evil and misguidance.

5- They are the پgStraight Pathپh of Allah, whom people are ordered to
follow.

6- They have all the knowledge of the Prophet (PBUH&HF). Allah has
placed the knowledge of everything in them. They are the inheritors of
all branches of knowledge. Particularly, they possess the complete
knowledge of religion. They are authorized to expound the religion and
explain its commandments and prohibitions.

7- Allah has authorized them to interpret the Holy Quran and to explain
its meaning after the Prophet (PBUH&HF). No one knows its
interpretations, its hidden warnings, and its mysteries except through
them. They guide people to the truth of the Quran and call them to it.

8- They are the executors of the will of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) and the
deputies of his affairs (Wasi). Imam Ali (PBUH) was the greatest in
virtue and rank among the deputies of all the prophets (most of whom
were prophets themselves) just as the Prophet (PBUH&HF) was the greatest
among all prophets (PBUT).

9- Imam Ali (PBUH) is the most virtuous amongst the creation of Allah
so long as creation exists.

10- Imam Ali (PBUH) was foremost in accepting Islam and worshipping
Allah.

11- Imam Ali (PBUH) fought against the enemies of Allah by His command
and was the greatest helper of religion.

12- Imam Ali (PBUH) was the greatest aid and defender of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF). He fought on his behalf and offered his life as a sacrifice
for him. His relation to the Prophet (PBUH&HF) was that of Aaron to
Moses (PBUT).

13- Imam Ali (PBUH) was the dearest and the closest to the Prophet
(PBUH&HF). He is from the Prophet (PBUH&HF), and the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
is from him. The Prophet (PBUH&HF) called him his brother.

14- The title of پgthe Commander of the Believersپh exclusively belongs
to him.

15- Allah and His Prophet (PBUH&HF) are pleased with him. All verses of
the Holy Quran that express Allahپfs satisfaction or praise in their
ideal sense have been revealed about him.

16- The divine light, the divine guidance, and the divine leadership
have been placed in Imam Ali (PBUH) and the Imams from his descendants
up to Imam Mahdi (PBUH), the last divinely appointed Imam. The earth
will never lack an Imam until the Day of Judgement.

17- Imam Ali (PBUH) and the Imams of his descendents are the trustees
of Allah, His appointed judges, the vessels of divine knowledge1, the
greatest proofs of Allah 1 The پgdivine knowledgeپh refers to all the
heavenly knowledge created by Allah, and placed in His best creation.

It is called divine just because Allah issued and authorized it, and
because it is not a science generated by a human. It is called His
knowledge since it is His creation and is attributed to Him. However,
this should not be confused with His پgEternal Knowledgeپh.

It should be made clear that any knowledge that a human being can
possess, grasp, or comprehend is a creation, and has no similarity
whatsoever with Allahپfs Eternal Knowledge (i.e., His Essence), which is
not created. The knowledge that a human or even an Imam possesses is not
a part of Allahپfs Eternal Knowledge, otherwise it would imply His
Essence has parts.

Any imagination or perception of Allah's Eternal Knowledge by us is a
creation of our mind and cannot be attributed to Allah. With regard to
the Essence of Allah, we are not allowed to theorize or converse because
we have no way to understand Him, and by پgHis Eternal Knowledgeپh, we
only mean, پgHe is not ignorantپh.

We should recognize that His Essence (Dhat) is free from any type of
knowledge that we know (i.e., any generated knowledge even if it is
multiplied by infinity in terms of quality and quantity) just as we
recognize that there is nothing that He is unaware of. Nothing is like
Him.

Maintaining a difference on the quality or the quantity between His
knowledge and the concept of knowledge that is known to us is not enough
to avoid resemblance, and we need to deny the resemblance in the concept
of knowledge between the Creator and the creation.

There is neither concept, nor quality for His Essence. Allah is the
creator of perfections and qualities, and He is not limited by the
extension of qualities and concepts that we imagine. Allah knows, but
not like how His creation knows. Hence, our understanding of His Eternal
Knowledge (i.e., His Essence) is only among His creation, and His
exhaustive arguments against them.

18- Imam Ali (PBUH) and the pure members of his progeny constitute one
of the two weighty symbols besides the Holy Quran. If people adhere to
both, they will be never misled. Each one of the two guides to the other
and agrees with it.

19- Imam Ali (PBUH) and the Imams of his progeny are the most learned
about the religion. The lawful and unlawful things are only those that
the book of Allah, the Messenger, and the Imams, have declared so,
respectively.

20- The last Imam of his descendants, the Mahdi (PBUH), shall establish
the global kingdom of justice. He will revive Allahپfs religion, and
will overcome all religions and ideas.

He will annihilate falsehood, will purify the earth from the enemies of
Allah, will avenge the blood of all the friends of Allah, and will
re-establish the rights of Allah, the Prophet (PBUH&HF), and his
family.


