Transmitting the Sermon Through Modern Ways
===========================================

As the Prophet (PBUH&HF) ordered, every Muslim who receives his message
should transmit it to other members of his community, especially the
youth and children.

Transmitting the sermon is the greatest manifestation of enjoining what
is right (Amr bil ma’ruf)1.

The Prophet (PBUH&HF) mentioned that the most important example of
enjoining the right is conveying what he said in this sermon to
truth-seeking individuals who have not heard its details, urging them to
follow it as an order from Allah and His Prophet (PBUH&HF), and advising
them against violating it.

Introducing the position and virtues of Imam Ali (PBUH) to the people
is the best possible deed, because it makes known to people the
authentic source of inquiry for all righteous deeds.

The Prophet (PBUH&HF) stated in the sermon that without recognizing
Imam Ali (PBUH), there is 1 The word al-Ma’ruf means what is recognized.
It refers to the deeds that Allah has recognized as good. On the other
hand, the word al- Munkar means what is rejected. It refers to what
Allah did not recognize as righteous deeds, and thus, people should
avoid them. neither any value nor any effect in enjoining other
righteous deeds.

Therefore, it is the duty of all believing men and women to inform
other Muslims, who are prepared to hear the truth, about the content of
this sermon without screening it according to personal opinion.

What follow are some suggestions to make the text as well as the
meanings of this sermon popular in our community: 1- Holding frequent
special meetings for reciting the Arabic text of the sermon, its
translation, and its explanation.

Seeking nearness to Allah by reminding about the Prophet’s statements
on the day of Ghadir, and making such spiritual gatherings as the medium
of one’s requests before Allah.

2- Reciting a part of the sermon, even a small amount, in any general
gathering, and reminding about one’s obligation towards it.

3- Holding classes of memorizing the text of the sermon for the youth,
organizing competitions, quizzes, and offering prizes for learning the
contents of the sermon.

4- Presenting the books containing the full text of the Prophet’s
(PBUH&HF) sermon at Ghadir Khum as gifts to the family and friends.

5- Making decorative objects, goods, and greeting cards, etc., on which
the key phrases of the sermon are written or carved.

6- Developing extracurricular programs in schools for teaching the text
of the sermon to the students.

7- Translating the sermon into different languages and publishing them
in papers and on the Internet.

Keeping alive the event and observing its anniversary There are many
traditions on the importance of observing the anniversary of the event
of Ghadir Khum. To be brief, only three traditions are partially quoted
below. The Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said:

“The day of Ghadir Khum is the greatest religious festival (Eid) of my
nation. It was the day that Allah, exalted is His rememberance,
commanded me to appoint my brother, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, as the guiding
banner for my nation, by whom they will be rightly guided after me. It
was the day in which Allah finalized religion and fulfilled His
blessings on my nation and was pleased that Islam be their faith.”1

Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said to one of his companions: 1 al-Amali,
al-Saduq, p. 125, Hadith 8, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 94, p. 110, Hadith 2.

“Fasting on the day of Ghadir is equivalent to fasting throughout the
entire age of the world… It is the greatest festival of Allah. Allah has
not sent any prophet but that he celebrated this day as Eid and was
aware of its sanctity. It is known in the heavens as ‘The Day of the
Famous Covenant’… You might think that Allah, the mighty and the
majestic, has created a day more sacred than that.

No, by Allah! No, by Allah! No, by Allah!”1 Imam Ridha (PBUH) said:

“Certainly, the day of Ghadir is more famous in the heavens than in the
earth… and by Allah, had people truly known the superiority of this day,
the 1 Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 3, p. 143, Hadith 1; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
95, p. 302, Hadith 2.

angels would have been shaking hands with them ten times a day.”1

Thanking Allah for this greatest blessing Being grateful to the
benefactor for his favors is a matter of rational necessity. The wiser
the servant, the more gratitude he expresses in words and actions to his
master. Allah states in the Holy Quran:

“We indeed bestowed wisdom upon Luqman: ‘Be grateful to Allah.’
Certainly, whoever is grateful does so to the profit of his own soul,
but if any is ungrateful, verily Allah is free of all wants and is
abundantly praised.”2

In addition, the greater the favor, the more appreciation that is due.
Divine guardianship (al-Walaya) is the greatest favor that Allah has
bestowed upon His creation. The more gratitude that someone expresses to
Allah by adhering to it, the more benefit he receives from it. On the
other hand, the more someone rejects Allah’s mercy, the more he is 1
Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 6, p. 24, Hadith 9, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 94, p.
118, Hadith 9.

2 Chapter 31, Verse 12 of the Holy Quran.

entitled to His curse, which lies in the absence of His mercy and
protection. Allah states:

“If you are grateful, I will increase your (benefits from My favor);
but if you show ingratitude, truly My torment is intense indeed.”1 On
the anniversary of the event of Ghadir Khum, Imam al- Sadiq (PBUH)
praised and thanked Allah, saying:

1 Chapter 14, Verse 7 of the Holy Quran.

“O Allah! We listened, obeyed, and answered the caller from You due to
Your favor. Thus, praise belongs to You. We seek Your forgiveness, our
Lord, and towards Your (reward or punishment) is the eventual turn.

1 We believed in Allah, who is Unique and has no partner, believed in
His Messenger, Muhammad, answered the caller of Allah and followed the
Messenger in adhering to our master, the commander and the guardian of
the believers, Ali Ibn Ali Talib.

He is the servant of Allah, the brother of His Prophet, the most
truthful, His exhaustive argument against His creation, the supporter of
His Prophet, and His true and clear religion. He is a flag of the
religion of Allah, the treasurer of His (issued) knowledge, the chest of
what is hidden by Allah, the place of His secrets, and the trustee of
Allah and His witness over His creation.

O Allah! We have heard the call of one calling (us) to faith, ‘Believe
in Your Lord,’ thus we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins,
blot out from us our evil deeds, and take our souls in the company of
the righteous. Our Lord! Grant us what You promised to us through Your 1
cf., Chapter 2, Verse 285 of the Holy Quran.

messengers, and disgrace us not on the Day of Judgement, for You never
break Your promise.1 Surely it was by Your favor and Your grace that we
acknowledged the Prophet and the Commander of the Believers (Ali), and
disbelieved in al-Jibt and al-Taghut.2 Thus, keep us attached to what we
have adhered to.

Resurrect us with our Imams, for we believe in them, have confidence in
their (authorities and virtues), and are submissive before them …”3

Some statistics about the text of the sermon Here are some statistical
facts about the sermon:

- The Prophet (PBUH&HF) explicitly mentioned the name of Imam Ali
(PBUH) in his sermon about forty times besides many more instances that
he (PBUH&HF) referred to him by pronoun.

1 Chapter 3, Verses 193-194 of the Holy Quran.
2 These two terms refer to the idols that are obeyed against Allah,
which, in reality, implies they are worshipped instead of Him.

According to the traditions, they refer to the two foremost enemies of
the family of the Prophet (PBUH&HF). Both terms have also been used in
Chapter 4, Verses 51 of the Quran. However, the latter term, al- Taghut,
has been used in seven more places in the Holy Quran. See for instance:
Chapter 2, Verses 256-257, and Chapter 4, Verses 60 and 76.

Iqbal al-A'amal, p. 473, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 95, p. 299, Hadith \#1. -
He (PBUH&HF) repeatedly used the following titles for Imam Ali (PBUH) in
this sermon:

- Wali and Mawla (guardian) fifteen times.

- Imam (leader) twelve times.

- Amir (commander) seven times.

- Wasi (executor of the will and deputy of the affairs) seven times.

- Akh (brother) four times.

- Khalifa (successor) three times.

- Hadi (guide) three times.

- The Prophet explicitly mentioned the word A’imma (Imams), referring
to the eleven Imams after Imam Ali (PBUH), nine times in his sermon.

- The sermon also refers to over one hundred verses of the Holy Quran
concerning Imam Ali (PBUH) and his authority, his followers, and their
enemies.

- The number of sentences categorized by some important subjects of the
sermon is as follows:

- Over fifty sentences on the Walaya of Imam Ali (PBUH).

- Twenty sentences about his virtues, yet stressing that it is
impossible to enumerate all his virtues in the sermon.

- Twenty-five sentences about the followers (Shia) of Imam Ali (PBUH)
and their enemies.

- Ten sentences on the Walaya of the Imams (PBUT) after him.

- Twenty sentences specifically about Imam Mahdi (PBUH), the last
divinely appointed Imam who will establish the divine government on
earth at the end of time.

- Twelve sentences about the importance of the Quran, and introducing
Imam Ali (PBUH) and his children as its exclusive authorized
interpreters.

- Ten sentences on urging people to pledge their fealty to Imam Ali
(PBUH) and the Imams after him from his offspring.


