An Overview of the Sermon
=========================

The text of the Sermon can be divided into the following ten major
parts:

Part 1: The opening of the sermon is dedicated to praising Allah and
regarding Him pure from any resemblance with His creation. It includes
great lessons on the Unity of the Essence of Allah. In addition, it
contains important information concerning His names, attributes, and
actions.

Part 2: This part of the speech informs the listeners of the reasons
behind delivering this sermon.

It includes the revelations that came down to the Messenger of Allah
(PBUH&HF) just before the event, and the divine order concerning what he
must convey to the people. It also explains the reason that the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) has delayed the speech until he reached that place.

Part 3: The Prophet (PBUH&HF) officially declares Allah’s decree
regarding the appointment of Imam Ali (PBUH) and the pure Imams after
him. He then enumerates some of the virtues of Imam Ali (PBUH), his
rights, and the duties of people regarding him.

Part 4: The Prophet (PBUH&HF) announces that Allah has completed His
religion through the leadership of Imam Ali (PBUH) and reminds people
more about his exclusive virtues.

Part 5: The Prophet (PBUH&HF) recites some verses of the Holy Quran
concerning the hypocrites, and states what they intend to do after him.
He advises people against violating Allah’s commands and emphasizes that
what will happen after him is but a test for people, which will
distinguish the believers from the disbelievers.

Part 6: The Prophet (PBUH&HF) gives a detailed description of the
followers and the enemies of Ahl al-Bait (PBUH), and informs people of
the final destiny of each, giving references to many verses of the Holy
Quran.

Part 7: To give hope to the believers despite all the future misconduct
of the enemies of Allah, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) informs people that
justice and faith will finally prevail, and the righteous will inherit
the earth.

He (PBUH&HF) dedicates this part of his speech to describe Imam
al-Mahdi (PBUH) and to confirm his advent as a promise from Allah and
His decisive decree.

Part 8: Reciting some verses of the Holy Quran, the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
informs people that pledging allegiance to Imam Ali (PBUH) is, in fact,
identical to pledging allegiance to Allah, the mighty and the
majestic.

Part 9: The Prophet (PBUH&HF) emphasizes that the divine commandments
including the obligatory and prohibited actions will never change in
future, and that Imam Ali (PBUH) and other Imams of his offspring are
fully aware of all final commandments and their limits. They are the
expounders of the religion and the divinely appointed judges for any
question pertaining to religion.

Part 10: The Prophet (PBUH&HF) asks people to recite the sentences of
the covenant with him. He takes their verbal oath of allegiance to Imam
Ali (PBUH) and other Imams of his family.
He also asks people who can reach him to confirm their oath by shaking
hands with him, Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husain, peace be upon them.

**Documentation of the sermon**

Different pieces of the sermon of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) at the pond of
Khum are found separately in many books narrated through numerous Shia
and Sunni authorities.

However, the most complete text of the sermon that has reached us,
which covers most aforementioned pieces, is found in a number of books
of traditions; the most distinguished of those which have been preserved
to this date, is al-Ihtijaj, compiled by Ahmad Ibn Ali al-Tabarsi, an
outstanding Shia scholar who lived in the 5th century AH.

Since various parts of this speech have been reported in numerous
earlier books of traditions, the most comprehensive text available in
al-Ihtijaj, is classified as parallel or frequent (Mutawatir). Thus, it
should be relied upon irrespective of its chain of narrators.

Al-Tabarsi has often omitted the chain of the narrators of the
traditions in his book, because as he stressed, he only narrated
traditions that were famous among the Shia traditionists before him.

However, due to the importance of the Sermon of Ghadir, al-Tabarsi has
quoted the chain of the narrators for this tradition in al-Ihtijaj,
which constitutes the following sound authorities traced back to Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (PBUH), the fifth divinely appointed Imam of guidance
after the Prophet (PBUH&HF):

The detailed sermon, with few minor differences in wording, has been
reported in the following books as well:

1- al-Yaqin, Sayyid Ibn Tawus (d. 664 AH), pp. 343-361, narrated from
Imam al-Baqir (PBUH) with the following chain of narrators:

2- Rawdhat al-Wa’idhin, Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan al- Fattal al-Nishaburi
(d. 508), part 1, pp. 89-99, narrated from Imam al-Baqir (PBUH), with
the chain of narrators omitted by the author due to its popularity in
the scholastic circles.

3- Iqbal al-A’mal, Sayyid Ibn Tawus (d. 664 AH), pp. 454-457, narrated
from Hudhaifa Ibn Yaman, through the Sunni authorities with the
following chain of narrators:

4- al-Tahsin, Sayyid Ibn Tawus (d. 664 AH), p. 584, narrated from Zaid
Ibn Arqam, through the Sunni authorities with the following chain of
narrators:

Unless otherwise specified in the endnotes and shown by brackets and
marks in the text, the presented Arabic text of the sermon and its
English translation are according to the original text of al-Ihtijaj,
Ahmad Ibn Ali al-Tabarsi, vol. 1, pp. 56-66, narrated from Imam al-Baqir
(PBUH). The phrases within the brackets are either the extra phrases
that only appear in the other books named above, or preferred lexically
among different phrases with similar meanings given in the
above-mentioned documents.


