The Sermon of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh&hf) On the Day of Ghadir Khum
========================================================================

Imam al-Baqir (PBUH) said:

The Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) intended to leave Medina to perform
pilgrimage having already conveyed all the commandments to his community
except for the pilgrimage and the guardianship (of the nation) (al-
Walaya).

Thus, Gabriel (PBUH) came to him saying, “O Muhammad! Surely, Allah,
majestic is His name, offers peace to you, and tells you, ‘Verily, I
have not taken the soul of any of my prophets or messengers except after
completing My religion and affirming My proof.1

Of the commandments, two obligatory duties still remain which you need
to convey to your nation: namely, (the details of) the duty of
performing pilgrimage, and the duty of (people in) acknowledging the
guardianship (of the believers) and following your successor after you.
Certainly, I have never left nor shall I ever leave My earth empty of a
proof.’

1 “The proof of Allah” (Hujjat Allah) is one whom Allah has placed
among His creation as His most evident sign in his time, who completes
His arguments against people by His authority.

Therefore, Allah, majestic is His praise, commands you to perform
pilgrimage along with everyone who is capable of attending from the
dwellers of the cities and suburbs as well as the Bedouins. Teach them
the pilgrimage as you taught them the prayers, the purification tax, and
fasting. Make them aware of its (details) as you made them aware of
other religious obligations.”

Thus, the announcer of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) informed people
that he (PBUH&HF) intended to go on pilgrimage and to teach them this
religious obligation.

(Because of his announcement,) the number of people from the
inhabitants of Medina and its suburbs as well as (other) Arabs who went
on pilgrimage along with the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) was in excess
of 70,000 — this is equivalent to the number of people from whom Moses
(PBUH) took pledge of allegiance for Aaron (PBUH), but they later chose
the calf (for worship) and the Samiri.1 Likewise,

the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) took the pledge of allegiance from
this number of people for Ali (PBUH), but they later broke their pledge
and chose the calf and the Samiri of their time (as their leaders),
following exactly the custom of their predecessors — Repeating the words
of compliance with the call of Allah (al-Talbiya),

the Prophet (PBUH&HF) traveled from Mecca to Medina and performed the
rituals of pilgrimage.

1 Sameri was a hypocrite who deceived the folk of Prophet Moses (PBUH)
during his leave, and made them worship a gold calf instead of Allah.
cf. the Holy Quran, Chapter 20, Verses 83-97.

When he was in the stopping place (al-Mina), the Angel Gabriel brought
him a message from Allah, the most High, saying, “O Muhammad! Your Lord,
the mighty and the majestic, greets you and states, ‘Indeed, your
inevitable time (of departure) has approached;

thus, fulfill your obligation; make your will earlier; entrust what is
with you of knowledge, the heritage of the early prophets in terms of
knowledge and signs, the weapon, and the chest1 to the executor of your
will and your successor, who is My far reaching proof over My creation
and My exhaustive argument against them, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (PBUH).

Raise him as a guiding flag for people, remind and renew people’s
covenant and pledge about adhering to the authorized representative2 of
Mine and the master of every believing man and woman, Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(PBUH).

Verily, I have never taken the soul of any of the prophets except after
perfecting My religion, and completing My bounty by means of requiring
adherence to My authorized friends and enmity against My enemies.

1 cf. the Holy Quran, Chapter 2, Verse 248.

2 The term “Wali-Allah” is translated as “authorized representative” or
“authorized friend” throughout the text. It refers to an individual who
is authorized by Allah over people, who exercises authority on behalf of
Allah and according to His command, and is the guardian of the
believers.

Thus, obeying him means obeying Allah and disobeying him means
disobeying Allah. Naturally, this lofty position only befits those who
are free of mistake by Allah’s protection, and are absolutely obedient
to Allah. See later explanation the term “divine protection” in the
footnotes.

As such, the pinnacle of monotheism, faith in My religion, and
completion of My blessings over My creation is (achieved only) through
following Ali, whose obedience is joint to the obedience of Muhammad
(PBUH&HF), My Prophet, as well as My obedience.

Anyone who obeys him has indeed obeyed Me, and anyone who disobeys him
has indeed disobeyed Me. I have placed him as a (distinguishing) flag
amongst My creation so that whoever recognizes him is a believer,
whoever denies him is a disbeliever, and whoever associates anyone in
pledge with him is a polytheist (in obedience of Allah).

One who meets Me (on the Day of Judgement) having accepted him as his
guardian shall enter Paradise, and one who meets me having enmity of him
shall enter the Fire.

Hence, O Muhammad, raise him as the banner (of truth), remind and renew
people’s covenant and pledge that you have already taken (informally in
several occasions), for I shall soon take your soul.’”

Because what he (PBUH&HF) knew of the inner enmity and hatred of the
hypocrites and the dissenters against Ali (PBUH), the Messenger of Allah
(PBUH&HF) was concerned about them lest (upon conveying this message)
they disperse (people) and return them to the days of ignorance.

Thus, he requested Angel Gabriel to ask his Lord for protection from
the evil deign of people, and waited to receive this protection for
delivering the message.

Similarly, when the Prophet (PBUH&HF) reached the Khif mosque as well
as the time the Prophet (PBUH&HF) reached Kuraa al-Ghamim after leaving
Mecca for Medina, Gabriel came to him bringing the same order without
giving protection. The Prophet (PBUH&HF) said, “O Gabriel, I am afraid
that my people will reject me and will not accept my saying concerning
Ali (PBUH).”

Once they reached the pond of Khum, three miles before Juhfa, it was
five hours past sunrise. At that moment, Gabriel descended upon him
again with an admonition and a guarantee of protection from the evil of
people, saying, “O Muhammad! Surely, Allah, the mighty and the majestic,
conveys greetings to you and states, ‘O Messenger!

Deliver what has been sent down to you from your Lord—regarding Ali
(PBUH)—and if you do not, you have not conveyed His message at all, and
Allah shall protect you from (evil) people.’”1

By that time, the front end of the caravan had already reached Juhfa.
Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) sent for all people who were ahead to
return, and waited until those who were behind reached the pond. Then he
(PBUH&HF) called for group prayer.

There were some trees in that place. The Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF)
ordered (his companions) to clean up the place under the trees and
gather the rocks and put them in one place in the form of a pulpit to
overlook the crowd. Then, the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) stood over
those rocks, and gave the following sermon:

1 Chapter 5, Verse 67 of the Holy Quran.


