Part 2 : Preparation For Delivering an Important Commandment From Allah
=======================================================================

I confess before Him that submissiveness befits my soul, and I bear
witness that Lordship befits Him.

I convey what He revealed to me, lest should I not do it, He may make
lawful that a calamity befalls me;

that which no one can turn away from me even if he has great schemes
[and sincere friendship]¦, (for) there is no god but He.

He has informed me that if I do not convey what He has revealed to me
[about Ali’s right]., (it is as if) I have not conveyed His message at
all.

Certainly, He, the most holy, the most high, has guaranteed for me
protection [from the (evil of) people]., and He is Allah, Who is
sufficient and bountiful.

Thus, He revealed to me (this verse): “In the name of Allah, the
compassionate, the merciful. O Messenger! Deliver what has been sent
down to you from your Lord—regarding Ali Ibn Abi Talib and his
leadership— and if you do not, you have not conveyed His message at all,
and Allah shall protect you from (evil) people.”1

O people! I have never been neglectful of conveying what Allah, the
exalted, sent down to me, and I shall now explain to you the reason
behind the revelation of this verse.

1 Chapter 5, Verse 67 of the Holy Quran.

Verily, Gabriel came down to me three times giving the order of my
Lord, Who is the security (of the believers)1, that I should stand in
this scene and inform everyone, white and black, that:

Ali Ibn Abi Talib is my brother, my deputy and the executor of (my
affairs) (Wasi), my successor [over my nation]. (Khalifa), and the
leader (Imam) after me,

whose position to me is like that of Aaron to Moses except that there
shall be no prophet after me,

and that he is your guardian (Wali) after Allah and His messenger.

Indeed, Allah, the most holy, the most high, had (already) sent down to
me a verse from His book about this, saying,

1 cf. al-Tafsir, Ali Ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi, vol. 2, p 360, under the
commentary of Chapter 59, Verse 23 of the Holy Quran.

“Only your guardian is Allah and His messenger and those of the
believers who establish the prayers and pay the charity while they bow
down.”1

Ali Ibn Abi Talib [was the one who]. kept alive prayers and paid
charity while bowing down in ruku’. He intends (the pleasure of) Allah,
the mighty and the majestic, in all situations.

1 Chapter 5, Verse 55 of the Holy Quran. Notice that in this verse,
Allah does not use the plural form of guardian (Wali), and He states
that only your Wali is Allah, Prophet Muhammad, and Imam Ali. This
implies that, at least for us, the Walaya of Imam Ali (PBUH) is the same
as (rather defined as) the Walaya of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF), which
in turn, is defined as the Walaya of Allah.

Hence, when Allah states in Chapter 32, Verse 4 of the Holy Quran that
there is no Wali other than Him (min dun Allah), this does not exclude
whom He assigned as Wali. Alternatively, we can say that there is no
Wali other than those whose authority is from Allah (min Allah).

In this connection, Imam Ali (PBUH), said, “... Allah made them (i.e.
Ahl al-Bait) His authorized representatives, and defined their Walaya as
His Walaya and their party as His party and said, ‘As to those who turn
to the Walaya of Allah, His Messenger, and the believers,- it is the
party of Allah that most certainly triumphs.’

(5:56) He also said, ‘Only your guardian (Wali) is Allah, His
Messenger, and the believers who establish prayers and give charity
while they are bowing.’ (5:55).” (al-Tafsir, al-Nu'mani, as quoted in
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p. 80, and vol. 90, p. 55).

I asked Gabriel to plead to Allah, [(Who is) the security (of the
believers),]. to excuse me from conveying it to you, O people,

due to my knowledge on the fewness of the pious, the numerousness of
the hypocrites,1 the corruption and the treachery of the sinful, and the
trickery of those who ridicule Islam,

those whom Allah described in His book as: “They say with their tongues
what is not in their hearts,”2 taking it lightly, while it is a grave
matter in the sight of Allah,3

1 The Holy Quran confirms that the majority of people are disbelievers
(cf. 13:1, 16:83, 17:89, 26:8, 30:8), wicked (6:116, 5:49, 5:100),
ungrateful (2:243, 7:10, 23:78, 27:73, 34:13), and consequently, will
abide in Hell (7:179).

2 Chapter 48, Verse 11 of the Holy Quran.

3 cf. Chapter 24, Verse 15 of the Holy Quran.

and due to their annoying me on many occasions, so much so that they
called me (all) “ear”, claiming I am so because of Ali’s frequent
attendance in my presence and my attention to him,

until Allah, the mighty and the majestic, sent down (the following
verse) in this regard:

“And of them are some who annoy the Prophet and say: He is an ear (for
accepting what he hears, particularly from Ali).

Say: One whom you call ‘ear’ is best for you; He believes in Allah,
safeguards the believers, and is a mercy for those of you who believe.
And for those who harm the messenger of Allah, there shall be a painful
torment.”1

1 Chapter 9, Verse 61 of the Holy Quran. Had I wished to name those who
have called me so, to point out towards them, or to lead to them by
their signs, I would have done so.

Yet, by Allah, I have indeed dealt with their affairs magnanimously.

Nevertheless, Allah is not satisfied with me until I convey what He has
sent down to me [regarding the right of Ali.].”

Then, the Prophet (PBUH) recited (again the following verse): “O
Messenger! Deliver what has been sent down to you from your Lord—with
regard to Ali— and if you do not, you will not have conveyed His message
at all, and Allah shall protect you from (evil) people.”1

1 Chapter 5, Verse 67 of the Holy Quran.


