Part 3 : Open Declaration of the Leadership of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (pbuh) and the Imams After Him
===============================================================================================

O people! Know that Allah has assigned him (i.e., Ali) as a guardian
and a leader for you,

whose obedience is obligatory for the immigrants, the helpers, and
those who follow (them) in goodness,

and for everyone, whether nomad or city resident, Arab or non-Arab,
free or slave,

young or old, white or black, and for every monotheist.

His (i.e., Ali’s) decree is to be carried out, his saying is sanctioned
(as law), and his command is effective.

êüىك@ïـا@a‰èد@êüىك@oن×@هك Cursed is whoever opposes him, blessed with
mercy is whoever follows him, faithful is whoever acknowledges his
(virtues and rights).

Indeed, Allah has covered him and those who listen to him and obey him
with mercy and forgiveness.

O people! This is the last stand I make in this gathering;

Thus, listen, obey, and submit to the command of your Lord,

for Allah, the mighty and the majestic, is your master, then [His
Messenger]., Muhammad, who is now addressing you, is your master.

Then, after me, Ali is your master and your leader by the command of
Allah, your Lord.

Then, leadership shall be in my progeny, within his offspring, until
the Day you meet Allah and His Messenger.

Nothing is lawful except what Allah declared so (in His book), [as well
as His Messenger, and them (i.e., the Imams)

and nothing is unlawful except Allah declared so (in His book), [as
well as His Messenger, and them].,

(for) Allah, the mighty and the majestic, has informed me of the
permissible and the forbidden things,

and I have made known to him (i.e., Ali) what my Lord has taught me of
His Book, the permissible, and the forbidden things.

O people! There is no knowledge except that Allah has kept its account
in (the heart of) me,

êüىك@ïـا@a‰èد@êüىك@oن×@هك and I have recorded the details of all the
knowledge that I was taught, in (the heart of) the leader of the pious,
(Ali (PBUH)).

Certainly, there is no knowledge except that I have taught it to Ali,
and he is the evident Imam [whom Allah mentions in the Chapter of Yasin:
“... And We have kept the detailed account of everything in an evident
Imam.”1].

. O people! Do not stray from him, nor should you flee from him, nor
should you refuse his guardianship and his authority,

for he is the one who guides to truth and acts upon it, and crushes
falsehood and proscribes it, accepting no blame, in the path of Allah,
from any blamer.

1 Chapter 36, Verse 12 of the Holy Quran.

He is the first to believe in Allah and in His Messenger; and he is the
one who offered his life as a sacrifice for the Messenger of Allah.

I commanded him, on behalf of Allah, to sleep in my bed, and he did it
to sacrifice himself for me.1].

He was with the Messenger of Allah when no one among men worshipped
Allah in the company of His Messenger other than him.

O people! Prefer him (over all others), for Allah has indeed preferred
him, and turn to him, for Allah has indeed appointed him (as your
guide).

1 This refers to the night of migration of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) from
Mecca to Medina, when the pagans rushed to kill the Prophet (PBUH&HF) in
his bed overnight, but they found Imam Ali (PBUH) sleeping in place of
him.

O people! He is an Imam authorized by Allah, and Allah shall never turn
to anyone (in mercy) who denies his authority, nor shall He ever forgive
him;

this is a decisive decree by Allah that He shall do so to anyone who
opposes His command about him, and shall torment him with the most
painful torment, which lasts forever and ever.

Hence, beware lest you oppose him, and thus, arrive at a fire whose
fuel is people and stones, prepared for the disbelievers.1

I am the seal of the prophets and the messengers, and the proof (of
Allah) over all the creatures, of the inhabitants of the heavens and the
earths.

1 cf. Chapter 2, Verse 24 of the Holy Quran.

He who doubts this, is indeed a disbeliever, with the disbelief of the
early era of ignorance.

And he who doubts anything of what I have said this (day), has doubted
all that has been revealed to me.

[And anyone who doubts any of the Imams, has doubted them all]., and
anyone who doubts us, shall be in the Fire.

O people! Allah, the mighty and the majestic, has bestowed this virtue
upon me out of His kindness and His grace.

And there is no god but He. My praise is for Him forever and ever, and
in all circumstances. .eZ5. .

O people! Prefer Ali (over all others), for he is the best of the
people, men or women, after me so long as Allah sends down His
sustenance and (and so long as) the creation exists.

Under curse and again under curse, under wrath and again under wrath,
is he who rejects this saying of mine and does not does not agree with
it.

Certainly, Gabriel has informed me of this from Allah, the most high,
Who also said:


“Anyone who bears enmity against Ali and refuses his authority, for him
shall be My curse and My wrath.”

Thus, every soul should look to what he has sent forth for the morrow.
Be watchful of (your duty towards) Allah lest you should oppose Him and
(your) foot should slip after its stability. Verily,

Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that you do. 1 O people! He (i.e.,
Ali) is “the side of Allah”2 that is mentioned in Allah’s Book.

He, the exalted, says, “Lest a soul should (then) say: ‘Ah! Woe onto me
that I abused and neglected (my duties towards) the side of Allah.’”3

O people! Reflect on the Quran and comprehend its verses. Look into its
clear verses and do not follow its ambiguous parts,4

1 cf. Verses 59:18 and 16:94 of the Holy Quran.

2 Side is used to express extreme nearness. One’s side is the closest
thing to an individual. Imam Ali (PBUH) is called the “side” of Allah
because he got “close” to Him through obedience so much so that he
became the criterion of nearness to Allah and His recognition.

In this manner, nearness to Imam Ali (PBUH) indicates nearness to
Allah, neglecting his right indicates neglecting Allah's right,
forsaking him indicates forsaking Allah, and recognizing him in one's
heart indicates recognizing Allah.

3 Chapter 39, Verse 56 of the Holy Quran.

4 Allah states in Chapter 3, Verse 7 of the Holy Quran: “It is Him Who
has sent down to you the Book, within which are some clear verses that
are the foundation of the Book, and other verses that are ambiguous.
But, those in whose hearts is perversity follow the part thereof that is
ambiguous, seeking enticement and attraction (of for by Allah, none
shall be able to explain to you its warnings and its mysteries,1 nor
shall anyone clarify its interpretation, other than the one that I have
grasped his hand, brought up beside myself, [and lifted his arm,].

the one about whom I inform you that whomever I am his master, this Ali
is his master;

people towards their own views), and searching for its hidden meaning.
But, no one knows its interpretation except Allah and those who are
firmly grounded in knowledge…” According to the traditions, “those who
are firmly grounded in knowledge” refers exclusively to the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) and his family (Ahl al-Bait (PBUT)). cf. al-Kafi, vol. 1, p.
213, Hadiths 1, 2, and 3, Kitab Sulaim Ibn Qais al-Hilali, p. 771, Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 33, p. 155, also vol.

23, p. 198, Hadith 31, p. 201, Hadith 40, and p. 202, Hadith 46.
Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) has confirmed this exclusive right for
the Imams (PBUT) in the next sentence of the sermon by swearing in the
name of Allah.

1 The word Zawajir has a number of meanings. The first meaning that
applies here is “warnings”. The Holy Quran has hidden warnings that only
an Imam (PBUH) can show them to people, and people cannot personally
derive those divine prohibitions from the apparent meaning of the
Quranic verses.

The second meaning is “deterrents”, which refers to the difficult
points in the Quran that deter individuals from understanding their
meanings. Only a divinely guided Imam can explain these complex issues
and mysteries.

and he is Ali Ibn Abi Talib, my brother, the executor of my (will),
whose appointment as (your) guardian and leader has been sent down to me
from Allah, the mighty and the majestic.

O people! [Indeed, I am leaving amongst you two weighty and precious
things that if you adhere to both, you will never go astray.]§

Verily, Ali and the pure ones among my offspring are the lesser weight,
and the Quran is the greater weight.

Each one [of the two]. informs about the other and agrees with it. They
shall never part until they return to me at the Pool (of al- Kawthar on
the Day of Judgement).

Behold! They (i.e., the Ahl al-Bait (PBUT)) are the trustees of Allah
amongst His creation, and His people of wisdom on His earth.”

Thereafter, Allah’s Messenger (PBUH&HF) took the upper arm of Imam Ali
(PBUH) by his hand, raised it, and said:

[“O people! Who has more priority over you than yourself?” People said:
“Allah and His messenger.”

Then, he (PBUH&HF) said:

“Behold! Whosoever I am his master, this Ali is his master. O Allah!
Stay firm in supporting those who stay firm in following him, be hostile
to those who are hostile to him, help those who help him, and forsake
those who forsake him.]\*

O people! This Ali is my brother, the executor of my (affairs), the
container of my knowledge, my successor over my nation, and over the
interpretation the Book of Allah, the mighty and the majestic, and the
true inviter to its (implications).

He is the one who acts according to what pleases Him, fights His
enemies, causes to adhere to His obedience, and advises against His
disobedience.

Surely, He is the successor of the Messenger of Allah, the commander of
the believers, the guiding Imam, and the killer of the oath breakers,
the transgressors, and the apostates.

I speak by the authority of Allah. The word with me shall not be
changed.1 I say with the command of Allah:

O Allah! Be the guardian of him who adheres to him.

Be the enemy of him who bears enmity against him.

Curse him who rejects him. .

Be wrathful towards him who denies his right.

1 cf. Chapter 50, Verse 29 of the Holy Quran.

Indeed, I have now fulfilled (my duty). Indeed, I have now conveyed
(the Message). Indeed, I have now made (you) hear (it). Indeed, I have
now clarified (it).

)Indeed, Allah, the mighty and the majestic, so said, and so did I on
His behalf.

Indeed, there is no commander for the faithful save this brother of
mine, and it is not permissible to call anyone other than him with the
title of “the Commander of the Believers” after my departure.1


1 In the traditions, the Prophet (PBUH&HF) and Imams (PBUT) have
stressed that Amir al-Mu’minin is the exclusive title of Imam Ali
(PBUH), and it is not at all permissible to call other Imams (PBUT) with
this title even though they were commanding the believers.

Moreover, the traditions specify two meanings for this title. The first
meaning of Amir is “the commander”, which comes from the root Amara
(..... .. .........). The word Imra ( ...... ) that the Prophet
(PBUH&HF) used in the above phrase of the sermon also comes from this
root, and has the same meaning. Refer also to another narration from the
Prophet (PBUH&HF) in Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 37, p. 294, Hadith 9 for the
meaning of Amir in this sense.

The second meaning of Amir given in the traditions is “the supplier” or
“the supplies”, which comes from the root Mira (...... ......). The word
Amir al-Mu’minin in this sense is interpreted as “the supplier of divine
knowledge for the believers.”


