28. Repentance
==============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أََنِ اسْـتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّکُمْ ثُمَّ تُوْبُوا إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And that you ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him.”[^1]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِِذَا تَابَ الْعَبْدُ تَوْبَةً نَصُوحاً أََحَبَّهُ اللٌّهُ فَسَتَرَ
عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If a servant repents sincerely, Allah loves him (and) so conceals his
sins.”[^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

Repentance is the cord of Allah which those repenting must necessarily
grasp; they need to clean their interior of their sins and testify
against themselves before their Lord.

They should be repentant from the depths of their hearts with regards to
their past misdeeds, and fearful with regards to the remaining period of
their lives. The auliya (friends) of Allah repent for the
(inappropriate) thoughts that may have passed through their minds, while
the special ones repent for engaging themselves in anything other than
Allah, even as the general masses repent for the sins committed by them.

It is vital that, in order to make amends for past (mis)deeds and
refrain from committing sins in the future, the person repenting should
not look upon any sin as being trivial and insignificant, but should
always experience regret over his past lapses, keep his soul away from
various kinds of lust and guide it towards struggle (against lust) and
worship.[^3]

1) The Inventor of a Religion and Repentance
--------------------------------------------

Imam Sadiq (as) related: “In ancient times there lived a man who sought
to earn his livelihood and procure great wealth by lawful means but was
unsuccessful. He then strived to achieve his objectives by unlawful
means but once again failed.

Satan appeared before him and said to him: “You tried to acquire great
wealth by lawful as well as unlawful means but were unsuccessful. Do you
want me to show you a way by which you would not only become wealthy but
you would also attract numerous followers?”

The man expressed his willingness to know how he could get rich.

“Concoct a religion and invite people to follow it,” suggested Satan.

The man fabricated a religion and soon, he had a lot of followers
through whom he became rich.  
 One day he realized that he had made a mistake by leading numerous
people astray so he resolved to inform the people of the falsity of his
religion and the error of his ways. But however hard he stressed and
emphasized, the people simply refused to accept his word.

“Your previous views were correct; have you become sceptical of your own
religion now?” they asked. When he heard these words, he got some
shackles and chained himself. He pledged that he would not unchain
himself until Allah accepted his repentance.

Allah revealed to the Prophet of the time to convey the following
message to the person: “By My Honour! Even if you weep and supplicate to
the extent that every ligament of your body falls apart, I shall never
accept your prayers, till you inform those people who have died after
having been led astray by you of the reality and they turn back from
your religion.”[^4]

2) The Employee of Bani Umayyah
-------------------------------

‘Ali Ibn Hamzah relates: “I had a young friend who worked as a scribe
within the Bani Umayyah administration. Once, he asked me to arrange an
appointment for him to meet Imam Sadiq (as). I sought permission from
the Imam (as) and he agreed to meet the man. At the appointed time, my
friend and I arrived in the Imam’s (as) presence.

My friend greeted the Imam (as), sat down and said: “May I be made your
ransom! I had occupied a position in the Ministry of Treasury of the
Bani Umayyah and have managed to acquire great wealth, although I have
committed some crimes too!”

“If the Bani Umayyah did not have people like you to collect taxes for
them and accompany them in their battles, they could not have usurped
our rights,” said Imam Sadiq (as).

“Does there exist a way for my salvation?” pleaded the youth.

The Imam (as) asked: “If I tell you, would you act upon it?”

The youth replied in the affirmative.

“From the possessions that remain with you, return those whose owners
are known to you, and as for those things for which the owners are
unknown to you, give them off in charity on behalf of their owners. In
exchange for this act, I shall guarantee you Paradise!” said Imam
(as).  
 Lowering his head, the youth responded after a long deliberation: “May
I be made your ransom! I shall do as instructed by you.”

‘Ali Ibn Hamzah says: We got up and proceeded towards Kufah. There, my
friend divested himself of all his possessions - even his clothes -
either returning them to their owners or giving them to charity. I
collected some money from my friends to purchase some clothes for him
and I used to send him money for his expenses.

A few months after this incident, he fell ill and we used to visit him
regularly during his sickness. One day, when I paid him a visit, I found
him on the verge of dying. Opening his eyes he said to me: “O’ ‘Ali! The
Imam (as) has fulfilled his promise.” Then he departed from the world.
We performed the ablutions, shrouded his body and finally buried him.  
 Some time later, I visited the Imam (as). As soon as his eyes fell upon
me, he said: “O’ ‘Ali! I have fulfilled my promise to your friend.”

“May I be made your ransom! It is as you say. He too mentioned it (the
guarantee of Paradise) to me before his death,” I said.”[^5]

3) Return before Death
----------------------

Mua’wiyah Ibn Wahab narrates: “When we set out for Makkah, there was an
old man with us who used to engage himself in acts of worship, but did
not profess the Shi’ite faith. This old man was accompanied by his
nephew, who was of the Shi’ites.

During the journey, the old man fell sick. I said to his nephew: “Why
don’t you inform him of the true faith; it is possible that Allah may
take him away from the world in the state of true faith and Wilayah.”

However, the other people advised him to leave the man alone and to let
him die upon his own faith. However his nephew did not heed their
advice. He went to his uncle and said: “O’ Uncle! After the death of the
Noble Prophet (S), the people, with the exception of a handful who had
adhered to Amirul Mo’minin (as), became apostates despite the fact that
the Caliphate (of Amirul Mo’minin (as)) had already been stipulated by
the Noble Prophet (S).”

Hearing these words, the old man heaved a sigh and said, “I accept this
faith,” and then breathed his last.”

Mua’wiyah Ibn Wahab relates: “We entered Madinah and arrived before Imam
Sadiq (as). ‘Ali Ibn Sari, one of our companions, related the incident
of the old man’s repentance and his acceptance of Imamate just before
his death, to the Imam (as) who said: “He is of the inmates of
Paradise.”

‘Ali Ibn Sari remarked in astonishment: “The old man did not know
anything about our faith and was totally ignorant of its laws and
rulings; it was only when his soul was about to separate from his body
that he accepted this faith!”  
 The Imam (as) explained: “What (more) do you want of him? By Allah! He
has (already) entered Paradise.”[^6]

4) Abu Lubabah
--------------

Abu Lubabah was one of the distinguished companions of the Noble Prophet
(S) and had participated in the battle of Uhud and the conquest of
Makkah. One of the sensitive aspects of his life was the incident of his
repentance.

When the tribe of Bani Quraidhah violated their covenant with the Noble
Prophet (S), the Noble Prophet (S) initiated a military expedition
against them and besieged their fort. Some persons from the tribe of Aus
approached him and requested: “Just as you had handed over the fate of
the tribe of Bani Qainaqa’a to be decided by the tribe of Khazraj, leave
it upon us to decide the fate of the tribe of Bani Quraidhah.”

“Will you be satisfied if I were to appoint one person from your tribe
to rule in the matter?” the Noble Prophet (S) asked.

They agreed. The Noble Prophet (S) suggested Sa’d Ibn Mu’adh, but the
Bani Quraidhah refused to accept him. They told him to send Abu Lubabah
to them so that they could confer with him. The Noble Prophet (S)
assigned Abu Lubabah, who had his house, property and family in the fort
of Bani Quraidhah, the task of conducting consultations with them.

As soon as Abu Lubabah entered the fort, men and women, old and young,
surrounded him and began lamenting and complaining to him (over the
state of affairs) with the intention of attracting his pity and
compassion. Then they asked: “Should we submit before the rule of the
Noble Prophet (S)?”

“You could do that*,*” he replied, making a gesture (by pointing to his
neck) to indicate that submission was equivalent to death.  
 He quickly realized that by performing this act, he had been unfaithful
and disloyal to the Noble Prophet (S). It was on this occasion that the
following verse was revealed: “O you who believe! Be not unfaithful to
Allah and the Messenger, nor be unfaithful to your trusts while you
know. Know that your property and your children are a temptation, and
that Allah is He with Whom there is a mighty reward.”[^7]

Overcome with shame, he came out of the fort and proceeded straight
towards the mosque of Madinah and, tying himself to one of its pillars
in the mosque, called out: “None should untie me till Allah accepts my
repentance.”

He remained in that state for ten to fifteen days, allowing himself to
be untied only for prayers or to go to the washroom.

“If Abu Lubabah had come to me, I would have sought forgiveness for him
but since he himself awaits Allah’s forgiveness, leave him alone till
Allah forgives him,” the Noble Prophet (S) commented when he came to
know what Abu Lababah had done.  
 Umme Salamah states: “One day, at dawn, I saw the Noble Prophet (S)
happy and smiling. May Allah always keep you smiling! What is the reason
for it?” I asked him.

“Jibra\`il has informed me that Abu Lubabah’s repentance has been
accepted,” he said.

“Do I have your permission to inform him of the good news?” I asked.

“You may if you wish,” he answered. From inside the room I called out:
“Glad tidings, O’ Abu Lubabah! Allah has accepted your repentance.”

The people rushed forward to untie him but he ordered: “I place you
under the oath of Allah that none, except the Noble Prophet (S), should
untie me.”

When the Noble Prophet (S) arrived in the mosque for the morning
prayers, he untied Abu Lubabah from the pillar which stands even today,
in the Mosque of the Noble Prophet (S) and is popularly known as the
‘Pillar of Repentance’ or the ‘Pillar of Abu Lubabah’.[^8]

5) Buhlul, the Gravedigger
--------------------------

**Buhlul**[^9]**, the Gravedigger**

Mu’adh Ibn Jabal was in tears when he arrived in the presence of the
Noble Prophet (S) and greeted him. The Noble Prophet (S) replied to his
greeting and asked: “What makes you cry?”

“At the door of the mosque, there is a good-looking youth who weeps as
intensely as a mother whose young son has died, and he wishes to meet
you,” replied Mu’adh.

The Noble Prophet (S) agreed to meet him.

The youth entered and greeted the Noble Prophet (S) who returned his
greeting and enquired: “Why do you weep?”

“Why should I not weep? I have committed sins which Allah will never
forgive and He is bound to hurl me into Hell,” said the youth.

“Have you associated someone with Allah?”

“No.”

“Have you killed anybody?”

“No.”

“Even if your sins are of the magnitude of mountains, Allah shall
forgive them,” said the Noble Prophet (S).

“My sins are greater than the mountains,” the youth explained.

“Are your sins in the magnitude of the seven earths, the seas, the
sands, the trees, all that lies on the earth, in the skies, the stars,
the Throne and the Chair?” asked the Noble Prophet (S)).

“My sins are greater than all of these things.”

“Woe unto you! Are your sins greater than your Lord?”

The youth lowered his head and replied, “Allah is devoid of all
blemishes; it is my Lord, who is greater.”

“Would you not relate one of your sins to me?” enquired the Noble
Prophet (S).

“Why not?” responded the youth, whose name was Buhul. “For seven years I
used to dig up the graves of the dead, take out their shrouds and sell
them. One night, a maiden from amongst the Ansar (The Helpers) died and
was buried in the cemetery. When I dug open her grave to remove the
shroud from her body, the Satan tempted me and I committed a grave sin.
As I was turning back, the body called out to me: “O’ Youth! Don’t you
fear the Ruler of the Day of Judgment? Woe unto you of the fire of the
Day of Judgment!”

Having narrated this, the youth wanted to know what he should do.

“O’ Sinner! Stay away from me for I fear that I might burn in your fire
too!” cried out the Noble Prophet (S).

The youth left, heading straight towards the mountains. He tied his
hands to his neck and became engrossed in worship, supplications and
seeking forgiveness.

For forty days, he wept day and night to the extent that even the wild
beasts were affected by his weeping. After forty days he asked Allah to
either punish him by means of fire or forgive him, so that he might not
have to face humiliation on the Day of Judgment.

Allah revealed the following verse, which refers to the forgiveness of
Buhul: “And those who, when they commit an indecency or do injustices to
their souls, remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their faults… and
who forgives the faults but Allah.”[^10]

The Noble Prophet (S) recited this verse with a smiling face and then
asked: “Who can take me to that youth?”

Mu’adh agreed to take him. Accompanied by Mu’adh, the Noble Prophet (S)
went to the place where the youth was. He saw him standing between two
boulders, hands tied to his neck and engaged in supplication. His face
had become dark due to the scorching sun and all his eyelashes had
fallen off due to the intense weeping. Wild beasts had gathered around
him while the birds circled over his head, all of them weeping over his
distressed and pitiable state.

The Noble Prophet (S) advanced towards him, untied his hands and cleared
the soil from the top of his head.

“O’ Buhul! Glad tidings for you; you have been liberated by Allah from
the fire (of Hell),” he said.  
 Then, turning to his companions, he said, “This is how you should make
amends for your sins.”[^11]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Surat Hud (11), Verse 3

[^2]: Jame’ al-Sa’adat, Volume 3, Page 65

[^3]: Tadhkeratul Haqaiq, Page 75

[^4]: Pand-e-Tarikh, Volume 4, Page 251; Biharul Anwar, Volume 2, Page
277

[^5]: Shanidani-ha-e-Tarikh, Page 55; Mahajjatul Baiďa, Volume 3, Page
254

[^6]: Khazinatul Jawahir, Page 312; Rauďatul Anwar of Sabzwari

[^7]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Anfal (8), Verse 27-28 يا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا لا تَخُونُوا اللَّهَ وَ الرَّسُولَ وَ تَخُونُوا أَماناتِكُمْ وَ
أَنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ وَ اعْلَمُوا اَنَّماَ اَموَالَكُم وَ اَولاَدَكُم
فِتنَةٌ وَ انَّ اللهَ عِندَهُ اَجر عَظِيم

[^8]: Paighambar Wa Yaran, Volume 1, Page 129; Majma’ al-Bayan, under
the discussion regarding verse 102 of the chapter al-Taubah: وَ آخَرُونَ
اعْتَرَفُوا بِذُنُوبِهِمْ خَلَطُوا عَمَلاً صالِحاً وَ آخَرَ سَيِّئاً
عَسَى اللَّهُ أَنْ يَتُوبَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ

[^9]: Editor’s note: Not to be confused with Buhlul who lived during the
time of Imam Riďa .

[^10]: Holy Qur’an, Surah Ale ‘Imran (3), Verse 135: وَ الَّذِينَ إِذا
فَعَلُوا فاحِشَةً أَوْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ ذَكَرُوا اللَّهَ
فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا لِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَ مَنْ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ إِلاَّ اللَّهُ

[^11]: Risalah Liqaullah, Page 62; Majalis as-Saduq


