37. Treachery
=============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ لاَ يُحِبُّ مَنْ کَانَ خَوَّاناً أَثِيْماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah does not love him who is treacherous, sinful.”[^1]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ لَكَ أَنْ تَأْتَمِنَ الْخَائِنُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is not for you to trust a treacherous person.”[^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

If a thing such as money, a business, a car or the like is placed as
trust in one’s possession, one should not be unfaithful to it, spoil or
disfigure it or deny having received it as a trust.

A person with this vice does not have credibility neither in the eyes of
Allah nor in the eyes of the people. He drops down from the level of
faith and the (evil) reaction of his deed rebounds – affecting him, his
wealth and his family in a detrimental way.

It has been strongly advised that one should not be deceived by a
person’s (prolonged) prayers and (numerous) fasts - for it is possible
that the person may have simply become fond of performing these acts –
instead, one should test a person for truthfulness, and faithfulness
with respect to the trusts (placed in his custody).

One should never place a trust in the possession of an unfaithful
person. Lending money or giving one’s daughter in marriage to a
treacherous person is disapproved and if one does so and then happens to
suffer loss or harm, it is only himself that he should censure and
rebuke.

1) The Treacherous Minister
---------------------------

During his reign, Gushtasp had a minister by the name of Rast
Rawishan[^3]. As a result of this prestigious name, Gushtasp held him in
high esteem and favored him over the other ministers.

This minister exhorted Gushtasp into oppressing the subjects and
confiscating their property in the belief that the orderliness of the
kingdom’s affairs was dependent upon the treasury and that the subjects
ought to be poor in order that they remained subservient and obedient.
He himself had not only accumulated a lot of wealth but had come to
harbour animosity towards Gushtasp.

One day, when Gushtasp came to the treasury, he realised that there was
no money to pay his workers. Furthermore, his cities were falling into
ruin and the people were in distress. This left Gushtasp in a state of
bewilderment.

Out of sheer despair, he climbed onto his horse and set off into the
wilderness. As he wandered, his eyes fell upon a flock of sheep in the
distance. When he came nearer, he observed that the sheep were sleeping
while a dog lay suspended from the gallows. In astonishment, he asked
the shepherd the reason for killing the dog. The shepherd replied: “This
dog was a loyal animal; I nurtured him and trusted him to protect the
sheep. After a period, he came in contact with a she-wolf and both
became friends. When night fell, the she-wolf would take hold of a
sheep, eat half of it, and leave the other half for the dog.

“One day, I noticed a decrease in the number of sheep and after
investigation, came to know of the dog’s treachery. Therefore, I hung
him up on the gallows so that it is known that the consequence of
treachery and evil is torture and punishment!”

Hearing this, Gushtasp thought to himself, “My subjects are like these
sheep and I am like the shepherd; I must investigate and study the
condition of the people so that I know the cause for their deplorable
state.”

He returned to his court and asked for the list of prisoners who were
locked in his prisons. Studying the list, he concluded that his
minister, Rast Rawishan, had imprisoned all of them and that he was the
cause of all the evils and troubles. He had the minister hanged and
admitted to himself that he had been deceived by his name.

Gradually he made the kingdom prosperous, rectified the past damages,
paid attention to the state of the captives and refrained from trusting
anyone, ever again.[^4]

2) Treachery during Ziarat
--------------------------

Al-Hajj Hasan, the son of Ayatullah al-Hajj Husain Tabataba\`i Qummi,
relates: “I had come to Tehran from Mashhad for the treatment of my
eyes. During that time, one of the traders of Tehran who was known to
me, had travelled to Khurasan for the ziarat of Imam Riďa (as).

One night, I dreamt that I was in the sanctuary of Imam Riďa (as) who
was seated on the sepulcher. Suddenly, I observed that the trader shot
an arrow at the Imam (as) which greatly troubled him. For the second
time, from another direction of the sepulcher, he let fly another arrow
towards the Imam (as) and again the Imam (as) was deeply troubled. The
third time, the trader shot an arrow from behind but on this occasion,
the Imam (as) collapsed on his back. Shocked and petrified, I woke up
from my sleep.

When my eye treatment was completed, I wished to go back to Khorasan but
then decided to stay on till the trader returned from Khorasan. When he
returned, I spoke to him and asked him certain questions but could not
get to the bottom of the matter. Eventually, I narrated my dream to him,
whereupon, with tears flowing from his eyes, he explained: “One day,
having entered the sanctuary of Imam Riďa (as), I noticed that before me
stood a lady with her hand placed on the sepulcher. I placed my hand on
hers and so the lady went to the other side of the sepulcher. I followed
her there and once again placed my hand on hers. This time, the lady
went behind the sepulcher. When she had placed her hand upon it, I did
exactly the same as before and asked her where she was from. She replied
that she was from Tehran; we became friends and returned to Tehran
together.”[^5]

3) The Daughter’s Disloyalty towards the Father
-----------------------------------------------

Satrun, whose title was Dhizan was the king of Hadhar, a state located
between the rivers Tigris and Euphrates. In Hadhar, there was a
beautiful palace by the name of Jausaq.

Once, the king attacked a city that was under the control of Shapur;
looting and plundering it, he massacred a great number of its people and
eventually occupied it. In the process he managed to take Shapur’s
sister as captive.

When Shapur came to know of this, he gathered his army and set out
towards the king. Dhizan had locked himself inside a strong fort which
Shapur laid siege to. This siege continued for a period of four years
but Shapur was unable to penetrate the fort.

One day, Dhizan’s daughter, Nadhirah, an extremely beautiful maiden, was
strolling outside the fort when Shapur’s eyes fell on her. He was
instantly captivated by her beauty. He sent word to her that if she
helped him conquer the fort, he would marry her. During one of the
nights, Nadhirah, who too had fallen for Shapur, got the guards of the
fort intoxicated and opened its doors to Shapur’s forces. In the battle
that ensued, her father Dhizan was eventually killed.

In keeping with his promise, Shapur married Nadhira. One night he
noticed that there was blood on her bed. As he set about to investigate
the cause of it, he observed that a strand of thick hair lay on her bed
and this had caused her delicate and subtle body to become scratched and
injured.

“What did your father feed you with?” he asked her.

“Yolk of eggs, brain of lambs, butter and honey,” she replied.

When he heard this, Shapur reflected for a while and then said:

“Despite these comforts provided by your father, you were not loyal to
him; how can you ever be loyal and faithful to me?”

He ordered that she be tied to a horse’s tail and the animal made to
gallop through the desert so that the desert thorns become coloured by
the blood of this treacherous and unfaithful daughter.[^6]

4) The Indian and the Sixth Imam
--------------------------------

Imam Kadhim (as) narrates: “One day, I was with my father in the house
when a friend entered and told my father that some people were standing
outside, waiting to see him. My father asked me to find out who they
were. As I went outside, I saw numerous camels laden with chests and a
man seated on a horse.

“Who are you?” I asked the man.

“I am from India and seek the honour of meeting the Imam (as),” he
replied.

I returned to my father and informed him about the man outside.

“Don’t let this impure and treacherous person enter the house,” he
instructed, and so I did as I was told. The people pitched their tents
at that very place near the house and waited for a long time till Yazid
Ibn Sulaiman and Muhammad Ibn Sulaiman intervened and procured
permission for them to meet my father.

When the Indian entered, he sat down before the Imam (as) with folded
knees and said: “May you have good health! I am from India and the king
has sent me with some presents which are to be handed over to you. For
several days I have been seeking permission to enter but you have been
refusing to meet me. Do the Prophets’ children conduct themselves in
this manner?”

My father (as) lowered his head and answered, “You will come to know the
reason for it later.” He then asked me to open the letter that the
Indian had brought. In the letter, the king of India had extended his
greetings. Then he had written: “It is because of you that I have been
guided aright. I had been presented with an extremely beautiful
slave-girl, and I found none, save you who could be worthy of possessing
her and so, in addition to some clothes, ornaments and perfumes, I gift
her to you. Out of one thousand persons, I selected one hundred, and
from them, I selected ten and from the ten, I have short listed one
person, Mizan Ibn Khabbab, who is trustworthy. I send him to you
together with the slave-girl and the presents.”

My father turned to the Indian and said, “O’ Unfaithful person! Turn
back, for I shall never accept a trust that has been subjected to
unfaithfulness.”

The Indian swore that he had not been unfaithful, however my father told
him, “If your clothes were to testify that you had been unfaithful with
respect to the slave-girl, would you become a Muslim?”

“Do forgive me!” implored Mizan.

“Then write your deeds to the king of India.”

“If you know something in connection with the issue, you write it down,”
said Mizan.

The man had a sheepskin over his shoulder; the Imam (as) told him to
place it on the ground.

My father then offered a two-rak’at prayer after which he went into
prostration and supplicated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْـئَـلُكَ بِمَعَاقِدِ الْعِزِّ... إِيْماَناً
مَعَ إِيْماَنِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

then raising his head, he turned towards the sheepskin and said:

“Speak out all that you know about this Indian.”

The sheepskin began to speak as if it were a sheep, and said:

“O’ Son of the Prophet of Allah! The king considered this person to be
trustworthy and had laid great emphasis with regards to protecting the
slave-girl and the gifts. When we had travelled some distance, we
reached a desert where heavy rains lashed us. All our belongings had
become soaked due to the rain. A short while later the clouds cleared
away and the sun began to shine. At that point, this unfaithful person
called out to the servant, who had been accompanying the slave-girl, and
dispatched him towards the city to purchase something. When the servant
had gone, he said to the slave-girl: “Enter into this tent which we have
pitched beneath the sun so that your clothes and body dry up. The
slave-girl entered the tent and pulled up her clothes up to her calves.
As soon as his eyes fell upon her legs, he became mesmerized and
persuaded the slave-girl into being unfaithful.”

The Indian, disturbed and distressed at witnessing the sheepskin
(speaking out his misdeed), confessed to his misdemeanour and sought
forgiveness. The sheepskin returned to its original state and the Imam
(as) ordered him to put it on. As soon as the Indian had placed it over
his shoulder, it encircled and tightened itself around his neck and the
man was almost on the verge of being strangulated when the Imam (as)
said: “O’ Sheepskin! Leave him so that he can return to the king who
would be the most appropriate person to punish this man for his
unfaithfulness.”

The sheepskin reverted back to its original state. The Indian, overcome
with fright, implored the Imam (as) to accept the gifts.

“If you become a Muslim, I shall gift the slave-girl to you,” said the
Imam (as).

But he declined the offer. The Imam (as) then accepted the presents, but
refused to take the slave-girl, and the man returned to India.

After a month, a letter arrived from the king of India, in which, after
extending his greetings he wrote: “You accepted that which did not have
any significant value, whereas rejected that which was valuable. This
left me greatly disturbed and I said to myself: ‘The children of the
Prophets possess divine insight and wisdom and it is possible that the
person who had escorted the slave-girl, might have exhibited
unfaithfulness.’ And so, I wrote a letter in your name to myself, and
said to the man that your letter had reached me in which you had
mentioned his unfaithfulness. I said to him: ‘Nothing, except the truth,
can save you’, whereupon he confessed and related to me the entire
episode of his unfaithfulness with regards to the slave-girl and the
incident of the sheepskin. The slave-girl also confessed and so I
ordered both of them to be beheaded.

“I bear witness to the Unity of Allah and the Prophethood of the Noble
Prophet (S) and have to state that I shall personally arrive in your
presence later.”

Before long, he arrived in Madinah after having abdicated his kingship
and transformed himself into a true Muslim.[^7]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Nisa (4), Verse 107

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Volume 78, Page 248

[^3]: Literally, his name means ‘a truthful worker’.

[^4]: Jawame’ al-Hikayat, Page 313; Siyasatnameh-e-Khwajah Nidham
al-Mulk

[^5]: Rahnama-e-Sa’adat, Volume 1, Page 257; Jame’ al-Durar, Volume 1,
Page 448

[^6]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, Volume 5, Page 142, Al-Mustatraf, Volume 1,
Page 210

[^7]: Pand-e-Tarikh, Volume 1, Page 217; Biharul Anwar, Volume 11, Page
136


