38. The World
=============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ماَ الْحَياَةُ الدُّنْياَ إِلاَّ لَعِبٌ وَّ لَهْوٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And this world’s life is naught but a play and an idle sport.”[^1]

The Noble Prophet (S) stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَصبَحَ وَ الدُّنْياَ أَکْبَرُ هَمِّهِ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللٌّهِ فِي
شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He who rises in the morning such that his greatest concern is for (the
issues of) the world, shall have nothing of (the guardianship) of
Allah.”[^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

The world is like a figure whose head is pride; its eyes, greed; its
ears, covetousness; its tongue, dissimulation; its hands, lust; its
legs, vanity and its heart, heedlessness. Whoever loves the world, will
be dragged by it towards arrogance and pride; whoever likes the world,
will be made greedy by it towards itself and whoever desires the world,
will be hauled by it towards covetousness.

A person who has praised the world has cloaked himself with the garment
of dissimulation; one whose goal and objective is this world, his heart
gets filled with vanity, and one who trusts this world, is overcome by
negligence and heedlessness (with respect to Allah). Consequently, Hell
shall be the abode of the worldly people.[^3]

1) Esteem and Humiliation
-------------------------

Harun Rashid, the ‘Abbasid Caliph, was very fond of the Barmaki family.
They were his close and special companions, generally occupying
ministerial posts, and from amongst them, he was particularly fond of
Ja’far Barmaki. This mutual respect and esteem continued for over 17
years. In 189 ah, due to certain events, the Barmaki family became the
object of Harun’s wrath and consequently, all of them went through very
difficult times.

Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdul Rahman Hashmi narrates: “On the day of ‘Eidul Adha,
I approached my mother who was having a conversation with a lady dressed
in old clothes.

“Do you recognize this lady?” my mother asked me. I said I did not.

“This is \`Ubadah, the mother of Ja’far Barmaki,” she said.

I moved towards ‘Ubadah and spoke to her for sometime, all the while
experiencing astonishment over the state she was in.

“O’ My Mother! What have you seen of the wonders of the world?” I asked
her.

‘Ubadah replied, “O’ Son! I have experienced a day of ‘Eid, similar to
this day (‘Eidul Adha), when I had four hundred slave-girls standing
before me at my service and (yet) I used to complain that my son Ja’far
had not granted me my right (fully) for I should have had more
slave-girls serving me. Today is another day of ‘Eid but I am now faced
with a situation in which the only things I require are two sheepskins -
one for use as a mattress and the other for use as a blanket.”

Muhammad Hashmi continued: “I gave her five hundred dirhams, which made
her so happy that she almost died of delight. ‘Ubadah kept coming to our
house periodically, till she eventually passed away.”[^4]

2) Imam ‘Ali and the Public Treasury
------------------------------------

Shu’bi narrates: “Accompanying the other youths, I too entered the vast
open ground of Kufah where I saw Amirul Mo’minin (as) holding a small
whip in his hand and standing near two containers filled with gold and
silver coins. He used the whip to keep back the huge crowd that had
gathered whilst he was distributing the money.

The Imam (as) continued to distribute the money till there was nothing
left for himself, and he returned home empty-handed at which point, I
went home too.

“I have witnessed a very strange thing today and I fail to comprehend if
this person’s act was good or bad, in that he never retained anything
for himself!” I said to my father.

My father inquired as to what I was talking about. I narrated to him all
that I had witnessed, whereupon my father, bursting out in tears, said
to me: “Son, you have just watched the most excellent person from
amongst all the people.” [^5]

Zadhan reports: “Qambar and I set off see Amirul Mo’minin (as). When we
reached him, Qambar said: “O’ Amirul Mo’minin! Arise, for I have
concealed a significant treasure for you.”

“What is the treasure?” inquired the Imam (as).

“Arise and accompany me in order that I show it to you,” insisted
Qambar.

The Imam (as) got up and followed him into the house. Qambar brought out
a linen bag, which was full of small sacs containing gold and silver
coins.

“O’ Ali! I know that you distribute everything amongst the people and
never retain anything for yourself and so, I have saved this especially
for you!” said Qambar.

Imam (as) remarked, “I would have preferred you to set this house on
fire and burn down everything.” As he said this, he struck the bag with
his sword, causing the gold and silver coins to fall out. He then
ordered us to distribute the coins among the people. After we had
carried out his instructions, the Imam (as) said: “Bear witness that I
have not taken anything for myself and have not been negligent with
respect to the distribution of money amongst the Muslims. O’ Gold and
Silver! Deceive someone other than ‘Ali.”[^6]

3) Hadhrat Sulaiman
-------------------

Sulaiman Ibn Dawud (as) was one of those very few Prophets to whom Allah
had granted sovereignty over the east and the west of the world. For
years, he ruled over jinn, men, animals, birds and wild beasts, and knew
the language of all creatures - an authority so great and extensive that
it was ineffable.

He had prayed to Allah: “Grant me a kingdom the like of which You shall
never grant to anyone after me.”

After Allah had graced and honoured him with such a kingdom, Hadhrat
Sulaiman (as) said to his servants one day: “I have not passed one
single day, from morning to night, in a state of happiness. Tomorrow I
shall enter my palace, climb onto its roof and view my subjects. Do not
permit anyone to approach me lest my happiness should turn into
sadness.”

The next morning, taking hold of his staff, he climbed to the uppermost
portion of his palace and stood there, leaning upon his staff, observing
his kingdom and subjects, and experiencing joy over what Allah had
granted to him. As he was looking around, he suddenly noticed a
good-looking youth, dressed in clean clothes, appearing from one corner
of his palace.

“Who granted you permission to enter the palace?” he asked the youth.

“The Lord,” replied the youth.

“Who are you?” asked Sulaiman (as).

“Izra\`il.”

“Why have you come?”

“To seize your soul, Sulaiman.”

“I had wanted today to be my day of happiness but Allah desired
otherwise; comply with the orders given to you,” said Sulaiman (as).

Izra\`il seized his soul while he stood leaning on his staff while the
people, looking at him from afar, thought him to be alive.

When time passed, there arose a controversy amongst the people. Some
said, “It has been several days that he has not eaten or drunk anything
and so he is our Allah.” Another group said, “He is a sorcerer; he has
made it to appear to us that he stands, whereas, in reality, it is not
so.” A third group said, “He is a Prophet of Allah.”

Allah sent an army of ants to eat through his staff as a result of
which, the staff broke and Sulaiman collapsed. It was then that the
people realized that he had passed away several days before.[^7]

4) Talhah And Zubair’s Love for the World
-----------------------------------------

Talhah and Zubair had been of the elders during the initial phase of
Islam and had extended fitting contributions in the battles. After the
death of the Noble Prophet (S), both of them, and Zubair in particular,
vehemently supported Amirul Mo’minin (as) and never hesitated in
offering their assistance to him.

Their support continued till ‘Uthman was murdered and the people
selected Imam ‘Ali (as) as their leader. When this happened, these two
approached Imam (as) and formally requested him to appoint them as
governors of some cities.

However, when they encountered a negative reply from Imam ‘Ali (as),
they conveyed a harsh message to him through Muhammad Ibn Talhah, which
said: “We have had to make a lot of sacrifices for the sake of your
Caliphate and now that you have the reins of power in your hand, you act
as a dictator, bringing to the fore the likes of Malik Ashtar and
pushing us into the background?!”

Imam ‘Ali (as) sent a message through Muhammad Ibn Talhah saying: “What
should I do in order that you may be pleased?”

“Appoint one of us as the governor of Basrah and the other as the
governor of Kufah,” they replied.

“By Allah! When I do not consider them to be trustworthy here in this
place (Madinah), how can I place them over the people of Basrah and
Kufah?” asked Imam ‘Ali (as).

He then instructed Muhammad Ibn Talhah to go and tell them: “O’ Sheikhs!
Fear Allah and His Prophet with respect to the ummah of the Noble
Prophet (S) and do not oppress the Muslims; have you not heard Allah
say: “(As for) that future abode, We assign it to those who have no
desire to exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief and the
good end is for those who guard (against evil).”[^8]

Having failed to realize their ambitions of power and riches, Talhah and
Zubair decided to go to Makkah. They approached Imam ‘Ali (as) to seek
his permission to go to Makkah for performing the ‘Umrah. The Imam (as)
told them that they did not really intend to perform the ‘Umrah, but
they swore that they had no other motive and were firm and faithful in
their pledge of allegiance.

Upon the Imam’s orders, they renewed their pledge with him and then set
out for Makkah. There, they broke their pledge, raised an army and in
the company of ‘Aishah, set out towards Basrah for the Battle of the
Camel! On the way, they met Ya’li Ibn Munabbah, who carried with him
approximately four hundred thousand dinars for Imam ‘Ali (as) from
Yemen.

The two men forcefully took away the money from him and utilized it for
fighting the Imam (as).

In this battle (36 ah), thirteen thousand soldiers from the army of
Talhah and Zubair and five thousand soldiers from Imam ‘Ali’s (as) army
were killed. Talhah was eventually killed by an arrow shot by Marwan,
who belonged to his own army. After killing him, Marwan declared: “I
have extracted revenge of ‘Uthman’s blood from Talhah.”

Zubair withdrew from the battle and was murdered on the way by Ibn
Jurmuz. The consequence of their penchant for power and proclivity
towards worldly desires was nothing but an ignominious death.[^9]

5) What he Desired and What Eventually Happened!
------------------------------------------------

On the 23rd of Muharram, 169 ah, Mahdi ‘Abbasi died in Masabdhan and the
caliphate passed on to his son Musa, titled Hadi ‘Abbasi, who at that
time, had gone to Jorjan to fight the people of Tabaristan.[^10]

Harun Rashid, his brother, took the pledge of allegiance for him from
the people of Masabdhan and Baghdad and sent a message to inform him of
the situation. Hadi quickly returned to the capital.

Harthamah Ibn A’ayun recounts: “One night, Hadi ‘Abbasi summoned me to a
private meeting with him.

“Do you know how disturbed I am because of this infidel dog Yahya Ibn
Khalid? He has turned the people against me and is coaxing them to
support Harun. You must go to the prison immediately and behead him,” he
said. “Then proceed to the house of Harun and murder him. After this,
survey the prison and kill every person from the progeny of Abu Talib.
When you have executed these instructions, prepare the army and proceed
towards Kufah; once there, drive out all the descendants of ‘Abbas from
their houses and set their houses on fire.”

Hearing these instructions, a shiver ran through me.

“I do not have the strength to carry out these great and difficult
tasks,” I pleaded.

“If you exhibit negligence in obeying my orders, I shall kill you,” he
said, and ordered me to stand where I was whilst he went into the
women’s quarters.

I thought that since I had exhibited aversion towards these acts, he
would assign them to someone else and then have me killed. I promised to
myself that if I were delivered from this predicament, I would set off
for a place where nobody would recognize me. Suddenly, a slave appeared
and informed me that Hadi ‘Abbasi had summoned me. Anticipating death, I
testified to the Unity of Allah and the Prophethood of the Noble Prophet
(S) and advanced forward. Midway, I heard a lady speak out: “O’
Harthamah! I am Khaizran, Hadi’s mother. Come and see what calamity has
befallen us.”

As I entered the room, Khaizran, who was behind the curtains, said:
“When Hadi entered the house, I moved aside the covering from my head
and begged pardon for Harun, but he refused. At that moment he was
suddenly overcome by a fit of severe coughing. He drank some water but
it did not help and he died there and then (18 Rabi’ al-Awwal, 170 ah).
Now go and inform Yahya Ibn Khalid of his death so that he can take the
pledge of allegiance for my son Harun.”

Harthamah continues: “I informed Yahya of Hadi’s death and then
proceeded towards Harun’s house, where I found him reciting the Noble
Qur’an. I informed him that he had become the Caliph but he refused to
believe it and so I narrated the entire incident to him. That very
night, Harun was informed of the birth of his son, Mamun.”[^11]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul An’am (6), Verse 32

[^2]: Jame’ al-Sa’adat, Volume 2, Page 24

[^3]: Tadhkeratul Haqaiq, Page 35

[^4]: Tatimmah al-Muntaha, Page 181

[^5]: Al-Gharat, Volume 1, Page 55; Dastan-hai Az Zindagi ‘Ali , Page
114

[^6]: Dastan-hai Az Zindagi ‘Ali , Page 128; Nahjul Balagha (Ibn Abil
Hadid), Volume 8, Page 181

[^7]: Hayat al-Qulub, Volume 1, Page 370

[^8]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Qasas (28), Verse 83

[^9]: Hikayat-ha-e-Shanidani, Volume 3, Page 20; Tarikh-e-Ya’qubi,
Volume 2, Page 169

[^10]: Modern day Mazandaran (Tr.)

[^11]: Rangarang, Volume 1, Page 24


