40. Theft
=========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أََلسَّارِقُ وَ السَّارِقَةُ فَاقْطَعُوا أََيْدِيَهُمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And (as for) the man who steals and the woman who steals, cut off their
hands.”[^1]

Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا سَرَقَ السَّارِقُ قُطِعَتْ يَدُهُ وَ غُرِمَ ماَ أَخَذَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When a thief commits a theft, his hands are cut and he is made to
indemnify what he has taken.”[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Denying the wife her dower, not repaying one’s debts, not paying one’s
obligatory zakat and so on, are also examples of theft, but the meaning
that immediately comes to mind upon hearing of theft, is ‘taking into
possession the property and wealth of others, secretly and deceptively’
. This is the meaning which is actually intended here.

If there were to be no security (in the society), the people would be
unable to sleep in peace for fear of thieves. It is for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining security that Islam has ordered a thief’s
fingers to be severed; even if the act happens to be committed by a
child, he has to be castigated in some manner, so that he desists from
committing this evil act in the future.  
 It is due to the non-implementation of this Qur’anic ruling that an
increasing number of thieves are found even in Islamic societies these
days.

1) The Imam and the Thief’s Confession
--------------------------------------

A person approached Imam ‘Ali (as) and confessed that he had committed a
theft.

“Are you able to recite something from the Noble Qur’an?” Imam (as)
asked him.

“Yes, I know the chapter al-Baqarah,” replied the man.

The Imam (as) said, “I forgive you because of the chapter al-Baqarah.”
Ash’ath Ibn Qais, who happened to witness this, asked the Imam (as)
whether he could repeal a punishment that had been stipulated by Allah.

“What do you know? If a person confesses to his crime, an Imam has the
authority to either punish him or pardon him, but if two persons testify
to a person’s crime, it is not permissible to annul the punishment (and
pardon him),” the Imam (as) retorted.[^3]

2) The Bedouin’s Camel
----------------------

Sheikh Tawoos al-Haramain narrates: “I had been standing near Masjid
al-Haram in Makkah when I witnessed a Bedouin advancing on his camel.
When he reached the mosque, he dismounted, made his camel sit down, tied
its two knees and then, raising his head towards the sky, implored: “O’
Lord! I entrust unto You this camel and the load that lies upon it.”
Then he entered Masjid al-Haram. When he had circumambulated the Ka’bah
and offered his prayers, he came out of the mosque and found his camel
missing. He looked up towards the sky.

“It has been said in the holy Shari’ah that property should be sought
from one, unto whom it has been placed as trust. I had entrusted my
camel unto You, so return my camel to me,” he said.  
 Hardly had he uttered these words when I observed that someone emerged
from behind the mountain of Abu Qubais, with the rein of a camel in the
left hand and the right hand severed and suspended from his neck. He
came close to the Bedouin.

“O’ Youth! Take hold of your camel,” he said.

“Who are you and how did you land up in this state?” asked the Bedouin.

“I was impoverished and needy and hence stole your camel,” said the
stranger. “I went behind the mountain of Abu Qubais when I suddenly
noticed a rider coming towards me. As he came closer to me, he shouted
out: Bring your hand forward. When I had extended my hand, he severed it
with a stroke of his sword and, hanging it on my neck, said to me:
Return this camel to its owner immediately.” [^4]

3) Buhul and the Thief
----------------------

Whenever Buhul happened to have money in excess of his expenses, he used
to save it by concealing it in one corner of a ruined and broken down
house; this continued till the amount eventually reached a figure of
three hundred dirhams.

The next occasion when he had saved another ten dirhams and had gone to
the place to add it to his concealed savings, a trader who lived in the
neighbourhood, found out about the hideout. As soon as Buhul had left
the hiding place, the neighbour dug up the money that was concealed
beneath the ground.

The next time when Bulool came to the place, he found his money missing
and immediately realized that it was the work of the trader. He decided
to approach the trader.

“I wish to trouble you by telling you about my secret,” Buhul said to
the trader. “I have placed my money in different places.” Then he began
enumerating the places till the entire figure reached three thousand
dirhams. “The place where I have placed three hundred and ten dirhams is
the safest of them all. I now wish to transfer all my money to this
place in the ruined house.” Saying this, he bid the trader goodbye and
left.

The trader decided to return the three hundred and ten dirhams to the
place from where he had stolen the money with the intention that when
Buhul placed all his money there, he would steal the increased amount.
Some days later, Buhul returned to the ruins and found the three hundred
and ten dirhams in its original location. Taking out the money, he
defecated there and covered it with earth.  
 Immediately after Buhul had left, the trader rushed towards the spot
and, removing the earth, sought to collect the entire money, only to
find his hand dirtied by the excrement. He thus comprehended Buhul’s
deception. A few days later Buhul visited him.

“I want you to compute some figures associated with my money,” said
Buhul. “How much does eighty dirhams added to fifty dirhams added to one
hundred dirhams, and this sum added to the dirty odour that emanates
from your hands, sum up to?”

Saying this, he took to his heels. The trader rushed after him in hot
pursuit, but failed to catch him.[^5]

4) The Qur’an-Reciting Blind Thief
----------------------------------

‘Allam Ibn Al-Thaman says: “I was employed by a trader in Basrah when
one day, I had to undertake a journey to ‘Ubullah. I put five hundred
dirhams in a bag and set out for the journey. I reached the banks of the
river Tigris where I hired a boat. As I was passing by the region named
Mismar, I noticed a blind person sitting by the riverbank, reciting the
Qur’an. In a very sad voice, he called out: “O’ Seaman! Take me in the
boat for I fear that the animals might kill me at night.” Initially the
boatman refused but when I rebuked him, he consented. The blind man sat
in the boat and continually recited the Qur’an from memory till we came
near ‘Ubullah, whereupon he stopped his recitation and began to
disembark from the boat.

All of a sudden, I realized that the trader’s money, which had been
given to me in trust, was missing. Both the boatman and the blind person
removed their clothes to prove that they had not taken the money. I
thought to myself, “The trader is bound to kill me.” Thousands of
thoughts whirled in my mind and I began to weep and pray.

As I walked towards ‘Ubullah, a man came up to me and sought to know the
reason for my lamentations. I informed him of the theft of the trader’s
money.

“I shall show you a way (to extricate yourself from this problem),” he
said. “Purchase some good food, go to the prison and plead to the prison
warden to let you in. Inside the prison, go to Abu Bakr Naqqash and give
him the food. He will inquire about your problem, and when he does so,
narrate the entire story to him.”

I followed his instructions and when I had narrated my problem to Abu
Bakr Naqqash, he said: “Now proceed towards the tribe of Bani Hilal and
go to a certain house. Open the door and enter the house. There you will
notice some handkerchiefs hanging behind the door. Tie one of them to
your waist and sit down in a corner. A group of people will enter and
engage themselves in consuming intoxicants; you should pick up a bowl
too and after calling out, ‘For the health of my (maternal) uncle, Abu
Bakr Naqqash,’ begin drinking from it. Upon hearing my name, they will
inquire after my health. Pass this message to them: ‘Yesterday, my
nephew’s money was stolen. Hand it back to him,’ and they will hand over
the money to you.”

I did as instructed and they too, without any protest, handed over the
bag of money to me. I requested them to inform me as to how the theft
had taken place. After great reluctance, one of them asked me if I
recognised him. Looking closely at him, I realized he was the same blind
man who had been reciting the Qur’an, while the other person was the
boatman.

“One of our associates swims underwater behind the boat,” he explained.
“When the Qur’an is recited, the traveller becomes so absorbed that he
does not notice that we have thrown his money into the water. It is
collected by the associate in the water and carried to the shore, to be
distributed amongst ourselves when we gather together the next day.
Today was the day for the distribution of the money, but since we have
received orders from our chief, Abu Bakr Naqqash, we have returned the
money to you.”

I took possession of the money and thanked Allah for having been
delivered from this quandary.[^6]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Maidah (5), Verse 38

[^2]: Tafsirul Mu\`in, Page 114

[^3]: Qadhawat-ha-e-Amirul Mo’minin, Page 119 (authored by Tustari)

[^4]: Rahnama-e-Sa’adat, Volume 2, Page 272; Khulasatul Akhbar, Page 526

[^5]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, Volume 2, Page 71; Khazain Naraqi

[^6]: Jawame’ al-Hikayat, Page 357


