22. Trust In Allah
==================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِِذاَ عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَکَّلْ عَلى اللٌّهِ اِنَّ اللٌّهَ يُحِـبُّ
الْمُتَوَکِّلِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So when you have decided, then place your trust in Allah; surely Allah
loves those who trust.”[^1]  
 Imam ‘Ali (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلتَّوَكُّلُ عَلى اللٌّهِ نَجاَةٌ مِنْ كُلِّ سُوْءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Placing one’s trust in Allah is the means of deliverance from every
evil.”[^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

Tawakkul (placing one’s trust in Allah) is a jar that has been sealed
with Allah’s seal, and only that person who does not rely on Allah and
place his trust in Him, shall break open the seal of the jar and consume
its contents.

The lowest grade of tawakkul is when a person does not strive to act
upon his own principles before the right time, and does not endeavour to
acquire more than what has been ordained for him. The essence of
tawakkul is entrusting one’s affairs to Allah, and if a person is
heedless towards the actual ‘cause’, i.e. Allah, he shall not achieve
the reality of tawakkul.  
 Tawakkul can never be realized by mere words and claims, rather, it is
an internal and esoteric issue, which finds its roots in faith and
belief, and it is by abandoning all hopes and aspirations that a person
can arrive at the reality of tawakkul.[^3]

1) The Trader who Placed his Trust in Allah
-------------------------------------------

During the time of the Noble Prophet (S) there lived a trader who, in
all affairs, always placed his trust in Allah. He used to travel from
Syria to Madinah for trade and during one of his trips, he was
confronted by a bandit who drew his sword and intended to kill him.

“If it is my wealth that you desire, come and take it and leave me
alone,” pleaded the trader.

“Killing you is a must, for if I let you go free, you will identify me
to the authorities,” said the bandit.

“In that case give me respite till I have offered a two rak’at prayer,”
requested the trader.

The bandit agreed and the trader engaged himself in prayers. Having
completed the prayers, he raised his hands and beseeched: ‘O’ Lord! I
have heard from Your Prophet that whoever places his trust in You shall
remain protected. I have no helper in this desert and Your grace is my
only hope.’  
 Having placed all his trust in Allah, he had hardly completed his
supplication when a rider on a white horse loomed in the distance. When
he came close, the rider confronted the bandit and killed him with one
stroke of his sword. Then, turning to the trader, he said: “O’ You, who
places your trust in Allah! I have killed the enemy of Allah and He has
delivered you from him.”

“Who are you that you have come to my assistance in this desert?” the
trader asked.

“I am your *tawakkul*. Allah brought me out in the form of an Angel and
I was in the heavens when Jibra\`il called out to me and said*:* “Hasten
to the assistance of your master and exterminate his enemy”, and here I
have come and eliminated your enemy*.*” Having said thus, he disappeared
out of sight.

The trader fell down in prostration of thanksgiving to Allah and
acquired a stronger conviction with respect to the instructions of the
Noble Prophet (S) regarding tawakkul. On arrival in Madinah, he
approached the Noble Prophet (S) and narrated what had transpired.

“Indeed! Tawakkul raises a person to the pinnacle of success and the
rank of a person who possesses it, is equivalent to the ranks of the
Prophets, the friends of Allah, the righteous ones and the martyrs,”
said the Prophet (S).[^4]

2) The Noble Prophet and Trust in Allah
---------------------------------------

When Abu Sufiyan, the chief of the polytheists of Makkah, saw the ten
thousand strong army of Islam (during the conquest of Makkah), he was
filled with awe and astonishment. As he walked beside the battalions of
the Noble Prophet (S), he murmured: “I wish I knew why Muhammad became
victorious over me. How did he manage to gather for himself such a
powerful army despite being alone and without support in Makkah?”

The Noble Prophet (S) overheard him. “We became victorious over you by
Allah’s assistance!” he said, placing his hand upon Abu Sufiyan’s
shoulder.

In the battle of Hunain, when the enemy suddenly and unsuspectingly
attacked the forces of Islam, chaos reigned supreme within the Muslim
ranks. When the Noble Prophet (S) watched this state of the Muslim army,
he sought Allah’s help by placing his trust in Him, and supplicated:
‘*O’ Lord! All praise and thanks only belong to You. I place my
complaint (regarding the state of affairs) before You and it is only You
from whom help and assistance ought to be sought.’*

At that moment, Jibra\`il descended from the heavens and said to him:
“O’ Prophet of Allah! You have recited a supplication which Musa (as)
had recited when the sea had split for him and he was granted
deliverance from the evils of Fir’awn.”[^5]

3) The Illness of Prophet Musa
------------------------------

Once, Prophet Musa (as) became ill. The Bani Israel came to him and
realizing what his illness was, advised him: “If you consume such and
such medicine you will recover from your sickness.”

“I shall not seek any cure but will instead wait till Allah cures me
without the help of any medicine,” said Musa (as) to them. His illness
became prolonged whereupon Allah revealed to him: “By My Majesty and
Glory! I shall never cure you till you have consumed the medicine which
they had recommended to you.”

Musa (as) asked the Bani Israel to treat him with the medicine that they
had previously suggested. They treated him and shortly after that, Musa
(as) regained his health. However, this incident left Musa (as) with a
feeling of complaint and dejection but Allah revealed to him: “You
desired to annul My Wisdom by means of your trust in Me! Is there one,
other than Me, who has placed the medicinal and beneficial effects in
plants and various things?” [^6]

4) Hammad Ibn Habib
-------------------

Hammad Ibn Habib Kufi narrates: “One year, I had set out for Hajj
accompanied by some people. Just as we passed by a place called
Zubalah*,* a dreadful wind with black dust began to blow. Its intensity
was so great and severe that everyone in the group were left scattered.
I found myself alone and lost in a place with no water or trees. It was
not long before night fell. Staring into the distance, my eyes perceived
the silhouette of a single tree and I began trudging towards it. As I
approached the tree, I witnessed that a youth, dressed in white apparel
and scented with musk, also came up to the tree.

‘This person must be one of the auliya of Allah!’ I thought.

I concealed myself fearing that if I came forward, he would move away to
another place. The youth readied himself for his prayers, recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَنْ حَاذَ کُلََّ شَيْءٍٍٍ مَلَکُوْتاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

and then started his prayers.  
 I noticed that there was a spring of water nearby. I performed my
ablution and stood behind the youth for my prayers. I observed that in
the course of his prayers, when the youth reached the verses that
narrated Divine chastisement and punishment, he would repeat them with
wailing, weeping and lamentation. After the prayers, the youth began to
walk away from his place, all the while supplicating:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَنْ قَصَدَهُ الضَّالُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fearing that I might lose him, I rushed toward him and pleaded: “I place
you under the oath of He Who has taken away exhaustion from you and
instilled within you the ecstasy of this solitude! Have pity upon me for
I have lost my way and I (also) desire to be adorned with your traits
and attributes.”

“If you had truly placed your trust in Allah, you would never have lost
your way. Now follow me,” replied the youth.

Saying this, he went to one side of the tree and, taking hold of my
hand, brought me to a place by means of tayy al-ardh[^7]. It became
apparent to me that morning had dawned.

“Good news for you, for this place is Makkah,” said the youth.

I realized that I could hear the voices of the pilgrims who had come
there to perform the Hajj. I turned to the youth and asked: “I place you
under the oath of He, upon Whom you have pinned your hopes for the Day
of Judgment! Tell me, who are you?”

“Since you have placed me under oath, I shall inform you of my identity.
I am ‘Ali Ibn Husain (Zainul ‘Abidin),” the youth answered.’”[^8]

5) Relying upon the Butler
--------------------------

Jibra\`il came to Prophet Yusuf (as) while he was in prison and asked
him: “O’ Yusuf! Who made you the most beautiful of all men?”

Yusuf replied, “Allah.”

Jibra\`il questioned again, “Who made you the most beloved of all
children in the eyes of your father?”

“My Allah,” said Yusuf.

“Who directed the caravan towards the well (into which you were
thrown)?”

“My Lord,” replied Yusuf.

“Who protected you from the stone which the people of the caravan had
hurled into the well?”

“Allah.”

“Who delivered you from the well?”

“My Allah.”

“Who protected you from the deceit of the ladies?”

“My Lord.”

Jibra\`il finally concluded, “Allah says: What made you seek your need
from someone other than Me? For this act, you shall stay in prison for
seven years (for the offense of placing your trust in the king’s barman
and asking him to seek your freedom from the king).”

According to another tradition, Allah revealed to him: “O’ Yusuf! Who
was it who showed you that dream?”

Yusuf replied, “It was You, O’ My Lord!”

“Who protected you from the guiles of the wife of the King of Egypt?”
asked Allah.

“It was You, O’ My Lord!”

Allah declared, “(Then) why did you seek help from someone else and not
from Me? Had you placed your trust in Me, I would have liberated you
from your imprisonment, but now that you have placed your trust in
someone else, you must stay in prison for seven years.”

(After this) Yusuf wept so much in prison that his inmates became
frustrated with him and it was decided that he would only weep on
alternate days. [^9]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Surat Ale ‘Imran (3), Verse 159

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Volume 78, Page 79

[^3]: Tadhkerah al-Haqaiq, Page 72

[^4]: Khazinatul Jawahir, Page 679; Majalis al-Muttaqin (of
Shahid-e-Thalith)

[^5]: Dars-hai Az Zindagi-e-Payambar-e-Islam, Page 216; Biharul Anwar,
Volume 21, Page 150

[^6]: Jame’ al-Sa’adat, Volume 3, Page 228; ‘Ilm-e-Akhlaq-e-Islami,
Volume 2, Page 290

[^7]: Literally: Folding up of the earth. Covering a great distance in a
fraction of a moment, miraculously. (Tr.)

[^8]: Pand-e-Tarikh, Volume 5, Page 182; Biharul Anwar, Volume 11, Page
24

[^9]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, Volume 3, Page 280; Layaliul Akhbar, Page 92


