23. Submission
==============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أُمِرْناَ لِنُسْلِمَ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَـمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And we are commanded that we should submit to the Lord of the
worlds.”[^1]

Imam Baqir (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَقُّ خَلْقِ اللٌّهِ أَنْ يُّسْلِمَ لِمَا قَضى اللٌّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The most worthy of Allah’s servants is one who submits before divine
decree.”[^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

The attribute of taslim[^3] holds a rank higher than those of ridha[^4]
and tawakkul[^5]. This is because a person who possesses this attribute
abandons his own quest for seeking solutions to the problems that plague
him and instead, dissociates himself from his inner attachments to such
an extent that he hands himself over to Allah completely.

In the attribute of Riďa, the actions are generally consistent with
human inclination and temperament, while in tawakkul, people take Allah
as their agent, but such is not the case in the attribute of tasleem.
The chosen ones of Allah are afflicted with various kinds of
difficulties such as an ill-tempered spouse, poverty, disease,
harassment by the people, and so on; but having submitted themselves
totally, they neither voice any protest nor do they experience any sort
of unhappiness over these afflictions.

1) The Imam’s Reply
-------------------

It has been narrated that sometimes, Imam Sadiq (as) entertained his
guests with sweetmeat and porridge, whereas at other times, he presented
them with olives and plain bread.

A person once said to him: “If you manage your affairs with prudence
(and foresight), you will always be consistent and will thus be able to
entertain your guests in the same manner at all times.”

“The management of our affairs lies in Allah’s hands (and we are in
total submission to His Will). Whenever He grants us (an increased
livelihood), we cater for our guests and ourselves liberally but
whenever He restrains our livelihood, we too adjust our lives
accordingly,” replied the Imam (as).[^6]

2) Mu’adh Ibn Jabal
-------------------

Mu’adh embraced Islam at the age of eighteen and participated in the
battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq and some others. The Noble Prophet (S)
established the bond of brotherhood between him and ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas’ud.

Mu’adh was compassionate by nature and possessed a pleasant personality.
The Noble Prophet (S) sent him to Yemen as its governor and showered him
with numerous advices, one of them being: “Do not be too strict with the
people; behave with them in such a manner that they are attracted to
your speech and religion.”

During the Caliphate of the second Caliph, a battle ensued between the
Muslims and the Romans and Mu’adh participated in it too. In the year 18
ah, in ‘Amwas*,* Syria, an epidemic of plague began to spread. Abu
‘Ubaidah, the commander of the Muslim army, was afflicted with the
disease and when he realized that his death was inevitable, he appointed
Mu’adh as his successor. The soldiers requested Mu’adh to pray for an
end to the calamity but he declined to do so.

“This is not a calamity. Instead, it is a prayer of your Prophet (S);
death of the pious and righteous ones, and martyrdom, which Allah grants
to only a few from amongst you,” he said.

He then supplicated: “O’ Lord! Grant the household of Mu’adh their
complete share of this Mercy (plague).”

Shortly afterwards, members of his household were afflicted with the
disease and succumbed to it. When he too sensed its effects in his
finger, he placed the finger in his mouth and biting it, said, “O’ Lord!
This is small and trivial; make it blessed (for me).”

He eventually died of this plague (in the year 18 ah) at the age of 38
and was buried near Jordan.[^7]

3) Learn Submission from the Pigeons
------------------------------------

During the time of one of the prophets, there lived a lady who had a son
who was in his youth and whom she loved dearly. As divine decree would
have it, the son died leaving the mother greatly aggrieved and immensely
disturbed. She was in such a state that her relatives approached the
prophet of the time and sought his help.

When he came to the mother, the prophet found her in a state of sorrow
and agitation and was weeping. His eyes then fell upon a pigeon-nest
nearby. He turned to the lady and asked: “O’ Lady! Is this a
pigeon-nest?”

The lady replied that it was.

“Do the pigeons give birth to their young ones?” asked the prophet.

“Yes.”

“Do all the young ones grow up to be able to fly?”

 “No, we kill some of them for their flesh,” said the lady.

The prophet continued, “And despite this, these pigeons do not abandon
their nest?”

“No, they do not move away to another place,” replied the lady.

The prophet then advised, “O’ Lady! Be apprehensive lest you be worse
off than these pigeons in the eyes of your Lord. These pigeons, despite
the fact that you kill and eat their young ones in front of their eyes,
do not turn away from you. Whereas you, as a result of losing just one
son, have directed your anger towards Allah, turned away from Him,
exhibited all this agitation, and uttered things that are
inappropriate.”

Hearing these words, her tears ceased and she never displayed impatience
and discontent thenceforth.[^8]

4) Sa’sah
---------

Ahnaf Ibn Qais narrates: “Once, I complained to my paternal uncle
Sa’sah, of stomach ache. Instead of sympathising with me, he rebuked me
severely by saying: “O’ Nephew! Whenever you experience any discomfort
and you complain about it to another being similar to yourself, there
can exist only two possibilities on the issue: the person to whom you
have narrated your problem is either your friend, in which case, quite
obviously, he too would be concerned for you; or he is your enemy, in
which case he would be delighted over your disturbed state.

Do not manifest your problem to someone who is like you and does not
possess the power to free you from it; instead seek shelter in, and
present the problem to Him, Who has afflicted you with it, for it is He,
Who can rid you of it.

O’ Nephew! It has been forty years since one of my eyes lost its vision
but I have not revealed this to anyone - not even my wife knows that I
am blind in one eye!”[^9]

5) Submission before a Ruling
-----------------------------

The date-plantation of Zubair Ibn ‘Awwam (a cousin of the Noble Prophet
(S)) lay adjacent to that of one of the Ansar (the Helpers). Once, there
arose a dispute between them in respect of the irrigation of their
lands.

In order to resolve the dispute they approached the Noble Prophet (S)
and presented the problem to him. Taking into account the fact that the
plantation of Zubair lay near the upper part of the land where the water
came from, while that of the other person was near the lower section
(and it was the customary practice that the upper part would be watered
before the lower one), the Noble Prophet (S) ruled that it should be
Zubair, who should water his plantation first, followed by the person
from the Ansar.

Despite the totally just nature of the ruling, the Ansar was displeased
and protested to the Noble Prophet (S) saying: “You have ruled in
Zubair’s favour as he happens to be your cousin.”

The Noble Prophet (S) was so greatly upset at this antagonistic staement
that the colour of his face changed. At this juncture, the following
verse was revealed: “*But no! By your Lord! They do not believe (in
reality) until they make you a judge of that which has become a matter
of disagreement* *among them, and then do not find any straitness in
their hearts as to what you have decided and submit with entire
submission.”*[^10]

This verse indicates that nobody can express dissatisfaction with the
ruling of the leader of an Islamic government of the Noble Prophet (S)
and seek to follow his own inclinations. One should submit totally to
the verdict given.[^11]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul An’am (6), Verse 71

[^2]: Jame’ al-Sa’adat, Volume 3, Page 204

[^3]: Submission to the will of Allah. (Tr.)

[^4]: Satisfaction and pleasure over divine decree. (Tr.)

[^5]: Complete reliance upon Allah. (Tr.)

[^6]: Shanidani-ha-e-Tarikh, Page 32; Mahajjatul Baiďa, Volume 3, Page
43

[^7]: Paighambar Wa Yaran, Pages 264–259; Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, Volume 3,
Pages 122-124

[^8]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, Volume 2, Page 761

[^9]: Pand-e-Tarikh, Volume 5, Page 188; Al-Kuna Wa al-Alqab, Volume 2,
Page 13

[^10]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Nisa (4), Verse 65 (و يُسَلِّمُوا
تَسلِيمًا)

[^11]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, Volume 9, Page 102; Majma’ul Bayan, Volume
3, Page 69


