24. Contemplation
=================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَوَلَمْ يَتَفَکَّرُوا فِي أََنْفُسِهِمْ مَا خَلَقَ اللٌّهُ
السَّمٌواَتِ وَ الأََرْضَ وَ ماَ بَيْنَهُماَ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ وَ
أََجَلٍ مُسَمًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do they not reflect within themselves: Allah did not create the heavens
and the earth and what is between them two but with truth, and (for) an
appointed term?” [^1]

Imam ‘Ali (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلتَّفَکُّرُ يَدْعُو إِِلـى الْبِرِّ وَ الْعَمَلِ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Contemplation invites (man) towards good (deed) and its performance.”
[^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

Reflecting over one’s own state and that of the other people leads to
the manifestation of the good, expiation of sins and illumination of the
heart. It draws a person’s attention towards his Hereafter and brings
about an increase in his or her (good) deeds.

Contemplation is a quality and an act of worship, the like of which
there is none - just as the Noble Prophet (S) has said: “An hour of
contemplation is superior to an entire year’s worship.” Only he, upon
whose heart Allah has cast His glance and illuminated it with the light
of His cognizance, can reach the station of contemplation, whereupon he
then begins to perceive the world with a vision of comprehension and
understanding, and never becomes heedless of Allah.[^3]

1) Rabi’ah
----------

Rabi’ah Ibn Ka’b reports: “Once, the Noble Prophet (S) said to me: “O’
Rabi’ah! You have been serving me for seven years and therefore, will
you not ask for something from me in order that I grant it to you?”

“O’ Prophet of Allah! Grant me some time in order that I may reflect
over the matter,” I requested. The next day, when I had arrived in his
presence, the Prophet (S) said: “O’ Rabi’ah! Speak out your wish.”

“Pray to Allah that He makes me enter Paradise along with you!” I said.

Hearing this request, he inquired, “Who is it that has taught you to
seek this from me?”

“No one has taught it to me. I considered that if I sought great wealth,
it would eventually get exhausted; if I sought a long life and numerous
children, the ultimate eventuality would be death; hence, as a result of
this contemplation, I eventually opted for this request,” I replied.

The Noble Prophet (S) lowered his head for a few moments as he
deliberated, after which, raising his head, he said: “I shall seek your
wish from Allah, but you must help me too (in this matter) by
prostrating excessively.”[^4]

2) Contemplation before Action
------------------------------

One of the companions of the Noble Prophet (S) said to him: “I always
tend to suffer losses in my business transactions. The guile and
deception of the sellers or the purchasers act like magic and leave me
cheated.”

The Noble Prophet (S) advised: “In every transaction in which you fear
that you might be deceived, demand from the person with whom you are
doing business with the right to annul the transaction within a period
of three days. This is for the reason that should you happen to suffer
losses, you would be able to take back your money. In addition, be
patient and forbearing in the course of the transaction.

“Do know that contemplation and patience are from Allah, while hastiness
and impetuosity are from Shaitan. You can learn this lesson from a dog,
for when you throw a piece of bread to a dog, it does not immediately
begin to eat it but first smells it and after finding it to be
appropriate, begins eating it; similarly, you should smell every matter
that comes up before you (i.e. reflect and ponder over the pros and cons
of it and do not embark upon it without the preliminaries). You, with
your intellect and wisdom, are no less than a dog; thus, contemplate and
reflect before every action.”[^5]

3) Types of Contemplation
-------------------------

Miqdad, one of the loyal companions of ‘Ali (as), says: “I went to Abu
Hurairah who said that he had heard the Noble Prophet (S) say:
‘Contemplating for an hour is better than the worship of one year.’

I went to Ibn ‘Abbas and heard him say that the Noble Prophet (S) said:
‘Contemplation for one hour is superior to seven years of worship.’

I went to another companion and heard him narrate that the Noble Prophet
(S) said: ‘An hour of contemplation is better than seventy years of
worship.’

I was astonished to hear each of them narrating differently from the
other and so, I approached the Noble Prophet (S) and informed him of the
three different versions. He said: “All three of them speak the truth.”
Then, in order to prove his point, he summoned the three men. All of us
gathered in the presence of the Noble Prophet (S).

The Noble Prophet (S) asked Abu Hurairah: “How do you contemplate?”

“As stated by Allah in the Qur’an: ‘*(Men of understanding) reflect on
the creation of the heavens and the earth.’*[^6]. I too reflect upon the
wonders of the heavens and the earth,” he replied.

The Noble Prophet (S) remarked, “One hour of your contemplation is
better than one year of worship.”

Then turning to Ibn ‘Abbas, he asked, “How do you contemplate?”

“I reflect upon death and the horrors of the Day of Judgment,” replied
Ibn ‘Abbas.

The Noble Prophet (S) said, “One hour of your contemplation is better
than seven years of worship.” Then, he asked the other companion, “In
what manner do you contemplate?”

The companion answered, “I reflect upon the fire of Hell and its
dreadfulness and severity.”

“One hour of your contemplation is better than seventy years of
worship,” the Noble Prophet (S) stated.

In this way the issue was solved and it became clear that the rewards
for contemplation depended upon the intention that accompanied it.[^7]

4) Thoughts of Leadership
-------------------------

Sa’di narrates: “One of my friends who was disturbed and distressed due
to his meagre livelihood, complained to me about his low income and a
large family.”

“In order to safeguard my reputation, I intend to shift to another city
so that no one becomes aware of the abject state of my affairs,” he
said. “You are aware that I know accounting and can maintain accounts; I
have approached you so that you use your rank and position to get me a
job in the government so that I might lead my remaining life with peace
of mind and will be grateful to you for your efforts!”

I said to him, “Handling the accounts of the king entails two aspects;
on the one hand it carries hope while on the other hand it is also work
which has to be feared. Do not place yourself in an ominous situation
for the hope which the work possesses.”

“In view of my condition, your advice appears to be inappropriate; in
addition, you have not responded correctly to my request,” said the
friend.

“You surely possess piety, knowledge and trustworthiness but (do realize
that) envious and fault-finding individuals lie in wait for you. It is
in your own interest that you lead your life with contentment and
abandon the idea of a high rank and post,” I explained.

My friend was upset when he heard this and said, “What kind of reasoning
and deliberation is this? It is in times of need that friends should
step forward for help, for in good times even enemies pretend to be
one’s friend.”

Sensing his embarrassment over my advice, I took him to the minister of
treasury who was known to me. I narrated to him my friend’s plight and
the minister assigned him the responsibility of a petty task.

As time passed, the officials found him to be vigilant and
pleasant-mannered and so promoted him. After a long time, I embarked on
a journey to Makkah with some of my friends. On the way back, not far
from my city, I came across my friend who seemed to be in a state of
distress. He came towards me looking depressed.

“Why are you in such a state?” I asked him.

“Just as you had predicted, a group of people became envious of me and
accused me of treason,” he responded. “The king, without any
investigation, threw me into prison and subjected me to torture and
punishment. I remained in prison till the news of the return of the
pilgrims reached the city, whereupon I was set free. The king even went
to the extent of confiscating the inheritance which I had received from
my father.”  
 Sa’di continues: “I said to him, ‘I had advised you previously that
working for kings is similar to a journey by sea – beneficial, but at
the same time, dangerous – you might either strike treasure or end up in
destruction, but you refused to take heed!’”[^8]

5) The Kingdom of Rey or Killing the Imam
-----------------------------------------

Yazid instructed his governor, ‘Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad, that if Husain
(as) refused to pledge allegiance, he should fight the Imam (as).

Prior to the incident of Kerbala, ‘Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad had appointed
‘Umar Ibn Sa\`d as governor of the province of Rey, but before he could
go there, ‘Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad sent him a letter, which contained the
following instructions: ‘Husain (as) has arrived in Iraq. First proceed
to Iraq, fight with him, kill him and then proceed towards Rey.’

‘Umar Ibn Sa’d approached ‘Ubaidullah and requested: “O’ Amir! Relieve
me of this responsibility!”

“I shall relieve you of this responsibility but I shall also relieve you
of the governorship of Rey,” ‘Ubaidullah responded.

‘Umar Ibn Sa’d found himself hesitating between fighting the Imam (as)
and governing the great kingdom of Rey. He requested ‘Ubaidullah to give
him respite for a night so that he could reflect over the matter.
‘Ubaidullah agreed and ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d passed the entire night pondering
over the matter till he eventually opted for the kingdom of Rey, which
lay before him at that moment, but chose to disregard Hell and Paradise,
which were in the next life. He decided to fight the Imam (as).  
 The next morning, he went to ‘Ubaidullah and expressed his readiness to
accept the responsibility of fighting the Imam (as). ‘Ubaidullah placed
a huge army at his disposal so that he could proceed to Kerbala for the
purpose.

Imam Husain (as) entered Kerbala on the 2nd of Muharram while ‘Umar Ibn
Sa’d, in his capacity as the supreme commander of his army and with a
four thousand strong cavalry, arrived there on the 3rd.

He appointed Shimr as the chief of his army and on the 10th of Muharram
went to the extent of ordering the killing of Imam Husain (as) and
seventy two of his children and companions just for the purpose of
acquiring the kingdom of Rey.”[^9]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Rum (30), Verse 8

[^2]: Jame’ al-Sa’adat, Volume 1, Page 166

[^3]: Tadhkerah al-Haqaiq, Page 29

[^4]: Khazinatul Jawahir, Page 345; Al-Da’wat (By Rawandi)

[^5]: Riwayat-ha Wa Hikayat-ha, Page 195; Dastan-ha-e-Mathnawi, Volume
2, Page 125

[^6]: Noble Qur’an, Surat Ale ‘Imran (3), Verse 191

[^7]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, Volume 5, Page 87; Tafsir Ruhul Bayan,
Volume 8, Page 440

[^8]: Hikayat-ha-e-Gulistan, Page 65

[^9]: Muntahal A’mal, Volume 1, Page 333


