25. Humiliation
===============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهاَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لاَ يَسْخَرْ قَوْمٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O you who believe! let not (one) people laugh at (another)
people.”[^1]  
 The Noble Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ حَقَرَ مُؤْمِناً مِسْکِيناً أَوْ غَيْرَ مِسْکِينٍ لَمْ يَزَلِ
اللٌّهُ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ حَاقِراً لَهُ مَاقِتاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If a person humiliates a believer, indigent or otherwise, Allah shall
always abhor and humiliate him.” [^2]

Short Expalantion
-----------------

Factors such as arrogance, malice, envy and the like cause some
individuals to view others who are either illiterate or lack strength
and whom they have compelled into performing base and lowly work, with
contempt and humiliation.

Disparagement in every form is forbidden; moreover, if the humiliated
person experiences a feeling of disgrace and injury, this is bound to
result in a metaphysical reaction which would reflect badly upon the
esteem and personality of the offender. Thus, it is befitting to take
regard of the weakest of Allah’s creations so that, we too are
encompassed by His grace and compassion.

1) Mufaďďhal Ibn ‘Umar
----------------------

Once, a letter signed by some of the Shiite elders, was brought to Imam
Sadiq (as) by a few of the signatories themselves. The letter complained
of the friendship of Mufaďďhal Ibn ‘Umar, the Imam’s representative in
Kufah, with some pigeon-fanciers, who were apparently not of good
character.

After reading the letter, the Imam (as) wrote and sent a letter to
Mufaďďhal through those very individuals who had brought the complaint
to him.

Perchance, the Imam’s letter reached Mufaďďhal while some of the
signatories of the letter of complaint were present in his house.

Opening the letter in their presence, he read it and then handed it over
to them. When the signatories read the letter, they found that it
contained some instructions from Imam (as) to Mufaďďhal, requiring him
to arrange a transaction involving a large amount of money. The letter
did not make the slightest reference to Mufaďďhal’s association with the
pigion-fanciers.

Since the issue concerned the raising of money, Mufaďďhal’s guests
lowered their heads and said that they needed time to think about it.
They asked to be excused from making any monetary contribution.

Mufaďďhal, the intelligent person that he was, requested them to stay
over for food and prevented them from leaving his house. In the
meantime, he sent word to the pigeon-fanciers asking them to come to his
house. When they had arrived, he read out the Imam’s letter to them in
full view of the previous group. Without wasting any time, the
pigeon-fanciers left and while the previous group was still engaged in
consuming the food, they returned, handed over a large amount of money
to Mufaďďhal and then took his leave.

At this point, Mufaďďhal turned to the complainants and said: “Despite
the fact that these youths help the religion when the occasion demands
and there exists a great possibility that they may turn to the right
path, you desire that I should not entertain them and associate with
them? Do you think Allah is in need of your prayers and fasts that you
have become so haughty over them, but when it comes to money, you seek
excuses and refuse to answer the call of the Imam (as)?”

The elders who had viewed Mufaďďhal’s friendship with those youths with
contempt, were left mortified and speechless as they departed from his
house.[^3]

2) The Conduct of the Noble Prophet
-----------------------------------

The Noble Prophet (S) and a few other individuals were having their meal
when a person, suffering from smallpox, came to the gathering. His
disease was so acute that the boils had become septic. Every person,
near whom this diseased person tried to sit, would show his revulsion
and loathing by rising up and moving away from him. (Noticing this) the
Noble Prophet (S) made the person sit beside himself and exhibited great
kindness towards him.



On another occasion, the Noble Prophet (S), together with a few of his
companions, was busy having his food when a leper arrived in the
gathering. The people present expressed their abhorrence and detestation
over his arrival but the Noble Prophet (S) asked him to sit next to
himself and invited him to eat the food.

A person from the Quraish, who had displayed his aversion, was afflicted
with the same disease before meeting his death![^4]

3) The Consequence of Holding Someone in Contempt
-------------------------------------------------

There lived amongst Bani Isra\`il, a person who was so sinful and
immoral that they eventually had him expelled from their midst.

Once, while wandering around, he came across a pious worshipper, above
whose head flew a pigeon casting its shadow over him (thus protecting
him from the sun). He said to himself: “I am a Banished person but this
man is a pious individual; if I sit near him it is possible that due to
his piety, Allah may show mercy upon me too.”

With this in mind, he approached the worshipper and sat down beside him.
On seeing the exiled man sit next to him, the worshipper thought to
himself: “I am the pious worshipper of this tribe whilst he is a
disreputable, Banished and despised sinner; how can he sit down beside
me?” Turning his head away from the man, the worshipper ordered him to
go away from him.

Just as he had uttered these words, Allah revealed to the prophet of the
time: “Go to those two persons and ask them to start their deeds afresh,
for I have forgiven all the sins of the immoral person and erased all
the good deeds of the worshipper,” (for exhibiting self-conceit and
holding the other person in contempt).[^5]

4) The Short and Ugly Son
-------------------------

Sa’di narrates: “A king had several sons, one of them being short, thin
and ugly, while the others were tall and good-looking.  
 The king would look at the short son with scorn and contempt, thereby
causing him humiliation. The son, being intelligent, realized why his
father looked down upon him and so said to him: “O’ Father! A short but
wise person is better than a tall but ignorant one. He who is taller is
not necessarily better and superior; a sheep is clean but an elephant,
like a carcass, always possess a foul smell.”

The son’s words made the king laugh and the elders of the court approved
of what he said, but his brothers were upset.

Coincidentally, during those days, it so happened that the enemy forces
attacked the kingdom and the first person from the king’s army to
heroically attack the enemy was the king’s short and ugly son. With a
display of great courage, he felled a few of the enemy chiefs and then,
returning to his father and paying his respects to him, said: “On the
day of battle the lean horse comes of use.” Despite the fact that a
group of his soldiers had taken flight, the son returned to the
battlefield.

“O’ Men! Endeavour hard or else put on the dress of womenfolk,” he
shouted with bitter sarcasm.

This sarcasm breathed fresh life into the cavalry who fought with
renewed vigour till they eventually overcame the enemy forces and became
victorious. The king kissed his son all over the face and named him his
successor. From then on, he looked at this son with great respect and
esteem. These events caused his brothers to become so envious of him
that they put poison into his food in order to get rid of him.
Fortunately, his sister watched what was happening through a small door
and sent a warning signal to her brother by shutting the door loudly.
The intelligent brother became suspicious and abstained from eating the
food.

“It is impossible for skilled people to die while the unskilled ones
continue to live on and take their place,” he commented.

When the king was informed of the incident, he reprimanded the other
brothers and sent each of them to the farthest part of his kingdom.[^6]

5) Bring forth One Worse than Yourself!]
----------------------------------------

Allah revealed to Prophet Musa (as): “The next time you come to converse
with Me, bring along someone who is inferior to you.”

Musa (as) set out in quest of such a person but failed to find one,
because every person that he encountered, he did not have the nerve to
think that he was superior to that person.

Then, deciding to direct his search amongst the animals, his eyes fell
upon a diseased dog. He decided to take it along with him. He tied a
rope around the dog’s neck and began pulling it but after a short
distance, he regretted his action and set the dog free. He returned
empty-handed to have his conversation with Allah.

“Why did you not bring someone along with you, in accordance with My
order?” came the voice from Allah.

Musa (as) beseeched, “O’ Lord! I failed to find anyone who could be
inferior to me.”  
 The reply came from Allah: “By My Might and Glory! Had you brought
someone, regarding him to be inferior to yourself, I would have surely
erased your name from the list of Prophets (and relieved you of the rank
of Prophethood)!”[^7]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Hujarat (49), Verse 11

[^2]: Jame’ al-Sa’adat, Volume 2, Page 215

[^3]: Ba Mardum In Guneh Barkhord Konim, Page 78; Manhajul Maqal of
Astarabadi, Page 343

[^4]: ‘Ilm-e-Akhlaq-e-Islami, Volume 1, Page 435; Jame’ al-Sa’adat,
Volume 1, Page 357

[^5]: Shanidani-ha-e-Tarikh, Page 373; Mahajjatul Baiďa, Volume 6, Page
239

[^6]: Hikayat-ha-e-Gulistan, Page 43

[^7]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, Volume 2, Page 676; Layaliul Akhbar, Page 197


