[Introduction]
==============

Throughout history, the philosophy of human rights has been to ensure
human dignity, irrespective of race, religion, creed, caste and color.
Theories, codes and behaviors have been established to ensure this basic
principle. However, as Thomas Hobbles wrote, “human beings are
fallible.” Hence, such theories and laws were not always practical and
were often full of contradictions. People try to trace the genesis of
human rights back to ancient to Greece and Rome where natural law
governed the institutions, but these rights are not in due order process
of law. The Magna Carta (1215) of England is seen as a remarkable
achievement, but it has its own defects. It has been established through
case law, that members of Judaism and Sikhism are fully protected; under
the Race relation act, but no such protection exists for members of
other faiths[^1]: More recently, the Bill of Rights of the United States
was written but it too has shortcomings. The U.S. considers itself to be
a righteous nation but it is prejudiced toward other nations and
minority races. Despite the so-called established laws of Human rights,
there is much discrimination in United States on the basis of color,
caste and creed.

Going back through history, the concept of human rights in Islam and its
practical applications to human beings is totally neglected. However,
Islam, with its divine dependence upon the prophet Mohammad (SAW)
contains a message of human rights as its basic law and injects the
values of interest which fully normalize the claims and demands and
needs in every society for which laws and provisions were made for the
interest of individual human beings.


