[Main Points of Research]
=========================

The claims or demands of such human beings fall into one of three
categories:individual, public or social . As we know rights and duties
are correlated. One can't have right without duty or duty without right,
so Law had particular influence on rights and duties. The function of
the law is to control illegal activities and safeguard the rights of
other human beings. Prophet Mohammad (SAW), the final messenger, worked
day and night for the preservation of human rights. He acted very
determinately against human rights atrocities. Moreover, after migration
in 622 A.D., he introduced the charter in Madina which guarantees full
protection of religion, life, and also safeguards property. After the
conquest of Makka, where many atrocities were perpetuated against
Muslims, the Prophet Mohammad showed forbearance and great statesmanship
by forgiving everyone. Divine guidance guarantees these rights and
obligations and has been conveyed to humanity ever since the origin of
mankind.

As mentioned earlier, duties and rights are not separate from each other
in Islam. In this regard, A.K. Brohi says, "Since within the totally of
Islam, man’s duty is to society and to every other individual,
paradoxically, the rights of each individual are protected by the
obligations of all under divine law, as the state itself is compelled to
protect the rights of individual.”3 The right to life in Islam is also
protected and emphasizes that no one has the right to violate any one’s
right to life in this regard. The Holy Quran says, “Do not kill a soul,
which Allah had made sacred except through the due process of law.”4 In
another verse Allah Says, “Nor take life which Allah had made sacred
except for just cause.”5 So far as revenge for murder is concerned it
can only be decided by a competent court of law. Otherwise, anyone who
commits murder without due process of law would be considered to have
killed the whole humanity. The Holy Quran says, “If anyone slew a person
unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief in the land, it would
be as he had slewed the whole humanity.”

The significance of protecting human life is explained in the second
part of the above verse. If anyone saved a life it would be as he saved
the life of whole of humanity.6 Islam gives this right to each and every
human being regardless of race, nationality or religion. The Prophet
Mohammad (SAW) is reported to have said, “One who kills a man under
covenant (a non Muslim Citizen of Islamic State) will not even smell the
fragrance of paradise.”7

Keeping in view the concept of human rights, the duties of humanity
under the guidance of natural law have been categorized into two vast
fields: Haqooq ul Allah and Haqooq ul Ebad. Haqooq ul Allah are the
rights of Allah upon mankind and consist of many types of worship and
rituals. The Haqooq ul Ebad are the rights of humans. Each of the rights
of Allah correspond to public rights and, because Muslim laws regards
observance of necessary devotional acts as being beneficial in the
community, there is no hindrance of all rights vested to Allah for the
service of humanity.8 Both categories of rights – Haqooq ul Allah and
Haqooq ul Ebad – are originally vested to Allah. It is explicitly clear
in Islam that duties towards other human beings are vested to Allah
alone. Now the concept has emerged from

the divine guidance, which leads both to preserve the rights of Allah on
men and women.

These are clear from the tradition of Prophet Mohammad (SAW), when he
said Allah will enquire from you about human rights on the day of
judgment. It is written, “‘O children of Adam! I asked you for food, but
you didn’t feed me.' The man will reply, ‘O Allah how could I feed you
when you are the sustainer of all men.’ Allah will say 'such and such of
my servants asked you for food but you did not feed him. Do you not know
that if you had given him food you would have found that food here with
me?” And again, Allah asked, “‘O children of Adam, I asked you water and
you didn’t give it to Me.’ Man will say," ‘O Allah how can I give you
water, when you are the Lord of worlds?’ Allah says ‘such and such of my
servants asked you for water, but you did not oblige him. If you had
given water to him, you would have found it here with Me.”9

Now human rights which are explored within the Haqooq ul Ebad would be
grouped into two sections, one section needs the establishment of a
state. We can say these are state sponsored human rights. Another would
be called moral rights, which requires individual emphasis and everyone
has to work for the establishment of these rights. The goal of an
Islamic state is to preserve the rights of human beings who have been
deprived from these rights. The first caliph of Islam, Abu Bakr, when
elected as Amir Ul Mumeneen in Madina, said “The weak shall be strong in
my eyes until I restore to them their rights and the strong shall be
weak in my eyes until I have restored the rights of weak from them.”10

These rights cannot be considered as the products of socio-economic
conditions as per Marxist or Freudian concepts. For both of these
thinkers assume that man is the creation of his own complex ideas. Life
with human rights is the natural condition; they are innately needed by
man in order to continue on the path towards perfection. Before
determining the proper criteria of rights, two conditions concerning the
nature of man and of rights should be visualized.11 The criteria for
rights should be universal, and impartial with respect to color, caste
and creed. Now the only criteria we had to find is human conscience in
the general sense which includes both moral and conscious awareness so
that human beings should be conscious to preserve the rights of others
in the community. Without consciousness, a body has no humanity. It is
just like a piece of log for which there can be no hope for rights.12

The Muslim state was run by caliphs who were not monarchs trying only to
satisfy themselves. Rather, these caliphs were just rulers and advocates
of divine law. They were totally against the dictatorship concept of
rule. There was no concept of the English doctrine, "the King can do no
wrong and is not liable to face justice.” In the Islamic political
system, caliphs are themselves subject to the divine ruler (Allah). In
this regard, the Holy Quran says, “I seek refuge in the lord of mankind,
the king of mankind the Allah of Mankind.”13 The great commander Khalid
bin Walid once addressed the Romans who regarded their emperor as the
king of kings by saying, "Your king may be like that, but our caliph,
whom we have elected as such, if he thinks about the kingship even for a
moment, he shall be deposed.”14

The Islamic judicial system is unique because justice is its core and no
one can commit anything unjustly. Once Hazrat Ali lost his armor which
was later found with a Jew. The caliph complained in the court of
justice against the Jew. The caliph Hazrat Ali brought his son Hazrat
Hassan as witness in support of his case. The judge rejected the
complaint of Caliph and did not consider the evidence of any such
relative as reliable, this kind of just judicial system impressed the
Jew and he at once embraced Islam.15 We are directed in the Holy Quran
to act justly with every one, Muslim, non Muslims and even with
relatives and orphans and the poor.

Islam, being the universal religion, does not allow any one to deprive
another of his or her rights. Indeed, Islam guides mankind to respect
one another regardless of religion. Because Islam is the religion of
tolerance, Muslims have made treaties whenever they are close to victory
in War. Once, the commander of a Muslim army Abu Ubaida al Jarrah made a
treaty with the people of Hamas and invited the caliph Hazrat Umar in
this regard. Hazrat Umar declared the treaty and said, as per the
treaty, the lives, property and religious laws concerning you are
protected and secured under due process of law16 Justice is the inner
most quality which gives moral luster and spiritual dignity to human
affairs.

Within the circumstances of law and politics, justice has two distinct
meanings: first it is a characteristic of the human mind that
distinguishes between right and wrong. Secondly, it signifies legal
rules which allow a society to maintain law and order.17 Islam strictly
prohibits mankind from acting unjustly and emphasizes work for moral and
ethical upliftment and against fraudulent activities. The Holy Quran
says, “And defraud not the substance of any people and do not act
corruptly on the earth making mischief. And guard yourself against the
punishment of Allah for all sorts of corruption.18 Allah always acts
justly and does not make mankind beasts of burden under his divine
command, but insists always on the individual responsibilities of man to
make a choice between good and evil. The Holy Quran says, “Whosoever
goes for right does so only for his own and whosoever errs, errs only to
its hurt. No soul can bear another's load. We never punish until we sent
a messanger.”19 In another verse, Allah says, “Every soul is a pledge
for its own deeds.”20 Mohammad Asad explains the relationship between
man and Allah like this:

But He only indicates will to us, He does not compel us to behave in the
way indicated. He gives us freedom of choice. We may, if we so desire,
willingly submit to his revealed law and thus, as it were against Him,
disregard His law and risk the consequences. However we decide the
responsibilities to ourselves.21

Everybody has been born free and has the right to peaceful existence.
Allah himself declared in the holy Quran that, one, all human beings are
born free and, two, that slavery and forced labor are abhorred.

Islam not only secures the life of its people but also guarantees the
protection of their property. Such a guarantee of protection of life is
laid on the lawful property gained through reliable sources.22 Prophet
Mohammad (SAW), in his farewell address, said, "Your lives and property
are forbidden to one another and to you until you meet your lord on the
day of

judgement.”23 Mr. Salahudin mentions in his book,Bunyadi Haqooq *,* that
such rights include the rights of enjoyment and consumption, the right
to investment in some business, the right to transfer and right to
protection of the occupation of one's property.”24 During the caliphate
of Hazrat Umar “a Syrian cultivator complained that the army had
trampled down his crops, and the caliph at once ordered for the payment
of the ten thousand dirhams to him as compensation out of the Baitul
Mal.”25

The rights of Subjugation are safeguarded so much that, during the
period of caliph Umar a farman was sent to Abu Ubaida concerning the
conquest of Syria, which forbid the Muslims to do any injustice to the
Dhimmis. It said, “They should not harm them at any cost nor take their
substances unjustly. And keep faith fully all the terms you have made
with them.”26 During the first century of hijra in the era of the 2nd
caliph of Islam, Hazrat Umar framed the administrative system in such a
way that every Dhimmi was protected through due process of law. Their
properties were safeguarded For example, when the central Mosque of Kula
was constructed, the remains of some older forts, which were situated in
the land of a Dhimmi, needed to be used for construction. The state paid
compensation to the Dhimmi as per the required cost of the remains of
the old forts.27

The Holy Quran places great emphasis on just dealings so that every one
get his due rights related to property and honor. It is written,

O ye who believe standout firmly for Allah as witness, to fair dealing
and let not the hatred of others to you make you swerve, to do wrong and
depart from Justice. Be just, that is next to piety, and fear Allah. For
Allah is well acquainted with all that you do.28

Abdullah Yousuf Ali had explained this verse very simply. He says, “to
do justice and act righteously in a favorable or neutral atmosphere is
meritorious enough, but the real test comes when you have to do justice
to people who hate you or to whom you have an aversion. But no less is
required by the higher moral law.”29

From the very beginning Islam and kufr have had ideological differences,
they can never be one and the same, so it is necessarily our belief that
logical links between Islam and kufr do not exists. Islam was revealed
to eradicate the atrocities perpetuated by the unbelievers who had
perpetuated grave human rights violations. Every ideology is rooted in
the reality of requirements and need. Knowing reality - who is the
creator, who feeds him - is necessary. After reflecting upon this, man
has only two alternatives either to embrace the Islamic ideology in
which human rights are preserved, or, deny this reality and act against
the Haqooq ullah and violate his own rights.

Of course, if a man takes a materialistic approach towards the world, he
will find several ideologues to take the place of Allah, each drawing
him to its diverging way. The Holy Quran says, “Allah sets forth an
example: there is a slave who has several owners who are partners who
are always differing with one another, and there is another slave who is
wholly owned by one man. Are the two alike in condition?”30 Surely such
person of varying ideology will not be able to act justly. The ideology
he had placed before

him could not provide everyone his right. It is a matter of fact that in
the modern so-called civilized world in which several ideologies are
working at the state level such ideologues use every kind of tactics to
suppress others on ideological grounds. But the Holy Quran at this
juncture preserves the rights of everyone, even during the war times,
and preserves the rights of non-combatants. For it is only fighters who
are to be fought – not the non-combatants. It is written, "Fight in the
cause of Allah those who fight you, but do not transgress limits; for
Allah love not transgressors.”31

Justice is the real cause of Islam. “The Prophet Mohammad, the great
patron of justice, was also commanded to act justly as I am commanded to
be just among you.”32 During the prismatic period, injustice prevailed
everywhere and every kind of tactic was used to gratify one’s soul and
suppress people for self interest. The Holy Quran commands Muslims to
respect human rights, Allah Says;

O ye who believe, stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to Allah,
even as against yourselves or your parents or your kin whether it be
against rich or poor For Allah can best protect both. Follow not the
lusts of your hearts, lest ye swerve, and do not distort justice or
decline to do justice. Verily, Allah is well acquainted with all that ye
do.33

The modern system of justice is against the moral system of justice.
Islam denies favor to those who have done injustice or any other crime.
Take for example the case of Taimai ibn Ubairiaq. He was nominally a
Muslim but in reality he was a hypocrite and perpetuated all sorts of
wicked deeds. He was suspected of stealing a set of armor, but when the
trial was hot he planted the armor in the house of a Jew, where it was
found. The Jew denied the charge and accused Taima, but the Muslims lent
their sympathy to Taima because he was also a Muslim. The case was
brought to the Prophet Mohammad, who acquitted the Jew according to the
strict principles of justice as guided by the Allah. Attempts were made
to prejudge, and deceive the Prophet Mohammad but he was not swayed.
When Taima realized that his punishment was imminent, he fled and became
an apostle.34

On this point, Allah revealed this verse, "We have sent down thee with
the book in truth, that thou mightiest judge between the people by that
which Allah has shown thee, so do not be an advocate for those who
betray their trusts”.35 In Islam the right to honor is also guarded and
much significance is laid on it in the holy Quran. Muslims are commanded
to respect others and not to abuse others. In this regard Allah says, "O
ye who believe, let not some men among you laugh at others. Do not
defame nor be sarcastic to each other by offensive nicknames.... nor
speak ill of each other behind their backs.”36

Honor of everyone is protected in Islamic law regardless of social rank.
There is no distinction between men according to their caste or status.
Islam directs man very simply that all human beings are created from a
single pair and that piety is the only nobility in Islamic law. It is
written,

"O mankind! We created you from a single pair of male and female and we
made you into tribes and nations that you may recognize each other.

Verily the most noble among you, in the sight of Allah is he who is most
righteous among you. Surely Allah is all knowing and all aware”.37

It is a fact that man has his origin from Hazrat Adam, the first
messenger and human being from whom all human beings spread on the earth
through different ages. So, in this regard all human beings are brethren
to each other. The Prophet Mohammad, on his farewell pilgrimage,
delivered a lecture at the pulpit of Kaba in which he said, "No Arab has
any superiority over a non-Arab, nor does a white man have any
superiority over a black man. You all are children of Adam and Adam is
created from clay.”38 In Islamic history, the right to honor is given
first priority. The caliphs were also anxious about the preservation of
these rights. During the caliphate of Hazrat Umar, “a famous chief of
Syria holding a royal rank embraced Islam and was performing the
circumambulation (Tawaf) around the Kaba, when the hem of his mantle
fell and came into the feet of another circumambulator (tawafian).
Jabalah at once slapped him on the face. The victim retaliated and
Jabalah complained to the caliph. Upon hearing the complaint, the caliph
Umar said, ‘You have received the punishment for what you have done.’
Jabalah was amazed at the reply and said, ‘I belong to a high-class
family. If anyone acts rudely against us, he is punished with death. The
caliph Umar replied that that was un-Islamic (jahilia).” Islam equalizes
all ranks and everyone is equal before law. Jabala furiously replied,
"If Islam is a system in which there is no distinction between high and
common people, I abjure it.39

Islam vanquished from the ground level the discriminatory approach of
life on the basis of color; caste and region. Prophet Mohammad (SAW) not
only held this view, but also practically shows that everyone is equal
before the law.

"Once a woman from a noble family of Madina committed a crime of theft
and was caught red handed. The case was brought to the Prophet Mohammad
and he was asked to spare the woman because she was from a noble family.
The Prophet Mohammad (SAW) replied,

The nations that lived before you were raised to the ground by Allah,
because they punished only the lower strata of their society and forgave
only their own crimes. I swear By Allah whose hands are my life that
even if Fatima (the beloved daughter of Prophet Mohammad (SAW)) had
committed this crime, I would have cut-off her hands"40

In Islam personal freedom is given to man to judge things by his own
reason, but he should not transgress the limits Muslims are directed to
obey. In the Holy Quran personal, freedom is highlighted. It is written,
"And when you judge between man and man that ye judge with justice.”41
In another verse, the Prophet Mohammad was asked to investigate every
report delivered to him regarding personal freedom. He said, "If a
wicked person comes to you with any news ascertain the truth lest ye
harm people unwillingly and afterwards become full of repentance for
what ye have done.42

Keeping the above verse in mind, man is given personal freedom to such
an extent that he can not harm others and also investigate reports so
that mankind would be saved from atrocities of other people. No doubt,
every

one has to take the burden of his own actions. Allah says, “Everyone
shoulders the heed of one’s acts on none but oneself: no bearer of
burden can bear the burden of another.43

Islam does not prohibit the right of protest against the tyranny of the
government. The Prophet Mohammad has regarded protest against a tyrant
to be the best form of jihad.44 It is the result of prophetic and
Quranic teachings that people openly criticized the caliphs and never
hesitated to protest against any unlawful action. Once Caliph Umar
called a shura to restrict the amount of dower. An old woman openly
opposed his acts on the basis of Quranic injections. At once Hazrat Umar
changed his statement and accepted the statement of that old woman and
thanked her. Once Umar the second caliph stood on the pulpit of the
Mosque and said, “Gentleman if I bend to worldliness what would you do?”
A man raised his sword and said “We shall cut of your head.” In order to
test his determination, Caliph Umar asked him, “Have you said such words
for me?” The man said, “Yes, for you.” Hazrat Umar replied, “Praise to
be to Allah! Still there are men in Ummah that can put me to right if I
do wrong.”45

Islam grants freedom to all women whether she belongs to Muslim Ummah or
to a conquered nation. In all conditions Islam honors and respects her
chastity.46 The protection of equal status for men and women is
considered to be vital. If you judge the rules of inheritance you will
find no difference on the economic possession of sons and daughters.47
One who violates the chastity of women has to face harsh punishment.
Islam strictly opposes adultery. It is written, "Do not approach the
bounds of adultery.48

Respect for the chastity of woman is found no where else as strong as it
is in Islam. Nowadays, in the so-called civilized countries, armies are
provided the means to gratify their desires opposite to this Muslim
history. Witness that Muslim armies have protected the women of
countries they have conquered just as they would protect their own women
for the last fourteen hundred centuries. It never happened that a Muslim
army has ever perpetuated this kind of illogical activity.49

Islam, from very beginning, has preserved the rights of the needy and
directed those who are wealthy to take care of the plebian section of
the society. In the Holy Quran, Allah says, “And to their wealth and
possession was acknowledged the right of the needy who asked him who was
prevented (from asking).50 This right was preserved for both Muslim and
non Muslim because in world affairs Muslims and non-Muslims have the
same rights under the Islamic state. In this regard Khalid bin Walid
made a treaty during the Caliphate Of hazard Abu Bark with the people of
Hiram in which he provided them with grants as long as they were under
the care of the Islamic State. He said,

I have granted the right that if anyone among you is old and is unable
to do any work or has suffered through natural disaster and after being
rich has become destitute (extremely poor) so much so that his fellow
Muslims pay alms to him, his jazia will be remitted, he and his children
will receive allowance of maintenance from the public treasury (Bait ul
Mal) as long as they live in*dar ul Islam* . But the Muslims will not be
responsible for their maintenance if he and his family leave the*dar ul
Islam* .51

The worst thing to occur in human history is slavery. Slaves were
treated inhumanly and did not receive the respect that humanly beings
need. They were made beasts of burden through slavery and this also
exited in Islam. But Islam’s response was totally the opposite of the
response of other religions and civilizations. Islam taught Muslims that
freeing a slave means to get rid of sins. Freeing a slave due to one’s
own will means that that person will be protected from hell fire.52

According to the tradition of the prophet Mohammad (SAW), when he
advised his companions regarding slaves, he said “these are your
brothers over whom Allah has granted you authority. You should feed them
on what you eat yourself, cloth him as you clothe yourself and you
should not set him a task beyond his capacity and if he is assigned
something heavy and difficult, you should help him in carrying it out.53

The slaves were freed and were given the same privilege as the other
citizens of the state and are allowed to marry with anyone as per his
wish.54

The Prophet Mohammad (SAW) himself freed as many as 63 slaves. Hazrat
Aisha freed 67, Abdullah ibn Abbas 70, Abdullah bin Umar freed 1000 and
Abd al Rahman purchased 30000 and set them free. This problem of slavery
was solved within forty years. In this way, their right to privilege and
honor was saved.55 Islam worked very hard to eradicate forced labor and
slavery once and for all, declared unpaid slavery a major sin and freed
slaves.56 In the holy Quran it is said,

And serve Allah and ascribe no partners to Him. Show kindness to unto
your parents unto near kindred and orphans and the needy and to your
neighbors who are not kin, and the travelers and wayfarers and the
slaves whom your right hand possesses. Lo Allah love none such as are
proved and boastfull.57

The Holy Quran also reports that Allah said;

Let those who find not the where with for marriage keep themselves
chaste, until give them means, out of his grace. And if any of your
slaves ask for a deed in writing (their Freedom for a certain Sum) live
them such a deed. If you know any good in them; yea give them something
yourselves put of the means which Allah has given to you but force not
your maids to prostitution when they desire chastity, in order that ye
May make a gain in the goods of this life.58

Keeping in view the above facts, one can infer that the concept of human
rights in Islam is so unique that it did not make any distinction on the
biases of color, caste or region. The laws of Islam have no equal in
human history. It not only guarantees the security of life but also
preserves the chastity of woman without any difference between Muslims
and non-Muslims. In Islam many ways of worship are allowed but the whole
lifestyle under the moral and ethical scheme is immutable. There is no
match to it in world history from Greek, Roman and Sasanid down to the
present age so-called civilized world Islam believes in peaceful
existence and depends on the philosophy of live and let live peacefully.


