Hadith No. 19: a Day of Greeting and Disavowal
==============================================

<p dir="rtl">
رَوَى الْحَسَنُ بْنُ رَاشِدٍ عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِقَالَ: قُلْتُ:
جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ، لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ عِيْدٌ غَيْرُ الْعِيْدَيْنِ؟ قَالَ:
نَعَمْ، يَا حَسَنَ! أَعْظَمُهُمَا وَ أَشْرَفُهُمَا. قَالَ: قُلْتُ لَهُ:
وَ أَيُّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ؟ قَالَ: يَوْمٌ نُصِبَ أَمِيـرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَفِيهِ
عَلَماً لِلنَّاسِ. قُلْتُ لَهُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ وَمَا يَنْبَغِي لَنَا
أَنْ نَصْنَعَ فِيهِ؟ قَالَ: تَصُومُهُ يَا حَسَنَ وَ تَكْثُرُ الصَّلوٌةَ
عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ فِيهِ وَ تَتَبَرَّأَ إلـى اللٌّهِ، مِمَنْ
ظَلَمَهُمْ، فَإِنّ الأَنْبِيَآءَ كَانَتْ تَأْمُرُ الأَوْصِيَآءَ
بَالْيَومِ‏ الَّذِي كَانَ يُقَامُ فِيهِ الْوَصِيُّ أَنْ يُّـتَّخَذَ
عِيْداً
</p>

It has been narrated from Hasan ibn Rashid from Abi 'Abdillah [Imam
Ja'far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq] (peace be upon him) that he said, “May I
be sacrificed for you! Do the Muslims have a festivity other than the
two 'Eid celebrations?” The Imam (peace be upon him) replied, “Yes O’
Hasan! (There is one) greater than these two and much worthier than
them.” The companion replied, “And what day is that?” The Imam said,
“The day upon which Amirul Mo'minin ['Ali ibn Abi Talib] (peace be upon
him) was appointed as the flag (of guidance) for the people.” The
companion then asked, “May I be sacrificed for you! And what should we
do (on this day)?” The Imam replied, “You should fast on it, O’ Hasan,
and recite many prayers upon Muhammad and his family and disavow
yourself towards Allah from all of those who oppressed them; surely the
Prophets (of the past) also commanded their successors to consider the
day of their appointment a day of celebration and 'Eid.”

Misbahul Mutahajjid, Page 680

Hadith no. 20: The 'Eid of the Successors

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ أَبْي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِقَالَ: ... تَذْكُرُونَ اللٌّهَ عَزَّ ذِكْرُهُ
فِيهِ بِالصِّيَامِ وَالْعِبَادَةِ وَالذِّكْرِ لِمُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ، فَإِنَّ رَسُولَ اللٌّهِأَوْصى أَمْيرَالْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْ
يَتَّخِذَ ذٌلِكَ الْيَوْمَ عِيْداً، وَ كَذٌلِكَ كَانَتِ الأَنْبِيَاءُ
تَفْعَلُ، كَانُوا يُوصُونَ أَوْصِـيَائَهُمْ بِذٌلِكَ فَيَتَّخِذُونَهُ
عِيْداً
</p>

It has been narrated from Abi 'Abdillah [Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq] (peace be upon him) that he said, “…(on the day of 'Eid
Ghadir) you should remember Allah, the Noble, on this day through
fasting and worship and through remembering Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad since surely the Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his family) had advised Amirul Mo’minin to take this day as a
day of 'Eid, and this is the same thing which the (previous) Prophets
also did; they too advised their successors who took this day as a day
of 'Eid.”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 7, Page 327, Hadith 1

Hadith no. 21: The Day of Dedication and Prayers

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِقَالَ: وَالْعَمَلُ فِيهِ يَعْدِلُ ثَمَانِينَ
شَهْراً، وَ يَنْبَغِي أَنْ يُّكَـثِّرَ فِيهِ ذِكْرَ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَ
جَلَّ، وَالصَّلَوٌةَ عَلى النَّبِيِّوَيُوَسِّعَ الرَّجُلُ فِيهِ عَلى
عَيَالِهِ
</p>

It has been narrated from Abi 'Abdillah [Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq] (peace be upon him) that he said, “The worth of (good) actions
performed on this day (18th of Dhul Hijjah) is equivalent to 80 months
(of good deeds) and one is advised to frequently remember Allah, the
Noble and Grand, and send prayers upon the Prophet (blessings of Allah
be upon him and his family) and that a man be generous to his family (by
presenting them with gifts).”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 7, Page 325, Hadith 6

Hadith no. 22: The Day of Seeing the Leader

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ مَوْلاَنَا أَبِي ‏الْحَسَنِ عَلِيَّ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍقَالَ لأََبِي
إِسْحَاقٍ: وَ يَوْمُ الْغَدِيرِ فِيهِ أَقَامَ النَّبِيُّأَخَاهُ عَلِيًّا
عَلَمًا لِلنَّاسِ وَ إِمَامًا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ. [قَالَ] قُلْتُ: صَدَّقْتَ
جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ، لِذٌلِكَ قَصَدْتُ، أَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ حُجَّةَ اللٌّهِ
عَلى خَلْقِهِ
</p>

It has been narrated from our master, Abul Hasan 'Ali ibn Muhammad
[al-Hadi] (peace be upon him) that he said to Abi Ishaq: “The Day of
Ghadir is the day when the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and
his family) appointed his brother 'Ali as the flag (of guidance) for the
people and the Imam after him.” Abu Ishaq said, “You have spoken the
truth, may I be sacrificed for you. It is for this reason (alone) that I
came to see you. I bear witness that truly you are the proof of Allah
over all of His creations.”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 7, Page 324, Hadith 3

Hadith no. 23: The Day of Praising Allah

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ عَلِيِّ بْنِ مُوْسى الرِّضَا:مَنْ زَارَ فِيهِ مُؤْمِناً أَدْخَلَ‏
اللٌّهُ قَبْرَهُ سَبْعِينَ نُوراً وَ وُسِّعَ فِي قَبْرِهِ وَ يَزُورُ
قَبْرَهُ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ وَيُبَشِّرُونَهُ
بِالْجَنَّةِ
</p>

Imam 'Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (peace be upon him) has said, “Allah will
grant a person who visits a true believer on it (the Day of 'Eidul
Ghadir) seventy types of Divine Light in his grave and will expand his
grave. Every day, 70,000 Angels will visit him in the grave and they
will grant him the glad tidings of Paradise.”

Iqbal al-A'mal, Page 778
Hadith no. 24: The Day of Visiting and Doing Good

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ الصَّادِق:ُيَنْبَغِي لَكُمْ أَنْ تَتَقَرَّبُوا إِلـى اللٌّهِ
تَعَالـى بِالْبِرِّ وَالصَّوْمِ وَالصَّلوٌةِ وَ صِلَةِ الْرَحْمِ وَ
صِلَةِ الإِخْوَانِ، فَاِنَّ الأَنْبِيَآءَ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ كَانُوا
إِذَا أَقَامُوا أَوْصِيَآءَهُمْ فَعَلُوا ذٌلِكَ وَ أَمَرُوا بِهِ
</p>

Imam as-Sadiq [Ja'far ibn Muhammad] (peace be upon him) has said, “It
is advisable for you (on the day of Ghadir) to become close to Allah,
the Most High, through good deeds, fasting, prayers, establishing (and
maintaining) family ties and establishing ties between (your) brothers.
The Prophets (peace be upon all of them) did the same thing when they
appointed their successors, and also advised them to act similarly.”

Misbahul Mutahajjid, Page 736

Hadith no. 25: Salat in Masjid al-Ghadir

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِقَالَ: إِنَّهُ تُسْتَحَبُّ الصَّلوٌةُ فِي
مَسْجِدِ الْغَدِيرِ لأََنَّ النَّبِيَّأَقَامَ فِيهِ أَمِيرَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَوَ هُوَ مَوْضِعٌ أَظْهَرَ اللٌّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيهِ
الْحَقَّ
</p>

It has been narrated from Abi 'Abdillah Imam [Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq] (peace be upon him) that: “Surely it is recommended to pray
inside Masjid al-Ghadir since verily the Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his family) introduced the Commander of the Faithful (peace
be upon him) [as the Imam] to the people here and this is the spot in
which Allah, the Noble and Grand, made known The Truth.”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 3, Page 549

Hadith no. 26: Salat on the Day of Ghadir

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ أَبِي عَبْدِ اللٌّهِقَالَ: وَ مَنْ صَلَّى فِيهِ رَكْعَتَينِ أَيَّ
وَقْتٍ ‏َشَآءَ وَ أَفْضَلُهُ قُرْبَ الزَّوَالِ وَ هِيَ السَّاعَةُ
الَّتِي أُقِيمَ فِيهَا أَمِيـرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَبِغَدِيرِ خُمٍّ عَلَماً
لِلنَّاسِ وَ ... كَانَ كَمَنْ حَضَرَ ذٌلِكَ الْيَوْمَ...
</p>

It has been narrated from Abi 'Abdillah [Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq] (peace be upon him) that: “A person who performs a two Rak'at
Salat any time he wishes (during the Day of 18th of Dhul Hijjah), though
it is best that this (Salat) be performed as close to the time of Zawwal
(mid-day when the sun begins its decline; this is when the time for
Salatul Zuhr beings) as possible because this is the time at which
Amirul Mo'minin (peace be upon him) was appointed at Ghadir Khumm as the
flag of the people and … (the reward for this Salat) is as if the person
had been present on the Day (of Ghadir Khumm)…”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 5, Page 225, Hadith 2

Hadith no. 27: Fasting on the Day of Ghadir

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ الصَّادِقُ:صِيَامُ يَوْمِ غَدِيرِ خُمٍّ يَعْدِلُ صِيَامُ عُمْرِ
الدُّنْيَا لَوْ عَاشَ إِنْسَانٌ ثُمَّ صَامَ مَا عُمِرَتِ الدُّنْيَا
لَكَانَ لَهُ ثَوَابَ ذٌلِكَ
</p>

It has been narrated from as-Sadiq [Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad] (peace be
upon him) that: “Fasting on the Day of Ghadir is equivalent to fasting
the time span of the (existence of the) entire world – meaning that if a
person were to live a life of the entire existence of the world and were
to fast this whole time, the reward for this fasting would be equivalent
to fasting (this one day of Ghadir).”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 7, Page 324, Hadith 4

Hadith no. 28: The Day of Congratulations and Smiling

<p dir="rtl">
عَنِ الرِّضَاقَالَ: ... وَ هُوَ يَوْمُ الْتَهْنِئَةِ يُهَنِّئُ
بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضاً، فَإِذَا لقى الْمُؤْمِنُ أَخَاهُ يَقُولُ: أَلْحَمْدُ
لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي جَعَلَنَا مِنَ الْمُتَمَسِّكِينَ ‏بِوِلاَيَةِ أَمِيـرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَ الأَئِمَّةِوَ هُوَ يَوْمُ التَبَسُّمِ فِي وُجُوهِ
النَّاسِ‏ مِنْ أَهْلِ الإِيْمَانِ...
</p>

It has been narrated from al-Ridha ['Ali ibn Musa] (peace be upon him)
that: “…and this is a day of congratulations and felicitations in which
you should greet and congratulate one another. When a believer meets
another, one should say, ‘All praise belongs to Allah who has made us
amongst those who hold firm to the Wilayat of the Commander of the
Faithful and the A’immah (prayers be upon all of them); and this is a
day of smiling at other people and those of true faith.”

Iqbal al-A'mal, Page 464


