Hadith No. 33: the Perpetual Wilayat
====================================

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ أَبِي الْحَسَنِقَالَ: وِلاَيَةُ عَلِيٍّمَكْتُوبَةٌ فِي صُحُفِ
جَمِيعِ الأَنْبِيَآءِ وَ لَنْ يَّـبْعَثَ ‏اللٌّهُ رَسُولاً إِلاَّ
بِنُبُوَّةِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَوَصِيَّةِ عَلِيٍّ
</p>

It has been narrated from Abil Hasan ['Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha] (peace be
upon him) that: “The Wilayat of 'Ali (peace be upon him) has been
written in all of the books of the (previous) Prophets and Allah did not
appoint a single Messenger except with a (pledge to the) Prophethood of
Muhammad and the successorship of 'Ali (peace be upon him).”

Safinatul Bihar, Volume 2, Page 691

Hadith no. 34: Wilayat and Tawhid

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ : وِلاَيَةُ عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ وِلاَيَةُ
اللٌّهِ ‏َوَ حُبُّهُ عِبَادَةُ اللٌّهِ وَ اتِّبَاعُهُ فَرِيضَةُ اللٌّهِ
‏َوَ أَوْلِيَاؤُهُ أَوْلِيَاءُ اللٌّهِ وَ أَعْدَاؤُهُ أَعْدَاءُ اللٌّهِ
‏َوَ حَرْبُهُ حَرْبُ اللٌّهِ وَ سِلْمُهُ سِلْمُ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ
</p>

The Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family)
has said, “The Wilayat of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib is the Wilayat of Allah;
love for him ('Ali) is worship of Allah; following him ('Ali) is an
obligatory act from Allah; his friends are the friends of Allah and his
enemies are the enemies of Allah; fighting with him is (like) fighting
against Allah; and making peace with him is (like) making peace with
Allah, the Noble and Grand.”

Al-Amali of as-Saduq, Page 32

Hadith no. 35: The Day of the Cry of Despair of Shaitan

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ جَعْفَرٍ عَنْ أَبِيهِقَالَ: إِنَّ إِبْلِيسَ عَدُوَّ اللٌّهِ رَنَّ
أَرْبَعَ رَنَّاتٍ: يَوْمَ لُعِنَ، وَ يَوْمَ أُهْبِطَ إلـى الأَرْضِ، وَ
يَوْمَ بُعِثَ النَّبِيُّوَ يَوْمَ الْغَدِيرِ
</p>

It has been narrated from Ja'far [Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq]
(peace be upon him) from his father [Imam Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-Baqir]
(peace be upon him) that: “Iblis, the enemy of Allah, cried out (in
hopelessness) four times: The day when he was cursed (by Allah); the day
when he was sent down to the Earth; the day when the Prophet (blessings
of Allah be upon him and his family) was officially appointed (to convey
the message on Earth); and on the Day of Ghadir.”

Qurbul Isnad, Page 10

Hadith no. 36: The Wilayat of 'Ali is the Fortress of Tawhid

<p dir="rtl">
عَنِ النَّبِيّ:ِ يَقُولُ اللٌّهُ تَبَارَكَ وَ تَعَالـى: وِلاَيَةُ
عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبٍ حِصْنِي، فَمَنْ دَخَلَ حِصْنِي أَمِنَ مِنْ
نَارِي
</p>

It has been narrated from the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his family) that: “Allah, the Glorious and High, has said, “The
Wilayat of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib is My fortress, so whoever enters into My
fortress will be protected from My fire.”

Jami' al-Akhbar, Page 52, Hadith 7

Hadith no. 37: The Successor of the Prophet

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّه:ِيَا عَلِيُّ أَنَا مَدِينَةُ الْعِلْمِ وَ أَنْتَ
بَابُهَا وَ لَنْ تُؤْتَى الْمَدِينَةَ إِلاَّ مِنْ قِبَلِ الْبَابِ ...
أَنْتَ إِمَامُ أُمَّتِي وَ خَلِيفَتِي عَلَيْهَا بَعْدِي، سَعِدَ مَنْ
أَطَاعَكَ وَ شَقِي مَنْ عَصَاكَ، وَ رَبِحَ مَنْ تَوَلاَّكَ وَ خَسِرَ
مَنْ عَادَاكَ
</p>

The Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family)
has said, “O’ 'Ali! I am the city of knowledge and you are its gate and
no one can enter into the city except by going through its gate … You
are the Imam of my nation and you are my successor. Blessed is the
person who obeys you and depraved is the person who disobeys you. One
who follows you will succeed, while the one who turns away from you will
be in a loss.”

Jami' al-Akhbar, Page 52, Hadith 9
Hadith no. 38: Islam in the Shadow of Wilayat

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ الصَّادِقُ:أَثَافـى الإِسْلاَمُ ثَلاَثَةٌ: أَلصَّلوٌةُ وَ
الزَّكوٌةُ وَ الْوِلاَيَةُ، لاَ تَصِحُّ وَاحِدَةٌ مِنْهُنَّ إِلاَّ
بِصَاحِـبَتَيْهَا
</p>

Imam as-Sadiq [Ja'far ibn Muhammad] (peace be upon him) has said: “The
fundamental pillars of Islam are three: Salat, Zakat and Wilayat. No one
of these will be valid unless accompanied by the other two.”

Al-Kafi, Volume 2, Page 18

Hadith no. 39: A Thousand Witnesses

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ أَبُو عَبْدِ اللٌّهِأَلْعَجَبُ يَا حَفْصَ لِمَا لَقِيَ عَلِيَِ
بْنَ أَبِى‏طَالِبٍ!! أَنَّهُ كَانَ لَهُ عَشْرَةَ الأَلْفِ شَاهِداً لَمْ
يَقْدِرْ عَلى أَخْذِ حَقِّهِ وَ الرَّجُلُ يَأْخُذُ حَقَّهُ
بِشَاهِدَينِ
</p>

Abu 'Abdillah [Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq] (peace be upon him)
has said, “O’ Hafsa! I am surprised at what happened to 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib!! Despite having tens of thousands of witnesses he could not claim
his right when in reality a person needs only two witnesses to claim
what is rightfully his!”

Biharul Anwar, Volume 37, Page 140

Hadith no. 40: 'Ali , The Commentator of the Qur'an

<p dir="rtl">
عَنِ النَّبِيِّ فِي إِحْتِجَاجِهِ يَوْمَ الْغَدِيرِ: عَلى تَفْسِيرُ
كِتَابِ اللٌّهِ، وَ الدَّاعِيَ إِلَيهِ، أَلاَ وَ إِنَّ الْحَلاَلَ وَ
الْحَرَامَ أَكْثَرُ مِنْ أَنْ أُحْصِيَهُمَا وَ أُعَرِّفَهُمَا، فَآمُرُ
بِالْحَلاَلِ وَ أَنْهى عَنِ الْحَرَامِ فِي مَقَامٍ وَاحِدٍ، فَأُمِرْتُ
أَنْ آخُذَ الْبَيْعَةَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ الصَّفْقَةَ مِنْكُمْ، بِقُـبُولِ
مَا جِئْتُ بِهِ عَنِ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَ جَلَّ فِي عَلِيٍّ أَمِيـرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَ الأَئِمَّةِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ. مَعَاشِرَ النَّاسِ
تَدَبَّرُوا وَ افْهَمُوا آيَاتِهِ، وَ انْظُرُوا فِي مُحْكَمَاتِهِ وَ لاَ
تَتَّبِعُوا مُتَشَابِهَهُ، فَوَ اللٌّهِ لَنْ يُبَيِّنَ لَكُمْ
زَوَاجِرَهُ، وَ لاَ يُوْضَـعُ لَكُمْ عَنْ تَفْسِيـرِهِ إِلاَّ الَّذِي
أَنَا آخُذُ بِيَدِهِ.
</p>

From the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family), in
his address on the Day of Ghadir: “'Ali is the exegesis (Tafsir) of the
book of Allah and the one who calls others to it. Verily, that which is
permitted and forbidden is more than what I can explain to you; what I
command you as permitted and forbid you as prohibited, is all from one
position. I was commanded to take your allegiance and your pledge to
accept what I brought from Allah, the Exalted, regarding 'Ali, the
commander of the believers, and the Imams after him. O’ People! Ponder
and understand the verses (of the Qur'an), observe those that are clear
and do not follow those that are unclear; for by Allah no one can
explain to you its limitations or clarify its meanings except the one
whose hand I am holding (meaning Imam 'Ali).”

Wasa'il ash-Shi'a, Volume 18, Page 142, Hadith 43


