[Introduction]
==============

One of the most important developments in twentieth-century philosophy -
arguably,*the* most important development, at least in the
English-speaking world - was the rise of analytic philosophy. There has
been increasing debate in recent years over what exactly ‘analytic
philosophy’ means, as the term has been used in a wider and wider sense
and it has become harder and harder to identify any common assumptions,
methods or themes. But there is general agreement on its main sources:
the work of Gottlob Frege (1848-1925), Bertrand Russell (1872-1970), G.
E. Moore (1873-1958) and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889-1951) in the period
from roughly 1880 to 1920. (Frege’s first book,*Begriffsschrift* ,
setting out his new logic, was published in 1879; and
Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* was published in 1921.) More specifically, the
origins of analytic philosophy are often dated to the rebellion by
Russell and Moore against British idealism at the turn of the twentieth
century. But there is little doubt that as Russell’s and Moore’s ideas
were developed - in particular, as Russell became convinced that
mathematics was really logic, and through Wittgenstein’s early work -
Frege’s writings became increasingly influential. In the*Tractatus* ,
Wittgenstein critically engages with Frege’s and Russell’s ideas above
all else, with the result that both Frege and Wittgenstein have taken
their place alongside Russell and Moore as the acknowledged founders of
the analytic tradition.

Central to Russell’s and Moore’s rebellion against idealism was the
emphasis placed on analysis, as the remark cited above from Russell’s*My
Philosophical Development* indicates. But both Russell and Moore were
notoriously unclear as to what exactly ‘analysis’ meant, and they use
the term in a number of ways throughout their writings. At the time of
their rebellion, however, the*decompositional* conception was
undoubtedly dominant: analysis was understood as the process of
decomposing something into its constituent parts. This conception is
explicit in Moore’s 1899 paper, ‘The Nature of Judgment’. On the naïve
realist view advocated in this paper, the world is composed of
‘concepts’, which are synthesized into propositions, both concepts and
propositions being independent of us. Analysis is then accorded a
fundamental role in Moore’s epistemology: “A thing becomes intelligible
first when it is analysed into its constituent concepts” (1899, p. 8).

Both Moore’s naïve realism and the associated decompositional conception
of analysis were endorsed by Russell in his initial rejection of
idealism, but such a view faces obvious problems. How can we give an
account of propositions about non-existent objects, for example? Much of
Russell’s subsequent philosophy is an attempt to think through and find
solutions to such problems - the problems raised by adopting a
decompositional conception of analysis in the context of repudiating
idealism.[^1] After the initial exuberance of his naïve realism, Russell
gradually developed tools to cut back on his ontological commitments.
This led first to his theory of denoting concepts, which was replaced
within a few years by his theory of descriptions, on the basis of which
he then developed his full-blown philosophy of logical atomism. By this
time Wittgenstein, too, having been Russell’s pupil, was developing his
own form of logical atomism, which found its definitive statement in
the*Tractatus* .

How can this path to logical atomism, however, be thought to have given
rise to a whole new tradition of philosophy? Naïve realism is hardly
new, and even logical atomism has its precursors in the work of Leibniz,
in particular. In any case, neither naïve realism nor logical atomism
can be regarded as characteristic of analytic philosophy after the
1920s. More specifically, the decompositional conception of analysis
which seems to lie at the heart of Moore’s, Russell’s and Wittgenstein’s
early work is far from new. In its general form, such a conception
played a key role in Descartes’ philosophy (inspired by his analytic
geometry) and in Locke’s empiricism, to take just two examples from the
early modern period, and in the particular case of concepts, found its
classic statement in Kant’s account of analyticity.[^2] So if
decompositional analysis is meant to characterize analytic philosophy,
then why has analytic philosophy been thought to start with Russell and
Moore?

The answer is that it is not decompositional analysis on its own that
characterizes analytic philosophy, even during its logical atomist
phase. In my view, the single most significant event in the development
of analytic philosophy was not Russell’s and Moore’s rebellion against
idealism, but the appearance in 1905 of Russell’s theory of
descriptions. Frank Ramsey rightly described this theory as a ‘paradigm
of philosophy’ (1931, p. 263), a view that was endorsed by Moore (1959,
p. 151). What is crucial about the theory of descriptions is that it
introduced a quite different conception of analysis, which might be
characterized as a*transformative* or*explicatory* conception.
Fundamental to the theory is the*rephrasing* of the sentence to be
analyzed, a sentence of the form ‘The*F* is*G* ’, where ‘The*F* ’
represents the definite description, into a sentence of a quite
different form. To take Russell’s classic example, ‘The present King of
France is bald’ is analyzed as ‘There is one and only one King of
France, and whatever is King of France is bald’. There is nothing
decompositional about this type of analysis. ‘The present King of France
is bald’ is not being analyzed into ‘The present King of France’ and ‘is
bald’, for example. The definite description is ‘analyzed away’: no such
phrase appears in the analyzed sentence.

Again, though, the idea of transformative analysis itself was not new.
It can be found in medieval logic, for example, and arguably goes back
to Aristotle’s logic and ancient Greek geometry (which is the original
source of talk of ‘analysis’). Indeed, in some sense, transformation is
involved in all types of analysis.[^3] A good example of the idea in its
pure form can be found in the conception of paraphrasis articulated by
Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832). In his*Essay on Logic* (published
posthumously, in 1843), Bentham wrote: “By the word paraphrasis may be
designated that sort of exposition which may be afforded by transmuting
into a proposition, having for its subject some real entity, a
proposition which has not for its subject any other than a fictitious
entity” (1843, p. 246). Bentham applied the method in ‘analyzing away’
talk of ‘obligations’ (cf. 1843, p. 247), and the similarities between
Bentham’s method and Russell’s theory of descriptions have been
discussed, most notably, by John Wisdom (1904-93) in a book devoted to
just this relationship published in 1931.[^4]

In its distinctive modern form, however, transformative analysis
originated with Frege, which is why Frege has also come to be seen as
one of the founders of analytic philosophy. The central project of
Frege’s life was to demonstrate that arithmetic is reducible to logic,
and in pursuing this he both invented modern quantificational logic,
which made the project feasible, and provided analyses of number
statements. On his account, a number statement such as ‘Jupiter has four
moons’ is analyzed as ‘The concept*moon of Jupiter* has four instances’
(cf. 1884, §§ 46, 54).[^5] That is, it is viewed not as predicating of
Jupiter the property of having four moons, as a simple decompositional
analysis might suggest, but as predicating of the (first-level)
concept*moon of Jupiter* the (second-level) property*has four instances*
, which can be logically defined in Frege’s theory. To make clear that
number statements can be logically defined, in other words, Frege had to
transform the statements to show what was ‘really’ involved.

What distinguishes Frege’s and Russell’s use of transformative analysis
from earlier uses? Here what is crucial is the role played by
quantificational logic, which Frege invented and which Russell further
developed and applied. Quantificational logic offered a far more
powerful means of representing propositions and inferences than had
hitherto been available, but only worked by assuming that ordinary
language sentences could indeed be radically transformed in formalizing
them. The radical nature of these transformations and the use to which
they were put in Frege’s and Russell’s logicist projects inevitably
opened up semantic, epistemological and metaphysical questions. What is
the relationship between ordinary language and formal logic? What
governs the ‘correctness’ of a logical formalization? Clearly, not
everything is preserved in such transformations, so what*is* preserved
and what can be allowed to vary? If we make use of notions such as
‘content’, ‘sense’, ‘meaning’, ‘denotation’ or ‘reference’ in justifying
the analyses, then how are these notions to be explained and what are
their relationships? To what extent are our analyses answerable to the
world itself? Can we say anything a priori about what the world must be
like, and if so what? What is the relationship between language and
thought? How do they represent or engage with the world? These and many
other such questions have provided the dynamic of the analytic movement
ever since the work of Frege and Russell.

Of course, many of these questions have been asked before in different
forms, but what made such questions pressing was the need to justify the
new logic, and what arose, as a result, was far greater
self-consciousness about our use of language and its potential for
leading us astray. This greater self-consciousness has prompted talk of
a ‘linguistic turn’ having occurred in twentieth-century philosophy, a
turn that was arguably first made in Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* , drawing
on Frege’s and Russell’s ideas. But underlying this linguistic turn was
the analytic turn instigated by Frege’s and Russell’s use of
transformative analysis in developing and applying quantificational
logic. It is the philosophical questions that this raised that have
given shape to the analytic tradition.

But where does this leave decompositional analysis with which analytic
philosophy seemed to begin? The relationship between decompositional and
transformative analysis is one of the key issues addressed in this
volume - in particular, in Part One. But the short answer, as far as
Russell is concerned (brought out in the papers by Griffin and Hylton),
is that transformative analysis was introduced to*reinforce* his appeal
to decompositional analysis, which he continued to assume was required
at the ultimate level of analysis. For the aim of transformation was to
reveal the ‘real’ logical form of the proposition to be analyzed, the
constituents of the fully analyzed sentence being assumed to correspond
to, and be structured in exactly the same way as, the ultimate simple
constituents of the reality represented. As far as Frege is concerned,
the issue is more complicated, since Frege did not share Russell’s
fundamental assumption that every propositional content can be uniquely
analyzed into ultimate simple constituents. For Frege, function-argument
analysis (as utilized in transformative logical analysis) played a far
greater overt role than whole-part (decompositional) analysis, although
(arguably) he still made tacit appeal to the latter in the ontological
conclusions he drew. (For discussion of the differences between Frege’s
and Russell’s conceptions of analysis, see the papers by Reck, Levine
and Beaney.)

Although Russell does not seem to have recognized the distinction
between transformative and decompositional analysis, at least
explicitly, the distinction (or something like it) did come to be drawn
by the members of the so-called ‘Cambridge School of Analysis’ in the
late 1920s and early 1930s - in the second phase of analytic philosophy
(to endorse the division suggested by Hacker in his paper; see p. [2]
below). In their terminology, there was a difference between ‘logical’
or ‘same-level’ analysis, which simply transformed one sentence into
another, and ‘philosophical’ or ‘metaphysical’ or ‘reductive’ or
‘directional’ or ‘new-level’ analysis, which revealed the underlying
ontological commitments. (The distinction can also be seen as implicit
in Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* , as the papers by Hanna and Phillips
indicate.) There was a great deal of debate in this period about the
nature and role of analysis, the main result of which was growing
criticism of the reductive conception.[^6] But with the distinction in
place, it was possible to accept this criticism without rejecting
analysis altogether. Same-level analysis could be endorsed without
metaphysical reductionism, and this became the hallmark of the phase (or
phases) of analytic philosophy that followed.

The move away from reductive conceptions of analysis and the development
of alternative conceptions can be found, for example, in the work of the
Vienna Circle during the 1920s and 1930s (in the third phase of analytic
philosophy distinguished by Hacker). The most significant figure in this
regard was Rudolf Carnap (1891-1970), whose first major work,*Der
logische Aufbau der Welt* , was published in 1928. The*Aufbau* opens
with endorsement of what Russell called in 1914 ‘the supreme maxim in
scientific philosophizing’: “Wherever possible, logical constructions
are to be substituted for inferred entities” (1917, p. 115). This has
often been interpreted as recommending a programme of ontological
eliminativism, as suggested by the theory of descriptions, but Carnap
interprets it epistemologically, as permitting what he calls ‘rational
reconstruction’. (Russell’s own understanding of logical construction is
discussed in the papers by Hylton and Linsky.) As Carnap characterizes
it in the preface to the second edition of the*Aufbau* , rational
reconstruction is “the searching out of new definitions for old
concepts”, where the new definitions “should be superior to the old in
clarity and exactness, and, above all, should fit into a systematic
structure of concepts” (1961, p. v). As he goes on to note, such
clarification of concepts is what he later called ‘explication’; and the
idea of explication is one of the themes explored in this volume,
beginning with the paper by Reck.[^7]

Carnap’s programme of explication provides one example of the transition
to less reductive conceptions of analysis. But undoubtedly the most
striking and important example is Wittgenstein’s later work, in which he
explicitly repudiates his earlier logical atomism, and develops a new
view of philosophy as conceptual clarification. Wittgenstein’s early and
later thought is discussed in three of the papers in Part Two of this
volume, by Hacker, Hanna and Phillips. Wittgenstein’s ideas were
enormously influential, not only in Cambridge, among his various pupils
and colleagues, but also in Oxford in the two decades or so after the
Second World War (in the fourth phase of analytic philosophy
distinguished by Hacker), when related methodologies were used by
Gilbert Ryle (1900-76), J. L. Austin (1911-60) and Peter Strawson
(1919-2006), to name three of the most dominant figures. Strawson has
talked of ‘connective’ analysis replacing reductive analysis (1992, ch.
1), and this is an apt way to encapsulate the transition. But connective
analysis was not only a feature of British philosophy. As Baldwin shows
in his paper, a connective conception can also be found prior to the
Second World War in the work of C. I. Lewis (1883-1964), the most
important American analytic philosopher of the period. The development
of connective forms of analysis provides the main theme of the papers in
Part Two.

I suggested above that the single most significant event in the
development of analytic philosophy was the appearance of the theory of
descriptions in 1905. But 1905 also witnessed the introduction by Edmund
Husserl (1859-1938) of the idea of ‘phenomenological reduction’,[^8]
which was a key moment - perhaps*the* key moment - in the development of
phenomenology. The analytic and phenomenological traditions have often
been seen as rivals in the history of twentieth-century philosophy, but
in recent years, the common origins of the two traditions and their
philosophical connections have been stressed.[^9] One important
influence on Husserl, for example, was Bernard Bolzano (1781-1848),
whose work anticipates many ideas in later analytic philosophy.
Bolzano’s conception of analysis is discussed by Lapointe in the first
paper of Part Three.

Just as much as Frege and Russell, Husserl’s philosophy grew out of an
interest in the foundations of mathematics, and he became deeply
concerned to combat psychologism. From his earliest work onwards, his
aim was to uncover the sources of our meaning-constituting acts,
initially in mathematics and logic, later more generally. (Husserl’s
early development is explained in the paper by Moran.) Indeed, we can
also see an analytic turn as having taken place in giving rise to
phenomenology. As in the case of analytic philosophy, this had many
aspects. In my own work on conceptions of analysis in the history of
philosophy, I have distinguished three main modes of analysis - the
regressive, the decompositional and the transformative (see §1 of my
paper below). The decompositional and transformative modes have already
been introduced. But the regressive mode, understood as the process of
identifying the principles, premises, causes, etc., by means of which
something can be derived or explained, was arguably dominant in
conceptions of analysis up until the early modern period, and regressive
conceptions have been prevalent ever since (even if overshadowed by
decompositional conceptions).[^10] Frege’s and Russell’s concern to
reveal the logical source of our knowledge of arithmetic, encapsulated
in logical laws and definitions, can be seen as illustrating the
conception, and Russell alluded to the conception himself in the title
of a paper written in 1907, ‘The Regressive Method of Discovering the
Premises of Mathematics’. The regressive conception is also a feature of
Husserl’s methodology. We can see it reflected in Husserl’s remark in
the*Crisis* that he uses the key word ‘transcendental’ “*in the broadest
sense* for the original motif … which through Descartes confers meaning
on all modern philosophies … the motif of inquiring back into the
ultimate source of all the formations of knowledge” (1936, §26).

As Husserl’s use of the term ‘transcendental’ suggests, though, there is
a Kantian dimension to Husserl’s project, and the remark itself
indicates a Cartesian motivation as well. So what was new in Husserl’s
analytic turn? What Husserl himself identified as crucial was his
‘discovery’ in 1905 of the method of reduction (later elaborated into a
number of procedures), by which all our various everyday, psychological
and scientific assumptions are ‘bracketed’ in order to focus on the
underlying concepts and structures of our cognitive acts.[^11]
Phenomenology became the task of “clarifying the essence of cognition
and of being an object of cognition”, as he put it in*The Idea of
Phenomenology* (1964, p. 18).

It is not just the coincidence of date that prompts the comparison with
Russell here. For, as I suggest in my own paper, just as Russell was
concerned to identify the indefinables of philosophical logic, as he
described it in the*Principles* (quoted on p. [15] below), to be
apprehended by ‘acquaintance’, so too Husserl was concerned to isolate
through phenomenological reduction the ‘essences’ that underlie our
logical thinking, to be apprehended by ‘essential intuition’
(‘*Wesenserschauung* ’). Furthermore, as Haaparanta brings out in her
paper, there are also elements of ‘transformation’ in phenomenological
reduction, which raise philosophical issues, and the paradox of
analysis, in particular, which equally affect the kind of transformative
analysis exemplified by the theory of descriptions.

Insofar as grasping ‘essences’ amounts to “fixing concepts in
intuition”, as Moran characterizes phenomenological analysis (see p.
[19] below), Husserl’s project can also be seen as one of conceptual
clarification. This is discussed, in complementary ways, by Moran and
Thomasson in their papers. Moran elucidates the ‘transcendental
subjective’ aspects of Husserl’s methodology, while Thomasson compares
phenomenology with ordinary language philosophy. Appreciating the
similarities and differences between phenomenological analysis and forms
of analysis in analytic philosophy sheds much light on both. Certainly,
comparison demonstrates just how subtle and intricate are the
relationships between the various conceptions of analysis that can be
found in the two traditions, conceptions that themselves have roots in
earlier conceptions. The nature of phenomenological analysis and its
relationship to other conceptions of analysis form the central theme of
the papers in Part Three.

Even in a book devoted to the topic of analysis, with fourteen
contributors writing from a variety of perspectives, it is not possible
to do justice to the full range of conceptions of analysis in
twentieth-century philosophy. This volume focuses on certain key figures
in early analytic philosophy and phenomenology, in the period prior to
the Second World War. But both earlier and later conceptions are also
discussed, since these help place the developments in this period in
context. In the rest of this introduction I will say a little more about
each of the papers in turn, highlighting their significance in the
overall picture that I have all too briefly sketched in these first few
pages. I draw some conclusions in the final section.


