1- Frege and Russell: Decompositional and Transformative Analysis
=================================================================

The papers in Part One explore the work of Frege and Russell, the two
main instigators of the analytic turn that gave rise to analytic
philosophy. As indicated above, both Frege and Russell came to
philosophy through concern with the foundations of mathematics, and both
sought to demonstrate the logicist thesis that arithmetic (and geometry
as well, in the case of Russell) could be reduced to logic by offering
transformative analyses utilizing the new quantificational logic. It was
in their philosophical attempts to justify their logicist projects that
analytic philosophy was born.

In ‘Frege-Russell Numbers: Analysis or Explication?’, Erich Reck takes
as his starting-point the logicist definition of the natural numbers as
equivalence classes of equinumerous classes which both Frege and Russell
gave, and considers the status of this definition, focusing primarily on
Frege’s views. Was it intended as an ‘analysis’, in the sense of
revealing what the natural numbers ‘really’ are, or as an ‘explication’,
in the sense of offering a reconstruction that does essentially the same
job but in a more powerful and rigorous theoretical system? The
Platonism that many have attributed to Frege would seem to suggest the
first, while the second is compatible with a more conventionalist
reading that brings Frege closer to Russell and Carnap. Reck does not
attempt the difficult task of deciding the issue on textual grounds, but
he does elucidate the conceptions of analysis involved in asking the
question and discuss the constraints on such definitions that might
narrow down the possibilities.

As far as Frege’s Platonism is concerned, Reck argues that this should
not be interpreted as invoking a ‘Platonic heaven’ of abstract objects
such as numbers, which we apprehend by some quasi-perceptual
‘intuition’. The most charitable and sophisticated reading, he suggests,
is that developed by Tyler Burge,[^12] according to which getting at
‘the facts of the matter’ is taken to involve reasoning and theory
construction rather than (quasi-)empiricist observation. Nevertheless,
even this sophisticated reading seems to conflict with a more
conventionalist reading, and as Reck notes, there are certainly passages
where Frege offers something very close to Carnap’s notion of
explication (in lectures that Carnap actually attended).[^13]

One way of approaching the issue is by comparing the Frege-Russell
definition with alternative definitions such as those subsequently
provided by John von Neumann and, more recently, by Crispin Wright and
Bob Hale. Taking these three cases, how do we decide whether to identify
the natural numbers with the*Frege-Russell numbers* , the*von Neumann
numbers* or the*Wright-Hale numbers* , as Reck calls them? Like the
Frege-Russell numbers, the von Neumann numbers are classes
(set-theoretic objects), which satisfy the Dedekind-Peano axioms, but
they arguably do not do justice to the role of numbers in ‘bringing
together’ equinumerous collections. The Wright-Hale numbers, on the
other hand, seem to do justice to the application of numbers, but do
they really count as logical objects? Would Frege have been happy with
Wright’s and Hale’s ‘neo-logicism’?

Clearly, there are different constraints in different theoretical
contexts, and the question of what the numbers ‘really’ are can only be
answered in a particular conceptual framework. As Reck suggests, this
might help us in reconciling the Platonist and conventionalist strands
in Frege’s thought, even if Frege himself may not have seen it in this
way. Indeed, for any interpretation of Frege’s thought that might be
offered, we might well be tempted to ask an analogous question. Does the
interpretation offered count as an ‘analysis’ or an ‘explication’? Are
there ‘facts of the matter’ as to what Frege really meant? The question
Reck addresses in his paper clearly has implications beyond the specific
case of the natural numbers.

Frege’s and Russell’s logicist definition of the natural numbers as
equivalence classes of equinumerous classes is also the starting-point
of James Levine’s paper, ‘Analysis and Abstraction Principles in Russell
and Frege’. Although they offered the same definition, however, Levine
argues that they used that definition in quite different ways (providing
a further illustration of the Carnapian message of Reck’s paper, we
might add). For Frege, it played a role in his claim that numbers are
‘self-subsistent objects’, whereas for Russell, it was taken as showing
that numbers can be dispensed with in giving an inventory of the world.
Underlying these two different philosophical approaches were two
different conceptions of analysis and propositional contents. Central to
Russell’s philosophy from the time of his rejection of idealism, Levine
argues, was the principle that every propositional content can be
uniquely analyzed into ultimate simple constituents, a claim that Frege
did not endorse. This meant that, for Russell, every proposition had a
privileged representation (even if no one had yet been able to give it),
which mirrored its content at the ultimate level of analysis. If two
sentences of different forms could be used to assert the same
propositional content, therefore, then they could not both be privileged
representations. Frege, on the other hand, insisted throughout his life
that one and the same content (‘thought’, in his later terminology)
could be analyzed in indefinitely many ways, without assuming that there
was some one way that was uniquely privileged.

Consider, then, the case of the Cantor-Hume principle,[^14] asserting
the equivalence between (Na) and (Nb):[^15]

(Na)            The concept*F* is equinumerous to (i.e., can be
correlated one-one with) the concept*G* .

(Nb)            The number of*F* s is equal to the number of*G* s.

On Russell’s view, if (Na) and (Nb) have the same propositional content,
then at most only one of them can offer a privileged representation of
that content, since they are of different forms. So their equivalence
suggests that talk of numbers can be ‘reduced’ to talk of the one-one
correlation of concepts, so that we do need to suppose the existence of
numbers in addition to that of concepts. For Frege, on the other hand,
the possibility of contextually defining numbers in this way does not
imply that numbers are not objects. On the contrary, the fact that
number statements can be true and that constituent number terms such as
‘the number of*F* s’ are proper names is enough to show that
numbers*are* objects. The issue is how we can apprehend such objects,
given (as Frege himself stressed) that they are not*actual* objects,
i.e., spatio-temporal objects that have causal effects. It was here that
he appealed to the equivalence between (Na) and (Nb). According to
Frege, we apprehend numbers by understanding the sense of sentences in
which number terms appear, an understanding that is grounded (and hence
shown to have a logical source) by our grasp of sentences such as (Na)
together with our recognition of the equivalence captured in the
Cantor-Hume Principle.[^16]

What we have in the case of the Cantor-Hume Principle is what is often
called an ‘abstraction principle’, and Frege’s and Russell’s different
conceptions of analysis clearly lead to different views of the use of
such principles. In fact, it is significant in this respect that Frege
himself never called it an ‘abstraction principle’, a phrase which
itself suggests that one of the two sentences involved is on a different
and ‘higher’ (i.e., more abstract) level to the other - numbers being
‘abstracted’ from the relation of one-one correlation obtaining between
concepts. Indeed, from Russell’s diametrically opposed perspective, the
use of the phrase is also misleading, since it seems to grant that
numbers are objects, just ‘higher’ or more abstract objects. As Levine
notes (p. [16] below), Russell at one point remarks that the principle
of abstraction should really be called ‘the principle which dispenses
with abstraction’, since it “clears away incredible accumulations of
metaphysical lumber” (1914, p. 51). In Russell’s case, the reductionism
made possible by abstraction principles takes the form of
eliminativism - ‘analyzing away’ the supposed abstract objects. Not only
the use of abstraction principles but also the very name they are given,
then, reflects the underlying conceptions of analysis.

What led Russell to this eliminativist view of abstraction principles?
He may have shared Frege’s concern to demonstrate logicism, but he
adopted a diametrically opposed approach to the use of abstraction
principles. As Levine shows, at the root of this disagreement lies their
different conceptions of analysis, and in particular, their different
attitudes to the principle that every propositional content can be
uniquely analyzed into ultimate simple constituents, which Russell
endorsed but Frege did not. This principle was adopted by Russell in his
initial rejection of idealism. But adopting this principle does not in
itself determine which of the two sentences involved in an abstraction
principle is to be seen as the more fundamental (as the more privileged
representation, in Levine’s terminology), nor whether eliminativism is
to be preferred to a more moderate reductionism. Why should (Na) be seen
as more fundamental than (Nb), for example, and why, if we do this,
should we think of numbers being ‘analyzed away’ rather than just being
shown to be ‘higher’ objects?

Levine identifies the source of Russell’s concern with abstraction
principles in his interest in theories of serial order, which arose in
his engagement with Hegelian idealism. Take the case of events,
considered as ordered by the temporal relations of*before* ,*after*
and*simultaneous with* . On an absolute theory, to say that two events
are simultaneous with one another is to say that they both occur at one
time, moments of time being treated as just as real as events, and the
relation of*occurring at* being treated as just as basic as the ordering
relations. On a relative theory, on the other hand, events and the
ordering relations are taken as basic, and moments of time are then
defined in terms of these. (There is no absolute framework of temporal
moments in which events are located.) Immediately after his rejection of
idealism, Russell adopted absolute theories of order, but he soon came
to endorse relative theories. In the case of number, for example, he
moved from regarding numbers as just as real as (and distinct from)
classes to treating them as definable in terms of (and hence reducible
to) classes.

What led Russell to endorse relative theories of order? In his paper
Levine is more concerned with the differences between Frege and Russell
than with the details of the evolution of Russell’s ideas, but he does
note that the change coincides with Russell’s acceptance of logicism in
1901/1902.[^17] Russell was able to endorse the logicist definition of
numbers as classes without subscribing to Frege’s realism, however,
because of his different conception of analysis. This is Levine’s main
point, and it illustrates not only the dependence of metaphysical views
on conceptions of analysis but also, in the case of Russell, the
significance of the period between 1900 and 1905. This period has long
been recognised as crucial in the development of Russell’s thought, and
much light has been shed on it by the authors of the next two papers,
Nicholas Griffin and Peter Hylton.[^18] Griffin looks in more detail at
Russell’s early conception of analysis, and Hylton discusses the
transformative conception of analysis that was introduced by the theory
of descriptions in 1905.

In ‘Some Remarks on Russell’s Early Decompositional Style of Analysis’,
Griffin shows how fundamental Russell’s early conception of analysis was
in his thinking after his break with idealism, a conception that was
essentially decompositional, that is, that treated analysis as a process
of identifying the constituents of something. Russell initially conceded
to idealism that a complete analysis was only possible where the
complexes to be analysed were mere collections rather than unities,
unities involving relations that could not be separated out. But he
nevertheless rejected the key doctrine of the British idealists that all
relations are internal. What exactly did this doctrine mean, however,
and why did Russell reject it? In answering these questions, Griffin
focuses on the debate that Russell had with Harold Joachim (1868-1938)
in 1905-7, a debate in which the question of the nature of relations was
central. Russell glossed what he called the ‘axiom of internal
relations’ as the view that all relations are grounded in the natures of
their terms. But according to Russell, ‘the nature of a term’ could mean
either ‘all the propositions that are true of the thing’ or ‘the
adequate analysis of the thing’, and he accused the idealists
(Hegelians) of failing to recognise this distinction, a failure that
follows, he claimed, from their principle that every proposition
attributes a predicate to a subject (cf. pp. [11-13] below).

Understanding this principle to be restricted to the case of atomic
propositions, however, Griffin points out that Russell’s claim is only
correct on the assumption that*all* the properties of a thing are
included in an adequate analysis of it. For only then is it true that if
every (atomic) proposition attributes a property to a thing, then the
set of all (atomic) propositions that are true of a thing is the same as
the set of propositions that give its analysis. But such an assumption,
Griffin goes on to argue, makes all such propositions come out as
‘analytic’ - at least, on the traditional definition of an ‘analytic’
proposition as one in which the predicate is contained in the subject -
and this cannot have been Russell’s view. Indeed, Russell had himself
criticized this view in his book on Leibniz. So how can he have
maintained the assumption? Griffin’s answer is that Russell did not, in
fact, accept that all - or even most - propositions that are apparently
of subject-predicate form are actually of that form; many should be
construed instead as relational. Russell rejected, in other words, what
he saw as the Hegelian principle that every proposition attributes a
predicate to a subject.

As Griffin notes, however, such a defence of Russell’s early
decompositional conception of analysis is not completely successful, for
it does not solve the problem of simple terms (things). By definition,
simple terms have no parts, and so cannot be analysed; in which case, it
would seem, they cannot have properties. Griffin states the options for
Russell here, but does not attempt to resolve the problem. He concludes
his paper by highlighting the importance that the question of relational
propositions had in the development of Russell’s early philosophy and
the extent to which Russell’s break with Hegelianism was gradual: it
took him several years to think through the implications of his
rejection of the doctrine of internal relations in the context of his
decompositional conception of analysis. That conception was not new;
what was new was the use he made of it.

At the core of Griffin’s account of the defensibility of Russell’s early
decompositional conception of analysis is the claim that many apparently
subject-predicate propositions are implicitly relational. This is not a
claim that Russell would have made at the beginning of the 1900s. In*The
Principles of Mathematics* , for example, he wrote: “On the whole,
grammar seems to me to bring us much nearer to a correct logic than the
current opinions of philosophers; and in what follows, grammar, though
not our master, will yet be taken as our guide” (1903, p. 42). Russell’s
debate with Joachim, however, occurs around the time of ‘On Denoting’,
when Russell was developing the theory of descriptions, and the claim is
certainly characteristic of his views then. Central to the theory of
descriptions is the idea that a sentence may need to be transformed -
and indeed, radically transformed - to adequately represent the relevant
thought or proposition. This idea of transformation is discussed by
Peter Hylton in ‘“On Denoting” and the Idea of a Logically Perfect
Language’.

Hylton begins by clarifying Russell’s idea of a logically perfect
language, a language which mirrors the structure of both the world and
the thoughts that represent that world, and in which each ultimate
element (simple object) of the world is denoted by one and only one
word. Given that our ordinary language is not such a language,
associated with the idea is a certain conception of analysis, the aim of
which is to transform our ordinary sentences into sentences of the
logically perfect language. But what constraints are there on such
transformations? Hylton identifies what he calls Russell’s ‘Principle of
Acquaintance’ as the key principle, which Russell himself formulates at
the end of ‘On Denoting’ as follows: “in every proposition that we can
apprehend … all the constituents are really entities with which we have
immediate acquaintance.” Although this principle was not new in 1905,
Hylton argues, it did not impose any significant constraint on analysis
up to that point. In the immediate aftermath of his break with idealism,
Russell allowed acquaintance with all sorts of entities; and during the
period in which he held his theory of denoting concepts (from 1900/1901
to early 1905), any constraint that such a principle might have imposed
was negated, since that theory allowed propositions to have
constituents, namely, denoting concepts, that could denote things with
which we were not acquainted. It was only when that theory was rejected
in favour of the theory of descriptions that the principle finally came
to impose a real constraint on analysis.

As far as Russell was concerned, what was crucial about the theory of
descriptions was that it enabled him to maintain, in an unqualified
form, the view that he had first adopted in rejecting idealism - that a
proposition quite literally*contains* the objects which it is about.
That view had been restricted by the theory of denoting concepts, which
had provided a way of dealing with what were accepted as
counterexamples. But that theory had also left mysterious the relation
of denoting itself - the relation that was taken to obtain between
denoting concepts and the things denoted. Russell’s theory of
descriptions dispensed with this relation (except, perhaps, in the one
case of the variable), but its development came at a cost: the cost of
admitting that ordinary sentences need to be radically transformed to
yield their ‘real’ logical form, a form that can only be fully revealed
in the logically perfect language. In other words, the theory of
descriptions allowed Russell to retain his early decompositional
conception of analysis, in all its original simplicity, but only by
supplementing it with a*different* conception of analysis - the idea of
analysis as transformation.

Hylton goes on to consider the further development of this idea in
Russell’s later conception of a logical construction and in the work of
W. V. O. Quine (1908-2000). In the case of the former (which I will just
say something about here), this was reflected in Russell’s ‘supreme
maxim in scientific philosophizing’: “Wherever possible, logical
constructions are to be substituted for inferred entities” (1917, p.
115; quoted on p. [6] above, in discussing Carnap’s*Aufbau* ). The role
that the Principle of Acquaintance plays in Russell’s philosophy might
seem to make the need for inferred entities particularly acute. For if
we are (apparently) able to talk about a lot of things with which we are
not acquainted, then must we not*infer* their existence to explain how
our talk can be*about* such things? Russell denies, however, that such
talk is indeed about such things (even if they do exist), and has no way
of making sense of entities that are different in kind from those with
which we are acquainted. Instead, he suggests, we have to
construct*analogues* of those entities out of the entities with which we
are acquainted (i.e., out of our sense data). But this only reinforces
Hylton’s central point - that “Russell is committed to the possibility,
in principle, of an extremely far-reaching programme of philosophical
analysis” (p. [19] below]. Virtually nothing is what it seems, on
Russell’s philosophy after 1905, and it requires extensive analysis to
show what the sentences we use are really about.

Russell’s conception of logical construction forms the topic of the
final paper in Part One, ‘Logical Analysis and Logical Construction’, in
which Bernard Linsky sheds light on the source of this conception in
Russell’s philosophy of mathematics, and argues against two influential
interpretations of it. Linsky takes as his starting-point Russell’s
famous remark in*Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy* : “The method
of “postulating” what we want has many advantages; they are the same as
the advantages of theft over honest toil. Let us leave them to others
and proceed with our honest toil.” (1919, p. 71) Russell had in mind
here the ‘postulation’ by Richard Dedekind (1831-1916) of the irrational
numbers as limits of a series of ratios, whereas Russell saw himself as
actually ‘constructing’ them by defining them as classes. The
Dedekind-Peano axioms in the theory of the natural numbers also count as
‘postulates’ which in Russell’s (and Frege’s) logicist project are
derived as (supposed) theorems of logic. The logicist definitions of the
numbers thus provide the model of logical construction.

In his essay ‘Logical Atomism’, Russell offers a further formulation of
the maxim quoted above: “Wherever possible, substitute constructions out
of known entities for inference to unknown entities”. He then
immediately suggests that an instance of this maxim is what he has
called ‘the principle of abstraction’ or ‘the principle which dispenses
with abstraction’ (1924, p. 326). As we have seen in considering
Levine’s paper, this is the principle that Russell saw as governing his
treatment of abstract objects such as numbers. So the message would seem
to be that the appeal to abstract objects as inferred entities is to be
replaced by the logical construction of analogues that have the same (or
at least analogous) formal properties. This message lies at the heart of
Linsky’s criticisms of two particular interpretations of Russellian
logical construction. On the first, developed during the early 1930s in
the work of the Cambridge School of Analysis, logical constructions
provide metaphysical reductions, showing how entities of one kind (such
as numbers) can be ‘reduced’ to, entities of another kind (such as
classes). On the second, based on the more recent work of William
Demopoulos and Michael Friedman, logical constructions exhibit the
mathematical structures that can be taken as applicable to the empirical
world (with the help of appropriate representation theorems). I will
focus here on the first interpretation, since (as indicated above) the
Cambridge School of Analysis itself forms part of the early history of
analytic philosophy.

A paradigm example of logical construction, on the first interpretation,
is the ‘reduction’ of committees to their members: a committee is
nothing over and above the individual people that make up that committee
and their relevant activities. The idea was extended to the case of
material objects (which Russell had himself considered in*The Analysis
of Matter* of 1927): tables and chairs, for example, were seen as
logical constructions out of sense data. On such an interpretation,
Russell’s position comes out as similar to traditional phenomenalism.
But on Linsky’s account, Russell is not claiming that material objects
‘really are’ bundles of sense data. Rather, he is attempting to define
entities that have the same (or analogous) formal properties as material
objects, by means of which all the fundamental claims about the material
world, such as that no two material objects can be in the same place at
the same time, can be proved as theorems.

On Linsky’s view, then, logical construction is not a form of reductive
analysis but exemplifies what Carnap came to call ‘explication’; and it
is significant in this respect that Carnap did indeed have Russellian
logical construction in mind here (cf. pp. [6-7] above). Linsky is
reluctant to call it ‘analysis’ at all, or at least ‘analysis proper’,
which he characterizes as “the process of finding those ultimate
constituents of reality out of which the world in so far as we directly
know it through acquaintance is constructed” (pp. [9-10] below). But
this is just decompositional analysis, and there are many other uses of
the term ‘analysis’, not least in Russell’s own writings, as Linsky
recognizes. When Russell talks of ‘the analysis of matter’, for example,
he is indeed referring to logical construction and not just
decompositional analysis. The important point, though, is that the
conceptions (whatever they are called) are distinguished and their
relationships clarified; and Linsky is right to suggest that the
interpretation of logical construction within the Cambridge School of
Analysis was distorted by the influence of Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* .
Russell did not take himself to be analyzing ordinary language, and saw
no methodological difficulty in offering ‘analogues’ or ‘substitutes’ or
‘explications’ of our ordinary notions. For him, the type of analysis
exemplified in logical construction did not involve reducing entities of
one kind to entities of another kind, but rather, replacing postulated
entities by constructed entities that do analogous work within the
relevant theoretical system.

Although I have suggested that the appearance of the theory of
descriptions in 1905 is the single most important event in the
development of analytic philosophy, then, the analytic turn itself was a
far more complex event. Even in the particular case of Russell’s
philosophy, there were several key stages. Russell’s and Moore’s
rebellion against idealism may have accorded pride of place to
decompositional analysis, but this became supplemented by transformative
analysis, made possible by the quantificational logic that Frege
invented and utilized in offering his own analyses. But Russell’s use of
transformative analysis was different from Frege’s, and has itself given
rise to different interpretations and developments. All this is part of
the complex methodological inheritance that continues to shape analytic
philosophy today.


