2- Wittgenstein and Other Philosophers: Connective and Explicatory Analysis
===========================================================================

As mentioned above, the first phase of analytic philosophy culminated in
Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* , and in the late 1920s and early 1930s the
conception (or conceptions) of analysis involved in the programme of
logical atomism were subjected to increasing critique, with the result
that new conceptions of analysis emerged, which might be broadly
characterized as connective or explicatory rather than reductive
conceptions. This development is the main theme of the papers in Part
Two.

In the paper that opens Part Two, ‘Analytic Philosophy: Beyond the
Linguistic Turn and Back Again’, Peter Hacker offers an overview of the
history of analytic philosophy and the conceptions of analysis it
involves. In the first section, he divides analytic philosophy into four
phases. The first is the one with which we have mainly been concerned so
far, inaugurated by Russell’s and Moore’s rebellion against idealism and
culminating in Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* (though I would wish to accord
a greater role to Frege in the story than Hacker acknowledges here); the
second involved the Cambridge School of Analysis active in the 1920s and
early 1930s; the third was the heyday of the Vienna Circle in the 1930s;
and the fourth combined post-war Oxford philosophy, led by Ryle and
Austin, with the later philosophy of Wittgenstein and his pupils.
Whether we are now witnessing a fifth phase or the death of analytic
philosophy Hacker leaves as an open question.

In the second section, he notes the conceptions of analysis involved in
each phase, from the decompositional conception of Russell and Moore,
through Russell’s later reductive conception and the differing views of
logical analysis of the early Wittgenstein and Carnap, to the connective
conception of the later Wittgenstein, Ryle and Strawson. Although he
denies that analytic philosophy can be defined by reference to any
methods of analysis, he nevertheless suggests that it can be broadly
characterized by its concern, first, with formal logic, and second, with
language and its uses. But this characterization permits widespread
disagreement within the analytic tradition about the relationship
between formal logic and natural language. Indeed, Hacker suggests that
there has been polarization on the issue throughout its history.

In the final section of his paper, Hacker takes issue with Timothy
Williamson’s recent suggestion that analytic philosophy has now taken a
‘representational turn’, repudiating the earlier ‘linguistic turn’.
Hacker clarifies what was involved in the linguistic turn and defends
its essential achievement, which was to make the meticulous examination
of language a central method of philosophy. He criticizes Williamson’s
claim that the goal of philosophy is the analysis of representation, and
indicates why he thinks that the revival of metaphysics that Williamson
associates with the representational turn is a retrograde step. The aim
of philosophy, Hacker concludes, “is the clarification of the forms of
sense that, in one way or another, are conceptually puzzling - for they
are legion” (p. [19] below). Although Hacker may be cautious in
characterizing the state of analytic philosophy today, it seems to me
that, whether or not there is now a new strand that has taken a
representational turn, analytic philosophy is alive and well in the work
of Hacker and all those for whom connective analysis continues to play a
central role.

In ‘Kant, Wittgenstein, and the Fate of Analysis’, Robert Hanna traces
what he sees as the main development in conceptions of analysis from
Kant to the later Wittgenstein via the*Tractatus* . He begins by
outlining what he calls Kant’s ‘conceptual-decompositional’ theory of
analysis, though stressing its subservience to Kant’s transcendental
idealist project. He then suggests that in rejecting both Kantian and
Hegelian idealism, early analytic philosophy replaced this theory by the
‘logical-decompositional’ theory, which found its definitive statement
in the logical atomism of Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* . As Hanna explains
the Tractarian conception, logical analysis is concerned both to offer a
critique of language and to reveal the deep structure of our language
and thought; and it is in the latter respect that it differs from
Kantian analysis. In Kantian jargon, Hanna remarks, “Tractarian
logical-decompositional analysis is*noumenal* analysis
of*things-in-themselves* ”, aimed at establishing contact with the
simple objects that make up the substance of the world (p. [12] below).

Hanna goes on to discuss Wittgenstein’s later conception of analysis,
which he sees as dropping the noumenalism. More specifically, Hanna
argues, it emerged from Wittgenstein’s rejection of his earlier
direct-referentialist semantics and picture theory of meaning, and from
his elaboration of the idea that logic is ‘grammar’. Hanna calls
Wittgenstein’s later conception ‘dialectical conceptual analysis’, which
“(a) displays and diagnoses the dialectical structure of philosophical
problems, (b) describes, unpacks, compares, and contrasts the concepts
implicit in our various ordinary uses of language and states truisms
about them, and then (c) stops” (p. [18] below). This brings us back to
Kant, Hanna suggests, the main difference being the explicit recognition
on Wittgenstein’s part of the role that linguistic behaviour plays in
our cognitive activities. Philosophical analysis, Hanna concludes, “is
ultimately rational anthropology in a wide sense that includes the
theory of language:*the logically-guided universal normative theory of
human rationality* ” (p. [21] below).

According to Hanna, Tractarian logical analysis had two main aims - to
offer a critique of language and to reveal the deep structure of our
language and thought. In ‘Complete Analysis and Clarificatory Analysis
in Wittgenstein’s*Tractatus* ’, Dawn Phillips looks at the relationship
between these two aims in more detail, although she prefers to talk of
two conceptions of analysis being involved here. She begins by
explaining why a critique of language is necessary - because of our
misunderstanding of the logic of our language, reflected in our failing
to recognize how the linguistic signs we use symbolize. She argues,
however, that there is a problem in Wittgenstein’s conception of how to
correct this misunderstanding. For “in order to recognize the symbol in
the sign”, Wittgenstein writes, “we must consider the significant use
[*den sinnvollen Gebrauch* ]” (3.326), that is, we must consider when
the sign is used in accord with the rules of logical syntax. But if we
can do this, then it would seem that we must already recognize the
symbol in the sign, i.e., already understand the logic of our language.
What we have here is a version of the paradox of analysis, and to solve
this problem, Phillips suggests, we need to distinguish between complete
analysis and clarificatory analysis. The complete analysis of a
proposition reveals its ultimate logical form (exhibiting it as a
truth-function of elementary propositions); clarificatory analysis
merely removes a misunderstanding, and does not require full elucidation
of the logical syntax. It is clarificatory analysis that Wittgenstein
has in mind in talking of the ‘correct method’ in philosophy (cf. 6.53),
Phillips argues, and which avoids the paradox of analysis.

Of course, on Wittgenstein’s early view, the possibility of complete
analysis*underpins* clarificatory analysis. But Phillips makes the
further point that, even if it were possible, the complete analysis of a
proposition can only in fact be undertaken*after* clarificatory
analysis, clearing away confusions that may surround the use of the
proposition. And the importance of clarificatory analysis is reinforced
when we consider the transition to Wittgenstein’s later philosophy. For
what we find here is clarificatory analysis (understood as elucidating
the ‘grammar’ of our concepts)*without* an assumption that complete
analysis is possible; indeed, the latter is now explicitly rejected.
Phillips and Hanna are thus in agreement on the central development in
Wittgenstein’s conception of analysis from his early to his later work.

Wittgenstein is not the only philosopher who came to reject
decompositional or reductive conceptions of analysis from the late 1920s
onwards. In ‘C. I. Lewis: Pragmatism and Analysis’, Thomas Baldwin
discusses the work of C. I. Lewis, who was Quine’s predecessor as Edgar
Pierce Professor of Philosophy at Harvard from 1930 to 1953, and who
might reasonably be regarded as the most significant American analytic
philosopher in the period prior to the Second World War. Baldwin notes
Lewis’s work on modal logic, for which he is most well known, but
concentrates on his book*Mind and the World Order* , which was published
in 1929. Baldwin starts by discussing Lewis’s problematic account of
‘the given’, which he argues is an incoherent hybrid of two different
conceptions of sense-experience, being viewed by Lewis as both
indescribable and yet infallibly identifiable. Despite this account of
the given, however, empirical knowledge is determined, according to
Lewis, not by the ‘qualia’ of individual experiences but by the
intersubjective patterns among them. As Lewis puts it, “it is relation
which constitutes that*intelligibility* which is essential to knowledge”
(quoted on p. [7] below).

Baldwin goes on to show how this emphasis on relation was reflected in
rejection of a decompositional conception of analysis and endorsement of
a holistic one, although traces of the decompositional conception can
still be found. On Lewis’s official view, analysis is not the
‘dissection’ of a complex concept into simple concepts that directly
apply to qualia but the identification of the relations between
concepts: “logical analysis is not dissection but relation” (quoted on
p. [8] below). The results of analyses are analytic a priori
propositions, according to Lewis, and this leads to the question of what
determines our choice of such propositions as the governing principles
in the realms of logic, mathematics and science. It is here that Lewis’s
pragmatism comes out: our choice of principles is made on pragmatic
grounds, and hence pragmatic values infuse the very foundations of
knowledge and truth.

In the final section, Baldwin compares Lewis’s views with those of
Carnap and Quine. In the case of Carnap, he considers*The Logical Syntax
of Language* (1937), where Carnap famously advocated his principle of
tolerance: “In logic, there are no morals”. Here the similarities are
striking, the main difference lying in Carnap’s having taken the
linguistic turn. Baldwin criticizes the relativist implications of both
their positions, however, although he remarks that Carnap’s linguistic
approach at least “has the merit of removing the logical space for a
conception of the given” (p. [14] below). In the case of Quine, Baldwin
considers why Lewis did not follow his pragmatism through and, like
Quine, reject the analytic/synthetic distinction; the answer is that
Lewis remained wedded to a Platonist conception of meaning. Baldwin
suggests, though, that Lewis’s influence on Quine was far greater than
has generally been recognized (and than Quine himself acknowledged).

The final paper in Part Two is my own contribution to the volume.
Entitled ‘Conceptions of Analysis in the Early Analytic and
Phenomenological Traditions: Some Comparisons and Relationships’, it can
be seen as drawing together some of the threads in the previous papers
and filling in further elements in the overall story of analysis in
early twentieth-century philosophy. In exploring some of the
methodological connections between the analytic and phenomenological
traditions, it also serves to introduce some of the themes in Part
Three.[^19] In the first section of the paper, I outline the conceptual
framework that I have developed to explore conceptions of analysis in
the history of philosophy. In particular, I distinguish between three
main modes of analysis, which I call the regressive, the decompositional
and the transformative (as mentioned on p. [8] above, and alluded to in
a number of the other papers in this volume). The relationship between
the latter two has been one of the main themes in the overview I have
been offering in the present introduction.

In the main body of the paper, I explore three comparisons - between
Frege and Russell, between Moore and Franz Brentano (1838-1917), and
between Carnap and Husserl. With regard to the first, I argue that while
Frege and Russell both used transformative analysis, they did so for
different philosophical purposes. Frege did not share the eliminativist
motivations of Russell. The contrast I draw thus complements the
explanation of the differences between Frege and Russell given by Levine
and the account of the relationship between decompositional and
transformative analysis in Russell’s philosophy offered by Griffin and
Hylton. In the case of Moore and Brentano, I show how they both shared a
decompositional conception of analysis, and consider the question of
Brentano’s influence on Moore. With regard to Carnap and Husserl, I
sketch Husserl’s relationship to early analytic philosophy and his
rejection of crude decompositional forms of analysis, and compare
Husserl’s development of a richer conception with Carnap’s method of
‘quasi-analysis’ in his*Aufbau* of 1928. I end by clarifying their ideas
of ‘explication’, a term which they both used in their later work.
Carnap’s conception of explication has already been mentioned, in
introducing the papers by Reck and Linsky, in particular. Husserl’s
conception, though related, is rooted in his appeal to ‘intuition’,
which anticipates issues discussed in the papers in Part Three.


