3- Bolzano and Husserl: Semantic, Conceptual and Phenomenological Analysis
==========================================================================

As the papers in Part One confirm, analytic philosophy as we understand
it today has its origins in the work of Frege, Russell and Moore around
the turn of the twentieth century, and as the papers in Part Two show,
that work was developed in various ways as analytic philosophy blossomed
in the period that followed. As we have also seen, however, the founders
of analytic philosophy were not operating in a vacuum. They were both
reacting against earlier forms of philosophy and yet at the same time
subtly transforming certain key conceptions that they inherited, such as
the decompositional conception of analysis associated with Kant, in
particular. A proper understanding of the nature and development of
analytic philosophy thus requires situating it in the broader historical
context. One important philosopher active in the period between Kant and
early analytic philosophy is Bolzano, who was born in the year that
the*Critique of Pure Reason* was published and died in the year that
Frege was born. Although Bolzano had no direct influence on the founders
of analytic philosophy, many of his ideas anticipated ideas that we now
treat as characteristic of analytic philosophy, and he offered a
powerful critique of Kant’s philosophy, as Sandra Lapointe shows in
‘Bolzano’s Semantics and his Critique of the Decompositional Conception
of Analysis’.

Lapointe begins by elucidating the decompositional conception of
analysis that can be found in Kant’s discussion of analyticity, and
identifies what Bolzano took to be responsible for the inadequacies of
this conception, namely, the deficient understanding of the distinction
between the properties of objects and the constituents of concepts.
Bolzano’s critique of Kant is grounded in his own semantic theory, and
Lapointe goes on to explain some of the main elements of this theory,
focusing, in particular, on his conceptions of ‘Proposition’ (‘*Satz an
sich* ’) and ‘Idea’ (‘*Vorstellung an sich* ’) and his account of
analyticity. In the case of the former, there are instructive
comparisons to be made with Frege’s conception of sense (*Sinn* ), and
Lapointe clarifies the process of analysis that Bolzano saw as required
to exhibit the Proposition expressed by an ordinary sentence as used on
a given occasion. Such a process of analysis Bolzano called ‘*Auslegung*
’, involving the paraphrasing of the ordinary sentence into a sentence
of a semi-formal canonical language that expresses its meaning
completely and unambiguously. Here, too, we see a similarity to
Russell’s idea of analysis (after 1905) as involving the transformation
of ordinary sentences into sentences of a logically perfect language
which mirror the reality they represent. In the case of analyticity,
Lapointe shows how Bolzano’s account made use of the method of
substitution, which was later to play a role in the work of both Alfred
Tarski (1901-83) and Quine - although neither was directly influenced by
Bolzano.

While Bolzano may have had no direct influence on the development of
analytic philosophy, however, he did have an important influence on
Husserl, as Lapointe notes in the final section of her paper. Bolzano’s
influence on Husserl is also mentioned by Dermot Moran in ‘Edmund
Husserl’s Methodology of Concept Clarification’, Bolzano being seen as
having inspired Husserl to investigate our knowledge of ideal objects
such as numbers and universals (e.g. Redness). Traditional empiricism
went wrong, according to Husserl, by failing to provide an adequate
account of such knowledge, and one of the purposes of his new method of
phenomenological analysis was to offer a better account. Moran notes
Husserl’s apparent agreement with the empiricist in claiming that “no
concept can be thought without a foundation in a concrete intuition”
(quoted on p. [5] below), and explains Husserl’s construal of knowledge
as the ‘fulfilment of intuition’, but emphasizes that Husserl’s concern
was to expand the range of what counts as ‘fulfilment’. (As suggested
above, it is instructive to compare Husserl’s views here with Russell’s
early assumption that we can be ‘acquainted’ with universals and the
role that the principle of acquaintance plays in Russell’s philosophy.)

In his paper, Moran offers an account of the development of Husserl’s
conception of phenomenological analysis from 1891, when his*Philosophy
of Arithmetic* was published, to 1907, when Husserl started to see his
philosophy as a new kind of transcendental philosophy. From the very
beginning, Moran argues, Husserl was concerned with identifying certain
subjective conditions of objective cognition, which he came to call
‘phenomenological’ conditions, and distinguishing these from merely
‘psychological’ conditions. Moran illustrates this in section 5 of his
paper, in discussing Husserl’s early account of our grasp of the concept
of number. Husserl distinguishes the psychic acts that he regards as
essential in our coming to grasp the concept of number, such as the
intellectual synthesis he calls ‘collective combination’, from the
psychic acts that may be involved on particular occasions but are not
essential, such as our ability to order things in space and time.

After the*Philosophy of Arithmetic* , Husserl’s attention shifted to the
foundations of logic and epistemology, and Moran explains the
development of Husserl’s method in the two volumes of his*Logical
Investigations* (1900-1). Husserl described this work himself as “the
result of ten-year long efforts for a clarification of the pure idea of
logic by a return to the bestowing of sense or the performance of
cognition which occurs in the nexus of lived experiences of logical
thinking” (quoted on p. [19] below). Such a search for clarification can
be found illustrated in Husserl’s discussion of the sense in which we
talk of mathematical objects ‘existing’. Moran ends by addressing the
question of the relationship between phenomenological analysis and
linguistic analysis. According to Husserl, the latter is at best only a
preliminary to the former, the aim of which is to uncover the a priori
forms of consciousness - the necessary conditions of our apprehension of
objects.

Husserl’s method of phenomenological analysis is also discussed in the
final two papers of Part Three, Leila Haaparanta comparing it with
ancient Greek geometrical analysis and Amie Thomasson comparing it with
the form of conceptual analysis found in the later ordinary language
tradition of analytic philosophy. In ‘The Method of Analysis and the
Idea of Pure Philosophy in Husserl’s Transcendental Phenomenology’,
Haaparanta begins by offering a characterization of ‘pure’ philosophy,
in terms of the exclusion of argumentation based on empirical beliefs,
and then clarifies the process of ‘phenomenological reduction’,
understood as the movement from the ‘natural attitude’ to the
‘philosophical attitude’ whereby the various assumptions and commitments
of everyday life and science are ‘bracketed’ in order to find the
underlying logical forms and essential concepts. In section 4 she
explains Husserl’s distinction between three elements of cognition -
noesis (the cognitive act), noema (the cognized as cognized) and the
object itself (towards which the cognitive act is directed), and
outlines the debate that there has been over how these are related. She
then highlights what she sees as the key issue here, which concerns the
relationship between the objects of the natural attitude and the objects
(noemata) of the philosophical attitude. Must the latter not be the same
as the former if phenomenological analysis is to be correct, but if this
is so, then what does analysis achieve? What we have here, of course, is
yet a further version of the paradox of analysis.

Haaparanta does not confront this paradox directly, but instead
elucidates the process of phenomenological analysis by comparing it with
problem-solving analysis in ancient Greek geometry (though not as
understood by Husserl himself). Just as the geometer starts by taking
the figure to be constructed as ‘given’, in order to ‘analyze’ it to
identify the parts and their relationships, and the relevant principles,
by means of which to show exactly*how* it can be constructed (in accord
with the terms of the problem), so too, Haaparanta suggests, the
phenomenologist takes the objects of the natural attitude as given and
seeks to understand their formation. Like geometrical analysis, she
writes, “phenomenological analysis is stepping backwards, researching
into how experience is structured. The phenomenological description is
the phase of construction. Phenomenologists construct in the peculiar
sense that they articulate or make the constitution of the world of the
natural attitude explicit.” (p. [14] below) She concludes by noting the
analogy that can also be seen with Russell’s theory of descriptions,
where expressions, too, are transformed in yielding a deeper
understanding of what is (supposedly) meant.

In the final paper, ‘Conceptual Analysis in Phenomenology and Ordinary
Language Philosophy’, Amie Thomasson argues that both phenomenology and
the ordinary language tradition of analytic philosophy can be seen as
offering the same response to the crisis that reached its head at the
end of the nineteenth century regarding the proper methods and role of
philosophy. In particular, she suggests, they were both responding to
psychologism in taking philosophy to be concerned with the analysis of
meanings or concepts. In the first two sections she counters some
misconceptions about the differences between analytic philosophy and
phenomenology, and in the final two sections clarifies the fundamental
method that she sees them as sharing.

In the first section she argues against the view that while
phenomenology is concerned with analyzing meanings of our mental states,
analytic philosophy is concerned with analyzing meanings in language.
Husserl, too, stressed that we must begin with linguistic discussions
while keeping in mind that grammatical form can be misleading. On the
other side, within ordinary language philosophy, the aim is not insight
into words for their own sake but understanding of the concepts they
express. Indeed, as Thomasson notes, Austin himself at one point
suggested that his method might be called ‘linguistic phenomenology’. In
the second section, she rebuts the charge that Husserl’s phenomenology
invoked a baroque ontology of essences and a mysterious epistemology of
‘intuiting’ them. What Husserl meant by ‘inspection of essences’
(‘*Wesensschau* ’), she writes, was “nothing more than beginning from a
presentation of an object of a certain kind and imaginatively varying
the presentation in various ways to yield general truths about what
changes can and cannot be tolerated if we are to be presented with an
object of that kind” (p. [11] below). It is thus comparable to the
method of considering imagined cases employed so extensively by analytic
philosophers. And talk of ‘essences’, she goes on, is no more than the
linguistic hypostatization of general truths about concepts. As she sums
it up, “Husserl’s essences seem more properly understood as pleonastic
than as Platonistic” (p. [15] below).

In the final two sections, Thomasson suggests how Husserl’s method of
‘eidetic variation’ can be seen as a form of conceptual analysis, via
the transformations effected by hypostatization, which at the same time
yields ‘ontological’ results. But ‘ontology’ must here be interpreted as
similar to the ‘descriptive metaphysics’ that Strawson advocated,
Thomasson writes, which “differs from conceptual analysis only in ‘scope
and generality’, by its concern with interconnections among our most
general and basic concepts” (pp. [19-20] below). We have seen how one
strand in analytic philosophy culminates in connective analysis; if
Thomasson is right, then a similar strand can be discerned in
phenomenology. Certainly, the similarities in methodology between
certain strands in analytic philosophy and phenomenology are striking,
and elucidation of one can be used to throw light on the other.


