4- Conclusion: The Varieties of Analysis
========================================

What conclusions can be drawn from these studies of analysis in early
analytic philosophy and phenomenology? At the very least, they should
correct some common misunderstandings. It is frequently assumed that
‘analysis’ just means decomposition, and that it is analysis in this
sense, particularly in the form of conceptual analysis, that is
characteristic of analytic philosophy. But as we have seen, there are
many other forms of analysis in play, even if they combine with
decompositional analysis in intricate ways in actual practices of
analysis. Moreover, the decompositional conception and its centrality in
reductive projects was subjected to criticism at just the time that
analytic philosophy began to establish itself as a tradition in the
early 1930s.

Distinctive forms of analysis did indeed emerge in analytic philosophy
and phenomenology. In my view, the most important of these was Frege’s
introduction of quantificational logical analysis (a type of
transformative analysis, extending function-argument analysis from
mathematics to logic), which was further developed and pursued by
Russell, most notably, in the theory of descriptions. Not only did this
open up new possibilities of philosophical analysis (reductive,
eliminative and explicatory) but the issues raised by its use also set
much of the agenda in the development of analytic philosophy. As far as
phenomenology is concerned, the introduction of the method of reduction
was what Husserl himself saw as his breakthrough. Aimed at identifying
and clarifying the presuppositions in our everyday and scientific
thinking, this can be regarded as the central characteristic of the
parallel analytic turn that took place in giving rise to phenomenology.

Moore’s and Russell’s rebellion against British idealism was a
significant moment in the development of analytic philosophy, but it was
not significant because it introduced a new form of analysis. On the
contrary, it simply took over an existing, decompositional conception,
in a particularly crude form. It was significant because it marked the
start of a sustained attempt to follow through the implications of
putting that conception to work, in the context of rejecting idealism.
Russell was far more successful than Moore in this regard, most
importantly, because he was able to draw on and develop quantificational
logic, driven by his aim of demonstrating logicism. This led to the more
complex form of analysis exemplified by the theory of descriptions,
combining transformative logical analysis with decompositional
metaphysical analysis. What characterizes the analytic turn in giving
rise to analytic philosophy, then, was this*synthesis* of two forms of
analysis, and what has characterized analytic philosophy ever since is
the continually developing syntheses of forms of analysis that have
their roots in the work of the early analytic philosophers. Those forms
have evolved in response to the changing epistemological and
metaphysical environments.

As I said above, this volume focuses on certain key figures in early
analytic philosophy and phenomenology in the period prior to the Second
World War. As I have tried to bring out, a revealing picture of the
development of philosophical analysis emerges. But even in the period
concerned, there are many other significant figures and relationships,
consideration of which would shed further light on this development. A
fuller story would have to include, for example, the debate about
analysis among those connected with the Cambridge School of
Analysis,[^20] the interaction between Wittgenstein and the various
members of the Vienna Circle,[^21] the impact of Carnap and other
logical empiricists on the American scene,[^22] the transformation of
phenomenology by Martin Heidegger (1889-1976),[^23] and Ryle’s early
engagement with phenomenology.[^24]

In the wider context, there are also relationships between philosophers
within and without the two traditions that are important in
understanding the differing conceptions of analysis. The debate between
Russell and Joachim is discussed by Griffin, but Russell also sparred,
for example, with Henri Bergson (1859-1941), who was a very influential
figure in the first half of the twentieth century and whose ideas on the
superiority of ‘intuition’ over analysis Russell criticized.[^25]
Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) was even more important, and the influence of
psychoanalysis on philosophical methodology and on Wittgenstein’s
method, in particular, has frequently been discussed.[^26] There are
also other philosophers who wrote on methodology and who developed
conceptions of analysis in direct opposition to those of analytic
philosophers, most notably, R. G. Collingwood (1889-1943), who was
concerned to combat both Moorean philosophy and the logical positivism
of A. J. Ayer (1910-89).[^27]

All of this is part of the complex story that is the history of
twentieth-century philosophical analysis. At a time when the history of
analytic philosophy has come of age, I hope that the papers brought
together in the present volume will provide the basis for further
investigations of philosophical analysis and the relationships between
the analytic and phenomenological traditions. At a time, too, when
philosophical methodology is once again high on the agenda, I also hope
that the volume will encourage greater self-consciousness about
methodology and appreciation of the varieties of analysis and of the
value of understanding the historical roots of the conceptions and
methods that we all too often take for granted.[^28]


