Mutual Corroboration of Hotama and Atomic Hell
==============================================

Following is the description of the fire of Hotama given by the Quran:-
A " It is Hotama".

B " It is fire of Allah enkindled, which leapeth upon the hearts. It is
a fire closed in on them in outstretched columns" Following then are the
characteristics:-

1 That it is Hotama. Hotama means a crusher. 2 That it is fire and is
the fire of Allah. 3 That it leaps up unto the hearts.

4 That it shows encompassing characteristics and it raises columns We
will now treat each point individually to show these characteristics as
shown by the atomic fire;-

(I) THE QURAN SAYS " HOTAMA" THAT IS A CRUSHER.

The atomic fire and nuclear phenomenon both are crushers. The Quran has
used the word Hotama. Hotama is a qualitative noun formed from the
root-verb Hatama which means to " break any thing to pieces". Hotama
thus means "a crusher". The sound of the word Hotama recalls to our mind
the word Atoma. Mark the phonetic resemblance between the two, though
one is the pure Arabic and the other is an adoption from the Greek word
Atomos which means uncutable. The word Atom thus has assumed the meaning
opposed to the word Hotama which means " to break something to
pieces".

Yet both basically are concerned with the same action, that of
breaking. The scientist does not need to be reminded that the word atom
is a misnomer, for atom has been cut and deserves no more to be called
as atom. The scientist had after breaking the atom assembled and
discussed the inconsistency, yet after some discussion they left the
word atom as it were. This particular point that of the retention of the
word atom may or may not be of any particular scientific interest to our
theme, yet this phonetic resemblance of the two words, Hatam and atom
adds some interest in a way. It may serve as the formula of open sesame
to the gate of that great atomic mystery that lay concealed in the words
of the prophecy. We will not show that the atomic energy from its
beginning that is its generation to the last reactions of its radiation
is a series of crushing (breakings):-

(1) The atomic energy is the binding energy of the atom: The binding of
the atom which keeps the nucleons of the atomic nucleus packed close
together is broken and energy is released. Thus the binding of the
atomic nucleus is crushed and the energy is released. No match stick, no
sparkling system, no fuel is required to produce atomic fire. This is
the distinguishing feature of atomic fire to distinguish it from any
other type of fire. No other type of fire is ignited in this manner.

(2) Atomic fire is an absolute crusher. It has to be observed that the
crushing is done by the consumption of chemical fire too, but with the
difference that whereas in the case of chemical fire the nuclei of the
atoms remain untouched and intact so that there is the possibility of
the reproduction of the substance so consumed by some synthetical
method, there, in the case of the atomic disintegration the nuclei of
the atoms are so disintegrated as there is no possibility hitherto of
the nuclear rearrangement, for, the basic nuclear structure of atoms is
crushed. Again we see that the atomic radiation attacks the nucleus of
the cell, and there breaks the chromosomes. A work which could not be
performed by the chemical fire. Thus because the atomic fire destroys
the nuclear structure of atom which is called the basic building block
of the universe, and it also destroys the nucleus of the cell which is
called the basic unit of life, the atomic phenomenon could be termed as
absolute fire.

(3) All the three manifestations of the atomic bomb explosion, namely,
initial heat-radiation, blast, and nuclear radiations are the crusher.
The initial heat-radiation crushes the hearts of its victims at the time
of explosion though it has not the time enough to burn them, and so it
kills them through shock. The blast as the name implies is the blast and
it crushes the strongest buildings to dust. The raditions do so as is
their wont. They crush the atomic nuclei of the inanimate matter, thus
producing changes in the order of the atomic nuclei to cause
transmutations. In the living bodies, they crush the nucleons out of the
atomic nuclei and in the cell nuclei they crush the chromosomes.

(4) The atomic raditions as the crusher:-

Radiations knock out electrons from the atoms, and they eject nucleons
from the atomic nuclei and they cause transmutations of atoms by
crushing and changing the order of the atomic nuclei, as has been
mentioned above.

(5)

The atomists mark the crushing trait of atomic energy. Mark the terms
like bombarding, crushing, smashing, hitting, breaking etc. in the
explanation of the actions in the atomic process. When Germans named the
continuous spectrum of rays as "Bremsstrahlung" which literally means "
breaking radiation", the term was regarded by the atomists as highly
descriptive. The rushing attitude of Alpha Particles while bombarding
the gold foil astonished Rutherford so much that he recorded it as the
most incredible event that ever happened to him in his life:- " It was
almost as incredible as if you fired a 15 inch shell at a piece of
tissue paper and it came back and hit you". Wrote Rutherford in his
diary.

(6) Radiological terms indicative of the crushing trait of
radiations:-

The standard books of radio-biology may be found replete with phrases,
similes and sentences like the following to indicate the crushing trait
of the radiation: "the target concept, direct action, indirect action,
snapping the cable with a bullet, breaking the chromosomes, radiations
hit the cell like a sledge hammer and crush them etc.".

(II) THE QURAN SAYS " HOTAMA IS A FIRE":

The atomic energy is fire too. Atomic energy from the beginning to the
end is fire. In its generation stages it is heat. The initial heat
radiation of the atomic bomb is fire. Radiations too are fire.
Bequerrel, the discoverer of Radioactivity himself was the first to
experience the burn on his skin, next to the pocket in which he had
carried a phial of Radium. Edward Teller and Dr. Albert L . Latter wrote
on page 156 of their book "Our Nuclear Future", a vicious dragon
(Reactor) will spit radioactive fire". In X-ray therapy they use the
term Cross fire of radiation. Chemical fire too is fire, but what is the
chemical fire to the fire of atomic energy....which (latter) is of the
order of millions of degrees and no container on earth could be found to
contain it. Tremendous fires are started as a result of the tremendous
heat spread in the atmosphere in the event of the explosion of the
atomic bomb, yet such fires are not the part of the atomic explosion and
are not to be treated as atomic, but are of chemical nature.

(III) THE QURAN SAYS "HOTAMA IS A FIRE OF ALLAH".

Atomic fire too is the fire of retribution. Atomic fire has been
discovered in the course of the research of science whose object it has
been to gain dominion over nature for material benefit. The atomic fire
therefore has appeared as retribution. It is not energy. It is
destruction. And it is curse. The atomic bomb is not a weapon of defence
but mankind is blinded by the excessive desire of wealth and physical
comforts, and the doom is grievous.

(IV) THE QURAN SAYS, " HOTAMA IS A FIRE WHICH LEAPS UP UNTO THE
HEARTS".

The atomic fire leaps up unto the nuclei:- (1) Nucleus and the
Heart:-

Now the Quran has used the word "Hearts". while the scientist has
coined the term " Nucleus". Identity therefore has to be found between
the two words. These two words, the Nucleus and Heart are synonymous.
The Arab Lexicographers have translated this modern word nucleus as
heart and both show unmistakable characteristics and functional
resemblance. Both are dedicate and sensitive. If they die, the body dies
with them. We have to make no exertion in proving our point. The
scientists themselves call the nucleus as heart and indeed
orthodoxically, appropriately, and the practice is carried on in the
standard textbooks of atomic physics. Edward teller in 1939 spoke of
obtaining energy from the heart of atom in his lecture delivered on
atomic energy (vide the Hydrogen bomb by James Sheply and Clay Blair Jr.
Pages 18-49). And statements like the following could be found in the
standard text books of atomic physics:-

" Each fast particle comes from the break up of very heart of a single
atom----the Nucleus------ of the radioactive material". (Vide -Physics,
Physical Science Study Committee second edition, D.C.Heath and Company
Lexington, Massachusetts, July 1965 Page 360. And:-

" How many nuclear heart-beats are in the life-time of a radioactive
nucleus which lasts only billionth of a second". (Ibid- Page 21, Short
Problems).

Even the part of the reactor in which the process of atomic energy
generation takes place is called as the heart of reactor (Vide Our
Nuclear Future by Edward Teller and Dr. Albert L. Later. From the
photograph of the Reactor). Thus the point of the Quran is proved by
merely uttering the word Nuclear.

(2) Nuclei that is Hearts involved in Atomic energy generation
process:-

The atomic energy generation, both in fission as well as fusion
process, it is the nuclei of atoms that are involved. In Fission process
the atomic particles leap up unto the nuclei that is the hearts of the
atoms. While in the fusion process the nuclei that is hearts of atoms
are crushed together, and energy is liberated. In fusion process the
atomic fire obtained from the fission device is directed unto the nuclei
of the fusile material. Thermonuclear process provides us with the
clearest of the examples of the fire of atomic energy leaping up unto
the nuclei that is the hearts. Inward fission device produces the
necessary temperature and the heat is then directed unto the fusile
material where it leaps up unto the nuclei of Hydrogen atoms and fuses
them in groups of four. This is a distinguishing characteristic of the
atomic phenomenon, for, in no other phenomenon the nucleus of the atom
is involved. The scientists' term "thermo-nuclear" is the scientific
version of Quran's expression, that is " a fire which leaps up unto the
hearts".

(3) Atomic Radiations to leap up unto the nuclei that is hearts:-

(a) Effect of radiations in inanimate and living bodies:- The atomic
radiations do characteristically attack the nuclei of the atoms of the
material through which they pass. In inanimate matter they change the
order of the nuclei of the atoms and thus cause transmutations. In
living bodies they leap up unto the nuclei of the atoms and they eject
nucleons therefrom. They attack the nucleus of the cell and break the
chromosomes.

(b) The effect of radiation is beyond the control of the brain at the
level of the heart of life itself:- Radiations affect the coordination
of the function at the level where it is beyond the control of the brain
in a living body. It may be assumed that they attack at the very heart
of the life itself.

(c) Radiations' exceptional attraction toward all that is related to
the heart in the body:- Bone-marrow, and all blood forming organs, are
more sensitive to the effect of radiation than the brain, the nerves and
the muscles. The blood relation of bone-marrow, and blood-forming organs
is obvious. Multi-celllular organisms are more sensitive to radiation
than the unicellular organisms. The former have more elaborate and more
perfect circulatory and respiratory systems than the latter. The
relation of the circulatory and respiratory systems to heart through
blood is a fact. These points have occurred to me please. Oxygen is
related to heart through blood and the action of radiation in the
absence of oxygen is retarded.

(4) Heat-flash and Radiations of atomic bomb:-

The Heat-flash of the atomic bomb explosion strikes the body of the
exposed persons and having not enough time to penetrate beneath the
skin, kills the heart, however, by the shock. The radiations of the
atomic bomb explosion leap up unto the nuclei of the atoms as usual.
(5)

Nuclear and Thermonuclear Crusher:-

Atomic fire because it leaps up unto the nuclei and crushes them, may
be called as the nuclear crusher. And because in the thermonuclear
process its fire leaps up unto the nuclei of the atoms of the fusile
material and crushes them, it may be called as the thermonuclear
crusher. This term thermonuclear is the itnertranslation of the words of
the Quran, namely that, " It is a fire which leaps up unto the hearts".
Thermo means "heat", and "nuclear" means "that which is connected with
the nuclei, that is hearts".

(6) A Distinctive Feature of the atomic Fire which distinguishes it
from other types of fire:-

That the atomic fire springs from nucleus, and that the actions of the
atomic fire take place in the nuclear zones, is a feature exclusively
characteristic of atomic fire. Chemical fire never reaches the nuclear
zones. Wordsworth says:-

" To let a creed built in the heart of things, Dissolve before a
twinkling atomy". (Wordsworth- Excursions) The little couplet of
Wordsworth represents our point in the best of manner. We could say it
as follows:- "To let a universe built in the nuclear system, Dissolve
before a tempting energy".


