(v) the Quran Says " Hotama Is a Fire Closed in On Them".
=========================================================

Atomic fire has encompassing feature too:-

(1) The atomic bomb explosion assumes the form of an inverted cauldron.
Its fallout forms yet another enclosure around the first. The fallout of
the Megaton thermonuclear bomb forms a global enclosure.

(2) The Bone-seeking radioactive substances cannot be expelled from the
bones even after the death of the patient.

(3) Cancers have appeared from six to thirty years after the actual
exposure to radiation. All this time the radiation has kept the victim
encompassed.

(4) Cell is attacked by the radiation in the resting stage of the cell,
but the effect of radiation appears only in the anaphase of the cell.
Radiation thus keeps guard over the cell.

(5) If one organ of the body is irradiated, the whole of the body is
encompassed by the radiation.

(6) Frogs if lethally irradiated and kept in a dormant state at a low
temperature just above freezing point, they will instead of dying in the
usual time interval of three to six weeks survive for many months.
However, as soon as the irradiated animals are warmed up they begin to
show radiation symptoms and will die in the same time interval as the
animals which are not cooled after irradiation. Radiation has laid a
siege to the irradiated animals that are cooled.

(7) That the radiobilogists have sensed this encompassing feature of
radiation is proved from the fact that forty years ago, Alexander Haddow
suggested that the cancer-producing action of the cancer-producing
substances may be the result of prolonged interference with normal
growth. Although it only is suggestion without the scientific proof yet
it suggests the suspicion of the radiobiologist regarding the
encompassing trait of radiation.

(8) Radiation encompasses mankind, even all species, nay even the
plants to generations, to their extinction. Genes mutated by radiation
move secretly from generation to generation till they manifest their
existence in some generation in the form of abnormal birth. This
abnormality being inheritable increases in kinds and numbers through
marriage. This applies to every species of animals and plants to mean
that radiation has kept its siege over them for generations, and there
exists the possibility that radiation might continue its siege to the
extinction of all life on earth. Nay, even thereafter, after the
radiation has driven life to its grave, the huge grave of earth, it
would keep on the encompassment of the grave that is this earth to
million of years indeed according to the half-life of the radioactive
substances.

(9) The scene of the Hellish encompassment of this earth by radiation
in the age of full fledged atomic-energy-for-peace:-

Just imagine the scene of a world in some future age, when every power
house, factory, ship, submarine, railway engine, aeroplane bus even
every private car will have its own independent reactor. The leakage and
the frequent explosions of old reactors all over the world will fill it
with radiation and this earth will appear like a huge globe encompassed
by the net of radiations that would continue even after life has been
made extinct on earth by the effect of radiation. This world then for a
period before the extinction of life will resemble so exactly the atomic
hell that no keen-sightedness of a Socrates will be needed to see it so
or call it so, nor is it impossible now even before the state has
actually appeared, to imagine the actual state that will then be
prevailing, naming that state as the atomic hell.

(VI) THE QURAN SAYS " HOTAMA IS A FIRE CLOSED IN ON THEM IN
OUTSTRETCHED COLUMNS".

1. The outstretched column of the atomic bomb explosion:-

The column has become the symbolical representation of the atomic bomb
explosion. It is by the outstretched column that the atomic bomb
explosion is optically differentiated from the conventional bomb
explosion. Everybody knows the fact and recognizes it.

2. Radio-active atomic particles raise columns too:-

It is not only the atomic bomb explosion that raises the columns. The
radio-active atomic particles too raise columns by themselves. The world
of Radioactivity is a world of columns. A single Uranium-235 fission
liberates comparatively huge energy equal to 200 MeV and if a Copper
atom has to traverse a height of one inch only, it has to move a
distance equal to 100 million times its own diameter. We find that an
Alpha particle which is much smaller than the Copper atom in size and
whose radius is of the order of abut 10-13 cm can rise to the height of
from 3 to 7 centimeters. Thus the particle has traversed a distance
equal to millions of millions times its own diameter. A football rising
into air in the same ratio to its size would move far out into the outer
space. Gamma rays despite their extreme smallness traverse a distance of
200 yards in air. This ratio is further formidable, rather inexpressibly
large.

Beta Rays move several yards in air. The Neutron in the process of
fission chain reaction of U-235 has to move a distance more than ten
thousand times its size while rising from one nucleus to another, yet
the Neutron is checked by the absorbing Nucleus, otherwise it can
traverse greater distance if left to move unchecked. It means that the
feature of raising columns is inherent in the nature of the atomic
phenomenon itself, and is not confined to the atomic bomb explosion
only. Further we find the Cosmic rays falling in showers on earth from
the outer space. What formidable heights these columns would have. This
may also be remembered that so fast is the speed of the atomic particles
(Gamma rays move with the speed of light), that a rising particle would
appear like the flash of lightening, although rising like a column. The
scientist has not viewed this point from this angle as yet. A point more
important than the unification of natural forces perhaps due to its
correct direction.

(VI) A DESCRIPTION OF THE HELL OF HOTAMA BY THE HOLY PROPHET OF
ISLAM.

The Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) said:-

" Allah will send angels equipped with covers of fire, and nails of
fire, and columns of fire. They will cover the doomed with covers of
fire, and will transfix them with nails of fire, and will stretch the
columns of fire upward over them. The entire phenomenon will be made so
over airtight that not a trace of delight shall enter from without, nor
a trace of Agony will escape from within. Allah will forget them on His
throne, and will cut them off from His mercy. The inmates of paradise
will begin to enjoy the boons of Allah. The inmates of hell will cease
to cry for help, and speech will come to an end. Their speech will then
be (as the sound of) inhaling and exhaling". (Quoted from
Al-Jallalain).

It is hardly possible to find yet another description of the atomic
bomb explosion phenomenon as realistic and exact. The atomic bomb
explosion is like a cover of fire, the radiation rays are like the nails
of fire which transfix the unfortunate inmates of the atomic hell. The
columns of fire stretched upward are the columns of the atomic bomb
explosions.

VIII) THE QURAN SAYS " WHAT COULD TEACH THEE WHAT AL-HOTAMA IS?".

The early commentators of the Quran have said, the interrogative mode
of the Quran in this question implies terribleness of the phenomenon of
Al-Hotama. The terribleness of the atomic bombs and the atomic
radiations is no secret, but to this may be added the unusual complexity
of the subject of nuclear science. Today every atomist and every
radiobilogist may be put the question, " What could teach thee what
nuclear science is ?". Indeed, the complexity of the nuclear science is
so baffling, and may remain for ever baffling, and the knowledge of
nuclear science is so very scanty that the answer would invariably be as
" Nothing".

(IX) THE CAUSES OF THE PUNISHMENT OF AL-HOTAMA : THE SAME AS THE CAUSES
OFTHE APPEARANCE OF ATOMIC FIRE ON EARTH.

The Quran says "Woe to every backbiter, defamer, who amasseth wealth
(of this world) and arrangeth it (against the future). He thinketh that
his wealth will render him immortal. Nay, for verily he will be cast
into Al-hotama.". These are the causes given out by the Quran for the
punishment of Al-Hotama. The atomic fire is the production of a science
whose very object has been the accumulation of wealth and a struggle for
remaining for ever rich, increasing the riches in a systematic,
continuous, infinite and eternal manner with all the interest in this
world only. Backbiting and defaming is inherent in the very nature of
the philosophy of atomism which is the philosophy of this age. Mark the
perversion of the critical attitude of the modern rationalism which
could be seen to border on calumny. And that the struggle for the
dominion over nature with a view to obtaining material benefits as the
object of man's life it is that has ultimately resulted in the
appearance of the atomic fire. And dreadful enough, the identity between
the causes of this transient atomic hell and the eternal Hotama of the
next eternal world implies inescapable and eternal punishment in Hotama
for those who deserved punishment in this transient atomic hell, even if
they escaped it for any reason.

(X) THE ATOMIC ENERGY, THE SCIENTIFIC AND LOGICAL CONSE-QUENCE OF
THETHREE CAUSES MENTIONED BY THE QURAN

The Quran says " He will verily be cast into Al-Hotama". Just as the
three ingredients of gunpowder produce the gun powder, the three causes
of the atomic fire produce atomic fire. The causes as given by the Quran
are, "slander, wealth accumulation and perpetual struggle in increasing
the riches", and a "belief in eternity of this process of wealth
accumulation".

(XI) THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE ADOPTION OF ATOMIC ENERGY UNSCIENTIFIC,
ITS ADOPTION DISASTROUS.

The atomist could be sued in the Court of Science for his gross
violation of the dictates of science in recommending the adoption of
atomic energy. No force of nature is to be subjected to man's service
without first achieving control over that force and producing for the
protection against the pernicious effects. The atomic energy has special
place in this respect. It has its special insidious hazards that amount
to the total extinction of life on earth, and untold miseries and
unheard of afflictions. The nuclear scientist at present has very meager
knowledge of the subject of nuclear science and has little control over
it, while the hazards incident on the atomic energy are unique in
nature, and judging from the nature of the subject it appears that there
is little hope for attaining to the required knowledge of the subject,
and obtaining the required control over it.

The question of knowledge may be judged from the fact that there is no
certainty even in the permissible dose of radiation and it may prove
erroneous in future with ruinous results. Radiation is harmful in any
amount and the only possible method of protection against it is by
completely materially covering the source of radiation. The atomic
reactors have the tendency to explode and to inundate the neighboring
districts with the flood of radiation, while the people there are left
at the mercy of elements. No sure cure for radiation sickness is
discovered and none is in sight.

The genetic effects of radiation are irreparable and irreversible, and
nothing therefore could be done in that most important of the factors.
Mutated genes could not be detected and nothing could be done after the
mutated genes have manifested their existence with disastrous effects,
that may end in the extinction of all life on earth. These and many more
facts are all known to the scientist. But he appears to treat the
adoption of atomic energy as an experiment of research-cum-material
benefit.

That is, at the same time to conduct the nuclearexperiment on human
guinea pigs and to avail the material advantage of theatomic energy.
This is the suicidal attitude in the special case of atomicenergy. No
but the experiment has to be completed first in the Laboratory andthen
the adoption of the atomic energy has to be thought of. This is
theverdict of science itself. The experiment of atomic energy means
theinvolvement of the entire world in the destruction.

Alas, the scientist likeevery other individual of this age of atomistic
materialism has been blinded bythe influence of the three causes of the
appearance of the atomic hell,otherwise the problem is not so very
difficult to understand. If,however, the atomic-energy-for-peace or for
war will be adopted withoutfirst fulfilling, the requisite conditions
stated above then no Prophetis required to predict the disastrous ruin
of this world, whether it camethrough atomic bombs or whether through
the long term effects of the radiationsof atomic-energy-fore-peace in a
slow decaying manner.

(XII) THIS PROPHETIC WARNING OF THE QURAN IS A MIRACLE:-

Thiswarning of the Quran is a miracle undeniable by the scientist or
thephilosopher. It is the light, the only light to guide the world out
of theatomic pit. It is Noah's ark in the fiery deluge of atomism.
Neglect it, andthen, from this transient replica of Hotama (the eternal
Hotamic hell of thenext world) you go right into the eternal Hotama of
the next world, the causesof both are the same. The loss of this
transient world is like this world itselftransient. But dread the
eternal punishment in the next eternal world. I wishyou could judge


