Descreptipn of Hotama (atomic Hell)
===================================

In this brief, very brief chapter I will not be able toshow more than a
mere glimpse of all that which I have to show to this world, aworld
which according to a factual, scientific analysis is surely doomed to
aruin, a universal ruin in the flames of the atomic hell, naturally ,
justly,deservedly. This world inspite of all the wishful thinking,
optimism andostriching must either vanish suddenly under the hails of
atomic weapons,deservedly, or perish slowly, lingeringly, miserably
under the swarms of theatomic radiations, also, deservedly. No
protection from either the atomic bombsor the atomic radiations is a
possibility.

No peace treaties will be ofever-lasting avail in an atmosphere of
ever-increasing and never abating anduniversal anarchy till the
scientific process of this modern Baconian atomismworking in accordance
with unfailing and inexorable natural lawshas reached its final stage
and burst into the flames,all-consuming flames of all atomic hell,
atomism via atom to atomic hell. Sucha surmise, if it appears so
terrible, so pessimistically denunciative, then letit be known, that
Late Bertrand Russel too had arrived at the same conclusionin 1964 when
he communicated to me a single sentence which read:-

"Since Adam and Eve ate the apple, man has never abstained from any
follythat he was capable of, and the end is atomic bomb". Thus to
BertrandRussel this world was doomed to the atomic ruin.I too like
Bertrand Russelwould have died in disappointment about the end of this
mankind. But mydiscovery of the prophetic warning of the Quran about the
atomic hell in theyear 1961 rescued me from the similar fate, and
thereby I realized that anescape from the atomic ruin was a possibility
for this mankind in the light ofthat warning which was in the Quran, and
which was by the sheer Grace ofAlmighty Allah exposed to me, and is
hitherto known to neither a Muslim nor anon-Muslim anywhere in the
world.

That an antique book fourteen centuries in the past, should treat the
subjectof atomic science, and scientifically characterize the nuclear
phenomenongiving such characteristics of the atomic phenomenon as
distinguish it from therest of the phenomena, chemical, and electrical
is something which wouldcome as no mild surprise to the modern atomist
and radio-biologist,while the fact that the same book, in the same era
and in the same contextshould characterize the culture of modern
Baconian atomism is something whichwould cast the modern philosopher in
reverie. And again, that the same book inthe same passage should
constitute a link between the atomism and theatomic hell that is the
atomic bombs and atomic radiations would leave anAristotle and a Plato,
the two celebrated antagonists of atomism aghast withwonder.

The affair is such that serves as an outstanding example to show
thedifference between the human and divine intellect. The difference
which theintellects of the calibre of Einstein, Russel, Aristotle and
Plato, would bestsee, they themselves being some of the most outstanding
intellects among thehuman beings.

This prophetic warning of the Quran thus is the only hope in
thisall-pervading, a universal and ever-increasing darkness in a world
whichwilly-nilly is being dragged towards the brink of the atomic hell
to beconsumed. It was on 5th May 1980 that I in good faith dispatched an
articlecontaining the characterization of atomic phenomenon by the
Quran, to fifteenof the leading physicists all over the world for
attestation and on promisethat in case the characterization was attested
as correct, I would declare tothe world the name of the book as well as
the formula of neutralizing theatomic bombs and atomic radiations as may
be formulated from the text of thepassage concerned. Following is the
list of the names of these celebrities:-

1. Dr.Edward Teller, the well-known maker of thehydrogen bomb.
2. Mr.GeraldFrederick tape, M.Sc., Ph.D.
3. Mr.Wolfgang Kurt Hermann Panofsky, A.B, Ph.D. All thethree of
America.
4. SirDenys Haigh Wilkinson, K.T.D.Sc, Ph.D. Sc.D. F.R.S. Universityof
Sussex.
5. RendelSabastian Pease, M.A.D.Sc., FRS.
6. SirArthur Vick. K.T. OBE, D.Sc. Ph.D. LLD,DCL, F Inst P.FIEE, MRIA,
All the three of Great Britain.
7. StatensKarnkraft Inspecktion, stockholm Sweden.
8. International Atomic Energy Karntner, ViennaAustria.
9. RobertPompe of Germany.
10. Jacques Yvon of France.
11. Nobufusa Saito DSc.
12. Yukawa hideki DSc.
13. Sasaki Yoshitake.All the three of Japan.
14. Andrey DmitriyevickKakarov of USSR.
15. The ChairmanDepartment of atomic energy Government of India.

The response was, that Shirely Petty Secretary to Dr. Tellersent back
the article that I may be able send it to someone else, for Dr.Teller
was on extended travel and would be traveling most of the rest of
theyear also.

R.S. Pease of England, and Lennart Gillijan of Swedish Nuclear Power
Inspectorate,acknowledged the receipt of my letter. Others assumed
reticence. Why? Thisrecalls to my mind the case of Muller. H.J. Muller
to whom is due the profound,epoch making discovery of the induction of
mutations by ionizing radiation in1927. It is a curious commentary on
our times that Muller's paper, originallyprepared for the "Geneva
Conference on the Peaceful Use of atomicenergy" (August 1955) could not
be presented and discussed at theconference. Why? Because the discovery
in question was regarded as detrimentalto those who wanted to move on
the path of atomic energy with eyes closedagainst the hazards. The same,
though in a far greater degree, could be said ofmy discovery. My offer,
however, still holds good to the entire community ofthe atomists all
over the world. Herein is opened a new and novel vista ofresearch for
the scientist and the philosopher with the hope of redemption ofthis
mankind from a most grievous and most painful doom in the flames of
theatomic hell.

Although it is for the eminent physicists and Radio-biologists to
reallyappreciate the characterization of the atomic phenomenon, yet the
measure ofcomplexity is not such that would make the whole thing
incomprehensible to aman of average education and understanding. We will
now read the entire text ofthe prophecy which is as follows:-

"Woe to every backbiter, defamer, who amasseth wealth(of this world)
and arrangeth it (against the future). He thinketh that hiswealth will
render him immortal. Nay, for, verily he will be cast intoAl-Hotama. And
what could teach thee what Al-Hotama is? It is kindled fire ofAllah
which leapeth up on to the hearts. It is (a fire) closed in on them
inoutstretched columns" (Quran 104 - Al -Homaza).

Now the characteristic features of the atomic phenomenon according to
the Quranare:

1. That itis crusher, for the term Hotama literally means a crusher.
2. That itis fire and is fire of Allah.
3. That itis a fire which leaps up on to the hearts.
4. That itis a fire which is closed in on them.
5. That itraises outstretched columns.

6. And thatit is a phenomenon too complex andterrible, just as is
apparent from the question, what could teach thee whatAl-Hotama is?These
and exactly these are the characteristics of the nuclearphenomenon, and
are the characteristics which distinguish the nuclearphenomenon from all
the rest of the phenomena, chemical, and electrical. Wehave now to show
in the light of atomic science that these are exactly thecharacteristics
of the atomic phenomenon. The Quran has said:-

"Al-Hotama. And what could teach thee what Al-Hotama is? It is fire
ofAllah enkindled which leaps up on to the hearts. It is (a fire) closed
in onthem in outstretched columns".

We will treat these points one by one, believing that those among you
whodo not know atomic science will also be able to follow the theme. The
validityof the facts of atomic science included could be confirmed by
the atomist aswell as the text books of atomic science.

1. TheQuran says " Hotama". Hotama is a pure Arabic word derivedfrom
the root-verb Hatama, which means "to break something intopieces" or "to
shatter it". Hotama is a descriptive noun andmeans "a breaker or
crusher". That the Quran should call a fire bythe name of breaker would
at once call to the mind of the scientist the Germanterm
'BREMSSTRAHLUNG" which literally meant "breaking radiation"and was
applauded as highly descriptive by the atomists when first coined bythe
German for continuous spectrum of rays. Not only this, but it has to
beobserved that the characteristics of breaking or crushing is one of
theseparticular characteristics of the atomic phenomenon which
distinguish it fromall the rest of the phenomena, chemical, and
electrical.

Mark the atomic energyappearing by breaking the binding of the atomic
nucleus. Atomic and only theatomic energy is generated in this manner
and none other. Not only this,but further, the atomic phenomenon may be
regarded as the absolute crusher, since its breaking and crushing is of
an absolute nature. Atoms oncecrushed could not be reconstructed by a
method of synthesis. Nucleus oncedisintegrated could not be rearranged
in its original form by any means ormethods.

So completely absolute is the crushing involved in the atomic
actionsand reactions that the destruction of both the basic building
block of theuniverse, that is atom, and basic unit of life, that is the
cell is involved. Thisagain is a characteristic which distinguishes the
atomic phenomenon from allthe rest. Not only this, but further the
atomic radiations that are inherent inthe very nature of the atomic
phenomenon, show the identical trait of breakingand crushing. In
inanimate matter they break the atomic nuclei and causetransmutations of
atoms by changing the form of the nuclei. In living bodies,they attack
the cell nucleus and break the chromosomes thereof.

The heat flash of the atomic bomb explosion falls with a crushing
impact likelightening on the body and kills the heart of its victim with
the shock. Theblast of the atomic bomb is terrible crusher of
structures, while theradiations of the atomic bomb explosion carry out
the process of crushing inthe usual way. The first two features may be
observed in the conventional bombsalso. But what is the crushing wrought
by the conventional bombs to thatwrought by the atomic bomb.

This trait, that of breaking and crushing on the part of atomic
phenomenon maybe observed with conspicuity in all the standard text
books of atomic physicsthat may be found replete with terms like"
bombarding, crushing, smashing,hitting, breaking" etc. in the
description of the actions and reactions ofatomic phenomenon. Likewise
the standard text books of Radio- biology may befound replete with
phrases like " Target concept, direct action, indirectaction, snapping
the cable with a bullet, breaking the chromosomes," andsentences like"
radiations hit the cells like sledge hammer and crushthem", while
describing the actions and reactions of radiations to thismay be added
the words of Rutherford that expressed his astonishment at thecrushing
trait of the atomic particles. After his famous experiment in which
hehad bombarded the gold foil with alpha particles, he wrote in his
diary, "It was as incredible as if you fired a 15 inch shell at a piece
of tissue paperand it came back and hit you. It was the most incredible
moment that everhappened to me in my life".

Lastly back to the question of the phonetic and functional
identityexisting between the word atomic and Quran's Hotamic. The former
being coinedor adopted by the scientist and the latter by the Quran.
Atom no longer meanssomething indestructible, while Hotama of the Quran
means a destroyer and bothare concerned with the act of breaking. Do
mark the sound of the two words! Itappears to be one word. Is this then
a mere coincident? No. the exactcharacterization of the atomic
phenomenon by the Quran excludes thepossibility. Rather it appears that
he who coined the term Hotama, had beforehis eyes, indeed supernatural
penetrating eyes, the entire theme of atomicphenomenon and all the
future ages.

The term Hotama being neither Greek norEnglish enhances the wonder at
being so similar a term as atomic even in theArabic tongue. What other
name could be given to this fact if not a miracle?The tremendousness of
the crushing capacity of the atomic bomb and atomicradiation is as
conspicuously great that needs no allusion.

The Quran says" Hotama is fire of Allah enkindled". This point involves
no complexity. Atomic phenomenon produces energy. Energy produces heat.
Heat produces fire. The association of fire with atomic bombs and
radiations is a well known fact. But why Allah should associate this
particular fire with His own name is the question! The colossal
magnitude of atomic fire as well as its incredibly high temperatures
might be the consideration. Again if this mankind is consumed eventually
by the flames of the atomic bombs or the effects of radiations, as
retribution, then rightly this fire may be regarded as the wrath of
Allah enkindled. This is a fact which takes the mind of every thoughtful
man to the causes and the effects of this great problem. Will this
mankind be able to avoid the atomic war for ever or will it be able to
guard itself from the hazards that are apparently incident on the
existence of the factor of atomic radiation, are the questions that
demand the attention of every man that is endowed with the faculty of
thinking.

3. The Quran says" Hotama is a fire which leaps up on to the hearts".
Here then is a characteristic of the atomic phenomenon which may be
regarded as one most distinctively characteristic and the one, that
distinguishes the atomic phenomenon from every other. But this point of
the Quran is proved by merely calling the atomic phenomenon by its
characteristic name that of : "The nuclear phenomenon". The nuclear
phenomenon is called as nuclear because its actions appear in the
nucleus (heart) of the atom.

That, in no other phenomena, chemical or electrical , the actions take
place in the nucleus of the atom is well known. The nucleus therein in
all non-atomic phenomena remains untouched to the end. But how the point
of leaping up onto the hearts is proved, is the question! The Quran has
used the word, "Hearts" while the scientist has used the word,
"Nucleus". But the scientist himself uses the word" heart" for the
nucleus. The heart with nucleus thus is a synonym. The Quran has not
spoken amiss. That the scientist frequently and most aptly uses the word
heart to signify the nucleus, may be found in the standard text books on
atomic physics. Two out of scores of examples will suffice:-

a). "Each fast particle comes from the break-up of the very heart of
the single atom (the nucleus) of the radioactive material". (Vide
Physics: Physical science study committee ---second
edition-----D.C.Heath and Company Lexinton, Massachusetts, July 1965,
pages 130). b). "How many nuclear heart-beats are in the life-time of a
radioactive nucleus which lasts only billionth of a second".

(Ibid: Page 21. Short problems). Edward Teller spoke in the year 1939,
of taking energy from the heart of the atom. The entire field of action
of the atomic that is : the nuclear phenomenon, is within the nuclei of
the atoms. The fission as well as the fusion process both take place
within the nuclei of the atoms of the fissile and fusile material. The
best spectacle, however, of the leaping up on to the hearts that is the
nuclei, and the best proof of the word of the Quran may be seen in the
case of the Thermonuclear action, wherein the heat produced in the inner
fission device is being directed on to the hearts, that is the nuclei of
the outer fusile material. Remarkable in itself is the Term "
Thermonuclear" in its purport. It clearly means a fire which leaps up on
to the nuclei that is the hearts.

The atomic radiations not only show the nuclear characteristics by
having their actions within the nuclei, whether in inanimate matter or
whether in the living body, but further by showing a particular
attraction for the heart or whatever in the body is related to the
heart. They present the point of the Quran touching the heart in a
manner so quaintly suggestive as deserves the notice of scientist.
Radiations affect the coordination of the function at a level where it
is beyond the control of the brain, Bone-marrow and all the
blood-forming organs are more sensitive to the effects of radiations
than the brain, the nerves and the muscles.

Multi-cellular organisms are more sensitive to radiation than the
unicellular. This fact may be attributed to the better development of
the circulatory and respiratory system of the multicellular organisms.
The blood relation of the circulatory and respiratory systems with heart
is known. The action of radiations is retarded in the absence of oxygen
and again the blood relation of oxygen with heart is known. Heat flash
of the atomic bomb kills its victim through shock to the heart. Mark the
factor of blood relation in all these above mentioned instances.

4. The Quran says "Hotama is a fire closed in on them". The atomic
phenomenon shows encompassing characteristics distinctly. The fallout
enclosures of the local and global kind, the tenacity of the
bone-seeking radioactive materials, the appearance of cancer six to
thirty years after the exposure to radiation, the appearance of the
effects of radiation on the cell in anaphase inspite of the attack of
radiation on the cell in its resting stage, the encompassment of the
whole body by radiation inspite of the irradiation of one organ only,
the survival of the lethally irradiated frogs for many months instead of
dying in the usual time interval of three to six weeks if kept in a
dormant state at a low temperature just above freezing point,

conditional to the appearance of radiation symptoms as soon as the
frogs are warmed up and then the occurrence of their death in the usual
time interval that of three to six weeks, and Alexander Haddow's
suggestion that the cancer-producing action of the cancer-producing
substances might be the result of prolonged interference with normal
growth, and the encompassment of mankind to generations by radiation,
even to the point of extinction through long-term radio-genetic effects,
and thereafter the encompassment of the earth by radiation for millions
of years due to the wide-spread radioactive substances, and also the
encompassment of earth by radiation in the age of full fledged atomic
energy for peace, are some of the facts that indicate the distinct
encompassing features of the atomic phenomenon.

5. The Quran says" Outstretched columns". Besides the symbolically
distinctive features of the outstretched column associated with the
atomic bomb explosion, the world of radioactivity may be seen as a world
of columns. The 4 centimeter rise of an alpha particle if seen in
comparison to its tiny size with the height it has assumed, may be
regarded as to have constituted a column. The cosmic rays may be
regarded to have risen in columns whose dizzying heights might cause
them mind to reel.

The Quran says "What could teach thee what Al-Hotama is?" Judging from
the complexity of the nuclear science the same question may be put to
the nuclear scientist and the answer would invariably be. Nothing. The
terribleness of the atomic phenomenon is besides. Now if this
characterization of the atomic phenomenon, the most complex of the
natural phenomena is correct, and it certainly is correct, then what
reason there remains for a scientist to deny the possibility of a
miracle. How he could deny this miracle of the Quran. Again if none
other than God himself could know the phenomenon of the atomic hell at
the time when the Quran was revealed, then surely no more irrefutable
proof of the divine original of the Quran could be needed.

We cannot leave the first part of this warning of the Quran about the
atomic hell un-mentioned, for both the parts form an indissoluble entity
and are interlinked inseparably. Also the topic cannot be completed
without the treatment of the warning in ToTo. The text of the first part
of the warning is:-

" Woe to every backbiter, defamer, who amasseth wealth (of this world)
and arrangeth it (against the future). He thinketh that his wealth will
render him immortal. Nay, for verily he will be cast in to Al-Hotama".

Herein then may be found the character-ization of this culture of
modern science guided Baconian atomism. These characteristics, namely,
slander, engrossment in wealth accumulation, and a faith in the eternity
of this process of wealth-accumulation are not only the particular
characteristics of this modern Baconian culture, but also form the basic
cause of the appearance of the atomic hell, that is atomic bombs and
atomic radiations. Indeed Aristotle and Plato, though strongly
antagonistic to the theory of Atomism, could not have seen so far as to
find a link between atomism and atomic bombs. Here again is a point
which differentiates between the greatest of the human intellects and
the divine intelligence. Quran could see so far.

We will now show that the characteristics before-mentioned are exactly
the characteristics of this modern culture of Baconian atomism.

1. The Quran says" Back-biter defamer". This is the age of slander,
universal slander which has been intellectualized and named propaganda.
This is a peculiar feature of this age.

2. The Quran says" He amasseth wealth (of this world) and arrangeth it
(against the future)". No better description could be made of this
modern, science-guided, continuous, systematic, organized,
ever-increasing, infinite and universal process of wealth-accumulation
and its systematic arrangement for future, known by the name of
progress. This is a peculiar and particular feature of this age.

3. The Quran says, " He thinketh that his wealth will render him
immortal". Mark the faith of this age in the infinite continuity of this
progress through five yearly plans to the ultimate goal of
self-sufficiency. And see their solicitude about the continuity and
stability of the monuments of progress and property. They behave as if
they have to live for ever in this world.

4. The Quran says," Nay, for verily he will be cast into Al-Hotama (the
atomic hell)". Atomic hell (the atomic bombs and atomic radiations) is
the inescapable, logical end of these characteristics. The notion of
eternity on the part of the backbiting wealth accumulator is thus
falsified. The people of this particular age, even if they escape the
atomic war and atomic radiations, they will not escape the Hotama, that
is the atomic hell of the next eternal world, because the causes of both
this transient atomic hell and the eternal atomic hell ( Al-Hotama) are
the same. This transient atomic hell of this world is the representation
of the eternal Hotama of the next eternal world.

This warning of the Quran is the only hope of this mankind and is as
the Noah's Ark for this deluge of atomic fire. No anti-atomic movement
in the world can achieve success nor a religion could be completely
promulgated without adopting the guidelines appearing in this warning.
This 36 word prophetic warning of the Quran has taken me nineteen years
to treat, and now the following volumes in English are ready with me for
publication, as a test of the Muslim and the non-Muslim world.

Fourteen volumes in Urdu languages are besides these in English, on
various topics. I have written letters in this respect to the King of
Saudi Arabia, and to Ayatullah Khumaini of Iran, and to the Secretary
General of UNO and to His Holiness Pope Paul II and to Allamah Mohammed
Asad Tangier, and to the Presidents of Libya, America and Russia, and to
the Prime Ministers of India, Canada and Japan, and to the Sheikhs of
Arab Emirates. The Replies of Pope and the Prime Minister of Canada I
have received from the rest I am awaiting an answer.

The Question arises, why a man in my position and my circumstances
should submit to such a torturous ordeal for forty years for nothing?
The answer to this question is that in 1942, my 25th and the year of
Fermi's successful realization of Uranium Fission Chain Reaction in
Chicago, I was in Mussayyib in Iraq recommended by the Green Turbaned
Saint Al-Khidhr to Abraham for the Abrahamic mission in a dream.

The mission ultimately proved to be that of warning this mankind
against the hazards of atomic hell. And it is my conviction that this
mankind will be saved from the atomic doom, I at the time of my dream
had but negligibly meager knowledge, but thereafter like a man proposed
I learned languages, literatures, philosophies, sciences and scripture,
indeed without a school or a teacher, and was throughout obliged to work
for living. No Bunyan could find a heart to narrate this forty year long
afflictive pilgrimage, nor a Freud could find a method to subject my
intellectual achievements to psycho-analysis.

I have no claim on my dream. Rather let my work be read.A conference of
the eminent atomists and Radiobiologists, and the publication of these
volumes is the necessity. Difficulties are great, but God be on my side
to help. My appeal in this connection is to entire mankind for the sake
of their children and their childrens; children. Einstein in 1939
invited the attention of Roosevelt toward the possibility of making a
bomb a million times more powerful than the conventional bomb I now
invite the attention of the elite to a possibility of destroying that
bomb for the safety of mankind.

Benjamin Creme of London, sought his Christ, Lord Maitreya in
Bricklane, East London among the Pakistani community, and could not find
him there. It was the mission of stopping the third world war that
Benjamin Creme had assigned to his expected Christ. Declining outright
any such title or nomenclature precedence I declare to this mankind my
mission which is the annulment of the possibility of atomic ruin of the
world. An Astrologer of Pakistan by the name of Ghazi Munajim has
declared the presence of a spiritual personality like that of Benjamin
Creme's Lord Maitreya in the Punjab itself, a province of Pakistan, but
cannot tell who or where, yet believes that his presence itself will set
the things aright in the world. I say a substantial process and a
revolution will be necessary to save this world from the atomic ruin.

And now before I bring this chapter to its end, let me point to a very
relevant and yet very strange coincidence, It was in September 1963, two
years after my discovery of the prophecy of the Quran about the atomic
hell, that Miss Anne Mary Schimel, a renowned German Scholar, delivered
a series of lectures in the Punjab University Lahore. Her last lecture
was about the origin of the Quran. And it was this last lecture that I
by a mere chance happened to attend.

Her view was that the Quran could not have been the word of Allah,
because according to her there were mistakes in it, and because it was
for man to err and because God could never err, therefore the Quran
could not have been regarded as the word of Allah and obviously it was
the work of the prophet of Islam.

It was there that I found a chance to point to the prophecy of the
Quran about the atomic bomb, and there I explained the text to her as a
sure proof of Quran's divine original, for it was not for man to know
this in those days when the Quran, was being revealed, and it was God
only who could have known it then, and therefore it was the word of God
only that the Quran could have been. My thanks are due to Miss Anne Mary
Schimel for the manner in which she then convinced me of the truth and
the efficacy of the prophecy in Question. And now in the end let us all
pray to God that He through his boundless Mercy save this mankind from
the painful and disgraceful atomic doom which now confronts us all.
Amen.


