TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION
=========================

***In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful***

All Praise belongs to Allah, Who has sent down the Qur’an to His Beloved
Messenger as an Arabic Qur’an in order that we may understand. Peace and
Blessings on our Master, Muhammad, the most eloquent articulator of the
letter ض, his family, his companions and those who succeeded them until
the Day of Reckoning.

It is with great pleasure th.at I offer this annotated translation of
the famous***Ājurrūmiyyah*** to my Muslim brothers and sisters with the
hope that it will contribute to a better understanding of the Arabic
language and hence a better understanding of the Holy Qur’an and the
Prophetic***Sunnah*** as well as the vast Islamic heritage that the best
minds of the Muslim world have left behind.

About the Ājurrūmiyyah and its author
-------------------------------------

Of all the short texts and treatises that have been written on Arabic
Grammar there is none that has enjoyed as much popularity around the
world than the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** . It has been recorded from the author,
Abū Abdillāh, Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Dāwūd al-Ṣanhājī, who wrote this
text in Makkah whilst facing the Holy Ka‘bah that after he had written
this***Muqaddimah*** he threw it into the ocean and said: “If
this***Muqaddimah*** was written sincerely and purely for Allah’s sake
then it should not get soaked with water” and the result was that when
he recovered it from the sea it was still dry.

This most probably explains why this booklet has continued to enjoy
widespread popularity since the day it first appeared up to this present
day and that being so despite the existence of thousands of other Arabic
Grammar works. Numerous commentaries of various sizes have been written
on the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** and it has even been committed to verse. Even
up to this very day students are still engaged in memorising it because
of its brevity and easy style. Such is the bounty that Allah, All-Mighty
has bestowed on the author of the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** and what a bounty -
to have a book so small in size bring so much reward for its author.
Surely such blessing and goodwill can only be the returns and proceeds
of a Sincere and Pure Intention. May Allah reward the author richly and
abundantly for not only presenting us with this excellent treatise on
Arabic***Naḥw*** but also for teaching us the importance of a sincere
and pure intention.

What the Ājurrūmiyyah does and does not do
------------------------------------------

When students begin to learn Arabic they are often not aware of what
such learning really entails. Even well into their learning they might
still not be aware of how wide a field Arabic study is and what is
needed to become proficient in all the main areas. Often they are told
to study this or that book without knowing precisely what its main focus
or concentration is. Consequently, they spend a long time studying a
particular work while they could have studied another work that is more
suited to their specific needs. We will now take the***Ājurrūmiyyah***
and see exactly what it is that it does and does not do.

The***Ājurrūmiyyah*** aims at doing the following:

Providing the student with a general framework within which to
understand, think and communicate about Arabic***Naḥw*** rules in a
clear and coherent fashion

Acquainting the student with the relevant***Naḥw*** terms, concepts and
basic rules

Enabling students to perform simple and small-scale syntactic analysis
(***i‘rāb*** )

Serving as an introduction to Arabic grammatical texts of much wider
scope and much greater detail

Enabling the student to cover all the basic***Naḥw*** rules within a
very short period of time

Equipping the student with the requisite grammatical knowledge needed
(amongst other things) for performing basic communication tasks such as
the production and reception of grammatically well-formed sentences

Providing the student with a working knowledge of***Naḥw*** to enable
him to tackle basic Islamic texts

On the other hand, the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** is essentially a
basic***Naḥw*** text and not a full Arabic language course and as such
it does not:

Develop the student’s productive and receptive skills (listening,
reading, speaking and writing)

Build the student’s vocabulary except in the field of***Naḥw***

Provide the student with an in-depth knowledge of***Naḥw***

Give a comprehensive treatment of***Ṣarf***

Cover any of the other Arabic linguistic sciences such as***‘Ilm
al-Balāghah*** (rhetoric or stylistics),***‘Ilm al-Lughah***
(lexicology),***‘Ilm al-‘Arūd*** (prosody), etc.

Provide the students with exercises and drills i.e. it focuses only on
theoretical***Naḥw*** and not applied***Naḥw***

The student, who, therefore, wishes to learn Arabic holistically, is
advised to augment his Arabic studies with other Arabic language
material. A comprehensive Arabic course will have to cover:

Arabic grammar, theoretical and applied in the form of exercises and
drills

The four language skills: reading, writing, speaking and listening (i.e.
Arabic production and comprehension)

Vocabulary building in the relevant fields and situational contexts
(i.e. developing the student’s Arabic lexicon)

The textbooks that normally cover these areas of Arabic language study
are of two kinds:

Textbooks that are general and comprehensive in their coverage in that
they attempt to cover all the areas of Arabic language study in a single
book or set of books, e.g.***al-‘Arabiyyah li al-Nāshi’īn***
,***al-Kitāb al-Asāsiyy*** , etc.

Textbooks that are more narrow and specific in their coverage in that
each textbook is intended to cover at least one area of Arabic language
study

Furthermore, a student may want to learn Arabic for its own sake or as a
means to access the vast Arabic Islamic legacy or as a tool for
Islamic***da‘wah*** or for commercial purposes or for numerous other
reasons.

Accordingly, he will have to include Arabic material that deals with his
particular area of interest. For example, if his goal is to understand
Islam and all of its disciplines in Arabic then he is required to study
various Islamic components each with its own textbooks, etc.

Ten reasons why Muslims should learn Arabic:
--------------------------------------------

1- Allah, the Almighty and Wise, chose and singled out Arabic from
amongst all the languages of the world - past, present and future - to
be the vehicle for His final Revelation to the whole of humanity. This
fact alone should constitute sufficient reason for Muslims to learn
Arabic. Certainly, if Allah so wished He could have revealed the Qur’an
not only in any language but in every language but as He Himself states
in the Holy Qur’an: “Verily, We sent It down as an Arabic Qur’an in
order that you may understand”. This verse implies that Arabic has
certain unique features which make it superior to all the languages of
the world and which enable it to convey the subtleties and mysteries of
Allah’s Speech in a manner that no other language can. Furthermore, it
is Allah who endowed Arabic with these features and made it superior to
all other languages.

2- If Allah is who He is - the Creator of the worlds - and His Messenger
(Peace and Blessings be upon him) is who he is - the Best of Allah’s
creation - should not every Muslim in this world attempt to learn Arabic
to understand Allah’s Words and those of His Messenger? The Qur’an -
even though it is in this world - is not from this world but rather from
the Lord of the worlds. Allah, Most High says: “Verily It (i.e. the
Qur’an) is a Revelation from One, All Wise and All Knowing”. How can any
Muslim live in this world finding time to do so many things and yet not
find time to study the language of Allah’s Holy Book and the***Sunnah***
of His Holy Messenger (Peace and Blessings be upon him). How many of us
spend so much time, effort and money on learning the sciences of this
world but in comparison spend absolutely zero on learning the sciences
of the Next world. If we really know who Allah is and who His Messenger
is, we would not hesitate one second to learn the language of Allah’s
Book and the***Sunnah*** of His Messenger. The Qur’an and***Sunnah***
contain so much wealth - Real Wealth - but most of us prefer to remain
poor and deprived forever.

3- A great number of scholars believe the Qur’anic inimitability to
reside***inter alia*** in its language. The science of***al-Balāghah***
(eloquence/stylistics) was especially developed to deal with this
particular dimension of the Qur’an. This science demonstrates in no
uncertain terms that the Qur’an represents the Absolute Pinnacle of
Eloquence and that it stands unrivalled and unchallenged in its
stylistic output. However, to appreciate the stylistic aspects of the
Qur’an presupposes having learnt Arabic. Thus, those who are not
schooled in Arabic will forever be deprived of the Stylistic Beauty of
the Qur’an and fail to see and comprehend the subtle mysteries that are
enclosed in the depths of is language.

4- Apart from the Qur’an and***Sunnah*** that are in Arabic there is
also the vast and rich Islamic Legacy. This is the legacy left behind by
the world’s greatest minds. Without Arabic we would deprive ourselves of
the fruits of almost fourteen centuries of Islamic scholarship. All of
this scholarship was directed at serving Islam and the Muslim***Ummah***
. Numerous sciences sprung up after the advent of Islam with the
principal aim of preserving and explaining the Primary Islamic Sources.
These sciences are still being studied and taught up to today in Islamic
institutions and circles around the world - the result is an
ever-expanding heritage. Had it not been for the past Muslim scholars
then we would not have known Islam as we know it to today. May Allah
reward them abundantly for the great service they have rendered to Islam
and the Muslim Community.

5- A number of Islamic sciences derive explicitly from the Arabic
linguistic sciences in that a number of the issues discussed therein are
linguistic issues. To understand these issues requires a thorough
grounding in the Arabic linguistic sciences on which they are based.
These sciences include***inter alia*** :***al-Tafsīr*** (Qur’anic
exegesis),***‘Ulūm al-Qur’ān*** (Sciences of the Qur’an),***‘Ilm
al-ḥadīth*** (Science of***ḥadīth*** ),***al-Fiqh*** (Islamic
Jurisprudence),***al-‘Aqīdah*** (Islamic Theology). The reason for this
being the case is the fact that the two primary sources of Islam, viz.
the Qur’an and***Sunnah*** , are in Arabic and in order to understand
their message, unlock their hidden mysteries and treasures and
appreciate the linguistic subtleties with which especially the Qur’an
has been characterised one needs to be familiar with the Arabic sciences
that will make such a task possible. Thus,***al-Tafsīr*** is no more
than an interpretation of the Qur’an,***‘Ilm al-ḥadīth*** no more than
an interpretation of the Prophetic Traditions,***al-Fiqh*** no more than
an extrapolation of legal rules from the Qur’an and the
Sunnah,***al-‘Aqīdah*** no more than an extrapolation of a set of
beliefs from the Qur’an and authentic***Sunnah*** , etc. It is clear
from the aforementioned that each of these Islamic sciences involves a
detailed analysis and close investigation of the Arabic in which the
Qur’an and***Sunnah*** are couched. It is not uncommon to find that many
a difference amongst scholars on a particular Islamic matter has its
source in the manner in which they interpreted or read a particular
Qur’anic verse or Prophetic tradition.

‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said: “Learn the***Sunnah*** and
learn Arabic; learn the Qur’an in Arabic for it is in Arabic”.

He also said: “Learn Arabic for it is part of your Religion and learn
how the estate of the deceased should be divided (***al-Farā’id*** ) for
these are part of your Religion”.

Imam al-Shafi‘iyy is reported to have said that he studied Arabic for
twenty years (from its pure sources) in order to understand the Qur’an

Some scholars also maintain that learning Arabic is compulsory on every
Muslim. The reason for this ruling is that learning the Qur’an
and***Sunnah*** is compulsory on every Muslim and since the Qur’an
and***Sunnah*** cannot be learnt without Arabic it follows that Arabic
is also compulsory.

Al-Aṣmu‘iyy is reported to have said: ‘What I fear most for a student of
knowledge - if he does not know***Naḥw*** - that he may fall in the
category of those mentioned in the***hadīth*** : “Whosoever
intentionally contrives a lie in my name, then let him prepare or
reserve for himself a seat in the Fire”, because the Messenger of Allah
(Peace and Blessings be upon him) never used to make grammatical errors
in his speech so anything that you report from him and you make
grammatically errors in it then you would have contrived a lie in his
name’.

6- Knowledge of Arabic makes one’s devotion and worship much more
meaningful. This is especially the case when performing***ṣalāh*** ,
reciting and listening to the Qur’an, listening to***khutbah*** s,
making***du‘ā*** s, etc. In short, knowing Arabic obviates the need for
a mediator or interpreter between Allah and us. In other words, Arabic
enables us to listen to the Qur’an and Prophetic statements first hand.

7- Moreover, what constitutes the Qur’an is not its mere meaning but
rather its meaning together with the specific wording in which it is
couched. This means that no matter how close a particular translation is
to the actual meaning of the Qur’an it still does not constitute the
Qur’an which is the Divine and Uncreated Speech of Allah. At best, a
translation is no more than a human approximation of what the Qur’an
means and as such is finite and can never replace the infinite Speech of
Allah. Consider the following Qur’anic verses: “Say (O Muhammad): If the
sea were ink for (writing) the Words of my Lord, surely the sea would be
exhausted before the Words of my Lord would be finished, even if We
brought another (sea) like it as backup” and “And if all the trees on
the earth were pens and the sea (were ink wherewith to write), with
seven seas behind it to add to its (supply), yet the Words of Allah
would not be exhausted. Verily, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise”. In
addition, reliance on a translation (which in itself is deficient
because it is only a human approximation of Allah’s Divine Speech) means
one will always be deprived of the effect of the actual wording which
adds to the richness and inimitable eloquence of the Qur’an. It is not
the translation that brings tears to the eyes of men but rather the
Qur’an in the full splendour of its stirring words and moving meanings.

8- The problematic nature of translations is another reason why Muslims
should learn Arabic. Much of our Islamic heritage is still inaccessible
to the non-Arabic speaking Muslim population and so it will continue to
be for a very long time. Translations also have their own deficiencies
and shortcomings. These range from gross misinterpretation to poor
quality and sub-standard translation.

9- Language being a conduit of culture has an indelible influence on its
speakers. Arabic being the conduit of Islamic culture likewise has a
positive Islamic influence on its speakers. No doubt, the Qur’an and
Prophetic***Sunnah*** have left a permanent mark on the Arabic language
and are - to a large extent - also responsible for Arabic remaining
fundamentally unchanged over the past fourteen centuries.

10- If certain non-Muslims ( Orientalists ) - spurned on by their hatred
for Islam and the Muslims - studied Arabic for the purpose of destroying
Islam and gaining control over the Muslims then why should Muslims -
spurned on by their***īmān*** and love for Islam and the
Muslim***Ummah*** - not study Arabic for the purpose of defending Islam
against anti-Islamic forces and Islamophobia.

How to study the Ājurrūmiyyah
-----------------------------

There is no single way of studying the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** . Of the many
ways of studying the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** some might be effective and some
not and that also differs from student to student. Nevertheless, the
following are some guidelines for making the best of studying
the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** :

Making***du‘ā’*** and asking Allah to grant you mastery over Arabic as
well as sincerity in your quest

Having studied some Arabic before even if it is not considerable

Finding a competent teacher especially someone who has been through
the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** himself and has taught it before

Working through the original Arabic text and only referring to the
translation when necessary

Understanding not only the words, phrases and sentences in the text but
also the grammatical structure underlying the words, phrases and
sentences as far as possible

Organising the information into tables and charts to see how apparently
disparate parts are systematically related to each other and to
facilitate their understanding

Consolidating the information as one goes along through continuous
revision and by doing exercises and even attempting to memorise it

Consciously applying the rules when reading, writing, speaking and
listening to Arabic

Filling in examples in the text where such examples are required

Conducting simple syntactic analysis (***i‘rāb*** ) of the examples

Advice to students who wish to master Arabic grammar:
-----------------------------------------------------

Arabic grammar is a fairly exact science almost like mathematics and
physics and as such the student needs to take care that he or she has a
proper grasp of the technical terms that are employed.

The student is required to see Arabic grammar as a unified and coherent
system within which everything is interrelated and performs a function
within that system. The student might find it difficult to perceive it
at first but through patience and practice (and Allah’s Permission) he
will eventually see a holistic system emerging from the seemingly
disparate parts.

Arabic grammar is intellectually very demanding and as such the student
needs to be vigilant and in a continuous state of thinking. Under no
circumstances should he lower his guard for otherwise he will falter.
Thus, a great deal is dependent on the student himself in terms of
making sense of the information, integrating and assimilating it and
then applying it in the comprehension and production of sentences.

About the Translation:
----------------------

**The current work is not intended to serve as a mere translation of
the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** . In addition, it serves to do the following:**

**provide examples where the author did not provide any**

**explain the reason and rationale behind particular rules and points in
the text**

**provide additional information and elaborate on some of the rules**

**rectify some misconceptions**

**put the material in perspective**

I have also tried to give as literal a translation possible to
facilitate a close reading and word-for-word analysis of the source
text. It is not sufficient that the student merely understands the
general drift of what is said but should rather try to understand every
word and if possible the underlying grammatical structure i.e. how the
words are syntactically related to each other. Of course it is
impossible to translate every aspect of the source text but where it was
possible to translate a particular aspect even at the expense of a
better sounding translation I have done so.

It is said that the best way to learn Arabic is through Arabic, so why
the current translation of the***Ājurrūmiyyah*** . There is no doubt
about the truth of this statement but considering that a lot of Arabic
beginners do not know Arabic to start off with let alone being taught
Arabic grammar - a highly intellectually demanding subject - in the
medium of Arabic. There is no harm in trying to understand highly
complex grammatical concepts in one’s mother tongue especially during
the initial stages but one should always aspire to understand them in
the original language. At most one’s mother tongue should serve as a
stepping stone and not as a permanent replacement for Arabic as a medium
of instruction for not only does it severely slow down the Arabic
learning process but also defeats the whole purpose of learning Arabic
in the first place - which is to become proficient in its use. Unless
one’s intention is merely to understand Arabic theoretically and not
communicate it practically it would suffice learning it in one’s mother
tongue.

Thus, this present translation was never intended to replace Arabic as
the medium of instruction but only to facilitate Arabic beginners
getting a handle on Arabic grammar since too often have I witnessed how
many of them struggle to come to grips with basic grammatical concepts
with the result that a number of them develop a dislike for Arabic
grammar and even drop out eventually. Furthermore, even though this work
constitutes a translation it is only so in part for I try throughout to
use the Arabic grammatical terms instead of their English counterparts
only using the English equivalent when the term is introduced for the
first time and even here I place the English term between brackets after
the Arabic term indicating thereby the primacy of the Arabic term.
Moreover, I have written all the Arabic terms in bold once again
emphasising thereby their importance. Also, as I have mentioned before
that the translation does not constitute an autonomous and
self-contained text but should be used in conjunction with the Arabic.
In fact, the Arabic text should form the primary text of study and the
translation only serve to clarify and explain its difficult parts.

I have also purposely tried to avoid the use of highly technical
linguistic terms - the kind used by Wright and Howell - since the aim is
to clarify and simplify the Arabic text and not to obscure and
complicate it further by using language just as intelligible to the
Arabic beginner as the Arabic itself if not more. In cases where it was
necessary to use such terms I have always endeavoured to explain their
import.


