The Chapter on Identifying the ‘ALĀMĀT AL-I‘RĀB
===============================================

**For Raf‘ there are four ‘Alāmāt (signs): the Ḍammah, the Wāw, the Alif
and the Nun.**

As for the Ḍammah it is an ‘Alāmah of Raf‘ in four places:

in the Ism Mufrad (singular noun)[^22]

the Jam‘ Taksīr (broken plural)

the Jam‘ Mu’annath Sālim (sound feminine plural), and

the Fi‘l Muḍāri‘ (present/future tense) that does not have anything
attached to its ending[^23] .

[E.g. يَسْأَل ُ المدرس ُ والطلاب ُ والطالباتُ    (The teacher, the male
students and the female students ask)]

As for the Wāw it is an ‘Alāmah of Raf‘ in two places:

in the Jam‘ Muđakkar Sālim (sound masculine plural), and

in the Asmā’ Khamsah[^24] (five nouns), and they are:

أبو ك                         (Yourfather )

أخو ك                        (Youbrother )

حمو ك                        (Youfather-in-law )

فو ك              (Yourmouth )

ذو مالٍ          (Possessor of money/wealth)

[E.g. جاء المدرسُو نَ وأبُو ك   (The teachers and your father came)]

As for the Alif it is an ‘Alāmah of Raf‘ in the Tathniyat al-Asmā’ (dual
noun) specifically.

[E.g. جاء المدرسا ن والدرستا ن   (The two male teachers and the two
female teachers came)]

As for the Nūn it is an ‘Alāmah of Raf‘ in the Fi‘l Muḍāri‘ that has the
following (Ḍamā’ir: personal pronouns) suffixed to it:

the Ḍamīr Tathniya (personal pronoun of duality), or

the Ḍamīr Jam‘ (personal pronoun of the masculine plural) or

the Ḍamīr al-Mu’annathah al-Mukhāṭabah (personal pronoun of second
person feminine singular).

[E.g. تجلسان يا طالبان ، تجلسون يا طلاّب، تجلسين يا طالبة   (You two
students are sitting, You students are sitting, You female student are
sitting)]

For Naṣb there are five ‘Alāmāt: the Fatḥah, the Alif the Kasrah, the
Yā‘ and the Ḥađfu an-Nūn (dropping of the Nūn).

As for the Fatḥah it is an ‘Alāmah of Naṣb in three places:

in the Ism Mufrad (singular noun)

the Jam‘ Taksīr (broken plural), and

the Fi‘l Muḍāri‘ when it is preceded by a Nāṣib[^25] and does not have
anything attached to its ending.

[E.g. لن أسألَ المدرسَ والطلاّبَ   (I will not ask the teacher and the
students)]

As for the Alif it is an ‘Alāmah of Naṣb in the Asmā’ Khamsah like

رأيتُ أبا ك وأخا ك   (I saw your father and your brother)

And what resembles that.

As for the Kasrah it is an ‘Alāmah of Naṣb in the Jam‘ Mu’annath Sālim.

[E.g.    سألتُ المدرساتِ (I asked the female teachers)]

As for the Yā’ it is an ‘Alāmah of Naṣb in:

the Tathniyah

the Jam‘ (Muđakkar Sālim).

[E.g. سألتُ الطالبَيـ نِ والمدرسِيـ نَ   (I asked the two students and
the teachers)]

As for the Ḥađfu an-Nūn it is an ‘Alāmah of Naṣb in the Af‘āl Khamsah
whose Raf‘ is with the Tabāt an-Nūn (fixing of the Nūn).

![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image001.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image002.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image003.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image004.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image005.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image006.gif)[E.g.
لن تجلسان يا طالبان،لن تجلسون   يا طلاّب،لن تجلسيـن   يا طالبة

For Khafḍ there are three ‘Alāmat: the Kasrah, the Yā‘ and the Fatḥah.

As for the Kasrah it is an ‘Alāmah of Khafḍ in three places:

in the Ism Mufrad Munṣarif (fully-declinable/triptote singular noun)

the Jam‘ Taksīr Munṣarif (fully-declinable/triptote broken plural), and

the Jam‘ Mu’annath Sālim.

[E.g. سلّمْتُ على المدرسِ والطلابِ والطالباتِ   (I greeted the teacher,
the male students and female students)]

As for the Ya’ it is an ‘Alāmah of Khafḍ in three places:

in Asmā’ Khamsah

in the Tathniyah, and

the Jam‘ (Muđakkar Sālim).

[E.g. سلّمْتُ على أبي ك والطالبَيـ نِ والمدرسِيـ نَ   (I greeted your
father, the two students and the teachers)]

As for the Fatḥah it is an ‘Alāmah of Khafḍ in the al-Ism allađī lā
yanṣarifu (the noun which is not fully-declinable/not triptote)[^26] .

[E.g. سلّمْتُ على أحمدَ وعلماءَ من مصرَ   (I greeted Ahmad and scholars
from Egypt)]

For Jazm there are ‘Alāmatān (two signs): the Sukūn and Ḥađf.

As for the Sukūn it is an ‘Alāmah of Jazm in the Fi‘l Muḍāri‘ Ṣaḥīḥ
al-Ākhir (present/future tense verb that has a strong/sound ending).

[E.g.  لم أَسْأَلْ   (I did not asked)]

As for Ḥađf it is an ‘Alāmah of Jazm in:

the Fi‘l Muḍāri‘ Mu‘tall al-Ākhir (present/future tense verb that has a
weak ending)

in the Af‘āl whose Raf‘ is with the Tabāt an-Nūn.

![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image007.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image004.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image008.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image009.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image001.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image002.gif)[E.g.
يا محمد، لم تدعُـو ولم ترمِـي ولم تنسَـى  (Muhammad, you did not call,
you did not

throw and you did not forget)]

![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image002.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image001.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image010.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image011.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image011.gif)![](books/0791-science_of_arabic_grammer/images/image010.gif)[E.g.
لم تجلسان يا طالبان لم تجلسون يا طلاّب، لم تجلسيـن يا طالبة،

(You female student did not sit, You male students did not sit and You
two students did not sit)]


