The Author's Preface
====================

**THE EXAMPLE COMMENTARY IN BRIEF**

The greatest capital that we Muslims have, is the GLORIOUS QURA"N. Our
gnosis and knowledge, the commandments, living programmes, Islamic
politices, and the way of approach to God, and all and all; we find them
in this Great Divine Book. Therefore it is incumbent upon all the
Muslims, to get better acquainted with this great religious book they
have.

On the other hand; the fame of Islam has widely spread all over the
GLOBE, partly due to the Muslims late vigilance and wakefulness, and
partly due to the Islamic Revolution of Iran. This widely echoed name,
has aroused the sense of investigation and research, in the non -
Muslims who now like to know more and more about Islam. Therefore, at
present, there is a great demand for the translations and the
commentaries of the Holy QURA"N, throughout the world. Unfortunately
such a wide demand has not been satisfied yet.

Fortunately the presence of the HOLY QURA"N, all over in the Muslim
societies, throughout the world and especially in our own country
(Iran), daily increases. Expert reciters of the Book; those who keep it
in their memory, and the well versed commentators are not few or rare.
The commentary of QURA"N is now turned to an important classic field of
learning in the THEOLOGICAL SCHOOLS OF QOM, and for this purpose the
EXAMPLE COMMENTARY was prepared, which is expressive, simple to
understand, deep in meanings and meanwhile it is a work, up to date.
This was aimed to answer the problems of the day and to satisfy the
necessities of our time. Perhaps this is why the book has been received
by the people of various kinds, with ardent interest and hot
enthusiasm.

A big group of scholars, and learned commentators, well versed in
QURA"N, who are mostly Theological School Teachers of Qom; such as the
masters and professors:

MOHAMMAD REZA SHTIANIA" - MOHAMMAD JAAFAR EMA"MI - DAWOOD ELHA"MI -
ASADULLAH IMANI - ABD. ALRASUL HASANI - SAID HASAN SHOJAEE - SAID
NUROLLAH TABA" TABA"EE - MAHMUD ABDULLAHI - MOHSEN GHERA"ATI and
MOHAMMAD MOHAMMADI (ESHTEHARDI),worked hard for a periode of fifteen
years full time, to create this important and voluminous work.

[ 14 ]

Of course their weariness was entirely removed by the interest and warm
attention that people paid to their work. And now this hope is induced
in them that if God Speeds, it might be a work accepted in the presence
of Allah.


The FARSI VERSION of the BOOK has repeatedly gone under print. (more
than ten times so far) The ORDU TRANSLATION too, in twenty seven
volumes, has had several prints.

The Arabic Version also, which is named ALAMSAL, has recently been
published in BEIRUT, and else where is the Islamic countries.
Translation of the Book to English language is presently at hand, and we
hope that it shall very soon appear among the press.

When the complete work was published in 27 volumes, a group of people
demanded to have a concise of it, in order to get access to the
meanings; quicker, and by a less price, and else, in some teaching
classes to have a brief of the whole lot, for teaching and discussion.
It made us to consider the request, and intend to summarise the 27
volumes, reducing them to only five - a work that was not so easy to
do.

Then it happened that professor AHMAD ALI BA"BA"EE accepted the
responsibility of this hard and laborious job.

His ability and skill had already been proved to me for arranging the
Example Commentary in sequence of different subjects in a couple of
years.

I too, very often looked the work over and controlled it and gave
advices as far as I could, and many thanks to our Merciful Lord for the
fruitful results that has been obtained in the form of an expressive
translation of the text, and commentary in brief, for those who want to
use it as a reference. I have named it:

**THE EXAMPLE COMMENTARY IN BRIEF**

I thank Mr. BA"BA"EE too, for the excellent and useful work that he has
fulfilled, and hope it to be accepted by the learned and those who have
great interest in the HOLY QURA"N; and may it be a reservation for all
of us in the Dooms Day.

THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL OF QOM NA"SER MAKA"REM SHIRAZI

21 - 3 - 1999 = 1 - 1- 1373

[ 15 ]

**THE TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE**

**AS FOR THE TEXT**

The Glorious Qura"n is the Word of God. I am of opinion that no mortal
translator like me, can convey the whole and exact meaning of the verses
with so many dimensions that they have, into another language, The best
solution to this problem is to read and comprehend the Book in its
Arabic version. This is why I have inscribed the Arabic text as the
topic of my work.

RUMI says:-

If we cannot draw the whole lot of the sea water, We may drive enough
to satisfy our thirst. In translating the Arabic Text, for every verse
and even for every Phrase, I have referred to all the existing important
English Translations Such as that of Sale'sِArthur J.ArberyِN.J.
DawoodِAbdullah Yusef Ali and Dr M.H. Shakir. I have collated and made a
careful comparison of their translation and the original Arabic text to
the meaning of which I am not much unaware. In this comparison my scale
and criterion has been the Farsi translation of His Holiness Ayatollah
AL-OZMA MAKAREM SHIRAZI. Besides; I have added the especial views of his
Holiness in between parenthesis as he himself has done in his Persian
version.

In this respect I have done my best, and only for the sake of God, and
nothing else; so as to produce a clean, correct, and expressive
translation of the Holy Book that has been my favourite throughout my
life.

I have avoided entirely the customary Archaic language, and have made
my translation in the simplest form, and the most correct meaning as I
could, so that the common people speaking English and even the laymen
might read and understand the intention of their Lord God. But how far
have I succeeded to approach my goal? This is a matter to be judged by
the dear and learned reader.

[ 16 ]

**AS FOR THE COMMENTARY**

The Example Commentary of His holiness is a great voluminous collective
work done by 15 scholars and learned commentators, all well versed in
Qura"n Who worked hard for some 10 years under the direct control and
direction of Ayatollah Al-Ozma-Makarem.

Therefore the life of an individual like me will not suffice to perform
even half of the translation. On the other hand his holiness has written
this great book for the Persians who are almost all Shiites, and also
they believe in the matter. But I am translating it for the English
speaking world who are almost all Christians, and among them we may find
many people who hate Islam, and don't believe most of the matters.

To this effect my translation is focused on a certain Quotations from
the whole work, that may illustrate what is the truth about Islam; who
is the God that We Moslems worship, and what about Resurrection Day. And
matters that are common to all in Islam. And these quotations I have
translated and written in my own special literature and simple language
for common people. As a matter of fact the Soul and spirit of the
translation belongs to his Holiness Ayatollah Makarem Shirazi; and its
body has been shaped and formed by me.

Therefore, when comparing the translation with the original work, in
the first glance both may look different; while a deeper look will
prove, that I have taken the meanings from his holiness and illustrated
it with my pen and handi work in order to show in brief; what Islam and
Qura"n is. However I hope this abridgment may show the grandeur of the
whole work of 27 volumes.

**Mansoor Aminy-Baghbadorani**

[ 17 ]

**FA"TIHA = THE OPENING**

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE
MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

الْحَمْدُ ِللهِ رَبِّ الْعَـلَمِينَ(( 1 )) 1- PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH,
LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS

الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ(( 2 )) 2- THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

مَـالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ (( 3 )) 3- THE OWNER OF THE DAY OF DOOM

إِيّـاكَ نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ(( 4 )) 4- YOU ALONE WE
WORSHIP, AND YOU ALONE WE PRAY FOR HELP

اهْدِنَا الصِّرَ طَ الْمُستَقِيمَ(( 5 )) 5- GUIDE US IN THE STRAIGHT
PATH

صِرَ طَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ غَيْرِ الْمَغْضُوبِ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلاَالضَّآلِّينَ(( 6 )) 6- THE PATH OF THOSE WHOM YOU HAVE FAVOURED.


NOT OF THOSE WHO HAVE INCURRED YOUR WRATH.

NOR OF THOSE WHO ARE ASTRAY.

[ 18 ]


**THE COMMENTARY**

**SPECIALTIES OF THE OPENING CHAPTER**

1- It consists of seven verses, and it was revealed in Mecca. This
chapter differs with the other chapters, in melody, tone, and harmonics,
and through it, God has taught His servants the method of supplication
and prayer. It begins with the praise of Allah, continues with the
belief in the resurrection, and ends with the demands and requests of
the servant.

2- The opening chapter is said to be the basis of the Holy Qura"n. The
prophet called it: - "MOTHER OF THE BOOK" and his Holiness said to
JABIR- IBN- ABDULLAH ANSARI: \`\`Do you want me to teach you the best of
the SURAS, (CHAPTERS) that God has revealed in His Book?''

"Yes" \`\`he said, May me and my parents be thy ransom.'' The prophet
then taught him the OPENING CHAPTER OF QURA"N; and added that, the
chapter may cure every disease other than death. Perhaps this is why,
IBN-ABBAS, the famous commentator has said: \`\`everything has a
foundation, and the OPENING CHAPTER, is the foundation of the HOLY
QURA"N.''

3- The OPENING CHAPTER has been bestowed upon the prophet as a great
gift, and it is compared with the whole BOOK, where Allah says: - \`\`We
have bestowed upon you the seven often repeated verses, as well as the
Great QURA"N.'' QURA"N - S 15:87

**THE CONTENTS**

The contents of the OPENING CHAPTER may be divided in two parts: - A
part consisting of the praise of God, and the other states the
necessities and needs of His servants. It is narrated from the prophet
that God says: - \`\`I have divided the opening chapter between Me and
My servant, who has the right of asking me for his wishes.''

**VIRTUES**

It is also narrated that the prophet said: \`\`Rehearsing of the
OPENING CHAPTER, equals the rehearsal of two third of the whole Book.''
In this relation Imam Sadiq (AS) too, has said: \`\`SATAN moaned
painfully in four occasions: [ 19 ]

A) When he was banished from the presence of God.

B) When he was driven out of the GARDEN OF BLISS. (PARADISE)

C) When Mohammad was assigned for his prophetic mission.

D) And when the OPENING CHAPTER OF QURA"N revealed.''

**WHY SO NAMED?**

\`FATIHA' means beginning, starting, or opening. any thing, and here it
refers to the Book - the Holy QURA"N'S opening chapter. We have enough
evidences that the chapter was so called by the prophet himself; and
opens a window towards an important Islamic problem - that which some
people may think that QURA"N has been compiled and collected after the
prophet, and in the life time of either ABUBKR, OMAR, or OTHMA"N. But
the name FATIHA that has been the same in prophet's lifetime and even
since then, is a proof of the prophet's care and watchful attention on
the Holy Book. We have clear cut documents, and proofs that the
collected work which we have it now in our hands, was compiled as it is,
and arranged in this sequence by the order of the prophet himself.

ALI- IBN- IBRAHIM the great commentator of QURA"N who lived in the
third century A.H. has narrated from Imam Sa"diq (AS) that the prophet
ordered his cousin, son-in-low, and vicegerent, HAZRAT ALI (AS) to
collect and compile the different parts of QURA"N, which were then
written upon pieces of silk, paper, skins of animals, and etc.

The narrator adds that \`\`HAZRAT ALI (AS) fulfilled the commandment,
sincerely collecting the scattered pieces and parts. He then wrapped all
the parts in a yellow cloth and took them for compilation.''

Besides that; the famous tradition of the prophet, which is related by
many, and through successive witnesses; saying: \`\`I shall go and leave
among you two heavy things: the BOOK OF ALLAH, and my kins.'' Is an
enough proof that QURA"N had already been compiled in prophet's time.

As for the view that some say: \`\`HAZRAT ALI (AS) compiled the Book,
after the prophet'' It Should be known that, what was collected by
HAZRAT ALI (AS), after the prophet, was not merely the text of QURA"N:
It rather was a collection consisting of the text with various comments
of the prophet about different verses, and the historical evidences, and
some details and reasons for the revelations, and etc.

[ 20 ]

**THE COMMENTARY**

**IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE**

It is customary and established by common usage, to start any important
and valuable work in the name of some man of dignity in order to connect
the work to him, and commend it to his care and support.

If so, is it not much better to start everything in the name of HIM who
dies not, and is everlasting in life, power, and might - an everlasting
substance and unchanging essence, whom mortality can never touch!?

Such an eternal being is none, other than ALLAH, the Only one God.
Therefore everything and every work should begin in HIS sacred name, and
His help be prayed for. This is why the HOLY QURA"N too, commences with
the verse:

**IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE.**

The prophet has said: \`\`Any important work that begins not with the
name of God, may not have a good end.'' Imam Ba"gher (AS) too, said: It
is becoming to start every work - big or small - in the name of Allah,
so as to be blessed. To make it short; continuation of a deed depends
upon its relation and connection to God. To this effect, Allah orders
His apostle to start his teachings and preachings in the name of Allah
through the following revelations:

\`\`Proclaim! (READ) in the name of your Lord and Cherisher, Who
created - created man out of a clot of congealed blood.'' QURA"N - S
96:1-2

And according to the following verse; NOAH said to his followers:

\`\`Embark you on the ARK, in the name of Allah, be it sailing or at
rest, for my Lord is Oft: Forgiving, Merciful.'' QURA"N - S 11:41 And
SOLOMON too, began his letter written to the QUEEN- OF- SHEBA in the
name of Allah:

\`\`SHE (The QUEEN OF SHEBA) said: \`\`You chiefs! Here is delivered to
me a

[ 21 ]

letter worthy of respect. It is from SOLOMON, and is in the name of
Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate.'' QURA"N - S 97:30 On such a
basis all chapters of the HOLY QURA"N begin with the said verse: (IN THE
NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE) There is no doubt that
the verse is one of those of the OPENING CHAPTER, and all the other
chapters, (EXCEPT THE ONE NAMED REPENTANCE - SURA - 9). This has been so
arranged by the prophet, and has always been such, and a habitual usage
of Muslims when reciting QURA"N, to commence with the verse which they
call it BESMELEH = IN THE NAME OF ALLAH. This matter is so clear that
once MOA"VIYEH did not recite it in his prayer! Then some of the Helpers
and Emigrants, who were present there, objected and ironically said to
the Khalif: You stole it or forget it!?

**ALLAH**

Allah is the most comprehensive and collective among the names of God,
pointing at substance rather than the attributes. The different names of
God that are mentioned in the HOLY QURA"N, each of them denotes a part
of the attributes of God. The only name that refers to His Essence as
well as His attributes, is Allah. Other names of God are often used as
adjectives to qualify Allah; such as the Merciful Allah, the Forgiving
Allah, the Almighty Allah, and etc.

Through the following verse of QURA"N, many such qualifications are
attributed to Allah: \`\`He, is Allah besides whom there is no God. The
Sovereign, the Holy, the Peaceable, the Secure, the Mighty, the
Compeller, the Supreme. Glory be to Allah, above the partners that they
attribute to HIM.'' QURA"N - S 59:23

A reason for comprehensiveness of Allah is that only through the phrase
(LA" ELAH ELL ALLAH = NO ALLAH BUT ALLAH) one can convert and become a
Muslim.

**GOD'S MERCY - COMMON AND SPECIAL**

A group of commentators understand RAHMA"N, (TRANSLATED MERCIFUL) to
mean and denote Allah's common Mercy, that covers all

[ 22 ]

His creatures, whether a friend or enemy; a faithful, or a heathen -
all and all. As for the other derivative name RAHIM, (TRANSLATED
COMPASSIONATE) reveals Allah's SPECIAL MERCY and favour, which is
dedicated to His obedient and faithful servants.

Here, a point worthy of note is that: Throughout the HOLY QURA"N, the
word RAHMA"N is used in ABSOLUTE MODE to mean unlimited and
unrestricted, thus showing the commonness of the word; but RAHIM is used
especifically which denotes being bound to its peculiarity.

**WHY HIS MERCY, AND NOT OTHER ATTRIBUTES?**

True that God has infinite attributes that most of them could be used
at the beginnings, for a blessing, but MERCIFUL is used and emphasized
here for its universal effect and light, that covers all creatures and
creations, which may save those entangled in difficulties. Let us hear
this from God Himself in HIS HOLY BOOK: \`\`He (i.e. GOD) said: \`\`I
will afflict with my punishment whom I will. But My MERCY extends to
everything. Soon I will ordain that MERCY for those who avoid evil
deeds, and pay their due alms-tax, and those who believe in our
signs.''

QURA"N - S 7:156

We even see the prophets, such as HUD, grasping to the Mercy of God,
when they are in trouble and hardship, in order to be rescued: \`\`We
saved HIM, (HUD) and those who adhered to him by OUR MERCY, and we cut
off the roots of those who rejected our signs, and were not believers.''
QURA"N - S 7:72

1- PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH, LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS After the
commencement in the name of Allah the Merciful, one has to remind of the
great ORIGINATOR of the universe and His infinite and immeasurable
bounties and favours, through which he may know HIM better, and worship
HIM more sincerely, under the stimulus of praise and gratitude. When I
say the STIMULUS, its because when man gets a gift or a favour, soon he
wants to know WHO the giver is?! and by instinct, he feels a natural
tendency to be grateful and to give his thanks to the giver. This is why
ideologists say that thanks giving to the donor is

[ 23 ] incumbent by the acceptor through the natural command of
instinct.

That we say: Our guide in the theistical knowledge is HIS BOUNTIES, is
because the best way to know the origin and originator, is to study and
ponder upon the rules and the secrets of the creation, specially upon
those things connected with man's life. Such are the reasons that the
OPENING CHAPTER is then commenced with the PRAISE that belongs only to
God.

A- Every man who is a source of goodness and blessings or any prophet
and Divine Leader who lightens and brightens the hearts with religious
guidance - Any Gracious who grants and bestows graces - Any physician
who dresses a wound, or cures a painful disease - all of them have their
power and ability from the All-Mighty, and therefore, when they are
praised for what they do, they owe their praises to their Lord and
Cherisher. So is the sun, if it shines, and is praised for radiating
light - or the clouds, if they rain down, and are praised - and the
earth if it is extolled for giving us so many provisions and products -
all such praises and glorifications, belong to Allah the cherisher of
them all.

B- A remarkable point is, that the praise is not only at the beginning
and commencement of affairs and works, or whatever, but it should also
be ended with the praise of God, as we are instructed by the HOLY
QURA"N:

\`\`(THERE IN THE PARADISE), Their prayer will be; GLORY TO YOU LORD!
And their greetings is, \`PEACE!' and they end their prayers in; (PRAISE
BELONGS TO ALLAH, LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS).''

QURA"N - S 10:10

C- As for the ARABIC word RAB, (TRANSLATED TO LORD & CHERISHER)
Principally it means the owner of something who cherishes and nurtures
it, with care and affection. D- As for the ARABIC word LAMINEA",
(TRANSLATED TO WORLDS) It is the plural of LAMA", (WORLD) and denotes
the whole UNIVERSE.

**2- THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE**

The meaning of the word was given in a previous paragraph. What is to
be added here is that: these two attributes of Allah are

[ 24 ]

repeated at least for 30 times in our daily prayers. This is to say
that; we praise Allah for HIS MERCY, at least 60 times a day. and we
should therefore take a lesson in order to be kind and merciful in our
morals and ethicals, as our Lord behaves so with all His creatures.
Another point worthy of note is that: When we say we are the Servants of
Allah, we should not bring into mind and connote, the ancient slaves and
their cruel masters and merciless slave - holders. It rather denotes
that in spite of power and authority we should be kind, merciful, and
compassionate to all the creatures, as our Lord is so with us all.

**3- THE OWNER OF THE DAY OF DOOM**

The second important tenet of Islam is belief in the resurrection day,
and that Allah holds for HIMSELF the ownership of that DAY exclusively.
Here by GOD'S OWNERSHIP is meant, His influence, predominance, and
ascendancy over everything in that Day of judgement and justice - the
day in which man stands in the presence of his real OWNER, and real
Lord, Who can see and feel all that he has done, or said, even his
thoughts! Man shall come to know that nothing is lost or forgotten,
though it be as small as the head point of needle! Then it is he who has
to answer for his responsibilities and deeds.

Without doubt, the ownership of God in all the existing worlds, is a
real and absolute ownership, and not something relative or for the time
being.

One may ask: \`\`Why should we call HIM the owner of the DAY OF DOOM,
while He is the absolute, owner of all things?'' The answer is: Though
Allah is the owner of both this world, and Hereafter, but in the
hereafter, His ownership is more open and obvious to the sense and
sight. There; all the material relations and connections are cut out,
and the temporary and relative ownerships are abolished, and everything
is openly in the hands of God. No one is seen to have anything of his
own. (except his good or bad deeds)

HIS BELIEF IN RESURRECTION, prevents man from going astray, and doing
evil, and so is the effect of the daily PRAYERS. It is narrated that
Imam Sajjad (AS) was repeating the verse (OWNER OF THE DAY OF DOOM)

[ 25 ]

so much; and so that it seemed his soul would fain have gone out of his
body! As for the compound word YOMODDIN (DAY OF DOOM), it has always the
meaning of RESURRECTION DAY, throughout the HOLY QURA"N. In the other
phases the ARABIC word \`DIN' may mean \`RELIGION' OR \`REWARD', and
this is why sometimes the DAY OF DOOM is interpreted as the \`DAY OF
REWARD'.

**4- YOU ALONE WE WORSHIP, AND YOU ALONE WE PRAY FOR HELP MAN IN THE
PRESENCE OF GOD**

Through the fifth verse of the OPENING CHAPTER, it seems as if man
addresses his Merciful and Compassionate Lord, confessing his
submission, and his being a mere and sincere servant, and meanwhile he
prays for God's help by saying:

\`\`YOU ALONE WE WORSHIP, AND YOU ALONE WE PRAY FOR HELP'' The
preceding verses aimed at the monotheism and oneness of God's substance
and attributes, and this one drives at the oneness of His worship and
acts. By oneness of worship, we mean, no one ever deserves to be
worshipped except God, and our real submission and obedience should be
His. BY ONENESS OF ACTS, we understand that our Lord, Allah, is the only
real effective and effectual BEING. Of course it is not so that we
should ignore the natural causes and means - we ought to know that any
effective cause or means has its effectiveness by the WILL, and by the
DECREE of God.

**5- GUIDE US IN THE STRAIGHT PATH**

After submission to the will and wish of God; the servant's first
request is to be guided to the straight path, which is the road to
piety, purity, good deeds and justice. A question arises here, that,
\`\`Why should we always ask our Lord, in our daily prayers to, GUIDE US
IN THE STRAIGHT PATH? Does it not mean that we are always astray and
misled?''

[ 26 ]

Our answer to the question is:

Man, even in the straight path of guidance, is always exposed to erring
and slip - every now and then, he may be seduced by devils, and lose his
balance and fall down! He therefore has to commend himself to the care
of God, and pray for truth and evolution. As a matter of fact, guidance
means to lead the man in the path of EVOLUTION, and gradual perfection,
leaving in behind of him, all deficiencies and weak points. Absolute and
ideal perfection, only belongs to God, and it seems not so strange even
when we see the prophets and the saints too, pray for GOD'S GUIDANCE!
Imam Sadiq (AS) has understood the above VERSE to mean: \`\`Guide us to
a path that leads us to Your LOVE and PARADISE, and protect us from our
caprices and freaks.''

**WHAT IS THE STRAIGHT PATH?**

The straight path is the true religion of God, and obeying God's
commandments, as it is found in the HOLY QURA"N through the following
verse: \`\`Say my Lord has guided me to the STRAIGHT PATH which is a
right religion - the path trod by ABRAHAM, a man of pure faith, who was
not of the polytheists.'' QURA"N - S 6:161

**6- THE PATH OF THOSE WHOM YOU HAVE FAVOURED. NOT OF THOSE WHO HAVE
INCURRED YOUR WRATH. NOR OF THOSE WHO ARE ASTRAY.**

THE TWO DEVIATED LINES:

Guide us in the path of those whom you have favoured. (BY THY
GUIDANCE - THY GRACE - THY APOSTLES - BY KNOWLEDGE AND ACTS - BY STRIVE
AND MARTYRDOM and etc.) Not the path of those who have incurred your
wrath. Nor of those who left the path of truth and went astray.

In fact, God commands us by that verse to seek, and pray for the path
trodden by the apostles and men of piety and good deeds, and, HE [ 27
]

strictly warns us that there are always two divided lines at the sides
of the STRAIGHT PATH - the line of those who have incurred God's wrath;
and the line of those who have gone astray.

**WHO ARE THE FAVOURED ONES?**

The favoured servants of God are introduced through the following
verses of QURA"N: \`\`And whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle, they are
with those whom God HAS favoured, such as the PROPHETS, THE TRUTHFULS,
THE ,MARTYRS, THE RIGHTEOUS, and what a good friends are they.''
QURA"N - S 4:69


