Martyrs Are Alive
=================

The argument from perseverance and prayer proceeds now to the eternal
life of the martyrs, that begins with their death in the way of Allah,
saying: \`\`And don't say of those who are slain for the cause of God
\`THEY ARE DEA'D (NO! IT IS NOT SO AS YOU THINK) They are indeed alive,
though you perceive them not.'' Basically in every movement, there are
some timids and cowards, who pull themselves back of the scene, and
discourage others too, through their own lack of courage.

In the life time of the prophet, some of the swerving timids, by
showing hypocritical pity for the slain in the battle, they disheartened
the brave Muslims and weakened their intentions saying: \`\`Alas! This
and that died in the battle and they exist no more.'' To these frauds
and deceptive suggestions, God answered: \`\`You should not call those
who have been slain for the cause of Allah as 'Dead' Nay! They are
indeed alive - eternally alive. They are having sustenance and all
necessities for living, in the presence of


[ 166 ]

Their Lord; in contrary to you mortals, who are confined beyond the
high walls of space and time.'' A detail of this matter which is about
the life to come, will be given in S 3: 169.

وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُم بِشَيء مِّنَ الْخَوْفِ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْص مِّنَ
الاَْمْوَلِ وَالاَْنفُسِ وَالَّثمَرَتِ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّـبِرِينَ(( 155 ))
155- AND WE SHALL TEST YOU WITH SOMETHING OF FEAR AND HUNGER AND LOSS IN
PROPERTY AND LIVES AND FRUITS; AND GIVE GOOD NEWS TO THE PATIENTS.

الَّذِينَ إِذَآ أَصَـبَتْهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ قَالُوا إِنَّاللهِ وَإِنَّآ
إِلَيْهِ رَجِعُونَ(( 156 )) 156- THOSE WHO, WHEN AFFLICTED WITH
MISFORTUNE SAY: \`\`WE BELONG TO ALLAH, AND TO HIM WE SHALL RETURN.

أُولئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَتٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ وَأُوْلَـئِكَ
هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ(( 157 )) 157- THOSE ARE THEY ON WHOM ARE BLESSINGS
AND MERCY FROM THEIR LORD, AND THOSE ARE THE RIGHTLY GUIDED ONES.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE WORLD IS A FIELD FOR DIVINE TRIALS
(VERSE NO. 155)**

Now we come to tests and trials, and their various aspects and
different shades, that are discussed in these verses. The Holy Book
says: \`\`We will test you with something of fear and hunger, loss in
goods or lives, or your products and fruits, and give glad tidings to
those who patiently persevere.'' Success in the examinations, may be won
through hard works and perseverance. Therefore the verse ends in the
good news: \`\`And give glad tidings to the patients.''

[ 167 ]

VERSE NO. 156 Here in this verse the patients are introduced as:
\`\`Those who, when afflicted with a misfortune will say: to Allah we
belong, and to Him is our return.''

VERSE NO. 157 Here is mentioned the Grace of God and HIS Mercy by which
the patients and the steadfasts are rewarded saying: \`\`Those are they
on whom descends blessings from Allah, and Mercy, and they are the ones
who are truly guided.''

**NOTES:**

**1- WHY SHOULD GOD EXAMINE HIS SERVANTS?**

The first question that puts its foot forth in this regard, is that an
examiner wants to know something which he knows it not of the examined.
He puts someone under the test, because of his lack of information.
However this comes not true in the case of the All-Knowing and
Omnipotent Creator of the Universe. Why should such an All-Knowing God
put HIS servants under test or exams? In answer to this question we may
say:

TRUE! Man's examination arises from his want of knowledge and lack of
information, but God's trial is not on that account. He tests His
servants in order to nurture and nourish them. To train them and bring
them up. The purpose of God's examination is to increase the skill and
experience, and to disclose and put to work the hidden abilities of Man.
Man goes under the tests of God as a piece of steel goes to the furnace,
for more and further treatments, or it could be taken as similar to
maneuver practiced by the soldiers. They perform a series of various
movements in their maneuver, as training and for the purpose of
developing the skill and abilities of the army, and bringing them up in
art and technical proficiency.

**GOD'S EXAMINATION IS GENERAL**

The system of life in Universe, is the system of evolution and
development. All the moving creatures are traversing the road of

[ 168 ]

evolution and development. Therefore, all the people even the apostles
and prophets have to be tested in order to reach their higher destiny
and position, and to exhibit their natural talents and put to function
their hidden abilities. Allah's tests are of various natures and
qualities, sometimes HE tests His servant through fear, hunger, loss of
property and even loss of life; and sometimes HE may put HIS servants on
trials on account of rank and wealth, strength and health; whatsoever it
be, God's test is common and for all, and it is in fact a means for
development and evolution.

**THE SIGNS OF SUCCESS**

The code and mark of success in the said examinations, according to the
HOLY BOOK is patient perseverance, and being firm and steadfast in
difficulties and misfortunes, meanwhile having reliance on God through
the prayer. Another good means of help in adversity and afflictions is
to know the transitory condition of this mortal life here, which passes
over so quickly, and that this world is merely a passage through which
we have to pass without any delay!

إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَآئِرِ اللهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ الْبَيْتَ
أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا وَمَن
تَطَوَّعَ خَيْراً فَإِنَّ اللهَ شَاكِرٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 158 )) 158- SAFA AND
MARWA ARE AMONG THE SIGNS APPOINTED BY ALLAH. THEREFORE WHOSOEVER MAKES
THE PILGRIMAGE TO THE HOUSE, OR MAKES THE LESSER PILGRIMAGE, THERE IS NO
BLAME OF SIN IF THEY COMPASS THEM ROUND. HE THAT DOES GOOD OF HIS OWN
ACCORD. SHALL BE REWARDED BY ALLAH. BE SURE THAT ALLAH IS GRATEFUL,
ALL-KNOWING.

[ 169 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 158)**

According to the traditions narrated by sonnies as well as Shiites;
ABRAHAM'S wife HAJAR - mother of the infant ISHMAEL, prayed for water in
that hot and dry desert, and in her eager quest round the hills she
found her prayer answered and saw the Zamzam spring. (A DETAIL OF HAJAR
IN SEARCH OF WATER WILL FOLLOW) Later the pagan Arabs had placed a male
and female idol, named, ASAAF and N?ELEH upon the two little mountions
SAFA & MARWA, now absorbed in the city of Mecca.

Then the idolater's superstitious rites around the two idols caused
some offence to the early Muslims, so that they felt some hesitation in
going round these hills and to compass them in their pilgrimage. The
verse came down to say that: \`\`The two mentioned hills are also two of
the sacred monuments, and signs appointed by Allah for the pilgrims to
compass and circumambulate them, and if the ignorant pagans have defiled
them with idols, it won't be a reason for the Muslims to stop performing
their rites.''

**IGNORANT DEEDS SHOULD NOT PREVENT OTHER'S POSITIVE ACTIONS.**

Due to the especial mental state which we hinted to, in the cause of
the revelation above; the verse firstly confirms that; SAFAA and MARWA
are also two of the signs appointed by Allah, and are among the sacred
monuments for the rituals of pilgrimage. So there is no blame on the
pilgrims to encompass these monuments and signs, and the superstitious
rites of the polytheists should never stop Muslims to halt their
religious rites. The two idols on top of the two symbols will not
derogate the least from its virtue and importance.

\* \* \*

1- As we have already mentioned above; SAFAA and MARWA are two small
mountains that are nowadays absorbed in the city of Mecca. Verbally
SAFFA, means a smooth and hard piece of stone, and MARWA means a rough
and hard peice of stone. By SIGNS OF ALLAH, it is meant such monuments
as a permanent object or a mountain that might make people to remember
Allah. [ 170 ]

2- HISTORICAL RECORD OF SAFAA AND MARWA.

According to our traditions; ABRAHAM (AS) had reached his old age
without having a son or a daughter. So he prayed for that, and his lord
answered his prayer, and in that old age of him, his maid servant, HAJAR
begot a son for him who was named ISHMAEL. His first wife SARAA did not
endure seeing her husband having a son from some other woman. Allah
commanded ABRAHAM (AS) to take the baby with his mother, and settle them
in Mecca, which was then a barren and parched desert. ABRAHAM (AS)
obeyed the commandment of his Lord, and took to Mecca and placed them
there. When he proceeded to depart, his wife HAJAR, began to cry saying:
\`\`What can a poor lonely woman, and her innocent infant, in this hot,
dry and barren land do?'' ABRHAM'S heart burnt with sorrow when he heard
the plea of his wife, and in a fervent prayer to God he said: \`\`O, My
Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in a valley without any
cultivation by your sacred house; in order, our Lord, that they may
establish regular prayer. So fill the hearts of some among men with love
towards them and feed them with products so that they may give
thanks.''

HAZRAT ABRAHAM (AS) said so to his Lord, and choked with tears,
committed his wife and child to the care of Allah and went away.... Soon
after; their supply of food and water was finished, and her breast
stopped milking. Then the restlessness of the babe increased her
anxiety. Forgetting her own thirst and hunger, she started the search
for water. She at first searched among the little mountain SAFAA, but
found no water. She looked towards the other opposite mountain MARWA,
and was deceived by the watery appearance of a mirage there. She
traversed to and for, the distance between the two hills, but no result.
Abandoned to despair, she returned to pick up her poor starving baby,
when Lo! At the foot of the child water had gushed out! Hence the famous
fluent spring of ZAMZAM that has satisfied millions of men and animals
so far! Seeing that, she prostrated herself on the ground to give her
thanks to her Merciful Lord.

The lesson here is that all of us, even our children, have to commit
ourselves to the care of Allah, put our trust on HIM, and then strive
hard in the path of truth that God HAS revealed to us through HIS

[ 171 ]

BOOK and prophet. And that we should know the value and importance of
Monotheism for the cause of which so many Muslims have gone as far as
the last beat of their hearts, in order to hand the loaded trust over to
us.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَآ أَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَـتِ
وَالْهُدَى مِن بَعْدِ مَابَيَّنَّـهُ لِلنَّاسِ فِى الْكِتَـبِ
أُوْلَـئِكَ يَلْعَنُهُمُ اللّهُ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّـعِنُونَ(( 159 ))

159- THOSE WHO CONCEAL WHAT WE HAVE SENT DOWN OF CLEAR SIGNS AND
GUIDANCE, AFTER WE HAVE MADE IT CLEAR FOR THE PEOPLE IN THE BOOK, ON
THEM SHALL BE ALLAH'S CURSE, AND THE CURSERS SHALL CURSE THEM TOO.

إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُوا وَأَصْلَحُوا وَبَيَّنُوا فَأُوْلَـئِكَ أَتُوبُ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنَا التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 160 )) 160- EXCEPT THOSE WHO
REPENTED AND AMENDED (THEIR DEEDS WITH GOOD ONES) AND MADE CLEAR.
(WHATEVER THEY CONCEALED OF TRUTH) THEY ARE THOSE TOWARDS WHOM I RELENT,
FOR I AM OFT-RETURNING, MERCIFUL.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 159)**

It is narrated from IBN ABBASS that some of the leading Muslims like;
SAAD-IBN-MOAZ - KHARIJ - IBN - ZAID and MOAZ IBN-JABAL, asked questions
of the Rabbis and learned Jews about the signs and symptoms of our
prophet that were revealed to them through TOWR?T (PENTATEUCH). They
concealed their knowledge and refused to display it and explain to
others who had no access to the book, and hence the verse:

[ 172 ]

**CONCEALMENT OF TRUTH IS FORBIDDEN**

The learned jews and their rabbis are addressed here who withheld their
knowledge from the others; but the verse in a general sense of meaning,
directs the effort and attention of all men of knowledge, and seriously
admonishes those who know something improtant and useful, and withhold
it from others, through their greed, jealousy or other selfish and
devilish intentions:

\`\`Those who conceal what we have sent down of clear signs and
guidance, after we have made it clear for the people in our Book, on
them shall be Allah's curse, and those entitled to curse, like the
angels and mankind. As a matter of fact concealing the truth, enrages
all the adherents and partisans of RIGHT. On the other hand the truth is
not merely confined to the signs of God or to the symptoms of HIS
prophets. To conceal anything reasonable that can help people to realize
prosperity and salvation, lays in the shade of this subject. Even being
silent, and making no utterance when one has to talk and to display a
fact or a figure is a heinous sin that deserves the curse mentioned in
this verse. We also ought to know that a curse is not a matter of words.
It is a terrible spiritual state with deprivation of God's grace and
Mercy.'' VERSE NO. 160

As for the HOLY QUR?N, which is a book of guidance and mercy, it will
never bar the gates of hope, amendment, and progress, in the people's
way. Whatsoever they be, defiled by sin, and contaminated by guilt and
mistakes, the book never lets them to lose hope, and abandon to despair
of their Merciful Lord. Thus the verse here urges to repentance and
amendment saying:

\`\`Except those who repent and amend their evil deeds with. good ones,
and those who disclosed and made clear whatever they concealed of truth;
those are they to whom Allah may trun in Mercy; because Allah is
Oft-Returning, Merciful.''

CONCEALING TRUTH IN ISLAMIC TRADITIONS. According to Islamic
traditions, the learned men who deliberately withhold their useful
knowledge from those who deserve to know and use it, are sternly
condemned. The prophet has said: \`\`If a

[ 173 ]

scholar is asked a question, and he denies to answer, in the
Resurrection Day a bridle of fire will be attached to his mouth.''
HAZRAT ALI (AS) was also asked that: \`\`Among the creatures of Allah;
who is worse than SATAN and PHARAOH?'' He answered: \`\`Corrupt and
vicious scholars who display false, and conceal the facts are worse.
They are the ones that on them is the curse of Allah, and that of the
cursers.''

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ أُوْلَـئِكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ وَالْمَلَـئِكَةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 161
)) 161- SURELY THE INFIDELS WHO DIE DISBELIEVERS; UPON THEM SHALL BE
CURSE OF ALLAH, AND THE ANGELS, AND PEOPLE, ALTOGETHER.

خَـلِدِينَ فِيهَا لاَيُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَهُمْ
يُنظَرُونَ(( 162 )) 162- THEY WILL ABIDE THEREIN (IN THAT CURSE AND
REMOTENESS OF MERCY) FOR EVER, AND NO RESPITE SHALL BE GIVEN THEM.

وَإِلَـهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ لاَّ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الرَّحْمَـنُ
الرَّحِيمُ(( 163 )) 163- YOUR GOD IS THE ONLY ONE GOD. THERE IS NO GOD
BUT HIM. HE IS THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THOSE WHO DIE INFIDEL**

In the preceding verses we saw the results of concealing the truth. Now
the argument comes to those infidels who do not get a chance to repent
or amend their deeds. They continue with their evil deeds until they
meet their end, and die disbelievers.This group of

[ 174 ]

people too, like those who conceal the truth, deserve the curse of
Allah and are subject to it: \`\`- Turely those who reject faith and die
rejecting and disbelievers,on them shall be the curse of Allah, and the
angels, and people altogether.'' VERSE NO. 162

Then it is added that they will abide therein: that is to say, they
abide in the Allah's curse and that of the angels, and people forever;
and no respite or freedom shall be given them. ABIDING IN THE CURSE OF
ALLAH signifies that the curse is not a matter of words; it rather must
be a dreadful spiritual and physical state of torture and torment which
has no end and no respite!

VERSE NO. 163

And owing to the fact that only MONOTHEISM and God's Grace and MERCY
can give an end to all these misfortunes and torments, the verse
implies: \`\`Your God is the only one God; There is no God but Him. HE
is the Merciful the compassionate.'' In order to overcome the terrible
consequences of evil, in this verse stress is laid on God's ONENESS, and
also on HIS grace and Mercy; so that one may seek refuge in them, and
through repentance and amendment of his bad works, obtain the missed
comfort and salvation.

إِنَّ فِى خَلْقِ السَّمَـوَتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَاخْتِلَـفِ الَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ وَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِى تَجْرِى فِى الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنفَعُ
النَّاسَ وَمَآ أَنزَلَ اللهُ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مِن مَّآء فَأَحْيَا بِهِ
الاَْرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ دَآبَّة وَتَصْرِيفِ
الرِّيَـحِ وَالسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخَّرِ بَيْنَ السَّمَآءِ وَالاَْرْضِ
لاََيَـت لِّقَوْم يَعْقِلُونَ(( 164 ))

164-IN THE CREATION OF THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH, AND THE ALTERNATION
OF NIGHT AND DAY, AND THE SHIP THAT SAILS IN THE SEA FOR WHAT PROFITS
PEOPLE, AND THE

[ 175 ]

WATER THAT ALLAH SENT DOWN FROM THE SKY THEREWITH REVIVING THE EARTH
AFTER ITS DEATH, AND SCATTERED IN IT FROM ALL KINDS OF MOVING CREATURES,
AND THE TURNING ABOUT OF THE WINDS, AND THE CLOUDS THAT ARE MADE
SUBSERVIENT BETWEEN THE SKY AND THE EARTH - SURELY IN THESE ARE SIGNS
FOR THE PEOPLE WHO USE THEIR WISDOM.

THE COMMENTARY THE MANIFESTATION OF GOD'S SACRED ESSENCE THROUGHOUT THE
EXISTENCE. (VERSE NO. 164)

In the previous verse, the word ended in the oneness and unity of God.
Here it begins a reasoning and mention of the unity of purpose and
design throughout the nature which may lead to the knowledge of HIS
existence and manifestation of HIS attributes, through their effects.
Let us notify first that, always and everywhere, an arrangement, and a
good order, is the evidence of knowledge and wisdom, and everywhere and
all the time co-operation, and collective action, is a proof of unity of
purpose and oneness of design and designer. Through the verse under
discussion, in the following six parts, effects of the good order and
unity of purpose and design that dominates over the universe, are put to
light:

1- It begins with the glory of the heavens and earth and the wonderful
extensive space around us saying :\`\`In the creation of the heavens and
the earth there are signs for people who use their wisdom.''

scientists have revealed that millions of galaxies like this milky way
of ours, are seen overhead in the spacious space with aided or unaided
eyes, so much so that our own solar system among them seems to be like a
droplet in an ocean! Only in our milky way there moves on their own
orbit hundreds of millions of suns and bright stars!

[ 176 ]

According to recent theories and views of scientific researchers many
thousands of these planets, like our own globe are inhabited and
occupied by living creatures in the widest diversity of nature! Lo! What
a grandeur and greatness, and what a power and ability of creator and
creation! 2- The verse then points at the most striking everyday
phenomenon, that results from interrelations of heaven and the earth;
such as the alternation of day and night, changing regularly in duration
and bringing forth various seasons and the warm and cold latitudes of
our globe - the night for rest and the day for work. In this relation
the verse implies: \`\`And in the alternation of night and day, there
are signs for those people who use their wisdom.''

3- And the stately and huge ships that sail across the oceans for
merchandise and other benefits of man. Thus the sea serves us no less
than the land, hence the verse: \`\`And the ship that sails across the
sea for what profits people.''

4- God's Grace and Favour to man and all the living creatures on the
earth are further exempilfied by the rain which leads to the fertility
of land, and by the verse, Allah calls to our mind the winter's death of
nature, as well as the revivification of the spring, which is a sample
and sign of nature's resurrection and raise of the dead bodies. In this
case the HOLY BOOK says: \`\`And (THINK OF)the water that Allah sent
down from the sky therewith reviving the earth after its death.''

5- The verse also makes a mention of the wonderful winds; driving the
clouds in the skies. It also drives the ships across the seas. The wind
also impregnates and fertilizes the trees, to make them fruitful by
scattering the seeds here and there and this way and that. The wind also
serves to move the polluted air which is rendered unclean, replacing it
with pure air for breathing, which is vital for the life.

6- Once again the clouds are called to mind, that are made as
subservient as slaves, between the sky amd the earth. At mid-day they
temper the glare of the sun, and all the time they affect and control
the

[ 177 ]

dangerous radiations, such as that of the ultraviolate an infrared
rays. Surely in all these signs that were mentioned here, the greatness
and infinite knowledge and extensive mercy of God can be seen.

وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَتَّخِذُ مِن دُونِ اللهِ أَندَادَاً يُحِبُّونَهُمْ
كَحُبِّ اللهِ وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا أَشَدُّ حُبّاً للهِ وَلَوْ يَرَى
الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا إِذْ يَرَوْنَ الْعَذَابَ أَنَّ الْقُوَّةَ للهِ
جَمِيعاً وَأَنَّ الله شَدِيدُ الْعَذَابِ(( 165 ))

165- AND THERE ARE SOME AMONG MEN WHO TAKE TO THEMSELVES COMPEERS APART
FROM GOD, THEY LOVE THEM AS ALLAH IS LOVED. BUT THOSE WHO BELIEVE, LOVE
ALLAH MORE ARDENTLY. O, IF THE OPPRESSORS MIGHT SEE, WHEN THEY SEE THE
CHASTISEMENT, AND THAT THE POWER ALTOGETHER BELONGS TO ALLAH, AND THAT
ALLAH IS STERN IN PUNISHMENT.

إِذْ تَبَرَّأَ الَّذِينَ اتُّبِعُوا مِنَ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوا وَرَأَوُا
الْعَذَابَ وَتَقَطَّعَتْ بِهِمُ الاَْسْبَابُ(( 166 )) 166- WHEN THOSE
WHO WERE FOLLOWED (THE ASTRAYING LEADERS) SHALL DISOWN THEIR FOLLOWERS,
AND THEY SEE THE CHASTISEMENT AND THEIR TIES ARE CUT ASUNDER.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوا لَوْ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً فَنَتَبَرَّأَ
مِنْهُمْ كَمَا تَبَرَّءُوَا مِنَّا كَذَلِكَ يُرِيهِمُ اللهُ
أَعْمَـلَهُمْ حَسَرَت عَلَيْهِمْ وَمَا هُم بِخَرجِينَ مِنَ النَّارِ((
167 )) 167- AND THOSE WHO FOLLOWED SHALL SAY: IF ONLY WE HAD ONE MORE
CHANCE, WE WOULD DISOWN THEM AS THEY HAVE NOW DISOWNED US. THUS ALLAH
SHOWS THEM (THE FRUITS OF) THEIR DEEDS AS (NOTHING BUT) REGRETS; AND
THEY SHALL NOT COME OUT OF THE FIRE.

[ 178 ]

THE COMMENTARY

ESTRANGEMENT OF THE LEADERS OF BLASPHEMY FROM THEIR FOLLOWERS. (VERSE
NO. 165)

The verse addresses those foolish persons who overlook and ignore
everything around us that points to God, and they think that something
else may be equal to HIM! They tread the way of their fancies and
fetishes, and their heart and love is given to their false gods; while
unlike them the heart of the righteous are wholly devoted, and absorbed
in the love of God. the verse begins with: \`\`And there are some among
men who take to themselves compeers apart from Allah, and love them as
Allah is loved! But those who believe, love Allah more ardently.'' The
love of the righteous is rooted by the spring of knowledge wisdom, and
gnostics; while that of the unrighteous, springs out of the, ignorances,
superstitions, and fancies, and this is why the love of the unbeliever
is not durable. So says the verse: \`\`O, if the oppressors could see
the consequences of their deeds, they would see the terrible penalty
that awaits them, and that all power is in Allah's hands, and not in
that of any one else.

VERSE NO. 166

Then the cover of ignorance and of negligence will be removed from
their eyes, and they come to know how far, they are gone astray! In
their terrible misfortune and adversity, they entreat their fetishes and
leaders to give them a hand in salvation, but the leaders deny their
followers and disown them! hence the verse: \`\`When those who were
followed clear themselves from those who followed them, and disowned
their adherents, and they see the penalty, and all relations between
them would be cut off.''

VERSE NO. 167

But to give a useless comfort to their burning heart, and to console
themselves for that dreadful loss to which they are encountered; they
say:

\`\`O! If only we could have one more chance, we would diswon them, as
they have now cleared themselves of us.''

[ 179 ]

They say so but no use! everything is now out of their control. Now the
inevitable consequences of blasphemy and rejection of God has appeared
to them, in its real form, their eyes has been cleared of cover, and
their false and artificial relations with their fetishes have dissolved.
What they see as a result of what they have done is nothing but sorrow
and regret. They have to live in a fire kindled by their own deeds from
which they can never come out.

يَـأَيُّهَا النَّاسُ كُلُوا مِمَّا فِى الاَْرْضِ حَلَـلا طَيِّباً
وَلاَتَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَتِ الشَّيْطَـنِ إنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ((
168 )) 168- O, YOU PEOPLE! EAT OF WHAT IS IN THE EARTH LAWFUL AND GOOD,
AND DO NOT FOLLOW THE FOOTSTEPS OF SATAN, FOR, TO YOU HE IS MANIFEST
ENEMY.

إِنَّمَا يَأمُرُكُم بِالسُّوء وَالْفَحْشَآءِ وَأَن تَقُولُوا عَلَى
اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 169 )) 169- HE COMMANDS YOU TO EVIL AND
INDECENCY, AND TO SAY ABOUT ALLAH WHAT YOU DO NOT KNOW.

THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 168) IBN-ABBASS has said: \`\`Some of
the tribes among the Arabs; such as the tribe of SAGHIF and KHAZAEH, had
declared some kinds of farming and animals unlawful without a reason.
They even foisted the prohibition on, by false ascription to divine
injunctions. (An example of this was taking congealed blood and eating
it fried- (TR. NOTE)

So the verse was sent down to stop them from legislating through
self-interests and fancies.

[ 180 ]

**FOOTSTEPS OF SATAN**

In the preceding verse, polytheism was sternly attacked and admonished.
One of the various kinds of polytheism is the acceptance of legislation
of anyone other than God; hence the verse: \`\`O, People! Eat of what is
in the earth and wholesome, and do not follow the foodsteps of Satan.

VERSE NO. 169 This verse certifies that Satan is a manifest and sworn
enemy of man, who always commands us to do evil and indecency. The
Arabic FAHSHAA translated to INDECENCY, implies evil deeds and deviation
from the straight path of Monotheism. Its shades of meanings are
anything excessive, immoderate, inordinate or extravagant. Anything that
goes beyond limits, is said to be FAHISH. Therefore it means all sorts
of evil deeds and indecency, covered and uncovered.

**GRADUAL DEVIATION**

The word \`FOOTSTEP OF SATAN' implies that the evil deeds and
deviations from the straight path is not a sudden happening. It rather,
occurs gradually and step by step, until its results penetrate deeply in
the hearts and minds of people. In other word Satanic Temptations by and
by inspire evil suggestions in man, and attract his attention step by
step, and therefore the HOLY QUR?N, calls man to be careful and from the
first step follow him not.

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اتَّبِعُوا مَآ أَنزَلَ اللهُ قَالُوا بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَآ أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ ءَابَاءَنَآ أَوَلَوْ كَانَ
ءَابَآؤُهُمْ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ(( 170 ))

170- AND WHEN IT IS SAID TO THEM: FOLLOW WHAT ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN, THEY
SAY: NOT THAT! BUT WE WILL FOLLOW WHAT WE FOUND OUR FATHERS UPON. WHAT?
EVEN THOUGH THEIR FATHERS WERE VOID OF WISDOM AND GUIDANCE?

[ 181 ]

مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا كَمَثَلِ الَّذِى يَنْعِقُ بِمَا لاَ يَسْمَعُ
إِلاَّ دُعَآءً وَنِدَآءً صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْىٌ فَهُمْ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ((
171 )) 171- THE LIKENESS OF THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE IS AS THE LIKENESS OF
ONE (i.e. the prophet's likness in calling disbelievers, is like the one
who calls the sheep, goats and animals in order to rescue them from
danger) WHO CALLS; BUT THEY HEAR NOTHING SAVE A CALL, AND A CRY! (IN
FACT THESE INFIDELS ARE) DEAF, DUMB, BLIND, AND THEY UNDERSTAND NOT
BLINDLY.

**THE COMMENTARY
BLINDLY IMITATING THE FOREFATHERS
(VERSE NO. 170)**

The verse implies the irrational logic of the pagans in prohibiting the
lawful foods, or keeping on with idolatery and fetishes, saying:
\`\`When it is said to them follow the truth that Allah has sent down,
they say: we will follow the ways of our fathers, and what we found them
upon!''

The Holy BOOK, at once condemns such irrational logic and says:
\`\`What? Even though your fathers were void of wisdom and guidance, you
will insist to follow and imitate them?! Had their forefathers been man
of knowledge and understandings they could be used as example for
imitation, but as far as evidences show, they were void of the least
stage of knowledge and wisdom, and even of a common sense. So how should
they want to be as imitative as a monkey from another monkey and not
even a man! This is therefore that sort of cursed imitation that has
always ruined the people, giving them to the wind of destruction.

[ 182 ]
VERSE NO. 171

\`\`The parable of those who reject faith is as if one goatherd or
shepherd who calls the sheep and goats, in order to rescue them from a
serious danger. But they hear nothing save a call or a cry. In fact the
infidels and rejector of faith are deaf, dumb, blind, and understand
nothing, and they will not return to the path of truth and salvation.

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا كُلُوا مِن طَيِّبَـتِ مَارَزَقْنَـكُمْ
وَاشْكُرُوا للهِ إِن كُنتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ(( 172 )) 172- O,
BELIEVERS! EAT OF THE GOOD THINGS THAT WE HAVE PROVIDED FOR YOU! (AS
SUSTENANCE) AND GIVE THANKS TO ALLAH, IF IT IS HE WHOM YOU WORSHIP.

إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْمَيْتَةَ وَالدَّمَ وَلَحْمَ الْخِنزِيرِ
وَمَآ أُهِلَّ بِهِ لِغَيْرِ اللهِ فَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ غَيْرَ بَاغ وَلاَعَاد
فَلاَ إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 173 ))

173- HE HAS FORBIDDEN YOU CARRION, BLOOD, THE FLESH OF SWINE; AND ANY
FLESH THAT IS SLAUGHTERED IN THE NAME OF ANY OTHER THAN ALLAH. BUT
WHOEVER IS CONSTRAINED (TO EAT ANY OF THESE) WITHOUT WILLFUL
DISOBEDIENCE, NOT TRANSGRESSING DUE LIMITS; NO SIN SHALL BE ON HIM; FOR
ALLAH IS OFT-FORGIVING MOST MERCIFUL.

[ 183 ]

THE COMMENTARY CLEAN AND UNCLEAN (VERSE NO. 172)

In this verse and the next one, once again we turn to the proclaiming
of some lawful and wholesome foods as unlawful by the pagan Arabs; but
this time and in this case the believers are addressed: \`\`O, you who
believe! Eat of the good clean foods that Allah has provided for you as
sustenance, and give thanks to Allah, if you indeed worship HIM
alone.''

VERSE NO. 173

Through this verse the foods that are unlawful are mentioned, in order
to close the door of excuses: \`\`He has forbidden you carrion, blood,
the flesh of swine, and any flesh that is slaughtered in the name of any
other than Allah.'' By carrion or dead meat, is meant the animal that
dies of itself and is not expressly slaughtered for food - Then comes
the BLOOD that the Pagan Arabs used to take it congealed and eat it
fried. - The third prohibited is the swine flesh. Naturally the pig is a
filthy animal, and filthy animals taken as food effects the eater. On
the other had swine flesh has more fat than muscle-building materials
and it also is more liable to diseases like TRICHINOSIS than other kinds
of meat. Pig meat is the first food of the Christians while it is as
prohibited to them as it is to Muslims, if they only could believe in
their scriptures. They read in LEVITICUS 11: 7-8 :

\*\*\*\*\*

\`\`Do not eat pigs, they are unclean. They do not chew the cud, but
they have divided hoofs. So do not eat these animals and even do not
touch their dead bodies. The pigs are unclean animals.''

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

The fourth prohibited food is any flesh that is slaughtered in the name
of any other than Allah, like the idols and fetishes.

[ 184 ]

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَآ أَنْزَلَ اللهُ مِنَ الْكِتَـبِ
وَيَشْتَرُونَ بِهِ ثَمَناً قَلِيلا أُوْلَـئِكَ مَايَأكُلُونَ فِى
بُطُونِهِمْ إِلاَّ النَّارَ وَلاَ يُكَلِّمُهُمُ اللهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَـمَةِ وَلاَ يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 174 )) 174-
THOSE WHO CONCEAL ANY PART OF THE BOOK THAT ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN, AND
SELL IT FOR A LITTLE PRICE, THEY EAT NOTHING BUT FIRE IN THEIR
BELLIES.

ALLAH WILL NOT SPEAK TO THEM ON THE DAY OF RESURRECTION, NOR WILL HE
PURIFY THEM, AND THEIRS SHALL BE A GRIEVOUS PENALTY أُوْلَـئِكَ
الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُا الضَّلَـلَةَ بِالْهُدَى وَالْعَذَابَ
بِالْمَغْفِرَةِ فَمَآ أَصْبَرَهُمْ عَلَى النَّارِ(( 175 )) 175- THEY ARE
THOSE WHO BOUGHT ERROR AT THE PRICE OF GUIDANCE, AND TORMENT IN PLACE OF
PARDON. WHAT HAS MADE THEM SO PATIENT TO ENDURE THE FIRE?

ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللهَ نَزَّلَ الْكِتَـبَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّ الَّذِينَ
اخْتَلَفُوا فِى الْكِتَـبِ لَفِى شِقَاق بَعِيد(( 176 )) 176- THAT IS
BECAUSE ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN THE BOOK WITH TRUTH, AND THOSE WHO ARE IN
VARIANCE REGARDING THE BOOK ARE IN WIDE SCHISM.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 176)**

All the commentators believe that in the above three verses the people
of the Book, and in particular the learned Jews are addressed. Before
the advent of our prophet, they used to inform the people, of the signs
and symptoms of the prophet who was foretold and predicted in their
scriptures; but when he appeared and preached his doctrine, they

[ 185 ]

denied him, and concealed their knowledge of him! They did so, because
they were afraid of losing their social religious influences and
advantages through which they piled wealth and were on the carpet for
consultation and judgements, being invited in parties, or leading social
and religious ceremonies.


