Again Reproach For Concealment
==============================

This is an emphasis laid on the verse NO 159 of the same chapter
saying: \`\`Those who conceal Allah's revelation of the BOOK, and
purchase for them a miserable profit; they eat in their stomach naught
but FIRE!'' That is to say; the presents, and the wealth which they
obtain as a reward for concealing the truth are none but burning fire
which is kindled in their very self, burning them in the stomach and
bellies.

Then our HOLY BOOK points at another spiritual chastisement which is
more painful than the said burning fire; and that is God's being cross
with them in the Dooms Day! They shall be deprived even of the words
which the just and Merciful judge speaks to a reasonable culprit, who
shall certainly not win HIS Grace and Mercy; hence the verse: \`\`Allah
will not speak to them on the day of Resurrection, nor will HE purify
them; and their shall be a grievous penalty.''

One of the excellent favour of our Merciful God in the Hereafter is
that God on the basis of HIS INFINITE MERCY may address the faithful and
speak to the believers so that he can apprehend, or grasp it with
understanding. Whether the dialogue and communication is through
inspiration or creation of words; it depends on that existing physical
and spiritual condition, about which we know not too much.

VERSE NO. 175

This verse makes the situation of this group of people more clear, and
shows the consequence of their losing bargain, thus: \`\`They are the
ones who buy error at the price of guidance, and torment in place of
forgiveness. O, What a boldness they show for the FIRE!?''

[ 186 ]

VERSE NO. 176 This verse implies that their dreadful doom is because
Allah has sent down His Message to HIS servant truthfully in the BOOK;
but those who are at variance, and seek causes of dispute in the BOOK,
are far from the purpose, and are in a wide schism.

لَّيْسَ الْبِرَّ أَن تُوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ قِبَلَ الْمَشْرِقِ
وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَلَـكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ ءَامَنَ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ
الاَْخِرِ وَالْمَلَـئِكَةِ وَالْكِتَـبِ وَالنَّبِيِّنَ وَءَاتَى الْمَالَ
عَلَى حُبِّهِ ذَوِى الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَـمَى وَالْمَسَـكِينَ وَابْنَ
السَّبِيلِ وَالسَّآئِلِينَ وَفِى الرِّقَابِ وَأَقَامَ الصَّلَوةَ
وَءَاتَى الزَّكَوةَ وَالْمُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِهِمْ إِذَا عَـهَدُوا
وَالصَّـبِرِينَ فِى الْبَأْسَآءِ وَالضَّرَّآءِ وَحِينَ الْبَأْسِ
أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا وَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْمُتَّقُونَ(( 177
))

177- RIGHTEOUSNESS IS NOT ONLY TO TURN YOUR FACES TOWARDS THE EAST AND
THE WEST. (TRUE) RIGHTEOUSNESS IS RATHER: TO BELIEVE IN ALLAH - AND THE
LAST DAY - AND THE ANGELS - AND THE BOOK - AND THE PROPHETS - AND WHO
GIVES HIS WEALTH FOR THE LOVE OF ALLAH, TO: HIS KINSFOLK - AND ORPHAN -
AND TO THE NEEDIES - AND TO THE WAYFARER - AND TO THOSE WHO ASK - AND TO
RANSOM THE SLAVE - AND TO PERFORM THE PRAYER - AND PAYING THE ALMS-TAX -
AND THOSE WHO FULFIL THEIR COVENANT WHICH THEY HAVE MADE - AND THE
PATIENT IN DISTRESS AND ADVERSARY, AND IN TIME OF WAR - SUCH ARE THE
TRUTHFUL, AND SUCH ARE THOSE WHO AVOID EVIL.

[ 187 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVEALTION**

The change of QIBLA caused a lot of fuss, and much dispute among the
parties, particularly among the Jews and Christians. Some who thought to
have lost respects in that sudden change of QIBLA, began to object and
criticise which was described in S 2: 172. So this verse came down to
show that QIBLA is not that sort of a matter to worth so much ado and
controversies, comparing to so many matters of more importance, which
are signified by the verse.

**THE ROOT AND FOUNDATION OF GOODNESSES**

Here we are given a beautiful description of the righteous and
God-fearing man who first has to fix his gaze on the love of God, and
not to the deadening formalism; like directing the face towards the East
and the West, or with closed eyes pretending to recite some incantations
to God! The verse then implies most important principles and the virtues
that a righteous God-fearing man should have. These are mentioned in six
groups of deeds and actions as follows:

1- Righteousness is not only to direct your faces towards the East and
West. It is right to have faith in Allah - the Last Day - the Angels -
the BOOK - and the prophets. This indicates that faith is not merely a
matter of words. We must do our best to realize the presence and
goodness of God, and to see the Last Day in the First Day of our faith
and work. We should also see God's hand of power working in ourself and
in all, and also God's Message and Messenger should come within our
experience.

2- After the FAITH, comes charity and helping the poor and supportless
people; but such a charity will be of value only, if it proceeds from
the love of God. This is to grant for the sake and love of God a portion
of our income to our kith and kin, to the orphans, to the people who are
in real needs, but who never ask. It is our duty to find them out. And
also to those who ask for help; and to ransom a slave. Slavery has many
forms, and all forms are included in this charity.

[ 188 ]

3- The third characteristic of the righteous man is that he performs
the prayers - all sorts of prayers incumbent upon him.

4- The fourth virtue of the God-fearing man is that he pays the due
alms-tax which is declared incumbent upon him. There are many a one, who
eagerly pay in charity, but they are indifferent and careless in paying
the alms, tax that is incumbent upon them. On the contrary, there are
some who pay their due religious taxes, but give no alms or charity to
the needy and poor who are without support or help. Both of these two
groups of people have their own weak points.

5- The fifth specification of the righteous man is that as the verse
says: \`\`They fulfil their covenants which they have made.'', and
observe faithfully their promises.

A capital of the social life is what we may call it the Mutual
Confidence and trusting one another. In a tradition, we read that a
Muslim will have to observe three conditions whether his opposite party
be a believer or an infidel, and these are:

1) Being faithful to covenants and contracts.

2) Passing over any deposite or trust to its owner, and the third is
respecting father and mother.

6- The sixth important virtue of the righteous and God-fearing man, is
being patient and standing firm in pains and panics and all kinds of
adversities, as the verse wants them to; saying: \`\`And the patient in
distress, and adversity, and in time of war. Such are the truthful, and
such are those who avoid evil deeds.''

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِصَاصُ فِى
الْقَتْلَى الْحُرُّ بالْحُرِّ وَالْعَبْدُ بِالْعَبْدِ وَالاُْنْثَى
بالأُنْثَى فَمَنْ عُفِىَ لَهُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ شَىْءٌ فَاتِّبَاعٌ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَأَدَآءٌ إِلَيْهِ بِإِحْسَـن ذَلِكَ تَخْفِيفٌ مِّن
رَّبِّكُمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ فَمَنِ اعْتَدَى بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَلَهُ عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ(( 178 ))

178- O, YOU WHO BELIEVE! RETALIATION IS PRESCRIBED FOR YOU IN CASES OF
MURDER, FREE MAN FOR FREEMAN, SLAVE FOR SLAVE, FEMALE FOR FEMALE, BUT IF
ANY REMISSION IS

[ 189 ]

MADE TO ANY ONE BY HIS (AGGREIVED) BROTHER (THE RETALIATION BEING
REDUCED TO BLOOD MONEY) LET THE PURSUING BE HONOURABLE, AND LET THE
PAYMENT BE IN KINDLINESS. THIS IS AN ALLEVIATION FROM YOUR LORD AND A
MERCY. THEN WHOEVER EXCEEDS THE LIMITS AFTER THAT, FOR HIM IS A PAINFUL
CHASTISEMENT.

وَلَكُمْ فِى الْقِصَاصِ حَيَوةٌ يَـأُوْلِى الاَْلْبَـبِ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تَتَّقُونَ(( 179 )) 179- AND IN RETALIATION THERE IS LIFE FOR YOU, O,
YOU MEN OF UNDERSTANDING, THAT YOU MIGHT AVOID EVIL

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 178)**

In pre-Islamic era, the Pagan Arabs, for the blood-feud of one
individual, who was killed from their tribes, would kill as many men and
women as they could! They were even willing to massacre a whole tribe to
retaliate a single murder of their own clan. This verse and the next
make it clear that Islam has mollified the horrors of the pre-Islamic
custom of retaliation. Here in the verse, equality and justice, is
prescribed with a strong recommendation for mercy and forgiveness;
saying if you must take a life for life at least there should be some
measure of equality in it.

**IN RETALIATION THERE IS LIFE FOR YOU!**

From this verse on, a series of Islamic commandments are discussed, the
first of which is the guard and respect for blood of people. With a red
line it crosses off and cancels all the customs of the blood feuds of
the Days of Ignorance, saying: \`\`Retaliation is prescribed for you in
cases of murder, free man for free man and slave for slave, and female
for female.''

[ 190 ]

The word \`RETALIATION here signifies that the guardians of the
murdered and the aggrieved party have a right to do the same with the
murderers. It also lays the stress upon the justice and equality, saying
that if you must take a life, take a free man for a free man, and a
slave for a slave, and a woman for a woman. i.e. killing of the slave of
a tribe should not involve a blood-feud where many free men would be
killed. the doors of Mercy should always be kept open, because brotherly
love and forgiveness is far better than taking vengeance. The Holy Book
in this relation has:

\`\`If any remission is made to anyone by his aggrieved brother;
(GENERALLY ALL MEN ARE BROTHERS IN ISLAM) then grant any reasonable
demand, and compensate him in kindliness and gratitude.'' Finally the
verse threatens those who try to misuse the concession, and alleviation
of the Merciful Lord, by exceeding the limits, thus: \`\`Then whoever
exceeds the limits after that, for him is a painful penalty.''
VERSE NO. 179

This short but meaningful verse is the answer to several questions that
might be raised; saying: \`\`And in retaliation there is life for you!
O, you men of understanding, so that you might avoid evil.'' This verse
has now turned to an Islamic slogan commonly issued; signifying that
Islamic retaliation has no ground for vengeance, Had the law of
retaliation not been recommended, the cruel merciless, inhuman, would
feel being safe and secure, and through their evil deeds would make a
Hell of the social life; so much so that some countries wherein
retaliation is abolished, the number of murders and crimes has abruptly
increased.

**IS MAN'S BLOOD MORE COLORFUL THAN THAT OF WOMAN?**

Some may criticise Islamic law of retaliation and say: \`\`According to
the above, man should not be retaliated for killing a woman and vice
versa. Of course not so! The meaning of the verse is not that a man
shouldn't be retaliated for murdering a woman; or that a man's blood is
more colourful than that of a woman. The law involves that the guardians
of the murdered woman have to pay

[ 191 ]

half of the blood money, and then they can have the killer killed. The
philosophy of this payment for retaliation lays in that men are very
effective and influential in economics of their family. For example,
when a woman loses her husband, she and her children may lose their
livelihood and have their economics entirely ruined. In order to observe
the rights of all; Islam has made it lawful for the heir or the heiress
to demand half the bloodmoney before killing the man who has killed a
woman.''

كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمْ إذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ إِن تَرَكَ خَيْراً
الْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوَلِدَيْنِ وَالاَْقْرَبِينَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقّاً عَلَى
الْمُتَّقِينَ(( 180 ))

180- IT IS PRESCRIBED FOR YOU, WHEN DEATH APPROACHES ONE OF YOU, IF HE
LEAVES BEHIND SOME GOOD, (WEALTH) THAT HE MAKES A BEQUEST, IN FAVOUR OF
HIS PARENTS AND KINSFOLK, (PERSONS CLOSELY RELATED) HONOURABLY. THIS IS
A DUTY INCUMBENT ON THE RIGHTEOUS

فَمَن بَدَّلَهُ بَعْدَمَا سَمِعَهُ فَإِنَّمَآ إِثْمُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ
يُبَدِّلُونَهُ إِنَّ اللهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 181 )) 181- WHOEVER CHANGES
IT AFTER HEARING IT, THE SIN SHALL REST UPON THOSE WHO CHANGE. SURELY
ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING, ALL-KNOWING

فَمَنْ خَافَ مِن مُّوص جَنَفاً أَوْ إِثْماً فَأَصْلَحَ بَيْنَهُمْ فَلاَ
إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 182 )) 182- HE THAT FEARS
AN ERROR OR AN INJUSTICE ON THE PART OF A TESTATOR, AND BRINGS ABOUT A
SETTELMENT AMONG THE PARTIES, INCURS NO GUILT. ALLAH IS FORGIVING AND
COMPASSIONATE.

[ 192 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
APPROPRIATE BEQUEST (VERSE NO. 180)**

In the preceding verse the argument was on the matter of life and
retaliation, and now this verse proceeds to the financials, that implies
the relation of money matters, and in a general sense of meaning to
wealth and goods: \`\`It is prescribed for you, when death approaches
one of you, if he leaves behind some good (WEALTH); that he makes a
bequest in favour of his parents and kinsfolk, in a spirit of love and
reverence. This is a duty incumbent on the righteous.''

It is worthy of note that instead of \`WEALTH' or \`PROPERTY' the verse
has used the word \`GOOD' which implies that Islam looks in the matter
of wealth and capital assets with a good and favourable eye supposing it
is obtained through a proper way and by rightful means that are lawful.
This is contrary to the idea of some sects who think of wealth as means
of corruption of morals and spiritualites. The word \`good' for wealth
also implies the lawfulness of it. Had it not been lawful to be wealthy,
our Lord would not call it good.
VERSE NO. 181

When a WILL or bequest has observed all the rules and rights, it is
held honourable and valid, and it is unlawful for a Muslim to make any
change in it: \`\`Whoever changes the bequest after hearing it, the
guilt shall be on those who make the change.'' Here it signifies that if
the executor of the will does something wrong or changes any part of the
bequest, it has nothing to do with the testator, as far as his will be
just to his heirs, and has not departed from what is considered
equitable; and the sin rests upon those who have changed it.

VERSE NO. 182

Up to here the Islamic decree is clear enough that any change in the
bequest is a guilt, and it is unlawful. But there are also exceptions in
any LAW or RULES. Let us refer to the verse: \`\`If the executor of the
will fears an error, or an injustice on the part of the testator, he can
make amendments, and bring about a settlement among the parties,

[ 193 ]

and by doing that, he incurs no sin upon himself. He may either
persuade the testator to change his bequest before he dies, or after the
testator's death, he may get the interested parties together, and ask
them to agree to a more equitable arrangement.

**1- THE PHILOSOPHY OF BEQUEST**

By the LAW OF INHERITANCE only a few of the kinsfolk may profit on a
certain account and amount. It may be so that, some of the close friends
and relatives of the testator are in strong need. Therefore the LAW OF
INHERITANCE is accompanied with the LAW OF BEQUEST, in order to fill the
shortcomings and to cover the weak points. Jurists have held that the
testator has power of disposition up to one-third of his property. Yet
he must not be partial to one heir at the expense of another, or attempt
to defeat lawful creditors. In islam stress is laid on making a bequest,
and our Holy Prophet (AS) said: \`\`He who does not make a bequest, dies
the death of ignorance.''

**2- JUSTICE AND EQUITY IN BEQUEST**

In the Islamic traditions, much stress is laid on justice and equity to
be observed on account of the bequests. In fact making a will is a very
critical matter, and it is as good a work, as it might be bad! HAZRAT
IMAM BAGHIR (AS) has said: \`\`He who observes equity and justice in his
bequest is like unto him who spends his wealth in the way of God, in his
life time; and he who departs from what is considered equitable; in the
Resurrection Day will be deprived of God's Mercy.''

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيَامُ كَمَا
كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ(( 183 ))
183- O, BELIEVERS! PRESCRIBED TO YOU IS THE FAST, AS IT WAS PRESCRIBED
TO THOSE BEFORE YOU, THAT YOU MAY GUARD AGAINST EVIL.

[ 194 ]

أَيَّاماً مَّعْدُودَت فَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضاً أَوْ عَلَى سَفَر
فَعِدَّةٌ مِّنْ أَيَّام أُخَرَ وَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ فِدْيَةٌ
طَعَامُ مِسْكِين فَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيْراً فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّهُ وَأَن
تَصُومُوا خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم تَعْلَمُونَ(( 184 ))

184- FOR A CERTAIN NUMBER OF DAYS (YOU HAVE TO FAST) BUT IF ANY ONE OF
YOU BE SICK, OR ON A JOURNEY, THEN (HE SHALL FAST A LIKE) NUMBER OF
OTHER DAYS, AND THOSE WHO ARE NOT ABLE TO DO IT, (FOR BEING TOO OLD, OR
PERMANENTLY SICK) CAN BE REDEEMED BY FEEDING A POOR. HE THAT DOES GOOD
OF HIS OWN ACCORD, IT IS BETTER FOR HIM. AND IT IS BETTER FOR YOU TO
FAST, IF YOU COULD KNEW IT.

شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِى أُنزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْءَانُ هُدىً لِّلنَّاسِ
وَبَيِّنَـت مِّنَ الْهُدَى وَالْفُرْقَانِ فَمَن شَهِدَ مِنْكُمُ
الشَّهْرَ فَلْيَصُمْهُ وَمَن كَانَ مَرِيضاً أَوْعَلَى سَفَر فَعِدَّةٌ
مِّنْ أَيَّام أُخَرَ يُرِيدُ اللهُ بِكُمُ الْيُسْرَ وَلاَ يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ
الْعُسْرَ وَلِتُكْمِلُوا الْعِدَّةَ وَلِتُكَبِّرُوا اللهَ عَلَى مَا
هَدَكُمْ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ(( 185 ))

185- (FASTING PERIOD IS) THE MONTH OF RAMAZAN, IN WHICH QUR?N WAS SENT
DOWN, AS A GUIDANCE TO PEOPLE, AND EVIDENCES OF GUIDANCE AND
DISTINCTION. (BETWEEN TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD) THEREFORE WHOEVER OF YOU IS
PRESENT IN THAT MONTH LET HIM FAST; BUT IF ANY ONE IS ILL OR ON A
JOURNEY, SHALL FAST A SIMILAR NUMBER OF DAYS LATER ON. ALLAH WANTS EASE
FOR YOU AND DOES NOT WANT HARDSHIP FOR YOU, AND (HE WANTS YOU) TO
COMPLETE THE PERIOD, AND TO GLORIFY ALLAH FOR HIS GUIDING YOU, AND THAT
YOU MAY GIVE THANKS.

[ 195 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
FAST, A SOURCE OF PIETY (VERSE NO. 183)**

Fast, is another Islamic commandment which is among the most important
religious services and worships. Qur?n with stress and emphasis says:
\`\`O, YOU WHO BELIEVE! Fasting is prescribed to you as it was
prescribed to those who were before you.'' And immediately it adds the
aim and purpose of fasting: \`\`Fasting is prescribed that you may
become God-fearing, and learn self-restraint.

VERSE NO. 184 In order that the incident of the physical fast may be
fully understood, more details are given here: \`\`You have to fast for
a certain number of days, but if any one of you is sick or on a journey,
has to fast a like number of days in other time.''

As for those who can do the fasting but have to do it with difficulty
and hardship, such as the aged or permanently ill people; should know
that Allah wants ease for them, and does not want hardship for HIS
servants. So they can be redeemed by feeding a poor. OR if he wants to
do more of his own accord, instead of feeding a poor much the better.
But to take it in a general sense, it is far better for us to do the
fasting.

**THE HYGIENIC, SOCIAL, AND EDUCATIONAL EFFECTS OF FAST**

By fasting, a Muslim may learn self-restraint and cherish his power of
decision and determination, and he may also moderate his passions and
caprices.

The instinct for food, drink, and sex, are strong in the animal nature,
and temporary restraints from all these enables him who fasts to direct
his attention to higher things and spiritual affairs. As a matter of
fact, the greatest advantage of fasting lays in its spiritual and moral
effects. It serves to promote man from the level of humanity up to the
rank of angels. As our prophet (AS) has said: \`\`Fasting is a shield
against the blazing fire of Hell.'' The prophet has also said that there
is a

[ 196 ]

certain gate in the Paradise, named the door of RAYAN, and it will only
opened to those who perform the fast commandment.

**ITS SOCIAL EFFECT**

It is evident that FAST can teach the lesson of equity in our social
affairs. According to a tradition; HESHAM-IBN-HAKAM asked HAZRAT IMAM
SADIQ (AS): \`\`Why was the FAST prescribed to us?'' and Imam answered:
\`\`It was commanded in order to settle equity and fairness in dealing
between the poor and the wealthy; so that the rich may also taste the
bitterness of poverty, and pass over the rights of the poor and have
mercy on them.''

**ITS EFFECT ON THE HEALTH**

In the old and new medicine, the temporary abstention from food, drink,
and sex, is proved to be salutary, and useful in health of almost all.
Most of the diseases are due to habitual eating and drinking to excess.
All the foods eaten, are not attracted to the body. They may leave some
extra fat and glucosides, and other unnecessary compounds in different
organism of the body, particularly in the blood; making suitable marshy
points for cultivation and development of microbes and other germs of
illnesses. The FAST burns out all the rubbish, and unessential
extrinsics of the body. According to a tradition; the prophet has said:
\`\`Fast and live healthy.'' He also has said: \`\`The stomach is the
house of all kinds of disease, and the FAST is the head of all the
medicines.''

**THE FAST AMONG THE PREVIOUS NATION**

From the present scriptures, we can understand that the Jews as well as
the Christians were also commanded to fast. Of course this does not mean
that Muslim FAST is exactly like the other fasts previously observed, in
the number of days, time or manner of fasting. But the scriptures
signify that the previous nations when encountered with a sorrow and or
a misfortune, they vowed a fasting. It is written in the scriptures that
Moses and Jesus (AS), both of them fasted for a periods of forty days.

\* \* \* \*

[ 197 ]

**FAST IN TESTAMENTS**

\`\`There by the AHAVA CANAL, I gave orders for us all to FAST, and
humble ourselves before our Lord, and to ask HIM to lead us on our
journey. So we fasted and prayed for God to protect us and God answered
our prayer.'' On the twenty-fourth day of the same month the Israelites
assembled to FAST to show sorrow for their sins. NEHEMIAH 9: 1-2 \`\`
But even now'', says the Lord, \`\`Repent sincerely and return to ME
with FASTING and weeping and mournings.'' JOEL 2: 12 The people ask:
\`\`Why should we FAST, if the Lord does not take notice? Why should we
go without food if God pays no attention to it?'' In answer to this God
says: \`\`As a matter of fact, when you are FASTING, you pursue your own
interest, and you still oppress your workers. The kind of FASTING I want
is to remove the chain of oppression, and yoke of injustice, and let the
oppressed go free. Share your food with the hungry, and open your house
to the homeless poor.''

ISAIH 58: 3-10

And when you fast do not put on a sad face that everyone may know you
are FASTING. When you FAST wash your faces and comb your hairs so that
others cannot know your FASTING.'' MATTHEW 6: 16

\`\`Barnabas and Sual preached the GOSPEL and in each church they
appointed elders and with prayer and FASITING they commanded them to the
Lord in whom they had put their trusts. ACTS 14: 23

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

**ADVANTAGES OF RAM?ZAN**

The month RAMAZAN is chosen for the FAST, in which the Holy QUR?N was
sent down as a guidance to the people. According to Islamic tradition,
all the scriptures have been sent down in the month of RAMAZAN: HAZRAT
IMAM SADIQ (AS), has said: \`\`TOWRAT (PENTATEUCH) was revealed to Moses
in the 6th of RAMAZAN, ENGILE (THE GOSPEL) sent to Jesus in the twelfth,
and QUR?N revealed in the eighteenth of the same month.'' Thus RAMAZAN
has always been the month of great revelations

[ 198 ]

and in this month through practicing FAST, we may purify our souls, and
have our connections with the HOLY BOOKS fixed.

وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِى عَنِّى فَإِنِّى قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الْدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ فَلْيَسْتَجِيبُوا لِى وَلْيُؤْمِنُوا بِي
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْشُدُونَ(( 186 )) 186- AND WHEN MY SERVANTS ASK YOU OF
ME. I AM NEAR, I ANSWER THE PRAYER OF THE SUPPLIANT WHEN HE CALLS ME. SO
LET THEM (TOO) ANSWER MY CALL, AND BELIEVE IN ME; PERHAPS THEY FIND THE
WAY (OF REACHING THE DESTINATION).

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

A man asked the prophet; whether God is near enough to us so that we
may not call HIM loudly? This verse was revealed to the prophet in
answer to this question.

**A WEAPON NAMED SUPPLICATION AND PRAYER**

One of the means of connection to God is the prayer and supplication,
and therefore the prophet has been addressed here that: \`\`When My
servants ask you concerning Me, tell them that I am indeed close to
them. I answer the prayer of every suppliant when he calls on Me. So let
them too, answer my call, and believe in ME, in order to find the way to
their destination which should be the paradise as well as my consent and
pleasure. To us; God is closer than whatever we may think of. HE is even
closer to us than our JUGULAR-VEIN, as it is mentioned in S 50:16

manifests HIS ardent love for HIS servants.

Asking God, through prayer and supplication, is a sort of self
awareness, and close communication to God who is the source of all
goodnesses. It is also a kind of effective worship and humbling of one's
self and soul to the Almighty God. Some say that it is meddling to God's
affairs, to ask him to do something for us, because he knows better,
what is to be done, and what is not to be done. Such critics do not know
that God's bounties and favour are divided in accordance to the
abilites, and he who is abler, his share is greater. we therefore hear
that HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ (AS), has said: \`\`there are many ranks in the
hands of God, that one cannot attain except through praying for it.''

أُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَتُ إِلَى نِسَآئِكُمْ هُنَّ
لِبَاسٌ لَّكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَّهُنَّ عَلِمَ اللهُ أَنَّكُمْ
كُنتُمْ تَخْتَانُونَ أَنفُسَكُمْ فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَعَفَاعَنكُم
فَالْئَـنَ بَـشِرُوهُنَّ وَابْتَغُوا مَا كَتَبَ اللهُ لَكُمْ وَكُلُوا
وَاشْرَبُوا حَتَّى يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكُمُ الْخَيْطُ الاَْبْيَضُ مِنَ
الْخَيْطِ الأَسْوَدِ مِنَ الْفَجْرِ ثُمَّ أَتِمُّوا الصِّيَامَ إِلَى
الَّيْلِ وَلاَ تُبَـشِرُوهُنَّ وَأَنتُمْ عَـكِفُونَ فِى الْمَسَـجِدِ
تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللهِ فَلاَ تَقْرَبُوهَا كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللهُ
ءَايَـتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ(( 187 ))

187- IT IS MADE LAWFUL TO YOU, ON THE NIGHT OF THE FAST, SEXUAL
INTERCOURSE WITH YOUR WIVES. THEY ARE A VESTMENT FOR YOU, AND YOU ARE A
VESTMENT FOR THEM. (GUARDING EACH OTHER) ALLAH KNEW THAT YOU WERE
BETRAYING YOURSELVES, (IN DOING THAT WHICH WAS UNLAWFUL) SO HE TURNED TO
YOU AND PARDONED YOU. SO NOW, YOU MAY ASSOCIATE WITH THEM, AND SEEK WHAT
ALLAH HAS ORDAINED FOR YOU; AND EAT AND DRINK UNTIL THE WHITE THREAD OF
DAWN APPEARS TO YOU DISTINCT FROM ITS

[ 200 ]

BLACK THREAD. THEN COMPLETE THE FAST TILL NIGHT. AND DO NOT APPROACH
THEM WHILE YOU ARE IN RETREAT IN THE MOSQUES. THESE ARE THE BOUNDS
(LIMITS) OF ALLAH; DO NOT COME NEAR THEM. THUS ALLAH MAKES CLEAR HIS
SIGNS FOR PEOPLE THAT THEY MAY GUARD AGAINST EVIL.

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 187)**

According to Islamic traditions, the first Muslims, at the commencement
of the FASTING, were permitted to eat and drink only a little while
before going to their night sleep. If someone who had fasted the whole
day slept during the sunset and then woke up, he was not permitted to
eat and drink any thing, and had to continue his fast. Also, sexual
intercourse was declared unlawful during the whole month. (RAMAZAN) Such
rules and regulations were hard to endure with, and some failed to
observe them, and in particular the young Muslims were not able of
self-control in sexual relations. Allah pardoned them and alleviated
their boredom by revealing the verse No. 187.


