Different Kinds of Pilgrimage
=============================

Our great JURISPRUDENTS, have classified the pilgrimage in three kinds
or classes:

A- INTERRUPTED PILGRIMAGE, which is called HAJJ-Al-TAMATOA. It is the
formal pilgrimage of which the chief rites are during the first ten days
of the month of ZUL-HAJJ. It is for those who live at a distance no less
than 48 miles from Mecca.

B- The COMBINED PILGRIMAGE, known as HAJJ-AL-GHERAN in Arabic.

C- And the SINGLE PILGRIMAGE called, HAJJ-ALAFRAD.

The latter two are for those who live within a distance less than 48
miles from Mecca.

There is also the Lesser Pilgrimage (UMREH), which is a less formal
pilgrimage that can be performed at any time of the year; and of course
it is performed by those who are far from Mecca. As for the residents of
Mecca the question of UMREH does not arise, for they are there in the
sacred town all the time.

In the Interrupted Pilgrimage, first the rites of UMREH are performed,
then the pilgrims come out of their Garbs. After that they perform the
chief rites of HAJJ, in the appointed days. But in the Combined and
Single pilgrimage, first the rites of HAJJ are performed, and then the
rites of UMREH. In the Combined Pilgrimage an animal has to be sacrified
but for the Single Pilgrimage the sacrifice is not necessary.

[ 217 ]

الْحَجُّ أَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ فَمَن فَرَضَ فِيهِنَّ الْحَجَّ فَلاَ
رَفَثَ وَلاَ فُسُوق وَلاَ جِدَالَ فِي الْحَجِ وَمَا تَفْعَلُواْ مِنْ
خَيْرِ يَعْلَمْهُ اللهُ وَتَزَوَّدُواْ فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ
التَّقْوَى وَاتَّقُونِ يَــأُوْلِي الاَْلْبَابِ (( 197 ))

197- THE Pilgrimage IS (PERFORMED IN) THE WELL-KNOWN MONTHS. SO WHOEVER
DETERMINES TO PERFORM IT, (BY PUTTING ON THE PILGRIM'S GARB) THERE SHALL
BE NO SEXUAL INTERCOURSE NEITHER OBSCENITY, NOR WRANGLING IN THE
PILGRIMAGE, AND WHATEVER OF GOOD YOU DO, ALLAH KNOWS IT.

PROVIDE YOURSELF WELL, AND KNOW THAT THE BEST PROVISION IS PIETY. AND
BE CAREFUL OF ME, O, YOU MEN OF UNDERSTANDING.

لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَبْتَغُواْ فَضْلاً مِن رَّبِّكُمْ
فَاِذَآ أَفَضْتُم مِّنْ عَرَفَـات فَاذُكُرُواْ اللهَ عِندَ الْمَشْعَرِ
الْحَرَامِ وَاذْكُرُوهُ كَمَا هَدَيـكُمْ وَإِن كُنتُم مِّن قَبْلِهِ
لَمِنَ الضَّـآلِّينَ(( 198 ))

198- THERE IS NO BLAME ON YOU TO SEEK THE BOUNTY OF YOUR LORD. (BY
TRADING DURING HAJJ) WHEN YOU DECAMPED FROM ARAFAT, (A DESERT NEAR THE
SACRED MOSQUE) THEN REMEMBER ALLAH NEAR THE SACRED MONUMENT, OF MASHAR
(IN THE MASHAR - AL - HARAM, ABOUT MIDWAY BETWEEN ARAF?T AND MIN?) AND
REMEMBER HIM AS HE HAS GUIDED YOU, AND FORMERLY YOU WERE OF THOSE WHO
ARE ASTRAY.

[ 218 ]

ثُمَّ أَفِيضُواْ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَفَاضَ النَّاسُ وَاسْتَغْفِرُواْ اللهَ
إِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 199 )) 199- THEN DECAMP FROM WHERE THE
PEOPLE DECAMP, AND PRAY FOR GOD'S FORGIVENESS, FOR ALLAH IS
ALL-FORGIVING THE COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 197**

1- Here again the rules and rites of HAJJ are followed up and new
instructions and commandments are given us. It begins with: \`\`The
Pilgrimage is performed in the well known months.''

These known months are three; namely: SHAWWAL - ZULQAAD - ZULHAJJ.

2- Then new instructions are added to the previous ones. For those who
have proceeded to perform the rites of HAJJ by wearing the GRAB=IHR?M;
in the state of IHRAM, there should be no sexual intercourse; and so is
touching the opposite sex with lust. During the state of the GARB
(IHR?M), whatever Allah has prohibited as obscenity and commiting sin,
such as wrong doing, quarreling, and wrangling, must strictly be
avoided.

The pilgrim should guard himself against injuring Muslims by deeds or
by words.

3- Then some spiritual aspects of the pilgrimage are mentioned that;
all that Allah has made obligatory; such as the daily prayers, and other
services must be done without any worldy purposes and ends, and merely
for the pleasure of Allah; knowing that whatever of good we do Allah
will know it.

Then it is recommended that the pilgrim should come with provisions to
satisfy his needs during the pilgrimage. Then at once the attention is
directed to fine spiritual instruction that, the pilgrim should provide
for his final journey to hereafter; and the best provision for that
purpose is PIETY.

[ 219 ]

As a matter of fact, there are so many signs, symbols, and symptoms,
left in Mecca and Medina, which are related to ABRAHAM and our prophet
and his near companions, and the history of Islam, that the pilgrim may
study and take lessons and prepare himself for a pious return. VERSE NO.
198

Through this verse some mistakes have been corrected, and rules
amended. The verse commences with: \`\`There is no blame on the
pilgrims, if they seek the bounty of their Lord by trading or a business
deal, during pilgrimage, but the profit must be sought legitimately, and
from the bounty of God. There should be no profiteering through trade
tricks.'' In the Pagan Era, every sort of trade and bargain, and
carriage or transport of goods, was declared unlawful and counted as a
sin during pilgrimage. The verse nullified that custom null, because
good and honest trade is a form of service to the community and
therefore to God. Then once again the verse directs our attention to the
chief rites of HAJJ; saying: \`\`When you decamp from ARAFAT, then
remember Allah in MASHAR-AL-HAR?M.''

About midway between the plain of ARAF?T and Mina is a place called
MUZDALIFE, which has become a sacred monument, and famed as
MASHAR-AL-HAR?M.

MASHAR is from the root word, \`SHOW-UP' which means intelligence and
common sense - or wit and understanding. In the tenth day of the month
ZELHAJJEH, the pilgrims of the house of God, who have performed all the
rites of HAJJ so far, encamp on that plain which is covered with fine
sands, and they stay there for the night, in praying and celebrating the
praise of God. That field and scenery there, is an example of the Dooms
Day! On that extensive bed of fine sands and soft gravels, under the
bright flickering stars of Arabian nights, several of millions of
pilgrims, all in their white Garbs, stay awake in prayer or in
meditation with deep reflection on some religious theme.

[ 220 ]

This opens many secret and mysterious windows in the hearts and souls,
from which springs out intelligence and understanding in the minds of
the devotee. And here is called MASHAAR to mean wit, intelligence or
common sense.
VERSE NO. 199

The rites of pilgrimage are mentioned one after another, till the verse
No. 199 tells us: \`\`Then decamp from where the people decamp'' (i.e.
from MASHAAR to MINA) According to Islamic traditions, certain arrogant
tribes who lived in Mecca, claimed some special advantage for
themselves - they did not go to ARAFAT with the crowd of pilgrims, and
only stayed in MOZDALIFA for a short interval. The verse here rebukes
them with such fineness saying: \`\`Then decamp (GO COLLECTIVELY) from
where (OTHER) people decamp, and pray for God's forgiveness...'' It
implies that there is equal and equality in Islam, and all of you must
perform all the rites simultaneously and in crowd; like the rest of the
pilgrims.

فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُم مَّناسِكَكُمْ فَاذْكُرُوا اللهَ كَذِكْرِكُمْ
ءَابآءَكُمْ أَوْ أَشَدَّ ذِكْراً فَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَآ
ءَاتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَمَا لَهُ فِي الاَْخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلاق(( 200 ))

200- AND WHEN YOU HAVE PERFORMED YOUR HOLY RITES, THEN LAUD ALLAH, AS
YOU LAUD YOUR FATHERS OR A GREATER LAUDING. THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO
SAY: LORD! GIVE US (OF YOUR BOUNTIES) IN THIS WORLD'' THEY WILL HAVE NO
SHARE IN THE WORLD TO COME.

وَمِنْهُم مَّن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَآ ءَاتِنَا في الدُّنْيَا حَسَنةً وَفي
الاَْخِرَةِ حَسَنةً وَقِنا عَذَابَ النَّارِ (( 201 )) 201- AND SOME OF
THEM SAY: \`\`OUR LORD! GIVE US GOOD IN THIS WORLD, AND GOOD IN THE LAST
(THE LIFE TO COME) AND GUARD US AGAINST THE CHASTISEMENT OF THE FIRE

[ 221 ]

أُوْلَـئِكَ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِمّا كَسَبُواْ وَاللهُ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ
(( 202 )) 202- THEY ARE THOSE FOR WHOM IS A PORTION OF WHAT THEY HAVE
EARNED, AND ALLAH IS SWIFT RECKONING.

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 200)**

According to a tradition from HAZRAT IMAM BAGHER (AS), in the Pagan
Era, after the completion of HAJJ, the pilgrims used to gather in
assemblies in which the praises of the ancestors were rehearsed. In
order to spiritualise the whole of the pilgrimage rites, it was
recommended for the pilgrims to stay on a two or three days after
pilgrimage to celebrate the praise of God, and laud Allah as they used
to laud their fathers or even a greater lauding.

COMMENTS:

The argument on pilgrimage is continued saying: \`\`When you have
accomplished your rites of pilgrimage, celebrate the praises of Allah,
as you used to celebrate the praises of your fathers with a rather more
or greater lauding. Of course this does not imply that a pilgrim should
celebrate the praises of God, as well as that of his fathers and
ancestors. It rather signifies that: if your fathers for a little talent
or aptitude, are worthy of praises, and deserve lauding, what about the
Lord God who has created you and your fathers and who owns the whole
universe?''

VERSE NO. 201

Then people are divided in two groups: one group adhere to the mortal
life and their prayer and demand is: \`\`Our Lord! Give us your bounties
in this world.'' But the second group ask for God's favour and bounties
in this mortal life, as well as the life to come which is everlasting.
This refers to the aims and goals of people, some of whom know nothing
but the goods of this life in the sensual world, and some other

[ 222 ]

want to use this world and its goods as a stepping platform, or a
ladder for their spiritual evolution and development, to be used in
Hereafter. As to the meaning of the word \`\`GOOD'' which is used in
this verse, the prophet has said: \`\`He who has been given a thankful
heart, a tongue busy in the remembrance of God and a faithful spouse to
help him in this world and last, the goods of the world have been given
to him and he is saved from the torture of the fire.'' As for the phrase
\`SWIFT RECKONING' at the end of the verse, implies that God will
consider the deeds of HIS servant and rewards them very soon - According
to a tradition: God will judge all the creatures, and issue HIS decree
on their accounts in a twinkle of an eye!

واذْكُرُوا اللهَ فِي أيَّام مَعْدُودات فَمَنْ تَعَجَّلَ فِي يَوْمَيْن
فَلاَ إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ وَمَنْ تَأَخَرَ فَلاَ إِثْمَ عَلَيْه، لِمَنْ اتقى
واتَقُوا اللهَ واعلَمُوا أَنَكُمْ إلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ(( 203 ))

203- AND LAUD ALLAH DURING THE NUMBERED DAYS (WHICH ARE THE 11th, 12th,
AND 13th OF ZELHAJJEH) BUT WHOEVER HASTENS ON IN TWO DAYS, INCURS NO
SIN, AND IF ANYONE STAYS ON (FOR THREE DAYS), IT IS NOT A SIN IN HIM
TOO, IF HE BE GOD FEARING. BEWARE OF ALLAH, AND KNOW THAT UNTO HIM YOU
SHALL BE MUSTERED.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 203**

This is the last verse here, in which the rules and rites of HAJJ are
discussed. Hereby the customs of the Pagan Era are condemned and driven
away; recommending the believers to stay after the feast of sacrifice,
in the valley of Mina, for prayer and praise: \`\`And laud Allah during
the numbered days.'' The (NUMBERED DAYS) here, are the three days after
the tenth

[ 223 ]

which are known as the days of TASHRICH - being optional for the
pilgrims to leave on the second or third day of TASHRIGH. As for the
Arabic \`ZIKR' here that has been translated to \`LAUDING' we have
traditions; that after performance of fifteen prayers beginning in the
noon of the festival day and ending in the 13th of ZELHAJJEH, the
following holy sentence should be repeatedly rehearsed: \`\`Allah is
Greater! Allah is Greater! There is no god but Allah. Praise belongs to
HIM only. Greater is Allah who protected us. HE who gives us sustenance
out of the domestic animals.''

The verse ends in the clause: \`\`Beware of Allah! and know that unto
HIM you shall be mustered.'' This may imply that through the spiritual
rites of the pilgrimage your sins might have been forgiven you; and you
are now like a newly born and innocent child free of guilt. Then guard
yourself against doing evil or commiting new sins, from now on, and
after your pilgrimage.

وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فِى الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيُشْهِدُ اللهَ عَلَى مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ وَهُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَامِ (( 204
)) 204- AND THERE ARE SOME MEN WHOSE SAYING ABOUT THE LIFE IN THIS WORLD
AMAZES YOU, AND HE CALLS ALLAH TO WITNESS WHAT IS IN HIS HEART, AND YET
HE IS THE MOST STUBBORN IN ALTERCATION.

وَإِذَا تَوَلَّى سَعَى فِي الاَْرْضِ لِيُفْسِدَ فِيهَا وَيُهْلِكَ
الْحَرْثَ وَالنَّسْلَ وَاللهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الْفَسَادَ(( 205 )) 205- AND
WHEN HE TURNS HIS BACK, (LEAVES YOU AND RETURNS) HE HASTENS ABOUT THE
EARTH, TO DO CORRUPTION THERE DESTROYING CROPS AND CATTLE, AND ALLAH
LOVES NOT MISCHIEF.

[ 224 ]

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُ اتَّقِ اللهَ أَخَذَتْهُ الْعِزَّةُ بالإْثْمِ
فَحَسْبُهُ جَهَنَّمُ وَلَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ (( 206 )) 206- AND WHEN IT IS
SAID TO HIM: \`BEWARE OF ALLAH,' VAIN GLORY SEIZES HIM IN SIN. THEN
SUFFICES HIM THE HELL, A DISMAL CRADLING.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 204)**

This verse and the next two verses are said to have been revealed about
a man named: \`AKHNAS - IBN - SHRIGH' who was a handsome, and eloquent
man, with a smooth tongue by which he indulged in plausible-talk with
many oaths, and pretended to be a worldly wise Muslim, but when he went
away, and out of the sight of the prophet, he proved to be a real enemy
of Islam and Muslims. In fact he was a true hypocrite, and a false
pretender to virtue and piety! In an incident he wildly put to fire the
crops and farms, and killed many of the Muslim's domestic animals in
vain.

**COMMENTS**

This verse alludes to some of the hypocrites in brief; that there are
some people whose eloquent speech and smooth tongue, about this life and
this world amazes you, but you must take care of his tricks and try to
realize his frauds, because in your back he may cause all sorts of
mischief and devilish acts!

VERSE NO. 205

Then the verse directs our attention to signs of the enmity of such a
one, which is generally his mischief, annoyance, and corruption. He
stirs up quarrels, and destroys the crops and cattle, while he knows
that God loves not mischief. [ 225 ]

VERSE NO. 206 And finally when he is advised not to do wrong and
corruption, and fear Allah, he pays no heed to the advice, and following
his vanity and arrogance, he continues with his mischief and increases
his corruption. Therefore he can never win God's salvation and love, and
his final abode is no where but the Hell.

وَمِن النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِى نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَآءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللهِ وَاللهُ
رَءُوفُ بِالْعِبَادِ (( 207 )) 207- AND AMONG MEN IS HE WHO (LIKE HAZRAT
IMAM ALI (AS) WHO REPLACED THE PROPHET IN HIS BED TO SAVE HIS LIFE)
SELLS HIS LIFE TO EARN THE PLEASURE OF ALLAH; AND ALLAH IS COMPASSIONATE
TO HIS SERVANTS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 207)**

The famous SONNI commentator, SAALABI, has narrated: \`\`When the
prophet was compelled to emigrate from Mecca to Medina, the idolaters
gathered round his house, in order to arrest and kill him! HAZRAT ALI
(AS), volunteered to lie on the prophet's bed, so as to throw dust on
the enemy's eye; and save the prophet's life, even at the price of his
own life! He therefore laid down on the bed, and covered himself with
the prophet's special green bed sheet, so that he could be seen from
behind of the short walls of the house that he was there, but none could
recognize whether he was Mohammand or Ali due to the darkness of the
night.

Meanwhile, God, through inspiration said to HIS two arch angels,
GABRIEL and MICHAEL: that I have already made you brothers, and I am
going to give one of you a longer life than the others. Now tell me
which one of you two is willing to grant gis extra length of life to his
brother? None of the two consented to leave it for the other! Then Allah
said to the arch angels: \`Just now, upon the earth, Ali has volunteered
to sacrifice himself to save the life of his brother Mohammad for my
pleasure. Now hasten to guard Ali's life against my enemies. Then
Gabriel appeared

[ 226 ]

to HAZRAT ALI and said to him: How happy to say that the angels are
proud of you and your self - sacrifice in the way of God.''

COMMENT

Some men in early Islam, like HAZRAT ALI (AS) were firm, sincere,
willing to give his life for the cause of Allah. Persecution, torture,
and threat to their lives could not separate them from the prophet, and
that was what won the love of God and established God's religion. In
this verse, and in this bargain the seller is man (ALI (AS)) the buyer
is God: The thing sold is human life; and the price obtained through the
bargain is God's pleasure; what a nice deal!

يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءامَنُواْ ادْخُلُواْ فِي السّلْمِ كَآفَّةً وَلاَ
تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَـانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ ((
208 )) 208- O, YOU WHO BELIEVE! ENTER ALL OF YOU IN PEACE, AND DO NOT
FOLLOW THE FOOTSTEPS OF SATAN, FOR HE IS A MANIFEST ENEMY TO YOU.

فَإِن زَلَلْتُم مِن بَعْدِ مَاجَآءَتْكُمُ الْبَيِّنَـاتُ فَاعْلَمُواْ
أَنَّ اللهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 209 )) 209- THEN IF YOU BACK SLIDE AFTER
THE CLEAR SIGNS THAT CAME TO YOU, THEN KNOW THAT ALLAH IS MIGHTY AND
WISE. (YOU CANNOT ESCAPE HIS JUST JUDGEMENT)

**THE COMMENTARY
THE ONLY WAY TO UNIVERSAL PEACE IS THROUGH FAITH**

After pointing to two contrasted types of man - one firm, sincere,
devoted, and willing to self - sacrifice to the cause, and the other a
hypocrite and pretender to false belief and piety, the verse now
addresses all the believers generally, and calls them to enter peace and
reconciliation. The verse implies that peace and comfort can only be [
227 ]

obtained through the rays of FAITH. To overcome, the causes of
dispersion and division, such as race and language, a strong uniting or
binding cord is needed, and no better than a general faith in God can be
found on this account. The argument is then continued to devil and doing
wrong, and says: \`\`Do not follow the footsteps of Satan who is an
avowed and manifest enemy of yours.''

It is repeatedly mentioned here that, turning back to peace equity, and
justice, and also adhering to enmity, warfare, and blood-shed, always
commences through simple matters and worthless differences, and
gradually develops into dreadful conflicts.
VERSE NO. 209

By this verse all the believers are warned that if they back slide
after receiving so many convincing evidences and clear signs, and yield
to Satan and let their rein in the hand of their arrogance and vanity,
resisting peace and justice to prevail and win mastery, then they have
to know that they are not able to defeat and frustrate the power and
plan of God, and loss will be theirs. Now that the path and plan has
been made clear enough, there is no room for devilish temptations, and
following caprices, for the Mighty and Wise Lord God will punish them
with justice.

هَلْ يَنُظرُونَ إلاّ أَن يَأْتِيَهُمُ اللهُ فِي ظُلَل مِّنَ الْغَمَامِ
وَالْمَلاَئَكَةُ وَقُضِيَ الاَْمْرُ وَإلَى اللهِ تُرْجَعُ الأُمُورُ ((
210 ))
210- ARE (THE FOLLOWERS OF SATAN AFTER ALL THE EVIDENCES AND CLEAR
SIGNS THAT HAVE BEEN REVEALED TO THEM) WAITING FOR ALLAH TO COME TO THEM
IN THE SHADOW OF THE CLOUDS, AND THE ANGELS? (WITH NEW SIGNS AND
REASONS? NOT SO) THE MATTER HAS ALREADY BEEN DECREED, AND TO ALLAH
RETURN ALL MATTERS.

[ 228 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 210**

Though the verse seems to be a little complex, but by some ponder over
the expressions, we may easily get the meaning. Here the prophet is
addressed saying: \`\`Do they expect God to appear to them with his
angels in HIS glory, and under the shadow of the clouds!? While the
matter has already been decreed.'' The last clause of the sentence
implies that the punishment of God has been decreed for the obstinate
rejectors of faith. the verse then ends in that all matters return to
Allah. Matters, here, may mean the raise of the prophet, sending of the
HOLY BOOKS, and revealing so many facts that man did not know it. This
is just like saying: the rewards and the chastisement of the believers
or the mischief makers both return to Allah which means He is the One
who decides on these matters.

**SEEING GOD**

Without any doubt, the sense of sight can only see material bodies that
have colour and are confined in space and time. As for the substance of
God who is not a material entity, and is superior to space and time;
eyes can see HIM neither in this world nor in the Last. This matter is
so evident that needs not any further discussion. Of course God is not
absent for the inner eyes of the hearts and the faith, and in the life
to come He will be more obvious than here.

سَلْ بَنِى إِسْرَائيلَ كَمْ ءَاتَيْنَـاهُم مِّنْ ءَاَيةِ بَيِّنَة وَمَن
يُبَدِّلْ نِعْمَةَ اللهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَآءَتْهُ فإِنَّ اللهَ شَدِيدُ
الْعِقَابِ (( 211 ))

211- ASK THE ISRAELITES HOW MANY A CLEAR SIGN HAVE WE GIVEN THEM, AND
WHOEVER CHANGES THE FAVOUR OF ALLAH AFTER IT HAS COME TO HIM, ALLAH IS
STERN IN PUNISHMENT.

[ 229 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 211**

This verse gives an instance of those whose characters were mentioned
in the previous verses - the children of Israel - who were shown so many
miracles and clear signs, and yet they went after their own ways, and
preferred their own fancies over the truth that came to them through the
scripture! So they sought excuses and adhered to some childish
pretexts - and so do people of all ages, and hence the verse: \`\`Ask
the children of Israel how many a clear sign have We sent to them?''

But they ignored and repudiated the signs, and miracles and paid no
heed to such great favours that their Lord bestowed on them. They even
used the bounties of Allah in wrong ways to please their caprices in,
though they should have known that: \`\`Whoever changes the favour of
Allah after it has come to him, Allah is strict in punishment.'' That is
to say God's retribution is stern and His justice is sure, when it comes
it will be strict and unmistakable to those who change His Grace, and
misuse HIS favour.

By changing the favour and bounties of God, it means to use the
physical and spiritual resources and abilities in a wrong way, and for
sinful purposes. This was not only done by the Israelites who are
exemplified here, and rather so do it people of all ages. Now a days,
our industrial world is afflicted by such misfortunes, because the
favours and the graces of God, which are bestowed to mankind through
science and knowledge, have been badly changed. Science came down to
serve man but changed the man to its servant, and now man is the slave
of his factory and industry! Now man uses his unique power of science
and technique to either enslave other men, or to destroy and annihilate
his kind! Man uses his physical and scientific power to extend
oppression and injustice, and he should come to know that God's
punishment is sure and stern!

[ 230 ]

زُيِّنَ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا وَيَسْخَرُونَ مِنَ
الَّذِينَ ءَامَنوُاُْ وَالَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْاْ فَوْقَهُمْ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَـامَةِ وَاللهُ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَآءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَاب(( 212 )) 212-
THE LIFE OF THIS WORLD IS ADORNED TO THE UNBELIEVERS. THEY SCOFF AT THE
BELIEVERS, BUT THOSE WHO WERE GOD FEARING SHALL BE ABOVE THEM ON THE
RESURRECTION DAY. (BECAUSE THE REAL MEASURES AND VALUES WILL APPEAR
THERE) AND ALLAH WILL GIVE SUSTENANCE TO WHOM HE WILL, WITHOUT
RECKONING.

THE COMMENTARY OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 212)

IBN - ABBASS, the famous commentator has narrated that: \`\`the verse
came down to answer a group of aristocrats and chiefs who had formed a
minority class in Mecca. They lived in affluent surroundings, and in the
luxurious houses. On the contrary, the believers were generally poor and
worked hard for their sustenance.'' The aristocrats scoffed at the
believers and said to them: \`\`If Mohammad was a man of eminent
personality, and was a distinguished man of God, as he claims, all the
lord, and chiefs of the tribes would have been his followers instead of
these poor and indigent people who have now adhered to him.'' So the
verse came down to this effect to render futile such childish ideas and
reasonings.

COMMENTS

The said cause of the revelation prevents us not to draw a general and
common rule of the verse, and taking it as a complementary to the
preceding verse. It signifies that the mortal life of this world is
adorned and made alluring in the sight of the unbelievers, and those men
of rank and wealth who reject faith. They


[ 231 ]

have been blind drank by vanity and arrogance, and therefore they
ridicule the believers who might probably be poor and needy. They know
not that God in His wisdom and plan, may give more to those who seem to
deserve it the least; and this temporary favour does not mean that the
favoured is dearer and nearer to God. The account is not taken down
here. It will be taken in the Last Day of Doom. There; in the life to
come the spiritual ranks and positions will take shape and form and are
personified. The believers will live a high class of life, and will have
the most comfortable positions; on contrary to the heathens who may be
men of rank and wealth, and social position here, but the losers there
who live in the worst of the abodes. Therefore God in HIS wisdom and for
His general plan may give of His bounty here, to whomsoever He pleases.
These are glad-tidings for the believers, and warnings for the
unbelievers.

كَانَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَهً فَبَعَثَ اللهُ النَّبِيِّنَ
مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ وَ أَنزَلَ مَعَهُمُ الْكِتَـابَ بِالْحَقِّ
لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فِيَما اخْتَلَفُواْ فِيهِ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ
فِيهِ إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوهُ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَآءَتْهُمُ
الْبَيِّنَـاتُ بَغْيَاً بَيْنَهُمْ فَهَدَى اللهُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنوُاْ
لِمَا اخْتَلَفُواْ فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِهِ وَاللهُ يَهْدِى مَن
يَشَآءُ إِلَى صِرَاط مُّسْتَقِيم (( 213 ))

213- THE PEOPLE (AT THE BEGINNING) WERE A SINGLE NATION (AND THERE WERE
NO CONFLICT BETWEEN THEM. THEN GRADUALLY CLASSES AND SOCIETIES DEVELOPED
AND RESULTED IN CONFLICTS AND DIFFERENCES) ALLAH RAISED PROPHETES AS
BEARERS OF GLAD - TIDINGS AND AS WARNERS, AND HE SENT DOWN WITH THEM THE
BOOK IN TRUTH, TO JUDGE BETWEEN PEOPLE IN MATTERS WHEREIN THEY DIFFERED.
AND NONE BUT THE VERY PEOPLE WHO WERE GIVEN (THE BOOK) DIFFERED IN IT
AFTER

[ 232 ]

THE CLEAR SIGNS THAT HAD COME TO THEM, DUE TO ENVY OF ONE ANOTHER. THEN
ALLAH GUIDED THOSE WHO BELIEVED, TO THE TRUTH OF WHAT THEY DIFFERED ON,
BY HIS LEAVE, FOR ALLAH GUIDES WHOM HE PLEASES TO A STRAIGHT PATH.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 213**

Leaving the arguments about the believers the unbelievers, and the
hypocrites, now a general and essential discussion is brought on, about
the genesis of religion and sects, and their purposes and goals, and
different conditions that has passed over them, saying: \`\`At the
beginning all the people were of one kind, and of a single community or
nation.'' They had no differences and conflicts among them. Then they
formed into a social life because they were created for progress and
development, and evolution could be obtained only through a social life.
Then differences, and diversity of opinions appeared when social life
was developed, and people differed in words as well as in deeds.

Then mankind felt that he needed a LAW to bring him social and
spiritual security and comfort. Such a law had to be a Divine one, that
could be sent down through the prophets, in order to give an end to the
conflicts and differences; and hence the verse: \`\`And Allah raised
prophets as bearers of glad - tidings, and as warners.''

Through the warnings of the apostles and their good news, attentions
were directed to the genesis and destination of man, and people were
prepared mentally and physically to ask for, and accept a law; and so
points the verse: \`\`And Allah sent down with the prophet the BOOK in
truth, in order to judge between people in the matters wherein they
differed.'' Thus through faith in the prophets, and by sticking to their
instructions, some water was poured down on the fire of differings and
adversaries, quenching it for a while, and this was in a fifth stage of
work.

[ 233 ]

That quiet condition continued for sometimes, till gradually the
Satanic temptation, and the roaring waves of caprices and passions
worked hard and effectively, and allured and seduced a certain group of
man, and so points to this stage the holy verse: \`\`And none but the
very people who were given the BOOK, differed in it; and that was after
the clear signs that had come to them. This was due to their arrogance
and envy at each other.'' Here people were divided in two groups: The
truthful believers who submitted to the will of Allah and the LAW
brought down by the prophets.'' They cleared their differences by the
scriptures, and thus the verse continues with: \`\`Then Allah guided
those who believed, to the truth of what they differed on.''

Meanwhile the arrogant and spiteful unbelievers remained astray and
stayed by differences and adversities; and the verse ends saying:
\`\`For Allah guides whom HE wills to a straight path.''

أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تَدْخُلُواْ الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِكُم مَّثَلُ
الَّذِين خَلَوْاْ مِن قَبْلِكُم مَّسَّتْهُمُ الْبَأْسَآءُ وَالضَّرَّآءُ
وَزُلْزِلُواْ حَتَّى يَقُولَ الرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ مَعَهُ
مَتَى نَصْرُ اللهِ أَلاََ إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللهِ قَرِيبٌ (( 214 ))

214- OR DID YOU SUPPOSE THAT YOU WOULD ENTER THE PARADISE WITHOUT SUCH
(TRIALS) AS CAME TO THOSE WHO PASSED AWAY BEFORE YOU? THEY WERE
AFFLICTED WITH MISERY AND HARDSHIP AND WERE SO SHAKEN THAT THE MESSENGER
AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED WITH HIM SAID: \`\`WHEN WILL THE HELP OF ALLAH
COME? (HERE THEY ASKED FOR GOD'S HELP, AND IT WAS SAID TO THEM) KNOW
THAT THE HELP OF ALLAH IS NEAR.''

[ 234 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 214)**

**COMMENTS**

The verse implies that the believers were of opinion that, through
their mere FAITH, they could obtain salvation and enter the Paradise
without any good work and action. The verse denied them that, saying:
\`\`Did you think that you would enter the Garden of Bliss without such
trials as came to those who passed away before you; while they
encountered many hardship and suffering, and were so shaken in spirit
that even the prophets and those who believed with them cried: When the
help of God may come?''

Of course they did not issue that word through objection, but as a
request and their wish. This verse points at one of the everlasting
Divine rules and customs; that in all ages the believers have to work
hard for salvation, and encounter sufferings and hardship, if they are
willing to enter the Paradise. In other word: \`\`NO PAIN, NO GAIN''

يَسْـَلُونَكَ مَاذَا يُنفِقُونَ قُلْ مَآ أَنفَقْتُم مِّنْ خَيْر
فَلِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالاَْقْرَبِينَ وَالْيَتَـامَى وَالْمَسَـاكِينِ
وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ وَمَا تَفْعَلُواْ مِنْ خَيْر فَإِنَّ اللهَ بِهِ
عَلِيمٌ(( 215 ))

215- THEY ASK YOU WHAT THEY SHOULD EXPEND? SAY WHATEVER GOOD YOU
EXPEND, SHOULD BE FOR PARENTS, AND KINS MEN, ORPHANS, THE NEEDY AND THE
WAYFARERS, AND WHATEVER GOOD YOU DO, ALLAH KNOWS IT WELL.

[ 235 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 215)**

AMR - IBN - JOMUH, an old wealthy Muslim believer asked the prophet:
\`\`What shall we give in charity, and to whom shall we give?'' This
verse came down to answer him.

COMMENTS

In the Holy Qur?n, there are so many verses that are revealed about
charity and alms; that are to be given in the sight of God, and for the
sake of God and it made the believers to ask for a more detail of that:
\`\` They ask you what should they spend? Say: Give any thing that is
good - any capital whether material or spiritual; such as property,
money, a helping hand, and even a word of kindness - Your charity is for
the parent, KINS MEN, orphans, the needy, and the wayfarers.'' The five
groups mentioned here are as example, and the charity is not only
limited to them and for them. The verse ends in: \`\`Whatever good you
do; Allah knows it well.'' This implies that, you need not to stick to
pretence on that, because God knows well whatever of good you do. So
give the charity and spend your money in the sight of Allah, and only
for the sake and cause of Allah, and shut out all sorts of prentence.

كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِتَالُ وَهُوَ كُرْهٌ لَّكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن
تَكْرَهُواْ شَيْئاً وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن تُحِبُّواْ شَيْئاً
وَهُوَ شَرٌّ لَّكُمْ وَاللهُ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 216
))

216- FIGHTING IS PRESCRIBED FOR YOU, AND YOU DISLIKE IT, AND IT MAY BE
THAT YOU DISLIKE A THING AND IT IS GOOD FOR YOU; AND IT MAY BE THAT YOU
LOVE A THING WHICH IS BAD FOR YOU. AND ALLAH KNOWS AND YOU DO NOT
KNOW.

[ 236 ]

THE COMMENTARY VERSE NO. 216

The precedent verse argued about charity through property, and here
again charity is wanted; but through life. This is because fighting for
the cause of truth, and for the sake of God, is one of the highest kind
of charity, as no one has anything more precious to offer, other than
his life. The Arabic \`KOTEBA' which means written or prescribed implies
that the commandment of sacred war (JAHAD) is strictly definite and
final.

It is natural for man to dislike warfare, because it serves to destroy
life and property, and brings forth injury and hardship. But for those
who love martyrdom for the cause of truth and in the way of God, which
occurs usually against selfish and aggressive persons, or a vain
glorious bully; it might taste as a sweet and delicious soft drink to a
thirsty man. The account of such a loving martyr is of surety different
from the account of a stubborn quarrelsome bull-dog, who merely fights
to conquer, and to rule the other, to satisfy his self-delusion and
selfishness.

The verse then points at a general and natural rule: \`\`That it is
possible that a man may dislike a thing which is good for him, or, on
the contrary, one may love a thing which is bad for him. God knows the
value of the things better than we do.'' Therfore our Creator definitely
wants us not to govern our fate with our fancies and conjectures;
because our knowledge is very little and limited. What we know comparing
it to what we know not, is only a droplet compared with an ocean. So if
God has prescribed to us the pilgrimage, the fasting or the fighting, it
is definitely for our own good and benefit, and they serve to increase
our insight and to extend the field of our vision.

[ 237 ]

يَسْئلُونَكَ عَنِ الشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ قِتَال فِيهِ قُلْ قِتَالٌ فِيهِ
كَبِيرٌ وَصَدٌّ عَن سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَكُفْرُ بِهِ وَالْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
وَإِخْرَاجُ أَهْلِهِ مِنْهُ أَكْبَرُ عِندَ اللهِ وَالْفِتْنَةُ أَكْبَرُ
مِنَ الْقَتْلِ وَلاَ يَزَالُونَ يُقَـاتِلُونَكُم حَتَّى يَرُدُّوكُمْ عَن
دِينِكُمْ إنِ اسْتَطَـاعُواْ وَمَن يَرْتَدِدْ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ
فَيَمُتْ وَهُوَ كَافِرٌ فَأُوْلَئكَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَـالُهُمْ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالاَْخِرَةِ وَأُوْلَئكَ أَصْحَـابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا
خَـالِدُونَ(( 217 ))

217- THEY ASK YOU CONCERNING THE HOLY MONTH AND FIGHTING IN IT? SAY:
FIGHT IN IT IS A GREAT, (SIN) BUT TO BAR FROM GOD'S WAY, AND DISBELIEF
IN HIM, AND (TO PREVENT HAVING ACCESS) TO THE SACRED MOSQUE, AND TO
EXPEL ITS PEOPLE FROM IT, IS MORE HEINOUS IN THE SIGHT OF GOD. AND
TUMULT IS WORSE THAN SLAUGHTER. AND THEY WILL CONTINUE FIGHTING WITH
YOU, UNTIL THEY TURN YOU FROM YOUR RELIGION IF THEY COULD DO IT. AND
WHOEVER OF YOU TURN FROM HIS RELIGION AND DIE BEING UNBELIEVER, THEIR
WORKS HAVE FAILED IN THIS WORLD AND IN THE HEREAFTER. THOSE ARE THE
COMPANIONS OF FIRE, ABIDING THEREIN FOREVER.

إنَّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُواْ وَجـاهَدُواْ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللهِ أُوْلَئكَ يَرْجُونَ رَحْمَةَ اللهِ وَاللهُ غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ(( 218 )) 218- THOSE WHO BELIEVED, AND THOSE WHO EMIGRATED AND
STROVE IN THE PATH OF ALLAH, MAY HOPE FOR ALLAH'S MERCY - ALLAH IS
OFT-FORGIVING COMPASSIONATE.

[ 238 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 217)**

On the 21st. OF THE prohibited month RAJAB-2 A.H. the prophet sent out
a group of nine armed men commanded by ABDULLAH - IBN JAHASH, on an
expedition to collect some information about the enemy's movements and
tactics. The prophet handed to the commander of the group a sealed
latter, and told him not to open it until he had travelled for a two
days distance in that direction towards NAKHLAH VILLAGE; and there he
was allowed to open the letter and fulfil the order that was written in
it. When the commander opened and read the letter as per order, the
prophet had commanded him: \`\`Continue your journey and go as far as
NAKHLEH, and there stay and look round for informations about the
fighting forces of GHOREISH, and their strategies, and convey your
collected informations to me as soon as possible.'' In addition to the
order was: \`\`Meanwhile do not compel your men to come with you up to
NAKHLEH, and if they are willing to return home, let them do that.''

When all of them knew what was the order in the sealed letter the
companions said to their commander: \`\`Our life is not dearer than
yours. We shall not leave you alone in the midway and we shall come with
you where you like to go.'' In a place called BEHR?N, two of them namely
SAAD and ATBEH went in search of their lost camel, and were taken
captives by the enemy. ABDULLAH and his group encountered with a very
rich caravan of GHOREISH, who were going on a trade.

The caravan that had only a few guards, could easily be trapped and
captured by a little fighting; but they still were in the prohibited
month of RAJAB for one or two days to expire. They had also no authority
from the prophet to fight an enemey unless they were attacked. After
all, their existence there was discovered by the enemy, and were in
danger of being captured and killed. They therefore held a military
consultation meeting, and all of them agreed to lay an attack of
surprise upon the enemy's caravan. They did so; killing one of the
guards, and captivated two of them namely HAKAM - IBN - KAYSAN, and
OTHM?N, and the others escaped to bring new forces.

[ 239 ]

ABDULLAH and his men returned to Medina with so much booties and two
captives, but the prophet did not welcome them for violating the
sanctity of the prohibited months in which war was declared to be
unlawful.

The jews and the hypocrites of Medina, simultaneously with the
idolaters of Mecca, gave them an uproarious welcome, and made much fuss
that Mohammad through his newly invented religion, violates the sanctity
of the prohibited months! The Helpers, as well as the Emigrants, also
reproached ABDULLAH and his men for their unlawful attack on the
caravan. Fear and anxiety filled the heart of ABDULLAH and his men. They
did not know what to say or what to do. He and his colleagues prayed
ardently for God's help, and Allah the Merciful answered their prayer,
and many questions through this verse. \`\`They ask you about fighting
in the prohibited months?''

**COMMENTS**

This verse is to answer some questions about JAHAD, and the exceptions
therein. Firstly it admits that fighting in the sacred month is
prohibited and declared unlawful by Islam too. Fighting in these months
is a great and heinous sin.

Then it adds that this law too, like any other law may have its own
exceptions - It should not be permitted that some evil doers, and
mischief makers, under the name of the law, commit oppressions and
corruptions. True that warfare is prohibited in certain months that are
held sacred, but to bar people from God's way, and disbelief in HIM, and
preventing people of having access to the House of God, and to expel its
people from it, is more heinous a sin than fight in a sacred month.

Then the verse in its remarks alludes to tumult, counting it worse than
slaughter; and that's true, because tumult is that sort of a crime that
affects and injures the soul and the faith of man, where as slaughter
impresses and harms the body. Therefore the Islam's instruction is to

[ 240 ]

stand firm and steadfast in front of the enemy, in the sight of whom
means can justify the end, and whenever, and wherever they raised their
hands against you, you have every right to raise your hands to defend.

يَسْئَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَآ إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ
وَمَنَـافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ وَإِثْمُهُمَآ أَكْبَرُ مِن نَّفْعِهِمَا
وَيَسْئَلُونَكَ مَاذَا يُنفِقُونَ قُلِ الْعَفْوَ كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ
اللهُ لَكُمُ الاَْيَـاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَفَكَّرُونَ(( 219 ))

219- THEY ASK YOU ABOUT INTOXICANTS AND GAMBLING? SAY: IN BOTH OF THEM
IS GREAT SIN, AND (THERE ARE ALSO SOME) PROFIT IN THEM FOR PEOPLE; BUT
THEIR SIN IS GREATER THAN THEIR PROFIT.

AND THEY ASK YOU WHAT SHOULD THEY EXPEND (FOR CHARITY)? SAY: WHAT IS
BEYOND YOUR NEEDS. THUS ALLAH MAKES CLEAR HIS SIGNS TO YOU THAT YOU MAY
REFLECT.

فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالاَْخِرَةِ وَيَسْئَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْيَتَـامى قُلْ
إِصْلاَحٌ لَّهُمْ خَيْرٌ وَإِن تُخَالِطُوهُمْ فَإِخْوَانُكُمْ وَاللهُ
يَعْلَمُ الْمُفْسِدَ مِنَ الْمُصْلِحِ وَلَوْ شَآءَ اللهُ لاََعْنَتَكُمْ
إِنَّ اللهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 220 ))

220- UPON THIS WORLD AND THE LAST WORLD. AND THEY ASK YOU CONCERNING
THE ORPHANS? SAY: TO SET THEIR AFFAIRS ARIGHT IS GOOD. AND IF YOU MIX
THEIR AFFAIRS WITH YOURS, THEY ARE YOUR BROTHERS, AND ALLAH KNOWS THE
JUST FROM THE UNJUST; AND IF ALLAH WISHED HE WOULD HAVE HARASSED YOU,
THAT ALLAH IS MIGHTY WISE.1

[ 241 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

Some of the prophet's companions asked him what the commandment of
Allah is about wine and gambling, and the verse came down to answer that
question.

**COMMENTS**

\`\`They ask you concerning intoxicants and gambling: Say; in them is
great sin and some profit for men, but the sin is greater than the
profit.''

The Arabic \`KHAMR' translated here to intoxicant, literally means
fermented juice of the grape; but in the law it is applied to any
intoxicant liquor or drug. Whatever makes you drink and sot is KHAMR,
and its drink is unlawful for Muslim. The liquors may have various names
and marks but they are all of the same nature and intoxicating and
declared unlawful.

The Arabic \`MAISIR' which is translated \`GAMBLING'; literally means
easy, or getting something easily, such as obtaining some profit or
wealth in an easy way and without doing any work for it. This is the
reason for the prohibition of gambling in Islam. In the gambling and
drinking there are great sin, and a little profit too, and a man with a
common sense will not, and should not, adhere to great physical and
spiritual loss, and sin, merely to obtain a little profit out of it.

The second question that is answered here is: \`\`What are we to spend
for charity?'' And the Qur?nic answer is: \`\`Spend that which is beyond
your needs; i.e. \`AFV'

The Arabic AFV, literally means; to eliminate - to efface - to
obliterate and etc. It also means medium, and the excess and extra
amount of something; and this is why it was translated here to mean:
\`\`What is beyond your needs.'' To make it short: \`\`any superfluities
we must spend in good works and in charity.''

VERSE NO. 220

After the revelation of the verses: S4: 10 and S 17:34, through which
approaching the properties of the orphans was prohibited, and [ 242 ]

eating their wealth was declared as eating fire! even the guardians of
the orphans became anxious, and some resigned and left the sponsorhip of
the orphans. Some men who looked after an orphan, discharged him from
his house and guardianship, for fear of committing a sin so great,
concerning the orphans! This caused a lot of trouble for the guardians,
as well as the orphans. So they came to the prophet and asked him what
was to be done in this relation?

In this verse (NO. 220) the main point and the object of thought and
reflection is declared to be this present world, and the world to come:
\`\`Reflect upon this world and upon the next.'' Although Man has to
obey God and His prophets; yet he has to fulfill the commandments
thoughtfully and not blindly.

Then the verse answers the third question concerning the orphans and
says: \`\`The best thing to do concerning the orphans, is to set their
affairs aright and justly. It is not good to leave them and avoid to
give them a hand for fear of committing a sin. The test is what is best
in the orphans interest. Allah knows well the just man fron the unjust
one.''

وَلاَ تَنكِحُواْ الْمُشْرِكَاتِ حَتَّى يُؤْمِنَّ وَلاََمَةٌ مُّؤْمِنَةٌ
خَيْرٌ مِن مُّشْرِكَة وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ وَلاَ تُنكِحُواْ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَتَّى يُؤْمِنُواْ وَلَعَبْدٌ مُّؤْمِنٌ خَيْرٌ مِّن
مُّشْرِك وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكُمْ أُوْلَئكَ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ وَاللهُ
يَدْعُواْ إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ وَالْمَغْفِرَةِ بِإِذْنِهِ وَيُبَيِّنُ
ءَايَـاتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ(( 221 ))

221- AND DO NOT MARRY POLYTHEIST WOMEN UNTIL THEY BELIEVE. A BELIEVING
SLAVE GIRL IS BETTER THAN A POLYTHEIST WOMAN, EVEN THOUGH SHE ALLURSE
YOU. (BY HER BEAUTY OR WEALTH).

AND DO NOT MARRY POLYTHEISTS UNTIL THEY BELIEVE. ABELIEVING SLAVE IS
BETTER THAN A POLYTHEIST EVEN THOUGH HE ALLURES YOU.

[ 243 ]

THOSE CALL UNTO THE FIRE, AND GOD CALLS UNTO THE PARADISE AND PARDON BY
HIS LEAVE, AND MAKES CLEAR HIS SIGNS FOR PEOPLE, THAT THEY MAY BE
MINDFUL

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 221)**

The prophet sent a man named MARSAD to Mecca on an assignment. There he
met with a beautiful woman whom he knew her from the Pagan Era. The
woman invited him for love, but he refused to accept. The lady asked him
to marry her, but this request of her was also rejected. Marsad told her
that for that purpose he has to consult with the prophet. When he asked
for the prophet's advice concerning the matter, this verse (221)
revealed saying: \`\`Do not marry polytheist women (and idolateress)
until they believe and convert.''

Then in a comparison the verse adds: \`\`A believing slave girl is
better than a polytheist free woman even though she allures you by her
beauty, wealth, or some other qualifications.'' Therefore the aim of
marriage lays not only in sexual affairs. A wife is supposed to be the
partner of her husband for life. She is to be the tutor and guardian of
his children and race. She makes half of the man's personality. How can
he or she, then take the polytheism and its inauspicious consequences,
in exchange for some temporary beauty and sex?

A happy and successful marriage can be obtained when spiritual harmony
is combined with the physical link: A difference in idea and religion
will affect the lives of both sexes, more profoundly than differences of
birth, race, language, and social positions. If two persons love each
other their outlook in the highest things of life must be the same. Then
the verse applies to the opposite phase of the commandment, saying:
\`\`Believer women too should not marry the polytheist until he
converts - a believing slave is better than a free man who is a
polytheist and idolater, even though his qualifications allure you.''

[ 244 ]

وَيَسْئلُونَكَ عَنِ الَْمحِيضِ قُلْ هُوَ أَذىً فَاعْتَزِلُواْ
الِنّسَآءَ فِي الَْمحِيضِ وَلاَ تَقْرَبُوهُنَّ حَتَّى يَطْهُرْن فَإِذَا
تَطَهَّرْنَ فَأْتُوهُنَّ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَكُمُ اللهُ إِنَّ اللهَ
يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهّرِينَ (( 222 ))222- THEY ASK
YOU CONCERNING MENSTRUATION. SAY: IT IS A HURT, (AND A POLLUTION) SO
KEEP ALOOF FROM WOMEN DURING THEIR MENSTRUAL PERIOD, AND DO NOT APPROACH
THEM UNTIL THEY ARE CLEAN AGAIN. WHEN THEY HAVE CLEANSED, THEN COME TO
THEM AS ALLAH HAS COMMANDED YOU. ALLAH LOVES THOSE WHO TURN TO HIM, (IN
REPENTANCE) AND HE LOVES THOSE WHO KEEP CLEAN.

نِسَآؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُواْ حَرْثَكُمْ أنَّى شِئْتُمْ
وَقَدِّمُواْ لاِنفُسِكُمْ وَاتَّقُواْ اللهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّكُم
مُّلاقُوهُ وَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 223 ))

223- WOMEN ARE YOUR TILTH, SO COME UNTO YOUR TILTH AS YOU WISH, AND
SEND FORTH FOR YOUR SOULS, (BY BRINGING UP GOOD AND FAITHFUL CHILDREN
AND RACE) AND BEWARE OF ALLAH, AND KNOW THAT YOU SHALL MEET HIM, AND
GIVE TIDINGS TO THE BELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO.222)**

Women have a menstrual flow of minimum of three to a maximum of ten
days, and their average menstrual cycle ranger from 26 to 30 days.

[ 245 ]

A group of the Jews believe that, association with women during their
monthly courses is absolutely unlawful and forbidden, even eating with
them on the same table was prohibited by them! On the contrary, a group
of Christians believe that it makes not much difference whether a woman
be in her period or be not. To them association with such women, and
even having sexual intercourse with them is of no harm and objection.
Pagan Arabs, more or less were affected by the Jewish ideas, and kept
themselves aloof from women in their menstrual periods. To this effect
some of the Muslims asked the prophet what was to be done concerning the
menstruation and the verse (No. 222) came to answer that question.

**COMMENTS**

In this verse we come to another question which is about menstruation
saying: \`\`They ask you concerning menstruation? Say: It is a harm. So
keep aloof from women during their periods, and do not approach them for
sexual intercourse, until they are clean again.'' Sexual intercourse in
such a condition is dangerous for both of the sexes. It may create
abhorrence in them, and result in barrenness of either of the couple;
and also for many medical reasons, sexual affairs in the menstrual
period is also forbidden by physicians too.

The verse then adds: \`\`When they have cleansed come to them as Allah
has commanded you.'' This is because physical cleanliness and purity
makes for health; bodily as well as spiritual.

VERSE NO. 223

Here a beautiful target is settled for the sexual intercourse saying:
\`\`Your wives are your tilth.'' - It is compared to man's tilth in
which - he sows the seed in order to reap the harvest. This comparison
may seem too heavy and obscure to some people saying why should one half
of the humanity be compared with fertile pieces of land or field! But by
that the Glorious Qur?n shows the necessity of a woman, and her state of
being exigent in creation of man. It also implies that women are not
created for being a means of

[ 246 ]

satisfying the lusts of the flesh, not to provide for sexual enjoyments
of man, and neither are to be used as a play-toy! Woman is rather an
important means of keeping on the race and the kind of human. The verse
then ends in enjoining piety and GOD FEARING: \`\`And beware of Allah,
and know that you shall meet HIM, and give good news to the
faithfuls.''

وَلاَ تَجْعَلُواْ اللهَ عُرْضَةً لاّيْمَـانِكُمْ أَن تَبَرُّواْ
وَتَتَّقُواْ وَتُصْلِحُواْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ وَاللهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 224
)) 224- AND DO NOT MAKE ALLAH THE SUBJECT OF YOUR OATHS AGAINST DOING
GOOD, OR BEING PIOUS, OR MAKING PEACE BETWEEN PEOPLE. (DON'T SWEAR!)
ALLAH HEARS AND KNOWS (EVERYTHING)

لاَّ يُؤَاخِذُكُمُ اللهُ بِاللَّغْوِ فِي أَيْمَـانِكُمْ وَلَـكِن
يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا كَسَبَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ وَاللهُ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ (( 225
))225- ALLAH WILL NOT CALL YOU TO ACCOUNT FOR A SLIP IN YOUR OATHS, BUT
WILL CALL YOU TO ACCOUNT FOR WHAT YOUR HEARTS HAVE EARNED, AND ALLAH IS
ALL-FORGIVING, FORBEARING.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 224)**

There was a scuffle between ABDULLAH - IBN - REVAHEH one of the
prophet's companions and his son in law, when he swore not to interfere
in their affairs, and take no part in their concerns. This verse came
down to prohibit this kind of oaths.

[ 247 ]

**COMMENTS**

This verse and the next one are about misapply of oaths, and it counts
an introductory to the argument about \`\`EELAA'' which is leaving
sexual intercourse with wives, merely by an oath. Such was an Arab's
custom of the Pagan Era, which many a time resulted in the separation
between husband and wife. The verse is: \`\`Do not make Allah the
subject of your oaths, for such and such trifles.'' It implies that
swearing is not a good deed, unless it be for something important.

VERSE NO. 225

This is to emphasize that an oath should not stop an important good
work, or prevent one from doing a significant duty or job: \`\`Allah
will not call you to account for slip in your oaths.'' This verse
alludes to two sorts of oaths:

1) One which is merely an idle talk without worth or basis. God calls
this not to account, and it has no expiation, but should be stopped
anyhow. When it has been a thoughtless oath with no intention behind it,
it may be expiated and cleared by an act of charity.

2) The second kind of oath is that which is taken intentionally and
earned by hearts, as Qur?n has pointed in this verse. - Such an oath is
a sin, and calls for expiation in order to get rid of its inauspicious
consequences.

لِلَّذِينَ يُؤْلُونَ مِن نِّسَآئهِمْ تَرَبُّصُ أَرْبَعَةِ أَشْهُر فَإِن
فَآءُوا فَإِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 226 ))

226- THOSE WHO RENOUNCE THEIR WIVES ON OATH, (i.e. THOSE WHO SWEAR THAT
THEY WILL HAVE NOT ANY MORE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE WITH THEIR WIVES) WILL
HAVE TO WAIT FOUR MONTHS; IF THEY CHANGED THEIR MINDS ALLAH IS FORGIVING
AND MERCIFUL.

[ 248 ]

وَإنْ عَزَمُواْ الطَّلاقَ فَإِنَّ اللهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ (( 227 )) 227-
BUT IF THEIR INTENTION IS FIRM TO GIVE A DIVORCE, THEN ALLAH HEARS AND
KNOWS ALL THINGS.

THE COMMENTARY VERSE NO. 226

In the pagan era, woman was a thing of no value in the sight of Pagan
Arabs. They had ugly and unfair ways of harming and suppressing their
wives and putting them down. One of such a bad ways and customs was
famed as: \`ellaa' - Sometimes through anger or his caprice, a husband
took an oath by God not to approach his wife in sexual affairs. This
deprived her of all her matrimonial rights, and at the same time kept
her tied to the husband, as a slave girl was tied to her master! She
was, in fact, not like a married woman, neither a widow.

On the other hand the husband was not under any pressure, and had not
such shortcomings as the woman, because they usually had several wives
in their service! If he was blamed for his act, and was asked to present
reasons for his refrain, he would say that his oath of \`ELLAA' has
bound him! This unfair and unjust custom was suppressed by Islam: \`\`As
for those who take an oath for abstention from their wives, a waiting
for four months is ordained - If they changed their minds, Allah is
forgiving.''

In such a serious matter if an oath is put forward as an excuse, the
man is told that it is no excuse at all, and God is Forgiving. He can
easily return back to his wife with an expiation for his oath which may
be an act of charity. The parties are allowed a period of four months,
in order to make up their minds, and see if they are seriously
determined against reconciliation, then divorce is the only fair and
equitable way that is left before them.

[ 249 ]

VERSE NO. 227

But if the husband insits in keeping from with his wife; after the
respite of four months, then the Islamic judge may put him in jail to
force him to change his mind and intention. He has either to reconcile
or give a divorce, and cannot live his wife unattended. Of course the
judge will do his best to reconcile them, and bring the couple back to
harmony, because our prophet (AS) has said: \`\`Of all things declared
lawful, divorce is the most hateful one in the sight of Allah.''

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْمُطَلَّقَاتُ يَتَرَبَّصْنَ بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ ثَلاثَةَ قُرُوء وَلاَ
يَحِلُّ لَهُنَّ أَن يَكْتُمْنَ مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ فِي أَرْحَامِهِنَّ إن
كُنَّ يُؤْمِنَّ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاَْخِرِ وَبُعُولَتُهُنَّ أَحَقُّ
بِرَدِّهِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ إِنْ أَرَادُواْ إِصْلاحاً وَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ
الَّذِي
</p>

عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَلِلرِّجَالِ عَلَيْهِنَّ دَرَجَةٌ وَاللهُ
عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ (( 228 ))228- DIVORCED WOMEN SHALL WAIT BY THEMSELVES
FOR THREE MONTHLY PERIODS. AND IT IS NOT LAWFUL FOR THEM TO HIDE WHAT
ALLAH HAS CREATED IN THEIR UTERUS, IF THEY BELIEVE IN ALLAH AND THE LAST
DAY. AND THEIR HUSBANDS HAVE A HIGHER RIGHT TO TAKE THEM BACK IN THAT
PERIOD, IF THEY INTEND RECONCILIATION. WOMEN HAVE RIGHTS SIMILAR TO THE
RIGHTS THAT ARE AGAINST THEM, WITH JUSTICE; BUT MEN HAVE A GRADE ABOVE
THEM, AND ALLAH IS EXALTED IN POWER, WISE.

[ 250 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 228**

This verse alludes to some commandments and rules about divorce. There
are four of such commands in this verse:

1) Divorced woman have to wait by themselves for three monthly
periods.

Islam wants to maintain the married state as far as possible and this
waiting period is settled to prevent any hastly action and leave the
door of reconciliation open to the couple. The Arabic \`GHOROOA'
translated here as monthly period; means cleanliness of the woman of
menstruation. Giving a divorce can only be lawful when the woman is
clean of menstruation and has had no sexual intercourse with her husband
for sometimes. Therefore the woman has to wait for a third period in her
menstrual cycle, and finally when she is cleansed, she can decide on
remarriage or else. 2) It is not lawful for them to hide what Allah has
created in their uterus.

3) The third commandment which can be deduced here, is that the
husband, in that waiting period, has a priority to take his divorced
wife back: \`\`And their husband have a right to take their wives back
in that period, if they intend reconciliation.'' In such cases and
during the waiting period, the husband has a right to return to his wife
without any formalities, and begin a new life with her.

4) Then the verse applies to a fourth commandment saying: \`\`Women
have rights similar to the rights that are against them with justice,
but men have a grade above them.''

Due to some physical and spiritual differences that exists between man
and woman, the management of the house is given to man and the
assistance is given to his wife.

Here it is definitely declared that man and woman shall have

[ 251 ]

similar rights against each other. But the difference in economic
position between the sexes, makes the man's rights and liabilities a
grade higher than the woman's. Elsewhere in the HOLY QUR?N (S 4: 34) man
is declared responsible to provide for his wife and maintain her.
Subject to this both sexes are on terms of equality in law, but in
certain matters the weaker sex is entitled to special protection. Then
the verse ends in that: \`\`Allah is mighty and wise.'' That is to say;
God's wisdom and plans require that every individual in the community
perform a certain task which is in harmony with the laws of nature and
instinct.

الطَّلاقُ مَرَّتَانِ فَإِمْسَاكُ بِمَعْرُوف أَوْ تَسْرِيحُ بِإِحْسَـان
وَلاَيَحِلُّ لَكُمْ أَن تَأْخُذُواْ مِمَّآ ءَاتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ شَيْئاً
إلاَّ أَن يَخَافَآ أَلاَّ يُقِيَما حُدُودَ اللهِ فَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَلاَّ
يُقِيَما حُدُودَ اللهِ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا فِيَما افْتَدَتْ بِهِ
تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللهِ فَلاَ تَعْتَدُوهَا وَمَن يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللهِ
فَأُوْلَئكَ هُمُ الظَّـالِمُونَ(( 224 ))

224- DIVORCE IS TWICE, (WITH RECONCILIATION BETWEEN) THEN HONOURABLE
RETENTION OR SEPARATION WITH KINDNESS. AND IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR YOU TO
TAKE ANYTHING OF WHAT YOU HAVE GIVEN THEM, UNLESS THE COUPLE FEAR THAT
THEY MAY NOT MAINTAIN THE LIMITS OF ALLAH. THEN IF YOU FEAR THAT THEY
CANNOT KEEP WITHIN THE LIMITS OF ALLAH, IT IS NO FAULT ON THEM FOR HER
TO REDEEM HERSELF. THOSE ARE THE BOUNDS OF ALLAH, SO DO NOT TRANSGRESS
THEM, AND WHOEVER TRANSGRESSES THE BOUNDS OF ALLAH, THEN THOSE ARE THE
OPPRESSORS.

[ 252 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 229)**

A woman complained to the prophet's wife saying: \`\`My husband
frequently gives me a divorce, and again and again returns in
reconciliation! In Pagan Era man had the right of divorcing his wife as
many times as he wanted to.'' When the complain reached the prophet
through his wife, the verse revealed limiting divorce to twice.

**COMMENTS**

In the prceding verse we came to know that, the rules and laws of the
waiting period and reconciliation, were prescribed in the interests of a
good and honourable life, for both sides, and to maintain their married
state as far as possible. Unfortunately some of the new converts in the
life time of the prophet, misapplied the law, and did as they used to do
it in their paganism before Islam. By the law they managed to put their
wives under a pressure. They frequently divorced her, and before she
could obtain a chance to settle a new marriage their husband proceeded
again to reconciliation, and took the wife back.

This verse came down to give an end to such tricks and unfair deeds,
saying: \`\`Divorce is only permissible twice. After that the couple
should either hold together on equitable terms, or separate from each
other with kindness.'' Therefore, there is no return and reconciliation
in the case of the third divorce, and after the second divorce the
spouses must definitely make up their minds either to dissolve their tie
of marriage permanently, or to live an honourable life together in
mutual love and forbearance.

The verse (NO. 229) then continues with issuing another command: \`\`It
is not lawful for a man to take back any thing of his gifts or dowers to
her.'' This commandment is for the protection of the woman who is
economically weaker than the man.

[ 253 ]

Then the verse points out at another kind of Divorce which is known as
\`KHALEE' in the LAW. It is a kind of divorce given at a woman's request
against compensation, saying: \`\`Then if you fear that they cannot keep
within the limits of Allah, it is no fault on them, for her to redeem.''
In some exceptional cases wherein the husband treats his wife with
cruelty and unjustice, and the very person and freedom of the woman,
besides her different rights are in danger; she is permitted to give
some material consideration to the husband in order to release her and
let her go free.

In this sort of divorce, woman is the source and the cause of
separation, and therefore she is the one to compensate the losses. Then
the verse stresses that all the prohibitions and limits that are
prescribed here, are justly ordained by Allah, so do not approach and
transgress the limits, and whoever goes out of the bounds of Allah are
counted as oppressors and have to answer for that.

فَإِن طَلَّقَهَا فَلاَ تَحِلُّ لَهُ مِن بَعْدُ حَتَّى تَنكِحَ زَوْجاً
غَيْرَهُ فإِن طَلَّقَهَا فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِما أَن يَتَرَاجَعَآ إن
ظَنَّآ أَن يُقِيَما حُدُودَ اللهِ وَتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللهِ يُبَيِّنُهَا
لِقَوْم يَعْلَمُونَ(( 230 ))

230- THEN IF HE DIVORCES HER (FOR THE THIRD TIME) SHE SHALL NOT BE
LAWFUL TO HIM AFTERWARDS, UNLESS SHE MARRIES ANOTHER HUSBAND. THEN IF HE
DIVORCED HER' THEN THERE IS NO FAULT IN THEM, TO RETURN TO EACH OTHER
(IN MARRIAGE) IF THEY THINK THAT THEY WOULD KEEP WITHIN THE BOUNDS OF
ALLAH. AND SUCH ARE ALLAH'S BOUNDS, WHICH MAKES THEM CLEAR FOR A PEOPLE
WHO UNDERSTAND.

[ 254 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
CAUSE OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 230)**

A woman said to the prophet: \`\`I was my cousin's wife. He divorced me
for three times. I then married another man. He, too divorced me. Can I
marry my cousin again?'' The prophet said to her: \`\`Yes you can; on
condition that your second husband had made love to you.'' (i. e. sexual
intercourse)

**COMMENTS**

This verse (NO. 230) is a continuation, and a note of first sentence of
the preceding verse (NO. 229), that two divorces followed by a reunion
are allowed. In the third time the divorce becomes irrevocable, until
the woman marries some other man, and the man makes love to her, and
then divorces her. In such conditions their reunion and marriage is
permissible, if they think this time they can keep within the bounds of
Allah, which are made clear for a people who understand.

وَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ الِنّسَآءَ فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ فَأَمْسِكُوهُنَّ
بِمَعْرُوف أَو سَرِّحُوهُنَّ بِمَعْرُوف وَلاَ تُمْسِكُوهُنَّ ضِرَاراً
لِّتَعْتَدُوا وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ وَلاَ
تَتَّخِذُواْ ءَايَـاتِ اللهِ هُزُواً وَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللهِ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَمَآ أَنَزلَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِّنَ الْكِتَـابِ وَالْحِكْمَةِ
يَعِظُكُم بِهِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْء
عَلِيمٌ (( 231 ))

231- WHEN YOU DIVORCED WOMEN, AND THEY REACHED THE END OF THEIR WAITING
PERIOD, EITHER RETAIN THEM IN HONOUR OR LET THEM GO WITH KINDNESS. DO
NOT RETAIN THEM BY FORCE TO TRANSGRESS. AND WHOEVER DOES THAT, HE HAS IN
FACT OPPRESSED HIS OWN SELF. AND DO NOT TAKE THE SIGNS OF ALLAH IN
MOCKERY. AND REMEMBER THE FAVOURS OF ALLAH BESTOWED UPON YOU,

[ 255 ]

AND FOR WHAT HE SENT DOWN TO YOU OF THE BOOK AND WISDOM, TO ADVISE YOU
THEREBY. AND BEWARE OF ALLAH, AND KNOW THAT ALLAH HAS THE KNOWLEDGE OF
ALL THINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
MORE LIMITS IN DIVORCE (VERSE NO. 231)**

This verse continues with establishing more limits in giving a divorce,
in order to look after the rights of the weaker sex: \`\`When you
divorce woman, and they have reached the end of their waiting period;
either take them back in equitable terms, or set them free with kindness
and honour.'' And then the stress is put on the other side of the
matter, saying:

\`\`And do not retain them by force to injure them or to take undue
advantages.'' The latter sentence is an explanation for the phrase:
\`\`SET THEM FREE WITH KINDNESS''. In other word; If some one uses the
law to injure the weaker party, his own morals and personality will have
to suffer from that. Therefore one should not through negligence, or
taking the appearances for judgement; treat the signs and commandments
of Allah, as a joke or in mockery; because, such a sin is very heinous,
and its punishment by God will be stern and serious. The verse ends in a
warning, that no one should think that the power and authority that is
given to him, should be used for his own selfish and satanic purposes.
Then: \`\`Beware of Allah and know that Allah has the knowledge of all
things.

وَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ الِنّسَآءَ فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ فَلاَ
تَعْضُلُوهُنَّ أَن يَنكِحْنَ أَزْوَاجَهُنَّ إِذَا تَرَاضَوْا بَيْنَهُم
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ ذَلِكَ يُوعَظُ بِهِ مَن كَانَ مِنكُمْ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَ
الْيَوْمِ الاَْخِرِ ذَلِكُمْ أَزْكَى لكم وَأَطْهَرُ وَاللهُ يَعْلَمُ
وَأَنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 232 ))

**232- WHEN YOU DIVORCED WOMEN, AND THEY REACHED THE**

[ 256 ]

END OF THEIR WAITING PERIODS, DO NOT PREVENT THEM FROM MARRYING THEIR
(FORMER) HUSBANDS, IF THEY HAVE COME TO AN HONOURABLE AGREEMENT. THAT IS
AN ADMONITION FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO BELIEVE IN ALLAH AND THE LAST DAY.
THAT IS CLEANER AND PURER FOR YOU AND ALLAH KNOWS, AND YOU KNOW NOT.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 232)**

One of the prophet's companions named MAAGHAL - IBN - YAS?R, had a
sister that was divorced. At the end of her waiting period, she came to
a fair mutual agreement with her former husband, and decided to return
and join him, but her brother prevented her from doing so. The case was
referred to the prophet and the verse NO. 232 revealed.


