Breaking Another Chain of Capativity
====================================

In the Pagan Era, women were in the chain of man's captivity, and were
treated according to man's caprice and selfishness. In choosing a
husband, she had no right to decide! She could be married with the
permission of her guardian, and if she was divorced, and then decided to
join her husband in reconciliation, she could only do so, with the help
and permission of her father, brother, or other guardians. Many a time
it happened that the couple separated through a divorce and yet they
loved each other, and when they repented and wantd to reconcile and save
their tie of wedlock, a man from the family - either a brother or a
father prevented her to rejoin her husband. Therefore this verse came
down to obliterate such unfair customs saying: \`\`Do not prevent them
from marrying their former husband if they come to a fair and mutual
agreement.''

The verse then gives a warning that this is: \`\`An admonition for
those

[ 257 ]

of you who believe in Allah and the Last Day.'' And in order to put an
emphasis on the matter it ends in saying: \`\`It is cleaner and purer
for you. Allah knows and you know not.'' In other word: \`\`These
commandments are for your own good, but only those from among you will
fulfil, that believe in God, and in the Last Day.''

وَالْوَالِدَاتُ يُرْضِعْنَ أَوْلادَهُنَّ حَوْلَيْنِ كَامِلَيْنِ لِمَنْ
أَرَادَ أَن يُتِمَّ الرَّضَاعَةَ وَعَلَى الْمَوْلُودِ لَهُ رِزْقُهُنَّ
وَكِسْوَتُهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ لاَتُكَلَّفُ نَفْسٌ إلاّ وُسْعَهَا لاَ
تُضَآرَّ وَالِدَةُ بِوَلَدِهَا وَلاَ مَوْلُودٌ لَهُ بِوَلَدِهِ وَعَلَى
الْوَارِثِ مِثْلُ ذَلِكَ فَإِنْ أَرَادَا فِصَالاً عَن تَرَاض مِنْهُمَا
وَتَشَاوُر فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا وإِنْ أَرَدتُّمْ أَن
تَسْتَرْضِعُواْ أَوْلادَكُمْ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذَا سَلَّمْتُم
مَّا ءَاتَيْتُم بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ
اللهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بصِيرٌ(( 233 ))

233- MOTHERS SHALL SUCKLE THEIR CHILDREN FOR TWO WHOLE YEARS. THIS IS
FOR THOSE WHO INTEND TO COMPLETE THE SUCKLING TERM. AND IT IS FOR THE
FATHER TO PROVIDE FOR THE CHILDREN AND TO CLOTHE THEM HONOURABLY. NO ONE
IS CHARGED WITH MORE DUTY THAN HE CAN BEAR. NOR A MOTHER SHOULD BE
PRESSED FOR HER CHILD, NEITHER THE FATHER. AND THE SAME DUTIES DEVOLVE
UPON THE (FATHER'S) HEIR. AND IF AFTER CONSULTATION, THEY DECIDED BY
MUTUAL CONSENT TO WEAN THE CHILD, THEY SHALL INCUR NO GUILT. AND IF YOU
HAVE DECIDED TO ENGAGE A FOSTER MOTHER, IT IS NO GUILT ON YOU, SO LONG
AS YOU PAY THE MOTHER WHAT YOU PROMISED, ACCORDING TO USAGE. AND BEWARE
OF ALLAH, AND KNOW THAT ALLAH SEES WHATEVER YOU DO.

[ 258 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
SEVEN INSTRUCTIONS ABOUT SUCKLING
(VERSE NO. 233)**

This verse which is the continuation of the terms and rules of marriage
and divorce; puts further on the table, an important problem which is
the suckling and the safeguard of the baby, whose father and mother are
separated through a divorce.

1) The verse begins with this order that: mothers should suckle their
children for two whole years.'' Although the father is the guardian of
the baby and responsible for his or her safeguard, yet suckling is
devolved upon the mother, who may milk her baby for a period that
completes in two years. By this the interests of the children whose
parents have separated, might be safeguarded.

2) This two years of suckling is for those parents who intend to
complete the milking term. That is to say: It may not always the
suckling period end in two whole years, and the mother or even the
father may reduce the term to some acceptable length of time according
to necessites and abilities.

3) The father is responsible to bear the cost of food and clothing, on
some equitable terms for the mother and her child. Worthy of note here
that, in this verse, instead of \`FATHER' the phrase, \`HIM FOR WHOM THE
CHILD IS BORN' is used! As if the verse wants to raise the sentiment and
the kind feelings of the father, and bring to his mind that the child
for whom he has to provide food and clothing is the fruit of his life
and heart, and not a stranger!

4) Then another important instruction is issued through the verse
saying: \`\`Neither the mother should treat the child unfairly nor the
father; due to being cross with one another.''

5) Then another order is given them in case the father passes away:
\`\`The heir of the father will have to fulfil all the tasks and duties
on account of the child and the mother.''

6) The verse continues with another instruction about weaning

[ 259 ]

of the child, saying: \`\`If the parent, both decide to wean the child,
by a mutual consent, and after due consultation, there is no blame on
them.'' 7) It may happen that the mother refuses to suckle the baby, or
actually she is not able to do that. In such a case they may engage a
foster-mother, to suckle their baby, but still the mother is to be paid
for her legal and religious rights simply because by mutual consent she
does not suckle the baby.

At the end of the verse there is a warning that the parties should
appeal to Godliness and piety: \`\`And beware of Allah and know that
Allah sees whatever you do.''

وَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجاً يَتَرَبَّصْنَ
بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُر وَعَشْراً فَإِذَا بَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ
فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيَما فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَاللهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ(( 234 ))

234- AND AS FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO DIE AND LEAVE WIVES BEHIND - THEY
SHALL WAIT BY THEMSELVES FOR FOUR MONTHS AND TEN DAYS. WHEN THEY HAVE
REACHED THE END OF THEIR WAITING PERIODS, THERE IS NO FAULT IN YOU, IN
WHAT THEY DO WITH THEMSELVES, IN A LAWFUL MANNER. AND ALLAH IS AWARE OF
WHATEVER YOU DO.

وَلاَّ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيَما عَرَّضْتُم بِهِ مِنْ خِطْبَةِ
الِنّسَآءِ أَوْ أَكْنَنتُمْ فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ عَلِمَ اللهُ أَنَّكُمْ
سَتَذْكُرُونَهُنَّ وَلَـكِن لاَّ تُوَاعِدُوهُنَّ سِرّاً إِلاَّ أَن
تَقُولُواْ قَوْلاً مَّعْرُوفاً وَلاَ تَعْزِمُواْ عُقْدَةَ النِّكَاحِ
حَتَّى يَبْلُغَ الْكِتَـابُ أَجَلَهُ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللهَ يَعْلَمُ
مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ فَاحْذَرُوهُ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ
حَلِيمٌ(( 235 ))

235- THERE IS NO GUILT ON YOU, IF YOU (INDIRECTLY) PROPOSE MARRIAGE TO
SUCH WOMEN (WHOSE HUSBAND ARE

[ 260 ]

DEAD) OR CHERISH THEM IN YOUR HEARTS. ALLAH KNOWS THAT YOU WILL SOON BE
MINDFUL OF THEM. BUT DO NOT MAKE A SECRET CONTRACT (OF MARRIAGE) WITH
THEM, EXCEPT IN HONOURABLE TERMS. AND DO NOT RESOLVE ON THE KNOT OF
MARRIAGE, UNTIL THE BOOK HAS REACHED ITS TERM. (i.e. THEY HAVE REACHED
THE END OF THE WAITING PERIODS) AND KNOW THAT ALLAH KNOWS WHAT IS IN
YOUR HEARTS. THEN BEWARE OF HIM, AND KNOW THAT ALLAH IS FORGIVING,
FORBEARING.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SUPERSTITIONS THAT RENDERED WOMEN HELPLESS
(VERSE NO. 234)**

A great difficutly of women is their marriage with another man, when
their husbands are dead. To observe the sanctity and respects of
marriage is a matther of importance, even after the death of man, and
therefore different clans, and tribes have their own rules and customs
for that. Some of them have gone to such extremes, that practically keep
their women in a heinous deadlock. Sometimes, these extravagances have
led to the most annoying crimes in treating the women! Some clans had
the custom of burning the widow alive when her husband died! Some other
clan burried the poor widow alive in the same grave with her husband!
Some tribes who were more temperate and gentle, deprived the widow of
her rights of marriage after she was widowed. The custom of some tribes
was to errect a tent upon the grave of the man, and his wife had to live
in that tent lonely and in dirt, wearing shabby and worn-out clothes,
without the least of adornment. She had to live in that tent for a long
time mourning, in order to be counted a faithful wife!

[ 261 ]

The said verse (No. 234) came down to draw a red line of obliteration
upon all these superstitions, and permitted the widow, at the end of a
widowhood term, to marry again with another man. The waiting period of
widowhood is four months and ten days: \`\`And as for those of you who
die and live a widow behind, they shall wait by themselves, four months
and ten days, and when they fulfilled this term of their widowhood,
there is no guilt in what they do with themselves, in a lawful and
reasonable manner.'' In order to prevent her kinsfolk and family from
improper interferences, Allah has given a warning here that: - \`\`Allah
is aware of whatever you do.''
VERSE NO. 235

Through this verse another important order for the widows in their
waiting terms has been notified, saying: \`\`There is no guilt on you,
if you indirectly propose marriage to such widows, or to cherish them in
your hearts. Allah knows that you would soon be mindful of them.'' It is
natural for a widow who has given up her husband and guardian, to think
over her fate and destiny, and to see what is the best for her to be
done; but some considerations are also to be observed, as to ascertain
if there is any unborn issue of the dissolved marriage, and also for the
mourning and respect of the deceased husband. That is to say, the
contract of a new marriage should not be made so soon, until the book,
as the verse has mentioned, has reached its terms.

If any one ties the knot of marriage in the waiting period of
widowhood, their marriage is void of value and unlawful; and if they
deliberately and knowingly do that, they become unlawful to each other.
The verse then encourage people to observe the above laws strictly by
some sort of threatening as: \`\`And know that Allah knows what is in
your hearts! Then beware of Him! and know that Allah is Forgiving,
Forbearing.''

[ 262 ]

لاَّ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ إن طَلَّقْتُمُ الِنّسَآءَ مَا لَمْ
تَمَسُّوهُنَّ أَوْ تَفْرِضُواْ لَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً وَمَتِّعُوهُنَّ عَلَى
الْمُوسِعِ قَدَرُهُ وَعَلَى الْمُقْتِرِ قَدَرُهُ مَتَـاعَاً
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقّاً عَلَى الُْمحْسِنِينَ(( 236 ))

236- THERE IS NO GUILT IN YOU IF YOU DIVORCE WOMEN WHILE YOU HAVE NOT
TOUCHED THEM YET. (YOU HAVE NOT MADE LOVE WITH THEM) OR HAVE NOT THE
DOWRY SETTLED; BUT BESTOW ON THEM A SUITABLE GIFT; THE WEALTHY ACCORDING
TO HIS MEANS, AND THE POOR ACCORDING TO HIS MEANS. THIS IS AN OBLIGATION
UPON THE GOOD-DOERS.

وَإن طَلَّقْتُمُوهُنَّ مِن قَبْلِ أن تَمَسُّوهُنَّ وَقَدْ فَرَضْتُمْ
لَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً فَنِصْفُ مَا فَرَضْتُمْ إلاَّ أَن يَعْفُونَ أَو
يَعْفُوَاْ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ عُقْدَةُ النِّكَاحِ وَأَن تَعْفُواْ أَقْرَبُ
لِلتَّقْوَى وَلاَ تَنسَوُاْ الْفَضْلَ بَيْنَكُمْ إِنَّ أللهَ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ(( 237 ))

237- AND IF YOU DIVORCED THEM BEFORE YOU HAVE TOUCHED THEM, AND YOU
HAVE ALREADY SETTLED FOR THEM. A DOWER, THEN HALF OF THE DOWER, (IS DUE
TO THEM) UNLESS THEY REMIT IT, OR HE IN WHOSE HAND IS THE KNOT OF THE
MARRIAGE (HER GUARDIAN OR SPONSOR OR FATHER) MAKES THE REMISSION. AND IF
YOU (i.e. THE HUSBAND) REMIT, IT IS NEARER TO PIETY. AND DO NOT FORGET
BEING MUNIFICENT (GENEROUS) TO EACH OTHER, THAT ALLAH OBSERVES WHATEVER
YOU DO.

[ 263 ]

THE COMMENTARY VERSE NO. 236

In the two following verses some other commandments about marriage and
divorce has been issued: \`\`There is no blame on you if you divorce
women before having them touched for sexual intercourses, or the
fixation of a dower for them.'' This is when the couple, before their
consummation come to a conclusion that they cannot live together, and
their future would be worse than their present, and that they find
separation the best for them. Here the man has to bestow on her a
suitable gift, and this offer should be compatible to the man's wealth
and position: \`\`the wealthy according to his wealth, and the poor
according to his ability and means.'' The verse then adds that:
\`\`Giving such a gift of a reasonable amount to the divorced, is an
obligation upon the good-doers.

VERSE NO. 237

Here the case of those women is brought forth, that a dower has already
been fixed for them, but they have got a divorce before they are touched
and made love with. The verse declares that in such a case half of
settled dower is to be paid by the man to the woman: \`\`And if you
divorced them before you have touched them (for sexual intercourse) and
you have already fixed a dower for them, then half of the dower is due
to them.'' Here an exception is also mentioned: \`\`Unless she remits
it, and dispenses with her dower, or if she has a guardian to whose hand
is the knot of the marriage, he too can remit the dower.''

But it behoves the husband to be more liberal and gracious to the woman
and pay her the dower in full measure, even if the marriage is not
consummated.

حَـافِظُواْ عَلَى الصّلَوَاتِ وَالصَّلاةِ الْوُسْطَى وَقُومُواْ للهِ
قَـانِتِينَ (( 238 ))

238- BE WATCHFUL OVER THE PRAYERS, AND (IN PARTICULAR OBSERVE) THE
MIDDLE PRAYER. (NOON PRAYER) AND STAND UP FOR ALLAH OBEDIENTLY.

[ 264 ]

فإنْ خِفْتُمْ فَرِجَالاً أَوْ رُكْبَاناً فَإِذَآ أَمِنتُمْ فَاذْكُرُوا
اللهَ كَمَا عَلَّمَكُم مَّا لَمْ تَكُونُواْ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 239 )) 239-
AND IF YOU (DUE TO WAR OR FEAR OF OTHER DANGERS) ARE IN FEAR (THEN
PERFORM YOUR PRAYERS) ON FOOT, OR RIDING AND WHEN YOU ARE SECURE, THEN
REMEMBER ALLAH AS HE HAS TAUGHT YOU THE THINGS (OF RITES AND LAW) THAT
YOU KNEW NOT.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 238)**

Some of the hypocrites made excuses of the warmth of the weather, and
with the aim of scattering Muslims, did not attend the noon
congregational prayer, which was always performed by the prophet
collectively. Some of the new converts too, followed the hypocrites and
absented themselves from the prayer! The prophet was worried about that,
and in order to overcome and obliterate the tricks of the hypocrites, he
insisted in performing the noon prayer, even so; congregationally. This,
of course, was difficult for the followers to follow it, in that hot
weather of Arabian summer. The verse then appeared and put an stress and
emphasis upon the matter.

**THE IMPORTANCE OF PRAYERS; AND IN PARTICULAR THE PRAYER IN NOON.**

Prayer, being the most effective means, of communication and connection
between man and God; has been emphasized here in this verse: \`\`Guard
strictly your prayers, and especially observe the middle prayer.'' Stand
up before God with obedience and humility, and let not hot and cold
weather, or troubles of the world, or else, attendance to wealth and
wife and children, prevent you from doing your important duties. By
middle prayer, we understand the NOON PRAYER, when the weather might be
very hot and man is tired and hungry.

[ 265 ]

VERSE NO. 239 This verse lays a stress upon the prayer which is
incumbent upon a Muslim to perform. It is so important a duty, that
should never be ignored or forgotten, even in exceptional cases like the
battle-fields or in states of danger and fear. In such conditions, still
the prayer is to be performed, except that some of its forms and
conditions lose importance, such as being directional to QIBLA, and
bowing down, and prostration on the ground: \`\`And if you fear an
enemy, perform your prayer on foot, or on horse back (RIDING); but when
you are safe and secure once again you must do the prayer as God has
ordained and taught.

وَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجاً وَصِيَّةً
لاَّزْوَاجِهِم مَّتَـاعاً إِلَى الْحَوْلِ غَيْرَ إِخْرَاج فَإِنْ
خَرَجْنَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي مَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ مِن
مَّعْرُوف وَاللهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 240 ))

240- AND THOSE OF YOU WHO DIE, LEAVING WIVES BEHIND (THEY SHOULD MAKE
A) BEQUEST IN FAVOUR OF THEIR WIVES, ONE YEAR OF MAINTENANCE WITHOUT
CAUSING THEM TO LEAVE THEIR HOMES. THEN IF THEY LEAVE (THE RESIDENCE) OF
THEIR OWN ACCORD, THERE IS NO GUILT ON YOU OF WHAT THEY MAY DO WITH
THEMSELVES OF LAWFUL DEEDS, AND ALLAH IS MIGHTY, WISE.

ولِلْمُطلَّقاتِ مَتاعٌ بِالمَعْروْفِ حَقّاً عَلَى المُتقّين (( 241 ))

241- AND FOR THE DIVORCED WOMEN, MAINTENANCE (SHOULD BE PROVIDED) ON A
REASONABLE MEASURE (WHICH IS) AN OBLIGATION ON THE GOD FEARINGS.

كَذلِكَ يُبَيّنُ اللهُ لَكُمْ آياتِهِ لَعَلّكُمْ تَعْقِلُوْنَ(( 242
))

242- SO MAKES ALLAH CLEAR HIS SIGNS FOR YOU THAT YOU MAY UNDERSTAND.

[ 266 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 240**

The HOLY QUR?N, once again, returns to the subject of marriage and
divorce, saying: \`\`Those of you who die and leave wives behind, should
bequeath for their wives a year of maintenance and residence without
causing them to leave their homes.'' Of course this is when they prefer
to live in their husband's house. If they leave the residence of their
own accord, there is no blame, as far as they do with themselves
whatever is lawful, such as wedlock with another man by the end of their
waiting period.

The verse ends in some condolences for the widow, that she should not
worry, or abandon to despair if a misfortune befalls such as losing the
husband; because God is Mighty and Wise, and if he closes a door due to
some of His plans and according to His Wisdom, He will soon open another
door through His Mercy and Grace; and that He is able to do whatever He
wants.
VERSE NO. 241

In this verse, Allah mentions an obligation which is on the pious and
God fearings; and that is a year of maintenance provided for the widow
on a reasonable scale of measure. VERSE NO. 242 In this verse which is
the last one about divorce; Allah makes clear His signs to the
believers, so that they may use their mind and wisdom to understand.

Using wisdom and intellect should result in movement and action,
fulfilling the commandments and observing the law; or else pondering
alone over a matter, bears no fruit.

[ 267 ]

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَـارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللهُ مُوتُوا ثُمَّ أَحْيَـاهُمْ إِنَّ
اللهَ لَذُو فَضْل عَلَى النَّاسِ وَلَـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ
يَشْكُرُون(( 243 ))

243- DID YOU NOT SEE THOSE WHO WENT OUT OF THEIR HOMES, AND THEY WERE
THOUSANDS, FEARFUL OF DEATH. THEN ALLAH SAID TO THEM: \`\`DIE YOU ALL,
THEN HE RESTORED THEM TO LIFE, FOR ALLAH IS BOUNTIFUL TO PEOPLE, BUT
MOST OF PEOPLE ARE UNGRATEFUL.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVEALTION (VERSE NO. 243)**

One of the cities of Syria was infected with pestilence, and the plague
killed the citizens one after another. Meanwhile, a large group of
people escaped the cities in thousands leaving their homes. with the
hope of being saved from that dreadful disaster. They reached a green
valley with a nice climate, and were saved; but as the verse alludes:
\`\`Allah said to them: \`Die you all!' And all of them passed away at
once!'' This was because, instead of being thankful to God for saving
their life and leading them to a bountiful and safe place, they were
puffed up with pride and vanity, and thought that it was their prudence
and plan that saved them so! They had to be grateful, but gave no thanks
and therefore by God's order they died with the same plague that they
escaped it for fear of death.

**COMMENTS**

The verse refers to an episode of a group of ancient people, who wanted
to escape their fate and death either by JAH?D in the battle-field, or
by pestilence, but they were caught by the same plague by God's will
when they made sure that they were safe and secure: \`\`Did you not see
those who left their homes, in thousands for fear of death, [ 268 ]

and Allah said to them \`Die you All.' Then Allah restored them to life
once again?'' To teach a lesson to those who may take lesson of such
incidents. The phrase: \`\`ALLAH RESTORED THEM TO LIFE'' denotes their
resurrection which occured by the prayer of a prophet named EZEKIEL or
HAZGHIY?L. The verse ends in a mention of God's Grace and bounties to
mankind saying: (HE RESTORED THEM TO LIFE BECAUSE) Allah is bountiful to
mankind, but most of them are not thankful.'' SHAIKH SADUQ the famous
SHIITE scholar has taken this verse to reason for believing that; before
the Day of Doom, there is also resurrection for groups of mankind.

\* \* \* \*

(The incident of the valley of dry bones and the prayer OF EZEKIEL in
the old tastements is as follows: \`\`I felt the powerful presense of
the Lord, when His spirit took me down in a valley where it was covered
with very many bones of men! I asked myself can ever these bones come
back to life? God answered me: \`O, Mortal Man! Tell the bones to listen
to the word of God; That I am going to put breath into you and bring you
back into life! I will give you sinews and muscles, and cover you again
with skins, then you will know that I am the Lord your Creator God.'

While I was telling the bones what the Lord said to them, I heard a
rattling noise, and the bones began to join together! While I watched;
the bones covered with sinews and muscles, and then with skin, but there
was no breath in the bodies! Then the Lord said to me: \`\`Mortal Man!''
Tell the wind that the SOVEREIGN LORD. Commands you to come from every
direction, to breath in these dead bodies, and bring them back to life.
I prophesied as I had been told and bodies came to life and stood up.
There were enough of them to form an army. Then God said to me: \`\`Tell
the people of Israel that they are like these bones. I the Sovereign
Lord am going to open their graves and take them out so that they will
know that I am their Lord God. From: O.T. EZEKIEL - 37:1-14 TRANSLATOR'S
NOTE)

وَقَـاتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللهَ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ(( 244 ))

244- AND FIGHT IN THE WAY OF ALLAH AND KNOW THAT ALLAH IS ALL-HEARING,
ALL-KNOWING.

[ 269 ]

مَنَّ ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللهَ قَرْضاً حَسَناً فَيُضَـاعِفَهُ
أَضْعافاً كَثِيرَةً وَاللهُ يَقْبِضُ وَيَبْسُطُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ((
245 )) 245- WHO IS HE THAT MAY LEND ALLAH A GOOD LOAN, THEN HE WILL
REPAY HIM MANY TIMES OVER, AND ALLAH DECREASES AND INCREASES, (THE
SUSTENANCE OF HIS SERVANTS; AND CHARITY AND ALMS NEVER DECREASES IT) AND
TO HIM YOU RETURN.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 244**

From here on the verses about JAH?D, are revealed, which is the sacred
fight in defence of truth and right, and that it should not be evaded as
a duty incumbent upon us: \`\`Fight in the way of Allah and know that
Allah knows and hears everything.''

**OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 245)**

Once the prophet said to his companions: \`\`Whoever gives an alm for
charity will have twice that much in PARADISE.'' One of the companions
named ABULDAHDAH -ANSARI told the prophet that he had two gardens. He
asked the Messenger of God: \`\`If I give one of my gardens in charity,
will I have two gardens of bliss instead of that?'' The prophet
answered: \`\`Yes! of course!'' The helper man gave one of his two
gardens which was better and more valuable for charity. The phrase:
\`AZ-FAN? KASEERA' in the verse implies, many time, or manifold
multiplied.

COMMENTS

Through this verse it is asked: \`\`Who will lend Allah a beautiful
loan, then He will repay him many times over?''

[ 270 ] \`\`BEAUTIFUL LOAN'' metaphorically may mean spending in JAHAD
for the pleasure of Allah, or in support of the poor and needy for His
sake. The ending phrase of the verse implies that: \`\`One should not
think that spending for the cause of God to Whose hands are the keys of
want and plenty, or decrease and increase, will lessen the wealth or
power that is used in charity.

**WHY IS IT CALLED A LOAN?**

In several verses, charity and spending for the cause of Allah have
been declared as lending and giving loans! This manner of embracement
will show Allah's great favour to mankind and also implies the
importance of charity and expenditures in the way of Allah. HAZRAT ALI
(AS), has said in the NAHJOLBALAGHEH: \`\`God has asked you to lend Him
a loan, while to Him belongs the treasures of heavens and the earth, and
He is free of want, and all praises belong to Him.

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الْمَلا َِ مِن بَنِي إِسْرَاءِيلَ مِن بَعْدِ مُوسَى
إِذْ قَالُواْ لِنَبِيٍّ لَّهُمُ ابْعَثْ لَنَا مَلِكاً نُّقَـاتِلْ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللهِ قَالَ هَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِن كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِتَالُ
أَلاَّ تُقَـاتِلُواْ قَالُواْ وَمَا لَنَآ أَلاَّ نُقَـاتِلَ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللهِ وَقَدْ أُخْرِجْنَا مِن دِيَـارِنَا وَأَبْنَآئنَا فَلَمَّا كُتِبَ
عَلَيْهِمُ الْقِتَالُ تَوَلَّوْاْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِنْهُمْ وَاللهُ
عَلِيمُ بِالظَّـالِمِينَ (( 246 ))

246- DID YOU NOT SEE A GROUP OF THE ISRAELITE'S GRANDEES, AFTER MOSES,
WHEN THEY SAID TO A PROPHET OF THEIRS: \`RAISE UP FOR US A KING, THAT WE
MAY FIGHT IN THE WAY OF ALLAH.' HE SAID: \`MIGHT IT BE THAT, IF FIGHTING
IS PRESCRIBED FOR YOU, YOU WILL NOT FIGHT?' THEY SAID: \`WHY SHOULD WE
NOT FIGHT IN THE WAY OF ALLAH, AND WE HAVE BEEN EXPELLED FROM OUR
HABITATIONS, AND OUR CHILDREN? (OUR HOMES ARE OCCUPIED

[ 271 ]

BY THE ENEMY AND OUR CHILDREN ARE TAKEN CAPTIVES AND HOSTAGES) BUT WHEN
FIGHTING WAS PRESCRIBED FOR THEM THEY ALL TURNED THEIR BACKS EXCEPT A
FEW OF THEM, AND ALLAH KNOWS ALL ABOUT THE OPPRESSORS.

247- AND THEIR PROPHET SAID TO THEM: \`ALLAH HAS RAISED UP SAUL AS A
KING FOR YOU.' THEY SAID: \`HOW CAN HE HAVE SOVEREIGNTY OVER US, WHILE
WE HAVE MORE RIGHT THAN HE TO KINGSHIP, AND HE IS NOT EVEN GIFTED WITH
AN EXTENSIVE WEALTH.' HE SAID: \`ALLAH HAS CHOSEN HIM OVER YOU, AND HAS
INCREASED HIM BROADLY IN KNOWLEDGE AND BODILY POWER.' AND ALLAH GIVES
HIS KINGDOM TO WHOM HE WILLS. AND ALLAH IS EXTENDER, ALL-KNOWING.

وَقَالَ لَهُمْ نَبِيُّهُمْ إِنَّ ءَايَةَ مُلْكِهِ أَن يَأْتِيَكُمُ
التَّابُوتُ فِيهِ سَكِينَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَبَقِيَّةٌ مِمّا تَرَكَ
ءَالُ مُوسَى وَءَالُ هَـارُونَ تَحْمِلُهُ الْمَلائكَةُ إنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لاََيَةً لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 248 ))

248- AND THEIR PROPHET SAID TO THEM, THE SIGN OF HIS KINGDOM IS THAT
THE ARK OF COVENANT WILL COME TO YOU, THEREIN SHALL BE A TRANQUILITY
(FOR YOU) FROM

[ 272 ]

YOUR LORD, AND RELICS WHICH THE HOUSE OF MOSES AND THE HOUSE OF AARON
LEFT BEHIND, (AND THE ARK IS) CARRIED BY ANGELS. IN THAT THERE IS A SIGN
FOR YOU IF YOU ARE BELIEVERS.

فَلَمَّا فَصَلَ طَالُوتَ بِالْجُنُودِ قَالَ إِنَّ اللهَ مُبْتَلِيكُم
بَنَهَرفَمَن شَرِبَ مِنْهُ فَلَيْسَ مِنّيِ وَمَن لَّمْ يَطْعَمْهُ
فَإِنَّهُ مِنّيِ إِلاَّ مَنِ اغْتَرَفَ غُرْفَةَ بِيَدِهِ فَشَرِبُواْ
مِنْهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِنْهُمْ فَلَمَّا جَاوَزَهُ هُوَ وَالَّذِينَ
ءَامُنُواْ مَعَهُ قَالُواْ لاَطَاقَةَ لَنَا الْيَوْمَ بِجَالُوتَ
وَجُنُودِهِ قَالَ الَّذِينَ يَظُّنُّونَ أَنَّهُم مُّلاقُواْ اللهِ كَم
مِّن فِئَة قَلِيلَة غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةَ بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَاللهُ
مَعَ الصَّـابِرِينَ(( 249 ))

249- AND WHEN SAUL MARCHED FORTH WITH THE ARMIES, HE SAID: \`ALLAH WILL
TRY YOU WITH A STREAM; THEN WHOEVER DRINKS FROM IT, HE IS NOT MINE, AND
WHO DRINKS IT NOT, HE IS MINEِA MERE SIP OUT OF THE HAND IS EXCUSED.'
BUT THEY DRANK OF IT, EXCEPT A FEW OF THEM. WHEN SAUL AND THOSE WHO
BELIEVED WITH HIM CROSSED THE STREAM, THEY SAID: TO-DAY WE CANNOT COPE
WITH GOLIATH AND HIS FORCES.' BUT THOSE WHO THOUGHT THAT THEY WOULD MEET
ALLAH SAID: \`HOW OFTEN BY ALLAH'S PERMISSION, A SMALL FORCE VANQUISHED
A LARGE ONE. AND ALLAH IS WITH THE PATIENTS.

وَلَمَّا بَرَزُواْ لِجَالُوتَ وَجُنُودِهِ قَالُواْ رَبَّنَآ أَفْرِغْ
عَلَيْنَا صَبْراً وَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَاوَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ
الْكَـافِرِينَ(( 250 ))

[ 273 ]

250- AND WHEN THEY WENT FORTH AGAINST GOLIATH AND HIS HOSTS, THEY SAID:
\`OUR LORD! POUR OUT UPON US PATIENCE, AND MAKE OUR STEPS FIRM AND HELP
US AGAINST THE UNBELIEVERS.!

فَهَزَمُوهُم بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَقَتَلَ دَاوُدُ جَالُوتَ وَءاتَـاهُ اللهُ
الْمُلْكَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَعَلَّمَهُ مِمَّا يَشَآءُ وَلَوْ لاَ دَفْعُ
اللهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُم بِبَعْض لَفَسَدَتِ الاَْرْضُ وَلَـكِنَّ اللهَ
ذُو فَضْل عَلَى الْعَـالَمِينَ(( 251 ))

251- THEY ROUTED THEM BY ALLAH'S PERMISSION, AND DAVID (A YOUNG BRAVE
MAN IN THE HOST OF SAUL)SLEW GOLIATH, AND ALLAH GAVE HIM KINGDOM AND
WISDOM, AND TAUGHT HIM WHATEVER (ELSE)HE NEEDED. AND HAD ALLAH NOT
DRIVEN BACK THE PEOPLE, SOME BY THE MEANS OF OTHERS; THE EARTH WOULD
HAVE BEEN UTTERLY CORRUPTED, BUT ALLAH IS BOUNTEOUS TO ALL BEINGS.

تِلْكَ ءَايَـاتُ اللهِ نَتْلُوهَا عَلَيْكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّكَ لَمِنَ
الْمُرْسَلِينَ (( 252 ))
252- THESE ARE THE SIGNS OF ALLAH. WE RECITE TO YOU IN TRUTH, AND THAT
YOU ARE ONE OF OUR MESSENGERS.


