An Incident For Lesson (verse No. 246)
======================================

The Israelites who were enslaved and tortured by Pharaoh and his hosts,
were saved by the wise leadership of Moses. After him, they were ruled
by JOSHUA, who managed to cross the JORDAN, and settle the tribes in
Palestine. They lived there for a short period in good faith,

[ 274 ]

abundance and welfare. Then, they were puffed up with pride and vanity,
and deviated from the straight path of Allah and as a result of that,
their union changed to variance, and their thankfulness to ingratitude.
So they suffered many reverses at the hands of the various tribes of
Palestines. They often fell into idolatry and left the worship of their
true One God! then it happend that from time to time they were ruled by
dictator rulers, which are called judges in the old testament. They
lived so for many years, until God raised another prophet from among
them whose name was SAMUEL. The Israelites gathered round him, asking to
appoint them a king. Samuel prayed to God for that, and his prayer was
answered and a young tall man of strength and wisdom from the little
tribe of BENJAMINE was appointed as their king. The faithless and
unstable Israelites began to raise all sorts of petty objection about
his kingship! Each of them wanted to be the king himself. Now through
this verse our prophet has been addressed that:

\`\`Did you not see a group of the Israelite's Grandees, after Moses,
who said to a prophet of theirs: \`Appoint for us a king that we may
fight in the way of Allah.''

Worthy of note here, that they said: \`We want to fight in the way of
Allah, or for the cause of God.'' And this sentence implies that;
whatever of warfare, or other kinds of endeavors, which may result in
freedom, and prosperity of MAN, is done; it is counted as for the cause
of Allah. In other word: Doing for HIS creatures is, doing for the
Creator.'' Anyhow, their prophet who doubted their truthfulness and
perseverance, said to them: \`\`Might it be that, if you were commanded
to fight; you would do it not.'' But the Israelites assured Samuel by
saying"-

\`\`Why should we not fight in the way of Allah, while we have been
turned away from our homes and our families?'' According to the
continuance of the verse, none of their promises they fulfilled:
\`\`When fighting was prescribed for them all turned back except a small
band of them.''
VERSE NO. 247

However, Samuel the prophet appointed a king or what the Holy Qur?n has
called \`\`MALIK'' for the Israelites as a ruler and commander of the
forces:

[ 275 ]

\`\`And their prophet said to them: \`Allah has appointed TALUT=SAUL as
king over you.'' The Grandees and influentials raised all sorts of petty
objection that how can he have sovereignty over us while we are more
liable and deserving to that position!?

In fact, they objected against the elect of God, when they said:
\`\`Saul is a simple and poor peasant who is not even gifted with an
extensive wealth! The knocking down answers that QUR?N has given to such
a people is: \`Allah has chosen him over you, and Has increased him
extensively in knowledge and bodily power and prowess; and Allah gives
of His kingdom to whom He wills.''
VERSE NO. 248

Even though their prophet, at their own request, and with the
permission of God appointed Saul as a king for them, and he also
mentioned some reasons for his choice besides that of God's will, such
as the king's strength and knowledge; the Israelites were still in doubt
about that elect and therefore, Samuel said to them as Qur?n relates:
\`\`The sign of his kingship and kingdom is that the ARK OF COVENANT
will come to you, wherein shall be tranquility for you from your Lord,
and some relics of the house of Moses and the house of ARON, and the ARK
is carried by the angels.''

The ARK OF COVENANT, basically was a chest in which Moses as a baby was
given to the Nile by his mother as per odrer of God. The box and baby
were taken up by Pharaoh's guards, and the chest remained safe, and kept
after the PASS OVER as a precious antique. It was made to contain the;
\`TESTIMONY OF GOD' or the Ten Commandments engraved on stone, with some
relics of Moses and ARRON.

VERSE NO. 249

At last they agreed with the appointment and yielded to Saul's
commandership and set out a large force in order to fight their enemies.
Saul wanted to make sure if the Israelites whole-heartedly believe in
their commander. He therefore took an examination of his troops, so that
he could get rid of all the doubtful ones. The wise commander put to
test the resistance and the endurance of his soldiers against thirst,
and said to them:

[ 276 ]

\`\`Allah will try you with a stream of water: Whoever drinks from it,
is not mine; and who drinks it not is mine.'' Unfortunately most of the
Israelites failed in the exam, and drank of it; but a few. A small band
consisting of 313 men (as some commentators say) crossed the stream
without drinking the water, and confronted with the enemy, even among
this small group of warriors, who had remained faithful, there were some
who appalled and discouraged with fear, by the number of enemy when they
met. They said: \`\`To-day we cannot cope with Goliath and his forces.''
But the faithful band among them, were determined to face any odd and
danger, for having perfect confidence in God, and the cause for which
they were fighting. They made a firm stand and said: \`\`How often by
Allah's permission a small force vanquished a large one, and Allah is
with the patient.''

Among these faithful ones was David a shepherd boy in the spring of his
youth, who slayed the enemy's commander!

VERSE NO. 250

Saul and his troops advanced to meet Goliath the Giant and his hosts,
and when the two parties were face to face the believers prayed to God
saying:

\`\`Our Lord! Pour out upon us patience, and make our steps firm and
help us against the unbelievers.'' They pleaded with God and asked
earnestly for patience, firm steps and perseverance and God's help to
overcome their enemy.

VERSE NO. 251

Of a surety God will never leave such faithful servants of His alone
and unaided: \`\`So they routed them by Allah's permission and David
Slew Goliath.'' David was a youth with no arms and armour. He had a pure
deep faith in Allah. He was not known even in the Israelite camp. In
outward appearance he was a poor shepherd. His shepherd sling was his
well tried weapon. He picked up a couple of pebbles from the ground and
used his sling to such an effect that the piece of stone pierced
Goliath's forehead and knocked him down! He then rushed

[ 277 ]

towards the fallen Goliath, and killed him with his own sword. Thus did
Allah manifest His Power in slaying such that giant by the hands of a
shepherd Lad! The Glorious Qur?n says that after doing so with Goliath:
\`\`Allah gave David kingdom and wisdom, and taught him whatever he
asked or needed.'' Here in these verse, it is not made clear enough,
that this David mentioned here is the one who became the king and the
prophet of the Israelites, and who was the father of SOLOMON; but the
verse does imply that the slayer of Goliath reached the rank and
position of an apostle.

Then the verse points at a general law and universal plan of God, who
loves all His creatures, and protects them. In protecting one, He may
use another, or He may attract one by repelling the other: \`\`And had
Allah not driven back the people, some by the means of others, the earth
would have been utterly corrupted; but Allah is bounteous to all
beings.'' God's love is for all and for ever.

VERSE NO. 252

This verse implies the various incidents that so far has been mentioned
of the Israelite long history, each of which being a clear sign of the
power and universal plans of God, and all being free of falsehood and
superstitions.

تِلْكَ الرُّسُلُ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَى بَعْض مِنْهُم مَّن كَلَّمَ
اللهُ وَرَفَعَ بَعْضَهُمْ دَرَجَـات وَءَاتَيْنَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ
الْبَيِّنَـتِ وَأَيَّدْنَـاهُ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ وَلَوْ شَآءَ اللهُ مَا
اقْتَتَلَ الَّذِينَ مِن بَعْدِهِم مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَآءَتْهُمُ
الْبَيِّنَـتُ وَلَـكِنِ اخْتَلَفُواْ فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ ءَامَنَ وَمِنْهُم
مَّن كَفَرَ وَلَوْ شَآء اللهُ مَا اقْتَتَلُواْ وَلَـكِنَّ اللهَ يَفْعَلُ
مَا يُرِيدُ(( 253 ))

253- AND THOSE MESSENGERS, WE HAVE EXALTED SOME ABOVE THE OTHERS. AMONG
THEM ARE SOME TO WHOM ALLAH SPOKE. OTHERS HE RAISED IN GRADES AND WE
GAVE JESUS THE SON OF MARY EVIDENCES, AND STRENGTHENED

[ 278 ]

HIM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT. (BUT THE RANKS AND GRADES OF THE APOSTLES DID
NOT CLEAR THE DIFFERENCES OF PEOPLE) AND HAD ALLAH SO WILLED, THOSE WHO
SUCCEEDED THEM WOULD NOT HAVE FOUGHT AGAINST EACH OTHER AFTER THE CLEAR
SIGNS THAT HAD COME TO THEM, BUT THEY DIFFERED. SOME OF THEM BELIEVED
AND SOME DISBELIEVED. IF ALLAH HAD SO WILLED THEY WOULD NOT HAVE FOUGHT
AGAINST ONE ANOTHER. BUT ALLAH WILL DO WHATEVER HE INTENDS. THE END OF
PART 2

**THE COMMENTARY
THE VITAL ROLE OF THE PROPHETS IN HUMAN LIFE
(VERSE NO. 253)**

The verse alludes to the degrees of the prophets, their missions, and
different gifts that God has bestowed upon each of them: \`\`And those
apostles we have exalted some above the other.'' This implies that
though the prophet's missions and messages were the same, yet some of
them are above the others in rank and position: \`\`Among them are some
to whom Allah spoke.''

This may refer to Moses to whom God spoke through a tree of glory, and
for that he is nicknamed as; \`MOSES THE INTERLOCUTOR'. Then the verse
adds: Others we raised in grades or degrees.'' This may refer to our
prophet Mohammad in whose person and mission, all the gifts and
characters are combined, and his creed and religion is the most perfect
one among all.

[ 279 ]

Then the verse refers to Jesus Chirst saying: \`\`And we gave Jesus the
son of Mary evidences, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit.'' By
evidences or clear signs, his different miracles are meant, such as
raising the dead; healing the born blind, or curing the lepers with the
permission of Allah. (QUR?N - S 3:45-51) Also his excellent religious
and divine knowledge may be counted among the clear signs. As for the
holy spirit: It may either mean Gabriel the Arch Angel of God who brings
down the revelations, or some sort of mysterious power which is found
more or less in Godly men, in various measures.

The verse continues with the mention of the differences of the people
after their prophets, in spite of all that evidences and clear signs:
\`\`And had Allah so willed those after them would not have fought
against each other, after so many clear signs that had come to them -
but they differed. \`\`That is to say: God could easily compel them to
agree, but His way and will is to encourage His servants to do things in
freedom and by free will.''

Although such freedom and free will might be misused by some selfish
profiteers; but still freedom is an important factor of MAN'S
development and evaluation.

يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ أَنفِقُواْ مِمّا رَزَقْنَـاكُم مِّن
قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ لاَّ بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلاَ خُلَّةٌ وَلاَ
شَفَـاعَةٌ وَالْكَـافِرُونَ هُمُ الظَّـالِمُونَ (( 254 ))

254- O, BELIEVERS! BESTOW IN ALMS A PART OF WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN YOU,
BEFORE THERE COMES A DAY IN WHICH THERE SHALL BE NO TRADING, NEITHER
FRIENDSHIP, NOR INTERCESSION, AND THE UNBELIEVERS ARE THE OPPRESSORS

[ 280 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ALMS, AN IMPORTANT MEANS OF SALVATION IN DOOMS' DAY
(VERSE NO. 245)**

Muslims are addressed here to perform one of their most important
duties which may serve to unify their society, strengthen their
government and defensive forces, and besides all, is an effective means
of salvation in Dooms Day: \`\`O, Believers! Bestow in alms a part of
what we have given you.'' The verse ends in a warning which may indicate
that by alms; \`ZAKAT' is meant here which is a duty incumbent upon
Muslims. It also puts some stress upon the people to do it before they
lose the chance of doing it: \`\`A day in which there is no trading,
neither friendship and nor intercessor.''

اللهُ لاَ إِلَـهَ إلاَّ هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ لاَ تَأْخُذُهُ سِنَةٌ
وَلاَ نَوْمٌ لَّهُ مَا فِي السَّمَـاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ مَن ذَا
الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِندَهُ إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِهِ يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ
أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ وَلاَ يُحِيطُونَ بِشَىء مِنْ عِلْمِهِ
إِلاَّ بِمَا شَآءَ وَسِعَ كُرْسِيُّهُ السَّمَـاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ
وَلاَيَؤُدُهُ حِفْظُهُمَا وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ(( 255 ))

255- ALLAH, THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE, THE EVER LIVING THE SELF-SUBSISTING
(BY WHOM ALL SUBSIST) SLUMBER SEIZES HIM NOT, NEITHER SLEEP, HIS ARE ALL
THAT IS IN HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. WHO IS HE THAT CAN INTERCEDE WITH HIM
SAVE BY HIS PERMISSION. HE KNOWS WHAT IS BEFORE THEM, AND WHAT IS BEHIND
THEM. THEY CAN GRASP ONLY THAT PART OF HIS KNOWLEDGE THAT HE WILLS. HIS
THRONE COMPRISING THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH HAS EXTENDED, AND PRESERVING
THEM DOES NOT WEARY HIM. HE IS THE HIGH THE GREAT.

[ 281 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT VERSES OF QUR?N
(VERSE OF THE THRONE) VERSE NO. 255**

Enough to show the importance of VERSE OF THE THRONE, is the narration
that: \`Once the prophet asked one of his companions named,
ABI-IBN-KAAB; which one is the highest of verses in the BOOK OF ALLAH?
and he answered - Verse of the Throne. The prophet happily touched ABI'S
chest and said: \`\`Drink - hail the knowledge'' i.e. congratulation.

COMMENTS

The verse begins with Allah's most sacred Essence, and greatest of
Attributes, that cannot contain in our understandings, and no words can
express Him! Perhaps the only FIT-WORD by which we may name the Essence
or Attributes of God is the pronoun \`\`HE'' Allah is a comprehensive
name of HIS Substance - all in all. A name that repudiates any idea or
suggestion that there can be any compeers of Allah, who is the true
living One God. \`HE is the ever living, Self - subsisting.'

He lives, but His life is Self - subsisting and Eternal, because His
absolute life is His very Essence, knowledge and power. His life does
not depend on anything other than His very Self, and is not similar to
any other life that are contingent and evanescent. He never dies.
\`Slumber seizes Him not, neither sleep.'

His life is perfect; so much so that HE is never subject to death nor
He needs to have some rest. Therefore His activities never slow down by
slumber or sleep. He will never be negligent, heedless, or unaware of
His creatures even for the least fraction of time, any where! \`His are
all that is in heavens and the earth.'

The fifth attribute mentioned here is His absolute OWNERSHIP of
whatever exists in space and time like the heavens and the earth.
Considering that everything belongs to God, and what we have is given to
us by Him temporarily, may teach us good lessons of

[ 282 ]

development and evolution, and prevent us from transgressing upon other
people. \`Who is he that can intercede with Him, save by HIS
permission.' \`\`No, creature can stand before Him as of right to
intercede for another creature, because both of them are dependent upon
God's will, unless HE, Himself permits that.'' About INTERCESSION we
have given enought detail in Q- S 2:42. \`He knows what is before them
and what is behind them. They can grasp only the part of His knowledge
that He wills' God's knowledge is absolute and is not conditioned by
time and space. Whatever may contain in time and space are clearly open
before Him, and He sees instantly whatever may be before or after; here
or there.

Our knowledge which is limited and confined in space and time, gets
some reflection of reality when it accords with HIS knowledge, and is a
ray of that infinite, Eternal spectrum of Radiation. \`His THRONE
comprising the heavens and the earth has extended; And preserving them
does not weary Him. He is the Most High the Great. His kingdom and Power
covers and maintains all the heavens and earth and everything in them.
By \`EVERYTHING' we understand all that exists, whether spiritual or
material. Therefore, in everything is the working of God's Power and
knowledge, and throughout space and time His Will is done, and His
authority accepted.

Imam Sadiq (AS) said: \`\`The heavens and earth in comparison to the
THRONE (ARSH), is like a finger ring fallen in the middle of a very
extensive desert!''

لاَ إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ قَد تَّبَيَّنَ الرُّشْدُ مِنَ الْغَيّ فَمَن
يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّـاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِن بِاللهِ فَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ
بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَى لاَانفِصَامَ لَهَا وَاللهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ((
256 ))

256- THERE IS NO COMPULSION IN RELIGION. RECTITUDE HAS NOW BEEN
DISTINCT FROM ERROR. SO WHOEVER REJECTS EVIL (SUCH AS SATAN, IDOLS, OR
ANY REBEL) AND

[ 283 ]

BELIEVES IN ALLAH, HAS REALLY GRASPED AT THE MOST TRUSTWORTHY
HAND-HOLD, THAT NEVER BREAKS. AND ALLAH IS ALL- HEARING ALL-KNOWING.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 256)**

One of the prophet's companions whose name was ABUHASIN, had two sons
who were attracted to Christianity, by the preachings of some priests.
The father asked the prophet to encourage his sons to recant and return
back to Islam. The said verse revealed to disclose that compulsion is
not compatible with religion.

**THE COMMENTS**

The preceding VERSE OF THRONE which implied the most important tenets
of Islam, that can easily be proved by reasoning and common sense,
concludes that truth and error are so clear from each other that any
person of good will and common sense should have no doubt in his heart
as to the fundamentals of religion, and therefore: \`\`There is no
compulsion in religion.'' as the verse begins with. The verse then ends
in that: \`\`He who rejects evil and avoids Satan, idolatries, and
disobedience to God; has grasped a firm hand-hold that never breaks, and
our safety and security, so long as we hold firmly to God and have our
trust on HIM, is assured.'' The ending of the verse implies that
religion depends on the will and faith, and not on the pretence, because
Allah hears well and knows well.

اللهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ يُخْرِجُهُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَـاتِ
إِلَى النُّورِ وَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَوْلِيَآؤُهُمُ الطَّـاغُوتُ
يُخْرِجُونَهُم مِنَ النُّورِ إِلَى الظُّلُمَـاتِ أُوْلَئَكَ أَصْحَـابُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيَها خَـالِدُونَ(( 257 ))

[ 284 ]

257- ALLAH IS THE GUARDIAN OF THOSE WHO BELIEVE HE TAKES THEM OUT OF
DARKNESS (AND LEADS THEM) TO LIGHT. AND THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE, THEIR
GUARDIANS ARE THE EVIL ONES, WHO TAKE THEM OUT OF THE LIGHT AND LEAD
THEM INTO THE DARKNESS THEY ARE THE COMPANIONS OF THE FIRE, AND SHALL
ABIDE IN IT FOR EVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 257**

The verse continues with the arrangment of the preceding verse about
belief and disbelief, and makes clear the condition of the two parties
from the stand point of leading and leadership, saying: \`\`Allah is the
protector of the faithful. He will lead them from the depths of darkness
into light.'' And as for those who reject faith, the evil ones, such as
Satan, Rebels, Deviated, and etc. is their leader, who take them out of
the light, and lead them into darkness. For this reason such faithless
people are the companions of the Fire, and they shall abide in Hell for
ever.

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِي حَآجَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي رَبِّهِ أَنْ
ءَاتَـاهُ اللهُ الْمُلْكَ إذْ قَالَ إبْرَهِيمُ رَبِّيَ الَّذِي يُحْيي
وَيُمِيتُ قَالَ أَنّاْ أُحْي وَأُمِيتُ قَالَ إِبْراهِيمُ فَإِنَّ اللهَ
يَأْتِي بِالشَّمْسِ مِنَ الْمَشْرِقِ فَأْتِ بِهَا مِنَ الْمَغْرِبِ
فَبُهِتَ الَّذِي كَفَرَ واللهُ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّـالِمِينَ((
258 ))

258- HAVE YOU NOT SEEN HIM TO WHOM ALLAH HAD GIVEN KINGDOM, (NIMROD,
WHO WAS PUFFED WITH PRIDE AND VANITY FOR HAVING POWER AND SOVEREIGNTY)
HOW HE DISPUTED WITH ABRAHAM CONCERNING HIS LORD? WHEN ABRAHAM SAID:

[ 285 ]

\`MY LORD IS HE WHO GIVES LIFE AND CAUSES TO DIE.' HE SAID: \`I (TOO)
CAN GIVE LIFE AND MAKE TO DIE!' (TO PROVE THAT, HE SLEW A PRISONER AND
PARDONED ANOTHER) ABRAHAM SAID: \`ALLAH BRINGS THE SUN FROM THE EAST, SO
BRING YOU IT FROM THE WEST.' THEN THE UNBELIEVER WAS CONFOUNDED AND
ALLAH GUIDES NOT THE PEOPLE WHO OPPRESS.

**THE COMMENTARY
ABRAHAM IN FRONT OF NIMROD, THE T?GHUT OF HIS TIME**

TAGHUT= REBELLIOUS, is an intensive word from the root: TOGHY?N=
REBELLION, which implies to any sort of uprising, revolt open
resistance, or defiance of any authority; and hence the Devil and Satan
manifest the meaning and symbolize it. In Pagan Era too, the Arabs had
an ancient idol which was named TAGHUT, and was worshipped by almost all
the tribes, and therefore TAGHUT CAN also imply idol. Here in this verse
NIMROD the tyrant oppressor king of Babylonia is the person alluded
to.

VERSE NO. 258

Here an example is given of faithful and faithless, and God's grace and
guidance, which was mentioned and discusses in the preceding verses. It
alludes to ABRAHAM the Breaker of Idols; and the tyrant and dictator of
his age, known as NIMROD who ruled over BABYLONIA, the original home of
ABRAHAM. (UR OF THE CHALDEES) Our prophet (AS) is addressed here in this
verse, saying: \`\`Did you not see him to whom Allah had given kingdom,
how he disputed with ABRAHAM concerning his Lord?''

[ 286 ]

The dispute was due to the power and kingdom that God had given him,
and it was also due to his lack of capacity. There are many a one who
has faith, and is good in deeds, and fair and gentle in behaviour; as
long as he has not come to rank and power. But as soon as he reaches to
a position and becomes rich, he forgets all, and deviates from his
straight path. The pride of power leads him to the darknesses of vanity
and selfishness, and he may easily profane the name of God and all the
important sanctities.

When Nimrod asked Abraham who had already broken their idols, and was
in their court procedure: \`\`Who is your Lord?'' ABRAHAM answered:
\`\`My Lord is He who gives life and causes to die.'' Here ABRAHAM
reasons through the greatest masterpiece of the creation which is life
and death, where as his opponent adheres to fallacious resoning and says
that: \`\`I can also give life and make to die!'' And in order to prove
his false claim, he ordered a prisoner to be executed, and another one
released! Then ABRAHAM astonished the claimer by going back to
fundamentals. He said to Nimrod: \`\`If you think that you have the
ultimate power, then make the sun rise from the west! And of course
Allah will not guide the oppressors.''

أَوْ كَِالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَى قَرْيَة وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا
قَالَ أَنَّى يُحْيي هَـذِهِ اللهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا فَأَمَاتَهُ اللهُ
مِاْئَةَ عَام ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتَ قَالَ لَبِثْتُ يَوْماً
أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْم قَالَ بَل لَّبِثْتَ مِاْئَةَ عَام فَانظُرْ إِلَى
طَعَامِكَ وَشَرَابِكَ لَمْ يَتَسَنَّهْ وَانظُرْ إِلَى حِمَارِكَ
وَلِنَجْعَلَكَ ءَايَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَانظُرْ إِلَى الْعِظَامِ كَيْفَ
نُنشِزُهَا ثُمَّ نَكْسُوهَا لَحْماً فَلَمّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ قَالَ
أَعْلَمُ أَنَّ اللهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَىْء قَدِيرٌ(( 259 ))

259- OR SUCH AS HIM WHO, WHEN PASSING BY A RUINED AND DESOLATE TOWN,
SAID: \`HOW AND WHEN WILL ALLAH GIVE IT LIFE AFTER ITS DEATH? THEN ALLAH
CAUSED HIM TO DIE A HUNDRED YEARS, THEN RAISED HIM UP AGAIN! HE

[ 287 ]

SAID HOW LONG YOU TARRIED? HE SAID: I HAVE TARRIED A DAY OR PART OF A
DAY. HE SAID: \`NOT SO! YOU HAVE STAYED HERE A HUNDRED YEARS. THEN LOOK
AT YOUR FOOD AND DRINK; AGE HAS NOT ROTTED THEM! AND LOOK AT (THE BONES)
OF YOUR ASS AND WE SHALL MAKE YOU A SIGN TO MANKIND. AND LOOK FURTHER AT
THE BONES HOW DO WE BRING THEM TOGETHER, AND THEN CLOTH THEM WITH FLESH.
SO WHEN IT WAS MADE CLEAR TO HIM, HE SAID: I KNOW (NOW) THAT ALLAH HAS
POWER OVER ALL THINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 259**

This incident is referred to a man (EZRA), who in his journey rides an
ass, and carries with him some food and drink and, Lo! He sees the ruins
of a desolate town, and the dreadful view of the scattered and rotten
bones of its inhabitants! The fearful scenery puts him in doubt and
despair, and asks himself: \`\`How and when will Allah give life to them
after such a death?!'' But as the verse implies God can cause
resurrection as He has done many time in history. The verse says:
\`\`Then Allah caused him to die a hundred years. Then He raised him up
again.''

Then in order to assure HIS apostle; God tells him to look over his
food and drink which was still as fresh as he had left it besides! On
the other hand he looked at his donkey and saw that only some of its
bones were remained; dry and all rotten. The verse continues: \`\`Then
look at your food and drink! Ages has not rotten them, but observe the
rotten bones of your ass and see how we gather them together and reunite
them, and see how do We cover them with flesh and skin, and blow life in
him, just to make a sign of you

[ 288 ]

and a teaching lesson for mankind.'' When all these happened and the
dead man and animal got a new life, Ezra said: \`\`Now I know well that
Allah has power to do whatever He intends.''

وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبَراهِيمُ رَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيي الْمَوْتَى قَالَ
أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِن قَالَ بَلَى وَلَـكِن لِّيَطْمَئنَّ قَلْبِى قَالَ فَخُذْ
أَرْبَعَةً مِن الطَّيْرِ فَصُرْهُنَّ إِلَيْكَ ثُمَّ اجْعَلْ عَلَى كُلّ ِ
جَبَل مّنْهُنَّ جُزْءاً ثُمَّ ادْعُهُنَّ يَأْتِينَكَ سَعْياً وَاعْلَمْ
أَنَّ اللهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 260 ))

260- AND WHEN ABRAHAM SAID: \`\`MY LORD! SHOW ME HOW YOU GIVE LIFE TO
THE DEAD? HE SAID: HAVE YOU NOT FAITH? HE SAID: YES, BUT TO REASSURE MY
HEART. HE SAID: THEN TAKE FOUR BIRDS, AND AFTER SLAUGHTERING THEM CUT
THEIR BODIES TO PIECES. THEN PLACE ON EVERY MOUNTAIN A PART OF THEM.
THEN CALL THEM. THEY WILL COME TO YOU FLYING. AND KNOW THAT ALLAH IS
MIGHTY WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
ANOTHER SCENE OF RESURRECTION IN THIS WORLD
(VERSE NO. 260)**

Following the story of Ezra about resurrection, another incident of
that kind is mentioned in this verse that: \`\`One day HAZRAT ABRAHAM
(AS), walking at a sea-shore saw the carcass of a man, half in the sea
and half on the shore, where the birds were eating his flesh out, and
the sea animal from the in!''

Seeing that; Abraham thought of a problem that every one wants to know
it clearly, and that is the resurrection after death. Here Qur?n

[ 289 ] HAZRAT ABRAHAM (AS) did all that, as per order of God, and when
he called them, each part of a bird joined his counter part, and they
became the same four birds that they were before their slaughter, all
alive and all sound and safe! This incident showed ABRAHAM that the same
sort of resurrection, but in a much larger scale will happen in Dooms
Day, and that Allah is Mighty and Wise.

مَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَلَهُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ كَمَثَلِ
حَبَّة اَنبَتَتْ سَبْعَ سَنَابِلَ فِي كُلّ ِ سُنبُلَة مِّاْئَةُ حَبَّة
وَاللهُ يُضَـاعِفُ لِمَن يَشَآءُ وَاللهُ وَسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 261 ))

261- THE PARABLE OF THOSE WHO EXPEND THEIR WEALTH IN THE WAY OF ALLAH,
IS THE LIKENESS OF A GRAIN OF CORN THAT SPROUTS SEVEN EARS, EACH BEARING
A HUNDRED GRAINS, AND ALLAH MAKES THAT TWOFOLD (OR MAINIFOLD) FOR WHOM
HE WILLS. AND ALLAH IS EXTENDER, ALL-KNOWING


