A Complementary To Preceding Discussing (verse No. 283)
=======================================================

[ 313 ]

THE COMMENTARY

Containing some other commandments, this verse (NO. 283) is a
complementary to the previous one. The commandments are as follows:

1- If you are on a journey, and you cannot find a scribe, a pledge is
to be taken. (A BAILMENT OF CHATTEL OR OBJECT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY AS
SECURITY FOR THE SATISFACTION OF A DEBT - WEBSTERS') At home too, if
there is no access to a writer; taking a pledge will have no
objection.

2- The pledge should actually be delivered to the creditor.

3- Then there is the exception of one whom you trust. As for the
trustee, neither writing, nor pledge is necessary. On the other hand the
trustee has to beware of Allah, and deliver the trust in time and
term.

4- After all, people are addressed in general and called to avoid
concealing testimony and evidences, because whoever hides that, his
heart is sinful as Allah says in the verse. Evidently the heart is the
seat of our secrets and affections. Therefore the sin of concealing
testimony, and hiding evidences will affect the innermost of our soul
and self, and will also taint our heart and our affections.

للهِ مَا فِي السَّمَـاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ وَإِن تُبْدُواْ مَا فِي
أَنفُسِكمُ أَو تُخْفُوهُ يُحَاسِبْكُم بِهِ اللهُ فَيَغْفِرُ لِمَن
يَشَآءُ وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَآءُ وَاللهُ عَلَى كُلّ ِ شَىْء قَدِيرٌ(( 284
))

284- TO ALLAH BELONGS ALL THAT IS IN THE HEAVENS AND ON THE EARTH.
WHETHER YOU REVEAL WHAT IS IN YOUR SOULS, OR HIDE IT, ALLAH WILL BRING
YOU TO ACCOUNT FOR THEM. THEN HE WILL FORGIVE WHOM HE WILL, AND PUNISH
WHOM HE PLEASES. AND ALLAH HAS POWER OVER ALL THINGS.

[ 314 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
EVERYTHING BELONGS TO HIM (VERSE NO. 284)**

In fact this verse (NO. 284) is the continuation of the last phrase of
the preceding verse that: To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens
and in the earth. Therefore if you reveal or conceal that which is in
your mind, it makes no difference for Him. He knows all, and will call
you to account for it. Then He will forgive whoever He will, if He knows
him deserving forgiveness, and He will punish whom He pleases for his
sins. Then don't you ever think that, deeds such as concealing evidences
and hiding testimony will escape His knowledge or sight.

ءَامَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَآ أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِن رَّبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
كُلٌّ ءَامَنَ بِاللهِ وَمَلائَكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لاَ نُفَرِّقُ
بَيْنَ أَحَد مِن رُّسُلِهِ وَقَالُواْ سَمِعَنا وَأَطَعْنَا غُفْرَانَكَ
رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ(( 283 ))

283- THE MESSENGER BELIEVES IN WHAT WAS SENT DOWN TO HIM FROM HIS LORD.
(HE BELIEVES IN, AND DOES WHATEVER HE SAYS) AND (SO DO) THE BELIEVERS,
THEY ALL BELIEVE IN ALLAH AND HIS ANGELS AND HIS BOOKS AND HIS
MESSENGERS. WE MAKE NO DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ANY OF HIS MESSENGERS. AND
THEY SAID: \`WE HEAR AND OBEY.' OUR LORD YOUR FORGIVENESS. (DO WE CRAVE)
OUR LORD! TO YOU IS THE RETURN. (OF ALL OF US)

[ 315 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 285)**

When the preceding verse (NO. 284) revealed saying: \`\`If you reveal
or conceal that which is in your mind, God knows it and will call you to
account for it.'' Some of the prophets's companions were afraid of that;
saying: \`\`None of us can get rid of Satan's temptations, and if so, no
one can escape Allah's wrath and punishment!'' To this effect the verse
(NO. 285) revealed to show the way to salvation, and how to pray God,
asking him to forgive us our sins. It came to teach us that with
realisation in hearts and confession on the lips, we should go to our
Merciful Lord and earnestly ask for His help, forgiveness, and
guidance.

**THE WAY AND METHOD OF FAITH**

The chapter of \`COW' started with the question of faith, showed its
various shades and aspects, discussed faith rejection, and faith
rejectors, and now rounds off its argument with faith and its practical
manifestation in conduct such that the faithful hears and obeys, and
that he prays earnestly for God's help, forgiveness, and guidance. Thus,
having faith in the Originator and Resurrector, and His Apostles, is
linked with being obedient to Divine Commandments, and holding on with
the Law.

لاَ يُكَلِّفُ اللهُ نَفْساً إِلاَّ وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
وَعَلَيْهَا مَااكْتَسَبَتْ رَبَّنَا لاَ تُؤَاخِدْنَآ إِن نَّسِينَآ أَوْ
أَخْطَأْنَا رَبَّنَا وَلاَ تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَآ إِصْراً كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ
عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا رَبَّنا وَلاَ تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لاَ طَاقَةَ
لَنَا بِهِ وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَآ أَنتَ مَوْلَـنَا
فَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَـافِرِينَ(( 286 ))

286- ALLAH DOES NOT CHARGE A SOUL WITH MORE THAN IT CAN BEAR. FOR IT,
IS WHATEVER (OF GOODNESS) IT EARNS, AND AGAINST IT SHALL BE WHATEVER (OF
EVIL) IT HAS

[ 316 ]

EARNED. OUR LORD! DO NOT QUESTION US IF WE FORGET OR MAKE A MISTAKE.
OUR LORD! AND DO NOT LAY ON US A BURDEN AS YOU LAID ON THOSE BEFORE US.
OUR LORD! AND DO NOT IMPOSE UPON US THAT WHICH WE HAVE NOT THE STRENGTH
TO BEAR, AND PARDON US, AND FORGIVE US, AND HAVE MERCY ON US, YOU ARE
OUR PROTECTOR. GIVE US VICTORY OVER THE UNBELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 286**

This verse implies that God will not charge a soul with any duty more
than it can bear, and of its capacity of doing it. All the Commandments
of the LAW, are defined, and made distinct in outline and character with
this verse, in order to be in harmony and agreement with man's capacity
and power. The verse then adds: \`\`Whatever of good deeds a soul may
earn will be to his own benefit, and whatever of evil it may do, he
shall have its bad consequences against itself. Thus the verse notifies
that every person is responsible for his or her deeds.'' After all, on
behalf of the believers, seven requests are prayed for, which are taught
as spiritual and moral lessons. They say: \`\`Our Lord! Do not question
us if we forget or make a mistake.''

Being forgetful is being careless, which may result in being broad and
liberal in standards of belief and conducts. And as the believers know
that they are responsible for what they do, they earnestly ask their
Lord to cover and clear their mistakes, and forgive their faults;
meanwhile they are resolved to avoid great and heinous sins.

In their next request they pray to God saying:

[ 317 ]

Our Lord! \`\`Do not lay on us a burden as you laid on those before
us.'' We must not think that we are superior to those who were before
us. On the contrary knowing how much they failed, we pray that our
burdens should be lightened, and we confess our realisation that we have
all, the greater need for God's Mercy and Forgiveness. In their third
request they pray: \`\`Our Lord! Do not impose upon us that which we
have not the strength to bear.'' This may imply the unbearable trials,
and stern punishments in this world and in the last. Their next three
requests are that: \`\`Our Lord! Pardon us, Forgive us, and have Mercy
on us.'' And finally in their seventh request they pray for God's help,
not in their own selfish ends, but in their resolve to uphold God's
truth against all unbelief: \`\`Our Lord! You are our Protector, Give us
victory over the UNBELIEVERS.''

**THE END OF SUREH BAQARA
(THE HEIFER=THE COW)**

[ 318 ]

**INTRODUCTION TO THE FAMILY OF IMRAN
(L? - IMRAN SURA 3)**

Some of the famous commentators have understood this chapter to have
been revealed during the years of the battle of BADR and OHUD (2/3 A.H.)
This was one of the most disturbed and agitated period of Islamic
history. The central theme and main subject of the verses circulate
around the following matters.

1- A great deal of arguments are about Monotheism and oneness of God
and His Attributes, the Resurrection Day and some Islamic teachings and
preachings.

2- An important part of the SURA, is about JAHAD; (THE SACRED FIGHT FOR
THE CAUSE OF GOD) and fine notes on the battles of BADR and OHUD shows
how Allah will help and uphold the virtuous. There is also the lessons
of Badr and Ohud that must be learned, to know that the misfortune of
the battle of Ohud was due to indiscipline of some, believers and the
cowardice on the part of the hypocrites. There are also notes on the
everlasting life of the martyrs.

3- Then a series of Islamic Commandments are issued about the unity and
union of Muslims - KAABA the house of Allah and pilgrimage - Enjoining
good and forbidding evil - Trusts and being trustworthy - charity and
alms - truthfulness and perseverance in front of enemy, and being
patient and being steadfast in difficulties.

4- A part of the SURA is allocated to the story and history of some of
the prophets and apostle for teaching spiritual and moral lessons. These
are mainly, Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Mary and others.

The subjects and matters of this long chapters of Qur?n are so linked
together that one may think it has been revealed all together and at
once.

HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ (AS) has said: \`\`He who recites the SURA OF HEIFER,
(COW) and the FAMILY OF IMRAN; in the Dooms Day, the two chapter, like
two clouds will give him some welcome shade. (from the sun)''

[ 319 ]

سوره آل عمران **THE FAMILY OF IMRAN**

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE

الم(( 1 )) 1- ALIF - LAM - MIM اللهُ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الْحَيُّ
الْقَيُّومُ(( 2 ))

2- ALLAH; THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE, THE LIVING THE SELF - SUBSISTING (BY
WHOM ALL THINGS SUBSIST) نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَـابَ بِالْحَقّ ِ
مُصَدِّقاً لِمّاَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَأَنزَلَ التَّوْرَاةَ وَالاِْنجِيلَ
(( 3 ))

3- HE SENT DOWN TO YOU THE BOOK IN TRUTH CONFIRMING THAT WHICH WAS
BEFORE IT, AND HE, SENT DOWN TOWR?T, AND THE GOSPEL OF JESUS; مِن قَبْلُ
هُدىً لِلّنَّاسِ وَأَنزَلَ الْفُرْقَانَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ
بِآيَـاتِ اللهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ وَاللهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انتِقَام(( 4
))

4- AFORE TIME AS GUIDANCE TO THE PEOPLE. AND HE SENT DOWN THE
DISCRIMNATOR. (A BOOK OF DISTINCTION BETWEEN TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD) THOSE
WHO DENY ALLAH'S REVELATIONS, FOR THEM AWAITS A STERN CHASTISEMENT. AND
ALLAH IS THE EXALTED IN MIGHT, THE LORD OF REVENGE.

[ 320 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ALIFE - LAM MIM (VERSE NO. 1)**

As for the abbreviated letters (MOQATTAAT) we gave enough details in
the beginning of the COW (QUR?N- S 2:1) and there is no need to repeat
it here. VERSE NO.2

\`\`Allah, there is no God but HE.'' He is the only everlasting, ever
living and Self-subsisting Essence. Whose attributes are different from
anything that we may know; and that, it seems that the only fit word by
which we can name Allah is \`\`HE''. More detail about this matter is
given in QUR?N - S 2:255. VERSE NO.3

Here in this verse our prophet is addressed that: \`\`The ever living
and self - subsisting God has sent down to you the BOOK (QUR?N) in truth
which confirms the scriptures that were sent before it. VERSE NO. 4

Then it adds that the BOOK which is sent down to you is a
\`DISCRIMINATOR' or a criterion which is a true standard of right and
wrong. The verse then implies that, after sending so many clear signs
and miracles; for those who deny and reject, there remains no other
resort, but to chastise them severely. And to put an stress on the
matter that God can, and will easily fulfill His threats and promises.
The verse ends in that: \`\`Allah is Mighty and the Lord of Revenge.''

إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَخْفَى عَلَيْهِ شَىْءٌ فِي الاَْرْضِ وَلاَ فِي
السَّمَآءِ(( 5 )) 5- AS FOR ALLAH, NOTHING IS HIDDEN FROM HIM IN THE
EARTH, NOR IN THE HEAVEN.

[ 321 ]

هُوَ الَّذِي يُصَوِّرُكُمْ فِي الاَْرْحَامِ كَيْفَ يَشَآءُ لاَ إِلَـه
إِلاَّ هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ(( 6 )) 6- IT IS HE WHO SHAPES YOU IN
THE WOMBS AS HE LIKES. THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE. THE EXALTED IN MIGHT, THE
WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 5**

This is a complementary to the preceding verses that implies:
\`\`nothing is hidden from God throughout the heavens and earth.'' And
how can something be concealed from His sight, while He is Omnipresent
and His existence is infinite and without limit of any kind. He is
nearer than ourself. though He has no place and is beyond space and
time, He encompasses all through - His knowledge and Power. VERSE NO.
6

This verse alludes to a corner of His infinite Power and Knowledge
through one of the most significant phenomenons saying: \`\`It is He who
shapes you in the wombs as He likes.'' Development of foetus in the
darkness of the womb, from one shape and state to another, until it
becomes a baby, is indeed an amazing work of the Creator, especially
with all that variations, and differences of form and figure, abilities
and qualifications which proves that there is no God but Our Lord, the
Creator who is All-mighty and All-wisdom.

هُوَ الَّذِي أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَـابَ مِنْهُ ءَايَـاتٌ
مُّحْكَمَـاتٌ هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَـابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَـابِهَـاتٌ فَأَمَّا
الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَـابَهَ مِنْهُ
ابْتِغَآءَ الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَآءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ
تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلاَّ اللهُ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ يَقُولُونَ
ءَامَنَّا بِهِ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِندِ رَبِّنَا وَمَا يَذّكَّرُ إِلاَّ
أُوْلُواْ الاَْلْبَـابِ(( 7 ))

[ 322 ]

7- HE IS WHO SENT DOWN TO YOU THE BOOK; SOME OF ITS VERSES ARE
FUNDAMENTALS, (CLEAR AND EVIDENT IN MEANING) THEY ARE THE MOTHER OF THE
BOOK (THESE ARE THE FOUNDATION OF THE BOOK, AND COMPLEXITIES OF OTHER
VERSES ARE INTERPRETED AND CLEARED WITH REFERENCE TO THESE FUNDAMENTALS)
AND SOME OTHER (OF THE VERSES) ARE AMBIGUOUS. BUT THOSE IN WHOSE HEARTS
IS PERVERSITY, THEY FOLLOW THE AMIBGUOUS PART SEEKING DISSENSION, AND
SEEKING TO PARAPHRASE IT. (WITH ALLIGURACAL EXPLANATIONS) BUT NO ONE
KNOWS THE HIDDEN MEANING EXCEPT ALLAH, AND THOSE WHO ARE WELL - GROUNDED
IN KNOWLEDGE WHO SAY: \`\`WE BELIEVE IN IT. ALL ARE FROM OUR LORD.'' AND
NONE DO MIND, SAVE MEN OF UNDERSTANDINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 7)**

HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ (AS) has said: \`\`Some of the Jews accompanied with
HAY-IBN-AKHTAB and his brother went to the prophet and said: \`according
to the NUMERICAL ALPHABET, (ABJAD ALIF=1, L?M=30, MIM=40) that make up a
total of 71; which indicates that your Islam and Muslim people will not
last more than 71 years.''

In order to prevent misinterpretation of the words and verses and
making a play-toy of phrases; the prophet said to them: \`\`Why have you
counted only A-L-M, while there are many other abbreviated letters in
Qur?n such as A-L-M-S and A-L-R, etc.? If you think that these letters
count for the

[ 323 ]

duration of Muslim community, why don't you then add all of them
together? Therefore the purpose of the letters are not so as you
think.''

**FUNDAMENTAL AND AMBIGUOUS VERSES**

This verse discloses one of the important qualifications of QUR?N which
may give us an important clue to the interpretation of our Holy Book:
\`\`Allah has sent down to you a Book, the verses of which have either
established meaning are allegorical.'' These ambiguous verses which
might be figurative, metaphorical or allegorical can be used as a
criterion to separate the truthful scholars who are well-grounded in
knowledge, from the obstinate seditious persons who pretend to be wise
and learned:

\`\`Those in whose hearts is perversity, follow the ambiguous part
seeking dissension by paraphrasing the verses.'' But those learned ones
with correct understanding and deep knowledge say: \`\`We believe in the
BOOK. All its verses whether fundamental or ambiguous are from our
Lord.''

The above verse implies that some of the verses are so clear and
established in meaning that leave no room for any sort of doubt or to
waver. This verses cannot be misused or misapplied. Literally these
verses are named the mother of QUR?N or the foundations. Some other of
the verses, due to their high level, and many shades and phases of
meaning, seem to be figurative, metaphorical, or equivocals, which are
capable of being understood in several possible senses.

Perverted people with mental disease, seek to misinterpret and misapply
such verses, in order to seduce and attract people towards themselves.
The frontiers of knowledge, such as the prophets may know the whole or a
part of the hidden meaning of the verses, and other learned ones know it
according to their capacity and level of knowledge and wisdom.

[ 324 ]

رَبَّنَا لاَ تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَيْتَنَا وَهَبْ لَنَا مِن
لَّدُنكَ رَحْمَةً إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْوَهَّابُ(( 8 )) 8- (THOSE WHO ARE
DEEP-ROOTED IN KNOWLEDGE, SAY:) OUR LORD! LET NOT OUR HEARTS TO SWERVE
AFTER YOU HAVE GUIDED US; AND GRANT US OF YOUR MERCY, THAT YOU ARE THE
MOST GRACIOUS ONE.

رَبَّنَآ إِنَّكَ جَامِعُ النَّاسِ لِيَوْم لاَّ رَيْبَ فِيهِ إِنَّ اللهَ
لاَ يُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ (( 9 )) 9- OUR LORD! YOU ARE THE GATHERER OF
PEOPLE FOR A DAY IN WHICH THERE IS NO DOUBT, THAT ALLAH WILL NOT FAIL
HIS PROMISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
FREEDOM OF SWERVES (VERSE NO. 8)**

As the ambiguous verses may cause deviations, those who are
well-grounded in knowledge, the more they know the less they think of
themselves and of what they know, but besides using their knowledge,
they seek refuge in God. Therefore this verse is their prayer asking God
to protect them from deviation and swerve: \`\`Our Lord! Let not our
hearts swerve after you have guided us.''


VERSE NO. 9 And being sure of their eventual return to God in the
Resurrection Day for final judgement, they pray saying: \`\`Our Lord!
You are the One that will gather together all the people for a day in
which there is no doubt, because you never fail your promise.'' Thus
they avoid any extreme, or caprices and emotions capable of deviating
them through faith in Allah and the Dooms Day.

[ 325 ]

إنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَن تُغْنِىَ عَنْهُمْ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلاَ
أَوْلادُهُم مِّنَ اللهِ شَيْئاً وَأُوْلَئكَ هُمْ وَقُودُ النَّارِ(( 10
)) 10- AS FOR THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE, THEIR PROPERTIES WILL NOT AVAIL THEM
NEITHER THEIR CHILDREN, AUGHT AGAINST ALLAH. AND THEY ARE THEMSELVES
FUELS FOR THE FIRE. (HELL)

كَدَأْبِ ءَالِ فِرْعُوْنَ وَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ كَذَّبُواْ
بِآيَـاتِنَا فَأَخَذَهُمُ اللهُ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَاللهُ شَدِيدُ
الْعِقَابِ(( 11 )) 11- (THEIR CUSTOM OF REJECTING FAITH AND DEVIATING
FROM THE TRUTH) IS LIKE THE BEHAVIOUR OF PHARAOH'S FOLK, AND THOSE WHO
WERE BEFORE THEM. THEY BELIED OUR SIGNS, THEN ALLAH SEIZED THEM BECAUSE
OF THEIR SINS. AND ALLAH IS STERN IN RETRIBUTION.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 10**

In the previous verses the position of the believers and the
unbelievers, in relation to the fundamental and ambiguous verse was
enlightened and shown. Now the argument is brought to the painful
condition of the heathens in the Dooms Day, in order to show them the
bad consequences of their evil deeds, down here. There; in their great
misfortune, there is nothing and no one to help them, or avail them
aught against Allah, even their own children. They shall be fuels of the
fire in Hell.

[ 326 ]

VERSE NO. 11 Here a clear example of the tribes with high power and
great wealth is given, which their riches and power availed them nothing
when God's chastisement seized them: \`\`They are like Pharaoh's folk,
and those who were before them. They belied our signs and then Allah
seized them because of their sins.''

قُل لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا سَتُغْلَبُونَ وَتُحْشَرُونَ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ
وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ(( 12 )) 12- SAY TO THE UNBELIEVERS: (DO NOT BOAST OF
YOUR TEMPORARY SUCCESS BECAUSE) SOON WILL YOU BE VANQUISHED AND DRIVEN
TOWARDS HELL AND THE EVIL RESTING PLACE.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 12)**

When the prophet and his companions won the battle of BADR, and
vanquished the Pagans; some of the learned Jews said: \`\`The promised
prophet is marked invincible in our scriptures, and Mohammad, is of
surety the one we expect to come,'' Others said: \`\`We should wait a
little longer, until another war breaks in, and then judge from what has
happened.'' Then when Muslims had some failure in the battle of Ohud,
the Jews said: \`\`No! Mohammad can't be the promised prophet for whom
we are longing, because he proved in the battle of Ohud that he is
conquerable.'' The verse was sent down to answer them.

COMMENTS

Here a warning is given to the Pagan Arabs, the Jews and the Christians
and generally to all those who reject faith, that their resistance would
be in vain and of no use at all: \`\`Say to the unbelievers;

[ 327 ]

soon will you be vanquished and driven towards Hell and the evil
abode.'' Qur?nic predictions are too many, and none have proved to be
untrue. A few years later the jews of Bani nazir, Banighoraiza, and
Khaibar, were all defeated and submitted to Mohammad and his forces, and
the next few decades saw the Roman Empire and Persian Kingdom overthrown
because of their arrogance, and their resistance to God's Message.

قَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ ءَايَةٌ فِي فِئَتَيْنِ الْتَقَتَا فِئَةٌ تُقَـاتِلُ
فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَأُخْرَى كَافِرَةٌ يَرَوْنَهُم مِّثْلَيْهِمْ رَأْيَ
الْعَيْنِ وَاللهُ يُؤَيِّدُ بِنَصْرِهِ مَن يَشَآءُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لَعِبْرَةً لاُّوْلِي الاَْبْصَـارِ(( 13 ))

13- THERE HAS ALREADY BEEN A SIGN FOR YOU IN THE TWO ARMIES WHICH MET.
(IN THE BADR'S BATTLE FIELD) ONE WAS FIGHTING IN THE WAY OF ALLAH, AND
ANOTHER UNBELIEVING, WHO SAW (THE BELIEVERS) TWICE AS THEIR REAL NUMBERS
WITH THE SIGHT OF THE EYE, AND ALLAH STRENGTHENS WITH HIS HELP WHOM HE
WILL. IN THAT THERE IS A LESSON FOR THOSE WHO HAVE EYES.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSR NO. 13)**

This refers to the battle of BADR, which was in the second year of
emigration. The little army of Muslims consisted of 313 men, 77 of whom
were the Emigrants of Mecca, and the other 236 men were of their friends
in Medina who were called the Helpers. The muslim forces were mostly
unarmed. They had seventy (70) camels, two(2) horses, six chain - mails,
and very few swords.

dangers of being attacked by their enemies in Mecca and the Jews and
hypocrites of Medina. The plan of the Meccans was to crush and
annihilate Mohammad and his follower and to this end, ABUSOFY?N, the
chief of GHOREISH was leading a richly - laden caravan from Syria to
Mecca. He called for armed aid from Mecca, with the excuse that the
caravan was in danger of being attacked by Mohammad's forces. An army of
the polytheists of Mecca was quickly organized and mobilized, and set
out for Medina and reached in due time. The army was well armed, well
equipped and in number they were more than a thousand. They had among
them some of the most experienced warriors and veterans of war. ABUJAHL,
the sworn enemy of the prophet and the persecutor of Muslims was the
commander of the forces. In a fearful fight, in the plain of BADR, some
50 miles south - west of Median, the prophet's forces defeated the
pagans, and won a brilliant victory. Muslims had some 12 martyrs in this
battle but they killed more than 70 of the heathens, and the same number
of them was taken as captives.

**COMMENTS**

The verse warns the unbelievers not to rely so much upon the material
means, such as wealth, weapon and number of forces and mounts. The
battle of Badr was a good lesson to learn, because Muslims in comparison
with the infidels were too weak, except that they were fighting for
their faith. So it was impossible on the physical basis, and without the
miraculous help of God, for such that small and ill - equipped force, to
defeat that large, well - equipped, and well experienced, army:
\`\`There has already been a sign for you in the two hosts, which met in
the Badr's battle field. One of the hosts was fighting for the cause of
Allah, and other party was unbelieving and faithless.''

The polytheists saw the believerse twice as their real number! Later
the enemy captives stated that they all had seen Muslim forces, at the
first sight less than what they really were; (QUR?N - S 8:44) but when
the fight began, God miraculously made them to see Muslims much more
than their real number! This was to fill the pagans hearts

[ 329 ]

with fear and fright to cause their defeat. On the contrary Muslims saw
the enemy less than what they were in number, and this wrong vision
caused Muslims to be steadfast and the pagans to waver and fickle:
\`\`And Allah strengthens with His help whom He will.''

زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَآءِ وَالْبَنِينَ
وَالْقَنَـاطِيرِ الْمُقَنطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفضَّةِ وَالْخَيْلِ
الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَالاَْنْعَـامِ وَالْحَرْثِ ذَلِكَ مَتَـاعُ الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاللهُ عِندَهُ حُسْنُ الْمَئَابِ(( 14 ))

14- IT IS ADORNED FOR PEOPLE THE LOVE OF LUSTS OF WOMEN, CHILDREN,
HEAPED-UP HEAPS OF GOLD AND SILVER, HORSES WITH MARK, CATTLES AND
FARM-LANDS. (AND IF SUCH THINGS BE THE MAIN OBJECTIVE OF MAN, THEY
SHOULD KNOW THAT) THESE ARE MERELY THE ENJOYMENTS OF THE PRESENT LIFE IN
THE LOWER WORLD, AND WITH ALLAH IS THE FAIREST RESORT.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 14**

This is a complementary to the preceding verse which alludes to those
who relied upon their wealth, power, children, and were puffed up with
pride and arrogance, and then deviated from the straight path of truth.
Here again the pleasures of this lower world are brought to minds: women
for love - children for support - hoarded wealth for everything else -
cattles - horses - and good farm lands, for which many will show ardent
love. All these thing are adorned to allure and attract man, and of
course they are adorned and made attractive by God for manifold purposes
which are hidden and open in God's general plan

[ 330 ]

and wisdom. Using these alluring and attractive pleasures of life as
means and equipments of development and evolution is something good and
necessary, but being in a blinding love for them, and turning them to
the highest goal and objective of life leads to a deadly misfortune and
to an Eternal Condemnation.

قُلْ أَؤُنَبِّئُكُم بِخَيْر مِّن ذَلِكُمْ لِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْاْ عِندَ
رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّـاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَـارُ خَـالِدِينَ
فِيهَا وَأَزْوَاجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ وَرضْوَانٌ مِنَ اللهِ واللهُ بَصِيرُ
بِالْعِبَادِ(( 15 ))

15- SAY SHALL I INFORM YOU OF THINGS BETTER THAN THAT? FOR THOSE WHO
ARE GOD- FEARING, WITH THEIR LORD IS GARDENS WATERED BY RUNNING STREAMS,
WHEREIN THEY SHALL LIVE FOR EVER, AND SPOUSES PURIFIED. AND ALLAH'S GOOD
PLEASURE. AND ALLAH SEES THE SERVANTS.

الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَآ إِنَّنَآ ءَامَنَّا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا
ذُنُوبَنَا وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ(( 16 )) 16- THOSE WHO SAY: \`\`OUR
LORD! WE BELIEVED. FORGIVE US OUR SINS, AND SAVE US FROM THE TORMENT OF
THE FIRE.

الصَّـابرِيِنَ وَالصَّـادِقِينَ وَالْقَـانِتِينَ وَالْمُنفِقِينَ
وَالْمُسْتَغْفِرينَ بِالاَْسْحَارِ(( 17 )) 17- THOSE WHO ARE PATIENT,
TRUTHFUL, OBEDIENT EXPENDERS IN ALMS, AND THOSE WHO ASK FORGIVENESS IN
DAY BREAK.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 15**

The pleasures of this world mentioned in the verse NO. 14 are compared
here with those of the next life, saying: \`\`Do you want me to

[ 331 ]

inform you of things that are far better than the pleasures of this
mortal life? there awaits for the faithful servants of God, gardens
which are watered with running streams, wherein they live with their
purified spouses for ever,'' Through this verse (NO. 15) QUR?N announces
that if the believers content with a moderate and lawful life in this
world, and avoid unlawful pleasures and excess in passions, and control
their caprices, and do not oppress others, God will grant them a clean,
pure, and higher spiritual and physical life of good pleasure, in the
next world.

VERSE NO. 16-17

the virtuous servants of God mentioned in the previous verse are
described in these two verses and six certain virtues and special
qualification are attributed to them as follows:

1- They have faith in their Lord whole hearted, so much so that they
feel a high responsibility for whatever they do, and earnestly pray to
God to forgive them their sins and save them from the agony of the Fire
of Hell.

2- They are patient - whatever of difficulty and hardship they
encounter in their way of worship, they endure it patiently, and
continue firm and steadfast. Further, they have a good self-restraint
against all sins and wrongs.

3- They are true and sincere in words and deeds, and they bring to
action what they have of truth in their mind, and there is no variance
in their deeds and words.

4- They are always humble and obedient to their Lord.

5- They spend in charity of whatever physical and spiritual goods they
might have.

6- The first thing they do every morning, is to approach their Lord
humbly and beg His pardon.

HAZRAT IMAM S?DIQ (AS) has said: \`\`Those who perform the single
prayer, (VETR) which is the last of the nigh prayers; and follow it
asking God's forgiveness for seventy time; they are among the seekers of
God's forgiveness, and the ending of the above verse (NO. 16) is
applicable to them.''

[ 332 ]

شَهِدَ اللهُ أَنَّهُ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَالْمَلاَئَكَةُ
وَأُوْلُواْ الْعِلْمِ قَآئمَاً بِالْقِسْطِ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ(( 18 ))

18- ALLAH BEARS WITNESS THAT THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE. AND SO DO THE
ANGELS AND THE SAGES, (WHO ARE ENDUED WITH KNOWLEDGE) UPHOLDING JUSTICE.
(IN HIS CREATION) THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE, THE MIGHTY THE WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 18**

Following the argument, this refers to the unity of God and His exalted
nature and wisdom: \`\`Allah bears witness (THROUGH HIS AMAZING
CREATION) that there is no god but He.'' So do the angels and the sages
who are eminents in wisdom. They too bear the same witness with
different reasoning and views; and rather all the creation and the whole
universe glorifies God and testifies His Oneness, while He upholds
justice throughout His creation. With such attributes, it is evident
that there is no god but HE, the Mighty One, the wise and all-wisdom.
This verse was one of the prophet's favourites, rehearsed by him often,
and in particular at the night of ARAFEH. (A RITE IN PILGRIMAG)

إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللهِ الاِْسْلامُ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ الَّذِينَ
أُوتُواْ الْكِتَـابَ إِلاَّ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَآءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْيَا
بَيْنَهُمْ وَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِآيَـاتِ اللهِ فَإِنَّ اللهَ سَرِيعُ
الْحِسَابِ (( 19 ))

19- THE TRUE RELIGION WITH ALLAH IS ISL?M. (WHICH IS SUBMISSION TO
GOD'S WILL) AND THOSE TO WHOM THE SCRIPTURES WERE GIVEN WERE NOT AT
VARIANCE, EXCEPT AFTER THE KNOWLEDGE CAME TO THEM; (AND THEIR VARIANCE
WAS) THROUGH ENVY. AND WHOEVER REJECTS ALLAH'S SIGNS, THEN ALLAH IS
SWIFT IN RECKONING.


