The True Love
=============

The verse clears what a true love for God may mean: \`\`If you really
do love Allah, follow His Messenger and in return Allah will love you;
and forgive

[ 343 ]

you your sins.'' This implies that love is not a weak interest in the
hearts of man, without any actual effect. Love should be reflected in
human's deeds and actions. In a general sense of meaning, this is an
answer and a lesson for those who claim to have the love of God, and His
apostles and saints. In every time and in everywhere they should have
some similarity in acts and deeds, and behaviours with those men of God.
VERSE NO. 32

The argument continues here, that if you are truthful in your claim of
loving God, then you have to prove it practically, by following the
Messenger of God and obeying God's commandments; and if you don't; you
don't love, and neither God loves the infidels.
إِنَّ اللهَ اصْطَفَى ءَادَمَ وَنُوحاً وَءَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَءَالَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَـالَمِينَ (( 33 )) 33- ALLAH CHOSE ADAM, AND NOAH,
AND THE FAMILY OF ABRAHAM, AND THE FAMILY OF IMRAN ABOVE ALL THE
WORLDS.

ذُرِّيَّةَ بَعْضُهَا مِن بَعْض وَاللهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 34 )) 34- THEY
WERE THE OFFSPRING OF ONE ANOTHER, AND ALLAH IS THE HEARER THE KNOWER.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 33**

This is a prelude to the story of Mary the Virgin, stating the position
of some of her ancestors who were good examples of those who really
loved God, and obeyed His commandments, and observed His covenants:
\`\`Allah chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham and the family of
Imran, among whom were Moses, Jesus, and Mohammad.''

[ 344 ]

God's choice could have been either genetically or canonically. It
could be possible that God excelled them in creation and genesis, or in
spite of their Free will, He developed and promoted them by His Grace
and Guidance; and that they obtained their work and position by their
strive and endeavour in the service of their Lord. VERSE NO. 34

Then it is added here that: \`\`They were the offspring of one
another.'' This may imply that all men of God, spiritually form one
family and one household. They all were the elects of God for their love
or Godloving, obedience, discipline, faith, and good deeds. Besides
ADAM, the verses alludes to the five Arch prophets of God, i.e. Noah -
Abraham, Moses, jesus, and Mohammad who are the offsprings of Abraham
and Imran.

إِذْ قَالَتِ امْرَأَتُ عِمْرَانَ رَبّ ِ إِنّىِ نَذَرْتُ لَكَ مَا فِي
بَطْنِى مُحَرَّراً فَتَقَبَّلْ مِنّى إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ
الْعَلِيمُ(( 35 ))

35- WHEN THE WIFE OF IMR?N SAID: \`MY LORD! I HAVE VOWED TO YOU, IN
DEDICATION, WHAT IS WITHIN MY WOMB; SO ACCEPT THIS OF ME, THAT YOU ARE
THE HEARER THE KNOWER.

فَلَمَّا وَضَعَتْهَا قَالَتْ رَبّ ِ إِنّىِ وَضَعْتُهَا أُنثَى وَاللهُ
أَعْلَمُ بِمَا وَضَعَتْ وَلَيْسَ الذَّكَرُ كَالاُْنثَى وَإِنّىِ
سَمَّيْتُهَا مَرْيَمَ وَإِنّىِ أُعِيذُهَا بِكَ وَذُرِّيَّتَهَا مِنَ
الشَّيْطَـانِ الرَّجِيمِ(( 36 ))

36- AND WHEN SHE WAS DELIVERED OF THE CHILD, SHE SAID: \`MY LORD!' I AM
DELIVERED OF A FEMALE CHILD; (AND ALLAH KNEW WELL WHAT SHE DELIVERED),
AND MALE IS NOT LIKE FEMALE. AND I HAVE NAMED HER MARY, AND COMMEND HER
TO YOU WITH HER OFFSPRING, TO PROTECT THEM FROM THE ACCURSED SATAN.

[ 345 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 35**

The word is now about Imran and his daughter Mary - her birth and some
other incidents of her life. According to some Islamic traditions' God
had inspired Imran that he would have a son who would become a prophet.
He gave the good news of that to his wife whose name was HANNA (ANNE in
English and ANNA in Latin). When she became pregnant she expected a male
child who would eventually become a prophet. She therefore vowed to
dedicate him to the service of the temple: \`\`My Lord! I have vowed to
you, in dedication, what is in my womb, So accept this of me.'' VERSE
NO. 36

But when she gave birth to the child and found her a female she was
sorry and said: \`\`My Lord! I am delivered of a female child and male
is not like female!'' This was because according to Mosaic Law a female
child could not be devoted to Temple Services. Besides that; a Lady
cannot keep herself clean to be in the service of the Temple, always,
because of her menstruation problem. A woman also is not like a man in
power and strength of their bodies. After all there is the problem of
pregnancy and giving birth with the female sex. So ANNE was content to
seek God's protection for her against Satan.

She then said to her Lord: \`\`I named her Maryam.'' The Arabic
\`MARYAM' translated MARY, literally means a worshipper woman or a
Temple's maid servant; and such a naming proves how eager the mother of
Mary was to dedicate her child in the service of God and His sacred
Temple.

فَتَقَبَّلَهَا رَبُّهَا بِقَبُول حَسَن وَأَنبَتَهَا نَبَاتاً حَسَناً
وَكَفَّلَهَا زَكَرِيّا كُلَّمَا دَخَلَ عَلَيْهَا زَكَرِيَّا الِْمحْرَابَ
وَجَدَ عِندَهَا رِزْقاً قَالَ يَـامَرْيَمُ أَنَّى لَكِ هَـذَا قَالَتْ
هُوَ مِنْ عِندِ اللهِ إِنَّ اللهَ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَآءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَاب((
37 )) 37- HER LORD ACCEPTED HER WITH A GOOD ACCEPTANCE,

[ 346 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 37**

The argument is continued here that God answered Anna's prayer, and
Mary grew under God's special protection: \`\`Her Lord accepted her with
a good acceptance, and grew her with a goodly growth.'' There is a fine
note in this phrase that God's work is growing - As a seed contains some
abilites and natural potentials, there is also in man's seed and soul
various capacities, that exist in possibility and not in actuality,
which the Gardener of the Universe grows them and cherishes them until
they develope enough to bear fruit. As Mary was brought up in the
Temple, she moved to higher and higher steps of progress and dignity:

\`\`Whenvere Zacharias visited her in the sanctuary, he found her
supplied with sustenance!'' According to Islamic tradition the
sustenance was out of seasonal fruits; that were brought to her by the
angels from the PARADISE!

هُنَالِكَ دَعَا زَكَرِيَّا رَبَّهُ قَالَ رَبّ ِ هَبْ لِى مِن لَّدُنكَ
ذُرّيَّةً طَيّبَةً إِنَّكَ سَمِيعُ الدُّعَآءِ(( 38 )) 38- THERE DID
ZACHARIAS PRAY TO HIS LORD, SAYING: \`\`MY LORD! GRANT ME FROM YOURSELF
AN OFFSPRING PURIFIED; THAT YOU HEAR PRAYER.

[ 347 ]

فَنَادَتْهُ الْمَلائَكَةُ وَهُوَ قَآئمٌ يُصَلِّي فِي الِْمحْرَابِ أَنَّ
اللهَ يُبَشِّرُكَ بِيَحْيَى مُصَدِّقاً بِكَلِمَة مِنَ اللهِ وَسَيّداً
وَحَصُوراً وَنَبِيّاً مّن الصَّـالِحِينَ(( 39 ))

39- AND THE ANGELS CALLED UNTO HIM WHEN STANDING IN PRAYER IN THE
SANCTUARY: \`\`ALLAH GIVES YOU THE GLAD-TIDING OF JOHN (YAHYA) WHO SHALL
CONFIRM A WORD OF GOD. HE SHALL BE PRINCELY AND CHASTE, AND AN APOSTLE
OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

قَالَ رَبّ ِ أَنَّى يَكُونُ لِى غُلامٌ وَقَدْ بَلَغَنَىِ الْكِبَرُ
وَامْرَأَتِى عَاقِرٌ قَالَ كَذَلِكَ اللهُ يَفْعَلُ مَا يَشَآءُ(( 40 ))
40- HE SAID: MY LORD! HOW SHALL I HAVE A SON, AND OLD AGE HAS ALREADY
COME UPON ME, AND MY WIFE IS BARREN. HE SAID: \`EVEN SO, ALLAH WILL
ACCOMPLISH WHAT HE WILLS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 38**

Now the discourse is upon Zacharias, and his son John the Baptist.
John's mother named Eizabeth was the sister to Mary's mother and both of
them were barren. Though old age grasped them, and they had abandoned to
despair of having a child; when Zacharias saw the out of season fruits
and out of reason sustence with Mary, he was excited and in a very
fervent prayer begged God to grant him a son. VERSE NO. 39

When Zacharias was standing in prayer in sanctuary, the angels gave him
the good news of having a son who would confirm a word from Allah.

[ 348 ]

As to the meaning of: \`A WORD FROM ALLAH' that John would confirm, we
understand it to be, \`Jesus Christ' who was created by a miracle - by
God's word. VERSE NO. 40

When Zacharias got the good news of having a son who would be chaste
and purified, princely in behaviour and of the righteous folk, he could
not contain his skin of happiness, and yet he was amazed that how could
this strange phenomenon happen?! It was not an ordinary or natural son;
that he and his wife were now very old and past the age of parenthood,
His wife was barren, even when a young woman; So like ABRAHAM who asked
God to show him how He raise the dead; Zacharias too, said: \`\`My Lord!
How can I have a son, and old age has already come upon me and my wife
is barren.''

The answer was no more than: \`\`Allah can easily accomplish whatever
He wants.''

قَالَ رَبّ ِ اجْعَل لّيِ ءَايَةً قَالَ ءَايَتُكَ أَلاَّ تُكَلّمَ
النَّاسَ ثَلاثَةَ أَيَّام إِلاَّ رَمْزاً وَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ كَثِيراً
وَسَبِّحْ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالاِْبْكَـارِ(( 41 ))

41- HE SAID: \`MY LORD! APPOINT ME A SIGN. HE SAID: YOUR SIGN IS THAT
YOU SHALL NOT SPEAK TO PEOPLE FOR THREE DAYS EXCEPT BY SIGNALS. AND
MENTION YOUR LORD MUCH. AND GLORIFY HIM AT EVENING AND DAWN.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 41**

ZACHARIAS asked God for a sign of that miracle, as Abraham did for a
sign of resurrection to assure his heart and to give confidence to his
mind; and God gave him a sign: \`\`Your sign is that you shall not speak
to people for three days except by signal.''

[ 349 ]

Allah considered Zacharias request, and for three days without any
natural cause or defect, he could not speak to people, while his tongue
was busy in mentioning the name of God and celebrating his praise!
وَإِذْ قَالَتِ الْمَلائَكَةُ يَـامَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللهَ اصْطفَاكِ
وَطَهَّرَكِ وَاصْطَفاكِ عَلَى نِسَآءِ الْعَـالَمِينَ(( 42 )) 42- AND
WHEN THE ANGELS SAID: \`O, MARY! ALLAH HAS CHOSEN YOU AND PURIFIED YOU,
AND CHOSEN YOU ABOVE THE WOMEN OF THE WORLDS.

يَـامَرْيَمُ اقْنُتِي لِرَبِّكِ وَاسْجُدِي وَارْكَعِي مَعَ الرَّ
اكِعِينَ (( 43 )) 43- O, MARY! BE OBEDIENT TO YOUR LORD. PROSTRATE
YOURSELF, AND BOW DOWN WITH THOSE WHO BOW.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 42**

Once again the Holy Qur?n returns to the amazing story of Mary and her
great honour and high dignity. It begins with the angels who spoke to
Mary and said: \`\`O, Mary! Allah Has chosen you over the women of the
worlds.'' She was an elect of God, and unique in giving birth to a
wonderful son by a miracle, without intervention of the customary
natural means. But this does not mean that she was more than a human
being created by God. She had so much need to pray to God as any one
else, and it was through such prayers, worship, and piety, that she was
purified and then chosen by God for high purposes such as giving birth
to a prophet so high as Jesus Christ.

[ 350 ]
VERSE NO. 43

Then as a sign of her gratitude and thankfulness, the angels advised
her to be obedient to her Lord, to prostrate herself, and to bow down in
prayer with those who bow.

ذَلِك مِنْ أَنبَآءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحِيهِ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا كُنتَ لَدَيْهِمْ
إذْ يُلْقُونَ أَقْلامَهُمْ أَيُّهُمْ يَكْفُلُ مَرْيَمَ وَمَا كُنتَ
لَدَيْهِمْ إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ(( 44 ))

44- (O, PROPHET) THOSE ARE SOME OF THE NEWS OF THE UNSEEN THAT WE
INSPIRE IT TO YOU, AND YOU WERE NOT WITH THEM, WHEN THEY CAST THEIR
PENS, AS TO WHICH OF THEM SHOULD HAVE CHARGE OF MARY. AND YOU WERE NOT
WITH THEM WHEN THEY WERE DISPUTING. (AND ALL THESE NEWS WERE INSPIRED TO
YOU)

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 44**

This brings to light another part of Mary's life history, calling them
the news of the unseen, or hidden, because such forms of stories that
are free from superstitions and full of truth, and which are not found
elsewhere in the books and scriptures, have been revealed by inspiration
to our prophet; i.e. the Qur?nic verses. Allah says to His Messenger:
\`\`You were not present there to see the contention and dispute between
the priests, and finally their casting lot by pen or reeds, and the fall
of the lot upon Zacharias in order to have the charge of Mary.''

This verse and others (QUR?N S 37: 140) imply that in certain cases
when contention and controversies have led to a deadlock taking decision
by casting lot is permissible in Islam.

[ 351 ]

إِذْ قَالَتِ الْمَلائَكَةُ يَـامَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللهَ يُبَشِّرُكِ
بِكَلِمَة مِّنْهُ اسْمُهُ الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ وَجِيهاً فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالاَْخِرَةِ وَ مِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ(( 45 ))

45- (REMEMBER) WHEN THE ANGELS SAID: \`\`O, MARY! ALLAH GIVES YOU GLAD
TIDINGS OF A WORD FROM HIM WHOSE NAME IS MESSIAH, JESUS, THE SON OF
MARY. HE IS OF A HIGH PERSONALITY IN THIS WORLD AND THE LAST, AND OF
THOSE WHO ARE NEAR. (TO ALLAH)

وَيُكَلِّمُ النَّاسَ فِي الْمَهْدِ وَكَهْلاَ وَمِنَ الصَّـالِحِينَ(( 46
))

46- HE SHALL SPEAK TO PEOPLE IN THE CRADLE, AND ADULTHOOD, AND (HE
SHALL BE) OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 45**

From here on, more parts of the story of Mary is mentioned, such as the
strange and unnatural birth of her son Jesus: \`\`And remember when the
angels said: O, Mery! Allah gives you the glad tidings of a word from
Him whose name is Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary, who is of a high
personality in this world and the last.'' VERSE NO. 46

In this verse one of the miracles and virtues of Jesus Christ is
pointed to, and that was his teaching and preachings when he was a child
in the cradle! His words in the cradle was full of wisdom and purpose,
as his sermons in adulthood.

[ 352 ]

قَالَتْ رَبّ ِ أَنَّى يَكُونُ لِي وَلَدٌ وَلَمْ يَمْسَسْنِي بَشَرٌ
قَالَ كَذَلِكِ اللهُ يَخْلُقُ مَايَشَآءُ إِذَا قَضَى أَمْراً فَإِنَّمَا
يَقُولُ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ (( 47 ))

47- SHE SAID: \`\`MY LORD! HOW SHALL I HAVE A SON AND NO MAN TOUCHES
ME? HE SAID: \`EVEN SO, ALLAH CREATES WHAT HE WILL. WHEN HE DECREES A
THING HE ONLY SAYS TO IT \`\`BE'' AND \`\`IT IS''.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 47**

When Mary heard the glad tidings of having a son without a husband, she
was struck with astonishment, and asked her Lord how could she have a
son while no man has ever touched her or touches her?! In answer to
that; God assured her that when He is going to do something or create
some one, He merely says to it: \`\`BE'' and it comes to \`\`BEING''

وَيُعَلِّمُهُ الْكِتَـابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَالتَّوْرَاةَ وَالاِْنجِيلَ((
48 )) 48- AND HE WILL TEACH HIM THE BOOK AND WISDOM, THE TORAH
(PENTATEUCH = BIBLE) AND THE GOSPEL.

وَرَسُولاً إِلَى بَنِى إِسْرَءِيلَ أَنّـِي قَدْ جِئْتُكُم بِآيَة مِن
رَّبّكُمْ أَنّـِي أَخْلُقُ لَكُم مِّنَ الطّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ
فَأَنفُخُ فِيهِ فَيَكُونُ طَيْراً بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَأُبْرِىءُ الاَْكْمَهَ
وَالاَْبْرَصَ وَأُحْيِ الْمَوْتَى بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَأُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا
تَأْكُلُونَ وَمَا تَدَّخِرُونَ فِي بُيُوتِكُمْ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاََيَةً
لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِين(( 49 )) 49- AND A MESSENGER TO THE
CHILDREN OF ISRAEL, (SAYING TO THEM) I HAVE COME TO YOU WITH A SIGN FROM
YOUR

[ 353 ]

LORD. I WILL MAKE FOR YOU OF CLAY THE LIKENESS OF A BIRD, THEN I WILL
BLOW INTO IT, AND IT WILL BE A BIRD BY THE PERMISSION OF ALLAH. I WILL
ALSO HEAL THE BLIND AND THE LEPER. AND I RAISE THE DEAD TO LIFE BY THE
LEAVE OF ALLAH. AND I WILL INFORM YOU OF WHAT YOU EAT, AND WHAT YOU
STORE IN YOUR HOUSES. SURELY IN THAT IS A SIGN FOR YOU IF YOU ARE
BELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 48**

Following the four virtues of Jesus that were mentioned above,
namely:

1- Being honourable and of high personality in this world and the last.
2- Being near to God. 3- Speaking in the cradle. 4- And being of
righteous folk.

Here two more of his particular moral excellences are named: \`\`That
God would teach him, Book, Wisdom, Bible, and Gospel.'' VERSE NO. 49

Here in this verse it is confirmed that Jesus was a true Messenger of
God, with several signs and miracles:

\* That he could make a bird out of clay and blow life in it, with the
permission of God.

\* That he could heal and give vision to born blind, and leper by the
leave of God; An act, which in the sight of the physicians of his time,
was undeniable great miracles.

\* That he could report of the secrets of the people as to what had
they eaten or hidden in their houses. All these were signs for them if
they were believers.

this verse certifies that the prophets are able; of course with the
permission of God, and when necessary; to ignore physics, and adhere to
metaphysics, performing supernatural things!

[ 354 ]

وَمُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيَّ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ وَلأُحِلَّ لَكُم
بَعْضَ الَّذِي حُرِّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَجِئْتُكُم بِآيَة مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ
فَاتَّقُواْ اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 50 ))

50- (AND I HAVE COME TO YOU) TO ATTEST THE LAW WHICH WAS BEFORE ME AND
TO MAKE LAWFUL TO YOU CERTAIN THINGS THAT WERE FORBIDDEN UNTO YOU. AND I
HAVE COME TO YOU WITH A SIGN FROM YOUR LORD. THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND
OBEY ME.

إِنَّ اللهَ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكُمْ فاعْبُدُوهُ هَـذَا صِرَطٌ مُّستَقِيمٌ((
51 )) 51- THAT ALLAH IS MY LORD AND YOUR LORD. THEN WORSHIP HIM, THIS IS
THE STRAIGHT PATH.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 50**

This verse and the next one is the continuation of the sayings of Jesus
Christ to the Israelites. He says here: \`\`I have come to attest the
Mosaic Law which was before me, and to make lawful to you certain things
that were declared unlawful and forbidden, and I have with me a sign
from Lord. Therefore, beware of Allah and obey me.''

VERSE NO. 51

Then in order to prevent deifying him, and making a god of him and a
godess of his mother, because of his exceptional nature of birth, and
amazing miracles, he declares: \`\`Allah is my Lord and your Lord, then
worship him, and this is the straight path.'' In the Holy Qur?n we
frequently read that when mentioning God, Jesus Christ would say my
Lord - Your Lord, or our Lord. This is

[ 355 ]

contrary to the canonical Gospel, which is of surety tampered with, and
is written many centuries after christ, in which the word LORD is
replaced or transalted into FATHER! When Jesus Christ was among people,
no one dared to call him a god or any sort of Deity. The TRINITY, which
is the union of three hypostasis - the FATHER, THE SON and the HOLY
SPIRIT, in one Godhead - being one god as to substance, but three gods
as to individuality; was a thesis founded in the third century A.D.

\*\*\*\*\*

Even in this canonical GOSPEL which has been compiled in the 3rd
century A.D.; In many chapters, and through many verses; MONOTHEISM,
which is the idea that there is only one God, has clearly been
proclaimed. An instance of this which is mentioned in the: MATT. 22:
33 - MARK and LUKE 10: 24 is: YAHOVAH OUR GOD IS THE ONLY GOD.

A pharisee who was a teacher of the scripture, asked Jesus: \`\`Which
one of the Commandments in the scriptures is the most important one?''
JESUS CHRIST answered: \`\`The most important commandment of the LAW is
this: \`Listen to ME, O, ISRAEL! YAHOVAH your GOD is the ONLY GOD. So
love your God with all your heart and mind.'' This is the greatest and
the most important commandment.''

**MATTHEWS - 22: 34
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

فَلَمَّآ أَحَسَّ عِيسَى مِنْهُمُ الْكُفْرَ قَالَ مَنْ أَنصَارِي إِلَى
اللهِ قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ نَحْنُ أَنصَارُ اللهِ ءَامنَّا بِاللهِ
وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ (( 52 ))

52- AND WHEN JESUS FELT THEIR UNBELIEF, HE SAID: \`\`WHO WILL BE MY
HELPERS UNTO ALLAH?'' THE DISCIPLES SAID: \`\`WE ARE THE HELPERS OF
ALLAH. WE BELIEVE IN ALLAH; AND YOU BEAR WITNESS THAT WE HAVE
SUBMITTED.'' (TO ALLAH'S WILL)

[ 356 ]

رَبَّنَآ ءَامَنَّا بِمَآ أَنزَلْتَ وَاتَّبَعْنَا الرَّسُولَ
فَاكْتُبْنَا مَعَ الشَّـاهِدِينَ(( 53 )) 53- OUR LORD! WE BELIEVE IN
WHAT YOU HAVE SENT. AND WE FOLLOWED THE MESSENGER. THEN INSCRIBE US WITH
THE WITNESSES.

وَمَكَرُواْ وَمَكَرَ اللهُ وَاللهُ خَيْرُ الْمَـاكِرِينَ (( 54 )) 54-
AND THEY (THE UNBELIEVERS) PLOTTED, AND ALLAH, TOO, PLANNED. AND ALLAH
IS THE BEST OF THE PLANNERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 52**

Moses foretold of the advent of Jesus Christ and the Jews were eagerly
waiting for the coming of the promised Messiah; but when he personally
appeared, and the unlawful interests of some of the Israelites was
endangered, only a limited number of them followed Jesus, and the rest
of them belied and denied him, and even did their best to kill the
truthful prophet of God!: \`\`And when Jesus felt unbelief of them, he
asked which of you will help me in the way of Allah? And from among them
some twelve men of his disciples answered him saying: \`We believe in
Him, and You Jesus Christ, bear witness in the presence of God that we
believed and submitted.''
VERSE NO. 53

In this verse; phrases are narrated which show the high level of faith
and sincerity of the disciple of Jesus Christ: \`\`Our Lord! We do
believe in what You have sent, and we obeyed the Messenger, then write
and register us among the testifiers, and those who have submitted to
your will. VERSE NO. 54

In contrary to the faith and sincerity of the Apostles, the argument
runs to infidelity, plots, and secret evil plans of the Jews and [ 357
]

his Roman enemies, that they devised against Jesus Christ: \`\`They
plotted, and Allah Who is the best of planners, planned to protect His
Message and Messenger, and evidently it is Allah's plan and plot that
overcomes and overwhelms.

إِذْ قَالَ اللهُ يَـاعِيسَى إِنّىِ مُتَوَفِّيكَ وَرَافِعُكَ إِلَيَّ
وَمُطَهِّرُكَ مِنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَجَاعِلُ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوكَ
فَوْقَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَـامَةِ ثُمَّ إِلَيَّ
مَرْجِعُكُمْ فَأَحْكُمُ بَيْنَكُمْ فِيَما كُنتُمْ فِيهِ تَخْتَلِفُونَ((
55 ))

55- AND WHEN ALLAH SAID: \`\`O, JESUS! I WILL CATCH YOU AND RAISE YOU
UP TO MYSELF, AND CLEANSE YOU (OF THE FALSEHOOD) OF THOSE WHO
DISBELIEVE. AND I WILL MAKE THOSE WHO FOLLOW YOU SUPERIOR TO THOSE WHO
DISBELIEVE, UP TO THE RESURRECTION DAY. THEN TO ME IS YOUR RETURN, AND I
WILL JUDGE AMONG YOU CONCERNING WHAT YOU WERE AT VARIANCE ON.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 55**

According to the verse NO. S 4: 157 and this one, S 3: 55; we Muslims
believe that Jesus Christ was neither crucified nor killed by the Jews,
and that another man was taken and crucified in his likeness. Then Jesus
is alive, and he was raised to the heavens by God, as the verse here
implies: \`\`When Allah said: \`O, JESUS! I will catch you and raise you
up to Myself, and cleanse you of those who disbelieve.'' The purpose of
cleanliness mentioned here, might either be his deliverAnce from the
cruel hands of the dirty and faithless enemies, or from the charge and
plots of the Jews; through the success of his

[ 358 ]

doctrine and religion over them. Then the argument runs on one of the
amazing predictions of Qur?n; foretelling that, always and until the Day
of Doom, those who are true Christians, and the followers of Jesus, will
be superior to the Jews who denied and rejected him: \`\`And I will make
those who follow you, superior to those who disbelieved you.'' We may
add here that; Muslims are the truest followers of Jesus Christ, because
they are the ones who follow up the true and unperverted teachings of
jesus, although there is a large body of nominal Christians and millions
of people baptized on his name.

Some have taken the Arabic \`\`MOTAVAFFIKA'' to mean death and causing
to die, and they are certainly wrong. All the learned and famous
commentators have taken this word to mean \`\`CATCH'' or \`\`TAKE'' and
they are right, because the root of this Arabic word is \`\`VAF?'' and
not \`\`VAF?T'', Which means to complete - to take - to catch, and etc.
In the Holy Qur?n, the word has frequently, and always been used to
mean, catching or taking or keeping something and has never been used to
mean death as loss of life and annihilation.

فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فَأُعَذِّبُهُمْ عَذَاباً شَدِيداً فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالاَْخِرَةِ وَمَا لَهُم مِّن نَّـاصِرِينَ(( 56 ))

56- THEN, AS FOR THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE, I WILL STERNLY PUNISH THEM IN
THIS WORLD, AND THE LAST AND THEY SHALL HAVE NO HELPERS. وَأَمَّا
الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـالِحَـاتِ فَيُوَفّيهِمْ
أُجُورَهُمْ وَاللهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الظَّـالِمِينَ (( 57 ))

57- AND AS FOR THOSE WHO BELIEVE AND DO GOOD DEEDS HE WILL PAY THEM IN
FULL THEIR REWARDS, AND ALLAH LOVES NOT THE OPPRESSORS.

[ 359 ]

ذَلِكَ نَتْلُوهُ عَلَيْكَ مِنَ الاَْيَـاتِ وَالذِّكْرِ الْحَكِيمِ(( 58
)) 58- THIS, WE RECITE TO YOU OF THE SIGNS, AND WISE ADMONITION.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 56 AND 57**

Jesus Christ is addressed in this verse and in the next one; that after
final judgement people shall be classified in two main groups: 1) As for
those who disbelieved, God will sternly punish them and they shall have
no one to help them against God's Chastisement.

2) And as for those who believed and did good deeds, God will pay them
in full their rewards.'' The ending of the verse is: \`\`Allah loves not
the oppressors.'' Accordingly He Himself will not oppress any of His
servants for the least. VERSE NO. 58

In this verse, the addressing is turned again to our prophet Mohammad
(AS) that these matters which we recite and reveal to you, are a portion
of our signs and our wisdom in the Qur?nic verses.

إِنَّ مَثَلَ عِيسَى عِندَ اللهِ كَمَثَلِ ءَادَمَ خَلَقَهُ مِن تُرَاب
ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ (( 59 ))

59- THE SIMILITUDE OF JESUS IS LIKE THAT OF ADAM IN THE SIGHT OF ALLAH.
HE CREATED HIM OF DUST, AND THEN SAID TO HIM \`\`BE'' AND HE \`\`WAS''
الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّكَ فَلاَ تَكُنّ مِّنَ الْمُمْتَرِينَ(( 60 ))

60- THIS IS THE TRUTH FROM YOUR LORD. BE NOT OF THE DOUBTERS. [ 360 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 59 AND 60)**

These two verses were also revealed to answer the Christian Embassy
that had come to the prophet from NAJRAN. They asked the prophet:
\`\`Have you ever seen a child without a father? Why then you are
lowering the position of Jesus Christ to the level of a man being?!''
The verse NO. 59 was sent down to answer that: \`\`If Jesus was born
without a human father, ADAM was also borns so; he had neither a human
father, nor a mother, like Mary!'' As far as physical bodies are
concerned, both, ADAM and JESUS were made of dust. In the sight of God
Jesus was as dust as ADAM was, or as all the mankind is. Thus Allah
created Jesus from dust, and then said to him: \`\`BE'' and he came into
\`\`BEING'' as Jesus Christ.'' Such was the story of the creation of
HAZRAT JESUS (AS), nothing more and nothing less.

Then, through the next verse (NO. 60) it is emphasized that: \`\`These
are the truth about the creation of Jesus that God Has revealed and
recited to you, so do not doubt about that.

فَمَنْ حَآجّكَ فِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَآءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْاْ نَدْعُ أَبْنَآءَنَا وَأَبْنَآءَكُمْ وَ نِسَآءَنَا
وَنِسَآءَكُمْ وَأَنفُسَنَا وَأَنفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَل
لَّعْنَتَ اللهِ عَلَى الْكَـاذِبِينَ(( 61 ))

61- THEN WHOEVER DISPUTE WITH YOU IN HIM, AFTER WHAT HAS COME TO YOU OF
KNOWLEDGE; SAY: \`\`COME ON! LET US CALL OUR SONS AND YOUR SONS, OUR
WOMEN AND YOUR WOMEN, OURSELVES AND YOURSELVES THEN LET US EARNESTLY
PRAY, AND LAY THE CURSE OF ALLAH ON THE LIARS.

[ 361 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO 61)**

Many of the verses in this chapter, refer to the Christian Embassy from
NAJR?N, a town 150 miles North of SANA?. In the year of Deputations,
i.e. 10 A.H. a Christian mission consisting of sixty priests, clergy,
and learned Christians, came to the Holy Messenger of God, for being
much impressed on hearing this passage of QUR?N, which explains the true
position of Jesus Christ for Muslims. They raised many questions which
were all answered by the prophet. Among the questions was: \`\`What is
exactly that to which you call us?'' The prophet said to them: \`\`I
invite you to worship none except your Lord, the only one God, and that
Jesus was no more than a human being - a servant of God - and chosen as
God's prophet. So do not exaggerate the matter, and stretch not his
position beyond the truth.''

They rejected the Divine Call, and adhered to the dogma that he was a
god or somehow the son of God! for having not a human father! Our
prophet who was indeed firm in his faith, proposed \`\`MOB?HALEH'' which
is the solemn meeting in which both sides should summon their men,
women, and children. Then they earnestly have to pray, and invoke the
CURSE OF GOD on those who are LIARS!

An appointment was fixed for the MOBAHELEH, and in time, the Christians
found Mohammad coming for that purpose. Mohammad (AS) was hand in hand
with his beloved brother, cousin, son-in-LAW, and vicegerent HAZRAT IMAM
ALI (AS) His two beautiful grand children; Imam Hassan, and Imam
Hussein, walked in front of them. FATIMA, his daughter whom he loved so
tenderly that he named her: \`\`THE MOTHER OF HER FATHER'' walked in
dignity and glory behind.

Mohammad (AS) and his nearests came forth so resolute; so firm, and so
faithful in their belief, that the Christians trembled with fear when
they looked them on the faces! The head of the missionary said to the
others: \`\`I see innocent faces coming to us, that if they ask God to
move the

[ 362 ]

mountains for them, God will do it.'' And thus the Christians Embassy
declined, and were dismissed in a spirit of tolerance; with a promise of
protection from the state, in return for tribute, or the \`\`WAGES OF
RULE''.

إِنَّ هَـذَا لَهُوَ الْقَصَصُ الْحَقُّ وَمَا مِنْ إِلَـه إِلاَّ اللهُ
وَإِنَّ اللهَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ(( 62 ))

62- THIS IS THE TRUE STORY (OF JESUS THE SON OF MARY) AND THERE IS NOT
ANY GOD EXCEPT ALLAH; AND THAT, ALLAH IS THE EXALTED IN MIGHT, THE WISE.
فَإِن تَوَلَّوْاْ فَإِنَّ اللهَ عَلِيمُ بِالْمُفْسِدِينَ(( 63 ))

63- THEN IF THEY TURN BACK, ALLAH KNOWS THE EVIL -DOERS.

**THE COMMENTARY

VERSE NO. 62**

Giving a true account of the birth, the life, and the death of Jesus
Christ, here it puts an emphasis, that these stories and narrations that
are recited here about him are mere truth. That which some have called
him God, or the son of God, and also that which some have known him an
illegitimate child, are all false and far from the truth. It is against
reason and revelation to call him God or son of God. His high position
in the sight of God is not that he had not a human father. It is because
of his piety and virtue, his knowledge and wisdom, and after all,
because of his good deeds and excellent morals.

The truth about him is what has been revealed to Mohammad (AS). In fact
Jesus is no more than a man, He was the clean and

[ 363 ]

purified servant of God, Who chose him for His prophethood. He was born
miraculously from a pure, clean and virgin mother and without having a
mortal father - something not difficult for God to do it. VERSE NO. 63

This verse threatens those who reject the truth deliberately, and after
it has been proved and made known to them: \`\`If in spite of all that
proofs and clear signs, they still turn their back and reject the truth,
Allah knows well the corruptors.'' It is obvious that, in spite of all
that logical reasoning of Qur?n, and their declining and escaping
MOB?HALAH, if they yield not to the truth, and obstinately continue
their useless disputes, they don't seek the truth, They rather drive at
corruption, and their aim is to ruin the faiths and truth, and of course
God is not heedless to that.

قُلْ يَـأَهْلَ الْكِتَـابِ تَعَالَوْاْ إِلَى كَلِمَة سَوَآءِ بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ شَيْئاً
وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضاً أَرْبَاباً مِّن دُونِ اللهِ فَإِن
تَوَلَّوْاْ فَقُولُواْ اشْهَدُواْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ(( 64 ))

64- SAY, O PEOPLE OF THE BOOK! COME ON TO A WORD COMMON BETWEEN WE AND
YOU; THAT WE WORSHIP NONE EXCEPT ALLAH, AND THAT WE DO NOT ASSOCIATE
WITH HIM ANYTHING, AND SOME OF US DO NOT TAKE OTHERS AS LORDS BESIDES
ALLAH. THEN IF THEY TURN BACK, SAY: \`BEAR WITNESS THAT WE ARE
MUSLIMS.''

[ 364 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CALL TO UNITY (VERSE NO. 64)**

The foregoing call was to accept Islam in all aspects, but this verse
(No. 64) invites us to join in common points and tenets that might exist
between Muslims and the people of the Book: \`\`O, People of the BOOK!
come on to a word or a term to be common between us - we and you - that
we worship none except Allah, and do not associate with him anything as
a co-sharer or compeer.'' The lesson in this verse is that: \`\`If
people are not willing to cooperate with us in all our goals and
objects, we may join with them in some important common aims.''

Then there is the problem of consecrated priesthood that from among
them, in different classes, some may claim superiority and
infalliability, and then stand between man and God in some special
sense. The same remark apply to the worship of saints and Imams. They
may be holy and pious, but they are no more than man, and have no right
to claim lordship over us. According to Islamic principles, no one can
claim lordship over man except God:

يَـأَهْلَ الْكِتَـابِ لِمَ تُحَآجُّونَ فِي إبْرَاهِيمَ وَمَآ أُنزِلَتِ
التَّوْرَاةُ وَالاِْنجِيلُ إِلاَّ مِن بعدِهِ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ (( 65
)) 65- O, PEOPLE OF THE BOOK! WHY DO YOU DISPUTE ABOUT ABRAHAM, WHEN THE
TORAH AND THE GOSPEL WERE NOT REVEALED TILL AFTER HIM. DON'T YOU USE
YOUR WISDOM?

[ 365 ]

هَـأَنتُمْ هَـؤُلاَءِ حَـاجَجْتُمْ فِيَما لَكُم بِهِ عِلْمٌ فَلِمَ
تُحَآجُّونَ فِيَما لَيْسَ لَكُم بِهِ عِلْمٌ وَاللهُ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ
لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ (( 66 ))

66- AH! YOU ARE THE ONES WHO DISPUTED ON WHAT YOU KNEW; WHY THEN YOU
DISPUTE ON WHAT YOU HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE? ALLAH KNOWS AND YOU KNOW NOT. مَا
كَانَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ يَهُودِيّاً وَلاَ نَصْرانِيّاً وَلَـكِنَ كَانَ
حَنِيفاً مُّسْلِماً وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ (( 67 ))

67- ABRAHAM WAS NEITHER A JEW, NOR A CHRISTIAN BUT HE WAS OF PURE
FAITH, A MUSLIM, AND WAS NOT OF THE POLYTHEISTS. إِنَّ أَوْلى النَّاسِ
بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَـذَا النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ
ءَامَنُوا وَاللهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ (( 68 ))

68- SURELY THE NEAREST OF PEOPLE TO ABRAHAM ARE THOSE WHO FOLLOWED HIM,
AND THIS PROPHET, AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED. AND ALLAH IS THE GUARDIAN OF
THE BELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 65)**

It is narrated in Islamic traditions that some learned Jews and
Christians wrangled and disputed about Abraham. One party said that he
was a Jew and belongs to our sect, and the opposite party claimed that
Abraham was a Christian in spirit and belief and through proper channel!
Each party claimed that Abraham was theirs, exclusively. To This effect
this verse revealed saying: \`\`Why should you argue about ABRAHAM while
the BIBLE and the GOSPEL were both revealed after him!?''

[ 366 ]

VERSE NO. 66

The Jews and Christians of various sects who wrangled even about some
matters of their own religion on which they had knowledge, and in spite
of their knowledge they made great mistakes, they also disputed about
some matters that they knew nothing about it! Here they are questioned
through this verse: \`\`You that disputed on what you knew and yet
failed and made mistakes, why should you then dispute about a matter on
which you know nothing?''

VERSE NO. 67

Then Qur?n expresses clearly that ABRAHAM was neither a Jew nor a
Christian, but one of pure and sincere faith, and he was not of the
polytheists and idolaters. The latter phrase leaves no room for the
pagan Arabs and idolaters too, to attach themselves some how to
ABRAHAM.

VERSE NO. 68

The people of the Book with their polytheistic ideas, have put the most
important tenet and commandment of Abraham's religion, beneath their
foot, and so were the Arab idolaters. Then how do they claim that they
are the followers of Abraham or he was their Father and leading prophet?
In fact he was not the follower of any of these polytheistic religions.
The only question here is: \`\`How can one call and consider himself a
follower of ABRAHAM the Shaikh of the prophets?'' To this question the
verse (NO. 68) answers: \`\`The nearest of people to ABRAHAM; are those
who follow him, and this prophet Mohammad (AS) and his followers for
having firm belief in the ONENESS OF GOD, and who are surrendered to
God's will.''

[ 367 ]

وَدَّت طَّآئفَةٌ مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَـابِ لَوْ يُضِلُّونَكُمْ وَمَا
يُضِلُّونَ إِلاَّ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ(( 69 )) 69- SOME OF THE
PEOPLE OF THE BOOK WISH TO MISLEAD YOU, AND THEY MISLEAD NONE BUT
THEMSELVES, BUT THEY DO NOT KNOW.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 69)**

A group of the Israelites were doing their best to attract some of the
influential Muslims, such as MOAAZ - AMMAR - and others, to their
religion; and by Satanic temptations they wished to make them recant!
This verse revealed to warn Muslims of their tricks and intrigues. The
verse by disclosing the hidden plots of the enemy, gives them also a
notice to stop carrying out secret plans, because their work and plots
would fail:

\`\`Some of the people of the BOOK wish to mislead you and to take you
to a back-turn, but they will fail and mislead none but themselves, and
yet they perceive it not.''

Those Jews were unaware that Mohammad's training and teaching was so
reasonable, and based on facts and figures that recant was far from his
converts. Therefore the lies and tricks of them would turn against
themselves and would ruin their own souls, though they could not
perceive it.

يَـأَهْلَ الْكِتَـابِ لِمَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَـاتِ اللهِ وَأَنتُمْ
تَشْهَدُونَ(( 70 )) 70- O, PEOPLE OF THE BOOK! WHY DO YOU DISBELIEVE IN
ALLAH'S SIGNS, WHILE YOU ARE WITNESSES?

[ 368 ]

يَأَهْلَ الْكِتَـابِ لِمَ تَلْبِسُونَ الْحَقَّ بِالْبَـاطِلِ
وَتَكْتُمُونَ الْحَقَّ وَأَنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 71 )) 71- O, PEOPLE OF
THE BOOK! WHY DO YOU CLOTHE THE TRUTH WITH FALSEHOOD, AND CONCEAL THE
TRUTH; WHILE YOU KNOW?

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 70 AND 71**

The people of the BOOK are admonished here for tampering with truth and
clothing it with falsehood for preventing the access of people to it:
\`\`O, People of the BOOK! why do you disbelieve in Allah's signs, and
work against the light which you, yourselves are witnesses of it - And
why do you clothe and cover the truth with falsehood, and conceal the
truth while you know!?'' Those jealous Jews, had the signs and symptoms
of the promised prophet in their scriptures, but concealed the facts and
did not allow the virtues and credentials of Mohammad to be known. By
doing that on purpose, they ruined their souls, and descended to the
lowest of degradation.

وَقَالَت طَّآئفَةٌ مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَـابِ ءَامِنُواْ بِالَّذِي
أُنزِلَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَجْهَ النَّهَارِ وَاكْفُرُواْ
ءَاخِرَهُ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ(( 72 ))

72- AND A PARTY OF THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK ( THE JEWS) SAID: \`\`BELIEVE
IN THAT WHICH IS SENT TO THE BELIEVERS IN THE MORNING, AND DENY IT IN
THE EVENING, PERHAPS THEY MAY RETURN (RECANT)''

[ 369 ]

وَلاَ تُؤْمِنُواْ إِلاَّ لِمَن تَبِعَ دِينَكُمْ قُلْ إِنَّ الْهُدَى
هُدَى اللهِ أَن يُؤْتَى أَحَدٌ مِّثْلَ مَآ أُوتِيتُمْ أَوْ يُحَآجُّوكُمْ
عِندَ رَبِّكُمْ قُلْ إِنَّ الْفَضْلَ بِيَدِ اللهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَآءُ
وَاللهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 73 )) 73- (THE JEWS ALSO SAY) AND DO NOT
BELIEVE EXCEPT IN HIM WHO FOLLOWS YOUR RELIGION; SAY: (THE REAL)
GUIDANCE IS THE GUIDANCE OF ALLAH. (THEY THEN ADDED, BEWARE) LEST ANY
ONE SHOULD BE GIVEN THE LIKE OF WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN GIVEN, OR THAT THOSE
(RECEIVING SUCH REVELATIONS) SHOULD DISPUTE WITH YOU BEFORE YOUR LORD;
SAY: GRACE IS IN THE HAND OF ALLAH. HE GIVES IT TO WHOM HE WILL, AND
ALLAH IS THE EXTENDER, ALL- KNOWING.

يَخْتَصُّ بِرَحْمَتِهِ مَن يَشَآءُ وَاللهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ((
74 )) 74- HE ADOPTS FOR HIS PARTICULAR MERCY WHOM HE WILL. ALLAH IS THE
LORD OF GREAT BOUNTIES.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 72)**

It is narrated that 12 Israelites colluded to go to the prophet, and
join the believers in the morning and then repudiate them in the
evening! When they were asked why so? They answered: \`\`We approached
and studied on site the signs and marks of the promised prophet in our
scriptures, and we came to conclusion that they don't conform with those
of Mohammad!''

COMMENTS

The Jews came no short in their enmity, and using all the means they
had against the prophet, such as military invasion - economical

[ 370 ]

incursion - social attack - and this verse points to a corner of their
cultural rush: \`\`And a party of the people of the Book said: \`
Believe in that which is sent to the believers in the morning, and deny
it at evening, perhaps they may return.'' Their plan was not without
effect at least on some of the weak minded Muslims and those wanting
self - reliance, because the 12 Jews who hatched the plot were known for
knowledge and being well versed in the Bible.

VERSE NO. 73

In order to prevent their followers to join Muslims, they advised them
to pretend to conversion, and keep on with their own faith: \`\`And do
not believe except in him who follow your religion.'' So Allah in a
parenthetical sentence says: \`\`The real and true guidance is the
guidance of Allah.'' Such plots and plans will have no important effect
against those who Allah intends to guide them. Once again the verse
returns to the continuation of the Israelites tricks that said:
\`\`Beware lest any one should be given the like of what you have been
given.'' In other word; Lest the Muslims should be able to convict and
prove you guilty, out of your own scripture before your Lord.

It is made clear here, that they were entangled in their self-conceit
and racial vanity, by counting themselves the best of people, and races,
and also the elect of God! seeking thereby undue advantages for
themselves.

The verse ends in addressing the Messenger of Allah. He gives it to
whom He will; and that Allah is the Extender.

VERSE NO. 74

With more emphasis it is said here: \`\`Allah will adopt for His
particular Mercy whom He will, for He is the Lord and the Owner of Great
Bounties and Grace.'' [ 371 ]

If we sometimes see God's special grace and more extensive bounties
include some one, and exclude some others; it is not due to limitation
and shortcomings, but rather for merits and deservings it is so.

**THE ANCIENT PLOTS**

The said verses are among the miraculous ones of Qur?n, that recovers
the hidden tricks of the Jews and other enemies of Islam. It also may
warn to-day's Muslims, of such plans and plot. In our time, too, the
propaganda means of our enemies have aimed at our young generation to
destruct and spoil their faith in Islam. They do that in various forms
and ways through scholars - by their orientalists, with their
historians, and journalists and even by their cinema actors and artists.
They deny not that their aim is not to convert our young ones to a
Christian or other religion. They merely want them corrupted!

وَمِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَـابِ مَنْ إِن تَأْمَنْهُ بِقِنطَار يُؤَدِّهِ
إِلَيْكَ وَمِنْهُم مَّنْ إِن تَأْمَنْهُ بِدِينَار لاَّ يُؤَدّهِ إِلَيْكَ
إِلاَّ مَا دُمْتَ عَلَيْهِ قآئماً ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَالُواْ لَيْسَ
عَلَيْنَا فِي الاُْمّيِّنَ سَبِيلٌ وَيَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ
وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 75 ))

75- AND AMONG THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK IS HE, THAT IF YOU TRUST HIM WITH
HEAP OF WEALTH, PAYS IT BACK TO YOU. AND THERE IS OTHER OF THEM, THAT IF
YOU TRUST HIM WITH A DINAR, WILL NOT GIVE IT BACK UNLESS YOU DEMAND IT
IMPORTUNATELY. THAT IS BECAUSE THEY SAY: \`WE ARE NOT BOUND TO KEEP
FAITH WITH GENTILES. (ONE OF NON-JEWISH FAITH OR RACE - A HEATHEN) AND
THEY TELL LIE ON ALLAH, AND THEY KNOW.

[ 372 ]

بَلَى مَنْ أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ وَاتَّقَى فَإِنَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ
الْمُتَّقِينَ(( 76 )) 76- YEA! HE WHO FULFILS HIS COVENANT, AND AVOIDS
EVIL, THEN ALLAH LOVES THE GOD- FEARINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 75)**

This refers to two of the Jews contemporary with the prophet: One of
them named ABDULLAH- IBN- SALAM, was a trustworthy and virtuous man. A
wealthy Muslim entrusted him with a hoard of gold that amounted to 1200
GHIAS= 840 KG. Abdullah gave him back all his deposite in due time and
term. The second Jew was a vicious traitor whose name was FAN?S; to whom
an Arab entrusted one Dinar (a gold coin equal to 66.36 Grains). Fan?s
betrayed and denied the trust; when the said verse revealed to this
effect.


