Who Are Those Who Have Incurred God's Wrath. and Those Who Are Astray?
======================================================================

From the nature of the HOLY QURA"N, we understand those gone astray,
are those who are misled and out of the way, of truth. As for those who
have incurred God's wrath - they are the obstinate and stubborn wrong
doers, who have pertinaciously adhered to their wrong opinions, and are
not willing to hear any advice or admonition. They never yield to any
reason, and in many cases have incurred the curse of God on themselves.
The following verse of QURA"N defines and describes them:

\`\`And that HE may punish the hypocrites, men as well as women; and
the polytheists, men as well as women, and the cherishers of evil
thoughts about Allah. On them is the evil turn, and the wrath of Allah
is on them, and HE HAS cursed them, and prepared the Hell for them - an
evil destination.''

QURA"N - S 48:6

Anyhow, those who have incurred the wrath of Allah are those who,
besides their blasphemy are obstinate and stubborn, and do not even stop
injuring and harming the apostles and the Divine Leaders!

**THE END OF THE OPENING CHAPTER**

[ 28 ]

S 2

THE COW (BAQARA)

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE
MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

الـم (( 1 ))

1- A.L.M.

ذَ لِكَ الكِتَـبُ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ هُدىً لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ (( 2 ))

2- THIS IS THE BOOK, NO DOUBT IN IT, A GUIDANCE TO THOSE WHO AVOID
EVIL. الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بالْغَيْبِ وَيُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَوةَ وَمِمَّا
رَزَقْنـَهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ(( 3 ))

3- (THER ARE) THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN THE UNSEEN, AND PERFORM THE PRAYERS,
AND BESTOW IN CHARITY A PART OF WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN THEM وَالَّذِينَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِمَآ أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَآ أُنْزِلَ مِن قَبْلِكَ
وَبِالاَْخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ(( 4 ))

4- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN WHAT HAS BEEN SENT DOWN TO YOU, AND WHAT
HAS BEEN SENT (TO THE APOSTLES) BEFORE YOU, AND WHO ARE SURE OF THE LIFE
TO COME أُوْلَـئِكَ عَلَى هُدىً مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ(( 5 ))

5- THOSE ARE ON GUIDANCE FROM THEIR LORD, AND THOSE ARE THE ONES WHO
PROSPER.

[ 29 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CONTENTS AND VIRTUOUS**

This chapter revealed in Medina and consists of 286 verses.

The comprehensiveness of this chapter from the stand point of Islamic
tenets and principles; and practicals, such as economical, political and
social affairs, can't be denied, Other important contents of the chapter
are as follows:

1- Discussions about THEISM & MONTHEISM, especially through pondering
over the secrets and laws of creation.

2- Discussions about resurrection and the life to come. giving some
physical examples, such as the story of raise and revival of the
slaughtered birds by ABRAHAM, as well as the story of EZRA the prophet,
who died and then got up a hundred years later!

3- There are in the chapter, also matters about the miracles of the
Holy BOOK QURA"N, and the importances there in.

4- The JEWS & HYPOCRITES, and their opposition, and intrigues, against
Islam and QURA"N is discussed here in a wider measure.

5- Some interesting historical event of the great prophets especially
ABRAHAM & MOSES are narrated here.

6- Several of the Islamic commandments such as: the prayer - the fast -
strive and the SACRED WARS - the pilgrimage to Mecca - the change of
qibla (from Jerusalem to Mecca) - marriage and Divorce - Trades
regulations and laws - usury - Retaliation and Retribution - unlawful
meals (SWINE FLESH) - Intoxicating or Alcoholic drinks, and some laws
and rules of inheritance and wills are clearly explained in the chapter
of the COW.

1- A.L.M.

**THE ABBREVIATED LETTERS (AL - MUQATTA-TA")**

Certain chapter (SURAS) of QURA"N have certain initials prefixed to
them which are called the ABBREVIATED LETTERS.

[ 30 ]

These letters have always been looked over as secrets and mysteries. We
have not heard of the PAGAN ARABS, or even the hypocrites, to have
objected or ridiculed these letters, though the form of their conducts
was so, and this means that they have not been much stranger to using
such abbreviations.

Recently a number of conjectures have been made as their meaning.
Opinions are divided as to the exact meaning of each particular letter
or combination of letters, but the most agreed idea about them is that,
these abbreviated letters point that; the GREAT, IMPORTANT DIVINE BOOK,
that has astonished all the well versed scholars and learned of ARABS
and NON-ARABS, who all failed to bring even a chapter the like of it;
merely consists of the simple and ordinary letters, that every one has
access to them and can use them in writing. On the other hand the words
and verses of QURA"N, which are composed of these letters are so
elegant, and deep in meaning that they easily pierce in the souls, and
penetrate in the depths of the hearts of men! They easily attract the
attention and reverence of a Layman, as well as that of a man of wisdom
and thought. QURA"N is just like the book of nature which is composed of
very simple elements, in which God has brought forth so many wonderful
and incredible creatures, such as the beautiful birds, various colours
and divers smell and scent. God brings out all these varieties from the
same soil of which we can make pots and jars!

**THE GOLDEN AGE OF ARABIC LITERATURE**

The PAGAN ERA OF ARABS, was the golden age of their literature! Those
BARE-FOOTED people, were deprived of all the social and economical
advantages, but their hearts were filled with the love of literature,
eloquency and oratory. They had a large periodic market, named AKAZ
which besides its usual affairs, had turned to a literature center. It
served also as an economical and judicial annual CONGRESS.

[ 31 ]

In that high council the best and the newest, verses and proses, were
rehearsed, for consideration and judgement; and the best ones were
chosen to be proclaimed as the poem or prose of the year. In such that
golden age of literature, the whole world is challenged to produce a
book like QURA"N, but it has not been produced - even by a chapter like
unto it, although many have tried hard and have done their best to do
so, and have failed!

Say: \`\`If man and JINNS were to gather together in order to bring the
like of this QURA"N; they will not bring the like of it, even if they
back up each other with their help and support.''

QURA"N - S 17:88

**2- THIS IS THE BOOK, NO DOUBT IN IT, A GUIDANCE TO THOSE WHO AVOID
EVIL.**

The phrase: \`No DOUBT IN IT' is not merely a claim, but rather a real
truth. We may consider some of the qualifications of the Book in a quick
scan; such as; its truthfulness - Grandeur - Firmness - Eloquency - Deep
meanings - sweet and simple explanations, which is seen throughout the
BOOK which repels and rejects all doubts; so that, nothing can excel
it.

It is worthy of note that, age, and elapse of centuries has not been
able to reduce or decrease such qualities and qualifications, and even
the progress of science and knowledge has enhanced the BRIGHTNESS and
LIGHT of the BOOK!

Such BOOK, NO DOUBT, IS A GUIDANCE OF THE VIRTUOUS PEOPLE.

**WHAT IS MEANT BY GUIDANCE?**

In QURA"N'S literature, GUIDANCE, appear in two phases of meaning: 1)
The guidance through creation, by which anything that comes into being
is guided by the creator through the path of evolution and development,
in order to reach a final destination and goal.

2) The religious guidance which is fulfilled by the apostles and

[ 32 ]

scriptures, and man by such guidance may tread and walk on the path of
progress and development.

**WHY IS THE QURA"NIC GUIDANCE FOR THE VIRTUOUS EXCLUSIVELY?**

True that QURA"N has come down as a guidance for all the mankind, but
if to some extent they be void of piety and are not willing to listen
and take lesson, how can the scripture, what so ever, profit them?
Flowers never grow in a salty soil though it be rained over abundantly.
The same is man's farm land of breast. If not clear of obstinacy against
efforts to remedy and relieve, nothing can profit him the least! This is
why our Lord says: \`\`THIS BOOK IS A GUIDANCE TO THOSE WHO ARE
VIRTUOUS''

3- (THE VIRTUOUS ARE) THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN THE UNSEEN, AND PERFORM THE
PRAYERS, AND BESTOW IN CHARITY A PART OF WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN THEM.

**THE EFFECT OF PIETY IN BODY & SOUL**

At the beginning of the chapter (THE COW), QURA"N divides the people,
in relation to Islam, into three groups:

1) The VIRTUOUS who have accepted Islam completely and in all its
aspects and respects.

2) The UNBELIEVERS who are opposite to the first group.

3) The HYPOCRITES with two faces, claiming to be a Muslim, when they
encounter with Muslims and saying that they believe not when they meet
the unbelievers!

Their real attitude is BLASPHEMY and rejection of FAITH, and they are
more dangerous to Islam than the unbelievers.

In this verse (NO. 3) the first group are discussed and five
qualifications are attributed to them:

[ 33 ]

**A- THE UNSEEN AND THE SENSUAL WORLD**

They believe in the UNSEEN. (world) - Seen and Unseen worlds are the
two material and spiritual worlds that are VIS-A-VIS and opposite to
each other. To believe in the - UNSEEN which is concealed of our senses,
is the first step of separating the believers from the unbelievers; and
it holds the followers of the Divine Religions, against those who reject
faith in God, and in the INSPIRATION, and RESURRECTION. Therefore the
first qualification mentioned here for the VIRTUOUS, is that they
believe in the UNSEEN. (WORLD) Those who believe in the UNSEEN, do
believe that the creator of this UNIVERSE has an infinite knowledge and
power over all things. He is Eternal and Everlasting and controls all
through His power and understanding.

They believe the Death doesn't mean non-existence and annihilation. It
rather is a window that opens to a more extensive world. though a
materialist may believe that the life and the world is limited to what
we can see and touch and feel, and the natural Laws and Rules are
effective without any plan, aim, or programme. They believe that Death
gives an end to everything, and reduces us to nothing!

Are these two groups of man comparable to each other? Of course not.
Because the first party can not avoid his good wishes, and doing good to
other people, but the second group sees no reason for doing that.
Therefore in the world of the BELIEVER, there is brotherhood and piety,
there is help and mutual understandings, while in its opposite world
there is colonization and exploitation, blood-shed and plunder and
robbery. They have named their RETROGRESSIONS and moving backward as
CIVILIZATION, and social development!

The Arabic word GHAIB (translated to UNSEEN) is a very comprehensive
word and in some traditions it has also been interpreted to mean the
ABSENT EMAM AL-MAHDI (AS).

[ 34 ]

**B- COMMUNICATION WITH GOD**

Another distinguishing mark of the VIRTUOUS PERSON is that he performs
the PRAYER which is an effective means of communication with God. The
believers who have found and paved their way towards the METAPHISICAL
WORLD are permanently kept in contact with the ORIGINATOR through their
daily prayers. They only bow down to Allah and no one else. Such a man
feels that he has moved up to an upper stage of life, and that he has
obtained the rank and value to speak directly to his creator, and this
motive serves to develop him the more and the better.

**C- CONNECTION WITH OTHER PEOPLE**

Another speciality of the VIRTUOUS PERSON is his relation and
connection with other people, through bestowing in charity a part of
that which God has given him.

Here God does not say that: \`\`THEY BESTOW IN CHARITY A PART OF WHAT
THEY OWN.'' He rather says: \`\`THEY BESTOW A PART OF WHATEVER ALLAH HAS
GIVEN THEM;'' and that consists of MORALS KNOWLEDGE, WISDOM, SOCIAL
POSITION and other physical and spiritual power and abilities too.

4- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN WHAT HAS BEEN SENT DOWN TO YOU, AND WHAT
HAS BEEN SENT (TO THE APOSTLES) BEFORE YOU, AND WHO ARE SURE OF THE LIFE
TO COME.

**D- BELIEF IN ALL THE APOSTLES**

The fourth distiction of the VIRTUOUS PERSON is his belief in all the
apostles of God, and their mission and commandments.

[ 35 ]

**E- THEY ARE SURE OF THE LIFE TO COME**

The fifth qualification of the VIRTUOUS MAN is believing in the
RESURRECTION, and what is called the Day of Doom. They are sure of the
life to come. They know that they are not created for nothing and
without any AIM, or purpose. They know that they are walking over a long
path of evolution and development, and that, Death is not the end of
that road, but rather a beginning. They believe that God's ABSOLUTE
JUSTICE awaits them all, and none of their deeds, bad or good, will be
ignored or left unrewarded.

This sort of belief brings mental and spiritual comfort and prevents
the stresses of work and responsibility to bother him much, because he
is sure that he shall be rewarded for the least of his works in a wider
and more extensive life, which is to come from the gateway of Death. The
belief in the life to come makes believer brave and even willing and
proud to be martyred! It also controls man against SIN and doing wrong -
The firmer in such a belief the farther from SIN.

**5- THOSE ARE UPON GUIDANCE FROM THEIR LORD, AND THOSE ARE THE ONES
WHO PROSPER.**

The above verse (NO. 5) points at the results obtained by the VIRTUOUS
PERSON who owns the above mentioned five qualifications and
specialities - They are upon guidance from their Lord, and they are the
prosperous ones. Here the parable of Allah's guidance is like that of an
easy paced mount, that takes his rider without much trouble and
difficulty into salvation and prosperity.

**WHAT IS THE MEANING OF PIETY?**

The ARABIC word TAGHWA" (translated to piety) means self control - In
other word, it is an internal power that helps man against excess and
transgress and passion. In man, piety is, as a BRAKE in a vehicle - a
device for applying resistance to the motion of a body. Piety is so
important in Islamic culture that the following verse

[ 36 ]

of QURA"N, relating it, has turned to a common and everlasting
slogan:

\`\`... The most honoured of you in the sight of Allah is the most
VIRTUOUS of you.'' QURA"N - S 49: 13

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ سَوآءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ ءَأَنذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ
تُنذِرْهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 6 )) 6- AS FOR THE UNBELIEVERS, ALIKE IS
TO THEM WHETHER YOU WARN THEM (GOD'S PUNISHMENT) OR DO NOT WARN THEM,
THEY WILL NOT BELIEVE.

خَتَمَ اللهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ وَعَلَى سَمْعِهِمْ وَعَلَى أَبْصَـرِهِمْ
غِشَـوَةٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 7 )) 7- ALLAH HAS SET A SEAL UPON
THEIR HEARTS AND UPON THEIR EARS, AND THERE IS A COVERING UPON THEIR
EYES, AND THERE IS A GREAT PUNISHMENT FOR THEM.

**THE SECOND GROUP**

These are the obstinate and stubborn unbelievers who stand exactly in
opposite to the above mentioned VIRTUOUS PERSONS. Their qualifications
in brief is said in the above verses. (NO. 6 & 7) The verse says:
\`\`THEY BELIEVE NOT'' and it is alike to them whether you warn them of
the chastisement of God, or do not warn them - they are so stubborn that
they do not accept a truth even if they see it clearly! This is because,
mentally, they are not ready for such acceptances.'' The next verse,
(NO. 7) indicates the reasons for such an obstinacy and rejection of
truth by saying:

\`\`Allah Has set a seal upon their hearts, and upon their ears, and
there is a covering upon their eyes, and there is a great chastisement
for them.'' A man who has not reached to such a condition, may still be
liable to guidance; but when he lost his power of comprehension and
distinction, there remains no way for his salvation. Such a man, for

[ 37 ]

losing all the means and instruments of understandings and grasping the
fact; will meet a natural torment, or heavenly chastisment.

**NOTES**

1- IS NEGATING THE POWER OF DISTINCTION, SOME SORT OF COERCION, TO
NULLIFY MAN'S FREE WILL?

If according to the above verse, Allah HAS set a seal upon the hearts
and upon the ears, and has covered the eyes, preventing them to see,
such men are forced to remain faithless! Does this not mean that God HAS
deprived them of their free will, and that they are held under
compulsion?

This question has already been answered by QURA"N, through many verses;
that losing their power of distinction is a reaction proportional to
their actings. Their continuous obstinacy and rejection - Their pride
and vanity - Their frequent transgresses and excesses - Following their
lusts and caprices, and their causeless and sudden changes of mind - And
to make it short their DOING WRONG, has led them to such a misfortune
and disaster.

**WHAT IS MEANT BY SEALING THE HEARTS?**

In the said VERSE (NO.7) and several other verses, losing the power of
distinction and comprehension is notified by setting a seal upon the
hearts.

When usually people put something in a pocket or sack, they plumb it
and seal it, for wanting not to be opened or touched. In Arabic
language, such a plumb or seal is called \`KHATM'. This is a simile of
the obstinate rejectors of faith, that due to continuous sinning, their
minds are closed to advices and sealed and their hearts are plumbed so
that no truthful words can penetrate in them. Man should therefore be
careful about himself, when even he does something wrong. He should wash
out the wrong or the fault, what ever it is; with the clean water of
repentance, and doing good deeds for amendment.

[ 38 ]

**THE MEANING OF THE HEART**

BY HEART, in QURA"NIC LANGUAGE, sometimes UNDERSTANDING is meant, (S
50: 37), some times the SOUL is intended - (S 33: 10) and elsewhere the
MIND is wanted. (S 8: 12).

**EXPLANATORY NOTE**

It seems that there are two powerful important centers in the human
body:

1) The BRAIN, whose duty is sensual perceptions through the nerve
system, and also controlling the movements of the limbs through the
muscles.

2) The HEART, is a hollow organ with muscular walls, settled in the
chest. Heart is the functional center of senses and emotions, and it
physically reacts on strong feelings. When we encounter a tragical
event, we feel its PRESSURE upon our hearts, and also when we meet
something that pleases and makes us happy, we feel its PRESSURE through
the nerves of our heart.

وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ ءَامَنَّا بِاللهِ وَبِالْيَوِمِ الاَْخِرِ
وَمَا هُم بِمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 8 ))

8- AND THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO SAY:

WE BELIEVE IN ALLAH AND THE LAST DAY;

AND YET THEY ARE NOT BELIEVERS.

يُخَـدِعُونَ اللهَ وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَمَا يَخْدَعُونَ إِلاّ
أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ(( 9 )) 9- FAIN WOULD THEY DECEIVE ALLAH
AND THOSE WHO BELIEVE, AND ONLY THEMSELVES THEY DECEIVE, AND THEY ARE
NOT AWARE.

فِى قُلُوبِهِمْ مَّرَضٌ فَزَادَهُمُ اللهُ مَرَضاً وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَكْذِبُونَ(( 10 )) 10- IN THEIR HEARTS IS A
DISEASE, THEN ALLAH HAS INCREASED THEIR DISEASE, AND THERE AWAITS THEM
A

[ 39 ]

PAINFUL CHASTISMENT FOR THAT THEY HAVE CRIED LIES.

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لا تُفْسِدُواْ فِى الاَْرْضِ قَالُواْ إِنَّمَا
نَحْنُ مُصْلِحُونَ(( 11 )) 11- WHEN IT IS SAID TO THEM: DO NOT MAKE
MISCHIEF IN THE LAND, THEY SAY: WE ARE BUT PEACE-MAKERS

أَلاَ إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْمُفْسِدُونَ وَلَـكِن لاَّ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 12 ))
12- KNOW THAT THEY THEMSELVES ARE THE MISCHIEF MAKERS, BUT THEY ARE NOT
AWARE.

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ ءَامِنُواْ كَمَآ ءَامَنَ النَّاسُ قَالُواْ
أَنُؤْمِنُ كَمَآ ءَامَنَ السُّفَهَآءُ أَلاَ إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ السُّفَهآءُ
وَلَـكِن لاَّ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 13 )) 13- WHEN IT IS SAID TO THEM: BELIEVE
AS THE PEOPLE HAVE BELIEVED, THEY SAY: SHALL WE BELIEVE AS THE FOOLS
HAVE BELIEVED? KNOW THAT THEY THEMSELVES ARE THE FOOLS IF THEY BUT KNEW
IT.

وَإِذَا لَقُواْ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ قَالُواْ ءَامَنَّا وَإِذَا
خَلَوْاْ إِلَى شَيَـطِينِهِمْ قَالُواْ إِنَّا مَعَكُمْ إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ
مُسْتَهْزِءُونَ(( 14 )) 14- AND WHEN THEY MEET THOSE, WHO BELIEVE, THEY
SAY: \`WE ARE BELIEVERS', BUT WHEN THEY ARE ALONE WITH THEIR DEVILS,
THEY SAY: \`WE ARE WITH YOU, WE WERE ONLY MOCKING'.

اللهُ يَسْتَهْزِىءُ بِهِمْ وَيَمُدُّهُمْ فِى طُغْيـنِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ((
15 )) 15- ALLAH WILL MOCK AT THEM, AND LEAVES THEM IN THEIR TRESPASSES
BLINDLY WANDERING ON.

[ 40 ]

أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُاْ الضَّلَـلَةَ بِالْهُدَى فَمَا
رَبِحَتْ تِّجـرَتُهُمْ وَمَا كَانُواْ مُهْتَدِينَ(( 16 )) 16- THOSE ARE
THEY THAT HAVE BOUGHT ERROR AT THE PRICE OF GUIDANCE, AND THEIR COMMERCE
HAS NOT PROFITED THEM, AND NOR ARE THEY ON THE RIGHT PATH.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE HYPOCRITES**

We now come to a third class of people, the HYPOCRITES, who are untrue
to themselves as well as to the others! In a certain part of HISTORY,
Islam encountered with a group of people who were insincere. They had
not enough insight and discernment to recognize a fact and believe it,
nor the intrepid courage and necessary braveness to oppose openly! The
HOLY QURA"N has called them THE HYPOCRITES, for having two different and
opposite faces. They misrepresent their opinions and characters, and
pretend to be what they are really not. Such people could not easily be
recognized for pretending to be a Muslim, but the HOLY QURA"N, has given
their signs and marks by which the Muslims could know them well.

One phase of the hypocrites which is underlined by QURA"N, is their
DUPLICITY, and double - dealing - i.e. their deception by pretending to
entertain one set of feeling, and acting under the influence of
another:

And there are some people who say: \`\`We believe in Allah and the LAST
DAY, and yet they are not believers''. They know this sort of tricks and
tactics an advantage of their wit and quickness of mind. By that
stratagem, they think that they deceive Allah and the believers, but
they only deceive themselves, and are not aware of that. (VERSE - 9)

[ 41 ]

QURA"N, says that there is a special disease in their hearts, and Allah
increases their disease as a result of their pretence and hypocrisy.
(VERSE NO. 10)

The insincere man who thinks he can get best of both worlds, by
compromising with good and evil, only serves to increase the disease of
his heart, because he is even untrue to himself. They are LIARS; and
telling lies, is their basic capital, and their best profit and the
results of commerce is a dreadful chastisement that awaits them.

Another phase of the hypocrites indicated in the HOLY BOOK, is that
they are MISCHIEF - MAKERS but they call themselves PEACE - MAKERS.
\`\`When it is said to them: \`Do not make mischief in the land'. they
say: \`We are only peace makers.'' (VERSE NO. 11) Much mischief is
sometimes caused by people who may think to have a mission of peace,
while they have not even a true perception of right and wrong! So by
their ignorance and arrogance, they blindly depress the good and
encorage the bad.

Another weak point, and mark, of the hypocrite is that: he thinks too
much of himself, and too less of the others, being an egotist he knows
himself very wise and says that: faith is good enough to fools: \`\`When
it is said to them: \`Believe as the people have believed' they say: -
Shall we believe as the fools have believed?! Know that they themselves
are fools if they but knew.''

Their third symptom is change of colour every now and then, and
pretending conformity with this and that, or any class of man whom they
meet, They are the jack of all fields and the master of nothing.
Wavering all the time - not to these, not to those, they are distracted
in mind. When they meet those who believe they say we are believers
(VERSE NO. 14) but when they are alone with their devils, they say we
are with you, we were only mocking.

Their dreadful fate and distressing destiny shall be such that QURA"N
says: \`\`Those are they that have bought error at the price of
guidance, and their commerce has not profited them, nor are they on the
right path.'' To make it short, their duplicity and double - dealing,
and the contrast of their inside and outside, which affects their word
and work, is an

[ 42 ]

obvious indication of their hypocrisy: but such a bad disease may have
a wider range, and covers a more extensive field of one's character and
acts. Through a tradition we read: \`There are three marked
qualifications of hypocrisy. Even if these be found in a Muslim who
prays and fasts; he is a hypocrite. These are:

1) Betrayal in deposits, or anything entrusted to the care of one.

2) Telling lies and being a liar.

3) The break of promise.'

Imam Sadiq (AS) has said: \`Pretence and hypocrisy is nothing but
polytheism.' Hypocrites deceive their conscience, and ignore BLAME
WORTHINESS of their conducts by their internal feelings. They have the
false consolation of thinking that they are peace-makers in order to
keep quiet the reproachful voice they sometimes hear from their
conscience or inner side.

مَثَلُهُمْ كَمَثَلِ الَّذِى اسْتَوْقَدَ نَاراً فَلَمَّآ أَضَآءَتْ مَا
حَوْلَهُ ذَهَبَ اللهُ بِنُورِهِمْ وَتَرَكَهُمْ فِى ظُلُمَـت لاَّ
يُبْصِرُونَ(( 17 ))

17- THEIR PARABLE IS LIKE THE PARABLE OF ONE WHO KINDLED A FIRE, (TO
FIND WAY IN A DARK DESERT) AND WHEN IT LIT ALL ROUND HIM, ALLAH (RAISED
A STORM) AND TOOK AWAY THEIR LIGHT, AND LEFT THEM IN DARKNESS UNSEEING.
صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْىٌ فَهُمْ لاَ يَرْجِعُونَ(( 18 )) 18- DEAF, DUMB, AND
BLIND, SO THAT THEY WILL NOT TURN BACK.

أَوْ كَصَيّب مِّنَ السَّمَآءِ فِيهِ ظُلُمَـتٌ وَرَعْدٌ وَبَرْقٌ
يَجْعَلُونَ أَصَـبِعَهُمْ فِى ءَاذَانِهِم مِّنَ الصَّوعِقِ حَذَرَ
الْمَوْتِ وَاللهُ مُحِيطٌ بِالْكَـفِرِينَ(( 19 ))

19- OR AS CLOUD BURST OUT OF THE SKY IN WHICH IS

[ 43 ]

DARKNESS, AND THUNDER, AND LIGHTNING. THEY PUT THEIR FINGER IN THEIR
EARS AGAINST THE THUNDER CLAPS, FEARFUL OF DEATH, AND ALLAH ENCOMPASSES
THE UNBELIEVERS. (THEY ARE ALL UNDER HIS CONTROL) يَكَادُ الْبَرْقُ
يَخْطَفُ أَبْصَـرَهُمْ كُلَّمَآ أَضَآءَ لَهُم مَّشَوْاْ فِيهِ وَإِذَآ
أَظْلَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ قَامُواْ وَلَوْ شَآءَ اللهُ لَذَهَبَ بِسَمْعِهِمْ
وَأَبْصَـرِهِمْ إِنَّ اللهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَىء قَدِيرٌ(( 20 ))

20- THE LIGHTNING ALMOST TAKES AWAY THEIR SIGHT. WHENEVER IT FLASHES
UPON THEM THEY WALK ON, BUT AS SOON AS IT DARKENS THEY HALT. HAD ALLAH
WILLED HE WOULD HAVE TAKEN AWAY THEIR HEARING AND THEIR SIGHT; FOR ALLAH
HAS POWER OVER ALL THINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
TWO REMARKABLE SIMILITUDES APPLYING TO THE HYPOCRITES**

A- The first similitude is that of a man, who in a very dark night has
kindled a fire for want of light. The fire produced a blaze, and lighted
all around him, (VERSE NO. 17) but it did not last long. Allah took away
their light and left them in utter darkness, so that they could see
nothing! they thought that they could do with that weak and dying light,
but when a storm raised and the flame extinguished, as it was
inevitable, the darkness covered them more intensely.

The light was that of faith and MONOTHEISM, that by instinct exists in
them internally, but they soon put it out when it appears; by their
hypocrisy, deception and arrogant compromise with evil. They who have
ended like the blasphemers, finally grope their way along their dark
road, dumb, deaf, and blind. (VERSE NO. 18)

These verses show that hypocrisy, deception or duplicity may win

[ 44 ]

temporary applause and approbation, but it will sooner or later show
its real face which is merely falsehood. B- In the second parable,
another phase of hypocrisy is shown. There is a dark and dangerous
night. It rains cats and dogs. Flashes of lightning is followed by
crashes of thunder. Fain would the thunder - crash, tear the membrane of
their ears. They are perplexed and wandering their animal course. They
put their fingers in their ears against the thunder-claps fearful of
death. (VERSE NO. 19) Wherever they move or go, they are encompassed by
Allah, and move under His control. In the intervals between deafening
crashes, and blinding flashes, there are moments of steady light through
which they take a few steps, but again they are plunged into darkness
and are forced to halt. (VERSE NO. 20)

Every now and then, they might be target of thunder-flashes and be
burnt to ashes! Had Allah willed, he would have taken away their sights,
for Allah has power over all things. Alas! That they have not sought a
safe and secure asylum to spare themselves the fearful chastisement of
Allah.


يَـأَيُّهَا النّاسُ اعْبُدُواْ رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِى خَلَقَكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ
مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ(( 21 )) 21- O, YOU PEOPLE! SERVE
YOUR LORD WHO CREATED YOU, AND THOSE THAT WERE BEFORE YOU, PERHAPS YOU
MIGHT AVOID EVIL.

[ 45 ]

الَّذِى جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الاَْرْضَ فِرَ شاً وَالسَّمَآءَ بِنَآءً
وَأَنْزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَأَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنَ الَّثمَر تِ
رِزْقاً لَّكُمْ فَلاَ تَجْعَلُواْ للهِ أَنْدَاداً وَأَنْتُمْ
تَعْلَمُونَ(( 22 ))

22- (THE LORD) WHO MADE THE EARTH A RESTING PLACE, AND THE SKY A
CANOPY, AND HE SENT DOWN WATER FROM THE SKY, WHEREWITH HE BROUGHT FORTH
FRUITS FOR YOUR SUSTENANCE, THEN DO NOT SET UP COMPEERS TO ALLAH
KNOWINGLY.

(SUCH CO-SHARERS AND IDOLS, HAVE NEITHER CREATED YOU, NOR DO THEY GIVE
YOU SUSTENANCE)

**THE COMMENTARY SERVE YOU SUCH A GOD:**

After explaining the situation of the three classes of people, namely
the VIRTUOUS, the HEATHEN, and the HYPOCRITE, the BOOK, refers to the
line of the first group which ends to SALVATION; saying: \`\`O, People!
Serve your Lord who created you, and those that were before you, perhaps
you might avoid evil.''

The addressing phrase: \`O, PEOPLE! has been repeated throughout the
HOLY BOOK for about 20 times. This is a comprehensive addressing, to
indicate that QURA"N, has not been revealed for only a certain class,
group, race, or tribe of people. Its invitation and call, is almost to
all mankind, calling them generally to the Service and Worship of the
only one God, Who has created them all. (VERSE NO. 21) It also
challenges to fight with all sorts of POLYTHEISM and deviation from the
path of truth.

[ 46 ]


