Traitor and Trusty
==================

A group of the Israelites were of opinion that they were not
responsible for other's trust and deposite! Their logic was that they
were the followers of the scriptures, and have had the prophets among
them. and so were they not bound to be faithful to the Gentiles, pagans,
and heathens! There were also groups of good and honest men among them
who would observe and reserve all rights of other people, whether in
their race and religion, or out of it.

Qur?n does not condemn all of them, for the wrong that some of them
have done; but meanwhile it shows that those who hold the right for
themselves to usurp the properties of other people by forcible seizure,
without any right; they do not understand any language other than that
of power and force, so one has to answer such people accordingly and
with that language.

[ 373 ]

VERSE NO. 76

This verse rejects the idea of those Israelites who said the properties
of the Gentiles, pagans, and heathens, is not unlawful for the people of
the Book! But the verse affirms that the criterion for personality and
the measure of humanity is to observe covenant and to fulfil promises
and to be virtuous and God fearing. Elsewhere in the Qur?n is said:
\`\`The most honoured of you in the sight of Allah is the most virtuous
(CHASTE) of you.'' Therefore the verse here says:

\`\`He who fulfills his covenant, and avoid evil, then Allah loves the
God fearings.''

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَشْتَرُونَ بِعَهْدِ اللهِ وَأَيْمَـانِهِمْ ثَمَناً
قَلِيلاً أُوْلَئكَ لاَخَلاقَ لَهُمْ فِي الاَْخِرَةِ وَلاَ يُكَلِّمُهُمُ
اللهُ وَلاَ يَنظُرُ إِلَيْهِمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَـامَةِ وَلاَ يُزَكِّيهِمْ
وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 77 ))

77- AS FOR THOSE WHO SELL ALLAH'S COVENANT, AND THEIR OWN OATH, FOR A
LITTLE PRICE; THERE SHALL BE NO SHARE FOR THEM IN THE WORLD TO COME. AND
ALLAH WILL NOT SPEAK TO THEM, NOR WILL HE LOOK UPON THEM IN THE
RESSURECTION DAY; NEITHER WILL HE PURIFY THEM, AND FOR THEM IS A PAINFUL
PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 77)**

A group of the learned Jews, who found their social and personal
interests endangered by Mohammad's doctorine; decided to rewrite the
scripture which was written by their own hands, thereby changing the
signs and symptoms of the promised prophet so that it would not conform
to those of the Messenger of God (AS). They had agreed to

[ 374 ]

swear then, that those were the words of God, and not of themselves.
The verse (NO. 77) was sent down to this effect, in order to disclose
their secret Satanic plans.

VERSE NO. 77

This verse implies some other offences and wrongs of the Jews, that not
only they would sell the covenant of God for a little price, but are
also untrue to themselves by falsifying and changing God's word for a
trifle! This verse is sent down in a general sense and common
addressing, although it aims in particular to the said Jewish group.
There are five painful punishments decreed for their offence in this
class: 1) That they will have no portion and share in the life to come.
2) That God will not speak to them. It is evident that God does not
speak with a tongue, as we do; because He is clear and clean from matter
and material. But He is able to create wave vibrations in the air, as He
did for Moses, or may inspire in the heart and mind of man whatever he
wants to say. 3) God will not look upon them in Dooms Day. Here too, we
should call to mind that His look is not with the aid of eyes and
physically. 4) That God will not purify and cleanse them of their sins.
5) An finally there is the painful punishment of God awaiting them.

The importance of their sin of concealing the truth, in the sight of
God, is evident and clearly shown by the physical and spiritual
punishment that are decreed here for them. What does the sinner get at
best for selling his soul and salvation? He who approaches to Allah,
will obtain spiritual virtues and advantages, such that God may look at
him or speak to him in Mercy,

[ 375 ]

وَإِنَّ مِنْهُمْ لَفَرِيقاً يَلْوُنَ أَلْسِنَتَهُمْ بِالْكِتَـابِ
لِتَحْسَبُوهُ مِنَ الْكِتَـابِ وَمَا هُوَ مِنَ الْكِتَـابِ وَيَقُولُونَ
هُوَ مِنْ عِندِ اللهِ وَمَا هُوَ مِنْ عِندِ اللهِ وَيَقُولُونَ عَلَى
اللهِ الْكَذِبَ وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 78 ))

78- AND THERE IS A SECT OF THEM WHO TWIST THEIR TONGUES WHEN RECITING
THE BOOK, THAT YOU MAY SUPPOSE IT (A PART) FROM THE BOOK; BUT IT IS NOT
FROM THE BOOK. AND THEY SAY IT IS FROM ALLAH, AND IT IS NOT FROM ALLAH.
AND THEY TELL LIE AGAINST ALLAH AND THEY KNOW.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 78)**

This verse too, was sent down about a sect of the Jews. It refers to
some learned who forged attributes and qualification for the Messenger
of God(AS), which was contrary to that in their Scriptures. They forged
and wrote it by their own hands and ascribed it to God! Then when they
recited their own writing, they twisted their tongues and distorted
their pronounciation to pretend that they were Allah's word from the
Bible: \`\`And there is a sect of them who twist their tongue when
reciting the Book, that you may suppose it a part from the Scripture,
while they know that it is not from the Book.'' They were not content
even with such a heinous sin, and explicitly ascribed their forgeries to
God and said: \`\`This is from Allah, while it was not from Allah!''

The ending of the verse affirms that it was not a mistake on their
side, and they did that deliberately: \`\`And they tell lies against
Allah and they know!

[ 376 ]

مَا كَانَ لِبَشَر أَن يُؤْتِيَهُ اللهُ الْكِتَـابَ وَالْحُكْمَ
وَالنُّبُوَّةَ ثُمَّ يَقُولَ لِلنَّاسِ كُونُوا عِبَاداً لِيّ مِن دوُنِ
اللهِ وَلَـكِن كُونُواْ رَبَّـانِيِّنَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تُعَلِّمُونَ
الْكِتَـابَ وَبِمَا كُنتُمْ تَدْرُسُونَ(( 79 )) 79- IT WAS NOT
(BECOMING) TO A MAN THAT ALLAH SHOULD GIVE HIM BOOK, JUDGEMENT, AND
PROPHETHOOD THEN HE SAYS TO PEOPLE BE YOU WORSHIPPERS TO ME INSTEAD OF
ALLAH! HE WOULD RATHER SAY: BE YOU GODLY, FOR THAT YOU WERE LEARNING THE
BOOK, AND FOR THAT YOU WERE STUDYING.

وَلاَ يَأْمُرَكُمْ أَن تَتَّخِذُواْ الْمَلائكَةَ وَالنَّبِيِّن
أَرْبَاباً أَيَأْمُرُكُمْ بِالْكُفْرِ بَعْدَ إِذ أَنتُم مُّسْلِمُون(( 80
)) 80- NOR WOULD HE ORDER YOU TO TAKE THE ANGELS AND PROPHETS AS LORDS.
WOULD HE ORDER YOU TO DISBELIEVE AFTER YOU HAVE SUBMITTED?

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 79 AND 80)**

As for the cause of these two verses, it is narrated that some of the
Muslims said to the Messenger of God (AS) that we salute and greet you
as we salute an ordinary man! Then give us leave to bow or to prostrate
before you for salutations, to exhibit a mark of deference to your
superiority.

The prophet said: \`\`It is unlawful to prostrate to any one other than
Allah. It is enough to salute your prophet as you greet others, but
recognize his rights, and follow him.''

[ 377 ]

**COMMENTS**

The verses reject and amend the dogma of making a deity and Lord of
man, as the Christians have done; saying that Jesus was the son of God
or the God Himself. As a matter of fact, Jesus was no more than a man
chosen by God as a prophet, and strengthened by the Holy Spirit
(GABRIEL), the arch angel, who brought the revelation to him. It is
neither natural nor reasonable that God's Messenger should preach
against God; saying worship me and not Him. Jesus was sent to preach the
true God, and the true Mosaic Law and hence the verse:

\`\`It is not possible that a man to whom is given the Book, (BIBLE and
GOSPEL) and wisdom, and prophethood, to say to the people; worship me
instead of God; on contrary he would say to them be you Godly, and
viruous for having been taught the book and studying the Scriptures.''
The prophets also never called the people to worship the angels or any
other being, except God the Cherisher and Lord of the universe. It also
rejects the faith of the Pagan Arabs who claimed to be the followers of
ABRAHAM, but believed the angels to be the daughters of God! Just like
the Jews who called Ezra as the son of God, or that sect of Christianity
who consider Jesus Christ as the son of God.

The verse ends in saying: \`\`How could it be possible for a prophet of
God, to call people to believe in God and in the Day of Judgement, Then
he changes his mind and say to them: \`Be you worshipper of me!'?'' The
verse also implies that the prophets are innocent and free of guilt.

وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللهُ مِيثَـاقَ النَّبِيِّنَ لَمَآ ءَاتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَـاب وَحِكْمَة ثُمَّ جَآءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ قَالَ ءَأَقْررْتُمْ وَأَخَذْتُمْ
عَلَى ذَلِكُمْ إِصْرِى قَالُواْ أَقْرَرْنَا قَالَ فَاشْهَدُواْ وَأَنَاْ
مَعَكُمْ مِّنَ الشَّـاهِدِينَ(( 81 ))

81- AND (REMEMBER) WHEN ALLAH TOOK THE COVENANT FOR

[ 378 ]

THE PROPHETS (FROM THEIR FOLLOWERS) WHEN I GIVE YOU BOOK AND WISDOM,
THEN THERE CAME TO YOU A MESSENGER CONFIRMING THAT WHICH IS WITH YOU,
BELIEVE IN HIM AND HELP HIM. (THEN ALLAH ASKED THEM) DO YOU ACKNOWLEDGE?
AND DO YOU TAKE THIS COVENANT OF MINE AS A BINDING ON YOU? THEY SAID WE
DO AFFRIM. HE SAID: THEN BEAR WITNESS, AND I (TOO) AM OF THE BEARERS OF
WITNESS WITH YOU.

فَمَن تَوَلَّى بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئكَ هُمُ الْفَـاسِقُونَ(( 82 ))
82- THEN WHOVEVER TURNS BACK AFTER THAT, THEY ARE WRONGDOERS.
(DISOBEDIENTS TO THEIR LORD)

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SACRED COVENANT**

The previous verses implied that Mohammad was foretold in the BIBLE and
GOSPEL. Here the argument is taken to a general principle that God took
a covenant from the prophets as well as their followers that when
knowledge and Book was given you, and then there came to you a prophet
who confirmed that which was with you, believe in him and help him. Then
the matter is emphasized by taking confession: \`\`Then Allah asked
them; Do you acknowledge my covenant and keep it as a binding on you?''
and they affirmed it.
VERSE NO. 82

Through this verse, those who break their promise are sternly
threatened, that they are the obstinate wrong doers whom God will not

[ 379 ]

guide them, and those who lose the guidance of Allah, their destination
shall be no where but the Fire in Hell.

أَفَغَيْرَ دِينِ اللهِ يَبْغُونَ وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَـاوَاتِ
وَالاَْرْضِ طَوْعاً وَكَرْهاً وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ(( 83 )) 83- DO THEY
THEN SEEK A RELIGION OTHER THAN THAT OF ALLAH, AND TO HIM HAS
SURRENDERED WHOEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH, WILLINGLY OR
UNWILLINGLY, AND TO HIM THEY RETURN.

قُلْ ءَامَنَّا بِاللهِ وَمَآ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ عَلَى
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَـاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَـاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالاَْسْبَاطِ
وَمَآ أُوتِىَ مُوسَى وَعيسى والنَّبِيُّونَ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ لاَ نُفَرِّقُ
بَيْنَ أَحَد مِّنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ (( 84 )) 84- SAY: WE
BELIEVE IN ALLAH, AND IN THAT WHICH HAS BEEN SENT TO US, AND WHAT WAS
SENT TO ABRAHAM AND ISHMAEL, AND ISAAC, AND JACOB, AND THE TRIBES; AND
TO WHAT WAS SENT TO MOSES AND JESUS, AND THE APOSTLES FROM THEIR LORD.
WE DO NOT MAKE DISTINCTION BETWEEN ANY OF THEM, AND TO HIM WE SUBMIT.

وَمَن يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الاِْسْلامِ دِيناً فَلَن يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ وَهُوَ
فِي الاَْخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَـاسِرِينَ (( 85 )) HE THAT CHOOSES A RELIGION
OTHER THAN ISLAM, (SUBMITTING TO THE WILL OF ALLAH) IT WILL NOT BE
ACCEPTED FROM HIM, AND IN THE WORLD TO COME HE SHALL BE AMONG THE
LOSERS.

[ 380 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE HIGHEST OF THE DIVINE RELIGIONS (VERSE NO. 83)**

Here the argument begins about Islam, and calls for the attention of
the people of the BOOK, as well as all the others. In a general sense of
meaning, it declares that whoever and whatever exists in the heaven and
the earth is Muslim! Willingly, and, or, unwillingly! This is because
Islam in its essence is knowing the Will and Plan of God, and Submission
to the Will and Plan: \`\`Do they seek a religion other than that of
Allah, and to Him surrendered whoever is in the heavens and the earth
willingly or unwillingly, and to Him they return.'' Therefore, Islam
which is the religion of nature and genesis, is to follow our nature and
conform our will to God's will. VERSE NO. 84

Through this verse Allah order His prophet Mohammad (AS), and all those
who follow him (MUSLIMS) to believe in that which is sent down to them,
and also to believe in that which is sent to all the other prophets such
as: ABRAHAM - ISHMAEL - ISAAC - JACOB - THE TRIBES - MOSES AND JESUS;
and to make no distinction between any of them. This is because Islam is
the religion preached by all the earlier prophets, and the truth that
was revealed and taught by all the Divine Books.
VERSE NO. 85

Therefore if any one chooses a religion others than Islam, he is false
to his own nature as well as to the Will and Plan of his Creator: \`\`He
that chooses a religion other than Islam, (which is submission to the
will of God) it will not be accepted from him, and in the world to come
he will be among the losers''. How can such a one, take benefit from the
guidance of his Merciful Lord, when he has it rejected deliberately?!

[ 381 ]

كَيْفَ يَهْدِى اللهُ قَوْماً كَفَرُواْ بَعْدَ إِيَمـانِهِمْ وَشَهِدُواْ
أَنَّ الرَّسُولَ حَقٌّ وَجَآءَهُمُ الْبَيِّنَـاتُ وَاللهُ لاَ يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّـالِمِينَ(( 84 ))

84- HOW MAY ALLAH GUIDE A PEOPLE WHO HAVE DISBELIEVED AFTER THEY
BELIEVED, AND BORE WITNESS THAT THE MESSENGER IS TRUE. AND THERE CAME TO
THEM EVIDENCES. ALLAH WILL NOT GUIDE THE OPPRESSING PEOPLE.

أُوْلَئكَ جَزَآؤُهُمْ أَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ لَعنَةَ اللهِ وَالْمَلائكَةِ
وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 87 )) 87- THOSE ARE THEY WHOSE REWARD SHALL BE
THE CURSE OF ALLAH, THE ANGELS, AND PEOPLE, ALTOGETHER.

خَـالِدِينَ فِيهَا لاَ يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنظَرُونَ(( 88 )) 88- ABIDING IN IT, THEIR ANGUISH SHALL NOT BE
LIGHTENED, NOR SHALL THEY BE REPRIEVED.

إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُواْ مِن بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَأَصْلَحُواْ فَإِنَّ اللهَ
غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 89 )) 89- EXCEPT THOSE WHO REPENTED AFTER THAT AND
AMENDED, FOR ALLAH IS FORGIVING, MERCIFUL.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 86)**

One of the helpers (MEDINA MUSLIMS) slew a guiltless man without any
right, and for fear of retaliation he renounced Islam and escaped to
Mecca as an apostate. He then seriously repented and through one of his
family in Medina asked the prophet, if there was any door of return
opened for him? This verse revealed declaring the acceptance of his
repentance on conditions.

[ 382 ]

**COMMENTS**

According to the preceding verse, Islam is the only religion accepted
by God. Therefore, a Muslim who renounces his religion and becomes an
apostate, cannot easily be forgiven and obtain salvation: \`\`How may
Allah guide a people who have disbelieved after they believed and bore
witness that the Messenger is truthful, and there came to them clear
signs from Allah. Such a people are indeed oppressors and Allah will not
guide the oppressing people.'' Why will not Allah guide them? the answer
is evident and obvious: \`\`They recognized the prophet - they knew him
through many clear signs and miracles - they testified his prophethood -
they made a covenant with him.'' And now in their apostasy they break
their covenant and all promises! They deny the voice of their heart and
conscience and have recanted and joined the enemies! How can such a one
be forgiven and then guided to salvation?

VERSE NO. 87

The punishment that such a one deserves is the curse of Allah - the
curse of the angels and the curse of the people; who were their
brothers, friends and mates, whom they betrayed - the curse of all
together. VERSE NO. 88

And they shall abide in that curse; in that spiritual and physical
anguish and punishment for ever. Their anguish will not lighten, nor
shall they be reprieved! VERSE NO. 89

Unless they repent whole heartedly, and return to Allah sincerely, and
once again ask earnestly for God's Mercy and Forgiveness; and amend
their deeds and change their mind. And of

[ 383 ]

course the Lord our Merciful Creator, is Often Forgiving and
Compassionate to His creatures.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ بَعْدَ إِيَمـانِهِمْ ثُمَّ ازْدَادُواْ
كُفْراً لَّن تُقْبَلَ تَوْبَتُهُمْ وَأُوْلَئكَ هُمُ الضَّآلُّونَ(( 90 ))
90- THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED AFTER THEIR BELIEF AND GREW IN THEIR UNBELIEF
(INSISTED UPON THEIR WRONGS) THEIR REPENTANCE (THAT IS DUE TO THEIR
HELPLESSNESS AND THE FEAR OF DEATH) WILL NEVER BE ACCEPTED. THEY ARE
THOSE WHO GO ASTRAY.

إنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَماتُواْ وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ فَلَن يُقْبَلَ مِنْ
أَحَدِهِم مِّلْءُ الاَْرْضِ ذَهَباً وَلَوِ افْتَدَى بِهِ أُولئكَ لَهُمْ
عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ وَمَا لَهُمْ مِّن نَّـاصِرِينَ(( 91 )) 91- THOSE WHO
DISBELIEVED AND DIED UNBELIEVERS, THERE SHALL NOT BE ACCEPTED FROM ANY
OF THEM THE WHOLE EARTH FULL OF GOLD, FOR HIM TO RANSOM THEREBY. FOR
THEM AWAITS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT, AND THERE IS NOT ANY HELPERS FOR
THEM.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 90)**

Some commentators understand this to refer to the people of the Book
who believed in Mohammad before his advent, but denied him in his
mission.

[ 384 ]

**USELESS REPENTANCE**

The foregoing verse pointed to those who repent sincerely, their
repentance being accepted, but here the argument runs over those whose
repentance have failed:

\`\`Those who renounce their belief and increase their blasphemy, and
insist upon doing wrong, their repentance which arises from their
helplessness, or the fear of death, will not be accepted. Such
repentance are mere pretence, and are of no use.'' VERSE NO. 91

Following useless repentance, now we come to know the useless ransom:
\`\`Those who disbelieved and died unbeliever, giving as much gold as
the whole earth can contain, for ransom, it will not suffice to save
them and they have to suffer the painful punishment that they deserve
it.'' It is obviouse that blasphemy will nullify and negate all our
deeds.

**PART 4 OF THE HOLY QURAN**

لَن تَنَالُواْ الْبِرَّ حَتَّى تُنفِقُواْ مِمّا تُحِبُّونَ وَمَا
تُنفِقُواْ مِن شَىْء فَإِنَّ اللهَ بِهِ عَلِيمٌ(( 92 )) 92- YOU WILL NOT
ATTAIN BENEFICENCE, UNLESS YOU GIVE IN ALMS OF WHAT YOU LOVE, AND
WHATEVER YOU GIVE IN ALMS ALLAH KNOWS IT.

VERSE NO. 92 Here is a sign and a test for One's faith and sincerity in
belief - giving in charity of that which we really love it and value it
greatly. Our life, our personal efforts, our wealth and properties,
our

[ 385 ]

knowledge and our Self are among the things that are loved more or
less. The Arabic \`\`BEAR'' which is translated here to
\`\`BENEFICENCE'' is a comprehensive word with a variety of shades of
meaning such as - benevolence, kindness, all sorts of goodness, so much
so that in another verse of Qur?n (Q 2:12) it implies the belief in God
and in Dooms Day and also it means the prayer and the Fasting.

Therefore to reach the position of the Good-Doers, needs to satisfy
different conditions, among which giving in alms of what we really love
it, and however small the amount of our charity, it will be within the
knowledge of God, and it is recorded and registered in His book.


