The Influence of Quranic Verses
===============================

The influence of Qur?nic Verses in the hearts of Muslims was quick,
deep, and great, so much so that its consequences could be seen soon
after the revelation.

Two instances, narrated by the commentators and historians are
mentioned below:

1- One of the prophet's companions, named ABUTALHA ANS?RI, had a
beautiful and profitable palm-grove in Medina. When the above verse came
down, he went to the prophet and said: \`\`The best thing I love in this
life is that garden of mine, which I am going to give in charity now for
the sake of Allah.''

The prophet said to him: \`\`Bravo! Bravo! this is a wealth that will
profit you much.'' Then the prophet added: \`\`I am of opinion that you
should spend it for the poor and needy persons of your own family and
near kins.'' He did as the prophet ordered: He sold the garden, and
divided its price among the poor and needy of his family.

2- We read in the history that ZOBAIDAH, the queen of HAROON - AL
RASHID had a very magnificent and expensive manuscript of the Holy

[ 386 ]

Qur?n. She had it adorned with expensive Jewels and a lot of gold, and
it was the most loved thing by her. One day she opened to recite the
book, and by chance, the above mentioned verse caught her sight. She
read the verse and decided to give the precious Book in charity. She
therefore called the royal jeweller, sold it, and by its price made a
drinking water system for the Bedouin Arabs. It is said that the system
still exists, and is on use, and it is called by her name.

كُلُّ الطَّعَامِ كَانَ حِلاًّ لِّبَنِي إِسْرَاءِيلَ إِلاَّ مَا حَرَّمَ
إِسْرَاءِيلُ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ مِن قَبْلِ أَن تُنَزَّلَ التَّوْرَاةُ قُلْ
فَأْتُواْ بِالتَّوْرَاةِ فَاتْلُوهَآ إِن كُنتُمْ صَـادِقِينَ (( 93 ))

93- ALL FOODS WAS LAWFUL TO THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL EXCEPT WHAT ISRAEL
FORBADE FOR HIMSELF BEFORE THE BIBLE (THE LAW OF MOSES) WAS SENT DOWN.
SAY BRING THE BIBLE AND RECITE IT, IF YOU ARE TRUTHFUL. (i. e. THESE
MATTERS THAT YOU HAVE FORGED AND ASCRIBED TO THE PREVIOUS APOSTLES, ARE
NOT FOUND EVEN IN YOUR PRESENT AND PERVERTED BIBLE)

فَمَنِ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ مِن بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئكَ
هُمُ الظَّـالِمُونَ (( 94 )) 94- THEN WHOEVER FORGES FALSEHOOD AGAINST
ALLAH AFTER THAT, THEN THEY ARE THE OPPRESSORS. (TRANSGRESSORS)

قُلْ صَدَقَ اللهُ فَاتَّبِعُواْ مِلَّةَ إبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفاً وَمَا
كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 95 )) 95- SAY ALLAH HAS SAID THE TRUTH.
THEREFORE FOLLOW THE CREED OF ABRAHAM. THE MAN OF PURE FAITH WHO WAS NOT
OF THE POLYTHEISTS.

[ 387 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVEALTION (VERSE NO. 93)**

As for the cause of this verse and the next two verses; it is narrated
that the Jews objected to our prophet that; why should he declare the
camel's milk as lawful to drink while Abraham forbade it, and that, the
sacred Mosque in Jerusalem was the QIBLAH of prayer chosen by all the
previous Apostles, while Mohammad has turned faces towards KAABA in
Mecca? The argument runs now on answering these objections:

**JEWISH ACCUSATIONS LAID AGAINST THE PROPHET**

The Jews denied the lawfulness of some foods such as the milk of camel,
and Qur?n rejects their charges saying: \`\`At first all the foods were
lawful for the children of Israel except a few of them that Israel
forbade himself of serving, and that was before the law was sent down.''
According to the Islamic traditions, when Jacob ate meat or drank the
milk of camel or some other particular food, they seemed not agreeble to
his health. He therefore refrained from some food which found them not
fit for his health. Then some of his followers followed him and
abstained from eating or drinking those particular foods. Laters on a
group of the Israelites were led to error and by the wrong impressions,
they thought that such foods were made unlawful by the Mosaic Law! VERSE
NO. 94

When they failed to show their claims out of the BIBLE, it was proved
that they had forged some falsehood against Allah deliberately and
knowingly, and therefore became real oppressors and sinners. VERSE NO.
95

Here the prophet is addressed that, those are the forgeries of the
oppressors, and are not among the LAW and the commandments, and they are
liars and God reveals the truth, and you follow the creed of ABRAHAM,
the man of faith who was not of polytheists.

[ 388 ]

إِنَّ أَوَّلَ بَيْت وُضِعَ لِلنَّاسِ لَلَّذِي بِبَكَّةَ مُبَارَكاً
وَهُدىً لِّلْعَـالَمِينَ (( 96 )) 96- THE FIRST HOUSE (TEMPLE)
ESTABLISHED FOR THE PEOPLE WAS THAT AT BEKKA, (MECCA) BLESSED AND A
GUIDANCE FOR NATIONS.

فِيهِ ءَايَـاتُ بَيِّنَـاتٌ مَّقَامُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمَن دَخَلَهُ كَانَ
ءَامِناً وَللهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيهِ
سَبِيلاً وَمَن كَفَرَ فَإِنَّ اللهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنِ الْعَـالَمِينَ(( 97 ))
97- THEREIN ARE CLEAR SIGNS, AND THE STANDING PLACE (FOR PRAYER) OF
ABRAHAM, AND WHOEVER ENTERED IT WAS SAFE. PILGRIMAGE THERE TO IS A DUTY
OF MAN, FOR THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD. AS FOR THE UNBELIEVERS, ALLAH IS FREE
OF WANT OF ALL THE WORLDS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FIRST HOUSE OF PEOPLE (VERSE NO. 96)**

The said second objection is cleared up through this verse and the next
one, rejecting the superiority of the Sacred Mosque of Jerusalem (THE
TEMPLE OF GHODS) over that of Mecca. (KAABEH)

According to some Islamic traditions; the foundation of KAABEH goes
back to Adam and Eve, and is the first house of worship that was
established for man. Adam, our first father built our first temple, but
it was ruined by the FLOOD. After that, ABRAHAM, with the help of his
son Ishmael, raised the foundations and rebuilt the house. It then
remained as a centre to which all Arab tribes resorted for worship, and
other purposes such as trade, and poetic contests. The centre was
respected by all Arabs - friend and foe alike.

[ 389 ]

Worthy of note that; in this verse KAABEH which is the house of God,
has been called the house of people, which implies whatever is named or
done for God is in fact for people and must serve man! In other word;
whatever is in the service of man, is counted and recorded as for the
cause of God.

Besides the advantage of being the first house of worship for people,
the verse alludes to other two advantages for KAABEH, that it is blessed
and also a guidance for all the people. The ARABIC word LAMINE? can be
translated to: all the worlds - all kinds of being - all nations - and
all creatures.
VERSE NO. 97

This verse states another two advantages of KAABEH that therein are
clear signs such as the station of ABRAHAM. Even today there is a point
within the enclosure, called MAGH?M IBRAHIM, where HAZRAT ABRAHIM was
supposed to have stood in prayer. Another sign of God is the safety and
security of the town and in particular that of the sacred territory.
Mecca was respected and held sacred aby All Arabs - friend and foe
alike. At certain months of the year, all fighting was and is forbidden
in it, even games are not hunted and killed. Mecca was recognized by
Arabs, as inviolable for the pursuit of revenge or violence, and now it
is held pure and sacred more than before.

In the next sentence, Allah orders the pilgrimage there to which is
obligatory and incumbent upon those who can afford it. This pilgrimage
was established by ADAM, and made an official duty by ABRAHAM, to be
preformed by worshippers of Allah, observing certain rules and rites.
The verse also implies that this pilgrimage is not especialized for
Muslims, like the other commandment. It is rather the duty of all
mankind who can afford to perform it.

[ 390 ]

The only term or condition for the pilgrim is the ability to afford -
i.e. having enough physical power and provisions to perform the rites.
As for the importance of the pilgrimage we should call to mind that our
prophet said to HAZRAT IMAM ALI: \`\`O, Ali! He who can afford the
pilgrimage and perform it not is an infidel, because Allah has made it
incumbent upon those who can afford; and him who holds himself back has
wronged his own self, and Allah is free of want. O, Ali He who delays
his due pilgrimage till he dies God will raise him in the Resurrection
day as a Jew or a Nazarine.''

قُلْ يَـأَهْلَ الْكِتَـابِ لِمَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَـاتِ اللهِ وَاللهُ
شَهِيدٌ عَلَى مَا تَعْمَلُونَ (( 98 )) 98- SAY: O, PEOPLE OF THE BOOK,
WHY DO YOU DISBELIEVE THE SIGNS OF ALLAH, WHILE ALLAH IS A WITNESS OF
WHATEVER YOU DO?

قُلْ يَـأَهْلَ الْكِتَـابِ لِمَ تَصُدُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللهِ مَنْ
ءَامَنَ تَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجاً وَأَنتُمْ شُهَدَآءُ وَمَا اللهُ بِغَـافِل
عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ(( 99 )) 99- SAY: O, PEOPLE OF THE BOOK, WHY DO YOU
BAR THE BELIEVERS FROM THE WAY OF ALLAH, SEEKING TO MAKE IT CROOKED
YOURSELVES BEING WITNESSES? AND ALLAH IS NOT HEEDLESS OF WHAT YOU DO.

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ إِن تُطِيعُواْ فَرِيقاً مِّنَ
الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَـابَ يَرُدُّوكُم بَعْدَ إِيَمـانِكُمْ
كَـافِرِينَ (( 100 )) 100- O, YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED IF YOU OBEY SOME
SECT OF THOSE WHO WERE GIVEN THE SCRIPTURES, THEY RENDER YOU APOSTATES
AFTER YOUR BELIEF.

وَكَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ وَأَنتُمْ تُتْلَى عَلَيْكُمْ ءَايَـاتُ اللهِ
وَفِيكُمْ رَسُولُهُ وَمَن يَعْتَصِم بِاللهِ فَقَدْ هُدِىَ إِلَى صِرَاط
مُّسْتَقِيم(( 101 ))

[ 391 ]

101- AND HOW WOULD YOU DISBELIEVE, AND ALLAH'S REVELATIONS ARE RECITED
TO YOU, AND AMONG YOU IS HIS APOSTLE. AND WHOEVER HOLDS FAST TO ALLAH,
HE IS INDEED GUIDED TO A STRAIGHT PATH.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 98)**

As to the cause of this and the following three verses, it is narrated
that one of the Jews named SHAS-IBN-GHAIS who was a dark minded old
devil, and much stubborn in his infidelity; passed by and saw a group of
Muslims who held a meeting. They were of the two tribes of AWS and
KHAZRAJ, known for their old and continuous enemity and hostilities; now
sitting so friendly in a peaceful meeting with lovely discussion! If so
the averse tribes go forward in friendship and peace, under the
leadership of Mohammad thought the Jew; The Jewish accounts will soon be
cleared, and the annihilation of our nation will be inevitable. The Jew
then encouraged some interlocutor Jew, to attend that meeting and remind
them of their bloody and dreadful battle of BOGHAS, in which many of the
two parties tore and mutilated each other so that their old enmity might
be renewed.

The plot was not without effect, and the old enemies and new religious
brothers began to wrangle with each other, and a quarrel was going to
begin, when the prophet was informed and reached them in time. He made a
very effective speech for them that opened their eyes once again. The
parties laid their arms down, and washed out their old hatered and
renewed their brotherhood.

**THE SOWERS OF DISCORD**

Here God tells his Messenger to ask in an admonishing mode; \`Why do
the people of the Scriptures' disbelieve and pay no heed to the

[ 392 ]
signs of God. Why should they do so much mischief and wrong in spite of
knowing well that God sees and witnesses all that they do?

VERSE NO. 99

Also ask them why do they bar and obstruct the believers from the way
of Allah, trying to make the straight path croocked, and dishonestly
deviate it from rectitude? Why should they overbear the burden of others
over that of their own, while it is more becoming to them to call and
preach the other people in Allah and the Law. And this is because they
were bound by their oaths and covenant, and had sworn solemnly in the
presence of their own prophets.

By the ending they are threatened that: Allah is not unmindful or
heedless of what they do! VERSE NO.100

Then a warning is given to Muslims that: \`\`If you listen to and obey
a faction of the followers of the scripture, they may render you
apostates, and make you to turn your backs, after you have been guided
and converted.''
VERSE NO. 101

Through this verse, in a surprising manner, Muslims are asked that; How
would and how could they recant and become disbelievers, in spite of
their connection with God's inspiration and while the revelations of
Allah are rehearsed and recited to them. And besides that the Messenger
of Allah was among them too!? That is to say: If others go astray is not
that much astonishing as a Muslim would be misled. At the end of the
verse, Muslims are advised to adhere to Allah and stick fast to HIM and
to HIS Mercy so that they might be guided to follow their prophet and
their straight path.

[ 393 ]

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللهَ حَقَّ تُقَاتِهِ وَلاَ
تَمُوتُنَّ إِلاَّ وَأَنتُم مُّسْلِمُونَ (( 102 )) 102- O, YOU WHO HAVE
BELIEVED! BEWARE OF ALLAH AS HE DESERVES AND DO NOT DIE UNLESS YOU ARE
MUSLIMS.

وَاعْتَصِمُواْ بِحَبْلِ اللهِ جَمِيعاً وَلاَ تَفَرَّقُواْ وَاذْكُرُواْ
نِعْمَتَ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنتُمْ أَعْدَآءً فَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ
قُلُوبِكُمْ فَأَصْبَحْتُم بِنِعْمَتِهِ إِخْوَاناً وَ كُنتُمْ عَلَى شَفَا
حُفْرَة مِنَّ النَّارِ فَأَنقَذَكُم مِّنْهَا كَذَلِكَ يُبَيّن اللهُ
لَكُمْ ءَايَـاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ (( 103 ))

103- AND CLING TO THE ROPE OF ALLAH (QUR?N AND ISLAM) ALL OF YOU
TOGETHER, AND DIVIDE NOT. AND CALL TO MIND THE FAVOUR OF ALLAH ON YOU,
THAT YOU WERE ENEMIES AND HE UNITED YOUR HEARTS, SO THAT BY HIS GRACE
YOU BECAME BROTHERS. AND YOU WERE ON THE BRINK OF THE PIT OF THE FIRE,
THEN HE SAVED YOU FROM IT. AND THUS ALLAH MAKES HIS SIGNS CLEAR TO YOU
THAT YOU MAY BE GUIDED.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 102)**

As to the cause of this and the next verse, it is narrated that:
\`\`One day two men from the hostile tribes of Aws and KHAZRAJ, named
SAALABEH and ASSAD-IBN-ZARAREH encountered, and began to boast and
mention the honour and pride that their tribes had attained after Islam
and their conversion''. One of them said: \`\`KHAZIMA whose witness
counts for two testimony, and also HANZALEH who took ablution by angels,
belongs to our clan.''

[ 394 ]

The other said, four men of our tribe have done the greatest service to
Islam and Muslims by teaching and preaching Qur?n. He named them as:
\`\`ABI-IBN-KAAB, MOAZ-IBN-JABAL and ZAID-IBN-SAABIT and ABUZAID.''.
Besides those, he added that; \`\`SAAD-IBN-EBAADEH the chief of Medina
and greatest of orators was theirs.'' The boastings and disputes led to
a quarrel, and the wrangle stretched its legs to their tribes, and once
again the conflict and the dead enmity revived and the two tribes took
arm against one another!

When the prophet was informed of that, he hastened towards the tribes,
and by an effective speech and wise management put out the fire, made
peace, and renewed their religious brotherhood. to this effect the above
verse revealed, and by a general commandment enjoined Muslims to grasp
and stick to the unbreakable rope of rescue and salvation that God has
stretched down to us. Here all Muslims are invited to unite and divide
not, through holding fast to Islam and Qur?n, which is called the rope
of Allah.

**CALL TO PIETY**

The verse begins calling to piety and Godfearing, which is the
preliminary step to unity and religious brotherhood. Calling to union
and unity without a firm and strong moral basis will fail. Therefore
through this verse the causes of dispute and division is weakened by the
beam of faith and piety. The believers are addressed here saying:
\`\`Beware and fear Allah as He deserves.'' The climax of Godfearing and
piety is the fear of sinning, and avoiding any sort of wrong, deviation
or transgression. The verse ends in calling the two hostile tribes of
Aws and KHAZRAJ, as well as all the other Muslims and even all mankind
to watch and be on guard for their end and final destiny: \`\`And do not
die unless you die a true Muslim submitted by all means to the will and
consent of Allah.''

[ 395 ]

**CALL TO UNION (VERSE NO. 103)**

The argument then runs towards the final goal which is to unite and not
to divide: \`\`And cling to the rope of Allah, all of you together and
divide not.'' As to the meaning and purpose of the \`ROPE OF ALLAH'
different views of the commentators leads to a single meaning of that,
which is any means or medium through which one may connect himself or
communicate with God; whether it be Qur?n, Islam, the prophet or his
near kins and household. Then the verse enjoins the Muslims to ponder
over their past, and the fearful enmity which existed among them, and
the dreadful battles they had for nothing, saying: \`\`And call to mind
the favour of Allah on you, that you were enemies, and He united your
hearts so that by God's Grace you became brothers.''

Here the union and joints of the hearts is ascribed to Allah because if
we study the records and the history of the Pagan Arabs; we see that
they easily were engaged in a bloody and cruel war for a mere trifle!
And that it was not possible to unite those wild human beings in the
usual ways and manners, for being so much ignorant, obstinate, and
fearless. It is so much so that event the non - Muslim historians are
amazed that how those pagans became united and turned to a single body
of people through Mohammad's teaching and Islamic instructions. They
were indeed at the brink of the pit of the Hell, when God through HIS
revelation and Compassionate Messenger saved them and guided them to a
firm straight path.

وَلْتَكُن مِّنكُمْ أُمَّةٌ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى الْخَيْرِ وَيَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَأُوْلَئكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ(( 104 ))
[ 396 ]

104- AND FROM AMONG YOU THERE SHOULD BE A BAND OF PEOPLE CALLING TO
GOODNESS AND ENJOIN RIGHTEOUSNESS, AND FORBID EVIL. THEY ARE THE ONES
WHO ATTAIN SALVATION.

وَلاَ تُكُونُواْ كَالَّذِينَ تَفَرَّقُواْ وَاخْتَلَفُواْ مِن بَعْدِ مَا
جَآءَهُمُ الْبَيِّنَـاتُ وَأُوْلَئكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 105 ))
105- AND BE NOT LIKE THOSE WHO SCATTERED AND FELL INTO VARIANCE AFTER
THE CLEAR SIGNS THAT CAME TO THEM. THOSE ARE FOR WHOM IS A GREAT
PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
CALLING TO RIGHT AND CONTENDING AGAINST WRONG
(VERSE NO. 104)**

It is ordered through this verse that there should always be a group
among Muslims who enjoin goodness and forbid evil. Then the verse
concludes that success and prosperity can only be attained in that way.
Our reverend prophet, by a parable, makes clear the importance of
enjoyining righteousness and forbidding evil. He said: \`\`A wrong doer
among the population is like a traveller among a group of other
passengers who are all sailing on a ship. When their ship is sailing
midway on the sea, the traveller takes an axe and scuttles the ship! If
the other passengers do not forbid him digging holes on the deck, sooner
or later the ship will sink and all the crews will drown.'' VERSE NO.
105

This verse refers once again to the important matter of unity and
union, putting an stress on avoiding variances and schism, that could

[ 397 ]

be expected to happen every now and then: \`\`And don't be like those
who fell in variance and divided among themselves in parties and sects,
after the clear signs that came to them. Those are the ones for whom
awaits a painful great punishment.'' A community in which unity and
relations and ties are attacked and weakened by means of variance and
wrangles, their land will turn to an open space for race courses of
strangers and colonizers, and what a great misery and affliction is
that.

يَوْمَ تَبْيَضُّ وُجُوهٌ وَتَسْوَدُّ وُجُوهٌ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ
اسْوَدَّتْ وُجُوهُهُمْ أَكَفَرْتُم بَعْدَ إِيمَـانِكُمْ فَذُوقُواْ
الْعَذَابَ بِمَا كُنتُم تَكْفُرُونَ(( 106 ))

106- ON THE DAY IN WHICH SOME FACES ARE WHITENED AND SOME FACES ARE
BLACKENED. AS FOR THOSE WHOSE FACES ARE BLACKENED - DID YOU DISBELIEVE
AFTER YOUR BELIEVING? THEN TASTE THE PUNISHMENT FOR WHAT YOU HAVE
DISBELIEVED.

وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ ابْيَضَّتْ وُجُوهُهُمْ فَفِي رَحْمَةِ اللهِ هُمْ
فِيهَا خَـالِدُونَ(( 107 )) 107- AND AS FOR THOSE WHOSE FACES ARE
WHITENED, THEY SHALL BE IN ALLAH'S MERCY; ABIDING THEREIN FOR EVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
DARK AND BRIGHT FACES (VERSE NO. 106)**

The argument about division and variances which may lead in being
apostate, now runs to the result of that which is a blackened and dark
face. It says that Islam will whiten faces but blasphemy may blacken
them! \`\`There is a day coming in which some faces are whitened and
some faces are blackened.'' Black is the colour of darkness which is
the

[ 398 ]

symbol of infidelity to God - sin - rebellion and misery, and finally
removal of the Grace and Mercy of Allah. VERSE NO. 107

Contrary to the above mentioned group of people there are some whose
faces are bright white in the Dooms Day. White means to be illuminated
with light which stands here for prosperity and being alighted by the
Mercy of God.

تِلْكَ ءَايَـاتُ اللهِ نَتْلُوهَا عَلَيْكَ بِالْحَقِ وَمَا اللهُ
يُرِيدُ ظُلْماً لِّلْعَـالَمِينَ (( 108 )) 108- THESE ARE THE SIGNS OF
ALLAH. WE RECITE IT TO YOU WITH TRUTH. AND ALLAH WANTS NOT INJUSTICE TO
ANY OF HIS CREATURES.

وَللهِ مَا فِي السَّمَـاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ وَإِلَى اللهِ
تُرْجَعُ الاُْمُورُ(( 109 )) 109- (AND HOW HE WISHS INJUSTICE WHILE) TO
ALLAH BELONG ALL THAT IS IN THE HEAVENS AND IN THE EARTH. AND TO ALLAH
IS REFERRED ALL THE MATTERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 108**

This refers to the previous instruction and commandments about faith
and faithlessness - About enjoining good and forbidding evil, and their
consequences. Then it concludes that these are all the signs of Allah
recited to us with truth, and rejecting them will catch our own lap,
because - every one is held in pledge of his own deeds: \`\`And Allah
wants not injustice for any of His creatures.''

[ 399 ]
VERSE NO. 109

Reasons are given here that God is far from being unjust, because to
Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and in the earth, then why should
he wish bad, and unjustice for his own creatures, who owns them all?
كُنتُمْ خَيْرَ أَمَّة أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ تَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَتَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللهِ وَلَوْ ءَامَنَ أَهْلُ
الْكِتَـابِ لَكَانَ خَيْراً لَّهُمْ مِنْهُمُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
وَأَكْثَرُهُمُ الْفَـاسِقُونَ(( 110 ))

110- YOU ARE THE BEST OF NATIONS, BROUGHT FORTH FOR PEOPLE. YOU ENJOIN
GOOD AND FORBID EVIL, AND YOU BELIEVE IN ALLAH. HAD THE PEOPLE OF THE
BOOK BELIEVED, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN BETTER FOR THEM. SOME OF THEM ARE
BELIEVERS, BUT MOST OF THEM ARE EVIL-DOERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
CAMPAIGNING AGAINST CORRUPTION AND CALLING TO RIGHTEOUSNESS (VERSE NO.
110)**

Once again it is refered to enjoining good, forbidding bad, and
believing in Allah: \`\`You were the best of the nations brought for
people, bidding good, and forbidding bad and evil.''

Worthy of note here is that, the superiority of A Muslim upon the other
people is for enjoining righteousness and forbidding evil; and also for
having faith in God. This is to say without belief in God; amendment of
the society and improvement of the population is not possible. Besides
that, enjoining good and forbidding evil is a warranty for the execution
of the Law.

The argument then runs on the Islam, which is a non-racial, universal,
and having the best and the most natural law, rule and regulation. It
means merely submission to the will of God: \`\`Had the

[ 400 ]

people of the book believed in such a divine, and natural religion,
that Islam is, It would have been far better for themselves.'' Of course
all of them are not alike - some of them are believers, but most of then
are evil doers, and that can never harm those who carry the banner of
faith and right.

لَن يَضُرُّوكُمْ إِلاَّ أَذىً وَإِن يُقَـاتِلُوكُمْ يُوَلُّوكُمُ
الاَْدْبَارَ ثُمَّ لاَيُنصَرُونَ (( 111 )) 111- THEY WILL NOT HARM YOU
(SERIOUSLY) EXCEPT A LITTLE HURT. AND IF THEY FIGHT WITH YOU, THEY SHALL
TURN THEIR BACKS ON YOU, (AND RUN AWAY) THEN THEY WILL NOT BE HELPED.

ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ أَيْنَ مَا ثُقِفُواْ إِلاَّ بِحَبْل
مِّنَ اللهِ وَحَبْل مِّنَ النَّاسِ وَبَآءُو بِغَضَب مِّنَ اللهِ
وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَسْكَنَةُ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ
يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَـاتِ اللهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ الاَْنبِيَآءَ بِغَيْرِ حَقّ
ذَلِكَ بِمَا عَصَواْ وَكَانُواْ يَعْتَدُونَ(( 112 ))

112- ABESEMENT SHALL BE PITCHED ON THEM WHEREVER THEY ARE FOUND, EXCEPT
THEY BE IN A BOND OF ALLAH AND A BOND OF THE PEOPLE. THEY HAVE INCURRED
THE WRATH OF ALLAH, AND DESTITUTION IS PITCHED ON THEM. THAT IS BECAUSE
THEY DISBELIEVED IN THE SIGNS OF ALLAH, AND SLEW THE PROPHETS WITHOUT
ANY RIGHT, THIS WAS DUE TO THEIR REBELLION AND WERE TRANSGRESSOR.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 111)**

When some of the illuminated chief Israelites, such as

[ 401 ]

ABDULLAH-IBN-SAL?M and his companions renounced their Jewish religion
in favour of Islam, the Jews blamed and reproached them for their
recantation. They were even threatened to death for renouncing their
forefather's religion. Then this verse revealed as a consolatory for
them, as well as the other Muslims.

**COMMENTS**

This verse and the next one consist of some predictions and
glad-tidings, all of which came true and proved correct during the life
time of the prophet:

1- The people of the Book cannot harm you Muslims severely, except for
some little troubles of no importance.
2- If they encounter in fight with you, they will turn their backs to
you and run away, and final victory is yours and then no one will help
them.

VERSE NO. 112

They will never stand on their own foot and are always in abjection and
misery; unless they change mind and amend themselves. It took no long
that all the prophecies proved to be correct in the lifetime of the
prophet. the verse concludes that there are two ways for them to clear
their abjection and misfortune: First to be in a bond of Allah, which is
believing in Him and grasping His truthful religion of submission.
(ISLAM)

The second way for them to live unharmed is, to be in a bond of people.
In other word; only the pity from God or from man may give them some
protection.

لَيْسُواْ سَوَآءً مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَـابِ أُمَّةٌ قَآئمَةٌ يَتْلُونَ
ءَايَـاتِ اللهِ ءَانَآءَ الَّيْلِ وَ هُمْ يَسْجُدُونَ(( 113 ))

[ 402 ]

113- YET THEY ARE NOT ALL ALIKE. THERE ARE AMONG THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK
AN UPRIGHT PARTY, WHO ALL THE NIGHT LONG RECITE THE REVELATIONS OF ALLAH
AND THEY PROSTRATE THEMSELVES. (AS A SIGN OF SUBMISSION)

يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاَْخِرِ وَيَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَيُسَـارِعُونَ فِى الْخَيْرَاتِ
وَأُوْلَئكَ مِنَ الصَّـالِحِينَ (( 114 ))

114- BELIEVING IN ALLAH AND IN THE LAST DAY. THEY ENJOIN GOOD AND
FORBID EVIL, AND VIE WITH EACH OTHER IN GOOD WORKS; AND THOSE ARE OF THE
RIGHTEOUS. وَمَا يَفْعَلُواْ مِنْ خَيْر فَلَن يُكْفَرُوهُ وَاللهُ
عَلِيمٌ بِالْمُتَّقِينَ (( 115 )) 115- AND WHATEVER OF GOOD THEY DO IT
WILL NOT BE DENIED. (ITS REWARD SHALL BE GIVEN TO THEM) AND ALLAH KNOWS
THOSE WHO AVOID EVIL.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 113)**

Again the argument in this verse and the next two verses, run over the
conversion of ABDULLAH-IBN-SAL?M an important Israelite and his
companions. His renouncement in favour of Islam kicked up a lot of fuss
and nervous excitements among the Jews. They spread among people; that
had they been fair and honest people, they would have not renounced
their forefather's religion, betraying his own people, in order to join
that of the illiterate Arabs.

**ISLaM'S SPIRIT OF TRUTH-SEEKING**

Islam respects sincere faith and true righteousness in whatever form it
may appear. Here for observance of justice and equity; and

[ 403 ]

respecting the rigths of worthy men, and also announcing this fact that
all the people cannot be looked upon with only one and the same eye, it
says:

\`\`All the people of the Book are not alike. Some of them are indeed
upright and morally corrected and honest, and all the night long they
recite the revelation of their Lord.'' VERSE NO. 114

They believe in God and the Last Day of judgement, and fulfill their
duties of enjoining good and forbidding evil. Another of their virtue is
that they vie and contend with other people in good works, and are of
the righteous. VERSE NO. 115

This verse is the complementary to the two foregoing verses showing the
good end of them: \`\`And what ever of good they do, it will not be
denied, and they shall have the due reward for it, because Allah knows
well the good and pious ones who guard themselves against evil.'' إِنَّ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَن تُغْنِىَ عَنْهُمْ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلاَ
أَوْلادُهُم مِّنَ اللهِ شَيْئاً وَأُوْلَئكَ أَصْحَـابُ النَّارِ هُمْ
فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ(( 116 ))

116- AS FOR THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED, NEITHER THEIR RICHES, NOR THEIR
CHILDREN WILL AVAIL THEM AUGHT AGAINST ALLAH. AND THEY ARE THE
COMPANIONS OF THE FIRE. THEREIN THEY SHALL BE FOR EVER. مَثَلُ مَا
يُنفِقُونَ فِى هَـذِهِ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا كَمَثَلِ رِيح فِيهَا صِرٌّ
أَصَابَتْ حَرْثَ قَوْم ظَلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ فَأَهْلَكَتْهُ وَمَا
ظَلَمَهُمُ اللهُ وَلَـكِنْ أَنفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُون(( 117 ))

IT DESTROYES THAT. (CORNFIELD) AND ALLAH DID NOT OPPRESS THEM, BUT THEY
THEMSELVES OPPRESSED.

**THE COMMENTARY

VERSE NO. 116**
The opposite party of the above mentioned fair and honest people, are
some faithless oppressors that are described in this verse and the next
one. \`\`As for the unbelievers neither their wealth nor their children
will avail them aught against Allah.'' Their false spending for false
purposes, will avail them nothing because the very essence of charity is
faith and love. If the wealth is spent for sheer ostentation, or hunting
people by the snare of the giver's power by a pretence of charity, how
can one expect a good result and productive farmland by that?

Qur?n clearly announces that social power and financial advantages,
alone, bring no points in the sight of God, and relying on them is a
mere mistake; unless they are used in a correct way. VERSE NO. 117

This verse implies the false spendings that are done for false purposes
and from base motives which are connected with the mortal life in this
material world. When they are sure of getting a valuable harvest or
fruitful farmland, there comes to destroy it a nipping whirlwind which
is some sort of calamity and disaster! In their despair they may blame
God for that misfortune; but the harm and injustice that he sees and
feels, had not come from God, but from their own soul and self: \`\`And
Allah did not oppress them, but they themselves oppressed.''

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ لاَ تَتَّخِذُواْ بِطَانَةً مِّن
دُونِكُمْ لاَ يَأْلُونَكُمْ خَبَالاً وَدُّواْ مَا عَنِتُّمْ قَدْ بَدَتِ
الْبَغْضَآءُ مِنْ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَمَا تُخْفِي صُدُورُهُمْ أَكْبَرُ قَدْ
بَيَّنَّا لَكُمْ الاَْيَـاتِ إِن كُنتُم تَعْقِلُونَ(( 118 ))

[ 405 ]

118- O, YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED! DO NOT TAKE FOR INTIMATE FRIEND OTHER
THAN YOURSELVES. (BEFRIEND WITH THE BELIEVERS) THEY DON'T FALL SHORT IN
CORRUPTING YOU. THEY DESIRE TO HAVE YOU IN TROUBLE. HATRED HAS ALREADY
SHOWN ITSELF OF THEIR MOUTHS. AND WHAT THEIR CHESTS CONCEAL IS GREATER.
NOW WE HAVE MADE CLEAR TO YOU THE SIGNS, IF YOU USE YOUR WISDOM.

هَـأَنتُمْ أُوْلاَءِ تُحِبُّونَهُمْ وَلاَ يُحِبُّونَكُمْ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ
بِالْكِتَـابِ كُلِّهِ وَإِذَا لَقُوكُمْ قَالُواْ ءَامَنَّا وَإِذَا
خَلَوْاْ عَضُّواْ عَلَيْكُمْ الاَْنَامِلَ مِنَ الْغَيْظِ قُلْ مُوتُواْ
بِغَيْظِكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ عَلِيمُ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ(( 119 ))

119- AYE! YOU ARE THE ONES WHO LOVE THEM, AND THEY LOVE YOU NOT. AND
YOU BELIEVE IN THE BOOK - ALL OF IT. AND WHEN THEY MEET YOU THEY SAY: -
WE HAVE BELIEVED. BUT WHEN THEY ARE ALONE, THEY BITE AT YOU THEIR
FINGERS, ENRAGED! SAY: \`DIE IN YOUR RAGE, THAT ALLAH KNOWS ALL THE
SECRETS OF THE CHESTS.

إِن تَمْسَسْكُمْ حَسَنَةٌ تَسُؤْهُمْ وَإِن تُصِبْكُمْ سَيِّئَةُ
يَفْرَحُواْ بِهَا وَإِن تَصْبِرُواْ وَتَتَّقُواْ لاَ يَضُرُّكُمْ
كَيْدُهُمْ شَيْئاً إِنَّ اللهَ بَمَا يَعْمَلُونَ مُحِيطٌ(( 120 ))

120- IF SOMETHING GOOD BEFALLS YOU IT GRIEVES THEM, BUT IF SOMETHING
BAD BEFALLS YOU THEY REJOICE AT IT. YET IF YOU BE PATIENT, AND AVOID
EVIL, THEIR GUILE WILL HURT YOU NOTHING, THAT ALLAH ENCOMPASSES WHATEVER
THEY DO.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

IBN-ABBASS has said that these three verses, (118 / 119 / 120)

[ 406 ]

revealed when some of the Muslims had taken some Jews for intimate
friends, for being neighbours, relatives or through fostering. The Jews
who were sworn enemies of Islam, pretend to love their Muslim friends,
but their aim was only to collect information by means of them, and get
access to Muslim's military secrets and strategies. These verses
revealed to warn Muslims of trusting their real enemies as confidants,
and rely not upon such friendships.


