The Most Dangerous Stage in the Battle of Ohud
==============================================

At the end of the battle of OHUD, the victorious army of the idolaters
returned back to Mecca at once and with an amazing speed, as if a great
and powerful fresh army was after them! they travelled up to a distance
of 15 miles from Medina, and stayed there in order to avoid giving any
ground for the impression that they were fleeing from the Muslims.
There; Abusofyan, their commander had a chance to think over the
matters, and came to know how bad their hurry and return in confusion
was! He seriously thought of returning to Medina the town of the
prophet. In the next morning by the guidance of Allah, the Messenger of
God issued an emergency commandment that:

[ 411 ]

\`\`Those who had taken part in the battle of OHUD had to set out
urgently in pursuit of the enemy!'' This was a good demonstration of
power, for overawing the enemy and inspiring the defeated Muslims with
confidence. The Muslims set out of Medina and came as far as
HAMR?OLASAD, some eight miles from Medina. HAZRAT IMAM ALI (AS) was
badly injured and had more than sixty wounds, small or big upon his body
when he heard of the new command. In spite of his strength completely
impaired, the Lion of God got up, dressed some of his more dangerous
wounds and joined the Muslim forces in time! Most of the Muslim warriors
were wounded and completely exhausted, but they did not want to disobay
God and His Messenger.

ABUSOFYAN the commander of the heathens, was informed that the
prophet's army are chasing them and have approached very near! He was
struck with astonishment, and a mysterious fear seized him all over. He
thought for a while and then issued an order of decampment. His troops
at once and immediately moved on and escaped, leaving some of their
heavy things and equipments behind. They made for Mecca with utmost
haste and in confusion! When the news of their flee reached the Muslim
camp, the prophet predicted that in future GHOREISH will never get
another victory like their's in the battle of OHUD. Later on the
prophet's prediction proved right and was found true. the above verses
revealed in such that critical state to encourage the believers and
infuse new blood in their veins and new movement in their blood.

لَيْسَ لَكَ مِنَ الاَْمْرِ شَىْءٌ أَوْ يَتُوبَ عَلَيْهِمْ أَوْ
يُعَذِّبَهُمْ فإِنَّهُمْ ظَـالِمُونَ (( 128 ))

128- NONE OF THE MATTERS IS UP TO YOU, (TO DECIDE ON) WHETHER HE TURNS
IN MERCY TO THEM, OR PUNISHES THEM, FOR THEY ARE OPPRESSORS.

[ 412 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 128)**

When in the battle of OHUD the prophet's tooth was knocked out of his
mouth, and his forehead was injured, and muslims were defeated; the
Messenger of God became very anxious about the polytheists and
idolaters, thinking how could they be guided while doing so with their
apostle?! He said: \`\`How can a people like these prosper when they do
such and such to their apostle who calls them to their Lord!'' This
verse revealed to give consolation to the apostle.

**COMMENTS**

Various comments have been made on this verse, but one thing is clear
enough; that it came down after the battle of OHUD, and it is related to
that war. The incident of OHUD carries great lessons that, God's help
will come if we believe in him, and be obedient to his commands and have
discipline and patience. If we fail; His Mercy is always open to us, but
we should know that it is also open to our enemy, and all his
creatures.

وَللهِ مَا فِي السَّمَـاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ يَغْفِرُ لِمَن
يَشَآءُ وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَآءُ وَاللهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 129 )) 129-
TO ALLAH BELONGS ALL THAT IS IN THE HEAVENS AND IN THE EARTH. HE
FORGIVES WHOM HE WILL (DUE TO THEIR MERITS) AND PUNISHES WHOM HE WILL.
(FOR THEIR SINS) AND ALLAH IS THE MOST-FORGIVING THE COMPASSIONATE

[ 413 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 129**

In fact, this is an emphasis on the preceding verse, saying:
\`\`Forgiveness or punishment is not in the control and hand of the
prophet. It is rather through the will of God, that one is pardoned or
punished according to their merits and deservedness.'' Creation is His.
He owns everything. He is the planner and the Manager, and only He Has
the right of punishing or pardoning. The great Commentator TABARSI has
written; a scholar was asked: \`\`Why does god punish a sinner in spite
of His infinite Mercy that is?!'' The scholar answered: \`\`God's Mercy
will not overcome or vanquish His wisdom. God's Mercy does not arise
from sensations and sympathy like that of man. His Mercy is always
mingled with His Wisdom, which necessitates to punish the wrong doers,
except in certain cases.''

يَـأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ لاَ تَأْكُلُواْ الرِّبَواْ أَضْعَـافاً
مُّضَـاعَفَةً وَاتَّقُواْ اللهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ(( 130 )) 130- O,
YOU WHO BELIEVE! DEVOUR NOT USURY, DOUBLED AND REDOUBLED, AND BEWARE OF
ALLAH THAT YOU MAY PROSPER.

وَاتَّقُواْ النَّارَ الَّتىِ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْكَـافِرِينَ(( 131 )) 131-
AND GUARD YOURSELVES AGAINST THE FIRE WHICH IS PREPARED FOR THE
UNBELIEVERS.

وَأَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَالرَّسُولَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ(( 132 )) 132-
AND OBEY ALLAH AND THE MESSENGER THAT YOU MAY BE TREATED MERCIFULLY.

[ 414 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
UNLAWFULNESS OF USURY (VERSE NO. 130)**

This one plus the next eight verses, consist of a series of economical,
social, and educational brief outlines. First of all the believers are
addressed and said to them: \`\`Devour not usury with compound
interests, and know that prosperity is not in greed, but rather in
giving.'' USURY was deeply rooted in trades and social affairs of the
Pagan Arabs, and the Holy Qur?n proceeded to cut it down gradually and
in four steps or stages:

1- In the verse; S 30: 39 it has sufficed with a piece of ethical
advice that: \`\`Whatever you get out of usury in order to increase the
property of people, it shall not increase with Allah. But whatever you
give in charity, desiring Allah's pleasure, you shall have it
manifold.''

2- In the verse; S 4:161 USURY is declared as one of the ugly and
offensive customs of the Jews: \`\`And their taking usury though they
were forbidden it. And their devouring the properties of people falsely
...''

3- In the verse; S 2: 275-9, all sorts of usury has been forbidden and
declared unlawful and is equal to fight against God: \`\`Those who
devour usury cannot arise except as one whom Satan by his touch has
driven to madness. That is because they say; trade is like usury....''

O, you who believe! Fear Allah and give up what remains of your demands
for usury ... And if you do it not, then take notice of war from Allah
and His apostle.''

4- And at last, through this verse (S 3: 130) the unlawfulness of USURY
is clearly announced, and one sort of usury which is the worst of all
has been referred to, and that is the progressive interest of usury -
doubled and redoubled in which the interest is regularly added to the
principal, and it is called the COMPOUND INTEREST.

VERSE NO. 131

Once again in this verse, the stress is put on piety and avoiding evil:
\`\`Guard yourselves against the Fire which is prepared for the
unbelievers.'' [ 415 ]

VERSE NO. 132

Following the above threat, here is an encouragement that: \`\`If you
obey Allah and His Messenger, you will have God's Mercy and salvation.''
وَسَارِعُواْ إِلَى مَغْفِرَة مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَجَنَّة عَرْضُها
السَّمَـاوَاتُ وَالاَْرْضُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ(( 133 )) 133- AND
HASTEN TO FORGIVENESS FROM YOUR LORD, AND THE PARADISE, THE WIDTH OF
WHICH IS THAT OF THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, PREPARED FOR THOSE WHO AVOID
EVIL.

الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ فِي السَّرَّآءِ وَالضَّرَّآءِ وَالْكَـاظِمِينَ
الْغَيْظَ وَالْعَافِينَ عَنِ النَّاسِ وَاللهُ يُحِبُّ الُْمحْسِنِينَ((
134 )) 134- THOSE WHO SPEND IN CHARITY ALIKE IN PROSPERITY AND IN
ADVERSITY, AND THOSE WHO RESTRAIN ANGER, AND FORGIVE PEOPLE, AND ALLAH
LOVES THE GOOD-DOER.

وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا فَعَلُواْ فَـاحِشَةً أَوْ ظَلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ
ذَكَرُواْ اللهَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُواْ لِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَمَن يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ
إِلاَّ اللهُ وَلَمْ يُصِرُّواْ عَلَى مَا فَعَلُواْ وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ((
135 )) 135- AND THOSE WHO WHEN COMMITTED AN INDECENCY, OR WRONGED
THEMSELVES, REMEMBERED ALLAH AND BEGGED HIS PARDON FOR THEIR SINS - AND
WHO CAN FORGIVE SINS EXCEPT ALLAH? AND THEY DO NOT KNOWINGLY PERSIST IN
WHAT THEY HAVE DONE.

[ 416 ]

أُوْلَئكَ جَزَآؤُهُم مَّغْفِرَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَجَنَّـاتٌ تَجْرِي
مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَـارُ خَـالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَنِعْمَ أَجْرُ
الْعَـامِلِينَ(( 136 )) 136- THEY ARE THOSE WHOSE REWARD IS SALVATION
FROM THEIR LORD, AND GARDENS (OF BLISS) BENEATH WHICH STREAMS FLOW,
THEREIN ARE THEY FOR EVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE RACE TO WIN PROSPERITY (VERSE NO. 133)**

After threatening the unbelievers and evil-doers, and encouraging the
believers and good doers; mention is made of an spiritual race to win
prosperity: \`\`Hasten to forgiveness and salvation from your Lord.''
Reaching an spiritual rank and dignity needs piety and salvation first,
and then the destination shall be settled, which is the paradise, the
width of which is that of the heavens and earth. Therefore, don't you
ever think of Paradise as an enclosed material garden which lays
somewhere in one of the plannets in the skies, that as the verse states,
it is as wide as the heavens and the earth!

**THE COUNTENANCE OF THE VIRTUOUS (VERSE NO.134)**

In the preceding verse the virtuous people were promised to live in the
Eternal Paradise. In this verse the virtuous is described and introduced
with four characteristics as follows:

1- They spend in charity and alms in all conditions, be they poor or
rich.

It is remarkable that the first qualification of the virtuous, has been
mentioned as giving alms, and spending for charity, which is contrary
and opposite to the ugly and offensive custom of devouring usury.

[ 417 ]

2- They restrain their rage and anger.

3- They forgive people their wrongs.

Restraining the anger is good, but not enough, because rancour and
hatred may remain in the depth of one's heart as a glowing piece of fire
beneath the ashes. Therefore taking in, the rage, and restraining the
anger, should accompany with forgiveness to bear sweet fruit. 4-They are
good-doers, and Allah loves those who do good.

VERSE NO. 135

When they commit an indecency or do something wrong, they remember God,
and beg his pardon for their sins. This implies that as far as a servant
remembers God, he will do no wrong and will commit no sin. And that, the
forgetfulness in the righteous, and men of piety is something temporary
and lasts no long, because sooner or later they call Allah to mind, and
beg His pardon for their sins and correct their wrongs and amend their
faults and deeds. In other word: When the righteous finds himself fallen
into sin or error, he will not lose hope and persist in doing that, but
repents and returns to God, asking His Forgiveness. The faith of the
virtuous encourages him in that blessed return.

VERSE NO. 136

In this verse the reward of the righteous has been described, which is
salvation from their Lord, and the eternal garden of bliss, beneath
which streams flow for their abode - an excellent recompense for those
who have worked well.

قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ سُنَنٌ فَسِيرُواْ فِي الاَْرْضِ فَانظُرُواْ
كيَفْ كَانَ عَـاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ(( 137 ))
137- MANY WERE THE WAYS OF LIFE BEFORE YOU THAT PASSED AWAY. THEREFORE
TRAVEL IN THE EARTH AND

[ 418 ]

OBSERVE HOW WAS THE END OF THOSE BELIERS. هَـذاَ بَيَانٌ لِلّنَّاسِ
وَهُدىً وَمَوْعِظَةٌ لِلّمُتَّقِينَ(( 138 ))

138- THIS IS A DECLARATION FOR PEOPLE, AND A GUIDANCE, AND ADMONITION
FOR THE VIRTUOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
STUDYING THE PAST HISTORY (VERSE NO. 137)**

The Glorious Qur?n holds the connection of the thoughts and culture of
the present generation, with that of those who have passed away, as
something very necessary. This is because, that connection will make
clear the duties and responsibilities of the future generation: \`\`Many
were the ways and methods of life before you that have passed away.''

By studying those ways of life, it can clearly be seen and sensed that
some people have had great progress due to their faith and good deeds,
and for avoiding evil through piety. On contrary, some have had
destruction, and declination, through their faithlessness, and
evil-deeds. and all these are recorded in the history of man. From this
motive instructions are issued for Muslims, to go on journeys, and
travel in the earth, to study the end of those who rejected faith and
did evil deeds. VERSE NO. 138

This verse implies that whatever we have said so far are plain
statement and clear declarations for all the people, and means of
guidance and advices for the virtuous ones who are God-fearing. These
advices and instructions are general and useful for every body, but only
the virtuous will take lesson, and use them.

[ 419 ]

وَلاَ تَهِنُواْ وَلاَ تَحْزَنُواْ وَأَنتُمُ الاَْعْلَوْنَ إِن كُنتُم
مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 139 )) 139- DISMAY NOT, AND GRIEVE NOT, FOR YOU ARE THE
SUPERIOR IF YOU BE FAITHFUL.

إِن يَمْسَسْكُمْ قَرْحٌ فَقَدْ مَسَّ الْقَوْمَ قَرْحٌ مِّثْلُهُ
وَتِلْكَ الاَْيَّامُ نُدَاوِلُهَا بَيْنَ النَّاسِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ اللهُ
الَّذِينَ ءَامُنَواْ وَيَتَّخِذَ مِنكُمْ شُهَدَآءَ وَاللهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ
الظَّـالِمِينَ (( 140 )) 140- IF (IN THE BATTLE OF OHUD) A WOUND TOUCHED
YOU, OF SURETY A SIMILAR WOUND HAD TOUCHED THE OTHERS, AND SUCH DAYS (OF
VARYING FORTUNE) WE ALTERNATE THEM BETWEEN PEOPLE, SO THAT ALLAH MAY
MAKE KNOWN THOSE WHO (REALLY) BELIEVE, AND TAKE WITNESSE FROM AMONG YOU,
AND ALLAH LOVES NOT THE OPPRESSORS.

وَلُِيمَحِّصَ اللهُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَيَمْحَقَ الْكَـافِرِين ((
141 )) 141- AND THAT ALLAH MAY PURGE THOSE THAT ARE TRUE IN FAITH, AND
BLOT OUT THE INFIDELS.

أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تَدْخُلُواْ الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَعْلَمِ اللهُ
الَّذِينَ جَـاهَدُواْ مِنكُمْ وَيَعْلَمَ الصَّـابِرِينَ (( 142 )) 142-
OR DID YOU SUPPOSE YOU WOULD ENTER PARADISE, WHEN ALLAH HAS NOT YET MADE
KNOWN THOSE WHO HAVE STRIVED (WHO HAVE FOUGHT FOR THE CAUSE OF ALLAH)
FROM AMONG YOU, AND THE PATIENTS.

وَلَقَدْ كُنتُمْ تَمَنَّونَ الْمَوْتَ مِن قَبْلِ أَن تَلْقَوْهُ فَقَدْ
رَأَيْتُمُوهُ وَأَنتُمْ تَنُظرُون (( 143 )) 143- AND YOU WERE DESIRING
DEATH (IN THE WAY OF ALLAH)

[ 420 ]

BEFORE YOU MET IT. THEN YOU SAW IT, AND WERE WATCHING IT. (BUT YOU DID
NOT CATCH IT BECAUSE YOUR DEED IS FAR FROM YOUR WORD)

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVEALTION (VERSE NO. 139)**

This one, and also the next four verses are the continuation of the
argument about the battle of OHUD; which was indeed a great test for the
new Muslim community. At the beginning, the battle went well for the
Muslims ..... The enemy wavered and were at the verge of defeat, when
the Muslims archers in disobedience of their orders, left their
battle-posts, in order to join in the pursuit and to share in the booty.
Soon the enemy managed to take advantage of opening left by the archers,
and there was a severe hand-to-hand fighting in which numbers told in
the favour of the heathens - Many of the Companions of the prophet, and
his Helpers of Medina were martyred, but fortunately there was no rout.
Among the Muslim martyrs, mutilated, was the brave faithful HAMZEH the
prophet's uncle in father side. the Messenger of God himself was wounded
in the forehead, and one of his front teeth was knocked out.

In the same night the prophet proceeded to recognize the mutilated
martyrs and bury them with religious ceremonies, He sat besides their
corpse shedding tears and burried them with grievance at the
battle-field, at the foot of the OHUD mountain. It was in such that
critical state, in which Muslims were deeply in need of coolness,
courage and hope that these verses were sent down.

**THE RESULTS OF THE BATTLE OF OHUD**

Through this verse, (No. 139) God had admonished Muslims

[ 421 ]

that they should take lessons of their success, as well as their
failure, and through the lessons amend and make well all their weak
points: \`\`Dismay not, and grieve not, for you are the superior if you
be faithful.''
VERSE NO. 140

Here is another lesson to be taken to reach a final success: That is a
fight which is for the truth, if you are harmed and injured, you should
know that your enemy has also been hurt, and more so because he has no
faith to give him hope and keep him up on the foot: \`\`If a wound has
been afflicted you, a similar wound has also afflicted your adversary,
therefore there is no room for your excess in grievance and despair.''

Then it refers to another Divine Custom that the sweet and bitter
fortunes and misfortunes of life are not durable, and such days and
times alternate between people through the plans of God - you had your
day and now they have their day, which very soon ceases to be. These are
similar to broken beams of light, and only God's light of truth will
last long and for ever, and will gain the mastery at the end. Then the
verse implies that; by bringing forth such unpleasant events in the life
of His servants, God intends to KNOW, i.e. TO MAKE KNOWN, who is who -
Who strives and who fights sincerely for the cause; and else who wavers
and turns away. This is to distinguish the evil doers from the virtuous
and the truth from the falsehood.

A nation that gives no sacrifice for its liberty, independence, and
rights, will think little of such virtues, but when he strives hard, and
gives high prices for its honour, and existence, that nation's present
and future generations will look at such virtues with respect and
regards.
VERSE NO. 141

This verse alludes to another natural cause of the Muslim's

[ 422 ]

failure in the battle of OHUD in order to reveal the weak points and
amend them: \`\`So that Allah through that incident might purge those
who are true in faith, and meanwhile blot out the infidels.'' The purge
or separating and carrying off whatever is impure, was in two aspects:
1) It cleared out the hypocrite from the ranks of the Muslim warriors,
because in the battle of Ohud there was an open treachery on the part of
300 hypocrites led by ABDULLAH-IBN-ABISELUL who deserted Muslims troops.
2) That bloody failure and effective test strengthened the faith of the
weak and wavering, by showing them the worth and value of order and
discipline, in the battle-field and in all fields of living.

VERSE NO. 142

This verse applies to the correction of a mistake that Muslims might
have had in their minds: \`\`Do you suppose that you would enter
PARADISE without Allah's testing and making known those who have strived
from among you and the patients?''

How can we enter the Garden of Bliss, without going into such trials
that came - to those who were before us and have passed away. They
encountered sufferings and adversities and were so shaken in their
hearts and spirits that even their apostles and their followers
exclaimed: \`\`When will the help of Allah come.'' (S 2: 214) VERSE NO.
143

After the incident of BADR, and the honourable martyrdom of some of
faithfuls, Muslims held meetings to their memorial, and therein
mentioned their names with high esteem and respect. In these meetings
and discussions many a Muslim said that he wished he would be a martyr.
As it is usual in such cases, some of them were not truthful in their
assertions, because at the battle of Ohud they wavered, and run away
leaving the prophet alone in the middle of the

[ 423 ]

Had it not been for the firmness, courage, coolness and bravery of the
prophet and the four or five man and one woman with him, everything
would have been lost?: \`\`And you were desiring death in the way of
Allah before you met it. Then you saw it and were watching it!'' You run
away leaving the prophet with the enemy!

وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلاَّ رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
أَفَإِيْن مَّاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَى أَعْقَـابِكُمْ وَمَن
يَنقَلِبْ عَلَى عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَن يَضُرَّ اللهَ شَيْئاً وَسَيَجْزِي اللهُ
الشَّـاكِرِينَ(( 144 )) 144- AND MOHAMMAD IS NOT EXCEPT A MESSENGER.
THAT, OTHER MESSENGERS HAVE (ALREADY) PASSED AWAY BEFORE HIM. IF HE
SHOULD DIE OR BE SLAIN, WILL YOU THEN TURN BACK ON YOUR HEELS (RECANT)?
AND IF ANY ONE SHOULD (RECANT AND) TURN ABOUT ON HIS HEELS, HE WILL NOT
HARM ALLAH THE LEAST, AND SOON WILL ALLAH REWARD THE THANKS GIVERS.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا كَانَ لِنَفْس أَن تَمُوتَ إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِ اللهِ كِتَـاباً
مُّؤَجّلاً وَمَن يُرِدْ ثَوَابَ الدُّنْيَا نُؤْتِهِ
</p>

مِنْهَا وَمَن يُرِدْ ثَوَابَ الاَْخِرَةِ نُؤْتِهِ مِنْهَا وَسَنَجْزِي
الشَّـاكِرِينَ(( 145 ))

[ 424 ]

145- AND NO ONE CAN DIE EXCEPT BY THE LEAVE OF ALLAH. (EVERY LIFE IS) A
TERM FIXED. AND WHOEVER SEEKS THE REWARD OF THIS WORLD, WE SHALL GIVE
HIM OF IT, AND WHOEVER SEEKS THE REWARD OF THE LAST, WE SHALL GIVE HIM
OF IT. AND SOON WE SHALL RECOMPENSE THE THANKS GIVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 144)**

This refers to another incident that happened in the course of the
battle of OHUD, when a cry was raised that Mohammad was killed: \`\`It
so happened that, one of the heathens killed MASAAB-IBN-UMEIR, who was
the standard bearer of Muslims, and also he had some physical
resemblances to the prophet. When so; the heathen exclaimed in strong
emotion and a very loud voice that, upon the glory of HOBAL, our great
idol, I killed Mohammad! He then ran this way and that, repeating his
news happily.''

A confusion and bad disorder followed the announcement, wherein most of
the Muslims; even the prophet's near companions (\`\`like OMAR and
OTHMAN'') abandoned the prophet and left the battle-field and run away.
The Messenger of God was indeed severely wounded, but through his
unexampled bravery and faith, his courage and firmness, he saved the
Muslim army from a rout. In that sad incident only a very few of the
prophet's companions; namely: HAZRAT ALI (AS) - TALHA - ABUDAJJANNEH and
NASEEBEH, a water carrier woman stayed at his side and fought bravely.
This verse is to reproach and admonish those multitude, and majority who
wavered and ran away, leaving the prophet alone in the battle-field for
the enemy!


