Another Defence Concerning Woman's Right
========================================

In this verse two other unjust and disagreeable customs of the Pagan
Era have been condemned and declared unlawful:

1- It addresses the believers that it is unlawful to inherit the
properties of women against their will and consent.

2- The second ugly and unbecoming custom of the Arab was that, they
kept a woman under pressure by various means, in order to force them to
leave and grant their dower and to take a divorce for nothing: \`\`Do
not force women to take back a part of the dower that you have given
them.'' This commandment has an exception for excluding those women who
are guilty of a manifest indecency such as adultary.

\* \* \* \*

(Some of the commentators have understood the above verse in

[ 503 ]

other way: \`\`The phrase, \`don't inherit the women against their
will' has nothing to do with their property, they say; and the purpose
is their very self. The cause for the revelation they say; was that
among many nations including Arabs in the Pagan Era, a step-son, or
brother took possession of a man's widow along with his goods and
chattels. This shameful custom of inheriting women against their will
was condemned and forbidden in Islam.'' TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.)

وَإِنْ أَرَدتُّمُ اسْتِبْدَالَ زَوْج مَّكَانَ زَوْج وَءَاتَيْتُمْ
إِحْدَهُنَّ قِنَطاراً فَلاَتَأْخُذُوا مِنْهُ شَيْئاً أَتَأْخُذُونَهُ
بُهْتَـناً وَإِثْماً مُّبِيناً(( 20 )) 20- AND IF YOU HAVE DECIDED TO
TAKE ONE WIFE IN PLACE OF ANOTHER WIFE, AND YOU HAVE GIVEN TO ONE OF
THEM A LOT OF WEALTH, (AS HER DOWRY) THEN TAKE OF IT NOTHING- WOULD YOU
TAKE IT BY WAY OF CALUMNY AND MANIFEST SIN?

وَكَيْفَ تَأْخُذُونَهُ وَقَدْ أَفْضَى بَعْضُكُمْ إِلَى بَعض وَأَخَذْنَ
مِنكُم مِّيثَـقاً غَلِيظاً(( 21 )) 21- AND HOW WOULD YOU TAKE IT WHEN
YOU HAVE LAIN WITH EACH OTHER AND A FIRM COVENANT HAS BEEN TAKEN OF
YOU?

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 20)**

During the Pagan Era when an Arab decided to divorce his wife and marry
a new one, he sometimes accused her of indecencies and fornication, that
he could give her not her dower. Or else he, many a time pressed her and
harmed her that she would consent and agree with a divorce without a
dower, or asking for some little rights that she might have had! So the
verse came down to admonish and reproach those cruel men who were doing
so:

[ 504 ]

\`\`And if you have decided to take another wife in place of your
present spouse, even if you have given her a lot of wealth, don't try to
get the least of it back - Do you indeed want to take it by slander and
through manifest sin!?'' VERSE NO. 21

This verse continues with the argument, with the aim of inciting the
emotions and the compassionate feelings of men through a fine touch
that: How dare of you to waste the definite and certain rights of a
woman with whom you have lain and made love and have had a solemn and
firm covenant!? Have you not a human conscience to blame and reproach
you - \`\`And how would you take it when you have lain with each other,
and a firm covenant has been taken from you?''

وَلاَ تَنكِحُوا مَا نَكَحَ ءَابَآؤُكُم مِّنَ النِّسَآءِ إِلاَّ مَا قَدْ
سَلَفَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَـحِشَةً وَمَقْتاً وَسَآءَ سَبِيلا(( 22 )) 22- AND
MARRY NOT THE WOMEN WHOM YOUR FATHERS MARRIED, EXCEPT WHAT HAS ALREADY
BEEN PASSED, THAT IT IS INDECENT, HATEFUL, AND EVIL WAY.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 22)**

After the Pagan Era, when Islam had been spread, one of the Helpers
named ABUGHOBAIS, passed away and his son proposed to marry his own
step - mother. The woman said: \`\`I consider you as my own son, and I
think not of this sort of marriage as a decent and appropriate one; but
still we may go to the Messenger of God and ask his opinion about
that.'' When they referred the matter to the prophet, the above verse
was revealed and declared that sort of marriage bad and unlawful:
\`\`Marry not the women whom your fathers married.''

[ 505 ]

Then three distinct difinitions of the marriage is outlined through the
ending of the verse in order to put an emphasis upon the commandment of
prohibition, that it is an indecent act. It is also hateful and
malevolent, and a wrong and evil way to be followed.

حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ أُمَّهـتُكُمْ وَبَنَاتُكُمْ وَأَخَوَتُكُمْ
وَعَمَّـتُكُمْ وَخَـلَـتُكُمْ وَبَنَاتُ الاَْخِ وَبَنَاتُ الاُْخْتِ
وَأُمَّهَـتُكُمُ الَّتِى أَرْضَعْنَكُمْ وَأَخَوَتُكُم مِّنَ الرَّضَـعَةِ
وَأُمَّهَـتُ نِسَآئِكُمْ وَرَبَـئِبُكُمُ الَّتِى فِى حُجُورِكُمْ مِّن
نِّسَآئِكُمُ الَّـتِى دَخَلْتُم بِهِنَّ فَإِن لَّمْ تَكُونُوا دَخَلْتُم
بِهِنَّ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَحَلـئِلُ أَبْنَآئِكُمُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
أَصْلَـبِكُمْ وَأَن تَجْمَعُوا بَيْنَ الاُْخْتَيْنِ إِلاَّ مَاقَدْ
سَلَفَ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً(( 23 ))

23- IT IS UNLAWFUL TO YOU (MARRIAGE WITH) YOUR MOTHER, YOUR DAUGHTERS,
YOUR SISTERS, YOUR FATHER'S SISTERS, YOUR MOTHER'S SISTERS, YOUR
BROTHER'S DAUGHTERS, YOUR SISTER'S DAUGHTERS, YOUR FOSTER- MOTHERS WHO
HAVE GIVEN SUCK TO YOU, YOUR FOSTER SISTERS, YOUR WIFE'S MOTHER, YOUR
STEP- DAUGHTERS UNDER YOUR GUARDIANSHIP BORN OF YOUR WIVES WITH WHOM YOU
HAVE MADE LOVE- BUT IF YOU HAVE NOT MADE LOVE WITH THEM THERE IS NO
BALME ON YOU (IN MARRYING STEPِDAUGHTERS) AND WIVES OF YOUR SONS WHO ARE
OF YOUR LOINS, AND TO TAKE IN MARRIAGE TWO SISTERS SIMULTANEOUSLY,
EXCEPT WHAT HAS ALREADY PASSED, THAT ALLAH IS FORGIVING COMPASSIONATE
.

[ 506 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
PROHIBITION OF MARRIAGE WITH CLOSE RELATIVES
(VERSE NO. 23)

** Here is a table of forbidden marriage with close relatives, and the
table agrees mainly with what is usually accepted among all nations. The
prohibition is due to: 1- blood relationship or consanguinity. 2-
Fostrage or milk relations. 3- The relatives in - law. Those related by
blood, or the consanguineous are of seven groups: mother, daughter,
sister, paternal aunt, maternal aunt, your brother's daughter, and your
sister's daughter. Mother includes grand mother through the father or
mother, great - grandmother and etc.

Daughters too, includes grand daughter through son or daughter, great-
grand- daughter and so on.

Then the fostrage and milk - relatives are named in the table; \`Your
foster- mother who have given suck to you, and also your foster-
sister.' In the third stage there comes in the verse the relatives- in-
law, who are mentioned in four groups:

1- \`your wife's mothers.' This implies that as soon as you marry a
girl, her mother and grand-mother, and going on, her great grand- mother
will be unlawful for you in marriage for ever.

2- Your step- daughter under your guardianship, and born of your wives
with whom you have made love - but if you have not made love with her
there is no guilt on you if you marry her daughters.

3- And taking in marriage two sisters in the same time and
simultaneously. Here an exception is pointed to: \`\`and that is what
had already been done and passed. This was because during the Pagan Era,
it was very customary for an Arab to marry with two sister
simultaneously and at the same time.''

[ 507 ]

وَالُْمحْصَنَـتُ مِنَ النِّسَآءِ إِلاَّ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَـنُكُمْ
كِتَـبَ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَأُحِلَّ لَكُم مَّا وَرَآءَ ذَلِكُمْ أَن
تَبْتَغُوا بِأَمْوَلِكُم مُّحْصِنِينَ غَيْرَ مُسَـفِحِينَ فَمَا
اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَأَتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً
وَلاَجُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيَما تَرَضَيْتُم بِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الْفَرِيضَةِ
إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً(( 24 ))

24- AND ALL MARRIED WOMEN (ARE UNLAWFUL TO YOU) EXCEPT THOSE WHOM YOUR
RIGHT HAND POSSESS. (YOUR CAPTIVES ARE LIKE THOSE WHO ARE DIVORCED, AND
YOU MAY MARRY THEM IF THEY ARE WILLING) SUCH IS ALLAH'S PRESCRIPT FOR
YOU, AND LAWFUL TO YOU ARE (ALL WOMEN) OTHER THAN THOSE, (MENTIONED)
PROVIDED YOU SEEK THEM WITH YOUR WEALTH (IN MARRIAGE) IN MODEST CONDUCT,
AND NOT IN FORNICATION.

AND AS FOR THOSE (WOMEN) WHOM YOU ENJOY (BY TEMPORARY MARRIAGE) GIVE
THEM THEIR DOWERS AS IT IS MADE INCUMBENT. AND THERE IS NO BLAME ON YOU
FOR WHAT BOTH OF YOU AGREE, (TO VARY THE DOWER) AFTER IT HAS BEEN
APPOINTED. THAT ALLAH IS ALL- KNOWING, ALL- WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE BEGINNING OF THE FIFTH PART OF QUR?N (VERSE NO.24 )**

The verse continues with the argument about the unlawful women, adding
here that: \`\`All the married women are unlawful to you.'' In the
commandment there is one exception: \`\`Except those whom your right
hand possess.''

[ 508 ]

These are the non- Muslim women who are taken captives in the sacred
war (JAH?D) under the commandership of a true and righteous Imam,
against those who persecute faith. This is because their captivity is
taken as a divorce in this special case. In the next part of the verse
mention is made of what is called MOT-EH in religious terms which means
temporary marriage: \`\`And as for those women whom you enjoy them by
way of MOT-EH (temporary marriage) give them their dowers in full.

**TEMPORARY MARRIAGE (MOTEH) IS A SOCIAL NECESSITY**

Lawfulness of the temporary marriage in the life- time of our prophet
is a certain matter which has no room for any doubt; and no report has
been received to say that the prophet did abrogate the commandment.

It cannot be denied that the sexual instinct in men and women is the
most powerful one among all the other instincts, so much so that some of
the psychologists know it to be the principle of the human instincts or
the main one. Now one of the most critical problems of our time is that
of the sex affairs, particularly in the youths and young generation.
This is because the popular necessities demand the period of school and
study to be lengthened. Then rare are the youths, young, and students,
who can afford to marry, a girl, or a girl to marry a boy, in their
lower ages wherein the sexual power is very difficult to be
controlled.

In such a critical condition what is to be done? Should we take
fornication and adultery easy, and regard it lawful and shake the
foundations of family houses? Or should we accept the temporary marriage
which has not the hard conditions of the permanent wedlock, nor the
disadvantages of fornication and adultery. Those people who reject the
temporary marriage as well as fornication and indecencies, what do they
want to do? and what is their proposal? or else do we

[ 509 ]

have to suppress and crush our sexual power and instinct or let it go
on free and uncontrolled?

وَمَن لَّمْ يَسْتَطِعْ مِنكُمْ طَوْلا أَن يَنكِحَ الُْمحْصَنَـتِ
الْمُؤْمِنَـتِ فَمِن مَّا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَـنُكُم مِّن فَتَيَـتِكُمُ
الْمُؤْمِنَـتِ وَاللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِإِيمَـنِكُم بَعْضُكُمْ مِّن بَعْض
فَانِكحُوهُنَّ بِإِذْنِ أَهْلِهِنَّ وَءَاتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ مُحْصَنَـت غَيْرَ مُسَـفِحَـت وَلاَ مُتَّخِذَاتِ أَخْدَان
فَإِذَآ أُحْصِنَّ فَإِنْ أَتَيْنَ بِفَـحِشَة فَعَلَيْهِنَّ نِصْفُ مَا
عَلَى الُْمحْصَنَـتِ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِىَ الْعَنَتَ
مِنكُمْ وَأَن تَصْبِرُوا خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ واللهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 25
))

25- AND THOSE OF YOU WHO CANNOT AFFORD TO MARRY BELIEVING FREE WOMEN,
THEY MAY WED BELIEVING GIRLS FROM AMONG THOSE WHOM YOUR RIGHT HAND
POSSESSES. AND ALLAH KNOWS BEST YOUR FAITH. YOU ARE ONE FROM ANOTHER. SO
MARRY THEM WITH THEIR FAMILY'S LEAVE, AND GIVE THEM THEIR DOWERS
HONOURABLY; PROVIDED BEING CHASTE, NOT FORNICATING, OR TAKING LOVERS
(BOY - FRIENDS).

WHEN THEY ARE IN WEDLOCK, IF THEY COMMIT INDECENCY, (ADULTERY) THEY
SHALL BE LIABLE TO HALF THE PUNISHMENT OF A FREE WOMAN. THIS (PERMISSION
FOR MARRYING SLAVE GIRLS) IS FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO FEAR TO COMMIT SIN.
AND IF YOU KEEP PATIENT, IT IS BETTER FOR YOU, AND ALLAH IS ALL-
FORGIVING, ALL- COMPASSIONATE.

[ 510 ]

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE COMMENTARY
MARRIAGE WITH SLAVE- GIRLS (AN INTRODUCTORY)**

Slavery and slave- trade, although against the true spirit of Islam-
was one of the most important trades and economical principles of the
ancient world, which is fortunately now out of date. But still there are
other conditions in which a man's or a woman's freedom is restricted.
One such case and instance is that of the captives of war. The phrase in
this verse: \`Whom your right hands possess'' might also apply to the
non- Muslims captives taken in a sacred war (JAH?D) which must be under
the commandership of righteous and innocent Imam. \`Your right hand'
does not necessarily mean that she belongs to you, or is your property,
because all the captives and spoils of war belong to the community and
are only yours in that sense of meaning. On the other hand there are
strict rules and regulations in Islam about captives of war, as how to
treat them or their ransom or being released for God. TRANSLATOR'S
NOTE

**COMMENTS
VERSE NO. 25**

\`\`Those of you who cannot afford to marry a believing free-woman,
they may wed a believing girl from among those whom your right hands
possess.'' In such a marriage you must be careful of your faith and make
sure that your spouse too, be a believing girl. The social condition of
the time was such that people avoided marrying slaves or captives
knowing them contemptible and scornful; and therefore the verse implies
that: \`\`You are from one another.'' To put it in other words, it is to
say; all of you whether slave or free are of the same root and race and
from the same father and mother, (Adam and Eve) and thus all the people
are the branches of one tree and the leaves of one branch.

Then the verse bids us to take permission for marrying them

[ 511 ]

from their master, owner, or guardian, whoever he might be; but we are
ordered to give their dowers to themselves that the slaves are the owner
of their dower and whatever else they may own lawfully.

Another condition or term of the marriage with captives or slaves is
that they should be chaste and clean, and not fornicating or mixing with
boy friend and taking lovers.

Then there comes in the verse their punishment for adultery and other
indecencies which is half of a free woman. Marriage with the slaves and
war- captives, as the ending of the verse implies, is suitable for those
who fear sinning, and cannot afford to marry a free- girl, nor to
control their passion and lust. But as the marriage is supposed to be a
sacred connection with the opposite sex for life, to protect the human
race and kind, and also she is to be a base and structural foundation of
family, it is far better for the man to keep patient until an
appropriate wife with the most suitable qualifications is chosen.

يُرِيدُ اللهُ لِيُبَيِّنَ لَكُمْ وَيَهْدِيَكُمْ سُنَنَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِكُمْ وَيَتُوبَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 26 )) 26-
ALLAH WANTS (THROUGH THESE INSTRUCTIONS) TO MAKE CLEAR TO YOU AND TO
GUIDE YOU THE (GOOD) COURSES OF ACTION OF THE PREDECESSORS, AND TURN TO
YOU (IN MERCY) AND ALLAH IS ALL- KNOWING, ALL- WISE.

وَاللهُ يُرِيدُ أَن يَتُوبَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَيُرِيدُ الَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ
الشَّهَوَتِ أَن تَمِيلُوا مَيْلا عَظِيماً(( 27 )) 27- AND ALLAH SEEKS TO
FORGIVE YOU, BUT THOSE WHO FOLLOW THEIR LUSTS, WISH YOU TO SWERVE AWAY
GREATLY.

يُرِيدُ اللهُ أَنْ يُخَفِّفَ عَنكُمْ وَخُلِقَ الاِْنسَـنُ ضَعِيفاً(( 28
)) 28- ALLAH WANTS TO LIGHTEN THINGS FOR YOU, AND MAN IS CREATED WEAK.

[ 512 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
WHAT ARE ALL THESE LIMITATIONS FOR?**

After receiving the above mentioned instructions and considering all
those commandments in relation to marriage, one may ask: \`\`What are
these limitations and restrictions for?'' This verse and the next two
verses are to answer that question: \`\`Allah wants through these
instructions and commandments pave the way to prosperity and salvation
for you.'' You are not alone in this long journey, and the only group to
whom these rules and regulations will apply, God rather wants to make
clear to you and to guide you the best and the most correct customs and
courses of action that your predecessors have already trodden. Besides
that, Allah seeks to forgive you your sins in order to purify your
hearts of devilish temptations, and lead you in a straight path to
prosperity and salvation; because Allah is All-knowing, All- wise.

VERSE NO. 27

Again it is emphasized in this verse that Allah seeks to forgive you,
but those people who follow their lusts and sensuous desires, wish you
to swerve away and to go far astray until you are drowned and submerged
in the dangerous lagoon of sin and pond of evil, and meet its burning
consequences.

These sexual freedom of our age is no more than a deceiving mirage that
will attract mankind to lie and falsehood.

VERSE NO. 28

And after all by such instructions, Allah wants to lighten our burden
and make our progress easier, for He knows that man is created weak, and
evil temptations are strong.

[ 513 ]

يَـأيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَأْكُلُوا أَمْوَلَكُم بَيْنَكُم
بِالْبَـطِلِ إِلاَّ أَن تَكُونَ تِجَـرَةً عَن تَرَاض مِّنكُمْ وَلاَ
تَقْتُلُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ بِكُمْ رَحِيماً(( 29 )) 29- O,
YOU WHO BELIEVE! EAT NOT YOUR PROPERTIES AMONG YOURSELVES IN VANITY,
EXCEPT IT BE TRADING BY (MUTUAL) CONSENT OF YOURS. AND KILL NOT
YOURSELVES (COMMIT NOT- SUICIDE) THAT ALLAH IS COMPASSIONATE TO YOU.

وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ عُدْوناً وَظُلْماً فَسَوْفَ نُصْلِيهِ نَاراً
وَكَانَ ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللهِ يَسِيراً(( 30 )) 30- AND WHOEVER DOES THAT IN
RANCOUR AND INJUSTICE, SOON SHALL WE JOIN HIM TO THE FIRE, AND THAT IS
EASY FOR ALLAH.

**THE COMMENTARY
HEALTH OF SOCIETY DEPENDS ON THE HEALTH OF ECONOMY
(VERSE NO. 29)**

As a matter of fact, this verse makes the foundation and basis of
Islamic laws and rules about trades and transactions. It is therefore a
reasoning means in the logical hands of Islam's jurisprundents:
\`\`Consume not your properties among yourselves in vain and for vanity
or on account of anything devoid of worth and truth, except it be by way
of trade of mutual consents. Therefore any kind of transgress, Fraud,
Dishonesty, Usury, or transactions, the limits and bounds of which are
not clear, or selling or buying things which are void of logical worth
and use, or the facilities of sinning, are all under this law forbidden
and declared unlawful.''

The next part of the verse implies that killing yourself and committing
suicide is much heinous a sin that leads to Hell: \`\`And do not kill
yourselves by committing suicide.'' there is a fine touch

[ 514 ]

here in this verse that, all the properties which you may hold, in
trust, be it in your own name or belong to other people, or the
community and the public purse, must not be wasted and consumed in vain
and for nothing. Because in this case your waste returns and reacts
towards your own ruin and destruction as if you are committing suicide
by injuring the economy! So you must be careful of your own properties
as well as for that of the other people as you are careful for your own
life.

When people try to rob each other by fraud, deception and tricks, and
shake the firm foundation on committing economical suicide, which is
none the less than personal taking lives. VERSE NO. 30

Here the punishment for disobeying the above commandment has been
decreed which is a blazing Fire! Whoever wastes and eats his own and
other's properties in vain and by fraud, or through transgression, and
commits suicide will soon join the wrath of God which is manifested in
the form of the blazing fire in Hell!

إِن تَجْتَنِبُوا كَبَآئِرَ مَا تُنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ نُكَفِّرْ عَنكُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ وَنُدْخِلْكُم مُّدْخَلا كَرِيماً(( 31 )) 31- IF YOU AVOID
THE GREATERS OF WHAT YOU ARE FORBIDDEN TO DO, WE SHALL ACQUIT YOU OF
YOUR EVIL DEEDS, AND ENTER YOU TO AN HONOURABLE ENTRANCE.

**THE COMMENTARY
SINS: BIG AND SMALL (VERSE NO.31)**

This verse clearly states that if you avoid committing major sins, God
will forgive you your minor sins. This implies that sins are of two
groups and grades according to the Islamic division:

[ 515 ]

The first group of sins that QUR?N has classified them as the MAJOR
ONES or the greatests of sins; and the second grades that are qualified
as the MINOR SINS - (QUR?N S 18: 49) The major sins in the sight of
Islam are the most heinous ones that give great offence. These are not
only prohibited to do, but severe threats of punishment and joining the
fire in Hell is followed when mention of them is made through the verses
of Qur?n. Instances of these heinous sins are; committing murder, usury
and committing adultery, or devouring orphan's properties.

On the other hand, small sins are counted as minor sin, provided they
are not repeated and done frequently. If you ignore their effect and
importance of being a sin, then you must expect their bad consequences.
وَلاَ تَتَمَنَّوْا مَا فَضَّلَ اللهُ بِهِ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَى بَعْض
لِّلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا اكْتَسَبُوا وَلِلنِّسَآءِ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا
اكْتَسَبْنَ وَسْئَلُوا اللهَ مِن فَضْلِهِ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ بِكُلِّ
شَىْء عَلِيماً(( 32 )) 32- AND DO NOT COVET THAT BY WHICH ALLAH HAS MADE
SOME OF YOU EXCEL OTHERS. TO MEN IS ALLOTTED A SHARE OF WHAT THEY HAVE
EARNED, AND TO WOMEN IS ALLOTTED A SHARE OF WHAT THEY EARN. AND ASK
ALLAH OF HIS GRACE, THAT ALLAH HAS KNOWLEDGE OF ALL THINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO.32)**

OMME SALAMEH the prophet's wife asked him that: \`\`Why should man take
part in the Sacred Wars (JAH?D) and women should not? Why should man
inherit twice as much as a woman? I wish I could be a man that I could
have his excellent social position.'' The verse came down to answer such
questions:

[ 516 ]

**COMMENTS**

The inheritance share of woman which is half that of man was a general
topic in questions from the beginning. As if it was forgotten that man
had been made responsible for all the expenditures of living, even for
those of the women. And if we consider their dowers too, we may find
women's share much more than that of men! Therefore: \`\`Do not covet
that by which Allah has made some of you to excel some other.''

Men and women have their own gifts from God - some greater than the
other. It may not appear clear in our eyes the secret of differences,
because we have no full knowledge as God has. We may see a small part or
a corner of God's main plan, and therefore we must not be jealous if
other people have more than we have in rank and wealth strength and
health and etc. If you want something more, instead of being jealous,
pray to God, and ask Him your needs, in order to make yourself fit for
more of God's bounties.

وَلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مَوَلِىَ مِمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَلِدَانِ
وَالاَْقْرَبُونَ وَالَّذِينَ عَقَدَتْ أَيْمَـنُكُمْ فَأَتُوهُمْ
نَصِيبَهُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَىْء شَهِيداً(( 33 ))

33- TO EVERY ONE WE HAVE APPOINTED NEARLY RELATED HEIRS OF THAT WHICH
PARENTS AND NEAR KINS LEAVE. AND AS FOR THOSE WITH WHOM YOUR RIGHT HANDS
HAVE ENTERED INTO AGREEMENT, THEN GIVE THEM THEIR SHARE THAT ALLAH IS A
WITNESS OVER ALL THINGS

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 33**

MAW?LI, plural of MAUL?, from the root of WAL?YAT, is being near in
place of relationship. MAUL? OR MAVALI that we have translated here

[ 517 ]

as a \`nearly related heir', may therefore mean a heir, partner, nearly
related, sharer, friend, protector or master. Then the verse in its
general sense of meaning is a commandment to respect your ties of blood,
neighbourhood, friendship, and friendly compacts and promises. As for:
\`\`Those with whom your RIGHT HANDS have tied a tie or entered into an
agreement.'' The right hand is mentioned here because almost all people
use their right hands in tying a tie, and rare are those who are
left-handed. By tie it is meant various kinds of connection or
obligation that may connect persons or things together and to unite them
such as family ties or ties of religion or duty.

As for those who may inherit a man through a tie of this kind, some of
the commentators have understood it to be the wife and husband who
through the ties of marriage inherit each other.

Some other commentators have understood it to be the ties of friendship
such as the pre- Islamic famous, \`COMPACT OF JARIREH', which was a
covenant made between two or more friends who entered into an agreement
to treat each onther as brethren.

\* \* \* \*

(Moulana Allahmeh YOUSUF ALI, in his commentary has given another view
in this relation that deserves more consideration; he says: \`\`When the
Emigration took place from Mecca to Medina, bonds and links of
brotherhood were established between the Emigrants and Helpers, and they
shared even in each other's inheritance. Later, when the community of
Muslims was solidly established, and relations with those left behind in
Mecca were resumed, the rights of blood- relation in Mecca, and the
Helper- brotheren in Medina were both safeguarded.'' This is the
particular meaning of the verse - The more general meaning is similar:
Respect your ties of blood, of neighbourhood, and of friedly compacts
and - Be just to All.

**(TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

[ 518 ]

الرِّجَالُ قَوَّمُونَ عَلَى النِّسَآءِ بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللهُ بَعْضَهُمْ
عَلَى بَعْض وَبِمَآ أَنفَقُوا مِنْ أَمْوَلِهِمْ فَالصَّـلِحَـتُ
قَـنِتَـتٌ حَـفِظَـتٌ لِّلْغَيْبِ بِمَا حَفِظَ اللهُ وَالَّـتِى
تَخَافُونَ نُشُوزَهُنَّ فَعِظُوهُنَّ وَاهْجُرُوهُنَّ فِى الْمَضَاجِعِ
وَاضْرِبُوهُنَّ فَإِنْ أَطَعْنَكُمْ فَلاَ تَبْغُوا عَلَيْهِنَّ سَبِيلا
إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَلَيّاً كَبِيراً(( 34 ))

34- MEN ARE THE MAINTAINERS (GUARDIAN AND PROTECTOR) OF WOMEN, BECAUSE
ALLAH HAS GIVEN THE ONE MORE (STRENGTH) THAN THE OTHER, AND BECAUSE THEY
SPEND THEIR WEALTH. (FOR THE WELFARE AND MAINTENANCE OF WOMEN) THEREFORE
THE RIGHTEOUS WOMEN ARE HUMBLES, GUARDING (THEIR CHASTITY IN THEIR
HUSBAND'S) ABSENCE, AS ALLAH HAS GUARDED AND AS TO THOSE WOMEN, ON WHOSE
PART YOU FEAR DISOBEDIENCE, ADMONISH THEM (FIRST) THEN DEPART THEM IN
THEIR BEDS, (DON'T SLEEP WITH THEM IN ONE BED, AND IF THEY CONTINUED
BEING OBSTINATE, FINALLY) STRIKE THEM. THEN IF THEY OBEYED YOU, DON'T
SEEK TO ENCROACH THEM, THAT ALLAH IS HIGH, GREAT.

**THE COMMENTARY GUARDIANSHIP IN THE FAMILY SYSTEM (VERSE NO.34)**

A family is a small unit and a building block of the large community,
and like the community it always has to have a leader or an incharge.
Either the man or the woman should be the incharge or manager of the
household, because both of them cannot have the same responsibility at
the same time, that; too many cooks will spoil the broth. The Holy
Qur?n, clearly expresses that man is the incharge who directs the
affairs of the house and is the guardian and protector of

[ 519 ]

woman. The verse intends no dictatorship or any encroachment, but
rather to recommend single leadership to maintain the order, and
conformity to what is reasonablely good for all the family.

The next part of the verse implies that this authority and leadership
given to man is due to his obligations and economical responsibilities,
that, he has to maintain the wife in a suitable condition.

According to the verse the wives are of two groups or classes: The
first is the good and righteous wife who is humble and obedient to her
husband. She is harmonous and kind in his presence, and in her husband's
absence, she guards his reputation, property, and also her own chastity
as ordained by God.

Among the second group are the wives who neglect and refuse to follow
their husband. They are obstinate and unyielding to reasonings and
discussions. Men are advised by Qur?n to take some disciplinary steps
and measures against such women, in order to amend them and correct
their wrong.

These disciplinary actions are to be observed; stage by stage. First of
all the man should try with verbal advices and admonition and if it did
not work, he may suspend his sex relations with her, and sleep not with
her in one bed. If even the separation of beds was not sufficient to
amend her; the man may use some force - majeure, and do some beating and
bodily punishment, perhaps she may change her mind. If at last the wife
yielded to reason and discussion, man should seek not to encroach her
and oppress.

وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ شِقَاقَ بَيْنِهِمَا فَابْعَثُوا حَكَماً مِّنْ أَهْلِهِ
وَحَكَماً مِّنْ أَهْلِهَآ إِن يُرِيدَآ إِصْلَـحاً يُوَفِّقِ اللهُ
بَيْنَهُمَآ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَلِيماً خَبِيراً(( 35 ))

35- AND IF YOU FEAR A BREACH BETWEEN THE TWO, THEN APPOINT AN ARBITER
FROM HIS PEOPLE, AND AN ARBITER

[ 520 ]


