The Family Court of Reconciliation (verse No.35)
================================================

What the above verse has pointed to; is an excellent plan for the
settlement of family jars and disputes, and it has several advantages
over the ordinary judicial courts as follows:

1- In the family circle, application of legal trickeries of law which
is the object of usual judicial courts will not prove effective and
efficient. Therefore the verse shows a new way for the settlement of
disputes between the couple: \`\`Appoint an arbiter from his people and
an arbiter from her family.'' The arbitration has proved to be the most
effective plan, but unfortunately Muslims do not resort to it
universally, as they should! It is evident that the arbiter from each
family knows more of the personal mannerism and pecularities of both
parties, and more chance and ability, if God speeds, to settle, disputes
and establish a real reconciliation.

2- In the ordinary judicial courts, the parties have to disclose their
secrets in the sight of not closely personal and intimates in order to
defend. Then such exposure of the secrets of marriage and intercourses
of the couple to the eye of a stranger, may injure the emotions and
feeling of the spouses, so much so that when they return reconciled,
they find their previous sincerity and former kindness entirely impaired
and diminished!

3- Almost all the judges in the common judicial courts, are indifferent
to the fate and ultimate lot of the judged. In fact they are neither
for, nor against the one upon whom their judgement is. On the other hand
the family arbiters are willing, and will to their best, to

[ 521 ]

reconcile and reunite the couple and encourage them earnestly to live a
peaceful life.

4- After all, such a family court has neither the expenses nor the
complications and confusions of the ordinary judicial courts.

وَاعْبُدُوا اللهَ وَلاَ تُشْرِكُوا بِهِ شَيْئاً وَبِالْوَلِدَيْنِ
إِحْسَـناً وَبِذِى الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَـمَى وَالْمَسَـكِينِ وَالْجَارِ
ذِى الْقُرْبَى وَالْجَارِ الْجُنُبِ وَالصَّاحِبِ بِالْجَنْبِ وَابْنِ
السَّبِيلِ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَـنُكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُحِبُّ مَن
كَانَ مُخْتَالا فَخُوراً(( 36 ))

36- AND WORSHIP ALLAH, AND ASSOCIATE NOTHING WITH HIM, AND DO GOOD TO
PARENTS, AND TO THE NEXT OF KIN, AND ORPHANS, AND THE NEEDY. AND TO THE
NEIGHBOURS WHO ARE NEAR, AND TO THE DISTANT NEIGHBOURS, AND NEAR
COMPANIONS, AND THE WAYFARER, AND THOSE WHOM YOUR RIGHT HANDS POSSESS,
THAT ALLAH LOVES NOT HIM WHO IS HAUGHTY, BOASTFUL.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 36**

The prime nature and the substance of Islam is to worship the only one
God whose name is Allah; and else to do good and to be good to mankind
in particular, and to all our fellow - creatures in general. The verse
alludes to a series of rights and instructions to observe such rights.
These rights, the observance of which is obligatory and incumbent upon
us all, are the rights of the creator and those of His creatures, and
some ten instructions can be deduced from the verse as undermentioned:

1- First of all the verse enjoins to worship God and believe in His
oneness, associating nothing with Him as partners. Leaving polytheism

[ 522 ]

and believeing in Monotheism is the essence of Islam, without which no
one can be a Muslim.

2- Then comes the turn of doing good to the parents which is second
important instruction after the faith in Monotheism. the rights of
father and mother have frequently been mentioned in Qura"n, and less a
subject will you find in the Book with so much emphasis and stress.

3- The third commandment is to do good to family and relative. This
virtue is enjoined here and there in the Book; sometimes in the form of
observing the bonds of relationship, and sometimes in an imperative
mood, to do good to relatives and kindreds.

4- In the fourth stage it is ordained to observe the rights of orphans,
and not to devour their properties, and injure them not the least in any
way.

5- Then the rights of the poor and needy is called to be observed. In a
community there might be so many indigents that must not be ignored or
forgotten, because leaving them unattended is against all human tenets
and philosophy.

6 & 7- Then comes the commands for doing good to neighbours. These may
either be near and relatives or intimates and friends, or neighbour who
are far and strangers whatsoever.

The rights of neighbours and doing good to them in the sight of Islam
is so important a matter, that Hazrat Imam Ali (AS) has said:

\`\`The prophet put so much emphasis and stress on the observation of
the rights of the neighbours that we thought he would finally order the
neighbours to inherit one another.'' Once the prophet repeated thrice
the phrase that: \`\`Upon my God he believes not in Me!'' When he was
asked: \`\`who believes not in you?'' the prophet answered: \`\`He whose
neighbour has no respite from his offence!''

8- Then the verse refers to those who are associates, and have ties of
friendship with us. The Arabic \`SA"HIB - BELJANB' which is translated
here to; \`near companions' has a wider meaning than a friend, a
favourer, or an intimate. in rather demands sociability and

[ 523 ]

good and fair behaviour to all other people, and even to all man's
fellow creatures.

9- The nineth group of people that are to be dealt with kindness and
Mercy, are the wayfarers who have been in need of some help. The verse
wants no one to avoid giving them a hand.

10- And finally the verse enjoins doing good to what our right hands
possess. These recommended ones may still exist, not under the title of
slavery, but in various forms, such as the people in your power and in
your charge. Even the animals who are not able to speak and express
their feelings are all God's creatures and God loves them all and
therefore they deserve our sympathy and service.

الَّذِينَ يَبْخَلُونَ وَيَأْمُرُونَ النَّاسَ بِالْبُخْلِ وَيَكْتُمُونَ
مَآ ءَاتَـهُمُ اللهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِلْكَـفِرِينَ عَذَاباً
مُّهِيناً(( 37 ))

37- THOSE WHO ARE NIGGARDLY, AND BID PEOPLE TO BE NIGGARD, AND CONCEAL
THAT WHICH ALLAH HAS BESTOWED UPON THEM OF HIS GRACE, AND WE HAVE
PREPARED FOR THE UNBELIEVERS A CONTEMPTIBLE PUNISHMENT.

وَالَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَلَهُمْ رِئَآءَ النَّاسِ وَلاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللهِ وَلاَ بِالْيَوْمِ الاَْخِرِ وَمَن يَكُنِ الشَّيْطَـنُ لَهُ
قَرِيناً فَسَآءَ قَرِيناً(( 38 ))

38- AND THOSE WHO SPEND THEIR WEALTHS (IN ALMS) TO SHOW OFF TO PEOPLE,
AND BELIEVE NOT IN ALLAH, NOR IN THE LAST DAY. AND HE WHOSE INTIMATE IS
SATAN, AN EVIL INTIMATE IS HE.

وَمَاذَا عَلَيْهِمْ لَوْ ءَامَنُوا بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاَْخِرِ
وَأَنفَقُوا مِمَّا رَزَقَهُمُ اللهُ وَكَانَ اللهُ بِهِمْ عَلِيماً(( 39
))

[ 524 ]

39- AND WHAT WOULD HAPPEN AGAINST THEM, HAD THEY BELIEVED IN ALLAH AND
THE LAST DAY, AND GAVE IN CHARITY SOME OF THAT WHICH ALLAH HAS BESTOWED
UPON THEM?AND ALLAH HAS FULL KNOWLEDGE OF THEM.

**THE COMMENTARY
FALSE AND TRUE CHARITY (VERSE NO.37)**

This is the continuation of the preceding arguments about the haughty,
proud, and arrogants who are stingy too. They not only refuse to do good
to others and to be gracious themselves, but hold and prevent others
from being kind and fair. The ending of the verse counts the niggardly
man among the unbelievers, and this might be due to the fact that the
source of niggardliness is unbelief in the Grace and bounty of God. The
verse promises such people a very fit punishment for their guilt, and
that is \`CONTEMPT': \`\`And we have prepared for the unbelievers a
contemptible punishment.'' This is because the niggard holds other
people in a state of contempt and humiliation, and by doing that, he
himself has to join a contemptible punishment which his deeds have
prepared for him.

VERSE NO. 38

The argument here reaches to another group of people, who are not
niggard and stingy, but on the contrary, they spend lavishly and with
profusion. Of course they spend not for the sake and consent of God, but
merely for pretence, and show off to people! There is neither faith in
their generosity, nor love. It is all pretence and hypocrisy. Their mind
is always busy on how to attract the attention of people towards
themselves through their spending which is void of sincerity. \`\`They
have chosen the Satan for their intimacy and what a bad intimate and
friend Satan is!''

[ 525 ]

VERSE NO. 39

This verse raises a question that: \`\`What wrong or evil would happen
to them, had they believed in Allah and the Last Day, and gave in
charity or alms a part or some of the sustenance that Allah has given
them?''

Sustenance may mean, material, spiritual or intellectual provisions or
anything that pertains to our life and growth. And of course, all these
means and provisions are from God, and we must spent or use them for
God. Such expenditure is not a waste or burden, but rather a positive
response to our inner most natural demands, which finally may lead to
our salvation and prosperity.

إِنَّ الله لاَ يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّة وَإِن تَكُ حَسَنَةً
يُضَـعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِن لَّدُنْهُ أَجْراً عَظِيماً(( 40 ))

40- ALLAH WILL OPPRESS NO ONE THE WEIGHT OF AN ATOM. AND IF THERE BE A
GOOD DEED, HE WILL DOUBLE IT, AND BESTOWS FROM HIS PRESENCE A GREAT
REWARD.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 40**

The Arabic \`ZARREH' translated to atom, primarily means an ant, and it
is applied to anything little or small, and now a days, it is referred
to the atom.

The verse implies that God will never oppress any one the weight of an
atom or the least, and on the contrary, if He find a good deed, He may
double or multiply it by His Grace and Mercy, and even a greater reward
may come out of His love, which depends somehow to our intention and
purity of faith and sincerity in ours acts.

**WHY GOD OPPRESSES NOT?**

Oppression and wrong are usually caused by ignorance, necessities or
mental weakness and shortcomings. He who is aware of

[ 526 ]

every one and everything, and is All- knowing and who is Self-
sufficient, and who has not the least of short comings in His sacred
Essence, will never oppress any one the least. This does not mean that
he can't but rather He won't. And why should He do wrong and unjustice
in spite of such an ability?

فَكَيْفَ إِذَا جِئْنَا مِن كُلِّ أُمَّة بِشَهِيد وَجِئْنَا بِكَ عَلَى
هَـؤُلاَءِ شَهِيداً(( 41 )) 41- HOW WILL IT BE THEN WHEN WE BRING FROM
EVERY GROUP OF PEOPLE (NATIONS) A WITNESS. AND BRING YOU AS A WITNESS
AGAINST THESE.

يَوْمَئِذ يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَعَصَوُا الرَّسُولَ لَوْتُسَوَّى
بِهِمُ الاَْرْضُ وَلاَ يَكْتُمُونَ اللهَ حَدِيثاً(( 42 )) 42- ON THAT
DAY THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED AND DISOBEYED THE MESSENGER, WILL WISH THAT
THE EARTH WOULD BE LEVELLED WITH THEM. (THEY WISH THEY WOULD BE DUST)
AND THEY WILL NOT CONCEAL THEN A SINGLE FACT FROM ALLAH.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 41 & 42**

Besides the limbs and parts of the body, and the angels who are all
witnesses against wrongs and sins in the Dooms Day; each prophet too,
bears witness for his people, and for his contemporaries. They will give
evidence and testify against those who have rejected Allah and done
evil, and in favour of the believing righteous men and women. In such
that clear cut situation, no one can deny his sins, evil deeds, and even
his bad inner intentions. Here is where those who confront with the
Divine court of justice, and judgement of high fidelity, and have been
faithless and evil doers, will wish that they were levelled with the

[ 527 ]

earth, and reduced to dust and to non- existence; for existence itself
will be a burden of shame and sorrow upon their shoulders!

يَـأيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَقْرَبُوا الصَّلَوةَ وَأَنتُمْ
سُكَرَى حَتَّى تَعْلَمُوا مَا تَقُولُونَ وَلاَ جُنُبَاً إِلاَّ عَابِرِى
سَبِيل حَتَّى تَغْتَسِلُوا وَإِن كُنتُم مَّرْضَى أَوْ عَلَى سَفَر أَوْ
جَآءَ أَحَدٌ مِّنكُمْ مِّنَ الْغَائِطِ أَوْ لَـمَسْتُمُ النِّسَآءَ
فَلَمْ تَجِدُوا مَآءً فَتَيَمَّمُوا صَعِيداً طَيِّباً فَامْسَحُوا
بِوُجُوهِكُمْ وَأَيْدِيكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَفُوّاً غَفُوراً(( 43
))

43- O, BELIEVERS! DO NOT APPROACH PRAYER WHEN YOU ARE DRUNK, UNTIL YOU
KNOW WHAT YOU ARE SAYING, NOR DEFILED, (DUE TO SEXUAL INTERCOURSE)
UNLESS YOU ARE TRAVELLING A ROAD- UNTIL YOU HAVE PERFORMED TOTAL
ABLUTION. BUT IF YOU ARE SICK, OR ON A JOURNEY, OR HAVE COME ONE OF YOU
OUT OF TOILET, OR HAVE TOUCHED WOMEN, (MADE LOVE) AND YOU CAN FIND NO
WATER, THEN TAKE SOME CLEAN SOIL AND WIPE YOUR FACES AND YOUR HANDS,
(RUB YOUR FACES AND HANDS WITH CLEAN SAND OR DUST OF EARTH) THAT ALLAH
IS PARDONER FORGIVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
SOME JURISPRUDENTIAL COMMANDMENTS (VERSE NO.43)**

From this verse some jurisprudential commandments can be deduced and
derived by reasoning as follows: 1- NO PRAYER IN THE STATE OF
DRUNKENNESS- It is evident that the prayer is the earnest request to
God, or the offering of adoration, confession, supplication, or thanks
giving to our Lord. We therefore should collect our mind and heart, and
approach God in a spirit of

[ 528 ]

reverence, and feeling of deep respect. If so, how can we do that, if
we are drunken and intoxicated? The Arabic \`SOKARA"' translate here to
drunken may refer either to a state of intoxication, or to a dazed state
of mind through drowsiness or some other causes.

2- NO PRAYER IN A STATE OF SEXUAL DEFILEMENT - This commandment has an
exception of being a traveller and having no access to water, or being
sick, so that washing might be harmful for the body. Then on condition
of doing what is termed \`TAYAMMUM' as undermentioned, one may perform
his prayer.

3- The permit for performing the prayer, or going to a place of prayer,
such as the mosque is issued after the performance of a total ablution,
which is washing your body in a certain manner, which is technically
named GHOSL = ABLUTION.

4- TAYAMMUM, (TOUCHING THE EARTH) for those who are excused of washing
their whole body - these excluded ones are:

A- A man or woman who is sick or wounded for whom washing is harmful.

B- In circumstances wherein water for ablution cannot be obtained, such
as being on a journey.

This is because a man who is sick or wounded cannot walk out far in
search of water or the water might be harmful to his wounds and
sickness. So is a traveller who has no control over his supplies and his
condition; and may get no access to water. In all these cases touching
the clean earth or soil or performance of TAYAMMUM is recommended thus:
you touch clean dust, soil, sand, or earth with both palms of your
hands, and then wipe your face with the soiled hand. Once again you
touch your palms upon the soil and wipe the back of your right hand with
the palm of left hand, and then the back of left hand with the palm of
right hand.

[ 529 ]

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا نَصِيباً مِّنَ الْكِتَـبِ
يَشْتَرُونَ الضَّلَـلَةَ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَن تَضِلُّوا السَّبِيلَ(( 44 ))
44- HAVE YOU NOT CONSIDERED THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN GIVEN A PART (A SHARE)
OF THE BOOK, THAT THEY BUY MIS- GUIDANCE. (INSTEAD OF LEADING THE
OTHERS, AND THEMSELVES, TO THE STRAIGHT PATH) AND WISH TO SEE YOU LED
ASTRAY?

وَاللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِأَعْدَآئِكُمْ وَكَفَى بِاللهِ وَلِيّاً وَكَفَى
بِاللهِ نَصِيراً(( 45 )) 45- AND ALLAH KNOWS BEST YOUR ENEMIES, AND
ALLAH SUFFICES AS A GUARDIAN, AND ALLAH SUFFICES AS A HELPER.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO.44**

Here in this verse; God in an exclamatory mood, seeming to express
surprise, addresses His Messenger saying: Have you not seen those who
were given a portion of the Book (JEWS AND CHRISTIANS) instead of using
it as a means of guidance to obtain salvation and prosperity for others,
as well as for themselves; they have bought misguidance and err, and
they wish you too, to lose the right path and go astray. Thus the light
of truth through their bad intention and mischief has turned to a dark
means of misguidance and falsehood. This is because they were not indeed
willing to join the truth, and looked at everything through the black
glasses of discord, hypocrisy and materialism.

VERSE NO. 45

Although these sorts of people show themselves to you Muslims

[ 530 ]

in the form of friend, they are of surety your real enemies and of
course Allah has full knowledge of All. What enmity can be more and
higher, that they do their best to rush against your salvation and to
ruin your prosperity? They do that hypocritically through the ties of
friendship, and if that trick didn't work, they adhere to slander and
ill-speaking of you, with the aim of leading you astray, and deviate you
from your straight path of truth. You need not to have any fear of them
because Allah is enough as a protector, and as helper for you.

مِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ عَن مَّوَاضِعِهِ
وَيَقُولُونَ سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا وَاسْمَعْ غَيْرُ مُسْمَع وَرَعِنَا
لَيَّا بِأَلْسِنَتِهِمْ وَطَعْناً فِى الدِّينِ وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ قَالُوا
سَمِعْنَا وَأَطْعْنَا وَاسْمَعْ وَانْظُرْنَا لَكَانَ خَيْراً لَّهُمْ
وَأَقْوَمَ وَلَكِن لَّعَنَهُمُ اللهُ بِكُفْرِهِمْ فَلاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
إِلاَّ قَلِيلا(( 46 ))

46- SOME OF THE JEWS DEVIATE WORDS FROM THEIR PLACES AND SAY: WE HEARD
AND WE DISOBEY. (AND THEY ALSO SAY WITH EXPRESSION) HEAR, AND MAY YOU BE
BEREFT OF HEARING- AND MAKE A FOOL OF US! (THEY SAY SO USING HEBREW)
WITH A TWIST OF THEIR TONGUES, AND TAUNTING THE RELIGION.

IF THEY HAD SAID: WE HEARD AND WE OBEY, AND LISTEN TO US (PLEASE HEAR
WHAT WE SAY) AND GIVE US TIME (TO PONDER OVER WHAT YOU SAY) IT WOULD BE
FAR BETTER FOR THEM, AND MORE UPRIGHT. BUT ALLAH HAS CURSED THEM FOR
THEIR UNBELIEF, AND THEY BELIEVE NOT BUT A FEW.

[ 531 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ANOTHER PHASE OF THE JEW'S TRICKS**

Another phase of their devilish deeds and tricks was to deviate words
from their places in order to pervert the meanings. One of the Jewish
tricks, was to twist words and expressions so as to ridicule the
prophet's teaching. As an instance: When they had to say: We hear and we
obey which is a principle of a true believer, they would loudly say:
\`WE HEAR!' and then they whispered the rest of the sentence: \`And we
disobey!'

They also equivocated ambiguous words that are obscure and have more
than one interpretation or explanation! For example, Muslims used the
word; \`RA"INA' which, when, used by Arabs, it may mean: \`Please give
us time to ponder over what you say.' But the Jews who were among the
audience, by a little twist, pronounced the word so that they could
reveal its hebraic meaning, which could be: \`make a fool of us.' Or, O,
you who take us to pasture like a goat or lamb.'

If they had said; as the attitude of a true believer demands, \`We hear
and we obey.' and else, \`listen to us, and give us time to ponder and
meditate over what you say,' it would be far better for them, and indeed
more upright. But alas! They went astray, and moved far away from the
target which is God's Mercy and Forgiveness, so much so that Allah laid
His curse upon them for their unbelief and mischief and only a few among
them could be saved and prospered.

يَـأيُّهَا الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَـبَ ءَامِنُوا بِمَا نَزَّلْنَا
مُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ مِّنْ قَبْلِ أَن نَّطْمِسَ وُجُوهاً
فَنَرُدَّهَا عَلَى أَدْبَارِهَآ أَوْنَلْعَنَهُمْ كَمَا لَعَنَّآ
أَصْحَـبَ السَّبْتِ وَكَانَ أَمْرُ اللّهِ مَفْعُولا(( 47 ))

47- O, YOU WHO HAVE BEEN GIVEN THE BOOK! BELIEVE IN WHAT WE HAVE SENT
DOWN, CONFIRMING WHAT IS WITH YOU, BEFORE WE OBLITERATE FACES, AND TURN
THEM BACKWARD; OR CURSE THEM AS WE HAVE CURSED THE SABBATH- BREAKERS.
AND ALLAH'S COMMAND (ALLAH'S WILL) IS DONE.

[ 532 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE DESTINY OF OBSTINATE INDIVIDUALS (VERSE NO. 47)**

Here the people of the BOOK, and in particular the Jews, are strictly
admonished and advised, not to be obstinate, and do believe in the new
revelation of truth, that also confirms their own Scriptures, and that
they deserve more than the nomad Arabs to believe in God, and grasp the
newly sent down truth of religion, for being acquainted from before with
God's inspiration. They are then threatened thus:

\`\`And if you want to continue with that obstinacy of yours in
rejecting the truth, and belying the Messenger of God, then you must
expect either of the two dreadful punishments; being defaced, or cursed
by Allah! God may obliterate your faces and turn them backwards.'' In
fact this phrase of verse: \`\`We obliterate your faces and turning them
backward.'' is an Arabic proverb, by which face implies the feature or
the prestige, and the main expression of man's essence. Therefore, if
those who are given the scripture, if they prove themselves unworthy of
such a precious gift, then God will do it other way, and then they will
lose their face of eminence and may turn to degradation and suffer
eternal damnation under the curse of Allah.

إِنَّ اللهَ لاَيَغْفِرُ أَنْ يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَلِكَ
لِمَنْ يَشَآءُ وَمَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللهِ فَقَدِ افْتَرى إِثمَاً عَظِيماً((
48 ))

48- ALLAH WILL NOT FORGIVE THAT PARTNERS BE ASSOCIATED WITH HIM, BUT
FORGIVES WHATEVER IS UNDER THAT FOR WHOM HE WILL. AND HE WHO ASSOCIATES
ANY PARTNER WITH ALLAH, HAS INDEED FORGED A GREAT SIN.

[ 533 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE MOST HOPEFUL OF VERSES (VERSE NO. 48)**

Allah has strictly said here that, He will not forgive those who put up
His creatures in rivalry against Him, and prove co- sharers for Allah.
The relation and connection of this verse with its foregoing ones, is on
the basis that; both the Jews and the Christians are somehow and to some
extent polytheists! It has been narratted from the Commander of the
Faithful, Hazrat Ali (AS) that this verse is the most promising and
hopeful of verses, for giving confidence to Monotheists, and affirming
that God may forgive all our sins other than Polytheism. Causes and
means of being forgiven are numerous; some of which are as
undermentioned:

1- Repentance of the past evil deeds and decision to do good
henceforth.

2- Extraordinary good deeds that may obliterate our bad deeds.

3- The intercession which was explained in comments of S2: 48.

4- Avoiding great and heinous sins by which the little sins might be
forgiven.

5- God's extensive pardon and Mercy for those who deserve it.

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يُزَكُّونَ أَنفُسَهُم بَلِ اللهُ يُزَكِّى
مَنْ يَشَآءُ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ فَتِيلا(( 49 )) 49- HAVE YOU NOT SEEN
THOSE WHO CLAIM SANCTITY FOR THEMSELVES? (IT IS NOT AS THEY SAY) RATHER
ALLAH SANCTIFIES WHOM HE WILL. AND THEY SHALL NOT BE WRONGED THE HUSK OF
A DATE STONE. (THE LEAST AMOUNT)

انظُرْ كَيْفَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ وَكَفَى بِهِ إِثْماً
مُّبِيناً(( 50 )) 50- OBSERVE HOW DO THEY FORGE THE LIE AGAINST ALLAH?!
AND THAT IS ENOUGH FOR A MANIFEST SIN.

[ 534 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 49)**

The Jews and the Christians claimed for having especial advantages
exclusively. They sometimes said: \`\`We are the elects and the children
of God. (Q- S5: 18)'' Other times they claimed: \`\`Paradise is ours,
and none can enter the Garden of Bliss, unless he be a Jew or a
Christian. (Q- S2" 111)'' This verse (NO. 49) was later sent down to
give an end to such false claims.

**SELF-PRAISE**

This verse criticises another blame - worthy claim and character of
those who praise themselves. Self - praise, and in particular, self -
sanctification, which is apt to lie at one's door easily, is a dangerous
disease of our spiritual and mental endowment. He who makes a show of
sanctity while being void of piety, is indeed a real hypocrite. So the
verse implies that sanctity can only proceed from Allah and He
sanctifies whom he wills.

VERSE NO. 50

This verse takes the claims of superiority as forging lies against
Allah. The ending of the verse clearly states that: \`\`Even if such a
claim, be their only fault or sin, enough is it to knock them down, and
to damn and doom them to an overlasting punishment.

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا نَصِيباً مِّنَ الْكِتَـبِ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْجِبْتِ وَالطَّـغُوتِ وَيَقُولُونَ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
هَـؤُلاَءِ أَهْدَىْ مِنَ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا سَبِيلا(( 51 ))

51- HAVE YOU NOT SEEN THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN GIVEN A SHARE OF THE BOOK,
(MEANWHILE) THEY BELIEVE IN IDOLS AND IDOLATERS, AND THEY SAY OF THE
UNBELIEVERS; THESE ARE BETTER GUIDED ON THE WAY THAN BELIEVERS.

[ 535 ]

أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ لَعَنَهُمُ اللهُ وَمَن يَلْعَنِ اللهُ فَلَنْ
تَجِدَ لَهُ نَصِيراً(( 52 )) 52- THOSE ARE THEY WHOM ALLAH HAS CURSED,
AND HE WHOM ALLAH HAS CURSED, YOU WILL NOT FIND FOR HIM ANY HELPER.

**THE COMMENTARY OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 51 AND 52)**

After the bloody battle of Ohud, one of the Israelite's chiefs, named,
KAAB - IBN - ASHRAF proposed to ABUSOFYAN who was the chief of
idolaters, that; let 30 men from among the Meccan Idolaters, and 30 men
from among the Jews touch the Sacred Shrine of KAABEH with their
stomaches, and then make a covenant that the two parties should strive
hardly and do their best to defeat Mohammad and his Muslims, and get rid
of them all!

Then the pagan idolaters of Mecca asked KAB-IBN-ASHRAF, saying: \`\`We
know that you are a very learned Israelite, and you are well versed in
the scriptures, while we are all illiterates; then please tell us; which
one of our religions is better than the other's - Mohammad's monotheism
or our idols?'' The idolaters then continued that: \`\`We water the
camels of the pilgrims, we respect and welcome the guests, we release
the captives and observe the bonds of relationship, and we keep the
house of God, KAABEH flourishing; but on the contrary, Mohammad cuts the
ties of relationship with us, ridicules and abuses our gods and idols,
and has recanted the religion of our forefathers!''

In answer to the idolaters, KAAB-IBN-ASHRAF said: \`\`I swear by Allah
that your religion (IDOLATERY) is far better and more truthful than the
religion which Mohammad preaches!''

**THE CONGRUENTS**

Another blame- worthy character of the Jews has been mentioned in this
verse that they were of the open opinion that the aim may justify any
action! In other word, for obtaining their goal and purpose,

[ 536 ]

they were willing to comply with any thing and any one, even to lie
prostrate in front of idols and false gods! These heinous deeds they
did, in order to attract the attention of the idolaters and heathen
towards themselves. They even concealed or perverted whatever they had
in their holy scriptures and sacred books about Mohammad! They preferred
the idolaters and heathens, who set up various compeers to Allah; over
the Monotheist Muslims. They shamelessly said that the idolater's
religion is far better than Islam, in spite of their claim of being
monotheists and worshippers of the only one God whom they called
YAHOVAH!

Therefore their end, and fate has clearly been stated in this verse:
(No. 52) \`\`That they are those whom Allah Has cursed them, and you
will find no one to help them!''

أَمْ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِّنَ الْمُلْكِ فَإِذاً لاَّيُوْتُونَ النَّاسَ
نَقِيراً(( 53 )) 53- DO THEY HAVE A SHARE IN THE KINGDOM? (THAT THEY
WANT TO JUDGE SO) IF IT WAS SO (THEY WOULD HAVE MONOPOLIZED EVERYTHING
FOR THEMSELVES) AND WOULD NOT GIVE PEOPLE A SPECK ON A DATE-STONE.

أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَآ ءَاتَـهُمُ اللهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
فَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَآ ءَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَـبَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَءَاتَيْنَـهُم مُّلْكاً عَظِيماً(( 54 )) 54- OR ARE THEY JEALOUS OF THE
PEOPLE FOR WHAT ALLAH HAS GIVEN THEM OF HIS GRACE! YET WE GAVE TO
ABRAHAM'S DESCENDANTS, BOOK AND WISDOM, AND WE GAVE THEM A GREAT
KINGDOM.

فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ ءَامَنَ بِهِ وَمِنْهُم مَّن صَدَّ عَنْهُ وَكَفَى
بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيراً(( 55 )) 55- AND OF THEM IS HE WHO BELIEVED IN IT,
AND OF THEM IS HE WHO BARRED (PEOPLE) FROM IT, AND HELL IS ENOUGH TO
BURN. (THEM)

[ 537 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSES NO. 53ِ55.**

This matter has been dealt with in the preceding paragraph, that the
Jews for attracting the attention of the Pagan Arabs, testified that the
worship of idols is more rightful than the worship of God! To please the
pagan idolaters, they even prostrated themselves in front of the idols!
This verse and the next one declares their judgement as blasphemy and
void of any value, saying:


1- Do they have any share in the kingdom, that want to judge like
that?

2- And that, for their oppression and injustice they have proved
unworthy to hold, or preach the message of God.

Losing that important position, jealousy and envy overcame their heart,
so that they can't admit that divine position for anyone other than
themselves.

HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ (AS) has said: \`\`Jealousy is due to the darkness of
the heart, and blindness of the mind. It may arise from the denial of
God's bounties bestowed on some other of His servants.'

Blindness of the heart, and objection against God's favour to other
people, are the two wings of blasphemy. It was due to jealousy that the
son of Adam has to suffer an eternal damnation.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِأَيَـتِنَا سَوْفَ نُصْلِيهِمْ نَاراً
كُلَّمَا نَضِجَتْ جُلُودُهُم بَدَّلْنَـهُمْ جُلُوداً غَيْرَهَا
لَيَذُوقُوا الْعَذَابَ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ عَزِيزاً حَكِيماً(( 56 )) 56-
THOSE WHO BELIEVED NOT OUR REVELATIONS, WE SHALL SOON JOIN THEM THE
FIRE. AS OFTEN AS THEIR SKIN IS BURNT OUT, WE EXCHANGE IT FOR ANOTHER,
THAT THEY MAY TASTE THE TORTURE, THAT ALLAH IS ALL- MIGHTY, ALL.- WISE

والَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّـلحَِـتِ سَنُدْخِلُهُمْ جَنَّـت
تَجْرِى مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَـرُ خَـلِدِينَ فِيهَآ أَبَداً لَّهُمْ
فِيهَآ أَزْوَجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ وَنُدْخِلُهُمْ ظِلاّ ظَلِيلا(( 57 ))

[ 538 ]

57- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID GOOD WORKS WE SHALL SOON ADMIT THEM
TO GARDENS (OF PARADISE ) WATERED BY RUNNING STREAMS, ABIDING THEREIN
FOR EVER. FOR THEM IS IN THERE SPOUSES PURIFIED AND WE SHALL ENTER THEM
INTO SHADES THAT ARE EXTENSIVE.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 56 & 57**

These verses explain the fate of the faithful and the faithless. The
faithless will be cast into burning Fire in Hell, by which his skin will
be roasted, and then renewed to burn again and again. The new skin is
made of material of the burnt one so that materially the skin is not
changed, and God has indeed the power and wisdom of punishing the
sinners so.

On the other hand, paradise is the eternal abode of the faithful. If
the Hell and its blazing fire is the symbol of torture, punishment, and
agony, so is paradise the symbol of salvation and prosperity. Living a
life without death and without end, in delightful gardens watered by
running streams, and with the companionship of purified, beautiful and
holy spouses, and more of that, the mutual consent of the Gracious Lord
and his faithful servant.

إِنَّ اللهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَن تُؤَدُّوا الاَْمَـنَـتِ إِلَى أَهْلِهَا
وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُم بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَن تَحْكُمُوا بِالْعَدْلِ إِنَّ اللهَ
نِعِمَّا يَعِظُكُم بِهِ إِنَّ اللهَ كَانَ سَمِيعَا بَصِيراً(( 58 ))

58- ALLAH COMMANDS YOU TO DELIVER TRUSTS BACK TO THEIR OWNERS, AND WHEN
YOU JUDGE BETWEEN THE PEOPLE, JUDGE WITH JUSTICE. GOOD IS THE ADMONITION
THAT ALLAH GIVES YOU, THAT ALLAH IS ALL.- HEARING, ALL.- SEEING.


