The Bounty of the Earth and the Sky
===================================

The VERSE NO.22 reminds some GIFTS and GRACE of God that worth many
thanks and gratitudes: First, it points out at the creation of the Earth
which is made as resting place for us. Such a wonderful fast and easy
moving mount that carries man upon its back, and travels with a
delirious and dazzling speed, through the infinite space, without the
least vibration and throbbing or thrilling! Such a mount is of surety
one of the great gifts of Allah to man. Its GRAVITY gives you a chance
and opportunity to move wherever you want, or to have rest whenever you
like. It gives you chances to work, to build, to farm and many other
functions. Have you ever thought that without the attraction of gravity
you had to wander in the air up and down and out of control?

The VERSE, then refers to the SKY, as another gift and grace of God
saying: \`\`And He made the sky a canopy for you.'' Here by SKY, the
ATMOSPHERE, or the air envelope around our planet is wanted, which is
held to it by gravitational attraction and it is extended to several
hundred miles. Though it seems to be insubstantial, but in realty it has
enormous mass with a total weight estimated to be 5000 million, million
tons, exerting a pressure upon the earth's surface avaraging about 15
Lb. per square inch.

Had this huge SPHERE OF AIR not surrounded the earth, meteoric showers
would have made IT inhabitable, and it could not be a resting place for
the creatures, as it is said in the VERSE NO. 22.

Then it refers to the GIFT OF RAIN; saying: \`And He sent down water
from the sky wherewith He brought forth fruits for your sustenance.'
Indeed is water a great, if not the greatest, Gift and bounty of our
Merciful Lord. It is the source of life, the foundation of all the
flourishing and cultivations and material bounties. It is a sign and
indication of GOD'S extensive MERCY, that covers and encompasses all
things, and also of HIS infinite POWER and KNOWLEDGE. HE easily brings

[ 47 ]

out from the pure, colourless water hundreds of thousands of fruits,
foods, flowers of various colour, smell, and taste; for man and animal.
This is one of the most lively and vivid reasons and proofs of HIS
existence. \`Then do not set up compeers to Allah knowingly.'

**IDOLATRY IN ITS VARIOUS FORMS**

Generally, to compare or liken any entity, in power, effects or
characters to God, is a form of POLYTHEISM, which sometimes creeps in
the hearts of man, as an ant may creep upon a black stone in a dark
night! The COMPEERS, or the false gods might be; idols, superstitions,
and natural phenomena. They may also be the pride of race and birth, the
pride of rank, power, and wealth, when are set as rivals to God or
compared with His attributes.

وَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ فِى رَيْب مِّمَّا نَزَّلْنَا عَلَى عَبْدِنَا فَأْتُواْ
بِسُورَة مِّنْ مِّثْلِهِ وَادْعُواْ شُهَدَآءَكُمْ مِّن دُونِ اللهِ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ صَـدِقِينَ(( 23 ))

23- AND IF YOU ARE IN DOUBT CONCERNING THAT WHICH WE HAVE SENT DOWN TO
OUR SERVANT, (THE PROPHET) THEN PRODUCE A CHAPTER LIKE IT, AND CALL YOUR
WITNESSES APART FROM ALLAH IF YOU ARE TRUTHFUL.

فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُواْ وَلَن تَفْعَلُواْ فَاتَّقُواْ النَّارَ الَّتِى
وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْكَـفِرينَ(( 24 )) 24-
BUT IF YOU DO IT NOT, AND NEVER SHALL YOU DO IT, THEN GUARD YOURSELVES
AGAINST THE FIRE WHOSE FUEL IS MEN AND STONES PREPARED FOR
UNBELIEVERS.

[ 48 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE HOLY QURA"N, AN ETERNAL MIRACLE**

Blasphemy may sometimes be rooted in misunderstanding the nature of
prophethood and miracles. Here an eternal miracle is pointed to, namely
the Glorious Qura"n, saying: \`\`And if you are in doubt concerning that
which We have sent down to our servant, then produce a chapter like
it.''

Here is a particular test. God has put many chapters before you. Can
you produce at least one single chapter like it? By that, Qura"n calls
to challenge all those who reject the idea that there is REVELATION, and
that, it is from God. This is to make a reason against them out of their
inability and failure. Not themselves alone, but if there be any one
apart of Allah, who may inspire spiritual truth in such a noble
language, let them bring their works forth or help you in doing that -
\`\`Then call your witnesses apart from Allah if you are truthful.''

In the following verse, (NO. 24) the book denies their ability of doing
that EVER! \`\`But if you do it not, and NEVER shall you do it, then
guard yourself against the fire the fuel of which is MEN & STONES,
prepared for the unbelievers.''

**STONES AS FUELS!?**

How can a piece of stone be the fuel for a fire? It may mean that the
fire of Hell is kindled in the self and soul of the guilty people - a
fire that consumes both the WORSHIPPERS of the false god, as well as
their idols that were made and carved out of stones. Perhaps the fire of
punishment mounts right up to the hearts and minds of the sinners - On
their very seat of affection, pity, and understanding! This is also
mentioned more clearly in another chapter of the Holy Book, namely
HUMAZA (THE SCANDAL MONGER) as follows:

\`\`The fire of Allah, that is kindled and mounted on the hearts.''
QURA"N - S 104: 4-5 Contrary to the fires that are kindled down here,
the fires kindled in the life to come, start up in the hearts and minds
and come out from in!

[ 49 ]

**WHY DO THE PROPHETS NEED TO BRING MIRACLES?**

The prophets should be able to do something extraordinary by bringing
miracles that no one else can; to use it as a sign and proof of their
truthfulness. In our case the HOLY QURA"N, is the everlasting and
eternal miracle of our prophet; apart of his numerous other miracles.
This miracle of his is, an everlasting, rational, speaking,
international and spiritual one.

Those prophets who were before Mohammad (AS) had to be with their
miracles, in order to establish them and to gain full recognition and
acceptance for them. But the Holy Qura"n is a permanent and self-
explanatory miracle, that needs not to be introduced or established by
the prophet. Many hundreds of years after our prophet, the BOOK is
remained lively and up to date; as a source of a religion, as a valid
law, as a document and reference for commandments, and full of
astonishing miracles. The Holy Book has broken the borders and the walls
of time and space, manifested in that very form which the scripture had
more than one thousand and four hundreds years ago, shedding the light
of truth and knowledge upon our age, as it shed upon the ARABIC PAGAN
ERA! Evidently an international and everlasting religion should have a
permanent and original document relied upon as a basis, proof, and
support, (which is the role that QURA"N has played throughout the
history of Islam.

**QURA"N'S SPIRITUALITY**

The miracles of the prophets before Mohammad (AS) were in a material
state or manner, such as raising a dead body, or making a baby to speak
in the cradle, or curing a deaf or blind. All such miracles had a
material source and bed that could be felt or sensed. But as for the
HOLY QURA"N, and its noble and amazing language, which is composed of
the ordinary alphabetical letters, and goes so deep into the hearts and
minds, making thought and wisdom to bow themselves in this respect, is
something that should be considered a little deeper, and with more
care.

[ 50 ]

وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّـلِحَـتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ
جَنَّـت تَجْرِى مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَـرُ كُلَّمَا رُزِقُواْ مِنْهَا
مِنْ ثَمَرَة رِّزْقاً قَالُواْ هَذَا الَّذِى رُزِقْنَا مِن قَبْلُ
وَأُتُواْ بِهِ مُتَشَـبِهاً وَلَهُمْ فِيهَا أَزْوَ اجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ
وَهُمْ فِيهَا خَـلِدُونَ(( 25 ))

25- AND GIVE GLAD TIDINGS TO THOSE WHO BELIEVE AND DO GOOD DEEDS, THAT
FOR THEM AWAITS GARDENS UNDERNEATH WHICH BROOKS FLOW. WHENEVER THEY ARE
GIVEN SOME FRUITS THEREFROM, THEY SAY: \`\`THIS IS WHAT WAS GIVEN TO US
BEFORE. (BUT THESE ARE SO MUCH BETTER) FOR THEY SHALL BE GIVEN THE LIKE;
AND THEY HAVE THEREIN SPOUSES FURIFIED, AND THEY ABIDE THEREIN FOR
EVER.''

**THE COMMENTARY
QUALIFICATIONS OF THE HEAVENLY BOUNTIES**

This one is an antithesis to the last verse, in which fire was the
symbol of punishment, and in this, garden is the symbol of felicity. It
promises that: \`For those who believe and do good deeds, there awaits
gardens of bliss underneath which streams of crystal water flows. We
know that GARDENS that lack permanent water, will have not fruitful
trees, vivid vegetations and lively plants. Therefore the gardens of
bliss in PARADISE, have their own source of water and rivers flow
underneath the trees therein.

Pointing to various fruits of the gardens, the verse adds that whenever
they are given some fruits therefrom, they say: \`\`This is similar to
what was given to us before.'' The fruit of goodness is goodness. They
are similar in shape, but much better in degree of taste, colour, scent
and fragrance.

[ 51 ]

Another gift of the GARDENS OF BLISS that is promised here is clean
spouses. Spouses who are clean spiritually as well as bodily. They live
in that abundance and affluence for ever and beyond the realm of time.

**CLEAN SPOUSES**

The only qualification that is mentioned here, for the spouses that are
in paradise, is their cleanliness. They are said to be free from
whatever sullies or defilements, or dirt, and were purified from moral
defilements too. From this, we may conclude that the first and most
important condition for choosing spouses is their cleanliness, as it is
narrated that the apostle said: \`\`Aviod any beautiful green grass that
grows in a dunghill?''

When he was asked what do you mean by that sort of grass? he answered:
\`\`It is the simile of a beautiful woman who grows in a contaminated
and corrupt family!''

**THE MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL BOUNTIES IN PARADISE.**

Though in so many verses, the material bounties of PARADISE is pointed
off; many times, spiritual gifts, too, are mentioned besides. As an
instance, we read the following verse: \`\`Allah Has promised the
believing men, and the believing women, Gardens underneath which rivers
flow. They abide there for ever. He has promised them goodly mansions in
the GARDENS OF ETERNITY, and yet the greatest of all that, is; GOD'S
GOOD PLEASURE - that is the supreme felicity.'' QURA"N - S 9: 72

إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَسْتَحِى أَن يَضْرِبَ مَثَلاً مَّا بَعُوضَةً فَمَا
فَوْقَهَا فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ فَيَعْلَمُونْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ
مِن رَّبِّهِمْ وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فَيَقُولُونَ مَاذآ أَرَادَ
اللهُ بِهَـذا مَثَلاً يُضِلُّ بِهِ كَثِيراً وَيَهْدِى بِهِ كَثِيراً
وَمَا يُضِلُّ بِهِ إِلاَّالْفَـسِقِينَ(( 26 ))

26- ALLAH IS NOT ASHAMED TO STRIKE A SIMILITUDE ABOUT A GNAT (WHICH IS
APPARENTLY A SMALL CREATURE) OR ABOVE IT.

[ 52 ]

AS FOR THE BELIEVERS, THEY KNOW THAT IT IS THE TRUTH FROM THEIR LORD,
BUT THE UNBELIEVERS SAY: \`WHAT COULD ALLAH MEAN BY THIS PARABLE BY
WHICH HE MISLEADS MANY AND LEADS MANY? BUT NONE IS MISLED BY IT SAVE THE
EVILِDOERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

When in the S 29: 41 the similitude of the SPIDER was used, and
similarly in the S 22: 73 the similitude of the FLY was struck, a group
of PAGANS criticized and mocked and said: \`What sort of Divine
inspiration is this, by which similitudes of gnat, spider, and fly are
struck and used! So was the above verse (NO. 26) revealed to answer
their childish question in an exalted language.'

**DOES GOD EVER STRIKE SIMILITUDES?**

The verse admits that HE DOES, saying: \`\`Allah is not ashamed to
strike a similitude about a gnat or some creatures above it.''
Similitude is a means of manifesting some facts by comparison, and in
order to despise and disclose the weakness and inability of the
claimants, it is closer to eloquency to use irony, and to choose for the
parable something of the weakest and of the lowest of the creatures as
an instance of this we read in the HOLY QURA"N:

\`\`O, People! A similitude is struck. Then listen to it. Those on whom
you call apart from Allah, can never create a FLY, though they should
all gather for it. And if the fly should snatch away anything from them,
they are not able to take it back from it, weak are the SEEKER AND THE
SOUGHT.'' QURA"N - S 22:73

As for the meaning of the phrase: \`OR ABOVE IT' in the verse NO. 26
the commentators have two ideas: One group understand it to mean:
\`\`ABOVE THE GNAT IN WEAKNESS OR SMALLNESS.''

[ 53 ]

Some others believe it to mean: \`\`LARGER AND MORE POWERFUL THAN THE
GNAT.'' We think the first idea to be the correct one. The verse is then
continued defending its simile by saying: \`\`As for the believers, they
know that it is the truth from their Lord.''But the unbelievers have
thought it to be a cause of schism and separation by saying: \`\`What
could Allah mean by this parable, by which He misleads many, and leads
many?!''

It is then immediately added as an answer to the unbelievers that
stumbling and offence only occurs as the result of sinner's own choice
of the wrong, and therefore, \`none is misled by it save the
evil-doers.'

الَّذِينَ يَنقُضُونَ عَهْدَ اللهِ مِن بَعْدِ مِيثَـقِهِ وَيَقْـطَعُونَ
مَآ أَمَرَاللهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ وَيُفْسِدُونَ فِى الاَْرْضِ
أُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْخَـسِرُونَ(( 27 ))

27- THOSE WHO BREAK ALLAH'S COVENANT AFTER IT IS RATIFIED, AND MAKE CUT
WHAT ALLAH HAS COMMANDED TO BE JOINED, AND DO MISCHIEF ON EARTH, THEY
SHALL BE THE LOSERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE REAL LOSERS**

Here in this verse, three significances of the unbelievers are added to
their misguidance which was mentioned in the last verse. 1) They are
those who break Allah's covenant after it has been ratified. Men have
entered into different covenants with Allah: The covenant of knowing
Him, and worshipping none besides HIM. The covenant of not following
SATAN; and also their own caprices and carnal desires. But they have
broken such covenants and promises, and have obeyed their wishes and
passions.

[ 54 ]

**WHERE WAS THE COVENANTS FIXED?**

Besides any gift and grace of God, there lays a natural covenant that
can be recognized by conscience and instinct. For God's loving care we
at least owe HIM gratitude and obedience which is a sort of natural
covenant, the words of which is uttered in the language and laws of
creation. But the sinner who knows this before he darkens his own
conscience, forsakes the path of truth, and even resists the grace of
God that comes to save him! He breaks the covenant of Allah by using his
power and abilities in the way of mischief and falsehood, and this is
why his case becomes hopeless, and the loss of felicity and bliss will
be his.

2) The verse also signifies that: \`\`They cut out what Allah has
commanded them to have it joined!'' These are the joints of families and
friends. The connections with society and some social affairs; And
having communications with the Divine Leaders. 3) Their third sign,
which is signified by the verse is doing mischief on the earth.

**THE IMPORTANCE OF OBSERVING THE BONDS OF RELATIONSHIP**

Though the above verse commends to observe and pay regards to all the
COVENANTS WITH ALLAH, but the observance of the bonds of relationship
has got a clear cut importance in Islam. It means to join, to help, and
to be good to kindreds and relatives, and cutting such relationship is a
SIN MOST HEINOUS, so much so that, Imam SAJJAD (AS) says to his son:
\`\`Do not befriend one who breaks the bonds of relationship because
QURA"N has announced him a CURSED and far from GOD'S MERCY!''

كَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِاللهِ وَ كُنْتُمْ أَمْوَاتاً فَأَحْيَـكُمْ ثُمَّ
يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ(( 28 )) 28- HOW
DO YOU DISBELIEVE IN ALLAH, SEEING YOU WERE

[ 55 ]

DEAD, AND HE GAVE YOU LIFE. AGAIN HE WILL CAUSE YOU TO DIE, AND HE
SHALL GIVE YOU LIFE AGAIN, AND TO HIM YOU WILL RETURN. (THEREFORE,
NEITHER YOUR LIFE IS YOURS, NOR YOUR DEATH; ALL IS GOD'S) هُوَ الَّذِى
خَلَقَ لَكُم مَّا فِى الاَْرْضِ جَمِيعاً ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى إِلَى السَّمَآءِ
فَسَوَّيـهُنَّ سَبْعَ سَمَـو ت وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ شَىء عَلِيمٌ(( 29 ))

29- IT IS HE WHO CREATED FOR YOU ALL THAT IS IN THE EARTH, THEN HE
PROCEEDED TO THE SKY, AND FASHIONED IT INTO SEVEN FIRMAMENTS, AND HE HAS
KNOWLEDGE OF ALL THINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE MYSTERIOUS GIFT OF LIFE**

To complete the reasons for theism, and knowing the existence of God,
which came in the past verses, (NO. 21 & 22) a proof is brought here,
that no just and fair heart can deny it. The proof is our mysterious
life! The verse says: \`\`How do you disbelieve in Allah, seeing you
were dead, and HE gave you life?!''

God has brought you into being. The mysteries of life and death are in
HIS hands. Before this mortal life of yours, you were an inanimate
being; just like the stones, the soil, the wood, and etc. You were
entirely bereft of life, spirit, and consciousness. You were not endowed
with understanding and knowledge. But now you are! you live! you know!
you feel! Such affairs of life are so mysterious and amazing that
millions of learned, and man of knowledge and wisdom, have tried to
disclose the secrets and reveal the mysteries of life, and have failed,
even to discover a millionth of the secrets and hidden matters! Can

[ 56 ]

anyone, with the least common sense, ascribe such a wonderful and
mysterious phenomenon to be the work of the inanimate nature, which is
void of knowledge, wisdom, sight and sense? This is where and why we
assert and insist on our assertion of theism, and our belief in God's is
existence, and manifestation as the CREATOR and RULER of the universe,
who has given us life and will cause us to die.

The verse then brings forth another evidence: \`\`THAT OF DEATH And
again He will cause you to die.'' Therefore you should come to know that
your life and death, is in the hands of Allah. The verse then puts on
the carpet, the idea of RESURRECTION and the raise of the dead bodies:
\`\`And He shall (ONCE AGAIN) give you life, and to HIM you will
return.''

That is to say: When you die on this earth, that is not the end. You
were of HIM, and you must return to HIM. Return to HIS MERCY. Return to
HIS infinite bounties, and immeasureably extensive space and worlds that
are above you and around you! And this is the main secret of life:
Coming from HIM and Going to HIM.

Resurrection and raise of the dead, is not something impossible or even
difficult in the nature. If we ponder over the life which is bestowed on
us - before it, we were not anything worthy of mention. Though the
words, DIFFICULT & EASY are meaning-less in the realm of power of God,
we can still deduce and conclude that; giving life to something that
already exists, though dead, is much easier than giving life to a
non-existence, as it is our case at first.

The verse then ends with the phrase: \`\`TO HIM YOU WILL RETURN'' which
TO HIM may mean to HIS BOUNTIES, GIFT and generally to HIS MERCY.''

VERSE NO. 29

After reminding the gifts of life and pointing at resurrection and
Dooms Day, other extensive and various bounties of HIS, is brought into
minds saying:

\`\`It is He who created for you all that is in the earth.'' This verse
explains the wonderful destiny of MAN, who is created to be Allah's
VICEGERENT on earth - a position that is higher than that of the
angels,

[ 57 ]

because all that is created on the earth and also in the skies are said
in the BOOK, to have been created for the MAN! The incredibly extensive
depths of space above and around man which is only a small part of God's
plan: \`\`HE proceeded then to the sky, and fashioned them into seven
firmaments''

The Arabic word ESTVA" (TRANSLATED: HE PROCEEDED) means to have
dominance and sovereignty over something.

**THE SEVEN SKIES**

As for the question that what is meant here by the NUMBER(7)? We think
that the exact SEVEN in number is intended, and it can be proved from
other verses. The undermentioned verse clearly indicates that all the
planets, stars, asteroids, or whatever might be, are all stationed
within the realm and bonds of the first sky; as follows: \`\`HE then
formed the sky into seven firmaments (SKIES) in two days (PERIODS), and
to each sky He assigned its duty, AND WE ADORNED THE LOWER SKY WITH
BRILLIANT STARS AND SECURITY, that is the ordering of the All-mighty,
the All-knowing.'' QURA"N - S 41: 12

Therefore the lowest of the seven skies is that which we can see
overhead, which contains all the stars planets, suns, moons, and all the
heavenly bodies that one can see with his eyes or can't see.

The upper six skies are now unknown to us, and we know not much about
them. Perhaps in future, science and knowledge, may come to discover
what do they have, and on what a nature they stand, revealing some of
their secrets.

وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَـئِكَةِ إِنّى جَاعِلٌ فِى الاَْرْضِ
خَلِيفَةً قَالُوا أَتَجْعَلُ فِيهَا مَن يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ
الدِّمآءَ وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ قَالَ إِنِّى
أَعْلَمُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 30 ))

30- AND WHEN YOUR LORD SAID TO THE ANGELS: \`I WILL CREATE A VICEROY ON
THE EARTH'. THEY SAID: \`WILL YOU PUT THERE ONE WHO WILL DO EVIL, AND
SHED BLOOD?' (THE

[ 58 ]

CREATURES THAT LIVED ON THE EARTH BEFORE MAN; MISUSED THEIR EMOTIONAL
NATURE, WHICH RESULTED IN DOING EVIL, MISCHIEF AND SHEDDING BLOOD! IF
THE AIM IS TO WORSHIP OUR LORD THEN) WE CELEBRATE YOUR PRAISE AND
SANCTIFY YOU. HE SAID: \`I KNOW WHAT YOU DO NOT KNOW.' وَعَلَّمَ ءَادَمَ
الاَْسْمَآءَ كُلَّهَا ثُمَّ عَرَضَهُمْ عَلَى الْمَلَـئِكَةِ فَقَالَ
أَنبِئُونِى بِأَسْمَآءِ هَـؤُلاَ ءِ إِن كُنْتُمْ صَـدِقِينَ(( 31 ))

31- AND HE TAUGHT ADAM THE NAMES, ALL OF THEM; (THE NAMES AND INNER
NATURE AND QUALITIES OF ALL THINGS) THEN HE PRESENTED THEM UNTO THE
ANGELES, AND SAID: \`TELL ME THE NAMES OF THESE IF YOU ARE RIGHT.'

قَالُواْ سُبْحَـنَكَ لاَ عِلْمَ لَنَآ إِلاَّ مَا عَلَّمْتَنَآ إِنَّكَ
أَنْتَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ(( 32 )) 32- THEY SAID:= \`GLORY TO YOU! WE
HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE, SAVE WHAT YOU HAVE TAUGHT US. SURELY YOU ARE THE
ALL-KNOWING THE ALL-WISE.'

قَالَ يَــادَمُ أَنْبِئْهُمِ بِأَسْمَآئِهِمْ فَلَمَّآ أَنبَأَهُم
بِأَسْمَآئِهِمْ قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكُمْ إِنِّى أَعْلَمُ غَيْبَ
السَّمَـوَ تِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَأَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا كُنتُمْ
تَكْتُمُونَ(( 33 ))

33- HE SAID: \`O, ADAM! INFORM THEM OF THEIR NAME'S, AND WHEN HE
INFORMED THEM OF THEIR NAMES; HE SAID: \`DID I NOT TELL YOU THAT I KNOW
THE UNSEEN THINGS OF THE SKIES AND EARTH? AND I KNOW ALL THAT YOU HIDE
AND ALL THAT YOU REVEAL?'

[ 59 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
GOD'S VICEROY (CALIPH) ON THE EARTH**

We have read in the preceding verses that God HAS created for MAN all
that is on the earth. Verses from NO. 30 to NO. 39 give some details of
three main important matters:

1) Informing the angels that HE is going to appoint a VICEGERENT
(CALIPH) in the earth.
2) Commanding the angels to bow down and prostrate themselves before
ADAM.
3) Describing the condition of ADAM in PARADISE, his fall from the
GARDEN OF BLISS, then his repentance and turn-back, and finally his
living with his children on the earth.

VERSE NO. 30

The verse NO. 30, indicates how GOD'S WILL was to create a VICEROY on
the earth, so that his attributes and qualifications might be a ray, or
a reflection of GOD'S ATTRIBUTES! \`\`And when your Lord said to the
angels: I will create a VICEROY on the earth.'' The ARABIC word KHALIF
translated, TO VICEROY, means agent, deputy, vicegerent, indicating an
agent having or exercising delegated power. This could be a reason as to
why the angels put forth question that:

\`\`Will you put there one who will do evil and shed blood, while we
celebrate thy praise and extol thy Holiness!?'' The angels might have
had some knowledge of the nature and emotions of man that could result
in mischief and bloodshed, but their information was not deep enough.
They thought that such deeds and characters were not becoming to a
creature who is GOD'S VICEGERENT (CALIPH). When the angels said so, God
answered them in brief, and let the details to be explained later on.

The angels had no independent WILL of their own, (FREE WILL) and were
not endued with power of passions and other emotions, and their
perfection could in some way and some how, reflect the perfection of

[ 60 ]

God; but it could not raise them to the dignity and rank of vicegerency
(CALIPHATE). A perfect caliph should have the power of initiation
himself, but whose independent actions always reflect the will of his
PRINCIPAL; which in this case is God. In their judgement they only saw
the mischief and bloodshed consequences of the misuse of the emotional
nature by man. They could not guess that, out of the progeny of ADAM,
might appear Men such as Mohammad, Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus, and
Saints and godly persons, martyrs, and many extraordinary charitable
patients, and self-denying men who have none and nothing but Allah.

**THE ANGELS ON TRIAL (VERSE NO. 31)**

By the favour of God, ADAM, had the aptness and natural suitability for
the extraordinary purpose of being GOD'S VICEROY (CALIPH) on earth;
because God had taught him the names and inner nature and qualities of
all things. What a great honour was it to MAN!? Emam Sadiq (AS) was
asked about the names that were taught to ADAM, and he said: \`\`That
means the, lands, the mountains, the valleys, the beds of rivers, and
everything, even the carpet which is laid here beneath us.''

ADAM, had also the ability of naming things giving each of them their
due, and suitable names.

VERSE NO. 32

After that; God presented them unto the angels and said: \`\`Tell me
the names of these things if you are right!'' The angels failed to
answer the question and said: \`\`Glory to you! we haven't such that
knowledge, we only know that which you have taught us.''

VERSE NO. 33

Now there came the turn of ADAM to explain the names and the nature of
things to the angels; for, God ordered him saying: \`\`O, ADAM! Inform
them of their names; and when he did that well and efficiently, God said
to the angels: \`\`Did I not tell you that I know the unseen things of
the skies and earth? And that I know all that you hide, and all that you
divulge?'' So they made sure

[ 61 ]

that MAN is the worthiest for being the caliph, and they bowed down
their heads to admit that.

وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلَـئِكَةِ اسْجُدُواْ لاَِدَمَ فَسَجَدُواْ إِلاَّ
إِبْلِيسَ أَبَى وَاسْتَكْبَرَ وَكَانَ مِنَ الْكَـفِرين(( 34 )) 34- AND
WHEN WE SAID TO THE ANGELS: \`\`PROSTRATE YOURSELVES BEFORE ADAM.'' THEY
ALL PROSTRATED THEMSELVES, EXCEPT SATAN, WHO REFUSED AND BECAME PROUD
AND BECAME OF THE UNBELIEVER.

وَقُلْنَا يَــَادَمُ اسْكُنْ أَنتَ وَزَوْجُكَ الْجَنَّةَ وَكُلاَ
مِنْهَا رَغَداً حَيْثُ شِئْتَُما وَلاَ تَقْرَبَا هَذِهِ الشَّجَرَةَ
فَتَكُونَا مِنَ الظَّـلِمِينَ(( 35 ))

35- AND WE SAID: \`\`O, ADAM! DWELL YOU AND YOUR WIFE IN THE GARDEN,
AND EAT OF THE BOUNTIFUL THINGS THEREIN WHEREVER YOU WISH BUT APPROACH
NOT THIS TREE, LEST YOU BE OF THE TRANSGRESSORS.''


36- THEN SATAN CAUSED THEM TO SLIP THEREFROM, AND BROUGHT THEM OUT OF
THAT THEY WERE IN, (OUT OF THE GARDEN OF BLISS) AND WE SAID: \`\`GET YOU
ALL DOWN, SOME OF YOU ENEMIES TO SOME OTHER. AND ON EARTH WILL BE YOUR
DWELLING-PLACE, AND YOUR MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FOR A TIME BEING.

[ 62 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ADAM IN THE GARDEN OF BLISS (VERSE NO. 34)**

To continue with explaining the dignity and high position of man,
QURA"N, says: \`\`We said to the angels prostrate yourselves before
ADAM. They all prostrated themselves except IBLIS, who refused and was
haughty and became unbeliever.''

Yes! He was puffed up with pride, and because of his pride and
disobedience he became unbeliever. In fact, anyone who is worthy for the
office and position of vicegerency is to be esteemed in all respects. We
usually respect the scholars and scientists who have learned some
formulas and laws of science, why not him who has been taught so much
about the names and nature of all being things?


